ER


The hystory writtone by Thucidides the Athenyan of the war, whic^e was
between the Peloponesians and the Athenyans, translated out of French into
the Englysh language by Thomas Nicolls Citezeine and Goldesmyth of London.

Imprinted the xxv. day of July in the year of our Lord God a Thousand,
five hundredde and fyftye.

Accept this History, so greatly magnefied
Which above other is named to precelle:
The fruit with the flower herein is comprised
With eloquence, treatinge of war right cruel
And of antiquity, is renommed so well
that nothing seems to be more lamented
Than knowlayge hereof to have been absented
So long from you of this famous Region.
Which now our King, of his haboundant grace,
With his high Counsailles delyberation,
Frankely has granted to be in every place
Good study to prefer, all slouthe to deface,
That the goodness therein being virtuously used:
The contraries also may prudently be exchued.
Happy, happy be we, to whom God sendithe
A King so virtuous, benign and prudente
That vices abhorringe, good exercise extends
Communycatinge this, so precious a talente,
To all his subjects, being of good intent,
Pray we therefore to God with heart and mind fixte
For the long wealthy reign of king Edward the Sixte.
The tenoure of the Kings Majesty's most gracyous Priuelege for Seven years.
EDWARD THE SIXTH BY THE Grace of God, King of Ingland, France, and Irelande,
Defendour of the faith and of the church of England and Irelande in earth
Supreme hedde. To all Justices, Maiours, Shiriues, Bailliues, Constables,
Custumers, Co^ptrollers, Sercheours, Kepars of our poortes, Crekes and
passages, and to all other our Officers, Ministres, and Subjects, these our
Letters hearing or seeing, and to every of them, Gretinge. WE late you wit,
that Iudgyng it to be mete and ryghtuous, that our Royal Majesty, (wherein
through the prouyde^ce, ordenaunce, and grace of the almighty and ever living
God, we presently do Reign) not only should aid those, that for public and
common vtilite do labor, specially in learning, but also graciously taking
them into our protectyon, should not cease to any mate the^ in such their
labors to be continued and augmented. Being credibly informed that our
faithful and well-beloved subject Thomas Nicolls, Cytezene and Goldesmith of our
City of London, has not only translated the hystorye, wryttone by Thucidides
the Athenyan of the wars that were among the Greeks, chiefly between the
Peloponesians and the Athenyans out of French into Inglish, but also intends
contynning in that his virtuous exercise, thereby to reduce and bring other
profitable hystories out of French and late^ne into our said maternall
language, to the general benefyt, comodytie and profyt of all our loving
Subjects, that well shall digeste the same: We, who from our tender yougth,
have loved and embrased Godly and virtuous learning, and the favorers thereof,
Myndyng to relieve and help our said subject in his labors and study, and
being enclyned to his reasonable and humble petycions and requests unto us in
this behalf made: Of our especyal grace, and by the advise and consent of our
right dear, right trusty and right well-beloved Pryuey Counsaille, woll and
straytely command all and singular Stacyoners, Prynters, bookesellers, and
merchants, wheresoever, and of whatsoever estate, degree, or condition he or
they be, and al other inhabiting, reseant, or having access in or to any our
Royaulmes, territoryes, or domynions as well in these parties, as beyond the
sea, that they nor any of them during the space of Seven years next to come to
be accounted from the first setting forth of the said historye, shall not
without express license obteygned of the said Thomas Nicolls, impresse or
imprynt, nor cause to be impressed or imprynted in any caracter of letter, nor
selle, give, alyen, nor distribute to any parsone or parsons, the said historye
of Thucidides, nor any part thereof, imprinted or to be imprinted in English by
any other parsone or parsones, tha^ by our said subject or his assigneis by
him thereunto admitted, upon pain of confiscatyng and forfayture not only of
all such books, as against the true tenor and purporte hereof shall be by any
mean impressed, imprinted, sold, put to sale, alyenated, given or
dystributed: but also upon penalty of Twenty pou^des of Currante monney of
this our Royalme of England, so often to be paid by the tra^sgressours, as any
of them shall be found and approved to do the contrary. The one half of the
said forfayture and penaltye to be to our use and bihoulf, and the other half
to the presenter approuynge the same. Anny act, statute, grant, license, or
other prouisyon heretofore had and made, or hereafter to be had and made to the
contrary hereof, in any wise not wtstandynge. Wherefore WE woll and command
you and every of you not only to permyt and suffer our said well-beloved
subject, peacesably to exercise, perceive, and enjoy the full benefyte and
effect of this our license and grant, but also at all times during the
same Seven years, when and as often as ye or any of you shall, by him or his
assigneis, be thereunto required, to be unto the same our Subject fauourynge,
helpinge, aydynge, furtheryng and supporting in and aboutes execucion of the
premysses. So as no defaulte shall be found to be in you nor any of you. As
for doing the contrary, ye and every of you woll answer unto us at your
extreme perils, For such is our pleasure, YOVON under our Signet at our
Palace of Westminster the xxiiii. of February, The fourth year of our Reygne.

God save the King and his Majesty's most honorable Counsaille.

To the right worshypfull Master John Cheke one of the Gentlemen of the Kings
Majesty's most honnourable pryuey Chamber and Skoolemayster unto the same most
Excellent Majesty, Thomas Nicolls Cytezen and Goldesmyth of London, wyssheth
parfayct hel^h with prosperous increase in worship.
CONSIDERING, right worshypfull Sir, that diverse of those, which heretofore to
their posterity left old matters, and studied by writing, to renew the
ancyent memory of hystories: have been by sundry learned parsonages noted and
taxed for this: that whylest they desired and coueyted fame of learning, and
went about to plant and establish their name to be continued from the
iniurye of forgetting: they bestowed their labor, more in adournynge,
garnyshinge and fylyng of their words, then in searching and declaryng of the
troth, thinking that, if any thing of untruth were by them set fourth in
causes, that were of long antiquitye before their time, it could not be
corrected, and yet nevertheless, that they should perceive exceadynge fruict
and benefyte through that the delycatenes of their vain narratyons, labors
and wits: knowing some other also to have been reprehended for this: that
being moved and carried either by pryuate ennemyties and hatred of rulers,
orells being to much given to the praysynge of Princes. Cities, and of pryuate
parsons, have by their colorable writing and with immoderate flattery
extolled h^storyes very base and skl^nder of them self, far above the faith
and effect of the troth of them, And chiefly, being hereunto anymated by the
prayseworthy zeal, and godly will, which you bear both to the increase in
virtue, and also to the communicatyng of honest labor and exercise unto the
benefyt of the students and favorers thereof: I have trauayled for to
translate playnelye and truly owte of the French into the Inglyshe tongue, this
hystorye, wrytton by Thucydides the Athenyan of the great wars that
continued among^st the Greeks, chiefly between the Peloponesians and the
Athenyans, during the space of twenty and seven years. Requyryng you of your
accustomed benignyte, not only with favor to accept this the furste my
fruict in translatyon, but also conferringe it with the Greek, so to am^nde and
correct it, in those places and sentences, which your exact learning and
knolaige shall Iudgemete to be altered and reformed, that thereby this said
translation may triumphantly resist and wythstande the malycyous and deadly
stynge of the general and most enemies of all good e^ercyse. I mean curyous,
fa^tasticall ^arsons, pryuey dyffamours of dylygent and virtuous laboure^ who,
though they them self to their reproach do ydely or with silence pass their
time, be yet grievously pynched with envy that other should travail to utter
their talente to the commodytie of many^ thereby to proffet. For this hystorye
is not only among the greeks and latenistes (as ye well know) reputed to be
much worthy of commendacion: but also the Lord Claudius of Seyssel, some time
Bishop of Marseille and afterward Archebyshop of Turyn, who translated the
same out of the Lattenne into the French tongue, Iudgyng that all other
hystoryes, which he had or should translate into the same his maternalle
language should appear but gross in regard of this: did dedycate it unto the
French King Loyes, of that name the twelfte, for the chief and best of all
works by him translated. The praise wh^rof, I ouerpasse and omit to rehearse
for that, that as well the said Archebyshop and one Master James Colyn,
sometime ordenarye Secretarye to the late French King, Fraunces, of that name
the furste, as also the right famous and well learned Clarke, Laurence Ua^le,
translator of this same hystory out of Greek into Latin have by their sundry
Prologues hereafter following, right amply and notably treated of the worthynes
thereof, and therein have also declared such lessons and documentes, as
undoubtedly may bring excellent knoweledge and great commodities to the
readers, digestynge the same, wherefore for to exchue prolixite and superfluous
words, I cease further to enlarge. Most instantly prayinge almighty God so to
assiste, defend and supporte all your Godly affairs and Studies, that the
same may take fortunate and happy success and effect.

Your Maystershyps well wyller Thomas Nycolls.

Hereafter follow the before mencyoned Prologues.

To the right Illustryous and right high excellency of Princes, and to the
right noble magnificence of Lords and nobility of France, James Colyn
unworthy ordenary Secretary to the King our Souueraigne Lord, and of his
chamber, Sends right humble gretynge with increase in honnour in perpetual
felycyte.
HERODOTVS the father of hystoryans wytnessethe, that there is a regyon,
adioynynge to the Thraces, inhabyted by certain people named Trauses: which
in times past were accustomed, that when a child was borne amongst them,
incontinently, as it was out of the mothers womb, the parents and neighbors
did assemble together, and there received his fourth coming with cries,
wepynges, and lamentacions, remembrynge how many myseryes and calamytes he
should of necessyte suffer in this world. And to the contrary, when a^ye of
them departed from this life unto death: they accompanied him to his grave, in
great festynge and reioysynge: in synging and joyfully rehersynge the
multitude of euyls and tourmentes, from which he was exempted by death. which
thing putting in consideration, the Ancyent Greeks usurped in such sort,
that Ausonus the Port made or devised a proverb, which said, that it were
right good for a man not to be borne, or if he were borne, to dye ymmedyatly:
so narowely looked they unto the incommodities of man's life. And to say the
truth, if that we would dylygently regard it, we should find with Plyny:
that nature has dearly and at to high a price, sold unto us, the
haboundaunce of things, which she brings fourth to our use, and that we
have no joy nor swetenes, that may not be, sadness and bytternes, which is
indyuidently joined unto them. For beside the incomparable dangier, that we
must pass for to come into this light, albeit that we be borne to have
lordeshyp and commandment over the other beasts, yet none of them comes
unto the world so unprovided and ill appointed, as we do, nor so frail, weak
and passyble as we be. And as the same Author Plyny in the Prologue of the
seventh book of his natural hystorye more largely and subtelly recyteth,
Nature has given to all beasts even from their birth, lybertye, vesture,
habytacyon and grateful nourriture. But man alone is he, that as soon as he is
borne, falls bare to the ground, begins his life by being bounden or
swadled, is constrained to borowe his garment of an other, to travail his
members and his spyryt to build his lodging, to get his food by sweat of
his body and contynuall labor of his hands: after the difficultes of his
rysynge up, and the length of time, that he must have to learn to go and to
speak. But yet this is worse, that where all other beasts, do give themself
by natural instinctyon, to that, which properly appertains to thoffyce of
their nature, the one to fly, the other to swymme: It is man alonly that knows
nothing without teaching, nether to go, nor speak, neither to eat, nor
finally to do any thing, that is in the world, without teaching, except it
be to weep. So that this pytyfull ignorance has given place and auctoryte
unto the Proverb Italian, which says, that a man must be borne wise, or
else to be borne two times. For if he be borne wise, he may escape infynyte
inconuenyences, where as through fault of experyence, he tombleth daily during
the course of this short life, into great prejudice of his wytt. If he be borne
two times, in the second life, he may aid him self with that, that he shall
have learned in the first and shall not wander in the darkness of error, as he
is constrained to do coming into this world without guide or light of
knowledge. Then as it is more necessary for man to learn, then for any other
beasts: and that the conceyuynge of knoweledge, consysteth in the spyryt: It
seems very strange to think from whence it may proceed, that (seeing that
Nature has fourmed us of members and spyryt, and that the members mortal and
weak, make us like unto beasts, so much in this more auau^taged than we, that
the more part of them be more strong and mighty, and less subjected to
dyseases: and y^ the spyryt durable and everlasting, by the which we are
parttakers with Angels makes us excellent and worthy above al other creatures)
yet always we seek and take pain to please the body by all means possible
(every man genera^ly toward him self) and that there be not many that pass
upon the spirit, or better to say: there be few found ye ones woll regard it.
There is no man of so low estate, that he cares not to couerre his parsone
with some sort of clothing. And the number of them is infynyte, that for to
give it more grace and deckynge, be not contended or take it to be suffycyent
to be wrappe it in gold, pourple and delicate silks, except they travail
strange countres of the world, for to get stoanes, most rare and precious,
and employ them to the curiosite of their nyce trymmynge, where may not a man
see that the more part of men lyuinge, not only have not their thought upon
true virtue and duty double rewarded, but also that they keep it not ones
under shadow or coueringe of the line or small threde of good conditions? Now
what shall we say, that for to sa^isfy our corporal acts, of the earth,
which within few years must return into duste (to the sustenance whereof
the things present, and that nature does offer us in ^uerye place, might
suffyce) There are no feldes, no seas, nor forestes, which be not by us with
great diligence trauersed and serched to thentent, that we may have delicious
meats and please our sensual appetytes. That which more is, albeit, that for
his commodity and ease, to defend the son, snow, rain and injury of the
air, one lodging or Cabayne well closed might be enough, yet we love better
to cause strange marbles to be brought from the furthest regyons of the earth
habytable, for to make, build and edifye large and great palaces. Where as
for the most part, we regard not wherewith the heavenly part, which is in us,
is repasted and fed, nor if his lodging be conuenyently prepared: and sonner
we set before it the leaves of vice, tha^ the most sauoury and sweet fruictes of
virtue, holding it more commonly recluded and locked in the obscure and base
usage of sensualytie, then in preferring it, to haunt the clear and high
operacions of honnestie. Furthermore if at any time we feel any part of our
body dysordered by sy^knes, we seek by all means and ways possible, for to
recover the health decayed: but we are little careful to provide recouerey, or
to mynystre mete medecyns to our mind, being evil at ease. Should this come
paraduenture for this cause? that for so much as the body is seen more then the
spryt, we think therefore that it has more need of such prouisyons? this
argument is not suffycyent, for not only the body has not more appearance,
than the spyryt, but also ye body is by hi^ greatly e^alted in it, and that it
be a true spyryt, it has as many faces, as it shows operacyons: and the body
never shows him self, but one form, in the which in many years he is
scarsely seen of many men, where the operatio^s of the spryt, may be in short
time known through all the world. And this self body continues but very few
days, where the spryt, which is everlasting, abides euerlastingely, and may
reteigne by him self through many worlds, that, wherein we accustom ourself,
during the time, that he is with the body. To the which things and other
infynitt, which may be alleged for this purpose, if men would have such
consideration, as they ought to have, it would cause better life and more
increase at this time than it does, and we having care suffycient for our body
(but more garnyshing our thoughts and minds, and feding them better, and
giving them more honorable habitacion) should be more worthy to have them, than
we be, and should take more great care to conserve them in health. And if
peradventure they chanced at any time to be diseased: we should enforce our
selfs with most diligence, to remedy their diseases, more then we do. Which
be: Arrogance, superfluite, ambition, Couetice, immesurable desire of lyuinge,
and that which makes us like unto beasts, IGNORANCE, so contagyous, and
pestylent in the mind of man, that it seems, that all other spyrytuall
infyrmytes, which trouble him, do all proceed from this alone, for where she
is, God is not duly honored, vice is not exchued, nor any public nor
private action or office, is rightfully and in order admynistred. So that the
sentence usurped by ancyent men, saying: that every ignorant person is evil,
has been of good right received. And to this approves that, which Terence had
no doubt to cause to be spoken by an old man of experience, that the earth
bears nothing worsse, than a ignorant man. For as he is in all things rude
and untaught, so in this, he is intolerable: that he thinks nothing well
done, but that, which he does him self. And truly ignorance is much unmeet
and unsitting in all parsones. but in them of nobility much more reproueable
and parnycyous. Who like as they surmounte the other in dignite of blood,
Riches, apparayll and auctoryte, so this is their great reproach, if they do
not pass other in excelle^cye of knowlaige, that apperteygneth to their
vocation, extendynge more to the charges and public administracions, than to
a heap of unprofitable pastymes and exercyses of recreation, wherein they lose
a great part of their time, which might much better be employed to learn
the roll of the parsonage, which should become them to play in the court of
the common welthe when their turn or course should come. The cost shall be to
dear, if they be forced to become wise by their expenses, as to learn in
making war. For war is a thing to be utterly exchued, and wisdom is right
miserable, that is gotten by use only. And it is certain, that they, which
lack prudence and knowlaige, can do no noble acts in time of war nor of
peace. Which regarded by Solomon King of Iewry, after that he, which can give
all things: had given him chose to deman^de what he would: he required
nothing, but wisdom. which chances aither by a souueraine priuelege of
nature, or else is obteygned by a great knowlaige of learning, joined with a
natural wytt, which is the rudder of the ship. And of such virtue and
efficacyte, that by means of it, as says Cicero, there be found many great
and virtuous personages without learning. And the natural man without learning
is more hable to receive prayseworthynes and virtue, then the learned without
naturel wytt. And at all times, for the good that may be, to trust in it, and
to employe it, without experyence, to take part upon the multitude of diverse
chau^ces, which happenne hourly in this world, is as perilleur, as to say^e a
voyage without any calamyte. For although the ship be good and strong, and
well garnished and tacled voyth sail and ballast, yet he, which is within,
knows not at a chance what wind blows, nor the Reace, that he ought to
keep, without the compass, by means whereof it has always be said, that
e^peryence is maystres of things, teaching us to rule and govern, in things
present and to comme, by Judgment and remembrance of things passed. But when
they, that understand matters, speak of Experience, they arrest not them
selves upon that natural wit only. Whereupon is comme the Proverb, which
says: In wasting one leeneth. Another is it in ye experience, which is gotten
in the only life of one man. For that is to short, frail and soden, for to
make dew prouysyon for all the proufes, that we have to do with, in this
worldly pilgremage. And without learning it is less suffycyent for to give us
good and clear kuowlaige of antiquite. The ignorance whereof, as writes Paulus
Emilleus, constrayneth the self same men, which arne becomme aged in study of
other arts liberal, always to resemble children, ignorant of parseuerance
and commone life, to live as strangers in their natyue countreye, and little
worthy to be called to the governance of the common wealth, and to the
company of Counsayls. But rather they woll sygnyfye the prays, which in the
French tongue is given to an excellent man, saying: He knows much, and has
seen much, thus speaking of that same experyence, which is ioynned with
learning. For as Master Philip de commines says wisely in his hystory, men do
see more in one only book within three months, than twenty men, lyuinge in
course one after an other, can see with the eye. With this, the C^ule and warly
learning, the constitucions of laws and Royalmes, the facyons, whereby they
are acquired and maygteyned, the means whereby they fall into decay, and
again whereby they arne reestablyshed and restored: all these things be only
conteygned in the descryption of good hystoryes and none where else. The
contempt whereof, togethers with lack of knoweledge of them, has been very
often cause, of right great Ruynes and total destruccyons of many estates,
and yet shall be so long, as audacite with the contempt of good learning,
shall have more liberty, then the contemplacyon of Antiquite, the very
inue^tres of good things. Whereof, the right virtuous, right mighty and right
Christian, Frances the furst of that name, by the grace of God the French
King, my souerayn Lord and maistre, having clear understanding, and knowing
the proffitt, that the knowlaige of hystoryes has brought him, both in wars,
and also in counsel, for to govern and conducte him in the dyuersytes of his
fortunes: has wylled not only to wytnes, but also to put in writing, and to
communicate by act (formally contrary to an other act of Alexander the great)
the fruit and delectacion, that men ought to mark and perceive thereby. But
after yt we shall have recyted them both, you shall judge which of the^ is more
worthy of praise. Alexander then being passed into Asia, had news, how
Aristotell his master had publyshed and made common the books of speculatiue
sciences, for ye which cause he wrote unto him letters of this tenure. It is
not well done of the, to publyshe the books of y^ science speculatyue: for in
what thing, shall we from hencefourth be more excellent then other, if the
doctrine which we have learned, begin to be common to every man. As for my
self, I love better to be excellent in science, than in puissance and
strength, farewell. The scienc^s, yt he calls speculatiue, be the
metaphisicals, which, as ^lutarche witnesses, arne of no utility, neither to
belearned, nor to be taught, and yet Alexander was angry, that they were made
common. But King Fraunces having, in his library, Thucydides the Athenian,
translated into our language by so noble a parsonage, as was the Lord Claudius
of Seissel (who sole^pnised it for his chief work) for that, yt the said book
was not elleswhere to be found, of his proper motion is content to communicate
it to princes, lords and gentle men of his Royaulme, though that he were
anhistografier, so highly esteamed among his country men, that they causedde
an image to be made like him, having a tongue of gold, for the elegancye and
truth, which he used in his historye, and that Demosthenes Prince of all
orators, that ever were, took such delight therein, that he wrott yt eight times
with his own hand. And for troth none of them that ever meddled therewith, drew
ever nere unto him, to descriue the deliberacions, counsels and exploytes,
keeping that, which belongs to persons, places and times. In such sort,
that for to be comprysed and contaygned the examples of all men's offices and
duties, as well in this book, as in those of Diodorus the Sicilian, of the
Capitaynes and successors of Alexander, and of Appian of Alexandria, of
wars, civil and forayne, all three of one self translation, all three
reposying in the knigly librairy, all three, not elleswhere to be found among
the vulgar people, the king perceiving, that the science of strange tongues
was not yet spread abroad, generally among the noblenes of his Roi^ulme, has
wylled this company to be set as upon a pyllerre, from whence they may be seen
of all parts, to the intent, that of that, which shall be founden to be therein
Imitable and good to follow, A man may take and use to the teachinges to the
profyt of the common welthe and edification of him self. And that ye same,
whereof men may perceive the end and beginning to be contrary unto honestye,
may be prudently considered, for to save him self from falling into the
like. From hence is it (my right redoubted and right honorable Lords) yt in
steed of Tristrams, Girons and Lancelotes and other, which do fylle books
with dreams, and wherein many have evil bestowed their good hours, ye have,
by the benefyt of the King, no less fruitful than, pleasante passetyme, for
to know what people were Pericles, Nycias, Antigonus, Lysimachus, Eumenes,
Hanibal, Scipion, and many other sage and valyant Capitaynes. those notable
acts be descryued in the volumes above rehearsed, geuynge your occasyon, to
assay by your power to transform your self into ye virtues, that you shall
perceive to reluce and shine in such excellent parsones. And to make your
proffyt, by the fautes, which you shall perceive to be therein noted, In
taking finally for your defense and guide this doctrine, historiall, which is
(as Cicero truly says) the wytnes of time, the light of troth, the life of
memory, the Maistres of the life, and the messangier of Antiquite in all and
every the passages of the one and of the other fortune. Which shall give you the
clear light of true experyence, for to conducte you virtuously in prosperity,
and honorably, to pass aduersite to the right great compforte and quyetnes of
your spyryt. But now it is time that we harken, what the translator shall say,
and that making an end of our Prologue, we begin to read his, and
afterward, manfully to pursue and follow the principalle work, in assurance
to find there, Recompense of our pain.

Here follows the Prologue or Proheme of the Lord Claudius of Seyssell,
Bishop of Marseylles into the translatyon of the hystory of Thucidides of
Athenes, of the war of the Athenians and Poloponesians, addressed unto the
right Christian French King, Loys the twelft of that name.
ALthough that all men's acts (right Christen and right victoriouse king)
ought to refer them self unto the author of Nature, who is the last end, to
the which, we ought to labor to come by the right way of virtues, and of true
good works, in hope of the life, and ^elicitie everlasting: and to exchue the
pathe, digressing from the same, and leading to ye left hand, to wit of vices
and of sins, which should bring us to perpetual da^pnation: yet nevertheless
our humayne works may have particular ends, not swaruing from the last and
principal. As in things worldly, he that makes war, although he pretends
by his furste intent, to revenge the contumely done unto him, or to defend
his own, or well to recover it, yet always the fynall intent (as concerning
worldly things) is for to have afterward peace and rest. or for to obteygne
glory and renomme. But he, that thinks on the frayltye of terrestrial or
earthly things, and of the immortalite of the soul: and that with a true
faith and godly purposes, he makes war: to the intent to defend and keep the
order of charity, and for by this mean to merit everlasting rest, and glory
immortal. And albeit, that it were more merytoryous and conuenyent for our
health, not to have in all operatyous, but one only end, which is the last
and principal: yet for so much as that is very hard, and rather a thing
Angelical, than humayne, for to wythdrawe all our senses of the soul, Joined
with them of the body (which be carnal) and to apply them to the same, which
be separated from the body, and from earthly things, to wit, to the
contemplatyon of things spyrytuall: It behooves us nevertheless to dyspose and
determyne by all means to pass quickly by these furste and mean ends,
which be worldely, in such sort, that men forget not the same, which ought to
be the last and principal. As the good pylgrymme, though that he soiourneth
in his vo^age for his necessite, or for his commodite, to the end to be more
strong and more fresh to iourneye, yet he holds in his intent, the first
conceyuing of his will, to wit to parfourme his voyage. For if he utterly
let or forgot it, he should never come to the end of it. And though that some
time he loses his way, or that he falls into a study in the way, ayther by
curiosite or by other occasion impertinent, if that he afterward come again
to his furst purpose, he shall nevertheless come to the end of his pilgrimage,
though that it be not so sone, nor so easy. Also such let may during this,
happen or come upon him, that he shall abide in his journey. Likewise is it, of
our worldly life, the which is nothing but a pilgrymage in this world. For if
we do so abuse our selves in worldly things y^ we put and fully set our
felicite in the^: we forget the end of the life eternal, and the felicite of
Paradis. But if yt we do not persevere therein, but as inpassyng: and so far as
necessite co^straineth therein, or well use the things terrestrial, principally
for to atteygne ye things celestial, y^ does not let us to obteygne ye end
of our pylgrimage, but does assist us thereunto. These ends tha^ set in due
course, and ordained to the last and pryncypall, be and ought to be diverse in
men's operations according to ye conditions of the personages, and the charge
that they have. For the princes and temporal Lords ought to do their endeavor
and uttermost to conserve and keep their subjects by good justice and polecye,
in quyetnes and peace, and also by force, if any would do them wrong or else
dymynyshe their Lordeshyp or lands, through ambition or covetousness. And
likewise the great Prelates and other inferyours, ought to provide for the
health of souls, which be committed unto the^, through good examples and
teachynges, and successively, they yt have charge of other, be they te^porall
or spyrituall public or domestical, small or great ought to have this same
regard, every one according to his said charge, And nevertheless in other
things, not concerning their charges, to proceed in their particular works by
the self way, to the intent yt in instructynge other, they lose not them selves,
as saint Paul says, for in so much as no man living is excused for charge yt
he has, but after the order of charity, he is bound furst and principally, to
have regard to his particular health, rather then unto others. I rehearse all
these things (right souerain Lord) for so much as having of a long time
known in you an ardent desire to understand and know all manner of hystoryes,
and chiefly treating of the life of great Princes passed, and also of co^mone
and politic gouernementes of great cities and commonweals, which have had
domination and empire, as of Greeks and of Romans: I persuaded my self, that
chiefly and immediately you do it, to the intent to understand the better, how
that you shall behave your self, in rulyng and governance of your Realm, and
of other prouynces, countries, lands, and lordeshyppes, that God has
committed unto your charge and governance, as well in time of peace, as in time
of war, and trustyng for your end principal, in this doing according to
your capacite and weakness (the help and grace of God assisting you) to merit
the glory and felicite everlasting. For though that sometime I have perceived
in you some pricque of man's glory, specially in your victoryes and prosperites
(which have been such and so great, that skarcely it were possible for a
humayne creature, how just and holy that he were, not to have at the furst
mouyng, some spark of vain glory and delectacyon) yet always I have
afterward seen many acts and operations in you, which gave to understand,
and have made me to believe, that coming again to the secret of your
conscience, and bringyng again the natural appetite to raysonne, you
confessed al to come of God, and would not use your said victoryes after man's
covetousness and desire, but according to reasone, and so, as appeared that you
might do without offending God or your neighbor. For if you had not had this
consideration. It is clearly notoryous, yt you might right easily and at many
times, poursuyng your said victories, have be hable to establish your estate
and empire in such sort, that it had not been in the power of man to give you
afterward therein empeschement and disturba^ce: but if they had ymagyned any
thing against you: it should have been to their great loss and dommaige without
having power to hurt you. But you have better loved to conteigne and arreste
the course of your said prosperites and victoryes by the hongre of reason,
led and conduicted by the fear of God, for the danger of yt, which might
chance: then for to suffer the sensual appetite to run on ye bridelle,
overthrown by the left way and displea^ante to God, as I do take it. For
this cause, and having good opinion of your Royal majesty, I have heretofore
been parforced to cause to comme to your knowlaige many profane histories,
which ye had not seen nor known before, for that they were not translated into
the french tongue, for some of the^ were in Greek, as the same of zenophone of
the voyage of Cyrus, and the same of Diodorus of the successors of Alexandre,
the other had been furst writtone in Greek, and afterward translated into
Latyne, as the same of Appyan of Alexandria. And the other wryttone furste in
latyne, but never were translated into French, as the same of Iustine. All the
which, besides the pleasure that may be taken in reading of them, be full of
teachynges and documentes, to him that woll taste, dygeste and reduce them unto
a moral sense. For there may be perceived many passages, which may greatly
serve to the conducte of public affairs, as well in the time of peace, as in
the time of war, And yet nevertheless, considering my Ecclesiastical estate,
and also the seruytude that I bear toward you, which is such, that I
hold and repute my self bounden to desire and procure your soul health,
chiefly: and also the prosperytie and felycyte of your temporal estate, as
much, as any subject or servant that you have, for many great goodness,
which of your grace and mere motion, you have done unto me without any mine
merytes, in all points undeserved, and for the affectyon and confydence,
which you have showed, and show to have in me, much more great, than my
small seruyces may have deserved, I thought it not conuenable, that I had
labored so far in translatynge for you humayne hystoryes, except that I
employed my time and labor in some spyrytuall thing. And thereby was moved to
translate the Ecclesiastical hystorye of Ruffinus Acquilesian, which is all
full of good doctrine, and of good examples, serving for our faith and for
ye edification of our consciences. And albeit that I addressed the said
translatyon to the right happy remembered the late queen your wife, for the
singularity and excellencye of her virtues, and of her deuotyon, and towardnes
to things spyrytuall, whereby she has left to them now lyuinge a memoryall
and reno^me perpetual, and an example of goodness and virtue to all ladies and
women of all estates: yet I well percey^ed, that such things were common
between you two, as all other were. And that for pleasure, which you show
of your grace to take in my translatyons, and also understanding the dignity
and excellencye of the matter, you would see, and cause it to be read, and
therein would take as much or more delectation than at other. And
notwythstandynge afterward having no other matter in hand, which seemed
unto me worthy of translation for to present unto you, whereof you have not
had knowlayge, and that I have not found in your librairy in old books,
which have benhertofore translated into French by many and diverse excellent
authors, I have finally chosen ye hstory of Thucydides the Athenyan, which he
has wrytton in.viii. books of the war of Peloponese and of the
Lacedemoniens, which seems right singulier unto me. not so much for the
declaratyon of the hystory (although yt it be very fair and rare enough to
French men, which have not had many of the books of the hystoryes of Greeks at
large in their language) as for the profundytie and excellencye of the orations
and propositio^s (which be called concio^s) conteygned in the same. Which
comprehend general teaching of all wayghty things, and the hole art and
efficacite of Eloquence, as all authors, as well Greeks as Latyns do show us.
Specially Cicero, who is the Prince of Eloquence amongst the Latins. Thinking
that I have done nothing by the tra^slations aforesaid, if I had not translated
this hystorye, which so greatly is celebrated by all them, which have had
knowlayge of the said orations and co^cions. And yet for all that, after I had
ouerrunne the said hystorye, I therein found so many difficulties, specially
in the understanding of the said orations and concions (which have always
seamed right hard to all them that have read the^, albeit that they were
excellent in lernyng, as Cicero him self acknowlaigeth) that I purposed to
repent and to withdraw me from my enterprise, and so much the more yt the
translatyon, which was made out of Greek by Laurencius Ualle, seamed to me very
obscure and hard, and truly so had I done, had not been M. John lascarf,
Devising with whom of this matter, by means of co^municatyon, which I had
had with him in translation of the other Greek hystoryes, purifyed or
translated out of Greek into Latin, whereof I have made mention before, and
showing him the difficulty, that I found in the said matter, he gave me
courage to intend unto it, magnifying greatly unto me the excellencye of the
said hystorye, and further promysyng me yt he would correct the latyne
translatyon of the same, in places and passages which he thought to have be
altered or darkened. In such sort y^ with good diligence, I might take out
the true sense. And so having accomplyshed the said translation, I might say,
that I had done one principal work in the French tongue. Which promyses and
persuasyons gave me such courage, Joined the desire that I have to be hable to
present unto you one thing singulier in him self, and not known to French
men: that I enterprysed to parfaycteit, by help of the annotacyons and
correction of the said Laskary. without which, for troth I could never have
known, how to comme unto the end, aswe^l for the dyfficultye of the matter,
as for the imperfectyon of the Latyne translation. in many circumstances. and
specially in the most hard. Therefore I most humbly require you (my redoubted
souuerayne Lord) that it may be your pleasure to take in good part this
translation. and to accept it for the chief o^ the works of my labourem this
art of translatyon, specially for humayne histories: as well for this that I
cannot find other matter, which shall not appear gross, as concerning this,
as also that my estate and my age, togethers with the busynes, in which you
have given me charges in Ambassades, yt you have committed unto me for your
principal affairs, when they have been most troublesome: have taken fro me
fantasye and facultye to attend or be vacant hereafter to such works, which
apperteygne to young people, endewed with good wytt and syngulyer doctrine, that
have no other busynes to withdraw their fantasyes. Also souuerayne Lord, I
hope that God of his goodness having regard to your intent, woll change the
will of Princes and people, which have these years passed, made and moved
war against you through ambition and couetice, as I do conjecture, using
great ingratytude against you, as it is well known, in such wise that knowing
the great goodness and playsures that you have done to them, and the malice and
deceyte of the^ that have been promoters and occasyo^ of ye said war and
discensions, together with the evils which have chanced and be to happen, if
it endure, and also your puyssaunce and army so strong, that sooner they may
therein loose, than win, like as they have perceived these two years passed,
shall cause the^ to require pair. Which God by his mean shall, easily do,
having always been desired or purchassed on your behalf, or else from the^, yt
he shall know to be obstynate, shall take away their strength and means to
execute it, by such remedies perpepuell or temporal, as his divine providence
shall know to be most conuenyent for the universal wealth of Christendom, as
he has already done to some of the^. In such sort, that you may use the
remanante of your days in suertie and rest, to the great rejoicing of your
good and faithful subjects, to the prosperity and augmentacio^ of your
royaulme, and to the perpetual glory of your Royal and victoryous name in
this world, and finally after all, to the eternal felicity of your soul. And
I, who unto this my age, which draws to oldnes, have not hitherto discharged
my self in any charge, yt God has given me, chiefly in the church, but have
employed all my time in temporal and worldly negotiations and affairs, require
him, that I may in this, yt it shall please him to lend me life hereafter,
supplye after my frayltie, to the faults paste in his service, without
therefore to be withdrawn from yours, there, where it shall please you to employe
me, and that I shall perceive that I may serve you and your Roy^ulme according
to my estate and condition Whereunto I hold and repute my self bounden in
conscience, and cannot foresake so to do without incurryng the detestable sin
of ingratitude. which above all other I have always abhorred, as the self
thing, that I esteem to be most displeasaunt to God. To whom I pray right
souuerayne Lord, that it may please him to order our operations and works in
the way of his commandments.

Here follow the Chapiters of the first book of Thucidides of the hystoryes
of Peloponese etc.
IN the first Chapter, the Author does show that the war, whereof he woll
speak, has been more great then any other, that the Greeks had ever had
within their country or without, and recyteth the beginning and vpcommynge of
the country of Greece, and of all the wars, that they had had before this
same. Cap. i. The beginning of the growing of the war of Greece, which
began between the Corinthiens and the Corciriens, and how the Corinthiens
having been vainquished by sea, and preparynge them selves to begin battle
again, Ambassadors were sent by aither of both parts to the Athenyens, to
get their favor or confederacyon. Capit. ii. The oration of the Corcyriens
before the counsel of Athenes. Capit. iii. The answer of the Corinthians.
Cap. iiii. How the Athenians received the Corciriens into their alliance, and
sent the^ succors, and how the Corinthiens and Corciriens had a battle by
sea, in the which a^ther of them took it, that he had the vyctorye. cap. v.
The other quarells and occasions of war that happened between the Athenians
and Corinthyans, by means whereof, all the Peloponesians were assembled at
Lacedemonie, to conclude war against the said Athenians. cap. vi. The
declaratyon or proposition of the Corinthians to the counsel of Lacedemonye,
against the Athenians. cap. vii. The declaration of the Athenyans unto the
Lacedaemonians. cap. viii. The narration and proposition of Sthenelaydes, in
following, whereof war was concluded against the Athenyans. cap. x. How the
Athenyans, after ye war against the Medians, did build again their city,
and the beginning of their Empire or Governance in Greece. ca xi. Of wars
that the Carthagians had after the same of the Medyans, until this present
war, as well against strangers as against the Greeks, by means whereof they
increased their Empire and auctorytie. cap. xii. The narratyon or proposition
of the Corinthyans to the counsaylle of Lacedaemonians before thassemblye of all
the confederates. Cap. xiii. How the war being concluded against the
Athenians by all the Peloponesians in the city of Sparte, the Lacedemonyans
sent their Ambassadors toward the Athenians for to summone them of certain
things. cap. xiiii Here Thauctour shows incidently the Trahisone, that
Pausanias would have done against the Greeks, and how he was slain. cap.
xv. How Themistocles duke of the Athenyens being persecuted as well by them,
as also by the Lacedemonyans, went or fled to the King Artaxerses, and there
ended his life. cap. xvi. How after many goynges and commynges, the Athenians
took deliberation, whyder they ought rather to accept war or to obey to the
Requests of the Lacedemonyans. Cap. xvii. The speaking and the opinion of
Pericles in the counsaylle of the Athenia^s, according whereunto, the answer
was made unto the Lacedemonia^s. ca. xviii
The Chapitres of the second book of Thucidides.
How the Beotians before the war was begone, did pryuely take the city of
Platea, which held with the Athenyans, and how they were driven from thence,
and the more part of them that were entered with in, were slain. Cap. i. The
great preparatyon of war, which is made as well on the behaulf of the
Athenyens, as also of the same of Peloponesians, and the cytyes that took part,
of the one side and the other. Cap. ii. The narration of Archidamus King of
Athenyens. Cap. iii. How after the persuasyons and exhortacyons of Pericles
unto the wars, all the Athenyans that dwelt in the feldes, wythdrewe
themselves and their goods into the city, and dysposed them selves to the
affairs of war. Cap. iiii. How the Peloponesians did furste enter the land
of Athenes, and the pyllages that they there made, and how the Athenyans by the
counsaylle of Pericles were let to issue or go out, reserved the men on
horseback, which were ouercomme. Cap. v. Of many e^ployctes of war, that
the Athenians did as well by sea as by land, the summer that the war began,
and the winter following, and also of some allyaunces and new amyties, that
they made in Thracia and Macedonia, and finally of the Public buryals or
funerals that they celebrated at Athenes, for them that dyed or were slain in
the same war. Cap. vi. The funeral narration of Pericles. Cap. vii Of the
pestilence which was the summer following in the city and land of the
Athenyans, and also of the feats of war, that were done of the one side and of
the other, and of the despair wherein the Athenyans were fallen. Ca. viii. The
narration and preposition of Pericles to the people of Athenes for to appayse
them, to exhort them to follow the war, and to endure and suffer the
present incommodites. Cap. ix. Of the virtues and commendable conditions of
Perycles. Cap. x. Of some other exployctes of war which were done the self
same summer, as well of the one side as of the other, and how the city of
Potydia did render it self by composition to Thathenyans. Cap. xi. How the
city of Platea was assieged by the Peloponesians, battred and assaulted, and
by the Cytezins defended. Cap. xii. How the Athenyens had an overthrow before
the city of Spartolia in the countreye of Beotians, And the Peloponesians an
other, before the city of Stracia in the countreye of Acarnania. Cap. xiii.
How the Athenyans had a victory by sea against the Peloponesians, and how the
one and the other party did prepayre them selves to fight at an other time by
sea. Cap. xiiii. The exhortacyon of the capytains Lacedemonyens to their men of
war. ca. xv The exhortacyon of Phormio to the souldyours Athenyens. Cap. xvi.
How in that same second battle on the sea, aither of the parties. reputed
hi^ self to have had the victory, Cap. xvi^. How the Peloponesians failled to
take the port of Pyrea privily. Cap. xviii. How Sitalces King of Odrisians
entered the countreye of Macedonia for to conque^e it from the King Perdicas,
and how he returned. Cap. xix. Of some feats of war that Phormio did in
the land of Acarnan^^, and of the original or beginning of the said
country. Cap. xx.
The Chapiters of the third book of Thucidides.
How the city of Mythilene willinge to rebelle against the Athenians, was by
them assieged. And how they sent toward the Peloponesians to have succor,
and of a discomforte that the Atheniens had in Noriqua. Cap. i. The proposition
and narration of the Mythilenians at the Assembly of the Allies and
confederates of Greece. Cap. ii. Of some great preparations, and of some small
feats, which were done that same ^eare of the one side and of the other. Cap.
iii. How the Athenyas that were assieged in platea and one part of the
Cytezins, did save them self by great force and labor, and passed through
all the walls, dyches and fortes of the Peloponesien^, which held them
assieged. Ca. iiii. How the Mythyleniens for fault of being succored in time
by the Peloponesians, did render them selves to the will of the Atheniens, and
it was determined by the Athenyans to slaye them all, and also of some things
that were in that same time done by the people of both parties. Cap. v, The
narration of Cleon in the counsel of Thatheniens. Capit. vi. The opinion of
Diotodus against that same of Cleon. Cap. vii. How the city of Mythilene was
in dangier to be utterly destroyed, and the punishment that it received for
rebellyone, and how the Plateans rendered themself to the will of the
Lacedaemonians, and also of some other feats of war, that was done the same
year. Cap. viii. The defense of the Plateans before the Lacedemonyans. Cap.
ix. The oration of the Thebains against the Plateans, and how they were slain
and discomforted. Cap. x. How the Peloponesians had a victory by sea,
against the Athenyans and the Corciriens, that took their part, by means of
the dyuysyon that was moved among the same Corciryens. Cap. xi. The
co^spiraties and partialities, which roase up, aswelle in the city of
Corciria, as in all the other cytes of Greece: by means of the war that was
between the Athenians and Peloponesians, and the cursed euyls that thereby
chanced. Capit. xii. How the Athenians sent their Army into Sycill, and of
that, which they did, and that, that chanced unto them, as well in the end of
the same summer, as during the winter and about the beginning of the summer
then following, both in the said countreye of Sycill, and in Greece, and also in
their own land, and how the Lacedemonyans did build the city of Araclea.
Cap. xiii. How Demosthenes Capytayne of the Athenya^s being before Le^cade,
departed to comme to make war against the Etholyens, and how he was by the^
discomforted, and some things that were done by the Athenians in Sycille.
Capit. xiiii. How Eurylochus Captain of the Peloponesiens, having faylled to
take the city of Naupacte, at the persuasyo^ of ye Ambracyens, enterprysed
war against the Amphilochiens and the Acarnaniens, and how the Atheniens did
purifye and consecrate the Isle of Delos. Capit. xv How Hurilochus and the
Ambraciens were by Demosthenes, and the Acarnanians and Amphilochians
discomfyted two times in three days, and of the sluggyshnes that the said
Lacedemoniens used toward the said Ambrociens. Capit. xvi.
The Chapitres of the fourth book of Thucidides.
OF some exploictes of war that were done between the Athenyens and
Lacedaemonians, and chiefly how the place and Isle of Pylus, was assieged by
the Peloponesians, and how the truse was made among them which were in the
army. Capit. i. The narration of the Lacedaemonians to the Athenyans, and the
answer which they had, and how the truse being faylled, they began to war
again. Cap. ii. Of things that were done at this time in Sycille, as well by
the Athenyans and their allies, as by them of the contrary part. Cap. iii.
How the Athenyans had the victory at Pylus. Cap. iiii. Of a victory that the
Athenians had against the Corinthiens in their land. Capit. v. How they that
were driven from Corinthe were taken by them of the town by the help of the
Athenyans, and afterward cruelly slain. Cap. vi. Of many victoryes and
prosperytes which the Athenyans had in that same saysonne, against the
Peloponesians, and specially in the Isle of Cithere and in Thrace and some
other things. Cap. vii. How the Secilians at the persuation of Hermocrates,
made peace among themselves, and returned or sent away the Athenyans, Cap.
viii. How the Athenians faylled to take the ^ytye of Megare by the
confederacy of some of the Cytezens, And how it was socoured by some of the
Lacedaemonians. Cap. ix. Of a loss of ships that the Athenyans had, and how
Brasidas passed through the countreye of Thrace by the aid of Perdicas King
of Macedonie, and of some his friends of the said countreye, for to come to
aid the Chalcidiens. cap. x. How the Acanthiens forsook the Athenians and did
take part with the Peloponesians. Capit. xi. The narration of Brasydas to the
Acanthiens. Cap. xii. How Hipocrates and Demosthenes dukes of the Athenians
made an enterprise upon the land of Beotiens, in the which they always failed,
to their great loss and disauauntage. Cap. xiii. The narration of Pagondas to
the men of war Beotiens. Cap. xiiii. The exhortacyon of Hyppocrates unto the
souldeours at the Ioyninge of the battle. How Brasidas duke of the
Lacedemonyens, took the city of Ampipholis secretly, and some other in the
countreye of Thrace by treaty. Cap. xiii. How Brasidas took the city of
Torone by treaty and consederation, and that same of Lecythe by force. Cap.
xiiii. The demonstracyons of Brasidas to the Toronians. How the Athenya^s did
make truse for one year with the Lacedemonya^s. cap. xv. How the truse between
the Poloponesians and Lacedemonyans was broken, by means of the cities of
Sciona and Menda, which Brasidas did take through rebellyon of the Cytezens
from the Athenyens. Cap. xvi. How Brasidas and Perdicas having taken some
lands from Arribeus, vnderstandying that the Ilyryans came to ouerronne them,
departed asunder, and how Brasydas being for saken of the said Pardicas and
of his bend, saved him self from the said Ilyryans, and how Brasydas and
Perdicas became enemies. Cap. xvii. The exhortacyon of Brasydas to his men of
war. How the city of Mende was taken by the Athenyens, and that of Scyone
allieged, and some other things that chanced about the end of the year.
Cap. xviii.
The chapiters of the fyfth book of Thucidides.
How the Athenyans, by the conductynge of Cleon, took the city of Torone from
the Peloponesians. and of a voyage, the which Pheax the Athenyan made into
Italy and Sycille. Cap. i. How Brasidas had a victory against Cleon and the
Athenyens, nere unto Ampipholis, in the which both the chyef Capyrans were
siayne. cap. ii. The exhortacion of Brasidas unto his souldeours. How the
Lacedemonyans made peace for them, and for their allies, and after how they
made alliance between themselves without the other. cap. iii. The form of the
allyaunce. How the peace between the Athenyans and the Peloponesians was not
observed, and how the Corinthians and some other cytyes of Peloponese made
allyaunce with the Argyues against the Lacedemonyans. cap. iiii. How the
Athenyans and Lacedemonyans were conuersante the same somer, living in doubt
and dyssymulation, the one with the other, and of some exploictes and treaties,
which were made during the said summer on both sides. Cap. v. How the
Lacedemonyans having, against the form of the treatye agrede and made with the
Athenyans, concluded alliance with the Boetiens without them, the said
Athenyans did it likewise with the Argyues, the Mantynyens and the Eolyens.
cap. vi. The tenoure of the alliance between the Athenyens and the Argyues the
Man tynyens and the Eolyens. How after many enterprises and exploictes of
war, that were done between the allies of the Lacedemonyens of the one part,
and the Athenians on the other, ye said Atheniens at ye request of the Argyues
declared the same Lacedemonia^s to have done against the treatise of peace and
of Thallyance, and to be perjured. How the Lacedemonyans with their allies,
being ready to fight against the Argyues and their allies, before the city of
Argos. A truse was concluded and taken A truse for.iiii. months by the
Captain without consent of the men of war, and how the said truse was
broken on the behalf of the Argyues at request of the Athenyans, and the
city of Orchomenia taken. Cap. vii. How the Lacedaemonians and their Allies
won a battle against the Athenyans, the Argiues and their other Allies in
the land of the Mantynyens. Ca. ix How peace was made between the
Lacedemonyans and the Argiues, and after that, the Alliance, and of some other
things, that were done as well on the behalf of the said Lacedemonyans, as of
the same of the Athenyans without any declaration of war. cap. x. The form
of the peace between the Lacedemonyans and Thargyues. The form of the
allyaunce between the Lacedemonyans and Thargiues. How the city of Melea was
assieged, and finally taken by the Athenyans, and some other things which
were done the self same year. Cap. xi. The conference and communyca^yon that
was between the Athenyans and the officers of Melea for to treat appoyntemente
between them. Cap. xii.
The chapiters of the Sixth book of Thucidides.
OF the Ylle of Sicile, and by what people it was inhabyted, and how the
Athenyans enterprysed to send thither their Army by sea for to co^quere it.
cap. i. Of some small exploictes of war, that were done the same winter in
Greece, and how the Athenyans enterprysed to go with their army into Sycyle to
conquer it. cap. ii. The narracyon of Nycias before the people of Athenes for
to dissuade and put of, the enterprise of Syryle. Cap. iii. The narration of
Alcibiades unto the Athenians for to persuade the enterprise of Sycile. cap
iiii. The narration of Nycias unto the Atheniens, intending yet again by an
indirect form, to break of, the enterprise of Sycile. cap. v. How the
people of Athenes at the persuasyon of Alcibiades, concluded the enterprinse of
Sycile. And how the army after that it was raised, departed from the port of
Pyreus. cap. vi. Of diverse opynyons that were among the Syracusayns, of the
army of the Athenyans, and the narrations, which Hermocrates and Athenagoras
made unto the people of Sarragosse, and the conclusyon that thereupon was taken.
cap. vii. The narration of Hermocrates. cap. viii. The narration of Anaragoras
to the Syracusayns. cap. viii. The Conclusyon of one of the officers of
Sarragosse. How the army of the Athenyans departed from Corciria, and how it
was evil received both in Italy and Sycille. cap. ix How Alcibiades being
adiourned to answer at Athenes for crimes laid unto him, went into
Peloponese, and incidently how Hipparchus brother of Hyppyas some time King
of Athens was slain. cap. x. How after the departure of Alcibiades, the other
two capytains Athenyans, having done some small things in Sycyle, came to
assiege the city of Sarragosse, and had a vyctory against the Syracusayns.
Cap. xi. The exhortacyon of Nycias unto the men of war. Cap. xii. How the
Syracusayns having chosen certain new Capytaynes, and given order in their
affairs, made an assault against them of Carana, and how the Athenyans
faylled to take the city of Mellana. Cap. xiii. How the Athenyans and
Syracusayns sent toward the Camerins, Ambassadors, ayther party, to bring
them to their alliance, and the answer that they made unto them both. And
also the preparatyons and practyues that the Athenyans made the said winter
against the Syracusayns. Cap. xiiii. The narration of Hermocrates unto the
Camarins. The narration of Euphemus Athenyen to the Camarins. Cap. xv. How the
Lacedemonyens, at the persuasyon of the Corynthyens and of Alcibiades, agrede
to the Syracusayns to send them succor. Cap. xvi. The narratyon of Alcibiades
Athenyan to the Lacedemonyans. How the Athenyans after they had made certain
preparatyons, came to assiege the city of Sarragosse, and of many vyctoryes
that they had against the Syracusaynes in making and assaultynge the rampares
and fortyfycatyons on both sides. And how the succors of the Peloponesians
came into Sycyle, and ofcertayne other things. Cap. xvii.
The Chapiters of the seuenthe book of Thucidides.
How Gylyppus being entered into the city of Sarragosse with the succors of
the other cytyes of Sycyle, that took his party, lost one battle, and did
win another against the Athenyans, and how the Si^^acusayns and Corinthians
sent Ambassadors to Lacedemonie, to have new succors, and likewise Nycias
does write unto the Athenyans ^or the self cause. Cap. i. The overthwart
narratyon of Gylyppus to his men of war. Cap. ii. The tenor of the letters of
Nycyas to the Athenyans, and the prouysyon, that they made upon the contenue of
the same. Cap. ii. How the Peloponesyans did, as enemies, enter into the
countreye of the Athenyans, and enclosed the town of Decelea with walls. And
of the succors that were sent into Sycile, as well on the behalf of the
Athenyans, as of the Peloponesians. cap. iii. How the Syracusains and the
Athenyans had a battle at the port of the city, as well by sea, as by land,
of the which both the one and the other party had the vyctoryes in diverse
respects. And of many other small fyghtynges and exploy^tes which were done
in the same Siege. cap. iiii. Of necessytes, wherein the city of Athenes was,
by means of the war, and how certain Thracyens which were comme into
their service, being sent back for lack of money, destroyed the city of
Micalesus, and afterward were almost all discomforted. cap. v. Of that, that
Demosthenes and Euremydone Capytaynes of the Athenyens did in their Journey,
going to the succor of the camp, which was at Sarragosse, and also of a
battle by sea, which the Athenyans had against the Peloponesians nyghe to
Naupactum. cap. vi. How in the mean time that Demosthenes and Eurimedo^ were
in their Journey to comme to succor the Camp of Thathenyans in Cycile, the
Siracusyans had a victory by sea against the said Athenyens, who besieged
them. Cap. vii. How Demosthenes and Eurymedon being arrived at the camp
before Sarragosse, and having in the night assailed the rampers of the
Siracusians at Epipole, were overthrown and lost many of their people. Cap.
viii. How the Athenyans after many consultacions being determined of their
Siege, and to depart from it, did for a superstition abide still at it. Cap.
ix. How the Syracusians having an other victory by sea against the
Athenyans, did their force to enclose them within the port, which they than
did hold. Cap. x. Of the cities and people that entermedled in the war of
Sycile, as well on the one side, as on the other. Cap. xi, How the Athenyans
were vainquished again in a battle upon the Sea by the Syracusyans and their
allies, in such sort that they could not save themselves by sea. Cap. xii.
The narratyon and encoragynge of Nycias unto the souldyours. Cap. xiii. The
encouragynge of the Syracusyans to their men of war. How the Athenyens and
their allies, after the dyscomforture, departed from their camp, to go by
land into the lands and cytyes of Sycile, that took their part. Cap. xiii.
The declaration of Nycias made to the men of arms. How the Athenyans, being
with their friends, departed from their camp after the discomforture for to go
from thence by land, were pursued by the Siracusians and their allies, and
finally all discomforted. Cap. xiiii.
The Table of the Chapiters of the eight book of Thucidides.
Of the prouisyon that the Athenyans (understandynge the d^scomforture of their
people in Sycile) made to susteygne war against the Peloponesians, and how
the more part of Greece together with the king of Persey, did allye themselves
together against the said Athenyans. Cap. i. How the Lacedemonyans were
required and entreated by them of Chio, and Lesbos and of Hellesponte to send
them an army by seafor to resist the Athenyans, against whom, they were
willing to rebelle. And the order that thereupon was taken. Cap. ii. How
certain ships of the Peloponesiens were repoulled by the Athenyens in the port
of Pyreus. And how the cytes of Chio, of Erythrea, of Myletu^ and many other,
yielded themselves to the pleasure of the Peloponesiens, and how the furste
alliance, was made between the king of Air and the Lacedemonyens. cap. iii.
The tenor of the alliance between the king of Air and the Lacedemoniens, How
they of Chio after that they had turned against the Atheniens, caused
Mylytenum and all the Isle of Lesbos to turn from them, and how afterward
the Atheniens recovered yt, together with certain other cities that were
rebelled against them And how having ouercomme them of Chio in three
battaylles, they pyllaged and wasted their land, and of certain other
things. Cap, iiii. How the Athenyans, having assieged the city of Myletum
had a great battle against the Peloponesians, in the which ayther party in
diverse chaunses had the vyctorye. And how the Athenyans understanding that
succors came to the city, raised their Siege, and departed. And afterward,
how the Lacedemonyens and their allies took the city of Lase, and within the
same Amorges, rebelle to the king of Air, whom they rendered to his
lieutenant. Cap. v. How the city of Chio being assieged by the Athenyans,
Astyochus chief of the army by sea for the Peloponesians, refused to geve them
succor. And how the second treatye of alliance was made with Tissaphernes,
with certain other small exployctes, which were done on the one side and of
the other. ca. vi. The second traictie of alliance between the Lacedemonyans
and the King of Air. How the Peloponesians had a victory against the
Athenyans by sea, and how afterward certain of their Capytains, ha^ynge had
communycatyon with Tissaphernes touching an article of their allya^ce, went
unto the Rhodes, and caused it to return against the Athenyans. Cap. vii.
How Alcibiades, being comme into the suspytyon of the Lacedemonyans,
wythdrewe him self toward Tissaphernes, and persuaded him to forsake the
party of the Peloponesians, and to allye him self with the Athenyens. And how
Ambassadors were sent by the Athenyans toward Tissaphernes for to conclude
it. Cap. viii. How they of Chio, having b^ne overthrown at an assault, which
they made upon the camp of the Atheniens with great loss of their people,
were straightly assieged and brought into great necessity. And how the
treaty that Alcibi^des took in hand to make the alliance between the
Athenyans and Tissa^hernes was broken. And the alliance renewed between the
said Tissaphernes and the Lacedemonyans. Cap. ix. The third traictye of
alliance between the Lacedemonyans and the King of Air. How a great deuysyon
happened among the Athenyans, as well in the ^ytye as without, specially in the
army, which was in Samya: by means of chaungynge of the estate and
gouernemente of the same, which did them great damage. Cap. x. How the
Peloponesians conceived great suspytyon against Tissaphernes, as well for that
he deceived them of succors which he had promised them, as also for that,
that Alcibiades had been restored and called again by the Athenyans, which
were in the army, and had all the auctorytie with the^, which he used to the
wealth and prouffit of his party. Cap. xi. How the Athenyans being comme
into great deuysyon and dyssensyon by mean of the commune estate which had
been changed, assembled them selves to comme to some accord and appoynctment.
Cap. xii. How the Peloponesians had a victory upon the sea against the
Athenyan^ nyghe unto Erithrea, and afterward how the government of four
hundred was abrogated, and the mutyne by that mean appea^ed within the city.
ca. xiii. How the Armies by sea as well of the Atheny^ns, as of the
Peloponesiens went into Hellesponte, and there prepared them selves for to
fight. Cap. xiiii. How the Athenyans had a victory against the Peloponesians
in the sea of Hellesponte. Cap. xv.
Here ends the Chapytres of the eight books of Thucidides, of the war
between the Peloponesyans and Athenyans^

Hereafter follows the Prologue or Proheme of Laurence Valla Translatour of
the said viii. books out of the Greek tongue into the Laten, addressed unto
Nicholas of that name the fyfthe Bishop of Rome.
I May well say in this behaulf (right reverend father) that^ which Ennius
the Poet, reherceth to have been said, by Eneas. In this substance, it is
great pleasure unto me to have es^aped thr^ugh so many cities of Greece, and to
have passed through the mids of mine enemies. For so much, as having ended
and acc^mplishedde the charge, that thou have said on me, it seems well unto
me to be escaped and come unto saluetie, through the mids of my enemies. For
like as some of Themperours of Rome, as Augustus Anthonius, and many other,
rested them selves at Rome, to give order to the polecie of the common welthe:
and committed the feate of wars, moved a far of, to their Dukes and
Lieutenantes: right so thou, having and taking charge and care of holy
things in the religyon of Gods and man's laws, of peace, of health, and of
the augmentacion of the people Romayne, have committed unto me, and to many
other (that have knowelaige of the Greek tongue and of the Latyne) as to thine
Dukes, trybunes and Capytaynes, that we should submyt holegrece to the, and to
thy obeissance, by diverse meanes^ every one according to his charge, the most
that we might. That is to wytt, that we should expound and translate for the
into the Latin tongue, all the books which we found composed or made in the
Greek tongue. which is a thing honnorable, singulier and greatly mere for a
sage pers^nage. For what thing may be more profitable, more plentyfull and
more commodyous, than to translate bokes^ Truly in my Judgment it is a
marcha^dyse of right precious wares. And I do not compare it unto a small
thing, when I compare it unto marchandyse, for there is nothing among men
more necessary than the same: which fournysheth men of that, that is
conuenyent for their living and nurriture, to their clothing and deckynge, to
their delyghtes and to all other things that be conuenable for them. All the
which things, marchandyse brings from diverse quarters. In so great
habundaunce, that by mean there of nothing is lacking in any part, and that
all things be every where common, in such sort, as in a manner, men were (as
the saying is, in the goldenne world. Likewise does the translatyon of books,
which is so much more worthy than marchandyse, as the goods of the soul be
more worthy, tha^ those of the body. For by things that this translation does
communicate unto us, the understandings and wits of men be nouryshed,
clothed, repaired, adourned, and by a manner of speaking, made deuyne. Therefore
there is nothing more delectable, more healthful, more to be desired, and to
comprehend a^ in one word, more profitable, then to see translated into our
tongue all that, that is found in the Greek, Hebrewe, Caldee or Arabique
tongue, be they treaties of histories, of orators^ of philosophers, of poets,
of phisicians or of divines. And ye may well and clearly perceive by this:
that if the old testament had not been translated out of Hebrieu into latyne,
and the new out of Greek, we other laty^ men should not have had any
knowelayge of God, and to be short, if that I had will suffycyently to laud
this art of translatyon, I must be more long and more prolixe, than the time
and purpose do require. But without speaking of other languages for to come
again to the comparasone that I have made of the art mylitarye, and of the
war in this translation: I repute it no less to be thy glory to have caused
to be translated the books, which yet be found not translated out of Greek
into latynne, than if thou had brought again into subjection of the
Romayne Empire, Asia, Macedonia and hole Greece. How beit in dystributynge thy
charges and commyssyons, thou have given me one, beit by chance or of set
purpose, so right hard: that skarce there is any that can be more^ for thou
haste committed to me to take and to expugne by force. viii. strong places,
set in a mountaygne upon high rocks well nigh inexpugnable by artyllery, nor
by skalynge, and skarcely to be batered by shot, and also it is very hard to
make there any bastillyon nor mines withoutfourth. And yet I w^ll not that you
impute this manner of speaking that I use, more to the weakness of mine
understanding, than to the dyfficultie of the matter^ for all they that have
knowlayge of the Grek^^he Authors confess by one common accord, that
Thu^^dides is very hard and obscure, in his orations pryncipally: wherwt
the.viii. books of his hystorye be stuffed, and that does wytnes unto us
Cicero, whom men called the Greek of his world, in his book of Oratory,
saying in this wise. The same narrations or orations, have so many hyd and
obscure sentences, that skarce one may understand them. And if any man would
say unto me, wherefore have thou than taken this charge upon the^ I answer
him: that I have not taken it, but it has been given me, or else I would not
for any thing, have demanded it. And if I have accepted it, it has been for
this, that it seemed unto me a thing reprehensible and inexcusable to resist the
commandment of my Emperor and master. whom I know to be so wise and so
virtuous. And sythens that it has pleased him to do me this honnour (for so
woll I take it) to commyt and give me to subdewe an prouynce, that never man
enterprysed to assaille, I had rather dye in the poursuyte, than to forsake it
through fayntnes of heart or dysobedyence. Albeit that I have been deceived of
a succoure, to whom I ill trusted. to wit of the Cardynall of Bizance, at
whose persuasyon as I believe, you have committed this charge unto me. Who is,
to speak the truth, and without flaterye, an excellent Greek among the
Latyns and an excellent latenist among the Greeks. For that, that now at the
hour, that I hoped that he should have helped me (as he had good knowlayge,
and would have done) he is gone for legate unto Bullonia, whereby I find me as
despayred of mine enterprise. not seeing a parsonage that would or might aid
me. By occasyon whereof thou may know (right reverend father) that I have been in such pain and travail, that if thou would judge unto me the
triumph for this here, as thou haste done to other in like case, I should not
rejoice so much of the same, as of this, that I am come to the end or
ouercommed my labors. for that, that I found me many times without aid and
without compaygnie, in the estate wherein they be, which make mines in the
earth to take a place, or for to find the mines or the veins of quarryes, and
when they have dygged very deape, they se not low nor high, far nor nere
any thing that they searched. Wherefore if that by these mines I have taken the
places, if I have found by dyggynge, the vain of stones of pure marbill, and
of fine gold (as I think I have done) it is not to marueylle, if I be right
joyful to be at the end of my labors. For, for to speak of Thucidides, he is
reputed amongst the Greeks, as the Porphir amongst the marbles, or as gold
among metals, for that, that there is in his speaking, so much gravity, so
much vehemencye and so much truth, without glofynge (which is the
pryncypall part in an hystorian) that they, which read it, think and believe
that that he writes, holy to be true, and that he him self that has wrytton
the hystorye, has not only seen the things, whereof he speaks, but also was
therein presydent or ch^ef. As he was for troth in many things, so as shall
appear hereafter by the dyscours of the hystorye, albeit that he was charged
to have to slackely comme to succoure by sea, the city of Antypolys with the
army by sea, whereof he had charge. By occasyon whereof he was bannyshed,
although vnryghtuously. During which banyshment, he composed this present
hystorye, and yet could not fynysh it as he had determined, bring prevented by
death. And yet nevertheless this present anthor and Herodotus have the praise
among the Grekyshe hystoryans, all like as Saluste and Titus Lyuius among the
Latynes. For the one of them, to wit Herodotus, goes forward all plain and
easy without any roughnes, as a river, that ronneth swetely all hole together
without any sourge and without wawes. The other, to wit Thucydides, has his
course more impetuous and in speaking of things of war, seems that he is at
the point of doing it, and that he gives tokenne to fight. As Quyntilian the
great Orator says in this manner. Many have wryttone hystoryes very
elegantlye, but no man puts me in doubt, that there a^ne not two, that
greatly exceade the other. And albeit y^ their virtue and excellencye be in
diverse qualyties, yet the praise is egall, as much to the one, as to the other.
To wytt, Thucidides, which is brief and compendyous without interuption, and
Herodotus, who is eloquent and copyous. The one is more vehemente for to move
men's hearts, the other more remys and gentle, the one is more singulier in his
orations, and the other in his speaking. The one is more lively, and the other
more playsante. Thowe haste than (right reverend father) by the testimonye of
Latynes, what the hystorye of Thucydides in Greek is. And if thou dyddest
think, that it has all the same mai^stye translated into Latynne, I would
forget all the labor that I have taken to do it. But more I will not, but
that thou despise not my labors, consydering, that the good knight esteameth
nothing so much, as to be holden and reputed by his head and Emperor, to be
vaillyant and hardy. Thus do I require you (right reverend father) that you
woll acknowlaige this historye of Thucidides to be thine and mine. For if thoue
allowest it, and have my work agreeable, I woll repute it common unto us both.

Here follows the translatyon of the Lord Cla^dius of Seyssell of Thucydydes
into the French tongue.

The furste book of Thucidides of Thistoryes of Peloponesia.
In this furste Chapter the Author, for to show, that the war, whereof he
woll speak, has been more great, than any of the other that the Greeks had
ever had within their countreye or without: reherceth the beginning and
procedynge of the countreye of Greece and of all the lands, that they had had
before this present war now moved.

The furste Chapter.
THucidides Athenyan has writ one the war, which the Peloponesians had
with the Athenyans from beginning of the same unto the end. hoping that men
shall find it right great and more worthy of memory, than all the other, that
have been before. By means that both parties were than very puissant and
plentyfull of al things necessary to maigteyne it. And also for that, that
all the residue of Greece did entermedle on the one side and on the other. Some
of them from the beginning and other after the consultacyon. and this motion of
war was very great, not of Greeks only, but also of strangers, and by a
manner to say, of many diverse natyons. And albeit that of other wars,
which were before this, and chiefly of the more ancient, there is no great
remembrance nor certainty: yet always I esteem by diverse conjectures, that I
have of many things which I have diligently inquyred, that they were not
very great. another concerning feats of war, another as touching other
thyuges. For that, that it is suerlye certain, that the country, that now is
named Greece, was not in times paste so establyshed and permanent as it nowis.
But the inhabytantes thereof were oftentimes driven away by other more
puissante, and went to dwell in other places. And by this mean, they had not
among them any trade of marchaundyse, nor any entrecourse by sea nor by land,
but all in fear. And for this cause they tylled not their lande^ but only so
much as was necessary for their living. Also they had not than great plenty
of monney, another did they pla^t many trees in their land, for that they were
not very certain to have power to enjoy them. And specially not having any
towns closed with walls, they made no great matter to be driven from thence.
thinking that they could live as well in an other land, whereby it may be
said, that they were not puissant nor having great towns nor apparayl of
war. So much were all the quarters of the same Region subjected to the
alterations of people, specially the quarter which men now call Beoce, Beoce.
the same of Thessale Thessale.
and^ many other that be in Peloponese. reserved the countreye of Archadye,
which was always the most rich and most fartylle of all the other. And by
means thereof, albeit that the in^abytantes there were a little more mighty,
than the other: yet they ofte^tymes destroyed themselves, by questions and
seditio^s that they had among themselves. and further they were greatly subject
to robberyes and ^illage of strangers. whereby I find yt the countreye of the
Athenians and the regyon Attique, has been longer inhabyted by one only nation
of people, than any of the other, for that, y^ the land there was so barren,
yt the other had no care to come thither to win it. but always it has been
(as men may see and perceive) by means thereof more peopled and increased with
new inhabitants, than any of the other, by that that they which were chosen
out of other countries by war or for sedition, wythdrewe themselves thither,
as into a place sure and stable. In such sort, that the city of Athenes,
which is their princypall town, and al^ the country came to so great
increase of people, that the land could not nouryshe them, but were
constrained to send part into Ionu^, and there to make Colonies, that is to
say, towns peopled with their nation. There is also an other argument, which
does clearly to know, that this was not than any great thing of the said
countreye of Greece. That is, that it is fully certain, that before the war
of Troy, that same Greece, which also is called Heliade, did nothing by
assembly. And also had not that same name universally, specially before Hellenes
son of Deucalion, Helenes Deucalio.
nor yet any time sythens, every countreye had his partycular name. But after
that the said Hellenes and his children had occupied Lordeshyp in Theotide,
Phthiotia.
they began to lead out and to cause their people to go from the same
countreye, through the other countrees, and by that means did enterprise to
enterm^dle, and use merchaundyse. and then men began to call them all,
commonly Hellenes, that is to say, Greeks. And yet for all this, they could
not so sone obteygne the same denomination over all, by right long time after,
as it appears by this, that Homere, who was long time after the said war
of Troy, names the^ not all generally by that same name, but calls only
them so, which came from Theotide with Achilles, who were the furste so
called. But as touching the Danoes, the Argyues, and the A^heans he calls
them by their said particular names, and names them not therefore strangers,
for that, as it seems to me, that this nomynation was not yet attributed to
that hole nation and countreye, which we call Greece, nor dysseu^red from
other. All the which (excepted the same) they name Barbarous or strange. And
for conclusyon all the same natyon, which is now called Greece, had thanne
particular names. And sythens by using of one only language, it has been
commonly called Greek, which before the said war of Troy, did never any
thing by assemblye, as well by reason of their pouertye, as also for that, that
they had no conuersatyon togidre. But to that enterprise of Troy, they went
all, by means that they than had had conuersatyon among themselves, and had
frequented to eat together. For Minos, Minos.
who is most ancient of them of the said country, of whom we have hard
spoken, assembled a great quantity of ships, wherewith he did hold and
rule the greater part of the sea, which we call presently, the sea of Greece.
And first occupied the Islandes called Ciclades, which he peopled with his
subjects, having driven from thence the Caryens. And after his death, he left
them for inheritance unto his children. And yet nevertheless chased from the
same quartier the robbers of the sea, as much as he might, as it is to be
thought, to the intent to enjoy the better the revenues thereof. For that,
that the Greeks and other nations which inhabyted nyghe unto the sea and to the
Islandes, after that they begone to use ships, and to sail, gave them
selves to pyllage and to rob upon the sea, having appointed for this
purpose, the myghtyest among them. And thus they did, as well for their gaygne
or lucre, as also to nouryshe the poor people, which dwelled on the land. In
such sort, that they daily pyllaged the tounes that were openne, and not
garnyshed with walls, and with the same pyllage, they lyuedde the more part of
them, without reputing the said manner of living to be shameful or a
thing dyshoneste. But rather did take it for glory and honnoure, as men may
see yet at this present day, of many, which exercise the said Pyratycall
or theuyshe craft. And that does also declare it self by this, that it is
found wryttone in many Poets, that when the said people, which inhabited
the sea at that time, dy^ there encounter, they demanded the one of the other,
if they were not thieves. By which it is good to understand, that they, which
made such demaundes, pretended that they did no vylleny to them, to whom they
did it, nor took it for shame to confess it. And yet at this present day, in
many quarters of Greece, they keep the self custom, to wit, among the
Ozelians, Ozolee.
that be in the countreye of Locriens, Locri.
among the Etholiens, Aetoli.
and the Acarnaniens, Acarnane.
which be in firm land, by occasyon whereof, they were accustomed to go
armed. Which was tha^ general in all Greece, for that, that they had no
suertye in their houses, nor yet in their iourneys. Wherefore they were
constrained for defense of their parsones, to go always armed, like as all
strangers do. And in so much as men may yet now see that there arne many
countries in Greece, which keep this manner of living: it is to be presumed,
that it was auncyently the custom general of all the Greeks. Among whom,
the Athenyans were the furste, that began to leave this custom, to go thus
armed, and so forsakyng that same manner of living: they gave them self to a
cyuile and delycyous life. And it is not long time passed, sense the ancient
of the country, (truly they of most reputacyon) did were robes of lynnen
clothe tryfles and muskballes of gold and their hears turned and trimmed
round by nethe. And the same custom and manner of living has been used in
Ionum by the accord, which they had with the Athenyans. But the old men
sense that time there, have to this present, used a very small sort of
habillementes. And the Lacedemonya^s, which be most ryhe and most pompous,
as well in habillementes, as in other manner of living, go all apparaylled of
one sort, the noble people, as the ^o^mone. And they were the furste, y^ for
to wrastelle, spoylled or turned the^ selves all bare and oynted them self
with oil. where auncyently they, which would do like excersises in Olympe had
before them little clothes to cover their pryueties. and it is not lon^e time,
that they left to were them, and the strangers do yet use them. specyallye
the Aliatiques, when they make the prize for the wrastelers and fyghters. For
they received none, if they did not were breeches. And in many other things it
may be showed, that the Greeks did in times past keep those manners, which
the rude people now hold. And to come again to our purpose of the cytyes of
Greece, those, which of most fresh memory were restoored and peopled,
specially those, that were rich, and had great number of people hauntynge the
sea, builded other cytyes upon the ports and hauons of the sea. and that they
might more suerly use mar^haundyse, and also defend themselves from their ill
neighbors: they kept the straytes of the land, which were between two seas,
that is called Isthmos, Isthmi.
but the ancient cytyes be very far from the sea, be they in Islandes or in
fyrme land. In the which, the furst founders were inhabyted to be far from
danger of pirates and robbers. for that, that they warred with the one and the
other, as well them, that dwelled in the low countries, as also those which
inhabyted an high in the fyrme land. Cares. Phenices.
And specially the Caryens and the Phenices (which inhabyted in the Islandes)
used ye self craft of Pyracy, by means that they held many of the Islandes.
And that has been found by experyence in this war of the Athenyens, for in
pourgyng the Islande of Delos and plucking down all the graves of them, that
were there dead and buried, they knew that more than the half number were
Caryens, as well by facyon of their harnoys, with the which they were engraued,
as also by manner of their buryinge, which was holy such, as now is used.
After than, that the King Mynos had obteygned the Empire of the sea in that
quarter, he chased the pirates and thieves from all the Islandes of the same
sea, and in their stead did send other people his subjects into many of them,
for to inhabyte them. Who living in more suertie, gave them self more to
excersise marchaundyse. Whereby some of them became so rich, that they enclosed
their tounes with walls. And the other, which were most poor, and were not
able to assure them selves with walls, did render themselves to be their
subjects by their own will. to the intent, that they might gaygne and use
marchaundyse under shadow of them, that were more mighty. Whereupon being so
augmented and enryched as is before said, in certain time after, they
assembled togethers to go to the siege of Troy. Among whom (in my judgment)
Agamenon was most mighty. Agame^non.
and he assembled together not only the ships, that were necessary to carry
them, which had been at the poursuyte of Helayne for to have her to wife,
which were bound by oath made between the hands of Tyndarus father of the
said Helayne to give aid for their power, Tindarus.
to him, yt should have it against all them, that for her cause, would do any
^ultrage or wrong unto him, but also a great number of other ships. And they
(that diligently have inquired of ancient feats of the Peloponesians) say,
that the same regyon of Peloponese was so named of one called Pelops, Pelops.
who coming thither from the countreye of Asia with a great quantytye of
gold and silver, albeit that he was a stranger, yet by reason of his riches,
he was by the people of the country that were poor, honored. In ^uche sort,
that they received him for their Lord. And after his name called the country,
Peloponese. and sythens his death, his successors and descente did yet get
more great lordeshyppe. For it happened that Euritheus, Euritheus.
wyllyng to go to make war, against the Myceniens, left Atreus to govern
his royaulme of Peloponese, Atreus.
for that he was his uncle, brother of his mother, and also tha same Eurithens
wythdrewe him self thither at that time, when his father persecuted him for ye
death of Chrisyppus, Chrisippus.
whom he slew. The same Eurytheus then being slain by the Heraclides in the
country of Attique, the Mycenyens, that feared to fall into the hands of the
said Heraclides, knowing moreover the said Atreus to be mighty, and a man that
loved the people, they received him unto their lord. And by mean thereof, he
was King and Lord of Micena with all the rest of ye lands of his said nephieu
Euritheus. By mean whereof, the Pelopides, to wit, the discente of Pelops were
more mighty than the Persydes, to wytt, the descente of Perseus. Who before
had dominyon of that countreye. Agamenon succedynge the same Euritheus, which
also was a man mighty by sea, more than any other of the Greeks, assembled in
the said countries which he held, this army, more by force, than by love,
for it is very certain, that he came to the said siege of Troy with greater
number of ships, than any of the other, and that he gave of the said
ships, unto the Acardyans, like as Homerus recyteth, if we woll take his
testimonye to be suffycyent in this behaulf. For in speaking, as a man had
given him the Royal scepter, he saych that the same Agamenon, besides the
countries that he held in fyrme land, had rule in many Islandes. and that
could no man do that dwelled in fyrme land (reserved the Islandes next unto
them, which were not many in number) if he had not been mighty by sea And as
touching that hooste, that Euritheus brought to Mycena, we may well judge,
that they might have been they, that were assembled before in the countreye of
Greece. For Micena was a very little town, and though in that time it was taken
to be great, yet now it would not so be taken, which is an argument euydent
enough to believe, that he had not there so great number of ships at the Siege
of Troy, as Poets have wryttonne, and as the renome has ro^ned since. For
if the cyty of Lacedemonie^s were not inhabyted, and that there remained but
the temples and comone buyldynges, I believe, that in succession of time, men
would not believe at the sight, that it has been so strong, and so puyssant,
as it now is. albeit that it holds two parts of the lymyttes of all
Peloponese for his terrytorye, and rules all the remenant, and that it has
many other cytyes and lands out of the said Peloponese in his alliance. And
nevertheless before the said city was well peopledde and builded with sumptuous
temples and other edifyces (Than when the people were dyspersed through the
vyllages, like as all the other people of Greece were) It is clear and manyfeste
that it seemed much less. The city of Athenes should be an other thing, if
the like should chance, that it were habondoned, for me^ might ymagyne and
judge in seeing the greatness and situation of the same, that it had been double
more mighty than it is. And thus I conclude that we ought not holy to believe
that, which Poets have wryttonne of the said army of Troy, nor to have more
regard to the greatness of cytes, then to their power. And that the same host
was greater then any of them, which had been before, but much less then
those, that men make at this present, we may well believe it by the Poesye of
Homer. For although it be very lykely, that he made the thing more great than
it was after the style Poetical, for to give more great luster or beautye unto
his declaratyon: yet were not those same than, so great, as these in this
present time. And that may appear by this, that of the twelf hundred ships,
which he reco^neth, he writes that those of the Beotiens carried every one, a
houndred and twenty men, and they of Philoctete syfty. wyllyng to show by this,
what the greatest and the lea^t ships might carry, seeing that he makes no
mentyon of the greatness of the other, nor of the number of the people that they
carried. which is to declare, that the greatest carried but one houndred and
twentye men, and the less fyfty. And also it appears that all they, which
were in the ships of Philoctete were both warryers and maronners, by that he
says that they were all men of war, as well the maronners, as the other, as
he says. And also it is to believe, in so much that the Kings and Dukes of
the country passed the sea with their puyssance and apparaylle for the sea,
that there tarried not many people in the country. And also they had not than
shyypes covered and strong, as men have now a days. But they were only
small slight ships mete for to rob upon the sea. And therefore (taking the^
for mean) between the greatest and least, he could not have so great number
of people in them, that men might say, that they had been sent by the common
assemblye of all Greece. And that chaunsed more for fault of money, thanne for
^aulte of people. For they might not carry but so many people, as they thought
to be hable to nourysh, during the war. Now is it very certain, that after
they were arrived, they were the stronger. For else they of Troy would not
have permitted them to close their camp unto the walls. And also they aided
not them selves during the siege with all the people, that they had brought
out. But for fault of vyctuayles, they were constrained to send one part to
labor the countreye of Cheronese, and one other part to rob and ^yllage by
sea. So that being so dyspersed, they susteygned war against the Troya^s, the
space of ten years, as well in defending, as in assayllynge, for that, that
they were indifferent and egall in force, by means of the absence of the
people, which the same Greeks had sent out to labor and for pyllage, but if
they had bad provision of victuailes, so that without goinge to labor and
pillage, they might have tarried altogithere, certaynely, they might have taken
the city and have destroyed it, as they did after, wtin much less time, but
they had enough to do for a time, to defend themselves. So than it must
conclude, that the wars and armies, which have before this of Troy were
very small for lack of monney and that the self same, which is most
celebrated and most renommed, was much less than poets have writtonne. And
furthermore it is manifest that the Greeks after that war, were often times
chased from their country, and constrained to go to dwell in other countries,
so that they had not so much rest, that they might multeplye and increase.
and that chanced, for that they had been so long at the siege of Troy, that
at their return, they found many things changed. and many sedytions arose
in the cytes, so that some of them, that had destroyed the said city o^
Troy, were constrained to build new cities, for they, whom we call now the
Beotiens, Boetii^
being chased by ye Thessaliens from the land, Thessal^
which they held about three skoore years, after the destruction of Troy:
came to inhabit that country, which is called Beoce. and before was called
Cadmee. which, Cadmea.
one part of the^ had holdenne in times paste, and specially than, when they
departed to goo unto Troy. And the Doriens, Doors.
about four skoore years after the said destruction of Troy, held
Peloponese. And a long time after ye country of Greece being with great
defficultie peasable, and the inhabitants assuredde, they began to send
fourth their people for to inhabit other countries. Among the which, the
Athenyens did people the country of Ionu^. and some other Islandes. And the
Peloponesians and other people of the rest of Greece, did people Italye and
Sycilie. All which things were done, sythens the taking of Troy. The
country of Greece, being than bicome so puyssant and rich, there chanced
every day new rulers in y^ cities by means of the revenue thereof, which was
grea^ely augme^ted. For before ye kings came by succes^io^, and they had their
puis^^nce, ^ighte^ and prehemynences lymyted. and also they studied most in
navigations, by means that all Greece did than freq^ente most commonly the sea
with small ships, not having yet the vsaige of great. whereof the Corynthyens
were ye furste Inuentors, Corinthii.
and there were made the furst galleys, that ever had been seen in Greece. And
since one Amynocles the Corynthyan shyppwryght, Amynocles.
made four for the Samyens, about three hundred years before the end of the
war, whereof we write. And the most auueye^r war by Sea, whereof we have
knowlaige, was bitwene the Corynthyens and the Corcyryens, Corcyrenses.
which was than there, about two hundred and three skoore years. And for
that, that the city of Corynthe is the strayte of the land between the two
Seas, it was always the staple of the Greeks, when they used marchandyse, yet
more for land, than for Sea. By this mean (and that as well they that inhabyted
within Peloponese as without came to merchandise within their land) they were
more rich, than the other, like as the self poets do us to understand,
which call Corynthe the rich city. And yet since that, all Greece did give
themselves to navigations and marchandyse by sea. After that the pirates and
robbers were driven away, the said city bicame much more rich, because that
they came from all coostes to land there. As touching the Ionyens, they had a
long time after, the usage of saylinge in the time of the furst king of Perse
Cyrus, and of his son Cambrises, so that they defended their Sea against the
said Cyrus. And in the self same say son, Polycrates that obteigned the
rule in the city of Sam ye, after the time of Cambyses, Cambyses.
was so mighty by Sea, that he occupied many Islandes. Among which was the
same, that men call Rhema. Rhema.
the which he consecrated and gave unto the god Apollo, who was in the temple
of Delos. After that, the Phocyans, Phocen^^es.
to wytt those, that founded the city of Massilia, Massilia
vaynquyshed the Cartagyans by Sea. And the victoryes and battles by Sea,
whereof we speak, were greatest and most renommed, whereof there is any memory.
and yet neuerthelas were long time, after the destruction of Troy. Moreover
the Athenyens, the Egenytes and other, that men find by writing to have had
than army by Sea: had very small number of ships: and also were very little.
Aegineti
For the more part of them, carried not above fysty men, and that was very
seldom. For the Athenyens, having war against the said Egenetes, and
fearing their strength by Sea, Themistocles their Duke and Capytayne
persuaded them, Themistoc^es.
that they should make out strong ships for to beat them by Sea. which
thing they did. and yet notwithsta^dynge, all the same ships were not
covered. Such was the estate and hooste of the Greeks by sea, as well from the
beginning and auncyentie, as also afterward. whereby, albeit that it were
not very great, yet neuerthelas they that intermedled, acquyred and got
great riches, great revenues and great lord ships, by means that in
saylinge, they subdued many Islandes, chiefly those, that were in the barayne
country, and lacking many things necessary. Also they made not than any
war by land, whereby might be got one anny great puissance, for insomuche
as the wars were between neighbor and neighbor, there was no great
getting, until they began to go fourth by sea, and to conquer without
their countries: for they could not agree togithers to obey unto the great and
principal cities of the country. And when they were assembled to counsel
upon war, they could not agree of the aid, that every country should make
and contrybute, but, without commune assembles, they warred the one neighbor
against the other, so as occasyons sarued the^. Untyll the war which in time
past was bitwene the Calcides and Eretriens, Chalcidenses. Eretici.
in the which, all Greece was divided and took part with ye one and with the
other. After that, many empeshementes happened unto every of the said people of
Greece, which wtholded the^ from encreasyng themselves. For as the Ioniens
began to augme^te themselves, Cyrus with the might of Perse came upon them,
and after that the same Cyrus had vaynquyshed Cresus, Cresus.
he took by force and subdued all the count^ey, which is between the river of
Halis, The river of Halis.
and the sea. As touching the other cities of Greece, ye governors, that had
dominatio^ over the^, took no care, but only to keep their persons and their
auctorytie, and to enryche and enlarge their particular howses. And for that
cause, went not much fourth of the said cities for to go to conquerre a far
of. Also it is not found that they did any thing worthy of memory. but only
a certain small war amongst the^ bitwene neighbor and neighbor, resarued
the^ that occupied Sycille, who, were most puyssant. After y^ saison it
chanced, that ye rulers, as well of Athenes, as of ye other cities, were chased
away by y^ Lacedemonia^s, excepted the^ of Sycille. For the city of
Lacedemonie, after yt it was increased by the Doryens, who at this present
does inhabit there, albeit yt very long time it was troubled by cyuile
sedytions and dissentions (as we have understand) yet always living, both in
ye time, and also of auncyentie, in good manners and by good laws, yt
preserved it self fro tyranny, and maynteygned his liberty. For we find,
that there were passed more than four houndred years, from the end of the
war, whereof we speak, y^ the Lacedemonya^s had had, ye same form of
living and o^ governance of public wealth, as they presently now have, and
also were so puyssante by mean thereof, that they amended the governance of
other cities. An one after the tyrants were driven out of Greece, the Medes
warred against the Athenyens, and vainquyshed them at Marathonica, Martho
and ten years after, the king Xerxes came with an i^estymable puyssance
for to subdue hole Greece. Xerxes
For to resist whose puyssance, by a common accord of all Greece, the
Lacedemonyans, as most myghtie, were made chief of the said war. And the
Athenya^s, parceyuinge the coming of the strangers determined to forsake their
city, and to bestow themselves in their ships, which they had caused to be
made and apparailled for that purpose. and by this mean, they became people of
the Sea. And certain time after that, y^ by one accord and by one common
assemble, they had driven away the strangers: all the Greeks, that were
rebelled from the obedyence of the Persyans, and likewise they, that were
united to resist them: divided them selves into two factions, the one under
the Lacedemonia^s and the other under the Athenyans^ for that, that those two
cities, were most myghthie of all the other, to wytt, Lacedemonye by land,
and Athens by Sea. and yet neuerthelas they abodde by a certain small space of
time, in good amytie, making war and taking part together. But anonne
after, war began bitwene the same two cities and their allies. and there was
no nacio^ of Greeks in any part of the world that followed not the one part
or other. In such sort, that from the wars of the Medes until this here,
whereof we speak, they have been always in war or in respyte of war, to
wit, the said cities, the one against the other, or else against their
subjects, that rebelled against them. By means whereof, they be by long
experyence greatly exercysed in arms, and also be well provided of all things
necessary for war. Now the said two cities had diverse manner of living with
their subjects and allies. For the Lacedemonyens made not thairs, trybutoires.
but would alonely that they should govern themselves as they did, to wytt, by
a certain small number of the most honest people amongst them, for their
profitt and utility. But the Athenie^s by a little and a little got to them all
the good ships that their allies had, except them of Chio and of Lesbos,
Chio. Lesbos,
and after did lay upon them certain trybute. by mean whereof they made an
army more great and more mighty on their side only, than all the country of
Greece had ever made before, fro the time that they made war generally
together. Such was the estate of Greece in auncyente time, as far as I can
find. albeit that it be right hard to believe, if a man would narrowely
consider and debate all the tokens or signs. For somuche as the people that
hear speaking of things passed (though that it be of their countries and of
their own ancesters) they suffer the bruyte to spread abroad and run as one
reports it unto the^, without enquiring any further of the truth. For we
se that the Athenyens bileue and say commonly, that Hyparcus was slain by
Armodyus and by Aristogitone, Hiparchus. Harmodius. Aristogiton.
for that he was a tyrante, and they do not consider that in the same saysone,
that he was slain, Hippias which was elder brother of Phisistratus reigned in
the city of Athe^s. of who^ Hiparcus and Thessalus were brotherne. and that
one day Armodius and Aristogiton, Prisistratus. Thessalus.
who had interprysed to kylle them all three, imagenynge that their purpose had
been discovered, by some their accomplyces, unto the said Hippyas, durst not
execute their enterprise against them, doubting that he had been aduertysed
thereof, but yet neuerthelas they determined to do some thing worthy of memory
before they were taken, so they came to find Hyparcus, who was making
sacrefyce in the temple, that is called Leocorion, Leocorium.
and there they slew him. And in many other things, whereof men have yet
memory, we find that the other Greeks have faulse opynion, and think them to
be other, than they have been. As the Lacedemoniens, who bileue that their
rulers, when they putt the balls in the boxes in the counsel to show their
opynion, did putt in every of them not one only, that is to say, that they
had two voices. And that there had been a company of pirates in their
country, which never was. So slouh^fulle and neglygent many people be to
search the truth of things. But who will consider the arguments, that I
have brought in and approved by this, that I have above recyted, shall not be
deceived. Nor shall give full faith unto poets. Who make the matters more
great, than they are, by fayn^nges^ nor also unto historia^s, who myngle
poesies through out their historyes, and study more to speak playsante
things, than veritable, like as Herodotus did. Where by it is chanced that a
great part of that, that they said without v^ynge any arguments or tokens of
truth, by succession of time, is holden and reputed for a fable. And yet is
true. And although that men have always judged this war whereof we write, to
have been v^ry great, and since that it has been ended, have by works
thereof, had in admiration the former and ancient: yet it shall be showed
evidently unto all them, that woll dyligently consider the one and the other,
that this here, has been much greater than any of the other. And
notwythstandynge that it should be a very hard thing for me to show all the
counsayles, that have been holdenne, the deliberatyons, opynyons and
co^clusyons and all the other purposes that were put fourth, as well in
general, as in particular, and as well before the war begone, as after, not
only of that, which I have vnderstanderstande by other, but also of that, that
I have hard myself: yet that, which I have hard of credible persons that
were present at the communy^ation, and that did speak things, consonante to
the truth after the common opynion, I have putt it together by writing. And
as touching that, which has been done during the war, I will not write
that, that I have heard say of all people, though it seem unto me verytable.
But only that, that I have seen and that I could understand to be certain by
credeble parsones, that have had true k^owlayge. And also it has not been
without dyfficultie to know the truth, for those themselves, that had been
present, did speak dyuersly after their particular affection, or after as they
minded it. And for that, that we woll not speak tryflynge things, it may be
well, that our hystory shall not be so delectable to read and to hear. But
they that will know the truth of things passed, and by the same consider
and judge things that may chance herafter, such or the like, shall find it
profitable. For this is not our intent, for to make for this present time a
tale playsante to hear for one time, but a history profitable to be know in
forever. And to declare, how that this war has b^ne greater, than that,
which the Greeks had against the Medes: It is very well k^owen, that the same
was ended in two battles by sea, and so many by lande^ there, where as this
endured right long time. and also there happened many euylls by mean there of
in Greece. such, as no man did euerse to happen in like time, though all those,
that have been done in Greece, were reco^ned or accounted, as well by strangers,
as amongst themselves, were it by towns destroyed and left desolate, or
inhabited again by other people, the auncye^t being chased away by fortune of
war: were it by cytezeins or people slain and bannysh^d by dyssentions and
^yuil sedytions. And yet by an other true tokenne it may be well judged
greater. than the other auncye^t, whereof the renome has remained: and that is
by the signs and other myshappes, yt has been seen, as well by great and
exceadynge Earthquakes, that chanced in many places of Greece, as also by the
Eclipses and obsturations of the son, more often, than had been ever seen, and
also by great extreme heates, whereupon followed great famyne, and after a
vehement pestylence, which brought many people to death. All which things
came with the war, whereof we speak. Of the which, the Athenyens and the
Peloponesyans were authors, having broken the peace, that they had made for
thyrty years after the taking of Eubece. Eubea
And to the intent, that there be no occasion to inquire the causes, whereupon
this so great a war began, I am willing to rehearse yt here. And I agree or
grant, that the most true and pryncyple was after mine judgment, (whereof
there is no speaking) the fear, which the Lacedemonyens had of the
Athenyens, whom they saw in short time to be so myghtie. Notwithstanding, the
reasons, that were alleged publicly and commonly on the one side and on the
other, for the which the peace was broken between them, were such, as I shall
declare.

The beginning of the Arising of the war of Greece, which begone bitwene
the Corynthiens and the Corcyriens. And how the Corinthiens having been
vainquyshed by sea and preparynge to begin bataile again, Ambassadors were
sent by aither of both parties toward the Athenye^s to win or obteigne
their aid and fau^ur. The.ii. Chapter.
EPydanne is a city, Epidammus.
which lies on the right hand, as men come from Greece into Ionu^ by sea.
which bordreth unto the Taulancie^s, Tablantii.
which be strangers of the country of Iliria. Into the same, in times past
came to inhabyte certain Corcyriens, brought thider by Phalius the Corinthia^.
who was of ye disce^te of Hercules, Phalius.
son of Erathoclides. Erahtoclida.
which Phalius was given the^ for chief or hedde by ye Corinthie^s, who were
their superious and Metropolitains of the said Corcyrie^s. without whose lyce^ce,
it was not laufull to the same Corcyriens to go to buy^d a new Collonie or
habitatio^ in an other country after their laws. And with the said
Corcyriens, some of ye self Corynthie^s and a number of the Doryans went
thider to inhabit. And so it happened, that wtin a small time the said
Collonie and town of Epydanne, became great and mighty, as well in riches, as
in people. But having been many diuisio^s among the^, some strangers, their
neighbors, made afterward war against them. By means of which war,
their force and puyssance was greatly dymynished, and finally by the last
sedicion and mutyne, which they had before this war, whereof we treat, the
como^s did chase away the nobles and the pryncipall governors of the city.
who, wythdrewe themselves toward the strangers, thaire neighbors, with
whom they came oftentimes to ouertunne and pyllage the land of the said
city, as well by sea, as by land. which saying, they that tarried within, sent
their messengers toward ye Corcyrie^s, as to their Metropolitains, prayinge
them, that they would not suffer them so to be destroyed, but to se^de them
some parsone to make appoyncteme^t with the^, that were driven out, and to
appaife the war of the strangers. which request the said messengers made in
all humylitie to the Corcyrie^s, being assembled in the temple of Juno. But
they granted the^ no prouysion. whereupon the Epydannyans, saying themself so
forsaken and destituted, and not knowing, what way to take to be delivered fro
the said war: sent other messengers to the temple of Delphos, to know of ye
god Apollo, (who gave there his aunswers) if it were expedient for them to give
their city to the Corinthiens, which had from the beginning brought their
ancestors into the same, to the intent that they should come to succor the^. The
which god made them answer, that they should give themselves to the said
Corinthiens, and take dukes and capytaynes of their people. which answer
received, they sent their Ambassadors toward the said Corinthiens, to show
the^, how that they had been brought to the said place of Epidanne by one of
their citezeins, and also that they were admonyshed, by thaunswere of god
Apollo, to comme to render themselves unto them. Saying which request, the
Corinthyens deliberated to go to succor them, as well for that, that they
reputed the^ as much their burgeoses, as of the Corcyriens, as also for the
hatred that they had against the Corcyriens. who, albeit that they had
auncye^tly been their burgeoses, and that the city of Corcyre had been founded
and peopled by the Corynthiens, yet they passed not upon them. and in their
public feasts, did not them the hounours, which the burgeoses of a town
were accustomed to do to their city Metropolytayne. And also in their
sacrifices, they gave not to the cytezeins of Corynthe. any place more
honnorable, than unto other. And the said Corcyriens did this for that, that
they were than, very rich and mighty by monney and all apparaille for war,
as much or more than any other city of Grace. they were also fyerce, for the
puyssance that they had had by sea, yet more great, than they at that time
had. And for the glory, that the Phaetians, Pheaces.
who before had inhabited in their city, had had in feats of the sea.
which moved them to keep always an army^ by sea, which they than had mighty
inoughe. For at the hour that they began the war, they had six skoore
ships. The Corynthyens, than being hateful to the Corcyriens for the reasons
above said, sent of their people to garnyshe the town of Epydanne, and also
some Ambrothiates and Leucadyans, Ambrociate. Leucadii.
and further suffered to all those of their cytezeins and subjects, that would,
to go thider to inhabyt. And for that, that the Corcyriens were stronger by
sea, fearing that they would impesche their people, which they sent to
succonr the said Epydannyans, if they went by sea, they caused the^ to go by
land until Apollonia, Apollonia.
which was one of their towns. wha^ the Corcyriens understood, that the
Corinthians garnyshed the said town of Epydanne with their people, and
thinhabita^tes thereof were given unto them, they were greatly displeased. So
they incontynently sent thider an army with xxv. ships. and with an other
number of ships, to trouble them the more, they sent them, whom they had
chased out of Epydanne before said, which came furste unto them to render
themself, showing their a^ncyente nobility, which might be seen in the
said place by the graves of their ancestors, prayinge them that they would
set them again into thaire houses and to chase away the garnyson of the
Corinthians. And for that, that the said Epydannye^s refused to receive the^
and to obey to the said Corcyryens, they came to assiege the^ with forty
ships accountyng them with the bannyshed men, whom they would have set
again into the town. and they called to their allyaunce the Ilyriens,
neighbors to the said city. Having than assyeged the town, they caused yt
to be cried with the sound of a trompett, that the habitantes or other
strangers, that were within the same, might comme fourth in suerty, and they
that would tarry within were declared enemies. But seeing that none of them came
fourth, they determined to assault the town. which is situated upon a
dystreayte of land, and compassed about with the sea on both sides. The
Corinthia^s being aduertysed of this seage, assembled their army to go for to
uccour their people. and ordained to send to the said place of Epyda^ne a new
Colonie of their citeze^s. and so made such an ordenaunce, that they, that
would not than go with the other, which presentely went thither for to dwell
there, might afterward ^ome, and have as much part as they. payinge from
that time to the people of Corynthe, fyftene groates a piece, so there were many
that paid monney, to be there received a^terwardes. On the other side the
Corynthiens sent toward them of Megare, Magara.
to pray them that they would lend the^ their ships for to accompaigny them,
if the Corcyriens would empesche them. who sent unto them.viii. ships well
appoincted. They of Paul's, Pales.
that is a city of Cephaleniens, Chephalenii.
iiii. the Epidauria^s fy^e. Epidaurfi.
The Harmyo^s, Hermiones.
one. The Troesania^s, Croezenii.
twain. the Leucadians, Leucadii.
ten. and the Ambrociotes. Ambrociate.
viii. as touching the Thebanis Thebani.
and the Philasiens, Phliasii
they demanded of them monney, and of the Heli^s, empty ships and monney.
besides this, the said Corinthiens had on their side, thyrty ships armed
and apparailled, and three thousand footmen. when the Corcyriens understood
the great preparation that the Corynthians did make, they sent toward them
messengers, and with them came thider Ambassaders from the Lacedemonyens and
Sycionyans. who demanded of the Corinthiens, that they should withdraw their
garrisone from Epydanne, with their burgeoses. that they had sent thither to
inhabitt there, for that, that they had nothing to do with the Epydannyans. and
if they there pretended any right, they offered to stand to the ordenance of
some of the cities of Peloponese, such as they should deuyse together. and if
they would not stand to the ordenance of man, they were content to be judged
by god Apollo Delphique, rather than to make war with them. And that they
should well advise and think, that if they would come by force, they should
constrayne the same Corcyriens to make new allyances for to defend
themselves. whereunto the Corynthiens answered them, that if they caused the
ships and strangers that were before Epydanne to be wythdrawen, the rest
might afterward be commoned upon. For it were to no purpose, to speak of
putting the matter in justice, having their Siege before the town. To this the
Corcyriens replied, that they were content to do yt, provided that the
Corinthians should withdraw their people from the town. and thereupon would
give such suertie by oath, as was accustomed, and that both parties should
surcease all exploictes of war until the dyfference should be determined.
But the Corinthians, who before had their people embarked and the su^cours of
their allies all ready, would not so agree. but sent before an heraulte, to
defye the Corcyrie^s, and by and by departed from their port with.lxxv.
ships and two thousand ^ote men to go against Epydanne, fully determined to
fight against the Corcyriens. Now ye capytaynes of the ships were Aristeus,
Aristeus
son of Pelicas, Callicrates son of Calie, Callicrate.
Thimanor, Timanor.
son of Thimates, and of the footmen, Archetymus son of Eurythimus,
Archetimus.
and Isarchidas, Isardichas.
son of Isarrus. being than arrived with their army for anem^ste the town
of Actie, Actium.
in the quarter of Anactorie, Anactoria.
where the temple of Apollo is, in the distrayt of ye goulphe of Ambractiens:
the Corcyriens sent unto theme an heralte in a brigantyne, to show them, that
they should not come further against them. and in the mean time they did make
ready their ships and putt themself in battle, taryinge for the answer,
which being come, and understanding by the same, that there was no hope of
peace, they began to sail against the^. the number in all was.lxxx. ships,,
the fysty reco^ned, which were at the siege of Epydanne. So anon the two
armies came to mete the one the other, and the battle was very sharp. but
the Corcyriens had ye victory very glorious. For there were fiftene ships of
the Corinthyens, all to crusshed and drowned. After which victory, the self
same day, the Epydannye^s did render themselves by composition. which was
such, that the strangers should be sold, and the Corynthiens prysonniers to
be used at will of the ouercommers. For this victory the Corcyriens set up
their Trophe of spoil upon the mounteine nighe to Corcyre, named Leucyna.
Tr^phe is a sign r^ised up in token of victory.

Leuciuna.


and slew all the prysonners, that they had taken within the town, except
the Corinthyens, whom they kept prisoners. And following their victory, after
that the Corynthyens, which skaped the battle, were returned: they took all
that, which they held nygh to the sea, and passing fourth, they pyllaged and
destroyed all the territory of Leucada, Leucada.
which was one of the Colonies of the Corynthye^s. and afterward did burn
the town of Cylenes. Cillenes
wherein was the chyef of the Elyenes, Elienes
for that, that they had aided the Corynthiens with monney and with ships,
and in effect, by right long time after the victory, they kept the sea at
thaire playsure, doing much evil and dommaiges to the friends and allies of
the Corinthiens. Until such time that the Corynthyans, seeing their friends
so mysused, sent a fresh a new army by sea. and came to pytche their camp
in Actie. and nygh the river of Thesphrotyde, Thesphroditi
that they might defend and succor Leucade and the other cities, that took
their part. And on the other side, the Corcyriens lodged their camp, as well
on the sea, as on land in Leucyne, which was directly oueranempste the other,
and all the summer both camps did continue without will to assail or draw
nyghe the one to the other, and in beginning of winter they returned both
into his house. Now the Corynthiens did so lamente for the victory that the
Corcyriens had had against them, that they never ceased afterward to make
ships, in such sort, that they raised again a new army by sea, very
puyssante. For they gathered together for monney, maryners and souldeors as well
of Peloponese, as of all the remennant of Greece. whereof, the Corcyria^s, (when
they understood yt,) were greatly astonyed. For that specially, that they had
no alliance with any other of the cities of Greece. For they were not wyllinge
to bind themselves to take part with the Lacedemonyens, nor with the
Athenyans. So they thought it expedyent to send Ambassade toward the
Athenyans to make alliance with them, and to get of them some succor, if it
were possible. which saying the Corynthians, they likewise sent their
Ambassade to the Athenyens for to let, that they should not give any succor
to the said Corcyriens. So they were hard in the counsaille of Athens, the one
before the other^ and the Corcyriens began in the manner that follows.

The Oration of the Corcyriens before the counsel of the Athenyans. Ca. iii.
IT is reasonable, lords Athenyans, that they which comme unto their
neygbours, for to requyer of them aid, like as we now come toward you, if
they cannot show any plaisirs and services by them done in times passed, nor
any alliance. whereby they arne bounden to do yt, that than they declare unto
them furste that the plaisir which they demand of them, is for proffytt of
them, of whom they require it. and it is the most expedient mean for to
persuade. if that it may be verefyed. And i^ that may not be, at the least,
that it shall not noye or bring any dommage unto them, and finally that they
shall perpetually bind them, unto whom they shall do it. And if they ne may
nor ca^ show any of the said things, they ought to take it in worth, if me^
refuse to grant their demand. All which things, the Corcyrie^s, which
have sent us hither to make allyaunce with you, do persuade themselves to be
hable to veryfie and approve. And al be it that the opynion that we have had
until this present without raysone, may be dommageable unto us, for the
necessity, wherein we now be, (for we were not willing hertofore to make
alliance with any parsone, until time that we had some necessity, and at this
present, having war with the Corinthyans, we be constrained to comme to
require it, whereby it chances that that, which we judged in times past to
be modestuousnes and prudence, to wit not to bind ourselves by allyaunce to
any other, to the intent, not to be by that mean constrained to put our estate
in danger for their appetite, it is now ymputed us for folly and lack of
wytt) yet always, without help of any person, we repulsed and chased away
the army be Sea of the Corynthiens which came to assault us, but seeing,
that our enemies do fortyfie themselves, and take aid of the country of
Peloponese and all the remnant of Greece, for to come a fresh to ouerrunne us,
and knowing, that we arne not puyssante inoughe to resist so great a
multitude, and that yt should be great danger for us, if we should comme into
their subjection, we ar^e constrained to search likewise for succor on all
sides, where we may have yt. And it is to be pardoned though we presume now to
do against our ancient custom and opynion, wherein we have long perseuered
through error, and not of malice. And if you wol thoroughly hear what we woll
say, this alliance, which we demand of necessyte of you, shall be honn^rable
and profitable by many reasons. Furste that you shall aid them, that be
oultraged or wronged, and not those that do wrong. Secondarely by that, that
you shall succoure them that be in right great danger, you shall employe
that benefytt in that place yt ever shall be had in remembrance, and
furthermore being myghtie by sea as we be, consider when there may ever
comme a better occasyon for your increase and prosperyte, and to the greater
descouragynge of your enemies, than to see to be offered unto you (and that
without any cost or danger) the great puyssance, which you should buy at
high price and with great intercessyon. and besides this, you shall get
prays of all natyons, and an perpetual oblygatyon of them, that you shall
have defended, and also you shall greatly increase your strength. All which
things have not very oftentimes chanced to our remembrance. and it has not
been many times seen that they that required succoure of other in feate of
war, have offredde them as much aid and saruyce, as they demanded of them.
And if any man would say that we can sarue for nothing but in time of
war, and that you have none, truly he deceyueth himself greatly. and
understands not, that the Lacedemonyans, fearing your puissaunce, do prepare
themselves to war against you, and that the Corynthiens, which have great
amytie with them and be your ennemies, go about to subdue us, for to have
afterward the better means to assault you, to the intent that we, whom
they hate as they do you, should not be hable afterward to come to succor
you. and that we should not putt them by of one of the two opynions that they
have, to wytt to hurt us and to fortefie themselves. Wherefore reasone woll
that you receive us into your alliance, sythens that we requyer it. And by this
mean that you prevent their imaginacions and pretenses, rather than to be
afterward constraynned to use to comme by contrarys and new remedys. And if
they woll say, that it is not honnest that you receue into your alliance their
burgeoses, they ought to consider, that every Colouie or company of
inhabitants ought to honor his city Metropolitayne, that has founded it,
wha^ that it does him good, but if it entreats the other noughtely, it must
depart from his frendeshipp. For men do not send Citezeins into new places
to inhabitt, to the intent that they should sarue them that tarried in the
city, but to the end, that they may be like and as brotherne. Now it is very
notorious that the Corynthyans has wronged us. for where we presented. them
to stand to trial and judgment touching the city of Epydanne, they had
lever debate their quarelle by war, than by frendeshyppe. And that which they
do against us that be their burgeoses and parents, ought to make you wise. and
not to suffer yourselues to be deceived with their tro^peries nor to obey to
their fraudulente requests, for he ^yueth in suertye, that agreith not to his
enemies, in the thing, whereof he may repent himself. And somuche the rather
you ought to receive us unto your alliance, that in so doing, the
Lacedemonyens cannot say, that you have done against the treaty of peace,
that is ^etwene you and them, consyderyng that we are not allied to the one nor
the other. And by the same treaty it is provided, that if there be any city
of Greece, that be not allied to the one nor to the othere of the said cities,
yt may allye it self. unto which of them yt woll. And yt should be very strange
and unreasonable, that they might arm their ships not only with your
friends and allies, but also with your subjects, and that it may not be
laufulle for you to accept an alliance, which men comme to offerre to you.
nor to do your proffit there, where you may, and that it should be imputed unto
you for crime or offense if you did grant unto us that which we demand.
Truly we should have much greater cause to sorrow for you, if you would not
grant us our request which be not your enemies, seeing us in such dangier.
And how much goodness so ever you did, you should not thereby appease thies
here, which be your ennemys, of their ill intent and purpose. but you should
permyt the^ through your neclige^ce to take away your strength, which you ought
not to do, but rather to defend, that none of your subjects should go to their
wages. and in receyuyng us to your alliance, to send us such succor, as you
shall think good, openly, whereby many comodyties shall come unto you like as we
have showed in ye beginning and above al other do show this following. For it
is notorious, that thies here be our enemies, and also they have power to
chastise and correct the^ yt they repute to rebelle, against the^. wherefore
seeing that we do offer you a felliship and allia^ce to aid you and sarue in ye
sea, and not only by land, in suffering us to be lost, you shall have much
greter loss and do^mage, tha^ if you did lose but people of maynne land. For
you should bring it to pas (if you could) that none might be so puyssant by
sea as you, and if you could not do that, at the least that all they that
had power there, might be your friends and allies. I have no doubt that the
causes which we show, do not seem to every of you, vtyle and profitable, but
some may fear, that in thus doing, you should break the peace. Unto whom
we answer. That it is better for you not to trust so much to that
confederation, and for to increase your strength, by means whereof you shall
keep your enemies in fear, rather, than trusting thereunto, not to be
willing to receive us to your alliance, and to abide more feeble, seeing your
enemies so strong. Who if they subdue us, shall be holy assured of their
purpose. And on the other part they that make this doubte^, do not well
consider the proufyt and honor of the city of Athenes. For this questyon
here is not only for Corcyre, but also for them of Athenes it self. For that,
that they may well perceive that the war is prepared not to be made at a
long time hereafter, but presently. Wherefore there should be no diffycultie to
receive into your amytie and alliance our city of so great importance,
being friend or enemy, consyde^ynge that it is so situated, that by the same,
one may easily pass into Italye and into Cycile. and also let, that ships
may not pass from the said places into Peloponese, nor from Peloponese thy
der, nor elleswhere. Besides many other commodites and proffittes, that you
may have by the same. And for to rehearse in short words the substance of
that, which I have said, I conclude that you ought not to refuse us, but to
consider that there be three cytyes in Greece, mygtye by sea, to wytt, ours,
yours and that of the Corinthians. And yt if you re^use to ioigne ours with
yours, and suffer that it be added to the same of the Corynthyans, you shall
afterward have war with the Peloponesia^s and with the Corcyryens. Where if
you reteygne us, you shall have more ships and force by sea for to resist
your enemies. Thus spoke the Corcyryans. and afterward the Corinthians were
hard, who spoke in this manner.

The naration and answer of the Corintiahns to that same of the Corcyriens.
The.iiii. Chapter.
FOrsomuche as thies Corcyriens here, have not only spoken of thai^ case for
to be received to your allyaunce, but also of us, saying that we have unjustly
bigonne war upon them, it is necessary for us to make mention of both. and
afterward to show you, that you ought to admit our demand (which is very
reasonale) and to reject the prouffites, that they here do present you
against reasone. They furst say, that by modesty they never have made alliance
with any city. But truly yt has not been, neither for modestye nor for
virtue, but through noughtynes, for that, that they would not have any
compaignyon nor wytnes to their myscheues and ill deeds, that might rebuke nor
warn them of their shame. Also the situatyon of their town, is mete to make,
that they may be arbyters of the oultrages that they commyt without coming
into any judgment of reasone. For that they went not much into other
Regyons, but the other nations came to them for marchaundyse. And so that,
which they pretend for their glory, not to have wylled to make alliance with
other people, has not been to that intent, that they had not been partakers
and fellows of the vyolences and iniuryes that the other committed like as they
say: but to the end that of those crimes that they did perpetrate, there
should be no arbitratours nor wytnes. And where they were strongest, might
wrong the other, thinking that so much they made their proffit the more, that
their pyllage was more secret, and also had therm the less shame. And if
they were so honnest people, as they say, they should show more their virtue
and wisdom, in geuyng and receyuynge things raysonnable. which they have not
done toward other, and less toward us. For albeyt that they be our
burgeoses, and that we have founded and established them, yet notwythstandynge
before this time, they be departed from us, and now they war against us.
And where they say, that we have not sent them from our city to inhabyte
there for to be evil entreated or wronged by us, we answer them, that we
also have not lodged the^ there, to receive oultrages and vilanyes of them, but
for to be always their superiors. And that they should honor us so, as
reasone woll, and as they do, yt we have sent to other Colonies. All the which
bear us singulier love and reverence. Whereby it may suffyciently appear,
that inasmuche as we be agreeable to all the other, which be in greater number:
they hear do wrongfully hate us. and if we have warred against them, it has
not been without reason, nor for a small cause. And in so much as we have
done them good for a small occasyon, raysone would that they should have endured
and borne with our anger, and so we should have had regard to their patience
and modesty. But they, trusting in their riches, after many insolences, that
they had used against us, camero take and occupye the town of Epydanne. which
is of our jurisdiction. And also they took it not than, when it was travailed
by w^rre of strangers, but at that time, when we came to succor it. And they
yet wtholde it by force. And it avails not to say, that before they had done
it, they were willing to submyt it to trial and iudgemen^, for this is not to
purpose when a man has occupied and holden a thing from another, to appeal
it into judgment, but men should present such parts before they come by
force. which they have not done. but they offered us the way of justice only
at that time, when they held the town assieged, and that they saw us ready
to come to succor it. And not content with that, they arne come hither
toward you, to require, that you wolle receive them unto your alliance, and
to be their compaignyons. And that not only to the war, but also to their
vyolences and unrighteousness, being our enemies. which thing they should
rather have demanded, when they had nothing done unto us, and not now, that
they have wronged us, and see themselves in danger and since that you have
had no partycypatyon with them, nor received any saruyce of them than, when
they were without busynes, you ought not now at this present, to communycate
to them your power. But rather, as you have not been parttakers of their
offenses, so ought you to keep your selves from incurrynge for their cause,
into any fault toward us. For it is to them, which have in times passed
communycated their force with their friends, that men ought, when the case
requires it, to render the like. But you that have not in any thing
particypated of the crimes and vyolences of these here unto this present, have
no occasyon to entermedle of their affairs for the time to comme. Now we have
declared to you, and done to be known (as it apperteygneth) that we be
grounded in good reasone, and equity against them here, and that they have
oultraged us, by their violence and couetyce. It now rests to cause it to
appear, that you may not with reasone receive them into your amytie and
alliance. For albeit that it be said by our treaty of peace, that it is
laufull for all the cytyes of Greece, that were not of your alliance, nor of
ours, to ioygne them to which of us they would, that is not to be understood,
that they may do it to the prejudice of the other party. but it is meant for
them, that have need of aid, and demand it. Without that, yt they, of whom
they demand it, should depart from the alliance of the other. And not for
them, that under color of bringyng and requyrynge peace, should procure war
against the friends of them, of whom they demand it. Which thing woll
presently chance, if you regard not that, which we woll say unto you. For if
you receive these here, you shall not only be their allies, but you shall also
beco^me of our friends, our enemies. And therefore if you be with them, it shall
justly force us in reue^gyng o^r selves on the^, also to revenge our selves on
you. Wherefore you should do wyselye, and according to raysone, not to take
their party, and better should you do, if you took ours (who be your allies
and confederates) against them that never had alliance nor treues with you.
and you ought not to begin to make a new law, that the one of the parties may
receive to his alliance the rebels of the other. For we have not done the
like toward you. But than, when the Samyans rebelled against you, and that
the other Peloponesyans were in contentyon and diverse opynyons, whyder they
ought to be aided or not, we judged not against you. For it seemed also unto us
to be against reasonne, to prohibyte anny parsonne to chastise his subjects.
And if that ye woll retire, wythdrawe and defend our subjects, that shall
have committed any ^ryme or offense, you may well know, that we wol^ do the
like unto yours. And by this mean you shall make a law, that shall redounde
more to your dommage, than to ours. For that, that you have greater number of
subjects, than we. To conclude, we think that we have showed and suffyciently
declared before you according to the laws of Greece, our right, and that which
raysonne wolleth. and that which we shall hereafter show, is in manner by
exhortacyon and request. And also we woll not demand any thing of you, as
your enemies to hurt you, nor yet as your friends to abuse you, but for to be
used according to raysonne. and also we think that you ought to do it, for
that, that in that time, that you had war against the Egenytes before the
war of the Medyans, Eginete
at which time you had no great ships: the Corynthyens leante you, twenty.
By means of which service, you had the victory against the said Egynetes.
and by means of this, that the other Peloponesians did for our love, not give
any succor unto the Samyans, you took vengeance on them at your will. And
that was done in time of one so great a war, that the people, for the desire
that they had to vainquyshe their ennemy, regarded none other thing. But held
for friend all men that aided them at that their busynes, though that before
they had been their enemies, and for ennemy, every man that was on the other
part, although he had been before, their friend. For also they left their
particular and domestycal affairs, without giving order therein, for the desire
and obstinacye that they had to revenge them on their enemies. Wherefore those
among you, that have remembrance of the said pleasures and seruyces, and the
other younger men, that have hard it spoken by your auncyentes, ought to be of
opinion, that me^ should recompense them by like means. And if it should be
said that that, which we speak is very reasonable, but that that, which the
other present, should be more profitable, if there be war, we answer you,
that how much the more, that men proceed justly in their causes, so much the
greater profyt does. comonlye follow. And the war, whereof the Corcyryens do
put you in fears, and for doubt thereof, do persuade you to do unreasonable
acts, is not yet certain that it shall fortune. And therefore it is not
reasonable, that for suspytyone of a war incertayne, you should take the
quarrel presented by the Corcyryens against us, your friends and allies. And if
you have any Imagynation of the said war for suspycyon that is chanced
between us, by means of them of Megare, you ought by your wits and prudence
now to dymynyshe and assuage it, rather, than to increase it. For a good
saruyce done in seasone, though i^ be less, may refrain and appease a fault
and ennemytie going before, much greater than the saruyce. And you should not
be moved for the offer that they make you of their ships, for it is greater
suertie for you not to take quarelle against your friends egall unto you, than
to get great things of people pufled up with pride, for a little present
prosperytie, with the danger, that may chance by means of them. Furthermore
we, that be in the same fortune that we were, when we required the
Lacedaemonians, do make unto you the self request, trustyng to obteigne it of
you, as we have of them. to wytt, that it may be laufull for every of us, to
punyshe and correct his burgeoses and subjects. And that instead to have
been aided against yours, through mean of our opinion and decre, you woll not
hurt us against ours, by your sentence, but rather render the like unto us.
and consider that now is the time, that he that shall serve, shall be holden for
ever for a true friend. and he that shall deserve, for a great enemy. And
for conclusyon that you receive not these Corcyryens here to your amytie and
alliance against our will, nor give them any aid against us. In which
doing you shall do your duty, and that, that apperteygneth to your osfyce,
and also shall do the thing, that shall be profitable for you. S^che was the
speaking of the Corinthyans.

How the Athenians received the Corcyryens into their alliance, and sent them
succors. And how the Corinthiens and Corcyryens had a battle by sea, whereof
ayther of them, took it to have the vyctorye. The.v. Chapter.
AFter that the Athenyans had hard both parties, they did put the matter into
deliberatyon two times. Whereby, at the furst they found the raysons of the
Corinthiens as good as the other. But at the second time, they changed their
opinion, and concluded to make alliance with the Corcyryans, not in the manner
that they required it. To wit, for to be friends of friends, and ennemys of
ennemys. For in that doing and going against the Corynthyans with them, they
had broken the alliance that they had with the Peloponesians. But only for
defense of the one party and of the other, if any came to assaultt them or
any of their allies. For without that, they doubted greatelye to have war
with the Peloponesians. and they would not suffer the Corcyryens to be
destroyed, who were so strong by sea. But they would suffer them to war
amongst themselves, by that mean to dymynyshe their strength, and after that
they were weakened, to take war against him, that they should think good. On
the other part, they considered the commodity that they might have by mean
of the said Islande for to go into Italy and into Sy^ylle. To this intent,
the Athenyans made alliance and confederation with the Corcyryans in the manner
that is declared. And anon after the departure of the Corynthyans, they sent
them for succor, ten ships armed. whereof Lacedemonius, Lacedemonius
son of Cymo^, Dyotymus, Diotymus.
son of Stro^bicus, and Protheas, Proteas
son of Epycles were Capytaynes. Unto whom they defended, that they should
fight against the Corynthyans, except they came against Corcyre, and would go
on land for to take or endommage the city or territorye of the same. in
which case, they might defend them for their power, fearyng to break the
peace, which they had with the Corynthyans, which they pretended not to do by
that mean. After that the said ten ships were departed, the Corynthyans,
who had made their preparatyon, came against the said Islande of Corcyre,
with an houndred and fyftye ships, of y^ which there were ten of the
Helyens, and asmany of the Eleucadyens, twelve of the Megarens.xxvii. of
Ambracyens, one of the Anactoryens, and the rest of their own, which were
four skore and ten. And every of the strangers had their Capytaynes and
rulers by them self. Of the succors that they had sent, and of the ships of
the Corinthians, Xenoclides son of Eurydes with four colleagues or
compaignyons that were appointed unto him, was Capytayne, So they departed
altogether with a good wind from the poorte of Leucade, and came unto the
land, that is foranempste the Islande of Corcyre. to wytt to the mou^teigne,
named Cymerium, Chimerium.
which is ye mouth or entry of Thesphrotide. Thesphrotydes.
In which place there is a poorte, and above the poorte, a city distante from
the sea, named Ephire, Ephire.
and nere unto the same, there is an other city, in the self regyon of
Thesphrotyde, named Eleatyde, about which, goes a great marreys, which
indureth to the sea named Acheruse by mean of the river of Achero^, Acherusia.

Acheron


which after that it has trauersed the said countreye of Thesphrotide, ronneth
over the said Marreys, and on the other side, runs into the sea, an other
river named Thyamys, Thyamys.
which departs the countreye of Thesprotyde, and that same of Cestryne.
Cestrines.
Between these twain ryuers, is situated the said promontory and rock named
Cymeriu^. Into the same place, came the Corinthians to take land. The
Corcyryens, being aduertysed of their coming, came with an houndred and ten
ships to plant their camp, in one of the next Islandes there named Sibota.
Sibota.
And Mycyades and Esimides Eurybatian, Misiades.

Aesimides.


were Capytaynes of their army. They had more beside the said number, ten
ships, with Athenyans. And beside that, they had set upon the promontory of
Leucyne an thousand foot men, Leucumia.
that the Pacynthyans had sent to their succoure. And also they looked to be
socoured by strangers, which inhabyted there adioynynge, which were always
their friends. After that the Corynthyans had set their matters in order, and
taken victuailes for three days, they departed by night from the said
promountory Cymeriu^, to comme to fight with ye Corcyryens. And by that it was
day, they saw them a far of in the main sea, coming right against them. So
they put them selves in battle on both sides. and made their order as
follows. The Corcyryens did put on the right side, the ten ships of
Athenes, and they divided the^ selves in three bands on the left side, every
of them having his Captain. On the Corinthians side, the Ambratiens and the
Magarens were on the right winge, in the middle were the other allies, so as
they were found, and in the left wynge dyrectly against the right wynge of
the Corcyryens were the Corinthiens their selves. In this manner came the one
against the other, having either of both sides given tokens to fight, and
aither of them had bestowed a great nombre of Archers and of other well armed,
in the tops of their ships upon top castles, evil enough appointed after
the fashyon of that time. and they fought very sharply, but not by art (as
they do at this days upon the sea) but hand to hand without removing, as
footmen do, that fight on main land. For after that they were myngled
together, they could not well remove the^ selves, nor droune the one the
other. And ye hope of victory was in them, that fought in the top castells,
rather than in any other thing. And in effect they fought more by strength
and by courage, than by conning. The fight and conflicte was very great. And
the ships of Athens went to succoure the Corcyrye^s, where as they saw the^
ouercommed, for to fear the enemies, and yet they did not fight against
them, fearyng to disobeye the commandment of their Lords. So chanced it,
that the Corinthiens that were on the right wynge, were so ouercharged by their
ennemies, that they took them self unto flight and were chased and followed by
ten ships of the Corcyryens until the land, where their camp was. and
they landed after the^ in such sort, that they took and pillaged all that,
that they found within. and afterward set fire therein. But in the mean time
that those were there occupied in the chase and in pillage, the Corinthiens y^
were in the left wynge, had easily victory against their enemies, that
tarried and fought against them, for also they were stronger in ships. The
Athenia^s than seeing the Corcyryens so ouercharged and put to rebuke, began
to succoure them earnestly and without dissymulation. and yet invaded not the
Corinthians at the beginning. But after that they saw the Corcyryens in
flight, and the other that chased them: they bent them self to fight, and to
resist, the best that they could, without making any dyfference of the
one, or of the other. For that, that necessytye required it, so that the
battaylle remained between the Athenyans and the Corynthyans, the Corcyryans
being in flight. nevertheless at the last they were constrained to wythdrawe
them selves after the other, and so the Corinthyans followed the chase. And
tarried not to bind, and fasten to their ships the barks of the ships that
they had beaten down, nor yet to cause them, that they had taken, to be towed
to land, but in sailing and chasynge, they endeavored themselves more to slaye
the enemies, then to take them alive. which doing they slew many of their
friends, that they found in their way upon their ships and on the bottomes
of them of their side, that had been dyscomfyted, thinking, that they had been
enemies. For so great number of ships being assembled, as well on the one
side, as on the other, and all Greeks, after that they were myngled togeder,
they knew not well the one, the other. And they could not tell, who were the
ouercommers or ouercommed. Also truly, this was the greatest assemblye of
ships, that ever in times paste had been made of Greeks, against Greeks.
After that the Corinthians had had chased the Corcyriens to the entrye of the
sea, they did return to receive their shippwrackes and ships skatered
abroad and bruised, and also their people that were hurt. So they found a
great number which they brought unto the poorte that is oueranempste from the
Islande of Sybota in the fyrme land, which is holy deserte in the regyon of
Thesphrotyde, where the strangers that were comme to their aid, did tarry them
on land. And after that they had bestowed there their bruised ships and their
hurt people, they sailed again with the other ships, that they had hoole,
for to go against Corcyre. which seeing the Corcyriens, came against them with
those hole ships, and them of Athens that were left. Fearing that the said
Corynthyaus would have made some entry into their land. Nowit was than late
and very night, and they had now begone to give token that they would fight.
When the Corinthians perceived, a far of in the sea, twenty ships, that the
Athenyans had sent a fresh unto the Corcyryans. fearyng that the te^ne,
which they sent them furst, were not suffycyent enough to save and defend
them, like as also it chanced, by occasyon thereof, the Corinthians begone to
take their oores, and by little and little to return back, for that
principally, that they knew not whyther there came a greater number after the
same that they saw or not. whereat the Corcyryens, which could not yet see
their said succoure, were all abasshedde, seeing their enemies so to return,
and could not think wherefore it was, until that some of their people
perceived the said twenty ships, and signified to them, that they came
directly unto them. Then being now also night, the Corcyryens likewise
wythdrewe themselves, and in this manner, having fought unto dark night: they
departed. And anon after, the said twenty ships, aryued at the port of
Leucine where the Corcyryens were wythdrawen, passing over the dead and the
broken pieces of the ships, that were bruised and drowned. of which twenty
ships Glauco^ son of Leager and Andocydes son of Leogorus had the
conducte. Glauco^.

Andocides.


And for that, that it was night, the Corcyryens at the furste burnte were in
doubt, that they had been ennemys. But having certain knowlayge of them, they
received them with great joy. The morrow after, the thirty ships of the
Athenyans, with them, that were left hoole unto the Corcyryens, went out of
the poorte with their sails displayed and came against the port of Sibota
where the Corinthians were, to see if they would come again to battle. Who,
when they saw them so to come, departed from the port into the main sea all
in good order, and there kept themself sure only to defend them, not willing
to go to assail the^. For that, that they feared the said ships newely
comme, which were all fresh and hoole, and theyrs were greatly hurt or
empayred at the battle the day before. and their people were busyed to keep
the prysonners that they had taken in the said battle. and also they could
not refreshe themselves with any thing in the place of Sibota where they were,
for that, that it was deserte and barayne. So they cared not, but how they
might honnestly wythdrawe them self into their quarter, fearyng that the
Athenyans would not suffer them to depart from thence, under color that they
had broken the peace, by that, that they came to assail the^ the day
before. So they devised to send upon a brygantyne some of their people
toward the said Athenyans, without any heraulte, for to espy what they
would do. Who spoke unto the^ in this manner. You do against reasone (lords
Atheniens) to begin war upon us, coming directly against the treaty of
peace, that we have togidres. and to let us that we may not chastyse our
subjects. And if you be deliberated so to do and to empesthe us that we may
not go against the Corcyryens, or else where that we woll, and by that mean
will to declare your selves our enemies, begin with us that be here, and
entreat us as enemies. At which words the Corcyrye^s that could understand
them, began to cry all with one voice, yt they should be taken, and all slain
incontine^tly. But the Athenians answered the^ in this manner. Lords
Peloponesians, we perceive not, that we have broken the treaty of peace,
which we have with you. For we be not comme hither to fight with you, but
only to defend and keep the Corcyryens our allies. Wherefore if you woll go
any where else than into their land, we woll not trouble you, but if you
come to endomage theyme, we woll defend them with our power. which answer
received by the Corynthians, they prepared them self to return unto their
houses. But before their departure, they set up their Trophee in token of
victory in the firm land of Sibota. And after their departing, the
Corcyryens gathered togeder their brokenne ships, and dead people, whom the
wind, from of the marreys, had in the night dryue^ to the shore of the sea,
even as they aryued. Afterward they set up an other Trophee in sign of
victory in the Islande of Sibota, directly against that same of the
Corinthians. For both parties pretended to have had the victory. To wytt the
Corinthians for that, yt they kept the sea until night, and gathered many
shipwrackes of the ships drowned, and also great number of their dead
people, and further had taken more than a thousand prysonners and drowned
aboutes threskoore and ten ships with ennemys. And the Corcyryens, for that
they had drowned about.xxx. ships with ennemys, and gathered together the
shipwrackes and their dead bodies as well as they. And moreover for that the
day followyng, having had the new aid and strength of Athenyans, they had
offered them battle, and they durst not march forwards, but were retired. In
this manner both parties departed, having opinion of the victory. The
Corinthians, in their return, took suddenly and pryuely the town and port of
Anactorye, Anactorium.
which is at the entrye of the Goulphe of Ambracie, Ambracium.
which poorte was common between them, and the Corcyryens, so they fournyshed
it with their people. And afterward returned to Corynthe. where being
aryued, they sold of the Corcyriens, which they had prysonners, aboutes eight
houndred, and two hundred and fyftye they reteygned, over whom they set good
watch, trustyng by their mean to overcome and recover Corcyre. For the more
part of the said prysonners were of the principal of the city. Such was
the end of the same furste war between ye Corynthyans and Corcyriens, after
the which, the Corinthians returned to their habytacyons.

The other quarells and occasions of war, that happened between the Athenians
and the Corinthians. By mean whereof, all the Peloponesians were assembled at
Lacedemonye for to conclude war against the said Athenyans. Cap. vi.
THe war, whereof we have spoken, was the chief occasyon of ye same, that was
afterward between the Corynthians and the Athenyans. For that the said
Corinthians pretended, that the same Athenyans had broken the treatye of peace
with them, by geuyng succors unto the Corcyriens against them. Afterward
there chanced other occasyons to move war between the said Athenyans and all
the Peloponesians, which were these. The Athenyans, perceiving that the
Corinthians went about to revenge them selves on them, came to the town of
Potydea, Potidea.
which is upon the destrayte of Palenes, and was one of the Colonies of the
same Corinthians, and their subject. So they commanded unto the inhabitants,
that they should raze down their wall of the side of Palenes, Palenes.
And furthere to give the^ pleadges, and to drive away their governors and
officers (whom the Corinthians called artifycers, and sent them every year
unto them) and not to receive them more from thence forwards, And this did
they, fearing that the said Potydia^s, should have declared against them, and
also caused the other allies to declare, which were in the country of Thrace
at the procurement and instigatio^ of the Corinthians. and alfo of Perdicas,
Perdi^ca.
son of Alexander king of Macedonie, who was newely become their ennemy,
although that before he was their friend and allye. By mean of this, that they
had made amytie and alliance with Philippe his brother and Dodras, Philippus^
Derda.
which had war against him. For fear of which allyaunce, he went to the
Lacedaemonians, and had persuaded the^ to make war against the Athenyans And
so was allied with the Corinthiens for to take into his tuition the town of
Potyde. And furthermore he practiced with them of the country of Chalcyde that
be in Thrace, Chalcides.
and with the Beotie^s, for to cause them to rebel against the Athenyans,
hoping that if through thayde of the same towns and countries, he might
bring them to his alliance, he might make strong war against the said
Athenians. Who, wha^ they understood it, for to let the reuoltement or
rebellyon of the said cities and countries, delyberated to send Acestratus,
son of Lencomedes accompanied with ten other Capytaynes with.xxx. ships
armed for to make war in the country of Macedonie. And commanded the^, that
in passing, they should take pleadges of the^ of Potide, and beat down their
wall. And furthermore that they should take good head that the other cytyes
did not rebelle. which understanding the Potydyans, sent some of their
cytezeins to Athens for to see, if they could obteigne of them, that they
would do no nouueltie. And on the other side they sent with the Corynthians to
Lacedemonye to have of them counsaille and comfort. who persuaded them that
they should prepare to defend themselves, if any would constrayne them, to
that, which is declared. During this time the Ambassadors, that were gone to
Athens: after that they had at length showed and debated their case, obteigned
very little of them. But they had, in their pre^ence, despatched the thyrty
ships, that they sent against Perdicas and against them. The Potydyans
perceiving this, trusted in the promise of the Lacedemonyans. Who had assured
them, that y^ the Athenyans came against the^, they would enter in armure into
their land, and would rebelle against the said Athenians, the Beotians and
Calcydes of one common accord with the^. Which Calcydes Perdicas had persuaded,
that they should habandone, and forsake their towns that they had on the
shore of the sea, for that they were not defensyble. And that they should
wythdrawe them self into the city of Olynthe which stands Inner into the
land, and that they should fortefye the same as well as they could. And unto
them that had habandoned their towns and howses, he gave them to dwell in,
during the war, the city of Migdonie, Migdonia.
which is nyghe the marr^ys of Boli^e. which the Calcydes did, and did beat
down their towns and houses, and prepared themself to make war. when they,
that conducted the thyrty ships of Athenes, were in the countreye of Thrace,
understood that the said cities were rebelled, specially that of Potyde, and
considering that they were not strong enough to make war against Perdicas
and against the cities revolted, they took their iourneye toward Macedonie,
whither they were chiefly sent. where they found Philippe and Dordras, that
came to ioygne to the^ with the host, that they had assembled in the
mou^taignes. During this time, yt the ships with Athenyans were in Macedonie,
the Corinthiens, fearing yt the city of Potyde, which had declared it self
against the Athenia^s, had no succor, for yt they took it to be their proper
act: sent for to save and defend them, a thousand six houndred foot men,
as well of their citezins and subjects yt went willingly, as also of mercenaryes
or huyred men which had soulde or wages in the country of Peloponese, all well
armed, and four houndred slightly armed. Of whom Aristeus, Aristeus.
son of Adymantus had the conduct, for that, yt he was very agreeable to the
people. In such sort, that ma^y good cytezeins went thider wyllingly in his
compaygny. and of the other part, he had always been friend to them of
Potyde. at which place, he arrived with his people the fourtyth day after
their rebellyon. The Athenyans than being aduertysed of the rebellyon of the
Potydiens and of the succors that the Corynthyans had sent, Callias
dyspatchedde Callia son of Calliadus and four other Capytaynes in his
company with two thousand men for to go against the said city of Potyde.
who being aryued in Macedonie, found that the people, that were furst come
thither, had taken the city of Therme, Therma.
and held the same of Pydue assieged, Pydua.
and so they ioingned to them, that they took it. but for the necessity and
desire yt they had to go into Potyde, understanding that Aristeus was there
arrived, they were constrained to make appoynctemente and alliance with the
said Perdicas. By mean whereof, they departed from Macedonye, and took the
way straight against Potyde. So they arrived at the port of Berrye, Berrea.
and thought to have taken the town at the arryualle. But seeing that they
could not do it, they went a land, and marchedde straight fourth against
Potyde. Having in their hole army three thousand foot men, as well of their
people as of their co^federates, and six houndred horse men Macedonyens. and
more they had.lxx ships which came coastynge the land. In such manner,
they iourneyed easily, that the third day they arrived at the place of
Grigrone, Gigonum.
where they planted their camp. The Potydians and Aristeus with their people,
understanding the coming of the Athenyans, went out of the city, and came
to set their camp before the city of Olynthe, Olynthus.
upon the distrayct, keeping their marcket without the town. And they all with
one accord did chose Aristeus to be Capytaine of the foot men, and Perdicas
of the horsemen. who incontynentlye after the appoinctement made with the
Athenyans, rebelled against them, and had sent horsemen for to succoure the
said Potydians, of whom he had given charge to Iolaus, Iolaus
as his lieutenant. Now the opinion of Aristeus was to tarry the Athenyans with
the bend, that he had in the said strayte, by the which me^ must of force
pass, to come to Potyde by land, if they would comme thither to assail it.
and that the Calcydes, with the other confederates, that were without the
straycte, and also the horsemen of Perdicas, should tarry within the town of
Olynthe. to the end, that if the Athenyans came to assault them, they should
come fourth to his succor, and enclose the said Athenians at their backs.
On the other side Callia, Capytayne of Athenyens and his compaignyons sent
their horsemen Macedonyens that they had, with certain number of footeme^,
before Olynthe for to keep them, that were within, that they should not come
fourth to succor the other. and they with the remaynant went directly agai^ste
Potyde. And when they were nygh to the straicte, seeing their ennemys, that
prepared them self to fight, they put them selves likewise in order. and so
came incontinently to the battle. In the which, Aristeus and they that were
with hi^, as well Corinthiens, as other all very good warryours, did drive
back, and putt to flight the formerwarde of the ennemys, that came against
the^, and gave them chase a long way^ but the other poinct, where the Potydiens
and the other Peloponesians were, was by the Athenyans vainquyshed and chased
to the gates of the town. Which seeing Aristeus, after that he was returned
fro the chase, was in great doubt, to which of two places he might retire, to
Potyde or to Olynthe. and finally he determined to wtdrawe himself with his
people, yt he might ioigne again with his wtin Potyde, for yt it was the next
retrecte. So they went into the sea, which did beat the walls of the town,
and between the same and many great stones, that were set before, for to break
the wawes of the sea, they passed through right great dangier of many throws,
that the enemies did cast against them. whereby some of the^ were slain, but the
more part entered into the town. Now were come fourth to succor the
Potydyans, they that were within Olynthe, which is situated in an high place,
without the destrayte, distant from the place, where the battaille was fought,
aboutes six thousand pases. But the horsemen, Macedoniens, came against the^
to drive the^ back. And after that they of the town saw, that the Atheniens
had the victory, they retired, and the Macedoniens likewise toward the
Athenyans. And thus the horsemen, neither of the one side nor of the other,
were not at the battle. This done, the Athenians set up their Trophee in
toke^ of victory, and rendered to the Potydyens their dead men according to the
custom. which were found well nygh, to the number of three houndred, as well of
their citezeins, as of their allies. and of the Athenyans aboutes the haluen
deal. Among whom, was Callias one of their Capytaynes. That done, the
Athenians closed the walls about with hydes toward the destraicte, and set
their people there to keep it. But they durst not go, and draw their closure
of the other quarter of the city of Potyde toward Palene, which was
ioingninge to the same town of Potyde. although that it were not walled on
that side, for that, that they were not in number to maigteigne two seges. and
feared that if they parted themselves, they of the town would comme to
assault them, in the one or the other place. When the news were signified at
Athenes, how Potyde was assieged by their people, but that they had not
enuyroned Palene with murage, they sent thither within a little time after, six
hou^dred men a fresh, under conducte of Phormyon, Phormio.
son of Asopius. Alphi.
who being departed from Aphite for to come toward Palene, set his people on
land, and went fair and well against Potyde. Destroying and burning their
feldes. And seeing that none came fourth of the town, he closed Palene with a
wall, by mean whereof the city of Potide was assieged, and beaten on both
sides by land, and also was assaulted on the sea side, by means that the
Athenyans had gotten the poorte. Aristeus, than seeing that there was no more
hope to be hable to defend the town, if no succor came from them of
Peloponese, pretended that with some good wind yt might happen, all the people,
that were wtin the town, should be sent away, reserved six houndred (w^erof
he would be one) the longer to s^steigne the siege, until some succor came
unto the^. For he feared, that victuailes should fail the^. But seeing that he
could not persuade that, he went fourth in a night without knowlaige of the
Athenians to give order for that, yt was necessary, and to provide for other
affairs, that were wtoute. and went to the Calcydes, by whose aid, he did
many exploictes of war in the lands of the Athenians, and of their parties.
And among other, being come to run before the city of Sermypile, he had set
an ambushement. by means whereof he slew a great number of citezeins which
came forth upon him. And nevertheless he solicited and labored greatly the
Peloponesians to send him some succor to Potyde. In this entrefeates or
procedinges, Phormion, after that he had enclosed Potyde on al sides, came with
six houndred men to ouerronne the countries of Calcide and Beoce. and so took
some castells. Such than were the quarells, between the Athenyans and
Peloponesyans, for the Corynthyans were sorye, that the Athenyans had troubled
the city of Potide (which took their part) and their Cytezeynes and other
Peloponesians that were within. The Athenyans complained that the Corynthyans
had caused the Potydiens which were their subjects to rebelle, and that they
were come to their aid for to defend them against them. But the war was not
yet fully declared. so that there was some respitt, for that the questyon was
not yet generallye against all the Peloponesians, but only against the
Corinthiens. who always fearing the loss of Potyde and of their people that
were within, did not cease to practyse their allies, to come with them toward
the Lacedemonyens. which were their head, to make their complayntes against
the Athenyans, as breakers of the peace, and ennemys to all the Peloponesians.
which they did. And on the other side, the Agenytes came thither not publicly
and openly, for they durst not for fear of the Athenyans, but secretly, they
persuaded war, as the other did. For that that they complained, that the
Athenyans would not suffer them to enjoy their lybertye, as it was appointed
by the said treatye of peace. when all the Ambassadors of the confederated
towns, which were comme for this matter, were arrived at Lacedemonye, the
Lacedemonyens assembled their counsel, and caused it to be declared with
loud voice, that if there were any parsonne that pretended to make any
complaincte against the Athenyans, he should speak publicly, as the custom
was. At which admonytion came before them almost all the confederates of
Peloponese, making their complainctes and doleances. And besides them, the
Megarens. who complained for that, that being under the seigniorye of the
Athenyans, they had prohybited them to use marchaundyse in their port, and in
their terrytorye. The Corinthians were the last, for they suffered the other to
speak before, of a set purpose, for to provoke and get the Lacedemonyans, and
afterward they spoke in this manner.

The narration and proposition of the Corinthians in the Counsaylle of
Lacedemonye, against the Athenyans. The.vii. Chapter.
THe faith and loyaultie, that you keep among you, as well in commun, as in
particular (Lords Lacedemonya^s) makes, that if any the other of us should
say any thing against you, that no man would believe him. And in that, your
modestye and loyaultie causes you to be esteamed. But you use one great
ignorance, touching things that be without. For albeit, that we have often
showed and preached, how the Athenyans would ouercomme and oppress us, yet
would you never believe us, but that, that they, that showed it unto you,
sh^lde say it, by means of particular questyons, that they had with them. and
by mean thereof would not assemble your allies, before that we were oultraged
and wronged. But you have forborne until this present,, that we be iniuryed.
And therefore it is very reasonable that in presence of your said allies and
confederates, we make the longer proposityon, for so much as we be dowbly
offended. to wytt, by the Athenyans that have oultraged us, and by you that
have not regarded it. And if there were any reasone, whereby a man might
defend, that it were no^ holy notoryous, that the Athenyans be they, which
trouble all Greece: It were requysitt that we should cause it to appear unto
them, that know it not. But what needs now to hold any longer purpose of
it, sythens that you may see, the one brought into the servitude by the
Athenians, and the other sharply assaulted. and specially they, yt be your
allies. whom of a long saisone, they have imagyned to wtdrawe unto them, for to
serve and aid the^ against us in time of war. Truly, if war were made
against the^. Certainly they have for none other purpose occupied Corcyre, nor
now do hold potyde assiged. whereof the one, to wit, Corcyre should fournyshe
the Peloponesians with great number of ships, and the other is very propice,
for the affairs of Thrace. For the which things you arne to be blamed. For
that, that from the beginning, when the war of the Medes was fynyshed, you
suffered them to make their city again. And afterward, moreover to increase
yt with great walls. And successively from that time unto this present day,
have tolerated and suffered them to deprive from lybertye and putt into bondage,
not their allies only: but also ours. How beyt it may well be said, that it
is you, that have done it. For the mysdeede is more attrybuted unto him that
suffers it to be done, where as he may let or withstand yt: than to him
that does yt. And pryncypally to you, that bear ye praise and the title to be
defendours of the liberty of Greece. And yet neuerthelas with great pain, you
have now caused the assemblye to be made. And wol not take the things to be
certain, that be holy not orious. But you wolle that we shall declare by what
means we be iniuried, where as it is necessary to deliberate but only, how
we^ should revenge us of the wrongs, which has be done unto us. For in
this, that the Athenyans did not comme against us to oultrage us atoones, but
by little and little, although they yet know not of this assembly. they do it
not without cause. But we perceue very well, that it is for that, that they
think that so doing, that you should not parceue yt through the slackenes
and for bearyng, which they know to be in you. which thing you should
easily do, if they executed al at ones that, which they have enterprysed. But
wha^ they shall see that you understand and pass not on yt, they wol execute
yt much more boldly and with greater force. Now, lords Lacedaemonians, you
arne they only, that be in rest. and woll not resist viole^ces by force, but
by length of time. nor abate the strength of your enemies wha^ they begin to
increase, but tarry, until they be dowbled. And this is not only now, that you
have had this custom. For we all do know, that the Medes, that came from the
worlds end against you, werein your land before you had made provisions,
that you might and onght to have done before, for your honnour and suertie. And
now you let at naught the Athenyans, which be not far from you, but euene
your neighbors. and you love better, that they should come to assail you,
tha^ furst to invade them. and by this mean, to put your self in hazart of
the war, wha^ they shall be much more stronger than they were. Truly you ought
well to consider that the victory, which we had against the stranger, king of
Medes, was in a great part through his fault. And chiefly the Athenyans, when
they had war against us, were vaynquyshed more by their errors that they
committed, than by our valyantnes. And also you ought to remember that some of
ours, trusting to your aid and favor, were taken and destroyed. and think
not that we speak thies things for hatred that we have against the said
Athenyans by manner of quarellinge. For it is the part of a friend, to his
friend, that he shows his quarrel or playncte when one does that to an
othere. which he ought not to do. but it is by manner of accusation that we
complain of the injuries, that our ennemys has done to us. And truly, if
there be any people in the world, to whom it is laufull to complain
themselves and to sorrow for their allies and confederates, we arne they, as we
think. marked specially, that we do fight for so great quarelles, and for
things of so great ymportance. whereof, as it seems to us, you have no
regard. and woll not consider, that we have to do against the Athenyans,
which be your ennemys, and people, that seek always nouuelties. and also be
subtle to study out means to increase themselves, and diligent to execute
them. but as touching you, you think that it is suffycient to keep togider
that, that you have, without to enterprise any thing. and also be negligent
to execute, though that necessity require it. And by this mean we see, that
they have greater audacyte, than force, so that they put themselves into many
great dangers against opynion of the people, and nevertheless whatsoever
hard thing that they enterprise, they have good hope to execute yt. but your
heart is much lessar to enterprise, than your force, for to execute yt. whereby
it chances, that in enterpryses, that be without danger, you put doubt. and
you never think that you arne long enough out of busynes. furthermore they be
diligente and you negligence. They go contynually fourth of their country, and
you arne restfull in yours. for they think that their voyages do welrecompense
their absence. but when you go out of your country, you think that that,
which you le^e behynd you, is lost. They, when they have vainquished their
enemy, do poursue their victories at length. and when they are ouercomed, they
lose not one jot of couraige. And furthermore in providing for things, which
concern the weal of their city, they use their wytts and counsel, as it
were for their own cause. but as for their bodies, they set them of and
haband onne them, as if they were of strange people, whom they knew not. And
when they fail to execute any enterprise, they think that they have lost
somuche of their own. And also when they have gotten any thing it seems to
them to be very little in regard of that, that they thought it to be. And if
they alsayed to do any thing, whereof they had been frustrated of their hope,
they parforced themself to recover such loss, by some new enterprise. And I
think in effect, that they and none other have and hope togiders the thing,
that they enterprise. so diligent be they to execute their enterprises. Also in
all thies things they use their life, and all their age, in labors and in
dangers, without much enioyinge the things that they have gottonne, for the
contynual desire, that they have to get other. And they think that there was
no feast nor other thing so playsante, as that, in which they executed the
thing, which they enterprysed. and that the repose, that men take through
necligence, is more dammageable to the parsone, than laborious exercise. in
such sort that it may be well said (to comprehend all in few words) that they
be borne with such wytt, that they cannot be in rest, nor suffer other to rest.
Having than one such a city your enemy, you sleep, lords Lacedemonie^s. and
think that they may well rest, who, when it is necessary) execute virtuously.
and give to understand, that if any would oultrage them, they have the heart
to resist. And you mesure your modesty and equity, with no will to do
euille to an othere. and to revenge you, when men would do it. which thing
you shall skarcely do when you have to do with a city your neighbor, which
shall be equal with yours. And now you woll, as we have before declared, live
and be conversant with the Athenians according to their ancient ma^ners and
customs. but it is necessary to have regard to ye things new and present in
this case, as in all other busynes. For as it is right convenient for a city,
that is in rest and peace, not to change his laws and ancient customs, right
so, for that, which is oppressed with affairs by an other. It is necessary to
think on many new things. And to Imagynne many crafts for to resist. and
it is the cause, whereby the Athenyans be always inclyned to enterprise new
things, much more than we, for the great experience that they have.
wherefore, lords, it is needful that henceforwardes, you cease your
prolonging and slackenes, and that you succor your friends, specially those,
that be at Potyde as we have understood. And enter with diligence into the
lands of the Athenyans. and suffer not your friends and parents to fall into
the hand of your mortal ennemys, nor also that we the other, be constrained
through despair, to seek other allyaunce than yours, which we may well do in
this case, without to be reprehended of the gods, by whom we have made oath,
or also of men, that shall understand the reasone, wherefore we shall have done
yt. For they that depart from their allies, being by them forsakenne, arne
not to be reputed breakers of faith. but worthily those, which have denied
them succor, which if ye do fourthwith deliver us, we will parseuer in the
faythfulnes, that we owe you. For doing otherwise, we should be unhappy, and
also could not recover it of other people, that have, as greatly, biloued us.
Upon which things it may please you to take good counsel and good
deliberation. and so ^o do, that yt may not be not said, that you govern the
country of Peloponese with iesser dygnytie and reputation, than your parents
did, that have left you this governance. In this manner, spoke the
Corinthians. Now were than in the city of Lacedemonie, certain Ambassadors
of the Athenyans, which were sent thider long before, for other matters.
Who, understanding thies complainctes and practices, denised, that it was
expedye^t for their honor to go toward the Senate of the city, not for to
answer to the complainctes, that were made against the Athenyans: but for to
show them in general, that they ought not to determyne upon those things,
before they had furst well digested them. and to do them to understand the
strength of their said city, bringinge to remembrance of the ancient men the
things, which they knew, and doing the young men do understand those
things, whereof they had yet no experience. For they thought well, that, when
the Lacedemonyans had understand thaire declarations, they would be more
enclyned to maigntaigne the peace, and rather continue i^ rest, than to
begin the war. For this they said unto the lords of the counsaylle, that
they had come matter to show them, if it were their plaisirs, who gave them
audyence. And they did speak in this manner.

The narration of the Ambassabassadours Athenians to the Counsaylle of the
Lacedemonyans. The.viii. Chapter.
WE be not come into this town, lords Lacedemonya^s, for to debate with our
allies, but we were here for other matters, as ye do know. yet understanding
the complaynctes, that the othere cities do make against ours, we be willinge
to present and declare, not for to answer, against the charges that they
lay unto us (for also you arne not our judges between us and them) but to the
entente, that you credit not lightly that, which they say against us, and for
their parsuation determyne slightly in this matter, (which is of so great
importance) otherwise, than is requisitt. and also for that, that we woll well
inform you of our affairs and deeds, as they be, and that the same, which
we hold, we have laufully gottoneyt. And furthermore that our city is such,
that yt ought to be esteemed. And without rehersynge the things so ancient,
that men have more knowlaige thereof by common fame and renomme, than by true
science: we wol speak of them that were done in the war of the Medes,
whereof you have true knowlaige. although that it be noisome and molestuous to
repete it often times, yet it is necessary now to do it. And also it that,
which we than did at our great danger, redoundeth to the common weal of all
Greece (whereof you have been parttakers) men should not be asshamed to show
it, not somuche for to excuse and justify our selves of the things that arne
laid to us, as for to do you to understand with what city, you shall have
to do, if that through evil counsaille, you enterprise the war. For ^urste
it is very certain, that we only went before the strangers in danger of
our lives at Marathonie. And afterward, when they came again the second
time, saying that we were not myghtie inoughe to goo to fight with them by
land, we went to encounter them by sea with all our ships, and vainquished
them at Salamyne. which victory let them, that they went not to pillage
and fourraige all your towns and cities of Peloponese. which they might
easily have done, consyderinge that they could not succor the one the other
against ^one so mighty an army by sea, as they had. The which thing, the
Barbarous king did well than declare. For being by us ouercommed by sea, and
knowing that he could never assemble one such a puyssance, he returned with
the greater party of his hooste. by which deed, being fully clear and
notorious, that the force of Greece, consisted in the army by Sea, we
fournished than three things, vtile and profitable for all Greece. To wytt,
great number of shyps, a Capytayne right wise and diligente, and a heart
obedyent and coragious. For as touching the ships, we had little less than
four houndredde, which were two parts of the hole army. Concerning the
Capytayne, we gave you Themistocles, which was principal author and mouer,
that the battle was made in the discreate of the sea, which without all
doubt, was the saufgarde of Greece. By occasyon whereof, you judged unto him
singular honors, more than to any other estrangier, that ever came unto you.
And as for the couragiousnes of heart, we showed yt very openly. For seeing that
we had not any succor by land, for that, that the ennemys had lately gained
all that, which was before us, we determined to leave our city, and to
destroy our houses, and to loose our particular goods, (not for to habandonne
and forsake our fre^des and allies and to disperse ourselves into diverse
places, which if we had done, we had not done them any saruice) but we went
fourth to search the dangers upon the Sea, without having regard or shewinge
any grudge against you, for that, that ye came not to succoure us in time of
need. wherefore we may well say for troth, that we were as profitable than unto
you, as you unto us. For you, that kept stille the towns inhabyted and
therein had your goods and your wives and childrenne, fearing to lose them,
came to our aid, not somuche for us, as for yourselues. For if you had
minded to have done for us, you should have come thider before our city had
been habandoned and destroyed. but as touching us in forsakyng our town,
(which now had no more form of a city) for to succor yours than, when it
had no great appearance to save yt self, we were well wyllinge to commit and
putt ourselves into the dangers of the said wars. and by this mean was
cause, for a great part, of your saulftie and of ours. where, if we had been
minded to submit ourselves unto the king of Mede, as many other countries did,
fearing to be destroyed: or after that we had habandoned our city, had not
had the hardynes to take the seas, but as people faynte hearted, had wythdrawen
our ourselnes into sure places: truly ye durst not have comme before the ennemy
with so small number of ships, as you than had, whereupon by that mean,
you should have been constrained to have done, as he would, without any
faightinge. Now seems it not unto you, lords Lacedemonyans, that for this
our hardynes and prudence, we be well worthy to have and obtaigne the
principality and seigniory, which we now have? Which ought not to be enuyed
nor molested by Greece, for that, that we got yt not by force: but partly by
pursuyng the enemies, which you would not do, and partly at request of some
of our allies, that came to pray us that we would take them into our
protection and governance. By means whereof, we have been constrained to
consarue and increase our principality from that time until this present,
furste for fear, afterward for honnour, and finally for proffytt. And saying
also that we we enuyed of many people, and that some of our subjects and
confederates, be lately rebelled against us, whom we have subdewed and
chastised, yea and that you arne moved to depart from our amytie and have
some suspicion against us, we should not be well counsailled to desiste from
our travail, but we should putt ourselves into great daungier. Fo they, that
should depart from our obeisance, should come under yours. wherefore no man is
to be blamed, if in things, wherein he parceyueth great danger, he prouydeth
for his indempnyte. And you, lords Lacedemonyens, do not you govern for your
profitte the cities of Pelopone^e? And if you had continued in your Empire
from the war of the Medes until this present, you should have been both
enuyed (as we be) of strangers, and also molestuous and rigorous to your
subjects. And of force, you should aither have been blamed to have been to
far imperial and rygorous to your subjects, or else have been constrained
to put your estate into dangier. And therefore if that we have taken and
consarued the rule and superiorite, that has been given us, we have done no
new thing, another that, that is contrary to humayne laws and customs. And
also there be three great things, that defend us to leave and forsake yt, to
wytt, the honor, the fear, and the proffytte. And of the other part, we arne
not the inuentours and authors of such thing, for it was never otherwise, but
that the more weak were constrained to obey unto the stronger. And we be well
worthy and do merytt so to do in our judgment, and also by yours, if you woll
egally consider, both proffit and reason. For no man woll prefarre reason
somuche before proffit, that if any ho^nest occasion be offered him to obteigne
advantage by force, that he woll let yt slip. And they be to be praised,
that in using and administringe right, be of nature more bening and gracious
in their government, than the rule and right of governing requires, like as
we do. And if our Empier came into other men's hands, we think, that they
should better parceue yt. Although that for this our bounty and gentleness,
we get more reproach, than praise. which is a thing very unreasonable. For,
for that, that we use the self laws in our contractes and in our judgments
with our subjects. which we use among our selves (besides this that it is a
thing contumelious and shameful for us) yet they repute us to be playdors and
contentious. And there is not one among the^, that consydereth, that there is
not any people in the world, that more ge^tly entreat their subjects, tha^
we do. And also men do not obey to other, that be playdours, as men do unto us.
For it is laufull for them. to use force against their subjects, which be
intierly their obeissantes. wherefore it is not for them to come thereto by
judgment nor process. But concerning ours, for the liberty, which they have
been accustomed to have with us and to be egall with us in justice, if a man do
them wrong in any thing by deed or by word, be it for neu^r so small a
matter, for the opynion that they have in the righteousness of our gouernance^
and that it should not be taken from them: they not only be not thankful to
us, for that the remanant was left unto them, that men might have taken from
them, by force: but also they take yt for more displeasure to lose that little
of their good, than if at the beginning we had utterly captyued them to our
will, and used toward them violence, and not justice. And yet in this case
they durst not ones have murmured or grudged, but being our subjects by
will, they would have thought it a great offense to disobey us. For we see
euyde^tly that the people take it to be more grievous and are more angry, when
they be wronged, than when they be forced. Also wha^ a man speaks to defraude
one, or to do him wrong, it is said, that the iustyceys comone: but when a man
speaks of constrayninge, it is understood that there is a superior, vsinge
will. Of this comes yt, that they, which presently be our subjects, when
they were in subjection of the Medes, endured patiently their Empire, and now
ours seems unto the^ to be hard. But to a discrete parsone, this is no
marvel. For all subjects do always compain of the seignyorie, that is
present. And if your self had changed our Empire and should rule our
subjects: truly the benyuolence that you should get of them for the fear,
that they have of us, should turn into evil will or displeasure. if you
would keep the train and show yourselues of the sort, that you declared in
that little time, that ye had the governance of all Greece, in the war of the
Medes. For you do not comunycate your laws and your customs to othere. And
moreover whosoever is sent by you to be Duke or Capytayne in any army, he
uses not other manners, than he was wonted to before. Nor such, as all the
remenant of Greece does use, but by all facyo^s does make strange particularites
and differente from other. wherefore, lords, vouchesaulf to consider, that the
matters whereof is question, be weighty and of great importance. And be well
worthy to be long consulted upon. And give not somuche faith to the
connsaille and accusacyo^s of the other people, that you take this charge so
great, upon you. But think well before the beginning of this war, of what
importance it is, and the dangers that may chance. For by length or
contynuance of war, happenne many hazardes. From which, we yet arne clear,
both you and we. But when it shall be bigoune, yt is not knowin, upon which of
us they shall fall. Also it is certain, that they that be to desirous and
hasty to begin war, do peruerte the order of reasone. For they begin by
execution and by force. which should be last, after that it were well
consulted. which fault no man shall find in us, and also we see not, that it
is yet in you. For this cause, whiles the things be entier and hole, we woll
well admonish you, that you take good advise, another to break the peace,
nor to falsefie your oath. And if there be any difference between us, let us
avoid yt by the manner conteigned in our said treaty of peace. Orells we
protest, and take to wytnes, ye gods, by whom we have sworn, that if you be
the Authors of the war, we wol pursue yt unto the end. Thus did the
Athenyans speak. And after that the Lacedaemonians had hard as well the
complayntes of the Peloponesians, as the declaracyons of the said Athenians,
they caused them all to go fourth, and put the matter into deliberacion among
them selves. So the more part of them, were of opinion, that the Athenians did
wrong and that it was expedient to move war against them without longer
tariyng. Which parceyuyng the king Archidamus, who was taken to be a wise man
and of clear understanding, stood up, and did speak in this manner.

The narration and proposition of Archidamus king of the Lacedemonyans.
The.ix. Chapter.
I Have experimented many wars, lords Lacedemonyans, and also I know that
there be many among you that be in such age, that they would not counsaille
to war, by imprudency and rashly, as yt chauncethe to many, and also would
not repute war to be a thing suer nor good. And if we consider this same,
whereof questyon is presently had, we shall not take yt to be small. For if
question were to make war against the Peloponesians our neighbors, our
strength should be like unto thairs. For that, that we might lead our army
subdainly against every of them. But to make war against them, that be
far from us, and that be greatly experymented in the sea, and fournished
habundantly of all things necessary, to wytt, of riches, as well in particular,
as in comone, of ships, of horses, of harnnes and of people, as much and
more, than any othere city of Greece, and also have moreover many allies,
trybutours unto them, how should we enterprise yt or upon what hope?
Consydering that we arne unprovided of all things to assail them fourthwith.
For if the question be of an army by sea, we arne much more weak tha^ they,
so be we of silver, for that ye we have none in general, nor mean to recover
it by and by, of particulars. Some do trust peradventure, that we arne more
puyssante than they in the feate of war. And that we have more people. By
mean whereof we may easily ouerrunne and waste their lands. But yt must be
considered that when we shall have well wasted their territorye, they have much
other lands elleswhere. And also they have the Sea, which shall furuyshe the^
always of that, that shall be necessary for them. And when we shall have
practiced and caused their subjects and allies to rebel, they must be
succurred by sea. For that the more part is inhabytinge in the Islandes. And
therefore, what manner war shall ours be? Considering that if we be not
stronger than they in the sea, or that we take not from the^ y^ revenues,
wherwyth they do furnishe the charge of their ships, we shall destroy more of
our lands, than of thairs. And also we may not afterward depart with our
honnoure from war, specially being thauthours of yt. And we ought not to
hope that by having pyllaiged and wasted thaire lands, we have the sonner
fynished the war. But I fear rather that in this doing, we leave yt unto our
children. For it is not to bileue that the Athenya^s have to small heart, that
for seeing their terrytorie wasted, that they woll render them subjects unto
us, or that they be so afraid of war, as if they did not know what it is.
And yet notwithstanding I am not so destytute of wit that I woll counsel
you to suffer your friends and allies to be iniuryed. And that you cause not
the wrong and deceytes of the said Athenyans to be parceyued. But I say truly
that you ought not yet, to take armure and make war against them. But you
should send toward them, and sommon them to do right. Shewinge them, that we
be not minded to suffer such things. And that rather we woll fight, than
endure them, without always to show that we be to soore chased to begin the
war. And in the mean time, we may prepare our case, drawinge to our amytie
new people, as well Greeks, as strangers from all parties. Whereby we may
have aid of ships and of monney. For yt is lawful for them, that by thaire
allies be evil handeled, (as we be by the Athenyans) to take allyaunce, and to
make amytie with all people, for to saulfe and to keep thaire estate. And also
we may in the mean time assemble our particular forces. And if they obey
unto the demandes that our Ambassadors shall make unto them, it shall be a right
good thing. And if they do it not, we shall have, (by puttinge this practique
in use) two or three years space, for to fournishe us of that, that is
needful. And we may afterward, if we think good, begin the war. And
when they shall see our preparation to be suffycient for to execute that,
which we shall have signefied unto them: they shall be more enclyned to obey us.
And specially, having their terrytorie intier and not wasted. For that, shall
cause questyon for to determyne, how they shall save their goods, before they
be pilledged by their ennemys. And I do think, that we should repute and hold
that same their territorye (so long as it shall be entier in their hands) as
for a sure hostage or pledge. And so much the more, as it shall be the better
labored. By reasone whereof, we ought willingly to co^sarue or save it For by
destroying yt, we should cause them through dispayer to bicome inexpugnable and
not to be overcome. And if, before we be provided and furnyshed, we do waste
the said lands at the desire of our confederates, and by mean of their
accusations, I fear greatly that we shall prouyde^ very evil for the feats
of them of Peloyonese. And that it redoundethe to their great damage and
dishonnor, for that, that such accusations, be they comone or particular, may
well be appaised. But a war, that shall begin by all us the other in
general, at the desire and for the complainctes of some particulers, may not
easily be left of, with our honnoure. And also we know not what ye end
thereof shall be. And if it seems to any, that it is for lack of heart, that
many cities confederated dare not enterprise fourthwith war against one only
city: Consider, that they have of allies so many as we, and those, which they
have, be their co^trybutours. and so be not ours, Consider also that to
maigteigne war, it is as necessary to have monney to pay the charges, as to
have people and harnois, which be unprofitable, if there be not wherewith to
enterteigne them. And specially for people of main land, against the^ by Sea.
wherefore let us furste take order for the expenses, and let us not fear for
the words of our allies. For truly, like as the ill or goodness that shall
chance, shall be more imputed unto us, than unto them, so ought we to foresee
and consider with great leisure, to what end the things may grow. And you
ought not to take for reproach and shame, the prolonginge and slackenes that
they charge us with. For if you be to hasty to begin war, before you be
provided, yt shall endure so much the longer. And for that, y^ our city has
always been fra^ke and right glorius, yt may well be said that this prolonging
and deliberation have ever be joined with our gravity. By mean whereof, we
alone and none other, do not lift up our selves by pride in our prosperities,
and in our aduersites do show oureselues less astonished, tha^ any other. And
also we be not moved lightly by praisings or perswasyo^s of other, to
enterprise things, yt we know to be right difficile, nor likewise by rebukes
and reproaches. And in effect we be by means of this sobernes both good
warryons, and also sage and well aduysed. To wytt, good warryours, for somuche
as of tha^ sobrenes proceeds shamefas^nes and fear of shame, and of that
comes hardynes. Also we be sage and well advised, for that, y^ we be so taught
and instructed fro our yougth, not to presume to be so wise, as to be bold to
conte^pne and transgress our laws, and to show our modesty, rather by
enduring their rigor, tha^ in disobeing the^. And moreover we set not greatly
our study on vain and unprofitable things, as to despise and abate by great
narrations and stif words, that be nothing to purpose, ye force and puyssance
of our ennemys. or to persuade lightly to begin war, as though here were no
othere thing to do. But we have the prudence to think, that the fantasy of
men that arne not exceadynge far from us, is like unto ours, and that the
hazardes of war be not comprised in narrations of many words. Wherefore we
ought always to give order to our busynes in effect, and not by words, and
to presuppose that we have to do with such ennemys, as use good counsel. And
not to putt our confydence in faults, that may be made, but to presume, that
they provide as well for their affairs, as we for ours, and that there is not
great difference bitwene one man and an other, but that same is most wise and
most esteemed, that shewithe best his knowlaige at need. Have will therefore
(lords Lacedemonya^s) to keep and enterteigne this form of living, which
your auncesters have left you. By following whereof, we ourselves have always
proffyted and prospered. And let us not suffer ourselves to be persuaded, to
consulte and determyne in a moment of time, of the lives and faculties of
great nombere of people, of great expenses, and defrayinge of monney, of many
towns and cities, and of our glory and reputacion. But all at leisure advise
you what you have to do. For we have better occasion to tarry than any of the
other, by reasone of our force. And for conclusion mine advise is, that we
shall send toward the Athenya^s, for to show them declarations touching
Potyde, and the other complaynctes and querells, that arne made against them.
And somuche the rather, that they offer themselves to stand to judgment, by
which their doing, we may not reasonably go against them, as oultragious and
enforcers. And neuerthelas may in the mean time provide us of things
necessary for the war. For by this mean, you shall both provide sagely for
your affairs, and also put your ennemys in great fear. Thus spoke Archidamus.
And after that many other had spokenne, in the last place arose up
Stenelaides, Steneleidas
who was for that time, one of the Trybuns of the people, that they call
Ephores, and he did speak in this manner.

The narration and proposition of Stenelaydes, by folowinge whereof, war was
concluded against the Athenyans. The.x. Chapter.
TRuly, lords, I cannot understand, what the Athenyans will to say by the
long talk, wherewith they have kept us here, for they have done nothing but
highly praised and set fourth their puyssance and their deeds, without
excusinge themself in any manner of the injuries and oultrages, that they have
done to our allies and to hole Peloponese. And if they were good against the
Medes, so much arne they double more worthy of punishment, to be evil against
us, now being bicome ill, from good. But as touching us, and them that be
like unto us, truly we be holy such, as we have been in times passed. And if
we be wise, we woll not despise our allies that be oultraged, another woll we
delay to succor them, saying that men delay not to oultrage theyme. And
though the other have more monney: more ships and more horses than we: we yet
also have good allies and valyaunte, that desarue not to be forsaken and left
to the Athenia^s, another that we should not redress their co^plaintes, for
process nor for words, co^sydering yt they be oultraged by deed and not by
words. But we ought to fight against them fourthwith and that with all our
power. And it is not needful that any man teach us, how we should consulte and
deliberate in this case, seeing that we be thus oultraged. For it is for them,
that are minded to wrong other, conuenyent, to make thies long consultations.
And therefore, lords Lacedemonyans, judge manfully and declare war, in
showing and defendinge your dygnitie and majesty Spertayne. And suffer ye
not, that the Athenyans make theirs more great, nor to destroy our allies.
But having the gods to help us, let us war against them, that do
injury us. After that Stenelaides had thus spoken, he said and ordonned
that the matter should be put into deliberation of the counsel, to be
determined by ye greater voice. And for that, that the noise was great
amongst them, for the diuersyte of opynyons (for their custom was to declare
and give their consent and opynyo^s by their voices and not by small balls)
for to encourage them the more to be of his oyynyo^, he said in this manner.
All those that be of opinion, that the Athenyans have brokenne the allyances
and wro^ged our friends: arise and withdraw yourselues into this place.
shewinge them a certain place of the halle, where they held counsel. And
they that shall be of contrary opinion, withdraw youreselfe into the othere.
which they did. So there was found a much greater number of them, that were
of the opinion, to make war. This done, they caused their allies to be
called, and showed them, that they thought that the Athenyans did wrong. But
neuerthelas before they would determyne war, they were minded to have the
advise and opinion of them all, to the intent that if it were mete to make it,
the same should be done by one common accord. And hereupon they sent all the
Ambassadors that were there, home to their houses for to consulte every of
them in his quartier. And likewise the Athenyans, after they had received
auuswere of that, that they were sent for, they returned to Athenes. And this
peblic^te, that is to say^ decre of the people, was made and pronounced
the.xiiii. year after the truyse of thirty years, which had been made after
the war of Eubee. And the Lacedemonyans were moved to make this decre, not
somuche for the words and declarations of their allies, as for fear that
they had, that the Athenya^s should make themselves mightier. Saying that the
more part of Greece, was now subjected unto them. And they were increased sens
the war of the Medes, in the manner that follows.

How the Ath^nyans after the war of the Medes, builded again their city,
and the beginning of their Empire in Greece. The.xi. Chaptre.
AFter that the Medes were departed from Europe, being vainquisshed by the
Greeks, as well by land, as by sea, and that they, that were saved by sea, were
descomforted nigh to Mycale: Lyothichides king of Lacedemonyans, Micales
Leotychides.
(who was Duke and Capytaine to the Greeks, that were at the same descomfyture
of Mycale) returned home with the Greeks of Peloponese, that he had under him.
But the Athenyans with them of Ionum, and of Hellespont, which than were
rebels against the king of Mede, tarried and assieged the city fo Ceste,
Sestus
which the same Medes did hold, who did forsake it. And by that mean, the
same Athenyans and allies took yt, and there kept their winter. The winter
passed, they all departed from Hellesponte, the country being habandoned of
the strangers, and the Athenyans went to take again their wives children and
moueables that were in the cities, wherein they had bestowed them to be kept, at
the beginning of the war. After, they returned unto Athenes, and determined
to make again and build their walls of the town, the more part whereof were
beaten down. And likewise the howsen. some of them in very small number
resarued. which the chief of the strangers had kept for to lodge in. Which
thing understanding the Lacedemonyans, they sent their Ambassadors to
empesche and let them to doyt. As Well for that, that they not wyllingly did
see, that they nor other should have walls to their towns, as also at the
instigatio^ of their allies, that feared the puyssance of the same Athenyans,
seeing that they had a much more great number of ships, that at beginning of
the war. And that sens the same, they had conceived a great audacytie. So the
said Ambassadors required the^ that they would not make again their walls,
but rather pluck down all those of the other towns, that were out of
Peloponese, that remained hole. And yet not withstanding did not declare unto
them the cause that moved them to make this request: but showed the^ that it
was for fear that if they made again their said walls, and the strangers
should return, they should have an other place to receive them, wherein they
might war against them, as they did than in the city of Thoebes, which
they did hold. For they said, that Peloponese was a place sure and
defensible, suffycie^t for the retreat of all the Greeks. When the Athenyans
had hard this Ambassade, they answered that they would shortly send of their
people to Lacedemonye for to make them answer. And with this answer sent
the^ again incontynently. And this they did by the counsaille of Themistocles,
who persuaded them, that they should send him fourthwyth before into
Lacedemonye, and that within certain time after, they should despatche other
people, that should have charge of that matter with him, and in the mean time
should cause with all diligence to be set to work all the^ of the town, as well
little, as great, and as well men, as also women, to make the walls for to raise
the^ by all means to be so high, that they might be fensible, and that they
should take the matter and the stones there, as they should find them most
ready, without sparing edifices public or particular. And after that he had
showed them this, and what he intended to do, he went to Lacedemonye. At which
place being aryued, he went not to the officers, nor to the counsel in many
days. But when any of the counsailers demanded him wherefore he slacked so much
to go thider, he found diverse excuses saying yt he tarried for his
co^paignyons, excusing their retarda^ce by diverse means, and neuerthelas
saying, that he hoped that they should come right shortly, and that he
maruailed, how they tarried so long. Wh^ru^to the honest people of the town
did give credit, for the amity and knowlaige that they had of him. But
during this time, people came every day, that reported to the said
Lacedemonya^s, how that the walls of Athens were co^tynually made up with all
diligence. And now were so heighned, that it was not to bileue, yt they would
cease. Themistocles, tha^ saying that there was no more means to abuse them,
prayed them, that they would not believe reaportes, but to send from amongst
the^ fayth^ull parsones unto the places for to see the thing at y^ eye, and to
make unto the^ true reaport. which they did. And on the other side, he sent
secretly by one his messenger to aduertyse the Athenyans, that they should
reteigne the said Ambassadors by the most cloked mean that they could, and
not to suffer them to depart, until that he were come again unto the^. In the
mean time aryued together his companyons of the Ambassade, to wytt,
Hambronicus son of Lysicles, and Aristides son of Lysimachus. who signefied
him that the walls of Athens were now of good heigh and defensible. For he
feared that wha^ the Lacedemonyans understood the truth of the thing, that
they would restrain them. The Athenyans did right well that, which he
commanded them. whereof, after that he was aduertysed, he came to the
counsel of Lacedemonyans, and showed them that the walls of his city were
now made i^ such sort, that they were defensible for them that were within
yt. And if the said Lacedemonyans or their said allies woolde fro^thence
forwards send their Ambassadors, they should send them unto people, that
understood well what were e^pedyent and profitable for a common wealth. For at
what time yt seemed unto them e^pedyent to forsake their city, and enter into
their ships, they showed that they had the heart and mind to do yt,
without counsaille of any othere. And also since, in all the affairs that
happened duringe the war, when they were putt into deliberation, thaire
opynion was found so good, as any of the other. And therefore they thought yt
good, most expedient and profitable, that their city were enclosed with
walls, rather than to leave it open, as well for the wealth of them, as of their
allies, for yt were impossible that things might egally be consulted upon,
where as indiffere^cie were not had. wherefore it was nedefulle, aither that
all the cities confederated should be without walls, orells that those
Lacedemonye^s confess and acknowlaige that those of Athe^s have been made with
good raison. The Lacedemonyens showed not themself to be displeased against
the Athenia^s, for thies words. For also they sent not their Ambassade to
impesch the^ precisely to make their walls, but only to persuade them to put
the matter into general deliberatio^. For y^, that they had the^ in great love,
for the good will that they had showed, and for saruyce that they had done at
ye war of ye Medes. Neuerthelas also they were sorry to have been so deceived
of their opynio^. In this manner returned Tha^bassadours of both parts without
any declaration of displeasure. And also ye city of Athenes, was by this
means in short time, enclosed with walls. which were made with great haste,
as may be well perceived by this, y^ men may se the fou^dacions to be of many
sorts of stones. and in some places they be not ^ayde egall, but as they were
found. And also men may see there, many stones wrought and entailled, which
had before ^arued for monumentes or tombs. and had made the circuicte of the
wall much more large than the town was. And for this cause they took the
stuf in all places to fournyshe yt. Besides this, Themistocles persuaded the
Athenyans to make an end of the wall, which he had caused to be begone in
the year, wh^^ he was governor and ruler of the city ab^ute the gaate of the
said city, that is called Pyree as well for that, Pyreus.
that the place was very propice, so as it than was (and yet being enclosed
should be more necessary, having three natural ports enclosed) as also to the
intent that the Citezeins, might the rather give themself to saylinge, which
was the thing, by means whereof, he thought that the city might be made more
puyssante. For this cause he was the furste, that had the hardynes to say to
the Athenya^s, that there lacked to rule the sea. And inco^tynently afterward
began to enterprise the Empire. Thus by his counsaile^ the wall was made and
fynyshed, wherewith the port of Pyree was enclosed (so that we se it now if
such largenes, that two wagons may pass there) al of great quartered fre
stones wtin fourth made with chalk and sand, and on the owte side the stones
be joined with graspes of irone with lead. But yet it is not raised above y^
one half in height, that it was appointed to be of. which was such, yt if it
had been so made, A very few people, though they were no warryous, might have
kept it against a great army. And the other people of defense, might have
entered their ships for to fight. For all his entente was principally, to the
affairs of the sea. For this cause (as I think) that he perceived that the
Medes, if they would return into Greece, might come sooner, and more easily by
sea, than by land. Wherefore it was more expedye^t, to fortefye the port of
Pyree, than the city. For this cause, he oftentimes persuaded the Athenia^s,
yt if they were constrained or ouercharged by land, they might retire and
strength them in this place, and make all their defense by sea. In such
manner, the Athenyans after the departure of the Medes, fortefyed their city
and their port with walls. Anon afterward, Pausanyas Lacedemonyan,
Pausanias.
son of Cleombrotus Duke of Greeks, departed from Peloponese with twenty
great ships. And with him went thirty other ships with Athenians, togeders
with a great n^mber of other their allies, which went all to land in
Cypres. where they took by force, many towns and cytyes. And from thence went
to Bizance, Byzantium.
which the Medes did yet than hold, and did take it likewise by force. All
which things were done under the conduct of the said Pausanias. But for that
he showed him self to lofty, or high, and imperial toward the allies, and
impytuous to all other, and specially to the Ionyans and those that newely had
been recovered from the obeisance of the Medes, they could not endure it. but
prayed the Athenyans for the amyte and allya^ce that was between them, that
they would be their heads, and not suffer, that the said Pausanias should so
oppress and ouertreade them. Whereunto the Athenyans gave willyngly the ear,
and watchedde the mean and occasyon, how they might most honestlye do it. So
chanced it, that in the mean time, Pausanias was sent for or commanded home,
by the Lacedemonyans, who had now ben aduertysed by many people of the
vyolences, that he did, and that he governed himself more like a tyraunte,
than a Duke. And by this mean, all at one time, he was called back, and all
the Greeks became under the obeisance of the Athenyans, reserved them of
Peloponese. And after that the same Pausanias was come again to Lacedemonye:
he was convicted of many violences and particular pyllages, b^t no great crime
could be approved against him. Nevertheless before he was acquyted, it was
laid to his charge, that he had confederacy with the Medes. And for so much
as it was in a manner clearly approved so to be, they would not send him
again to the army, to have the charge, but in his stead they sent Docres,
Dorcis.
and certain other Capitaines with a small number of people. But when they
were aryued at the army, the said men of war, seeing, that Docres regarded
them not, returned unto their houses. Which seeing, the Lacedaemonians would
not send other unto them, fearyng that those, that they should send the^,
should become worse, like as they had experimented by Pausanias. And moreover
they desired gladly to be delivered from the war of the Medes. And to leave
the charge thereof, to the Athenyans, who seemed to them to be people mete to
have conduyte thereof, and also were than, their good friends. The Athenya^s
having by this mean taken the auctorytye and principality upon the Greeks,
imposed and rated for every of the cities confederated, a certain number of
ships, and a certain quantytie of monney for defense of the country against
the Medes. And also to revenge them of the euyls, that they had done in the
countreye of Greece. Whereunto, the said confederates did gentely agree for the
great hatred that they had conceived against Pausanias. And than treasourers
and receiuours were furst created by the Athenians, for to recover, and keep
the monney of that same imposte, which they called, Tribute. And it was the
furste, that ever had been imposed over the Greeks, and yt amounted to the some
of four houndred threskoore talentes, and the temple of Delos was chosen for
to keep it in. Delos.
And there the said confederates did make their assemblies, and so every of
the confedered cytyes, at the beginning, did chose their Dukes and heads,
which did govern them according to their laws. And they were all called, and
had their voice in the common consultacyons that were made for the feats of
war. The Athenians came to this degree of rule and auctorytye, by occasyon of
war with the Medes. And for the de^yre that they had to do greater things.
But sythens the said war until this present, whereof we speak, the said
Athenyans did many great feats. as well against strangers, as against their
co^federates, that would have made nouuelties, and also against certain
Peloponesia^s, which in all the affairs of the said Athenya^s, were willing to
withstand and hinder them. The which matters, I am minded here to bring in,
departing somewhat from my narration, for that, that all they, which have
writtonne before me, have omytted this part. making only mention of things,
that were done before the war of the Medes, or in the same war. And
specially Hellicanus, who speaks some thing in his hystorye of Athenyans,
and touches it compendyously, without parfaictynge or making distinction of
the time. Also it seems unto me conuenyent, to make this narration for that,
that thereby it shall be understand, how the Empire of the Athenyans has been
establishedde.

Of wars that the Carthagians had, after that same of Medes, until this
present war, as well against the strangers, as against the Greeks, by
means whereof they increased their Empire and auctorytie. Cap. xii.
ANd furste, vnderconducte of Cymon son of Mylciades, Cimon.
they took and pyllaged the town of Eyonne, E^ona.
which is upon the river of Strymonne, Strymon.
that the Medes did keep. After, they took and fourraged the Isle of Scyre,
Sciros Dolopes.
that is in the sea, Egee, and from thence chased the Tollopes, who kept it,
and did inhabyte it with their people. And after, they had war against the
Caristyans and other of the Isle of Eubee, Caristii

Euboea


whom fynallye they subdued by treaty, and successively the Naxiens, Nax^^
that were rebels against them, who being conquered by force, were the furst
of the cities confederated, yt the Athenyans brought into servitude against the
form of the alliance. And they did the like afterward unto other, which
rebelled ^n like manner, which many did, by reasone of this, that when they
faylled to fournish the number of ships, or to pay the trybute, that they
had granted, or else that they departed from the army without license, the
Athenyans constrained and punished the^ rygourously, which thing was to grievous
for the^ to ^ndure. For yt they had not been accustomed to be so constrained.
And nevertheless they saw ye Athenyans use more authority, tha^ they were
accustomed, and yt the war was not egally made, by reason of this, yt those
Athenia^s had the power to co^strayne the^, that failed, whereof, they
themselves that were constrained had been cause, for that that through
stouthfulnes to go to war, and that they would not forsake their houses, some
among them had compounded to give money in stead of ships, which they
were bound to fournyshe for their portion. By mean whereof the power of the
Athenyans waxed strong by sea, and they abodde holy destitute of ships. In
such sort, that when afterward they would have rebelled, they found
themselves unprovided, and could not resist. After these things the
Athenyans and their confederates made war against the Medes. And in one
day, had two victoryes, the one by land nyghe the river of Eurymedone in
the countreye of Pamphilie, Eurimedon.
and the other upon the sea, nyghe thereunto, under the conducte of Simon. In
which battle by sea, were taken and desco^fyted all the ships and galleis
of the Phenycians, which were to the number of two houndred. It chanced anon
after, that the Thasians rebelled from the said Athenyans, Thasii^
by occasyon that the same Athenyans made their estaple of marchaundyses, and
specially of Iron, in the quarter of Thrace, which was on the other side of
the sea, dyrectly against them. But the Athenyans sent thither their army by
sea, which descomfyted that same of the Thasians. And afterward landed and
assieged the city. In this self time, they sent ten thousand housholdes,
as well of their citezeins, as of their allies, to the quarter of Strymonne for
to inhabyte with their people the town, which was than called, neuf chemins,
and is now named Emphipolis, Amphipolis.
and chased from thence the Edonians, Edoni.
that held it. But afterward, those Athenians being entered further by land
into the countreye of Thrace, were all descomfyted, nyghe unto Darasinque,
Drabescus.
by the people of the country, who were despleased, that the said town was
so peopled with strangers. In these affairs, the Thasians that had been
overcome by sea, and were assieged by the Athenyans as is before said: sent
toward the Lacedemonyans, to require succoure. prayinge the^, that they would
enter into the countreye of the said Athenyans, to the intent that they might be
constrained to raise and break their siege, and go to succor their land.
which thing the Lacedemo^yans did secretly grant to do. and had parfourmed
it, had not been a great earthquake, which happened in their country. By
means whereof, they durst not enteryryse that war. And also it chanced in
the self same time, that all the captyues of the Lacedemonyans, that were in
the quarter of Thuriate and of Eschee, Thuriate.

Ethe^s.


did fly unto Ithome, Ithome.
which slaves or captyues, were, for the more part, descended of thancyent
Messenyens, Messenu.
that were brought into captivity. And herfore they were al called Messenyans.
By occasion whero^, the Lacedemonyans began war against them of Ithome.
and thereby, could not succor them of Thase. Who, by these means, were
constrained by the length of the assiege, at the end of three years, to
render them to the will of the Athenyans. which did raze down their walls,
and took from the^ all their ships. And further, caused them to pay all that,
that they could make at that time, and taxed great stipendes to be paid in
time to comme. But by this mean, they left them their territorye and the
mines of metalls, that were in the mountaygnes. During this time, the
Lacedemonyans perceiving that the war, which they had begone against them of
Ithome, did draw to be very long, they sent to all their allies, to have
succor and aid of the^. And among the other, toward the Athenyans, for
that they seemed unto them, most expert to assault towns and walls, and that
by their aid they might take the town by length of siege. which they might
have done (for the Athenyans sent unto them Cymon, with a great bend) if the
Lacedemonyans had not suspected the said Athenyans. whereby afterward, open
discord followed discord followed between them. For that, that the
Lacedaemonians, seeing: that the town received them not, they began to doubt
them, and to fear the aud^citie of the Athenyans, and their redynes to
enterprise new things. In such sort, that they doubted, that they of the
town, had some intelligence or confederation with the^, by mean whero^ they
showed the^, that for that time they had no more need of their succor. And
under this color, lycenced them to depart, reteignyng nevertheless all the
other confederates. Whereupon the Athenyans knowing euydently that this was done
for suspytyon, and not for other cause, took this license to great dyspleasure.
For they thought well, that they had not meryted that same, toward the
Lacedemonyens. And therefore being comme again to Athenes, and having made
reaporte to the cytesens, they departed from the amytie and alliance, that they
had made with the Lacedemonyans at the war of the Medes, and did reallye
themselves with the Argyues, Argiui.
who were enemies of the Lacedemonyans, and both two togidres made alliance
with the Thessalyans. Thessal^.
But in the mean time, they that were within Ithome, seeing them to weak to
resist the might of the enemies, being also anoyde by the length of the siege,
which they had now susteigned nighe upon ten years, they made appoinctement
with the Lacedemonyans. By which it was ordained, that they should avoid the
town and all the countreye of Peloponese in suertye, without ever to return
thither. And if any of them were found there, that he should be bondsman unto him
that took him. which appoinctment those same Lacedemonyans made, through
occasyon of an answer, that they had had before, during the war, by the
Oracle of Apollo pythius. Which was of such substance. The Ithomyan, that
shall require mercy, ought to be suffered to pass. And the Ithomyans being by
this mean chased from their lands, withdrewe themself, all, with their wives
and householdes, toward the Athenyans. Who, for the hate, that they had
against the Lacedaemonians, received them willyngly, and sent them to inhabit
the Islande of Naupacte, Naupactum.
which they had newely conquered. And they had chased from thence the Locres
Osolyans. And in a manner, at the self same time, they of Megare departed from
the alliance of the Lacedemonyans, and rendered them selves unto the Athenyans.
By occasion of this, that having war against the Corinthians for their
lymytes or bounds, the said Lacedemonyans sent them no succoure. And by this
mean, the Athenyans do hold Megare, and the town of fountaynes, which they
name Pegase. which place of Megare, they fortefyed with thick walls, ye
extended from the city, until the river of Nysee. Nisoea.
And the same Athenyans caused those walls to be warded by their people.
which was the furste cause of the enmytye between the Athenyans and the
Corinthians. It chaunsed upon this, that Inarus son of Sannyticus king of
Lybyans, that be borderers to the countreye of Egypt, having assembled a
mighty puyssance in his city named Marye sur le Phare, Maria super Pharu^.
entered into the said countreye of Egypt, which was than in the subjection of
King Artharerses. and so what by force, and what by treaty, wythdrewe a great
part to his obeisance. and that done, sent toward the Athenyans for to make
allyaunce with them. Who at that time were aryued at the Islande of Cipres,
with two houndred ships, as well of their own, as also of their allies. And
after that they had hard and understood the request of the said Inarus,
they left the enterprise of Cypres, and went from those parties, and by the
sea, entryng into Nylus, they took at their aryual two parts of the city of
Memphis. Memphis.
And the third, named, the white wall, they besieged. Whereunto were retired
the Medes and the Perses, that were escaped from the other two parts with the
Egyptians, that were not rebels. On the other side, in the self same time,
the Athenyans that went fourth with their ships, nyghe unto Habie, did
fight against the Corinthians, Halia.
and against the Epydauryans, and were vainquyshed. But anon after in a
battle by sea, which they had against the Peloponesyans nere unto Cecriphale,
Cecryphalea.
they had the victory. And again after, having begone war against the
Egenytes, Aeginete.
they had there an other great battle between them by sea, nygh unto Egyne,
Aegina.
in the which, all the allies and confederates of both parties did mete,
whereof likewise those Athenyans had the victory, and did win or drown.lxx.
ships of ennemys. And pursuyng their victory, entered into land, and
besieged the said city of Egyne. Having Locrates, Locrates.
the son of Stribus, for Captain. which seeing, the Peloponesyans did take
the quarrel of the said Egynettes, as their allies, and sent to their
succoure for the beginning, three houndred me^, Corinthians and Epidaurians,
who occupied the promontoryes of Geranee. Geranea.
And on the other side, the Corinthians with their allies, entered in battle
into the land of Megare, thinkyng that the Athenians, having an army in
Egypt and at Egyne, could not defend, in so many places: and at the least, if
they would defend the countreye of Megare, they should be constrained to raise
their siege from before Egyne. which notwithstanding, they did not. But all
they, that could bear harnnoies, as well old as young, came out of the city,
and met the Corynthyans before Megare. And so did fight against them. And the
battle was so egall, that aither of the parties, pretended to have had the
victory thereof. But the Athenians did make and set up their Trophe or sign of
victory, pretending to have had the better, for that, that they abodde and
kept the ca^p. By mean whereof the Corinthians, that were returned into their
city, seeing that the ancient cytezeins blaymed them, for that they were
retired, came again twelve days after, for to plant and set up their
Trophee, foranempste the same of the enemies. But the Athenyans that were in
Megare, issued forth upon them with so great furye, that they slew all them,
that had set up the said Trophee. and the other yt should have been their
faulsgarde, they put to flight. Of whom a great part in their sleyinge, ran
into a field closed with dyches, so that there was none coming fourth. which
seeing, the Athenyans did set at the entering a good bend of their men to keep
them, that they returned not back, And the other ennyroned the said dyche on
all sides, and with strokes of stones slew all them that were entered within.
which was a great plage to them of Corinthe, though the rest of their people
did save themself within the town. About the time that these things were
done, the Athenyans enterprysed and began to make two great and thick
walls, that went from the city. The One, until the port of Pyreus, and the
other until the same of Phalere. Phalern.
At which time, the Phociens had their army against the Doryans, Doors.
from whom the Lacedemonyans were now departed, and held besieged three of
their towns, to wytt, Beon, Sytynyo^ and Erineon. Whereof after yt they had
taken the one, the Lacedemonia^s sent to the succor of the said Dorya^s,
Nicomedes son of Celobrotus, Nicomedes.
who than governed the city, for and instead of Plistynates son of
Pausanias, Plistoanax.
king of Lacedemonia^s, with a thousand, five houndredmen of their land, and
about ten thousand of their allies and co^federates. Notwithstanding before
they aryued, Understanding yt the Doryans had rendered the^self, by composition
unto the Corinthia^s, they returned unto their houses. But they were in great
fear to be empesched by ye Athenia^s if they took their voyage by sea. for on
ye cost of the goulphe of Crissee, Crissoeus.
the Athenia^s had great number of ships armed, and on the other coast of
Geraine, there was also danger. for yt the Athenyans did hold Megare and
fountaynes, called Pegase, and had there always both people and ships. And
further the passage was hard and straight. and also they knew that the
Athenyans did there wait for them. For this cause they concluded for the most
expedyente, to soiourne in the countreye of the Beotians, until such time,
that they had better aduysed for their iourneye. And also at the persuasion of
some of the Athenyans, such as imagyned to change the governance populair of
the city of Athenes, and to let that the walls should not be parfaicted,
that were begone. But the Athenians that perceived it, came fourth against the
Lacedemonyans, both old and young to the number of a thousand, and assembled
of their allies, to the number of.xiiii. thousand, as well for that, that it
seemed to them, that their ennemys knew not whyder to go, as also for that,
that they greatly doubted that they were come for to trouble their estate and
common governance. Beside the said number, certain horsemen of the
Thessalians, came to aid the said Athenians, for the alliance that they had
with them. But they turned to the other part, at the battle, that was made
nyghe the town of Tanagre, Tanagra.
in the countreye of Boece, whereof the Lacedemonyans had the victory,
notwithstanding that there was great manslaughter on both sides. After which
victory, the Lacedaemonians entered into the countreye of Megare, and cut down
all their trees, afterward took their journey by Gerayne and by the distraict
of Peloponese, and returned into their houses. But the Athenyans threskoore
days after the said battle lost, returned with a mighty power into the
countreye of the Beotiens, under the conduct of Myronides, Myronides.
and had a victory over them, nyghe Enophite, and by mean thereof, saysed
themself of all the land of Beoce, and of Phocide, and rased down the walls
of Tanagre, and took a houndredd hostages or pledges of the rychest of the
Locriens and the Eponicens. And also they fynyshed in the self time the two
walls, that they had begone at Athenes, for to extend unto the two ports.
After this, the Egenytes were constrained by length of siege, to render them
self to the Athenians, upon these conditions, that they should beat down
their walls, give over all their ships, and yearly pay certain trybute. At
departure from thence, the Athenyans went round about Peloponese, and burned
the fenses of the Lacedemonyans. and took from the Corinthians, the town of
Calcibe. After this, at their landynge, they fought against the Cycionyens
which were comme thither against them, and vainquished the^, all which things
were done in Greece by the Athenyans, in the time, that they had their army in
Egypt. In which countreye, they had many diverse adue^tures of war. And
besides this the king of Perse, from the beginning that he understood their
coming into that same country, sent one his captain a Persian, named
Megabasus into Lacedemonye, with a great sum of money, for to persuade the
Lacedemonyans, that they should by force enter into the land of Athenes, to
the intent to dyuerte or turn by this mean, the Athenians from Egypt. But
after that the said Megabasus had spente one part of the monneye, Megabazus.
and saw that he nothing prevailed: he returned with the rest into Egypt,
and sent an other capytayne, named also, Megabasus, son of Zephirus Persian
to the said country of Egypt, with a great army, which, being arrived,
had a battle against the Egyptyans, which were rebels and against their
allies, in the which they were vainquyshed, and the Greeks that were within
Menphis, were chased away. who withdrewe themself into the Islande of
Prosopyde, which is in the River of Nylus. in the which, the said Megabasus
held them besieged, one year and an half. During which time, he turned the
water from one of the sides of the said Islande. In such sort, that the
ships of the said Athenyans lay on dry land, and that the Islande was
joined to the fyrme land. And this done Megabasus entered dry footed within
the Islande with his army, and discomfyted the Athenyans, and by this mean,
that, which they had done in the said countreye of Egypt in si^e years, was
all lost at one instant, togethers with the more part of their people. And
the rest which was very small, saved themselves through the country of Lybye,
and came to aryue at Cyre^e. And by this mean, the countreye of Egypt came
again to the obeisance of the King of Mede, except the country, that
Amyrteus did hold, Amyrteus.
for that, that it was all maryce and forestes. And moreover the people of that
regyon were all good warryours. But Inarus king of Lybyens, Inarus
that had been cause of all the rebellyon, was taken by traysone and
afterward hanged on the gallows. During this time, fyfty galleys, which the
Athenyans sent to succoure their people in Egypt, arrived at one of the arms
or entering of Nylus, named Mendesius, Mendesius.
not knowing the dyscomfyture of their said people, which were assauted, on
the land side, by the people on foot that were there, and on the sea side, by
the galleys of Phenycians. In such manner, that the greater part were
drowned, and the other saved themself with force of oores. Such end and
issue took the great army and enterprise of the Athenyans and of their allies
in the countreye of Egypt. After the which, Orestes son of Echratydes,
Orestes
being chased from the country of Thessale by the king of the said land,
named Phassalus, Phar^alus.
had recours to the said Athenyans, and persuaded them in such wise, that
they enterprysed to set him again into the said countreye. And so came with
aid of the Beocyans and Phocyans, to land in Thessale. And took that, that
was in fyrme land nyghe the sea, and kept it so long, as they held themself
in battle all togethers, for the horsemen of the king, withstood^ them to
enter any further into the country. By occasyon whereof, seeing that they could
take no strong town, nor execute their enterprise, they returned without
doing any other thing, but that they carried Orestes with them. Anon after, a
thousand Athenyans that were in the place of fountaynes, named Pegase, which
they held, entered into their ships that they had there, and came to arryue
in Cycione under the conducte of Porydes, Sycionus.

Porydes.


son of Xantypus. And being landed, they descomfyted an army of Syconiens,
that came to ouerrunne them. This done, they took the Archers into their
compaignye, and passed through Acarnie, for to comme to take the the city of
Emade, and so assieged it. But seeing that they could not take it, they
returned. And three years after, they made truse for five years with the
Peloponesians. During the which, albeit that they kept abstynence of war in
Greece, yet they made an army of two houndred ships, as well of theyrs, as of
their compaygnyons, whereof Cymon was chyef capytayne, and they went to aryue
at Cypres, being at which place. they were called back by Amyrteus, king of
the maryces and forestes of Egypt, and so they sent to the said countreye of
Egypt, three skore of their ships. Citium
The rest remained at the siege before the city of Cyrcye. But being Cymon
their capytayne there dead, and they in great necessity of victuayles, they
departed from the said siege to have returned, and sayllynge foranempste the
city of Salamyne, which is in Cypres, they fought as well by sea, as by
land, against the Phenycyans, and against the Ciliciens, and had in both
battaylles, vyctorye, and afterward, they came again into their country.
And also the other ships of their bend, which were gone into Egypt. After
this, the Lacedemonyans, began the war that was called, consecrated. and
having taken the temple, that is at Delphos, did deliver it again to the
people of the town. But it tarried not long, that the Athenyans came thither
with a mighty army. which took it again and delivered it, to keep, unto the
Phocians. Anon after, the ba^nyshed men, that the Athenyans had chased from
the country of Beoce, having occupied Orcomenye, Orchomenu^.
Cheronee, Cheronoea.
and some other towns of the said countreye, the Athenians sent thither a
thousand men of theyrs, with an other number of their allies, as they might
redelye get them, under the conducte of Tholmydas, Tolmida.
son of Tholmee. And so took again Cheronee, and furnished it with their
people. And retournynge from thence, they were encontred by the said ba^nyshed
men, Beotiens, who had assembled the ba^nyshed of Eubee, the Locres, and some
other taking their party. who descomfyted them. The more part of them being
slain. and the other taken prisoners. By whose mean, and by delivering of
them, the Athenyans made appointment with the said Beotiens, and restored them
to their liberty. And by occasyon thereof, all the bannyshed and other that
were gone from the said country, returned thither incontine^tly,
understanding to be set again into their former lybertye. It tarried not long
after, that the Islande of Eubee, rebelled against the Athenyans, and so as
Perycles, Pericles.
whom the said Athenyans had sent with a great army for to bring them into
their obeisance, was in his iourneye for to go thither, he received news, that
they of Megare were likewise rebelled, and had slain the garnysone of
Athenyans, that were within, except a small number which saved them self at
Nisee. And those had got one unto their intelligence or confederation from the
Corynthians, the Sycionyans and the Epidauryens, and moreover that the
Peloponesians should enter, with great puissance, into the land of Athenes.
Understandyng the which things, he left the Iourneye of Eubee, and came
again to Athenes, but before that he arrived, the Peloponosyans were now
entered into the countreye Attique, that is to say of Athenes, and had fourraged
and pylledall the land, from the city of Hellusyne, Eleusma.
until the field named Thrasius. having for their Duke and Captain,
Plistonactes son to Pausanias, Plistona^.
King of Lacedemonyans. And that done without passing any further, were
returned unto their houses. which seeing, the Athenyans did afresh send
Pericles with the army into Eubee. who subdued all the Islande by compositio^,
reserved the city of Hescie, Hescioea.
which he took by force. And for that cause, chased away from thence, all the
inhabitants, and inhabyted it with his people. A^ return from that same
co^queste, or very shortly after, the appoinctment was made for thyrty years,
between the said Athenyans on the one party, and the Lacedaemonians and their
allies on the other party. through which, those same Athenyans rendered Pysee
les fountaynes. Pysea, in the latin Nysoea.
Trezenie and Achaye, Trezenis.

Achaia.


which was all that, which they did hold from Peloponese. It chaunsed, that
the Sixth year after the said appointement, great war was moved against the
Samia^s, and the Mylesyans by reasone of the city of Pryene. Priene.
And saying the Mylesyans, that they were not mighty or strong enough for
their enemies, they sent to make their complaynctes, toward the Athenyans,
by consent and intellygence of some partyculer cytezeins of Samye, that went
about to make an alteracyon or change in their city. At whose persuasyon,
the Athenyans went with forty ships against the said city of Samye. the
said city of Samye. And so brought it again, to the governance of the
co^mone estate. and took of them, fyfty young infantes, and fyftye men,
delivered for hostages, whom they left for paunde in the Islande of Lemne.
Le^nus,
Afterward, having left their garnysone at Samye, they returned. But anon,
after their departure, some of the cytezeins which were not in the city, when
the Athenyans had so oppressed it, but perceyuyng their coming, were
withdrawn into diverse places in the main land, by consent and delyberatyon
of the principal of the city made alliance with Pissuthnes, Pissuthne.
son of Hiscapsis, who than governed the city of Sardes. Sardes.
And he sent them seven houndred men of war, with whom, they entered by night
into the city of Samye, and did fight against the commons that had the
governance. In such manner, that they had the upper hand. Afterward they
went strayghte way to Lemne, and from thence recovered their hostages, and
fourthwith rebelled against the Athenyans, and took the people, that the
Athenyans had left there, as well for the governance of the town, as also for
the keep it. whom they gave unto Pissuthnes. And this done, they raised an
army for to go to Mylet. having confederation with the Byzantians. who
likewise rebelled against the Athenya^s, Who, being aduertysed of the
rebellyon of the said Samyans, caused incontynently.lx. ships to depart,
whereof there went but.xliiii. to Samie. For the other were sent, some of them
into Carye for to empesche, Caria.
that the Pheniciens should not pass for to comme to succor the said
Samyans, and the other into Chio, Chio.
for to fatche men. Being than the said forty and four ships, whereof
Pericles was Capytayne with nine other colleagues or capytaines, arrived in the
Islande of Tragie, they encountered.lxx. ships with Samyans, that came from
Mylet: whereof twenty were charged with men of war. and so they did beat and
ouercomme them. And after the victory, being come to their strength forty
shi^pes from Athenes, and from Lesbos, and.xxv. from Chio, they landed in the
Isla^de of Samye, and came to assiege the city. having furst driven back and
descomfyted, an bend, which was issued out of the said town against them.
And so enclosed it, as well on the sea side, as of all the other, with three
walls. Being at which assiege Perycles was aduertysed, how the Pheniciens
came with a great nombre of ships for to succoure the Samyens. So he
took.lx. of the ships that were last comme, with the which, he went, with
as much dylygence as he might, against the countries of Can and of Carye.
Caunus.
Now was on the other side departed from the port of Samye, Stesagoras with
five ships for to go to receive the Phenicians. Stesagoras.
The Samyans being than aduertysed of the departure of Perycles, came by sea
with all the ships, that they could assemble, to assail the camp of the
Athenyans, which was not fortefyed. And at the aryual, drowned the light
ships, that they found in the poorte. And the galleys that came against
them, they vamquyshed in battle by sea. By mean whereof, they were masters
of the sea, and for the space of fourtene days, set in and out of the city,
all that they would. But in the end of the said term, Pericles came again
with the other ships, who did close^ the^ up again within the town. And
anon after, arrived great succors for the said Athenians, to wit, forty
ships from Athenes, whereof were capitains Thucydides, Thucidides.
A^ones and Phormion. Phormio.
and twenty other from their allies, whereof were capytaynes, Clemopolus and
Anticles. Tlepolemus.
And fro Chio and fro Lesbos, thirty. And albeit that the Samya^s did make
certain small outrodes and eskarmouches upon the^ duringe the space of.ix.
months, that the assiege was before the city: yet ^eynge, that they were not
able to resist at lenghthe, they rendered themselves upon such conditions,
that they should raze down their walls, that they should deliver hostages and
all their ships, and for ye expenses of the war, should pay a great some of
money at certain terms. Also they appoincted the Bizantiens to this
condytyon, that they should obey to the Athenyans, as they did before. Anon
after, began the dyfferences of Corcyre and of Potyde, whereof we have above
made mentyon. and all the other, yt were occasyon of the war, whereof we do
write at this present. These be in effect the wars, that the Greeks had,
as well against strangers, as among themself, after the departure of the
king Xerxes out of Greece, until begrnnynge of this war, whereof we speak.
which was about fyftye years. During which time, the Athenyans increased
their Empire and their puyssance, greatly. wherein the Lacedemonyens, although
they perceived it well enough, gave them no great empeschement, but lived the
more part of the time, in peace and rest. For they were not hasty nor light
to enterprise war, nor also would not come thereunto, but for necessytie. Also
they were somewhat empesched by certain wars, that they had amongst them
self, until such time, as they saw the might of Athenyans so to increase,
and that they daily ou^traged their allies. For then they determined no
longer, to endure it. But to enterprise war, with all their power, for to
abate their puyssance, if they could. And after that they had publyshed the
decree, whereof has been spoken, by the which, they declared the Athen^ans, to
be infractors of their faith, and of the alliance, and oultragieux against
their allies and confederates, they sent their messengers to the temple of
Delphos, for to inquyre of the God Apollo, what end the same war should
have. By the oracle or answer of whom, it was annswered, as men say, that
if they pursued the war with all their power, they should have the victory.
and that he would aid them, in so much as they had called him thereunto. Having
than concluded the war in there counsaylle, they caused their allies and
confederates, to be again called into the city of Lacedemonie, for to
con^ulte the matter, and to dete^myne all together, if it were expedyent, to
begin the said war. And after that the Ambassadors of the cytyes were
aryued, the counsel was assembled. Whereunto the same Ambassadors were
called. And all the chyef of the other, did speak, chargyng the Athenyans, and
concludynge the war. And after all, spoke the Corynthyans, who before had
practysed and prayde all the other, to persuade the war fourthwith to be
made. Fearing that in the mean time that it should be deliberated, the
Athenyans should have taken Potyde. And sotheyr speaking was, of this substance.

The narration and proposition ^f the Corinthians to the Counsel of
Lacedemonyans before the assemblye of all the confederates. The.xiii. Chapter.
IT needs not more, Lords Peloponesia^s, to blame nor charge the
Lacedemonyans, that they will not enterprise war against the Athenyans,
considering that they have assembled us here, for this cause. Also it is
reasonable, that they, ye govern (as they be preferred to honnours before all
the other) that they have such regard to thaffayres of particulers in
general, that all may be egally governed and enterteigned. But as touching us
and other, which lately be departed from the Athenyans, it is no more needful,
to admonish us, to beware of them. But only they must be admonyshed, that
dwell in the mean land far from the sea ports, where be the fears and
staples of marchandyses. For it is very needful that they understand, that if
they give not aid and succor to them which dwell in the base countries nighe
the sea, the fatchyng of their goods and of their marcha^dyse shall be much more
difficile, and also the bryngyng again of wares, which come unto the^ by sea.
Wherefore they ought not now to make ille judgment of this, whereof is questyon,
saying that it nothing touches them, but they ought to understand, that if
they take no regard of the inhabitants of the base countreye, and do su^fre
them to be lost, the danger shall afterward come upon the^. And herefor is
it, that this present consultacyon is made, as well for them, as for the other.
For this cause, they ought not to be nyece and negligent to enterprise this
war, for to have afterward peace. For as it is conuenyent, for grave and
prudent people, to live in peace and rest, when they be not wronged, and that
no violence is done unto them: Even so it is convenient, for virtuous and
couragyous people, to turn peace into war, when they be oultraged. And
after that they have well provided for their affairs, to come again to peace
and accord. And another to be proud for the prosperity of the victory, nor
also, for couetyse of peace and of rest, to suffer the^self to be oultraged.
For he, that for to much love of rest, is nyce, and not forcinge to revenge
him self, parceyueth him self very sone depryued of the voluptuousnes, that he
takes of the rest. Also that parsone, that has oftentimes good adventures in
war, forgets him self by unassured and unfaithful fiercenes and
cruelty, in such sort that he thinks not what he ought to do. For
oftentimes, foolyshe enterpryses chance well, for that, that the enemies did
conducte theyrs, more folyshly. And also many enterpryses, that seemed, to have been well begone, have myshappened. For that, that the things in such matter
be never executed in the sort, that they were purposed upon. Also men have
always good and certain hope of things to comme, that they do enterprise.
But when it comes to execute them, they fail oftentimes, for fear. Now as
touching us, who have been greatly oultraged by the Athenyans, we purchase and
enterprise war against them upon good and just quarrel, to the intent to
live always in peace and rest, after, that we shall have been revenged of
them. Of the which war, we ought to hope to have the victory for many
reasons. The furste for that, yt we have greater number of people, and better
warryours, than they have. And the other for that we be all, with one will,
delyberated to do that, which shall be commanded us. And for that, that they
arne more mighty with ships than we, we woll supplye to that, as well so much
of our particular monney, that we woll furnyshe every one for his rate a
portion, as also of the Silver, which is in the temple of Delphos, and in ye
same of Olimpus, which we may coigne. And by that means, we shall easily
wtdrawe and reteigne their maronniers and also their men of war, which be
more strangers and mercenaries or huyred souldyours, than borne in that
country. which thing is otherwise with us. For we be more mighty of people,
than of monneye. And yt we may have the victory over them, it is to believe,
that they shall be discomfyted. And also, how much the more longer that they
resist, so much the more our people shall exercise and apply the^self to the
sea. And so much, as they be people of more heart, tha^ theirs, when that they
shall have been exercysed, they shall be always more strong. For ye hardynes that
ours have, comes unto the^ of nature. which the other may not acquyre or get,
another by art nor by learning. But we may well by exercise acquyre the
industry or travail, yt they have, more than we, and also we shall find
money enough for to fournyshe this affayre. For if their allies refuse not to
pay them trybute for to be in their seruytude and subiectyon, we shall not be
so wretched, that we refuse to contrybute with theirs, goods for to revenge us
of our enemies, and to save our lybertye. For also, when they shall have
taken them from us, they woll entreat us worse by cause of our goods. We have
on the other part many other means to make war against them. The furst is,
that we woll practyse their allies and subjects, and woll cause them to
rebelle against them, and by this mean we woll cause them to lose the
revenues, that they have more than we. Also we may destroy their countries and
territoryes, whereby monney grows unto them, and many other occasyons and
means may happen to us, whereof we now take no advise. For there was never
war made holy by the means, and according to the preparation that was
devised from the beginning, but of it self, it causes others to comme to the
understanding of men, according to the accydentes and chances, which do
occur and happen. And in that, they, that have most high and entier courage,
be in greater suertie, than they which be in sadness and in fear. And every one
of us ought to think and imagyne, that if he had questyon of his lymites or
bounds with his neighbors, that were as mighty as he, that he would not
suffer him self to be oultraged. Now presently, the Athenyans be mighty
enough to subdue us altogider, whereby they shall more easily subdue us
particularly, town ^or town. which thing they woll do, if that we allye not
our selves together, and resist them, all with one accord. And if they have
the victory over us (though it be a thing right heavy and dyspleasante to be
spoken) yet always he that hears it, ought to understand, that that same
victory, shall be no other thing but our bondage, which is a thing
abhomynable to be hard named, in Peloponese, much more to see by effect, so
many noble cytyes to be suppedytated and trauaylled by one, only city.
wherein it seems, either that we be nyce and neglygent, or for fear to much
pacyent, and by that mean degenerating from the virtue and glory of our
ancestres, who have delivered all Greece from seruytude. And it seems, that we
be not suffycyente to defend our lybertye, when we suffer one only city to
usurp the gouernemente over us, where as when there is one only tyrant in a
city we demand that he may be chased away. And we do not consider that by
indurynge this, we incur into three great and evil vices, to wytt, cowardnes
pusillanymytie and imprudence. And yt avails nothing to say for to excuse
you of the said vices, that you woll exchue the temeritie and rashness. which
has been pernycious unto many people. For this excuse (under shadow whereof
many have been deceived) ought rather for fear, to be named, madness. But it
sarueth nothing to our purpose to tax or reprehende things passed, by
longer talk, than the time requires, but we ought in prouyding and succouring
things present, to travail for those, that be to come. For you hold, and
have learned of your ancestres, to acqiure virtues by labors and trauayles.
From whom ye should not degenerate nor swerve. And if that you were
auncyently more rich and more mighty than they were, so much it should be
greater shame to lose in your riches, that, which they won in their
poverty. You have moreover many reasons and occasyons, which should move and
encourage you to make war. The furste is the answer of the god Apollo, who
has promised to aid you, you shall have more to your help, all the rest
of Greece, partly for fear, partly for their proffitt. And you ought not to
fear furste to break the peace and the alliance, which we have with the
Athenyans, which the God, who perswadethe us to begin war, Judges to have
been furste infringed by them. But yt shall be rather to defend the traicties
and confederations which, they have violated and broke^ne. For they that
defend themselves be not infractours of the peace, but they that furst make
assault Wherefore by all reasonne, there can not, but goodness, happen unto us to
enterprise this war. And in as much as you know, by the things that we
have showed you here in general assembly, for to anymate and persuade, how
it is necessary, as well for the common wealth of all, as for the particular of
every one amongeste us: Delay no more to defend your liberty, and
particularly to give aid to them of Potyde, which be Doriens, and be assieged
by the Ionyans. which is hole contrary to that, that was wont to be in times
paste. For that, that if we presently dissemble, we shall suffer one of us to
be destroyed. And wha^ it shall be published yt we have made this assembly for
to revenge us, but that we dare not, we may understand, that there may be
as much done to the other. But lords, allies, and confederates, knowinge that
we be comme into this necessytie, and that we counsel you that, which is for
the best, you ought to determyne and enterprise this war. And you ought not
so much to be afraid of soubdaine incomodites and difficulties of the war, as
to think of the goodness, which shall come unto you, by the long peace that
thereby shall follow. For peace establishes itself by war. And also men be
not assured to be without danger when they be in rest and without war.
And on the othere part in subduinge by force that city of Greece, which woll
usurp the tyranny or rule over all the othere, (whereof it already rules some,
and purposes to rule the rest) we shall certainly abide afterward in
suertie, and shall set at liberty those, that be in servitude and bondage.
Thus did the Corynthians speak.

How the war being concluded against the Athenyans, by all the Peloponesians
in the city of Sparte, the Lacedemonyans, sent their Ambassadors toward
the Athenyans for to sommone them of certain causes. The.xiiii. Chapter.
When the Lacedemonyans had hard all the^ of the other cities speak, which
were there assembled, they caused to be given small balls to the Ambassadors
of every of them, for to declare by that means, whider they willed peace, or
war. So they were all of opinion to make war, which was by them concluded
and determined. But there was no mean at that time to begin yt, for they
were unprovided of all things. For this cause, it was devised that every one
of the said cities should contrybute. And ordained that it should be done
without tracte or length of time, which they did in less than one year.
And in the mean time they sent Ambassadors toward the Athenyans, for to
expound and declare thaire faults and crimes, whereof they were charged. To
thintente to have better and more just occasion to make them war, if they
amended them not immediately. And chiefly demanded the^, that they should purge
the mysdede and offense, wherewith the Gods were offended, which was such.
There had been sometime a citezeine of the city of Athenes, named Cylon, a
noble and a mighty man, who had gottone, the pryze at Olympe. This Cilon had
to wife the daughter of Theagenes, who than was ruler of Megare. In making
which marriage, answer was given to the said Cylone, Cylon
by the god Apollo of Delphos, that when the great feast of Jupiter should
be, he should enjoy the fortress of Athenes. who having the conducte of men
of war of Theagenes, his ^ather in law, and assembly of some his friends of
the city, than, when the feast of Olympus was celebrated in Peloponese, took
and occupied the said fortress of Athenes, to the intent to make himself
lord and ruler. Persuading him, that, that was the greatest feast of Jupiter,
that was made. And for that, that he had at other times won the pryse in the
said feast, yt seemed to him the more that, ye same sarued to his case and
prophecy, of the god. For he had not considered, if the answer extended to
the feast that was celebrated at Athens or at other places. Also the god had
not declaired yt. And yet the Athenyans celebrated a very solemn feast every
year in the honor of Jupiter without the city, in the which were sacrificed
many beasts, counterfaicted by so great art, that they seemed to be lyuinge.
But Cylon, who had interpretated the oracle of Apollo to his own fantasy,
thinking to do well, enterprisedde the matter, like as has been showed. when
the Athenyans understood that their fortress was takenne, all they that were
in the feldes assembled and came to assiege the said Cylone and his men within
the said fortress. But for that the place was strong, and that it noyed them
to be there all occupied, the more part went to chair affairs, and left
the charge to nine of them with a competente number of people to keep and
h^lde the said place assieged. And so gave them full might to do all that,
which should seem unto them in that affayre, to be for the wealth of the
cite. Who, duringe the said siege, did many things apperteigninge unto the
administration o^ the common wealth. In ye mean time, Cylo^ and his brother
found means to issue secretly out of the fortress, and ^aued themselves. But
the other that tarried being constrained by famyne, after that many were
dead, came to couche themselves, before the great awter, which was within the
said fortress. Tha^ they that had the charge of the siege being entered
within, would have caused theyme to arise. And seyinge that they dyed, to
thintente that the temple should not be polluted and defiled, did draw them
fourth, and afterward did kylle them. But there were some that were mourdred
in passing by the infarnal gods, and some, at the foot euenne of the aulters.
By occasion whereof, they that committed the deed, and all their discente, were
holdenne for cruelle and sacrileges. And also the malefactors, were bannyshed
by the Athenyans. And likewise by Cleomenes chased out of Lacedemonye. And
afterward, being come into new dissension with the Athenyans, they that
were found of the said lingnaiges, were not only dryuenne out of the city,
but also the bones of the buried were cast forth from thence. And yet by
succession of time, they came thider again, and even at this present there be
certain housholdes there dwellinge. And that they did, knowing that Pericles
son of Xantippus was descended of the same raze or strain by his mother,
hopinge that if we were chased out of the city, they might afterward more
easily come to the end of thaire war against the Athenyans. And if that he
were not chased fromthence, at the least he should co^ceyue an great hate
toward the people that had this opinion, that for being minded to save them,
that same war was in part commenced and bigonne against them. Now he was in
that same time, the Chiefest man of the city, and had most authority. And
also contraryed the enterpryses of the Lacedemonyens. And anymated the
Athenyans to defend them by force of arms. To this request, the Athenyans
than answered the Lacedemoniens with the self same art. Saying that those
Lacedemonyans ought likewise to purge the sacrilege, wherewith they were
infected, by mean of the violence, that they had done in the temple of
Neptunus, in the place of Tenare. For at a certain time before passed, at the
instigation of Tynarus, Toenarus.
they had drawin out of the temple of Neptunus and slain certain fugitives,
that required mercy, and by this mean, violated the franchise and liberty of
the temple. By occasion whereof, the people had opinion, that thereupon followed
a great earth quake. which anon after chanced in the city of Sparte. And
furthermore the same Athenyans required the Lacedemonyans to purge an othere
sacrylege, wherewith they were likewise infected by cause of the temple of
Pallas, which happened in this manner as folowethe.

Here thauthor shewith incidently the trahisone, that Pausanias minded to do
against the Greeks, and how he was slain. The.xv. Chapter.
AFter that Pausanias, being by the Lacedemonyans exempte from the charge of
their army that he had in Hellespont^, for to come to answer to charges, that
were laid upon him: was absolved or clered of the same charges, yet was he
restored to this former charge. which parceyuinge, he departed from the city,
fayninge to be wyllinge to goo to the said country of Hellespont, for to sarue
in the war, as a simple souldyour. But the truith was, for to appoyncte with
the king of Medes touching that same war, which he himself had bigonne.
And afterward by mean of the said king, to usurp the rule and
principality over all Greece. For to come to which conclusions, he had now,
duringe his charge before his accusation, won the favor of the king by a
singular plaisir and benefitte, which he did him. That is, that having in his
return fro Cipres, taking the city of Bizance, together with the people, that
the king had left there in garny^one, amongst who^, there were many his
pare^tes and domesticals or housholdes, That same Pausanias sent them again
secretly, wtoute knowlaige of his companions, and colleagues or fel^owes in
commission, fayning yt they were escaped. And this he did by the mean of
Congilus, Congylus.
who had charge to keep the^ by who^ also he sent letters to the king of t^is
substance. Pausanias Duke of Spartains to the king Xerxes, The tenor of y^
letters of Pau^sanias sent to to ye king Xerxes.
gretinge. I send unto the thies prisoners, that I have taken by good war,
for to win thy good grace. And also I am desirous to espouse and mary thy
daughter, i^ it plea^e the, and in this doing, to bring al Greece into thy
obeissance, which thing I persuade my self that I may easily do, having good
intelligence or confederatio^ with the. wherefore if the thing be agreeable unto
the, send alo^gest by sea, some right faithful man of thine, to whom I will
communicate and make priuey the whole matter. Xerres was r^ght joyful of this
Epistle. And so sent incontynently Artabasus, Artabasus.
son of Pharnaces by sea, under color of geuinge him charge of the province
of Scilite, the which Mogabata did hold for the king. And he gave him letters
for to send to Pausanias who was in Byza^ce, which were sealed with the kings
seal, and furthermore gave him charge to travail with the said Pausanias in
all that, that he would command him, the best way and most secretly that
he could, Who after that he was arrived in the said province, executed his
charge right discretely. And among other things, sent the said letters unto
Pausanias, which were of this tenor. The tenor of Xerres letters to Pausanias.
The king Xerres unto Pausanias, greting. I thank the for yt plaisir and
benefit that thou haste done for me, by sending unto me again, the prisonners,
which thou did take at Biza^ce. which thing shall never by me nor by mine be
put in obly^^e, and also I take in good part that, which thou have done me to
understand. Therefore I pray that thou will travail day and night for to
execute that, which thou have promised me. For I will not spare gold nor
silver, nor also army, where it shall be required. Of which matter thou may
suerly treat and travail with Artabasus, whom I send unto the expressly, for
this matter. For he is a man discrete, and very faithful. In doing which
things mine affairs and thine shall proceed right well to our honnour and
prouffitt. After that Pausanias had received the said lettres, notwithstanding
that he was in great reverence with all the Greeks, for the charge and authority
that he had, he took much more great heart and greater audacytie. In such sort,
yt he was not content to live after the manner accustomed of ye Greeks, but
went fourth of Bizance apparailled after ye facyo^ of Medes, and in going
through the country of Thrace, he had souldiars, Medes and Egiptia^s in his
co^paigny. And also caused himself to be sarued at the table ple^tefully after
the manner of Medes. And for effect, he could not co^ceyle his heart nor
enterprises, but gave to understand by y^, that he did, that which in his
courage he co^spired to do. He was also dangerous to give audye^ce, and was
easily angered with every man. In such sort, that there was not he, that feared
not to aboorde him. which was the principal cause, for which the co^federates
of Greece, departed from the Lacedemonyens, and did allye themself with the
Athenya^s. By occasyon whereof, the Lacedemonie^s revoked him from his charge,
as it has been showed. Afterward being departed by ye sea of Harimond without
license of the lordeship, it was suspected yt he would resume the authorite. For
reason whereof, being arrived at Bizance, where the Athenyans kept the assiege,
he was chased away by the Lacedemonyens, and after he came not again to
Sparte, but withdrew himself into certain villages of Troade. And being there,
it was signefied unto the Lacedemonyens that he treated with the Barbarous or
strangers, some euille matter, so they thought it good no more to dissymule.
And sent a sargeant with his mace from one of the Tribuns of the people, whom
they call Ephores. who gave him in commandment that he should
incontynently come to Sparte as fast, as he,, and not to depart from his
company, upon pain to be reputed rebelle and ennemy of the city. And mynding
not to make himself more suspected, hopinge also by monney to iustefye and
purge him from crimes, that were laid upon him, went to Sparte with the said
sargeaunte. But fourthwith as he was arrived, he was putt in prysone by
ordenance of the said Ephores. Who have auctorytie to cause to be brought
thider, the king himself. Yet he came fourth incontynently by mean of
certain, whom he had corrupted by monney, and came to present himself to the
counsel, ready to make answer unto them, that would charge him. Now neither
the Citezeins nor his ennemys had no apparent wytnes or accusation for to
conde^pne nor punish him. Specially being a man of the lignage of kings, and
also of great dygnite and reputacion. For he had been tutor of Plistarcus,
Plistarchus.
son of king Leonydes, and in his name had, as tutor, the admynistration of
his roialme. Howebeit the insole^cie and fiercenes of his life, and that he
followed in many things, the manners of strangers, made him much suspected to
have intelligence with them, and to Imagine some thing to rule among them,
that were his. And consideringe many things that he had done against the laws
and customs of the cite, they made yt a great matter amongeste other, for
that, that being in the temple of Delphos, through a maruaillous audacite and
arrogancye, he wrott in a table of brass, which the Greeks had there
offredde of the spoille of the Medes, certain verses of this substance. After
that the Duke of the Greeks, had descomfited the army of Medes, Pausanias gave
this offeringe to Phoebus. which verses, the Lacedemonyens caused incontynently
to be taken away, and to be defaced. And caused to be put in place of that,
that Pausanyas attrybuted only this glory unto himself, the name of all the
cytes confederated, which had been at the battle against the strangers. And
furthermore, he was charged and accused of an other matter, which sarued better
to the present accusation. That is, that he had as some said, made great
secret treaties and coniurations with the prisonners of the city, promysinge
to give them liberty, and to make them Citezeins, if they would rise in armure
with him, and would do that, which he would command them. which was a true
matter. But yet it was not laufull to judge against him by accusation of
prysonners, according to the laws. By which it was prohybited to proceed to
any execution diffinitiue against any Cytezeine of Sparte, without undoubtful
and certain wytnes and accusation. So it chanced in thies procedinges, as it
is said, that one his domestical seruante of the city of Argille, whom he
had abused carnally in his yougth which was that same, that had charge to tarry
to Artabasus the last lettres, that that same Pausanias had wryttone to the
king Xerres, came to discover the case unto the Ephores. And the occasion,
wherefore he did it, was for a suspision that he had, because that he had seen
none of ye other messengers, that the same Pausanias had sent unto the said
Artabasus, return again. Wherefore fearing that it should myschaunce him, he
caused to cou^terfeate the seal, wherewith the letters were sealed, that he
might seal them again after that he had read them, if he found therein
nothing of that, which he had fantased, and to the intent also that the said
Artabasus should not parceyue that they had been opened. Having than openned
and read them, he found amongst other things that, whereof he doubted. That
is, that by the same, Pausanias did write to Artabasus, that he should slaye
him. which he incontyne^tly brought to the said Ephores. whereby they were
greatly instructed according to their imagination, that they had against
the said Pausanias. But yet the better to know the truth, they would gladly
understand it by his mouth, and so did use this cautele. They found mean,
that the said servant came to render himself within the temple or place of
Tenarus, as one man, that has offended his maistre. And puts him into
franchise or sanctuary. And did him to understand, that he came thider to
speak with him. which thing he did. And on the other side two of the Ephores
were hid within a very secrett place, so that they might hear and
understand all that, which Pausanias and his servant said together, with out
being perceived. Pausanias being than come to his man, and having demanded
him what was the cause, for which he had putt him into franchise, he declared
to him that he had opened the letters, and showed him all the tenor,
lamentinge himself for that, that by the same, his said maistre had commanded
him to be slain, notwithstanding that in all the treaties that he had had
with the king, wherein he trusted in him, he never found in him fault,
wherefore he thought it unreasonable that he had ordained that he should be
slain. As the other messengers had been, whom he had sent thider before,
which were but commune people. Whereunto Pausanias answered, confessinge the
whole to be true, and yet went about to appayse and keep him, that he should
not take it angrely, swerynge to him by the temple, where he was, that he would
never do him harm. And prayinge him that he would with all diligence goo
toward the said Artabasus, to the intent that ye matter were not empesched.
All which things the said Ephores, having well understood, and by this
mean, holdinge the case to be very true and well wytnessed, did ordeyne that
the said Pausanias should be apprehended within the city. But as the two
Ephores came alongest the street against him, he perceived by the countenance
of the one, and by the token, that the other, that was his friend, made unto
him, that they came to take him. And so he ran away for to get the temple
of Pallas, before that they might take him. But before that he came to the said
temple, withdrawing himself into a little house which was thereunto
adioigninge, for to have repoosed himself a little, he was overtaken by them,
that followed him. Who descouered the top of the same house, and let kepers
to the gates, in such sort, that he could not comme fourth. But he was kept
there so long, that he dyed for hunger. But before that he gave up the ghost,
they, that kept him, saying that he dyed, did draw him out of that place
which was hallowed, even so being in a traunse, as he was. Who incontynently
dyed bitwene their hands. And after his death, the Ephores were of opynyo^ to
cast him into a great cave, wherein were cast all the cariong^s of them, that
were putt to death by justice. Yet afterward they changed their opinion, and
caused him to be buried in a pytte there nyghe unto it. But a certain time
after, by revelation and answer of the god Apollo of Delphos, they were
commanded that they should take him out of the said pytte and should bury him
in the place where he yielded up the ghost. which thing they did. And yet at
this present day, the sepulcre may be seen before the temple, like as appears
by the letters that be graven in the stone of the sepulture. And moreover they
were commanded by the oracle of the god, that, for to purge the sacrilege that
they had committed by violating of the temple of the goddess, that they should
instead of one his body, re^dre twain. which they did. And in the stead of
Pausanias, whom they had taken, they offered him, two images and statures of
copper. By this mean now the Athenyans, for to answer to the Lacedemonyans,
touching the sacrilege, wherewith they charged them, rendered them the
contrary. Saying that it was requysitt also, that they should pourge this crime
and oultrage, which they had done to the goddess Pallas, which, by the god
Apollo, was judged sacrilege.

How Themistocles duke of Athenyans, being persecuted as well by them, as by
the Lacedemonyans, withdrewe himself toward the king Artaxerxes, and there
ended his life. The.xvi. Chapter.
When the Lacedemonyans had understand the answer of the Athenyans, they
sent unto them again their messengers, signyfying the^, how that
Themistocles had been consenting and parttaker of the self conspiracy, that
Pausanias had done, like as they said to appear by his process, which they
kept within the temple. Requiringe the Athenyans, that they should likewise
punish the said Themistocles. Temistocles
The which thing the said Athenyans lightly did believe. And all with one
accord sent as well from Sparte as fro Athenes, people, for to take the said
Themistocles. Who in that same time being bannished from Athenes, kept
himself in the city of Argos, the more part of ye time, but oftymes he went
through the country of Peloponese. Being than advertised of that same
deliberation, he departed from Peloponese, and went from thence by sea to
Corcyre, knowing that the people of that same city loved him, for many
plaisi^s and benefits that he had done them. But they showed him that if they
received him, they should cause the Spartaynes and the Athenyans to be their
ennemys. And so they set him a land in the coaste of the Islande next unto
them. And after perteyuinge that he was stille pursued, he wtdrewe himself
toward Admetus king of Melosses, Admetus.
although he knew him not, to be his friend. And not finding that same king in
his city, for that he was than absent, he came to render himself to the queen
his wife. who bad him to take their son by ye hand and to tarry in their house
until the coming of the king, who tarried not long before he returned. And wha^
he was arrived, Themistocles came to present himself and showed him. That
albeit in the time yt he was duke of Athenes, and that, wha^ ye same king was
at their mercy, he had spoken against him in certain things: yet were it not
reasonable yt he should take vengeance of him at that hour, yt he was come to
render himself to his marcy, in so much as ye things were not like, for he was
tha^ in much more poor estate, tha^ the king was, when the said Themistocles
iniuried him. And yt apperteigned not to a noble couraige to take vengeance,
but against his egalls. And on thoder part when the said Themistocles was
against him, ye said king travailed only to do his proffit for goods, and not
to save his life, as the said Themistocles presently did. For if yt he restored
him unto the^ that pursued him, he were cause of his death. After ye
Themistocles had made thies declarations, being set upon the ground with the same
son of the said Admetus (which is a facio^ to require ye most effectuously yt
might be) ye same king caused him to arise and promised not to restore him to
ye Lacedemonia^s and Athenia^s which thing he performed, notwithstanding
that sone after their messengers came to him and made many great declarations
for to persuade him to restore him. But understanding that he would goo to the
king Xerxes, he caused him to be accompanied by land unto the city of Pydue.
Pydua
which is situated upon the shore of ye other sea, appertaigning unto
Alexander. In which place he entered into a shipp, which was willinge to go into
Ionu^. But by fortune of sea he came to land for anempste the city of Nare,
which the Athenia^s did hold assieged. whereof the said Themistocles was
greatly astonyed, and yet discovered not himself to the patron of ye ship,
who knew not before what he was, nor for what cause that he fled, but said
unto him in this manner. If thou sauest me not and keep me secret, I wol say to
the Athenyans that thou have taken monney of me for to save me. But if thou
doist save me, I woll recompense the habu^dantly or liberally. And the remedy
is that thou suffer not any of them that be in the ship to go fourth, but keep
them here at ancre until we have wind for to depart. which thing the
patron granted him, and lay at ancre a day and a night. Afterward
having recovered the wind he halsed up the sail for to goo toward Ephasus.
Being arrived at which place, Themistocles parfourmed that, which he had
promised. And gave him a good some of monney. For anon after, it was largely
brought to him, as well from Athens, as also from Argos. From thens Themistocles
took his journey by main land with one maro^ner, being a Persyan. And so
wrotte letters to Artarerxes, The tenoure of Themistocles. letters to king
Artarerxes.
who than newely succeeded Xerres, his father, in the roiaulme of Mede and of
Perse, which were of the tenor that folowith. I come unto the king
Artarerxes, I Themistocles, that have done many do^mayges to thy house, more
than any other Greek, by that I was constrained to resyste thy father, who
assailed me. But I did him much more saruyce afterward, when yt was laufull
for me to do yt. For he was beholden unto me for his return, which was right
dangerous. And this said he, for that, that after that Xerxes had lost the
battaille by sea at Salamyne, that same Themistocles wrott unto him that he
should haste to return, fayninge that it was enterprised to break the
bridges where he should return, and that he had empesched it. After folowethe
the rest of the Epistle. And now that the Greeks do parsecute me, as thy
friend, I comme hither to do the much saruyce. But I am determined to soiourne
here one year, and afterward to show the causes, for which I am comme. The
king having red his letters, maruailed at his wytt, and granted him that,
which he demanded, to tarry there one year where he was, before to come unto
him. within which time, he learned all that was possible, both of the language,
and also of the ma^ners of the Persiens. Afterward he came unto the king,
and had more authoryte about him, than any of the Greeks, that ever came
thider, as well for the dignite and great reputacyon that he had had before, as
also for that, that he purposed and showed him means, to subdue all Greece, and
specially, for that he gave them to understand by experyence, that he was a
man of knowlaige and diligente. For he could well show, the force and
lyuelyues of his nature and of his wytt, and in this, he was maruaillous and
excellent above all other. He was moreover of his nature diligente and ready
without having at any time ever learned any studys or sciences, than, nor
after. And to give provision to all soubdayne cases, his counsaille was very
ready and singulier. And of the things which he conducted, he had a great
judgment what would follow. And ordered them very quietly and discretely, and
also he had good parceuerance in things, whereof he had not the administration.
But above all, in ambiguous matters, wherein it was hard to judge what were the
or the best, he had a maruailous providence. And besides this, he was without
fear above all men lyuinge in all things, whereof he did speak, as well for
the goodness of his nature, as also for the redynes of his wit. He declared to
the king what was to be done for y^ enterprise of Greece, but before it was time
to execute it, he dyed of a diseas, though it pleases some to say, that he
killed himself with poysonne, perceiving that he could not execute that,
which he had promised to the king. He was buried in the city of Magnesie in
the country of Asia, Magnesia.
and there is yet seen his sepulcre upon the market place. Of the which city,
the king had given him the governance and the revenue. which amou^ted to five
houndred talentes every year. For to fournishe it with bread. ^^d for to
fournishe yt with wine, Lampsaque was given him, Lamsacus.
for that, that place was esteemed to be most habundante with wine of all Asia.
And for his pytance, Mynute was given to him. Mynutus,
It is said, that his parents by his commandment, carried away his bones,
and buried them in the country of Athenes, without knowlaige of the Athenyans,
for so much as it was (...) laufull by the laws of the country, to bury the
body of a man, that was judged a traitor and rebelle. Such issue, had
Pausanyas the Lacedemonyan. And Themistocles the Athenya^. who were both, in
their country, right noble.

How after many goinges and commynges, the Athenyans did put it into
deliberation whither they should rather accept the war, or obey to the
requests of the Lacedemonyans. Cap. xvii.
AFter that the Lacedemonyans had required and summoned the Athenyans, and also
that the Lacedemonyans were by them required and summoned to purge their
offenses of the gods, and the sacrileges of the one part and on the othere,
those Lacedemonyans sent again to the Athenians to warn them that they should
restore and set the Potydyans again into liberty. And suffer the Egynyans, to
live according to their laws. But chiefly they declared, that they would not
comme^ce the war against them, if they would revoke the decree which they
had made against the Megarens. By which they were forbidden, to aryue in
the poortes of the Athenyans, and to come to their markettes, and also to use
merchandise with them. To all which requests, and specially, touching the
reuocatio^ of the said decree, the Athenyans determined not to obey. Alleging
against them of Megare, that they occupied the holly and indeuided place, and
that they received the fruits of Athens. Finally, yet after all thies
aunsweres, three Ambassadors of the Lacedemonyans came again unto them, to
wytt, Raphius, Ramphius.
Malesippus Malesippus.
and Agesandrus, Agesandrus.
who without making any mention of any of the othere matters, whereof had been
spokenne before, said unto them this words only in substance The
Lacedemonyans arne minded to have peace with you, the which you may have,
if you suffer the Greeks in their liberty. Upon which proposition, the
Athenyans, then caused the cou^saille of the city to assemble, for to
determyne one time for all, of the answer, which they had to make. Upon which
matter after that many had showed their opynyons, the one that the war should
be accepted, the other that the decre against them of Megare should be revoked,
rather than by occasyon thereof to have war, finally Pericles the son of
Xantippus, Pericles
who was at that time the chefest man of the city, and most renommed, as well
in word, as in deed, stood up and spoke in this manner.

The speaking and opinion of Pericles to the counsel of the Athenyans,
according whereunto, the answer was made unto the Lacedemonyans. The.xviii.
Chapter.
THough that I know, lords Athenyans, that men make not war with that same
ardor and desire, that they enterprise yt, but according to the cases that
happenne, do change their will: yet I continue still in my opinion, not to give
place to the Peloponesians. For I do see this, whereof we must presently
determyne, like and approchinge unto that, whereof I have had opinion before
this time. wherefore I think it a thing reasonable, that they among you,
that shall be of my advise, if there chance herafter any myschance against the
common opynyo^ of the people, that they ought than to excuse it. And if it
happen well (as we do hope) not to judge it their prudence for yt it is so
chanced. For it is commonly seen, that the chaunse of things to comme, be as
uncertain, as thoughts of men, which is the reason, whereby if any thing,
unlooked for, do chaunse us, we accuse fortune. Now to come to the case whereof
is questyo^, yt is very certain, that the Lacedemonya^s have always
heretofore imagyned against us, and yet presently do imagyne. For though yt be
spoken by our couena^tes and treaties, that if there be any controversy
bitwene any among us for any thing, they ought to stand unto the knowlaige or
judgment of other and in the mean time to continue in the estate and
possession, that they be found in: yet they have not demanded that we should
putt the causes, whereof the quarelle is made, into judgment and knolaige. But
wha^ that we have offered it them, they w^ld not accept it. For that, that they
love better that quarrels be avoided by war, than by words. And though yt
seem that they come by manner of request, yet is it by commandment. For they
co^mande us to depart from Potyde, yt we suffer the Egynyans in their
liberty, and that we revoke the decree, that we have made against the
Megar^ans. And they which be last come, do command us that we suff^e the
Greeks to live according to their laws. And to the intent, that any among you
do not think that the question is of a small matter, to wit to revoke the said
decre, whereupon they arrest most stiffly, saying that in that doing, we shall
not have war, and likewise that it should be a great fault to enter into such
a war for one so small a matter, I advertise you, that this small affair,
conteigneth the consequence and the establishment of all the other things,
where upon my opynio^ is grounded. For if you grant the^ this, they woll
command you incontine^tly some other thing, more great, seeing yt, for fear,
you shall have obeyde them in that. But if that you refuse them and speak
against them sharply with a good blow, they shall know, that they ought not
to come by authority toward you, but by amity. as from like to like.
wherefore I think that you must determyne aithere to obey them before you have
received any inconvenience of war, orels (which I repute to be the best) to
take the adventure of the war, rather tha^ to obey the^ in any thing small or
great. And so posses by this mean that, which we hold always in fear. For
into as great bondage and subjection a man puts himself by obeyinge to the
commandment of his Egalls and neighbors without any judgment, in a small
matter, as in a great. And if yt be forced that we come to war ye one against
the other, every with all his power, there is great appearance for him that woll
naroly consider all things, that we should not have the worse. For furst the
Peloponesya^s be the more part, handy craft men and laborers, who have no
monney in general and very little in particular. And also they have not
experyence of long wars, and specially of those, that be made by sea. And
even when they have any war among themself, they may not continue it long,
by cause of their poverty. And if there be question to send to the sea, they
have no mean to replenishe their ships with men, nor yet to send out a
puissante army by land. For that, that by that mean they should eloigne or
absent themself fro their domestical affairs and should lose their exercise
and manner of lyuinge. And furthermore you know that war is more susteigned
by riches and ready monney, than by violent exactions. Now if we occupye or
keep the sea, they woll be more ready, being ha^dy craft people and laborers,
to sarue with their bodies, than with mo^ney. Hoping that they may always save
their bodies fro dangers of the war, where they cannot excuse themself to
contribute to ye expe^ces of it, wha^ it shall be bigon until ye time that it
shall be acheued and ended. And for to speak of things passed, the Peloponesians
have been egall to ye other Greeks in one only battle, but thoroughly to
continue war, they have not been like unto the^ y^ were better provided, tha^
they. For that they use not one only cou^saille, but many. By occasyon whereof,
that, which they have to do, they do yt soubdaynely. And though they be much
different of faculties, of power and of all other things, yet every one man
has his opinion, as well the one, as the othere, and every man tendereth his
particular proufytte, whereby it comethe not commonly, that any thing is done,
that auaylethe. For if some be safly inclyned to fight with any, and to run
him over, the other fear greatly to spend their particular good. And
furthermore, for somuche as they come evil willingly to their common
assembles, they determyne in a momente of time of their general affairs, and
employe the more part of time, to their pryuate busynes. For every one of them
thynkethe that the common wealth shall not be endommaged by his absence, and yt
they shall have some there, that shall do so much for him, as if he were there.
And by this mean having every man this opinion toward himself, they
parceyue not, that the common wealth perishethe by them all togyders. And if
at any time they delyberate to attend thereunto diligentely and at length,
they cannot for lack of monney. And yet the affairs of war need no long
deliberations. And we must not fear their edifices nor their army by sea. For
as touching the edifices or buyldinges, though that they were in peace, yet
should yt be very hard for them to make a town so strong, as this here, and
therefore they shall make yt much less in time of war. And specially there,
where we shall make our rampares and munytyons to the contrary. And when now
they shall make against us a town firmed or closed with walls, and that they
shall strength yt with people, yt is true that they may endomage us as well in
making courses and pillage in some places of our land, as in drawing to their
party some of our subjects, yet by their buildinges they shall not defend,
that we go not into their land by sea, wherein we arne most strong. And also
we have by our contynuel exercise in the sea, more experience in the war
that is made by land, than they have by usage of the land war, in the fight
or battle by sea. To the which they cannot easily appoyncte nor frame
themselves to be expert. For we ourselfe that have contynuelly used this
craft, sens the war of the Medes, be not therein parfaictly instructed. How
shall they than do it, that were accustomed to labor the land, and not to
travail the sea. And on the other part, by having contynually a great number
of ships, laying watch for them, we shall keep the^ well from accustomyng
themselves to that business, and fro doing any thing of importance. And where
as, not seeing against the^, but a small number of ships, they may (trusting to
the great number of thaire people) take the adventure to come to fight upon the
sea, wha^ they shall se that there shall be a great number on all sides, they
woll save themself or exchue it. And by this mean, leuyng holy the use of
sailinge, they shall therein have every day less knowlaige, and also shall
bicome more idle. For (...) art of the sea, like as in all other, it is not
suffycient to exercise himself wha^he has no another busynes, but it is
required (for to know it well) to do no othere exercise, but that same there.
And if it be said that by mean of the monney that they shall take in Olympus
or in Delphos, that they may reteigne the huyred ma^onners that we have, giving
them greater sold or wages: truly I say that this should be a grievous thing
for us, if we should not abide so strong of our people, namely which should be
within our ships, as they of thaire oune people, but we shall be as mighty,
And that which more is, we have patrones and other ministres by sea in greater
number, than all the re^menant of Greece has. And also there is not he of the
mercenaries or ^uyred maronners that wol beside the danger wherein he should put
himself, be vannished from our land, having specially less esperance and
hope to proffitt on thaire side, than of ours. Insomuche as though happily they
do give them greater wages, yt shall not be but for a very short time. Thies
things and other like, yt seems to me mete, to show and reherce of the
Pelo^onesians. I woll now show of us that, which I understand and parceyue.
^e be for troth exempted from the things that we obiecte against them. And
also we have many notable things that they have not. For if they enter into
our country by land, we woll enter into thairs by sea, and so the damage,
that they shall do unto us, shall not be like unto that same, that we shall do
unto them, for that that we woll destroy a great part of Peloponese, and they
cannot destroy but all the land of Athenes, for that that they have no other
country where as we may not make war at our will. where as we have much
other lands, as well in Islandes as in main land. which they cannot war
upon, by cause of thempire and of the puissance that we have by sea, which is
a great advantage. For it is to consider, that if we were in any Islande of
the sea, we should be impregnable. Now is it in our power (if we woll) to do
as if we were Islanders, that is to wy^t, to habandone and to hold for lost,
all our towns and houses that we have in the feldes in this land of Athenes,
and to keep only and to defend this city and the sea. And if the
Peloponesians which be more people than we, do come to burn and destroy our
howses and our lands, we should not, through anger and furye, run upon them,
nor fight against them. For though that we shall have defeated or ouercomme
them at one time, they woll yet come again in as great number as before, for
to destroy us. And if one journey mishappened us, we should lose the aid of
all our subjects and allies. For when they understand that we shall not be
mighty for to go to assail them by sea with a great army, they woll not
pass much for you. And though peradventure we should lose our towns and our
lands for to save our bodies, we should not therefore lamente. For possessions
do not g^tt men, but men acquire possessions. And if I thought, that you would
bileue me, I would cou^saille that you yourselues should go to destroy the^,
for to cause knowlaige to be given to the Peloponesians, that you arne not
such, as woll obey them, for saving of them. I have moreover many other
things by which you may hope victory, if you will. But you must not,
until that you shall be in the defense, think to increase your seignyory, nor
add volu^tary parills to the necessary, that you shall have. For certainly I
fear not so much the enterprises of our ennemys, as the faults of our oune
people. Of y^ which things I will not speak at this present. But I resarue it
to speak wha^ we shall be in affayre or business. And to make an end of my
purpose, I think yt we should for this time send our ambassadors to ye
Lacedemonyans, and by them, to make answer, that we be content not to
prohibit nor forbid unto ye Megarens our ports and markets. Provided yt those
Lacedemonia^s do not prohibitt the use of their city to estrau^gers no more,
than unto us and our allies. For that, which we do, is no more to ye derogatyo^
of our treaties and allia^ces, tha^ ye, which they do. And touching the other
dema^^de which they have made, to suffer the cytyes of Greece in liberty, we be
therwt content, if they were therein, from the time of the said treaties, and
if they be content to restore their cytyes into such lybertye, that they live
according to their particular laws, as they woll, without that, that they be
constrained to keep the laws and ordenaunces of Laoconie, touching the
governance of their commone affairs. And furthermore that we be content for
all causes to stand to right and judgment according to the tenor of our
allyances, without mouyng any war, But if we be assaulted, we woll take pain
to defend us. This answer seems to me reasonable, y^a and honorable, for to
conserve the auctoryte and reputacion of our city. By which doing, we must
understand of necessity to enter into war. the whi^he if we wyliyngly do
accept, the enemies wol not be so sharp against us. And so much as we shall
eskape the greater dangers, we shall acquyre both more glory, and more
proffyt, as well in common as in particular. For you do all know, how that
our auncest^es, when they issued from hence for to go against the Medes, they
had not so great Empire, as we, another so much goods. And yet that, which
they had, they wyllingly did habandone and forsake, and by v^ynge rather of
^ounsaylle, than of fortune, and of virtue and hardynes, more than of force,
they chased away the Barbarous or strangers. And sense, they have amplefyed
and increased this our empire, even until the estate, wherein you now see it.
To whom we ought not to be inferyours, but virtuously and valyantly, to resist
our enemies and to take pain not to suffer this empire to be lessened nor
weakened otherwise, tha^ we found it. Thus spoke Pericles. And the Athenyans
reputing his counsel to be good, ensuynge the same, caused a decre to be
made. By which they appoincted Ambassadors for to go toward the
Lacedemonyans, to make them answer holy such, as he had devised, which was
in sum, to do nothing of that, which they had commanded, but to be well
willing to answer in a neutrall and indyfferent Judgment,, touching the
things wherewyth they were charged. Thus the answer was made. And
afterward they sent no Ambassade, the one to the other. Howebeit the causes
of the dyfference that was between them before the war, was the beginning of
the things that had been done in Epydanne and in Corcyre. Although that by
reason thereof, they ceased not they^ marchaundyse nor to haunte the one with
the other without saulfconducte and without haraultes, but yet not without
suspectyon, for also that which was done, was the dysturbance and breach of
the treatyes and confederations, and the occasyon of the war.

Here ends the furst book of Thucydides, and begins the Second book.
The Second book of How the Beotians before the war was begone, took
soubdainly the city of Platee, which held part with the Athenyans. And how
they were rejected, and the more part that were entered within the city, were
slain.
The first Chapter.
By the means and occasions. whereof we have spoken before, the war begins
between the Athenyans and Peloponesians, and also the allies and consederates
on both sides. Which went forward co^tynually after that it was bego^ne,
without yt they had any communication of marchaundyse together, but by
saulfconducte and by heraulte. Of the which war we woll speak and rehearse
by order all yt was done in the same, as well in time of summer, as in time of
winter. The year wha^ ye war did begin.
It began the.xv. year after thappoinctment and treatye, that they had made
for.xxx. years, tha^ as they conquered Eubee. And it was the.xlviii. year of
the priesthode of Chrysis in the city of Argos. In the which Enesius was
Ephore in Sparte, and Pythodorus governed than at Athenes for one month. Six
months after the battle, which was made at Potyde, in the beginning of the
furst spring tide. At which time certain Thebayns, to the number of three
houndred under conducte of two the chefest men of the countreye of Beoce, to
wit, Pythangelus, son of Phylide, and Dyemporus son of Onetorydes, entered
secretly by night, after the furst sleep, into the city of Platee, which is
in the country of Beoce, but than it was confederated with the Athenyans by
mean and intelligence of some of the city, that opened for them the gates, to
wytt, Nauclides and his accomplices, who would have delivered the said city
unto the Thebayns. hoping by that mean, to destroy some of the cytezeins
their ennemys, and moreover to make their partycular proffit. the which had
treated that practique, by the mean of Eurymachus, son of Leontiades, that
was the princypall and rychest man of Thebes. Also the Thebains who well
perceived that in all euentes, war should be begone against the Athenyans,
would gladlye, before that it were declared, have taken that town, which
always had been their enemy. For by that mean the thing was more easy to
do. Also they entered without y^ any parsone parceyued it, for that there was
nayther watch nor ward in the city, and they came without making any noyce
upon the market place of the city. Being in which place, they were not of
opinion to execute that, which they had granted to them of the town that had
brought them in, to wytt, to go to fourrage the houses of their ennemys, but
they devised to cause to be proclaimed through the town with sound of
trompet, that they that would be allies of the Beotiens, and live according to
their laws, should come thither and bring their harnoies, trustinge by this
mean to reduce the^ without any difficulty, y^ were citezeins, to their
intent. Who understanding yt the Thebaynes were in their city, and thinking
yt they had been in greater number for that, that they did not see the^ because
of the night: they accepted their party, and came to parlame^t with them, and
seeing that they would innouate no thing with the^, they returned into their
houses in good agreement. But incontynently after, perceyuinge that they were so
few people, they devised, that they might easelye defeat and overcome them,
if they set upon them. So they determined to assay it. For they departed
against their will from the alliance of the Athenyans. And to the intent that
their banquett should not be parceyued by their assemblye in the streets, they
persed incontynently the walls, which parted their houses, and passing from
the one to the other within a short time they were all togeders. Afterward
they turned their charettes overthwart the streets, for to serve them for
rampartes, and made all other prouysyons, such as they thought reasonable and
conuenyent according to the time. And after that they had ordained their case,
according as they had had leisure, and made moreover watch all that night,
aboutes one hour before day, they issued out of their houses, and came to
set upon the Thebayns. altogeders that yet were in the said market. Fearyng
that if they assailed them in the day, that they would have defended themself
better and more hardly, than they would do in ye night, being in a place,
whereof they had not well the practyse, like as it happened. For seeing that they
were deceived of their thought, and that they were assaulted, they did furste
ioygne themself all together. and parforced ones or twies themselves all with
one strength for to pass through some street, but they were always driven
back. And than parceyuing the bruyte that men made upon the^, as well they that
assailed them, as also the women, the children and other people unmeet to
fight, who casted stones and tyles from the houses upon them: they were so
astonyed (together with that, that it rained very sharply that night) that they
fled through the streets, so as they could without knowing the more part,
whyder they went, as well by mean of the night, as also that they had not
practyse of the town. And so they were empesched for to save them, by those,
that pursued them, whereby many were slain. By this chiefly, that one of the
citezeins came to the gate wherein they were entered, which only was open and
did shut it, casting the shalt of a dart ouerthwarte the lock instead of a
bar. So that they could not pass fourth that way, and so, some mounted
upon the walls, and threw themself from a high, down to the ground, the
more part of whom dyed. Some other came to have passed at an other gate,
whereat there was no ward, and with a hatchet that a woman delivered them,
brake the lock and issued fourth. But there could not pass any great
number, for that, that the thing was incontynently known. The other were
beaten done in the streets. But the greater part and chyefly those, that were
wygned togeders, came to rushe into a great edifyce or house which was wignyng
to ye walls of the town, whereof they found, by chaunse of adventure, the
door open. Thynkyng that it was one of the gates of the town, and that they
might save themself by the same. And than the cytezeins, seeing that they al
were closed with in, were in dyfference, whyther they should set it in fire for
to burn them all together, or that they should cause them to dye of an other
sort. But finally they there, and all the other that were yet within the
town, rendered themself with their armure to the will of the cytezeins.
During that these things were done in the city of Platee, the other
Thebayns, that should with a great bend have followed all the night, those,
that were furste entered, for to succor them, if it were need, had in their
way news, how they were assailed. So they hasted them, the most that they
might, for to come to their succoure. But they could not aryue sone enough.
For there is from Thebes to Platee.lxx. stades, and the great rain that was
fallen that night, had greatly kept them back. For the river of Asopus, The
river of Asopus
which they must pass, was by cause of the said rain not easy to be gaged. In
such sort, that when they were passed, they were aduertysed, how their
people that tarried within, were all dead or taken. So they devised among them
to take the paysans of Platee, that were without the city (whereof there was a
great number) together with a great quantyte of beasts and of moueables, for
that, that there were yet no news of war, to the intent to buy again (by
mean of those there that they should take) them of their people, that were yet
within the town, and that were living. And they being in this delyberation,
the Plateans which greatly doubted the self thing, sent with dylygence a
herault unto them. Showing that they had done naught, to go about during the
peace, soubdaynely to take their city. And neuertdeles to show and denounce
unto them, that if they did any evil to their citezeins that were in the
feldes, they would slaye all them that they had prysonners in the town, but if
they departed out of their land without doing any harm, they would render
them unto them in life. and thereupon they made their oath, as the Thebayns did
say. But the Plateans say, that they promised them not symplye for to render
them the said prysonners incontynently, but only, if they agrede with them,
after that they had spokenne together, and that without making any oath. But
how so ever it was, the Thebayns did return into their city, without doing
any evil in the terrytory of ye Plateens. And yet those Platee^s did
incontynently wtdrawe the persons, and the goods that they had in the
feldes. And after caused the prysonners that they had to dye, which were
about nine skoore. Among whom was Eurymachus, who admynystred the practyse of
the trahyson. And this done, they rendered unto the Thebayns, their dead men,
and fournyshed their city with that, that they thought necessary for the
time. The Athenyans, when they had hard what was done at Platee, gave order to
cause to be takenne all the Beotians that were found in the countreye of
Athenes. And fourthwyth sent toward the Plateens a trompet to defend or
command them that they should do no evil nor dyspleasure to them that they
had prysonners, until such time, as it were devised, what should thervpo^ be
done. For they were not yet advertised that they were slain, for that, that
the furst messenger, that came unto them, departed from Platee at the
beginning, as the Thebayns were entered, the second after that they were
vainquyshed and taken, and than they sent their trompett. Who when he was
arrived, found that the prysonners were all slain. Anon after, the Athenyans
came thither with their army or host, and brought corn for to victuayle the
town. And with that, left there a good garnysone of men of war, and led
away with them, women, children, and other people unmeet for the defense.

The great preparation that was made as well on the behalf of the Athenyans, as
of that same of the Peloponesyans, and the Cities, that took part with the one
side, and with the other. The.ii. Chapter.
THese things thus done at Platee, as we have said, the Athenians, seeing
manyefestly that the treuse was brokenne, prepared themself, to make war.
And the Lacedemonyans and their allies, did the like, and so they determined,
as well on the one side, as of ye other, to send toward the King of Mede.
And the other strangers, of whom they hoped to have any succoure, and also to
the cytyes, that were out of their obeisance for to draw them to their
alliance. And chiefly the Lacedaemonians gave charge unto the cytyes of Italy,
and of Sycille that took their part, to make ships according to their
possibilytye (besides those, that they had) to the number of five honndred in
all. And moreover that they should fournyshe a certain some of monneye,
without declaring to them, the other matters, but that they should not receive
into their ports more than one ship of Athenes at a time, until that all
the apparaylle were ready. Likewise the Athenyans on their side sent
Ambassadors furste, to all the cytyes, that were of their obeisance. And
afterward to the other, that were nyghe to Peloponese, to wit, to Corcyre,
to Cephanalie, to Acarnanye and to Zacynthe. zacynthus,
For they parceyued well, that if the said cities were in good amytie with
them, they might more easily run by sea round about Peloponese. And in
effect they thought not of one thing, of ^he one sydenor of the other, which
was not wayghtye. And also they enterprysed not the war of any other sort,
nor more coldelye, than was conuenyent for people of such renomme. For also at
beginning, all people be most hot to defend them selves. whereby it
happened that many young men, as well of Athens, as of Peloponese, were not
greatly dyspleased with the war, for that, that they had not experymented nor
proved it. And also all the other cities of Greece were anymated to war,
seeing that the princypall were thereunto enclyned. Moreover there were made
diverse pronostications. And the aunsweres and oracles of the Gods, were
reaported in diverse sorts, not only in cities that were tangled with this
same war, but also in the other, And it chanced among other things, that
the temple of Delos trembled, which thing was never seen, to the remembrance
of the Greeks, and by the new or strange things that were parceyued, men
judged of things, that were to comme. By mean whereof, all those fantasyes
were curyously searched and inquyred of. But so much was it, that the people
generally had more affection to the Lacedemonyans, than unto the Athenyans. For
that chiefly, that they said, yt they would restore all Greece into lybertye.
By reason whereof, they advanced them self all, as well in common, as in
particular to aid them, with such affection, as it seemed to every one, that
if he were not there, the thing should be empesched through his fault. And
many there were, that were dyspleased, and not well contented with the
Athenyans. Some for that their empire was taken from them, and the other
fearing to come into their subiectyon. In this manner they prepared themself,
both with heart and apparayle as well on the one side, as on the other. And the
cytyes that took party, with the Lacedemonyans, were all the Peloponesyans
that arne within the distrayte, except the Argiues, and the Achayans, who were
friends, as well of the one, as of the other. And there were not of the said
Achayans at beginning, but the Pellians, that took part with the
Peloponesians. But afterward all the other did take it. And out of
Peloponese were of this party, the Megarens, the Phocyens, the Locrya^s, the
Beotiens, the Ambrotiates, the Lewcadyans and the Anactoryans. Of who^ the
Corinthians, the Megarens, the Sycyonyans, the Pellyans, the Hellyans, the
Lewcadyans and the Ambracyens fournyshed ships, the Beotians, Phocyans and
the Locryens, horsemen, and the other footmen. And this is concerning the
Peloponesyans. On the party of the Athenyans, were they of Chio, of Lesbos, of
Platee, and the Messenyans, that be in Naupactus, Naupactus.
many of the Acarnanyens, the Corcyryans, the zacynthians, and the other that
were their tributours, among whom were the Carians, which be far beyond
sea, and Dorians, that be joining unto them, the country of Ionu^ and that
same of Hellesponte, many places of Thrace, and all the yslandes, that be out
of Peloponese and of Crete on the parties of, le soleil leuant which be called
Ciclades, resarued Melo and There. Of whom the Lesbyans and the Corcyryans
fournyshed ships, and the other footmen. These were the allies and
consequentes, and also the preparations of the one party, and of the other.
The Lacedemonyans, after that they understood the chance that was happened at
Platee, commanded all their allies, that they should keep their people ready,
with apparayl that were necessary for to issue unto the field at a day named,
and to enter into the country of Athenes. And after that this was done, two
parts of all the cities met at one time, in ye destraict of Peloponese, that
is called Isthmos, and sone after, all the other arrived there. who being there
all assembled, Archidamus king of the Lacedemonyans, who was general or chief
of the army, called unto him all the officers and pryncipallest of all the
cytyes, and spoke unto them in this manner.

The narration of Archidamus King of Lacedaemonians. The third Chapter.
Lords Peloponesyans, and you other our allies, our auncestres have had
many wars, and made many armies, as well within the countreye of Peloponese,
as without, and those among us that be aged, have some experyence. Yet we
never issued to the field so puyssant, nor with so great apparayle for war,
as at this present. Also we go against a right mighty city, where there is
likewise a great number of good warryours. Wherefore we must show us such,
that we destayne not the glory and renome of our elders, and of our selves.
For all Greece is moved for this war, and the more part, do long look for our
victory, for the hatred that they have to the Athenya^s. nevertheless we must
not (for that we be in right great number, and go against our enemies in great
hope, yt they dare not issue against us) leave nor omyt any thing of our
apparaylle, but it is necessary, that every one of us as well capytayne as
conductor and souldyer be always in fear to fall into any danger through his
fault. For the feate of war is always doubtful. And men fight right
oftentyme for a small matter and for dysdayne. And many times the smaller
number, for the fear that it had, has vainquyshed the greater, that
contempnynge the enemies, kept not his order. Wherefore it is conuenyent, when
we shall enter into the land of our ennemys, to be ready and hardy, but when
it shall comme to the deed, men must prepare themselves in fear. which doing,
we shall be more ready for to assail our ennemys, and more assured to fight. And
also we must think. that we go not against a city weak and unprovided, so
that it cannot revenge him self, but against the city of Athenes, which is
provided of all things. And that they be people for to issue against us. But
at beginning, as we shall enter into their land, by all means, as to their
syghte, we woll ennemylike bourne and pyllage it. For all people, that
soubdaynely parceyue any thing not accustomed, to be done their dommage, be
moved to wrath and anger. And those, that do not their things by reasone,
right oftentimes do overthrow themselves in the affair, as holy furious and
mad. And it is to believe, that the Athenyans do it more, than other people,
for that that they think, that it apperteigneth to the^, to govern other, and
to destroy the land of other men, rather, than they should come to destroy
theyrs. Wherefore you must follow them, that shall conducte you in this
enterprise, in great esperance of victory, as well for the virtue and reputacyon
of our auncestres, as also for ours. And nevertheless having regard that you
go against a right puyssant city, y^ue hold you always affected and
provided for all chances, that might comme. And moreover have always in
remembrance to be appoincted as apperteigneth every man for himself, and
furthermore to keep you well, and to execute redely that, that you shall be
commanded. For it is a fayer thing and of a great suertie for a great
bend, where there is great number of people, to see them al appoincted with
one obedyence. After that Archidamus had this spoken and that the counsel was
resolved, he sent again Melesippus, Melesippus^
son of Diacrytus of Sparte, to Athenes, for to understand, if they would
not speak more humbly, perceyuinge the enemies ready to enter into their
land. But they would not admyt the said Melesyppus into their senate, nor yet
into their city. But sent him from thence again without hearing, for that,
that the opinion of Perycles was greatest, by which it was said, that
heraulde nor Ambassadoure should be received from the enemies, sense that they
were issued in arms against them. And also they caused to be commanded to
the said Melesyppus, to depart their land within a day, and to say to them
that had sent him thither, that they should not send again unto them, any
parsone, except furste that they were returned into their country. And
moreover gave him people for to conducte him back through their countreye, and
to keep him, that he spoke to no man. Who being comme to the borders of their
countreye so, as they that conducted him, would license him, he spoke unto
them, these words without more. This journey shall be beginning of many great
euyls in Greece. And after that he was come again to the camp, Archidamus,
understanding that the Athenyans had nothing assuaged of their high courayge,
caused his army to dis^odge and entered into the land of Athenyans. And on the
other side, the Beotiens into the land of Platee, and pyllaged it with an
other bend. For the Lacedemomonyans had departed to the Peloponesyans one
part of the host, and this was done before, that the other were all assembled
in the destrait of Peloponese. And this much to show how they assembled, to
enter into the land of Athenes.

How after the perswation and exhortacyon of Pericles to the war, the
Athenyans that dwelled in the feldes, wythdrewe them self and their goods
into the city, and dysposed them self unto the affairs of the war.
The.iiii. Chapter.
When Pericles son of Xantyppus, the tenth Duke of Athenyans, understood that
the enemies were entered into the said land, doubtyng him self for that,
that Archidamus had been lodged in his house, yt he would defend to his people
that they should do no damage to the lands and houses, that he had without,
either for curtesye and of himself, or else by commandment of the
Lacedemonyans, for to put that same Perycles into suspytion of the people, as
they were lately minded to do, demaundyng that he should be driven out of the
city for to pourge the sacrilege whereof has been spoken, he advanced himself
thereof to speak to the assemblye of the city, Declarynge unto them, though
Archidamus had been his geste, yet that should not redounde to the dommage of
the city. And that if it chanced that the houses and possessions of other
cytezeins were burned, and yt his were presarued, he would give them unto the
co^munaltye. to the entente that no suspytyon should be conceived against him
for that matter. And so he exhorted more over the people, The substance of the
exhortacyon of Pericles to the Athenyans.
as he had done before, to be ready and apparayled for the war, to bring all
their moveable goods into the city, to prepare their ships and other
munytyons by sea, whereof they were most puyssante, and to enterteigne into
their amytie, their allies and confederates, from whom they had monney, for
that, that the victory chiefly comes in feate of war, by force of monney,
and by good conducte and admynistration. showing them furdermore that they
should have great confydence in the revenue that they leuyed yearly by form
of tribute upon their subjects and confederates, which amou^^ted to six
houndred talentes, over and above the other revenues, that they had in
general. And likewise they should trust to the ready monney which they
presently had in their Castelle^ to the sum of six thousand talentes. For
although that they had had for the most, ten thousand, three less, yet
the rest was spente at the erectyng of the castle of Propilee, and for other
buyldinges, and also for the war of Potidee. And also they had beside this,
great quantyte of gold and silver not coigned in diverse kinds, as well in
general, as in particular, besides the hallowed vessels and other ornaments of
temples, and that, which was deputed to the pomp of plays, and beside that,
that they had won of the spoil of the Medes, and many like things, which
amou^ted unto no less than five houndred talentes. And besides all that, there
were many great sommes of money in the temples, wherewith they might help
themself in necessity, and in extremytie. when the rest should fail, they
might take the gold, wherewith the great Goddess Dyana was covered, which
amou^teth, as it is said to forty pound wayght of talentes all fine gold
and massis. which, it should be laufull to take, for conseruatyon of the common
wealth, in rendryng it always intierly, after the war. In such manner he
exhorted them to have good hope, that monney should not fail them. And
concerning the force of people, he showed them, that they had thyrtene
thousand warryours, besides those that were deputed to the keeping of places,
and of walls and forteresses, which amounte unto.xvi. thousand. For so many
there were that kept watch and ward in the said places, from beginning,
that the enemies came into their land, comprehended the old and the young,
and also the strangers, that dwelled in the town, all bearing armure. Also
they had to keep the wall, which is called Phalerius, which extends itself
from the walls of ye town until the sea, conteignyng.xxxv. houndred stades,
of length. And the walls in that, which was warded, conteigne.xlin. of
cyrcuyte. For yt (which was between the said wall Phalerie and the other,
that is called the great wall, which likewise extends it self until the
sea, conteignynge forty stades in length) was not subject to ward, the
said two walls being well kept, yt were without the city. And moreover
there was to ward the forteresse of the gate, that is called Pyreus, which
comprehendynge the other adioyninge, that is called Munychie, conteigneth
threskore stades in circuyte, the moytie whereof was watched holy by footmen.
And for this they had.xii. houndred men at arms, and sixtene houndred
arbalestrers, all horsemen. Such was thapparaile of the Athenyans for truth
without any thing thereunto added, when the Peloponesyans entered into their
land. Perycles made unto them many other remonstraunces and declarations,
such, as he had accustomed, for to give them to understand, that they should
have the better of that same war. After which persuasyons, they went all
for to fatche their goods into the city. And afterward sent by sea, their
wives, their children, their moueables, their vtensyles and instruments, the
wood of the buyldynges, that they had beaten down, and their cattle into
Eubee, and into other yslandes next adioynynge. Which thing was odible unto
them, for that a long time, a great part of them inhabyted the feldes, where
they kept their household. For such was always the custom of the Athenyans,
more, than of other people from the furst beginning of the city. And from the
time specially of Cecrops and of other furst kings, until Theseus, the
countreye of Athenes was inhabyted by vyllages and boroughs, and every vyllage
had his court and his officers. For that, that living insuertie and without
war, they neded not to come to their kings for to co^^sulte upon common
affairs, no, though there were some, yt made war among the^, as the
Eleusins, Eleusinii.
after that Enolphus ^oyned him self with Erechthus. Emnolpus.

Erechteus.


But after ye Theseus came to the kingdom, who was a man puyssaute and wytty,
besides yt, that he reduced and reformed through civility and pollecy many
other things in the said country, he abolyshed all his small officers, and
the courts of the villages and bouroughes, and caused the people to draw into
the city, which at this present, be all under one counsaille, and under one
court. And constrained the^ al, laboring their lands, as before, to chose
and have their ordinary house, in ye same city generally. which city having
in his time made great and well ordered, he left it by succession unto them
that came after, from hand to hand. Whereby for remembrance of the same
goodness, at such day, as that same assemblye and union of the city was made,
the Athenians do yet at this present celebrate a solemn feast yearly in the
honor of the goddess. For before that, the city conteigned not but ye same,
which is now the castle, and that, that is above on the south side, like as the
temples of the other gods do wytnes, which be within the said castle, and the
other that be without of the south side, as ye same of Jupiter, Olimpya^ of
Pythe, of Tellus and of Bacchus. Unto whom was yearly celebrated the feast
Bacchanal the tenth day of the month Antesterion, Anthesterion.
like as the Ionyans, who be descended of ye Athenia^s, do yet at this present
hold it for troth. And many other ancient temples there be in ye same place,
wherein also is the fountain yt is called now, sense the rulers have appointed
it, the new co^duictes. which auncyently was called Calliroe. Calliroe
And men used it for that, that it was nyghe the place in all great things.
Whereby yet at this present, the opinion of the people is, that it should be
used in sacrifices, specially in those, that be made for maryages. And that
part of the city, that is above the castle in the highest part of the
town, is yet at this day by the Athenyans called the city, for memory of the
antiquite. For to return than to our purpose, the Athenyans, that at
beginning dwelled in the feldes at their playsyr, though that afterward they
were reduced and brought to the city, yet for the custom that they had for
to dwell in the feldes, continued there the more part with their household,
as well of the auncyentes, as of the new citezeins until this present war.
By reasone whereof, it was very grievous and not easy for them to draw into the
town. And so much the more, that after the war of the Medes, they had
brought chyderall their moueables. And on the other part, it greaued the^
greatly and was molestuous, that they should leave their temples and their
particular Gods, which they had in the vyllages and ^ouroughs. which for
the ancient usage that they had to sacrifyce there, they reputed them to be
their part. And also it was mete for them to leave and change all their manner
of living. Whereby in effect it seemed unto every of them by departing from
their vyllages, that they habandoned their city. And after that they were come
within the city, there were very few that had houses. Afterward, some of
them went unto their parents and friends, the other and the more part lodged
themselves in places of the city not inhabited, and in all the temples,
reserved those, that were in the high city of Eleusine. and some other, which
were surelyer shutt and kept. And also there were that lodged themself within
the temple named Pelasgeque, which was all above the old city, though that it
were not laufull to dwell there, like as it was conteygned in the end of a
verse of an answer of Apollo Delphicque. which said in this manner. The
temple Pellasgeque shall keep most comodyouslye the rest. But to my judgment
that same answer came to the contrary of that, that men understood by it.
For the calamytie chanced not to the city, for that, that the temple was
profane by the habitacyon of the people, as some woll understand it, but to
the contrary the necessytye to dwell there, came through the calamyte of the
war. For the oracle of the Godde, foreseynge the war that should comme,
showed before, that when men should inhabyt there, it should not be for any
goodness. Many also lodged them self within the towers of the walls. And for
conclusyon, every one lodged himself there, where he might. For the city made
them no empeschement, seeing so great a number of people to be comme out of
the feldes. But a^terwardes, they were lodged upon the long wall, and in a
great part of Pyreus. After that the people and the goods were wythdrawe^
into the city, they were all given and attentyue to provide for things,
apperteygnynge to war. Specially to cause the succors of the towns
subjected and confederated, to assemble, to make ready and tacle an houndred
ships. which they would send to Peloponese. In this manner the Athenyans
were busyed in the feate of war.

How the Peloponesians intred furste into the land of Athenes, and the
pyllages that there were made. And how the Athenyans by the wisdom of
Pericles, were empesched to issue forth, reserved the horsemen, which were
repoulsed and driven back again. The.v. Chapter.
THe host of the Peloponesyans coming into the land of Athenes, they minded
to lodge furste in the town of Enoe, Oenoe.
which is upon ye borders, between Athenes, and Beoce. And for that, that the
town was strongely walled, into the which the Athenyans retired in time of
war, the Peloponesians determined to take it by batterye. For this cause,
they made engyns to be set up for battery: but for that, yt it was long time
in doing, they had great suspytyo^ against Archidamus, that he was favorable
to the Athenya^s. For also they thought that he had been eneglygent in causyng
the confederates to assemble, and that he had coldly encouraged the army. And
after that it was assembled, that he tarried long in the destraicte of
Peloponese, before he departed, and more, that after his departure, that he
came very softly. but above all, they complained of that, that he had been so
long before Enoe. And they thought, that if he had used dylygence, they had
(entering readely into the land of Athenes) pyllaged all the goods, that the
Athenyans had brought into the city. In such suspytyon was Archidamus at the
assiege of Enoe, who as men say, caused it to be protracted at length, hoping
that the Athenyans, before that their land should be begone to be wasted and
destroyed, would come fourth, rather, than to see it destroyed before their
eyes. But after that the Peloponesyans had done all their best for to take
Enoe, seeing that there was no hope to do it, and also that the Athenyans had
not sent any heraulde nor message unto them, they departed from thence about
fourskoore days after that, which had been done by the Thebayns at Platee. and
entredde into the countreye of Athenes in the time of summer, the corn being
ripe in the feldes, under the conducte of Archidamus king of Sparte. And
vainquyshed all the said land, beginning in the quarter of Eleusine and of
Triasie. and also did repoulse and drive back the horsemen of the Athenyans,
that were come fourth upon them, into a place that is called Rithie.
Afterward, they passed more further, having on the right hand the mountaygne
of Egaleon, The mountaygne of Egaleon.
overthwart the regyon called Cecropie, and came until Acarne, Archarna.
which is the greatest town that is in all the regyon of Athenes, before the
which they laid their assiege, and there they were long, pyllagynge and
destroying the country. It is said that Archidamus kept him self abowtes the
town with all the army in battle, as for to fight, and would not descend
into the plain, fearyng that ye Athenyans, who had so great no^bre of young
people, more encouraged to war, than ever they had before, would come to
ouerrunne them, and could not endure to see their land, so wasted and
pillaged. And when he yet did see, that they were not come fourth, the
enemies, being in Eleusine and after in Trasie he minded to assaye, if they
durst comme to raise the siege from before Acarne, considery^g also that the
place was very propyce and mete for to lodge and soiourne his camp. Also he
thought, that they of the town, that were well the third part o^ Athenes
(for there were three thousand all men of war) would not suffer t^em
wyllyngly to waste their terrytorye, and for that cause, all together would
c^mme fourth, as well from Athenes, as from Acarne for to give them battle.
And if they came not fourth, that than men might, from thence forwards with
less fear, waste and burn all the territory of Athens. And comme to the
walls of the town. For when the Acarnes should have seen all their land
wasted and their goods lost, they should not be so determined nor so ready to
put themself in danger for to keep the lands and the goods of other. And by
this mean they should be of diverse opynyons. Such was the fantasye of
Archidamus, being before Acarne. But the Athenyans, whiles the ennemys were
aboutes Eleusine and in the land of Triasie, they had some opinion that they
would pass no further. For that, that they remembered that.xiiii. years before
ye war, Plistonactus, Plistonax.
son of Pausanias king of Lacedemonyans, being entered into the land of
Athenes with the host of Peloponesyans, when he was come to the said
countries of Eleusyne and of Trias^e, passed no further, but returned.
Through occasyon whereof after his return, he was rejected and bannyshed from
the city of Sparte, for that, that it was suspected, that he had taken monneye
for to return. But when the Athenyans understood that the host of ennemys
was before Acarne, which was not distant, but.lx. slades from the city, and
that they saw before their yes their terrytorye wasted, which thing never man
of the town, young nor old had seen, but at the war of Medes, they thought
it a thing to much intolerable and not to be suffered. And so they were
determined, specially the young people, no longer to endure it, but to ys^ue
forth upon the enemies. Whereupon the people being assembled upon the markett,
there was among them a great altercation. For some would that they should
issue fourth with all their force, the other would not suf^re it, the dyuynours
also unto whom men repaired on all sides for to know their opinion, reaported
diverse Judgments and diverse dyuynations. On thoder side, the Acarnanyans,
seeing that their land was wasted, labored greatly the Athenyans to set
fourth, and they thought that they ought to do it, for to succoure their
people, that were within Acarne in great number. In this manner the city was
in great tumulte and dyssentyon of all sides. and were angry against Perycles,
and spoke unto him many iniuryous words, for that, that he would not lead
them fourth being their duke, saying that he was cause of all their euylle.
without remembrynge that, which he had counsayled and showed the^, before the
war, But he, seeing that they were astonyed for the hurtes that they did see
in their land, and that they had evil opinion, in will to go fourth against
raysone, he would not assemble them, nor make declaration as he was accustomed
to do. Fearing that they would make some determynation, more through anger,
than by reason, but gave order to keep the town, and to hold it quiet, the
most that might be. And nevertheless, he caused the horsemen to issue fourth
for to defend, that those that came from the camp of the ennemies for to
run before the city, might not carry away the goods, that were aboutes it.
And there was a small conflict in the quarter, that is called, Phrigie, between
a bend of the said horsemen Athenyans, the Thessalyans joined with them, and
those of the Beotyens. Wherein the said Athenyans and Thessalyens had not the
worste, until that the fotemen B^otiens came to the succor of their horsemen.
For than they put them to flight. And there were some of the dead men that
were carried away into the city, the self same day without demanding them
of the enemies. And the morrow after, the Peloponesyans erected and set up a
trophee upon the place in token of the v^ctorye. Now the Thessalyans were
ancient allies of the Athenyans, and than they had sent them succoure of the
said horsemen, to wytt they ^f larisse, they of Pharsale, they of Parrhasie,
they of Cranonie, they of Pirasie, they of Cyrtomie, and they of Ferere. Of the
which succors, the Capytaynes were, Polymedes and Aristanus for Larisse,
Polymedes. Ariston.
Meno^ for Pharsale, Menon
and other for every one of the said cities. When the Peloponesians did se,
that the Athenyans came not fourth to battle against them, they did break
up from before Acarne, and came to pyllaige and ouerronne certain other
villages that were between Parneth and the mountaygne of Brilesse.

Of many exploictes of war that the Athenyans did, aswelle by sea, as by
land, the summer that the war biganne and the winter followynge, togidres
with certain allyaunces and new amyties, that they made in Thrace and in
Macedonie, and finally, of the public exequies or obyt that they celebrated
at Athenes for the^ that were dead in that same war. The.v. Chaptre.
DNringe the time that the Peloponesyans fouraged and wasted the country of
Athenes, the Athenyans caused to depart from their port the hou^dred ships,
that they had apparai^led, wherein were a thousand men armed and four houndred
Archers under the conduccte of Carcynus, Carcynus.
son of Xenotymus, of Protheas, Protheas.
son of Epicles and of Socrates, Socrates.
son of Antigenus, for to go to ouerronne round aboutes Peloponese. Who,
being departed from the poorte with great preparation, committed themself
unto the sail. As concerning the Peloponesyans, they abodde in the land of
Athenes, so long as they had victuailes. And when they began to fail the^,
they returned through the country of Beotya^s, without doing there any harm.
But in passing through the country of Oropes, who were subjects of the
Athenyans, they pyllaged one quarter named Pyrace, and that done, returned
every man into Peloponese and so into his house. After they were departed, the
Athenyans did ordeyne their wards, as well by sea, as by land, for all the
time, that the war should endure. And by common decree, kept a thousand
talentes of the^ that were in the fortress of the old city, and did ordeyne
that no man should touch yt. but of the remanant, men might take that, that
should be needful for the feate of war. And they did defend upon pain of
life, that no man should propone nor put into deliberation to take of the said
thousand talentes, except it were of necessity, for to resist the ennemys,
in case that they came to assail the city by sea. With that same monney, they
made an houndred galleys beside the ordynary, right fayer and gorgyouse. And
every year they thereunto appointed new patrones and Capytaynes. Which
galleys might not be employed to any other use, but, in ye case above said, men
might take of the said sum of a thousand talentes. As touching those that
were departed in the o^here houndred ships against the country of
Peloponese, they joined themselves with fifty other ships, that the
Corcyryens had sent them for succoure, and altogether compassinge aboutes the
said country, besides many great hurtes that they there did, they landed and
came to assiege the city of Metoune, Methona.
which is in the country of Laconie. which was than ill repaired with
walls, and unprovided of people. But by fortune, Brasidas, son of Telydas
Spartayne, was in the same quarter, very nighe unto yt, with a small number of
men of war. Who understanding the coming of the ennemys, came with a
houndred armed men, only, for to succor the town, and passed through the
mids of the camp of the ennemys, that were dispersed and skatered abroad,
And they made to ye wall so diligently and manfully, that with a very small
loss of his people, that were slain in passinge through, he entered into the
town, and saved yt. By reasone of which hardynes, he was praised by the
Spartaynes above all those, that were in that same war. At departure
fromthens, the Athenyans went to land in the country of Elede, wherein they
took the town of Phee, where they soiourned two days, pillaging all that
country, and also they defeated and discomsited three houndred good men of the
valleys of the said country of Elyde, with a certain other no^bre of the
country adioining yt were come down for to succor the said town of Phee.
And afterward, a great wind and tempest arising in ye sea, by mean whereof,
their ships might no longar tarry there, for that, that it was a place with out
port: one part of the^ embarked the^self. And passing before a rokky place,
called Ithis, they came to aborde in the port of Philie. To which place, the
Messenyens and the other, that could not be embarked at departure from Phee,
were come by land, and had taken the town by force. Which understanding,
that there were now assembled a great bend of people of the country of Elyde,
for to come to ouerronne the^, habandoned the city and embarked themselves
with the other, and departed altogether keeping that same sea, enuiro^ninge the
places, nighe about it. In the same self time, the Athenyans sent thirty
othere ships for to go against ye quarter of Locride, and for to keep ye
Island of Eubee, and they committed the co^ducte of the same ships unto
Cleopo^pus, Cleopo^pus.
son of Clynias, who, being there landed, wasted many countries along by ye
sea, and took the town of Thronie, Thronium.
and caused the same to deliver hostages. Afterward, certain Locrya^s being
come to repulse and chase him away, as he was before Alope, Alopa.
he defeated and overcame the^ in battle. In that same so^mer, ye Athenyans
chased all the inhabitants out of Egyne, with their wives and children,
reproching the^, that they were cause of all ye war. And also they thought yt
much more sure to inhabytt with their people that same city, which was
affectioned to the Peloponesya^s. which thing they did anon after. But the
Peloponesia^s, as well for hate of the Athenya^s, as also for yt, that the Egynes
had done the^ many plaisirs, both in ye time, wha^ the earthquake was in their
country, and also in ye war that they had against the Sklaues, they gave
the^ the city of Thyree for their habytacio^, Thyrea
with all the terrytory thereof unto the sea, for to labor. which terrytory
departs the country of Argiues, from that same of Laconie. And one part of
ye said Egynes, did inhabitt the^self there, and the other went dispa^sed
through the country of Greece. In ye self same so^mer, the furst day of the
month in the change of the moon, at which might only chau^se the eclips, As
it was bileued: the sun was darkened about noone or mydday. In such sort, yt
there was seen many stars in heaven, and anon after came again to his
clerenes. At which time, ye Athenia^s made appoinctme^t with Nymphodorus
Abderite, Nymphodores.
who was before their ennemy, for that, that he had great authority with
Sitalces, Sitalces.
son of Thereus king of Thrace, Thereus.
who had espoused his suster hopinge by his mean, to withdraw the said
Sitalces unto thaire allyaunce. For that same Thereus had furst in his
lyuinge made the royalme of Odrises, which he enjoyed, most great of all the
country of Thrace, which lives, in comparison of the rest, in liberty.
This same Thereus was not he, that had Progne daughter of Pandion, Progne
Pandio^
king of Athenes to wife, but they ruled in diverse countrees of Thrace, for
he, ye espoused Progne, holds ye country of Daulie, Daulia.
which is now called the land of Phocyde, that was than inhabyted with
Thracyens, in whose time, that same Progne and Philomene her suster did that
grievous offense, Philomena.
in the place of Itys. Itys.
By reasone whereof many poets making mention of Philomene, which is called
the nightingale, named yt the bird of Daulie. And it is good, to believe that
Pandyon, king of Athenes, made that alliance with the same Thereus king, that
held the country of Daulie, for that, that it was very nighe to Athenes for
to have succor and service, rather, than with the othere Thereus, that held
ye country of Odrises, which was greatly distant fromthe^ce. That same than,
of whom we speak, being a man of none estymation nor reno^me, got the
roiaulme of Odrises, and left yt unto Sitalces his son, with whom the
Athenyans made alliance, as well for to have places, friends and favorers in
Thrace, as also to destroy by his mean, Perdycas king of Macedonie.
Perdiccas.
And Nymphodorus came unto Athenes with full power of the said Sitalces, to
conclude thappoinctmente, which thing he did. And moreover he caused his
son, named Sadocus, Sadocus.
to be made Citezeine of Athenes. And he took charge to practice with Sitalces
that he should cease and forbear the war, that he made in Thrace, for to
send to the Athenyans horsemen and footmen lightly armed, all Thracyens. He
moreover made appoinctement bitwene the Athenyans and Perdicas by mean of the
city of Therme, Therma.
which they rendered him at perswation of the same Nephodorus. By mean of
which appoynctment, Perdicas ioynned with Thathenyans and with Phormeon,
biganne war against them of Chalcyde. Chalcidienses.
In this manner the Athenians had Sitalces king of Thracyans and Perdicas
king of Macedonyans in their alliance. And during this time, their people
that were gone into Peloponese with the hou^dred furst ships, took the town
of Solyon, Solyo^.
bilonginge to the Corynthyans. And after that they had utterly pillaged yt,
they gave it with all the territory unto them of Palere, Palire^ses.
which be in the country of Acharnanie. And after that, they took the town
of Astacte by force, which they reduced to their allyaunce, having chased
from thence Euarchus, Euarchus.
that held yt by tyranny. And this done, they took sail for to come to the
Isle of Chephalanie, Cephalenia.
which was situated for ane^pste the countries of Acharnanie, and of Lewcade,
and there were four cities, to wit, Pale, Pales
Cranie, Cranii
Samee, Sauius.
and Pronnee. Pronneus.
So without any resistance they took all the Isle. And sone after departed
fro^thence about the end of somer for to return to Athenes. But they, being
arrived at Egyne, understood how Pericles was come fourth with a great bend
of men of Athenes, and was entered into the territory of Megare. So they took
their way for to retire straight into that party, and there landed, and
ioygned themself with the other. Which was one of the greatest assembles of
men of war, that had been yet seen together, of Athenyans alonely. For also
the city was than in his flower, and had not suffered any calamity. And it
is said that they were ten thousand men armed all of Athens, besides three
thousand that were at Potyde, and the inhabyta^tes of the feldes, that were
retired into the city, which were issued with the^ to the number of three
thousand all well armed. And beside those, there was a great number of othere
lightly armed, which altogether having pillaged and wasted the more part of
the territory of Megare, returned fromthence unto Athens. And the same
Athenyans ceased not yearly to come to ouerronne the said country of Megare.
Sometime with horsemen, and sometime with fotemen, until that they took the
city of Nysee. But that furste year whereof we speak, they fortefyed with
walls the city of Atale^te. Atala^ta
And neuerthelas wha^ it came unto the end of ye somer they habando^ned and
destroyed yt. For that, that yt was nighe the Locryans and the Opuntyens, to
the intent that the Corsairyens should not have the commodyte to wythdrawe
themself thider, for to come to ouerronne the country of Eubee. All the
which things were done that self same summer, chiefly, after that the
Peloponesians were departed from the land of Athens. At beginning of winter,
Euarchus Acarnanyan, myndinge to return into the city of Astacte, required
the Corinthians to deliver him fifty ships, and a thousand five hou^dredde
men armed. By whose aid, together with some that he should find on his side,
he might recover the said city. which thing they did. And committed the
charge of the said army to Euphamydes, Euphamydas
son of Aristomynus to Tymoxenus, Timoxenus.
son of Tymocrates, and to Eumachus, Eumachus.
son of Chrisis. who being come by sea to the said city, set the same
Euarchus within yt. And parforced and advanced themself in that voyage, to
subdue certain towns of Acharnanie, which were alongest the sea. But
parceyuynge that they could not do yt, they returned fromthence, and passinge
by, before the Isle, they landed nigh to the city of Cranye, thinking to take
yt by composition. But they of the town fayninge to entreat with them, came
to assail them, being unprovided, and did slay one part of them, and the
other were constrained to retire into their barques, and to return into
their country. That self same winter, the Athenyans, The form of ye general
and public exequies in Athenes
followynge the ancient usage of the city, made their public or ope^ne
obiites or obsequies for them, that were dead in that same war. And they
were made in this manner. Three days before, there was made a great
tabernacle, within the which, was putt the boones of them, that were dead, and
their parents and friends might lay upon the^, what they thought good.
Afterward, every lignage of the town or trybe, had a great coffer of Cypres.
Into which they did putt the boanes of them, that were dead of that trybe, and
they did carry that same cofer upon a charrett. And after all the cofres, was
carried upon an other charrett, a great bed ready made, being holy void,
which represented them that were dead, whose bodies could not be found. And
the said Charyottes were co^ducted and acco^panyd by all sorts of people,
Citezeins or other, (those, that would come) until the sepulcre, whereat were
the wives and parents of the dead, making great weapinges and Lamentacyons.
And afterward they did putt all the said cofres in a public grave or
monument made for that purpose in the fairest suburb of the city, ye same
sepulcre or grave is called Ceramico^, wherein was accustomed to be buried all
they, that were dead in their wars, reserved the^, that were slain in
Marathone. To who^, for remembrance of their singular virtue, they wylled to
make a particular sepulcre upon the self place. And after that the corpses were
buryedde, the custom was, that some notable personage of the city, a man of
knowlaige and honnorable, according to the quality of the dead, should make
before the people a preachinge or declaration in their praise. And afterward,
every man departed. In this manner, the Athenyans buried them, that dyed in
their wars, so often, as the chance happened. And that time, Pericles son
of Xantippus, was deputed and chosen for to reherce and propone the praise of
them, that were the furst slain in that war. Who, after the solempnyte of
the sepulture of buryall acheued and ended, mounted or stood up in a high
chair, in manner, that all the people might understand him well, and did
speak in this manner.

The funeral declaration of Pericles. The.vii. Chapter.
MAny of them, that have herebifore declared in this place, greatly have
praised this custom to reasonne and speak before all the people in the praise
of them, that were dead. But it seems to me, to be enough, to declare by
deeds, the honnours and the praises of them, that by high acts have meryted
them, as you have seen, that has been done in this present solempnyte of
public funerals. And that men should not commyt to the discretion of one
only man, the virtues and praise of so many valyant people, another yet bileue
that, which he therein said, were yt good or evil. For it is a thing very
hard and difficile, to keep the mean and reasone in speakinge of such
things, whereof skarcely may be had a certain opinion, of the truth. For if
that he, that hears it spoken, has knowlaige of the deed, and loves him, of
whom is spokenne, he thinks always that there is less spoken, than ought
to be. And that he willed not. And by the cou^trary, unto him, that has no
knowlaige, it seems for envy that he has, that all that, which is spoken of
an other more further, than his oune strength, and virtue can atteigne to, is
without truth. For that, that every man thinks that none should praise nor
esteem an other more, than himself, and if a man pass further, he is envied
and in nothing bileued. But since it has been approved and allowed of a
long time, that it ought to be this done, it becomes me, obeynge to the
law, to accommodate and apply my speking to the opynyo^ and will of every one
of you, the most y^ I may, beginning to praise our auncesters and
progenitors, for that, that it is a thing raisonnable and honneste to render
in this place, this honnour, for the memory and recordation of them, that furst
inhabited and peopled this region. And from hand to hand, by their virtue,
have left and delivered yt, unto thaire descent, frank and free, until this
present day. And if they herefore be worthy of praise, our fathers which came
after, be yet more worthy, who above that, that their auncyentes had left
unto them, have acquyred and added, by thaire labors and virtues, all the
empire and seignyory, that we presently do hold. And yet, above them, there in
we that be living, specially in competente aage, have incresed and amplefyed
it, and also have provided and fournished our city with all things, that be
necessary as well for peace, as also for war. And yet I intend not to reherce
the great prowess and valyauntnes, that we and our ancesters have used, in
defending us, as well against the strangers, as against the Greeks that have
warred upon us. By means whereof, we have acquired and gottonne all our lands
and lordeshipps, For I will not be prolixe in those things, which you do all
know. But after that I shall have declayred, by what wit, by what industry
and labor, and by what art, our empire has been establisshed and augmented,
I will come to the praise of the^ hear, of whom, we have to speak. For that,
that it seems to me, not to be without purpose, to remember at this present,
thies things, and that yt shall not be unprofitable to all them, that be here
present, be they original cytezeins or inhabitants. For we have the rule of a
public weal, which folowith not the laws of cities nighe unto it, but we
give rather law and exemple unto other, the which we follow not. Also our
government is called Democrotie, which is not convenient for a few people,
but for many. By reasonne whereof, every of us, of what quality that he be,
(provided that he have some quality of virtue) has as much right to come to
honnors of the city, as the other. And it is not regarded of what house,
another of what part of Citezeins, he is, but only what virtue he has. for
what poor man it may be, or of what raze or distente, how vile or unknown
that it be, so that he may proffytte the common wealth, he is not impesched
to have charge and public office. We proceed furthermore, franquely and
symply to the feats of the common wealth, and to thaffayres and ymagynations,
that we have every day with our neighbors without mouinge ourselfe, or
being angry, if any of them rejoice of any violence, that they have done us.
And there as they rejoice, we keep an irreprehensible severity, dissimulinge
our heaviness. And neuerthelas we ioyefully comunycate our particular goods.
And touching them, that appertaigne to the common wealth, we do not mysuse
them, as well for fear of the officers, as of the laws. And chiefly of the^,
that be made or arne to make, to help them, that have been deceived, which
bring a manyfeste infamye unto them that deceive. Of the other part we have
many things for to refreshe and recreate the sprittes, that be travailed by
labors, to wytt, the plays and holly exercises, and the yearly sacrifices,
which be made with an honest and plaisant apparaile, through delectation
whereof, ^he heaviness and malencoly of the people is abolished and lessened.
Furthermore men do bring hither for the greatenes of the city, from all
lands and countries, all soortes of things, so that we use not, more of the
goods that increas and grow in our land, than of them, that be grown in
other countries. And as touching the mylitary or warly excercises, that be done
in the city, we be different from our ennemys. Forsomuche as we make and
suffer our city common to all people. And forbydde not any person, be he
cytezeine or stranger, to take yt or to biholde that, which he thinks good.
For our things be not hyd or kept secrett, though that they might proffitt the
ennemys, when they see them. Also we have not so much affyance in our apparaile
for war, nor in our subtelties and cawtels, as in the highness of our hearts,
which we may always show in all affairs. And though that we live more at our
ease, than many other, which from beginning of their yougth exercise themself
in learninges incessantly until they be made men, yet we be not for that,
less hardy and ready for to experymente all dangers, when it is needful. And
that may well be knowin by this, that the Lacedemonyans alone, durst not enter
into our land without they were acco^paignied with all their allies. And yet we,
without aid of other, be entered into the land of our neighbors, and also
have right often, without great difficulty subdewed them, that defended
themself very well in their howses. And yet never none of the ennemys durst
adventure themself to resist our foorce, when we have been altogiders. As Well
for the experyence and exercise, that we have in the sea, as for the men of
war that we hold in diverse places. And if our ennemys have any time the
victory against any bend of our people in one of the said countries, they
auaunte them self that they have vainquished us all. And likewise if they be
defeated by any of the said be^des, they say y^, that was done by us all. And
in infect, we love more rest, when we be not constrained by any necessity
unto travail: than to be, in contynuall labors. And to exercise us in good
manners and common wealths, rather than to live always in fear of laws. For
also it is best, not to search the myseries and myschaunces, until that they
happenne, and when it is time to enter therein, to show, that we go thereunto,
as bold, as those, that be always in the busynes. Yet may this city be had in
admyration, in one thing, as well as in all the other, that is, that we use
with our allies, an honneste and mean socyetie and fellishypp. And on the
othere part, we play the Philosopher, that is to say, that we endure
poverty, without losinge the heart to get goods: and use riches, more for
the commodyte, when it is time: than for Pomp and for glory. And there is
noone, that holds it for shame, to confess his poverty, but well rather, not
to parforce himself, for to exchue it. Further, there is none, that has not
care as well for the common affairs, as for his own particular. In such
manner, that those, which be occupied in their pryuate busynes, have not
therefore less knowlaige of the estate of the common wealth. For we have that
for synguler, that he, which has no knowlaige of the common wealth, we repute
him not only to be slouthful and necligent, but also we take him not, for a
cytezein. we also alone, judge the causes, when we conceive them, according to
reasone. For we repute nor think that raysoning and declarynge, noyeth or is
hurtful in causes, but rather that it hurts, not to learn and to be
infourmed by sage sentences and declarations of the manner, that they should be
done, before they be executed. And there of it comes, that we use in all
things that we have to do, more of audacyte and hardynes and of reasonne, than
any other. For the other sometime have through ignorance, more confydence, than
reasone wills, and sometime for to gronude themself tomuch in reasons, be
slack to execute their affairs. And yet, he ought to be reputed to have
reasonable and virtuous judgment, that knowith redely and clearly, the hard
and noisome things, as well as the pleasant. And by this mean, not to
withdraw himself from dangers, when they happen. we use furthermore the
offices of virtue, by contrary reasone and manner, that the othere people do.
For that, that we attempt and goo about to get friends, more by doing them
some pla^sire and benefytt, than in receyuinge it, of them. Also in kepinge the
amytie and benyuolence, he that receives the plaisir and benefytt, is in worse
condition, than he that does it. For, for him that does it, it is enough to
conserve it by benyuolence. But he that has received it, understands this
that in rendringe the like, he gratefieth not, but rather does render the
plaisir, which he has received. Also we alone do gratefie nobly and liberally
our friends, more for to proffitt them, than for to show, that we use our
liberality toward them. And for to speak all at one word, I think that
this city, is the myrroure and the doctrine of all Greece, and one body mete
and suffycient to be made mynistre of his members and suppostes in all manner
of things with good grace and honneste. All the which things be not showed
and verefyed by words nor by declaratio^s: but by the appearance of the troth,
as may be seen and knowin by the puissa^ce of this city, which has been
established by this mean in such reputacion, as it is seen by experyence,
that this same our city is reno^med through all the world, more tha^ any
other. And it is that city alone, that gives not occasion to his propre
ennemys, to run upon it for to hate it, though that they received thereby
shame and damage, co^sideringe of what people they received it: nothere is it
blamed of his subjects, as unworthy to govern. And also it cannot be said,
that, that our puyssance shows not itself but by tokens and signs, for there
be seen so great experiences, that both those that be present, and also those
that shall come after, shall hold them for miracles. And we need not to couett
to have an Homere, nor other poet of the^ y^ be lyuinge, for to exaulte or
extol^e our feats by poetical colors: for ye troth of things e^faceth and
blotteth out the opynion thereof, for that, that we have by our audacyte and
magnanimytie or noblenes of mind, made all the land, and all the sea passable,
leuinge every where, a memorial of ye goodness or of the evils, that we have
there seperatly done. Now for this city than, thies, whose exequies we
celebrate, died in fighting virtuously, for that, that they thought it a thing
tomuche hard to be depryued from it. which opinion and will, we other, that
be suruyuing, ought always to have. Which has been cause, wherefore I have
more prolixe and largely spoken of this city, as well to show, that we fight
not for a thing like unto othere, but for that same, unto whom none othere is
like: as also to the intent that the praisinges of them, of whom we speak,
should be more manifested and opened. Of which things, we have now said the
pryncipal part. For the prays of the excellency, and of the greatness of this
city, whereof I have before spokenne, is dew unto them here and unto their
like. which thing, very few of the other people of Greece may reasonably say,
of their feats. And I think that the chiefest judge of virtue in a man, is
the virtuous life: and the last confirmator, is the honnorable death, as that
same of thies here has been. For it is a thing just and reasonable, that
they, that cannot do othere aid nor othere service to the common wealth: that
they show themsel^ couragions to defend yt in feate of war. For that, that
this doing, they acquyte themselves right well in such common affair toward
the city, where they had evil acquitted before time, by attendynge to their
particular busynes. And by this mean reco^pense that same fault, by this
service. And there has not been he, of thies here, that withdrewe himself or
retired for his goods or riches, desiringe more the enioyinge thereof for the
time to come, than the goodness of the party, nor also, y^ spared himself from
dangers for poverty, hopinge to become rich: but rather seemed, that they had
lesser care for their wealth, than for the same, of their enemies. And in
effect, they were willing, in auenging themselves of ennemys, to come to this,
whereunto they be come. For that, that yt was the most fayer experyence that
they could make of their virtue, in hope, to acquire and get the glory,
which they had never seen. For the which, it seemed to them, by that, yt they
had seen of other, that they ought well to adventure their lives. And that yt
were better to endure death, in defendinge themselves valya^tly, than to eskape
by recuilling or drawing back. where upon not for to incur this dishonnour
and this shame, they have suffered in their bodies, and in a right small space
of time, have for a right great glory, willed rather to endure fortune, than
to obey unto fear. In which doing, they have showed themselves toward the
party, to be such, as they ought to be. And as touching the other that be
suruiuinge, they ought well to couett to have their intent set less unto
danger, but not to have less of heart, for to resist the ennemys. And
consider, that the proffitt and the utility consists not only so much in
that as I have showed you: for there be many among you that understand and
know yt, which may more amply expound and declare what goodness follows by
repoulsing of ennemys. But it consists more, and you shall know it better,
if that biholding always the greatness of ye city, by his works, ye take daily
more and more love in it. And so much that it shall seem more great unto you,
ye may think, that there have been noble people. who, knowinge reason and
honesty, have gottone by their virtuous works all thies things. And
whansoeuer that the affairs came otherwise, tha^ they desired, they were not
minded to defraude the city of their virtue, but rather they have offered and
given unto it, the fairest trybute or stipe^de that they might pay, that is to
wit, their bodies. whereby they have particulerly acquired for themself
eternal glory, and also right honorable buryall, not only to be therein
ingraued: but that their virtue and their glory, be in the same celebrated
and magnefyed for evermore, when time shall require to speak of their feats,
or for to ymitate and follow them. For to men illustrious, and reno^med, every
land is the sepulcre or grave. The memory of whom, is not consarued by the
Epitaphies and wrytinges of their domestical sepulcres. But by the renomme
that is issued and dyuulged in strange nations. who considered in their
understanding more ye greatenes and highness of their couraige, than that, which
is chanced unto the^. Such people we have here lords, brought fourth, that be
worthy to be ymitated and followed, to the intent, that knowinge, ye felecytie is
liberty, and that liberty is gentleness, you should not forsake the dangers of
war, and that the unhappy and miserable, that have no hope of goodness, should
not be reputed to do more wisely, to countergarde or safe their live, than
they, that be of an other condition, that is better, which put it in hazarte.
For truly, cowardenes accompaigned with shame, is to a noble and gentle heart,
more grievous ad displeasante, than death. which makes us without feling and
insensible, chau^sing by his prowess with hope of the common glory.
Considering the which things, you other, that were fathers of them that be
dead, ought rathere to comfort youreselues and to rejoice, than to bewail
them. For if you regarded the diverse dangers of death, whereunto the
infantes be subjects, so long as they be nourished: those arne most happy,
unto whom the more honnorable happenethe, as thies here have been. And you
likewise could not mourn more glorious, though that I know very well, that
it is right hard to persuade you, that you should not feel the heaviness and
dysplaisir, always, as you shall remember them, by the prosperytie that you
shall see of othere, of whom, in times paste, ye reioysed in like case. And
when you shall consider, that they be depryued, not only from hope of
goods, which they should paraduenture never have enjoyed, but of those same,
that they had long enjoyed, you must always patientely endure yt. And
comfort youreselfe^ with hope that you have, to have more chyldrenne, you
that are in age for to have them. For that, that by the more chy^drene, that
they shall have hereafter, you shall be caused to forgette the mourning of them
here that be dead. and shall sarue the commone wealth in two manners, that
is, that they shall not leave yt desolate, and also shall keep yt in suertie.
For so much as they, that put fourth their chyldrenne to dangers for the
common wealth, (as those have done that have lost thairs in this war) may
give better counsaylle and more raysonnable, than they that have not done yt.
And as touching the othere among you, that be so aged, that they have no
more hope to have chyldrenne, somuche the more they ought to be content and
to comfort themself to have had this aduauntaige above the othere, as to have
lived so long in prosperity, and that they shall pass the remenant of thaire
life (which could not be long) yet more swetely, for the glory of them here.
For the desire of honnoure is the only thing, that bryngethe not age. And as
some say, there is nothing that the people desire somuche in their age, as to
be honored. Concerning them among you that be childrene, and brotherne of
them, that be here dead, I see you to be conuyued unto a tourney, which is
right hard. For there is no man, that praisethe not with words, the virtue
of them that be dead. In soorte, that you that remain, for any valyauntnes
that is in you, shall be skarcely judged egall unto them, but rathere shall be
judged to be inferyours, for that, that among the living, there be always
enmytyes. Butt after that a man is dead, every man with one acco^^^ friendly
praysethe his virtue. And though it be needful, that I now speak some
thing of the virtue the of women that presently remain wydowes, I wolle
conclude the whole by a very short exhortatyon. That is that you ought to
hold for great glory not to be more frail, than the success imports,
nothere such as men ought openly to make one only me^tyo^ of your virtue or
of your blame. Now have I in this my preaching and oration, that has been
enjoined me, by virtue and authoryte of our laws, said and rehearsed, all the
things, that have seemed to me to be vtile and profitable. And they yt have been
here buried, have been honored with deed, more than with words. whose
children, the city shall nourish, if they be young and within the age of
pubertie or orphancie: for to give and set fourth a prays and a profitable
reward, both to them, which be dead, for their faithful service: and also to
other, yt shall herafter dye for like quarrel. For every man forces himself
willingly and with good heart, to acquyre that, that is ordonned and judged by
common decree, as a suffycient remuneratio^ and reward of the virtue. It
rests, since that every one of you has suffyciently bewailed and honored
in mourning his neighbors, parents, allies and friends: that you retire and
withdraw you all into your houses. In this manner and solempnitie, the
exequies and funerals were celebrated at Athens, the winter, which was the
end of the furst year of the war.

Of the pestil^nce that was in the city and land of Athenyans, with the
exploictes of war, that were done of the one side and of the other. And of
the despayer, where in the Athenyans were fallen. The.viii. Chapter
THe summer folowinge, the Peloponesyans and their allies entered again into
the land of Athenes by two parts, so as they had done ye summer preceding,
under the conduct of Archidamus king of Lacedemonyens. And having planted
their camp, pillaiged and wasted all the country. And an one after that they
were therein entered, there soubdainely came upon the Athenyans a pestilence,
which furst had been (as men say) in the city of Lemne and in many other
places. But there was never seen in place of ye world, so great contagyousnes,
nor whereof, so many people dyed. And the phisicyans could not therein ministre
remedy, another from the beginning knew nothing therein, so that many among
the^ thereof dyed, chiefly those, that went to visitt the sick. Also in like
manner, men found no remedy by vows, by diuinations nor by any such means,
as they used. For in effect all did nothing sarue or avail. By mean whereof,
when the people were attaincted or infected, they left all the said remedies.
And the same pestilence biganne, as it is said, in the country of Ethiope,
that is above Egypt. Afterward it descended into Egypt and into Libie, and
extended yt self greatly, into the lands and seignyories of the king of
Persie. And from thence, yt came incontynently to Athenes and biganne in Pyrens
By mean whereof, they of the town thought at beginning, that the
Peloponesia^s had impoysonned their country for that, that they yet had not
any fountaynes. Sone after, it passed into the hedde city. Fromthens, it spread
maruailously over all. Whereof I am right willinge here to speak, to thintente,
that every one, that has skille of physic, Here the Author descryuethe a
marvelous pestylence
or that knowith nothing thereof, declare, if it be possible to understand,
whereof the same might chauce, and what might be the causes vehement enough,
for to p^^^uce and bring fourth so soubdaynely, one so great mutacion and
change. As to touching my self, I woll well show, how it happened. And woll
declare the thing of the sort, that every one, that shall se that, which I write
(if any such chance, chanced an other time) maybe advertised and shall not
be ignorante. For I speak as having knowlaige. insomuche as I my self have
had this sickness, and seen them, that had yt. And it is to be knowin, that
the same year, precedinge and goinge before, was above all other exempted from
all other maladies. And to them, that were infected with other sickness, yt
turned into this self same. And those, that were in full health, found the^
soubdainly taken, without that, there was any cause precedinge, that might be
knowin. And furste they felt a great heat in the hedde, whereby their eyes
became read and inflamed. And withinfourthe, their tongue and their throat,
became all read, and their breath became stinkynge and harshe. Whereupon,
there ensued a continual neysinge, and thereof their voice became hoerse. Anon
after that, yt descended into the stomach, which caused a great coughe, that
did right sharply pain them, and after that the matter came to the parts of
the heart, it prouokedde them to a vomyte. By mean whereof, with a pain yet
more vehemente, they avoided by the mouth, stynkinge and bitter humors. And
with that, some did fall into a yeskynge, whereupon they came incontynently
into a palsy, which passed passed from some fourthwyth, and with othere
endured longer. And although, that, to touch and se them without, and
through the bodies: they were not exceadinge hot nor pale, but that their
skin was, as read color adusted, full of a little thynne blaynes: yet they
feeled wtinfourthe so maruailous a heat, that they might not endure, one only
clothe of lynnen upon their flesh, but they must of necessytie be all bare.
And the greates^e plaisir that they could have, was to cast them within a
very cold cave, so that many of the^ that were not kept, casted themself
within the pyttes, by force of the heat and of the droughe, though that it
were all one to drink little or much. With all this, they had no rest in all
their members, by means whereof, they could never sleep. And yet though the
evil engendredde or waxed more, yet the bodies were not thereby much
weakened, but they resisted the sickness more than would have been thought, in
such manner, that some, that dyed of that great heat that burned their
entrails, within seven days and some with in nine, they had yet some
strength. And if they eskaped this term, the maladye yet descended to the
belly, which caused a laxe with contynuall pains, whereby many died of
weakness. And for effect, this same pestylence and infectyon did gather
together and engendered furst in ye hedde and afterward ouerronned through all
the upper and exteryoure parts of the body. The vehemencye and violence
whereof, showed ytselfe to them, that recoueredde, in the extreme parties of
their bodies. For yt descended to the secret members and to the extremytes of
the fete and of the hands, and in such sort, that some that were recovered
thereof, lost them, the othere lost the eyes, some othere, when the maladye
left them, had lost knowlaige and memory of all things, and of themselves.
And for conclusyon this sickness touched all parts of a man, an^ was more
great, than could be expressed, and more sharp and vehement^ than man's force
can tolerate and suffer. And in this it declaredde ytselfe well to be more
great, than all those, that had been accustomed to be seen for all the
fowls and the beasts, that had accustomed to seasonne on men^ car^ongns,
did not than approach them, though a great number remained upon the earth
without buryall, aythere else they that seasonned, dyed there, and by this,
the infectyon was well known ^or the fowls were not seen, nothere up on the
corpses, nor elleswhere through out, where that same pestylence had course.
And above all othere beasts, the dogs gave most knowlayge of this
infectyonne for that, that they most accustomedde to haunte the people. Butt
for to leave many othere soortes of calamytes and of myseries of that same
pestelence that chanced dyuersly to particulers, unto some more sharply, than
unto othere, it comprehended al othere maladies, and did not run into any
other. whereof ^ome dyed for lack of good lokynge unto, and the other for
tomuche. And also there could no medecyne be found, that men might trust to
be propice and good against yt, for that, which profited one, did hurt an
other. It left neuerthelas the bodies in their entiernes, without that there
might be parceiued any difference of strength nor debilitie. And there was
another good complexion, nor regyment or governance, how good that yt was,
that might be exempted. But the woorste that was in this, was that men lost
their heart, and hope incontynently, as they feeled themself attain^ted. In
such sort, that many, for despair, holdinge themselves for dead, habandoned
and forsook the^self, and made no prouisyon nor resistance against the
sickness. And an other great evil was, that the malady was so co^tagious, that
those, that went for to visitt the sick, were taken and infected, like as the
sheep be, one after an other. By occasyon whereof, many dyed for lack of
succors. whereby it happened that many howses stood void, and they that went
to se them, dyed also. And specially the most honnest and honorable people,
which took it for shame, not to go to se nor succor their parents and their
friends. And loved better to putt and set fourth themself to manifest danger,
than to fail them at their necessity. Yet finally they forsook all, and were
overcome by the vehemence of the pestelence. Saying the multitude of them, that
dyed, in wepinge and lamentinge. But above all, they that were eskaped, did se
the party and the myserye of othere, for y^, that they had experyme^ted yt in
the^self. And also they were out of dangers. For yt never took them again
that had had it, at the least so, yt they were in doubt of life. By means
whereof, they were reputed to be right happy. And they themself for the joy
that they had of their present health: had a folishe and vain presumption to
eskape afterward, from all other sickness. Besides this pestilence, the
citezeins were molested and anoyed by the great quantyte and dyuersyte of
gross moueables, which those that were retired into the city had brought
thider. For that, that the lodginge being small and yet occupied with such
moueables and necessaries, they knew not, where to turn them self, and
specially at that same time of summer, and by this mean, they dyed, cowched,
where as they might, without any honnestie, some time the one upon the other.
And many were seen half dead in the streets (chiefly aboutes the fountaynes)
which wallowed on the earth, for the desire that they had of water. And the
same temples where they had holden their lodginges and abydinge, were full of
dead corpses. For through the violence of the sickness, they knew not what
they did, and had lost the knowlaige and reverence of religion of the
hollynes of places. And the right of the graves, which they used in time
paste, were all troubled and co^fused. For every man buried his, there, as he
might. So that many housholdes, there graves being filled by the multitude of
them, that were dead of their lignaige and familye, were constrained, to cast
the bodies of the other that dyed, into fylthy and dishonnest graves. For some,
seeing a butcher to be prepared and ready to burn some other body, casted ye
same of their pare^tes above, and did put fire under. The other did cast it
now after that the fire was there made, and the other body above, that
burned. And after departed. And besides all the evils and dommaiges, that this
pestilence caused, by occasyon thereof, bigo^ne one euille custom in our city,
which afterward exte^ded unto many other things, more great. For that, that
men had presently tha^ no shame to do things openly, which in times paste were
wylled not to be done in secret. By this, that they were kept and restrained
from wantonness and voluptuousnes. For saying than one so great and so
soubdayne mutation and change of fortune, and that they that dyed soubdaynely,
were very happy, in regard of them, that lauguyshed, and were long in pain:
The poor people to whom the goods or riches came, cared not, but for to
spend it shortly in all things of pleasure and voluptuousnes, and they
thought that they could not do better. having no hope to enjoy it long, but
rather attendynge and lokyng to leave them shortly, togeders with their life.
And there was none, that for honnestye (though he knew and understood it) that
would regard to be willing to enterprise any honest thing, wherein there was
any care or travail, having no hope that he should live so long, as to see
it acheued and fynyshed. But all that, which for the time, they found playsant
and delectable for man's appetyte, they reputed profitable and honneste,
without any fear of Gods or of laws. For that, that they thought it to be
all one to do ill, or good, considered y^ as well dyed the good, as the evil,
and also they hoped not to live so long, that punishment might be taken on
them for their misdeeds by justice, but they waited a greater punishment by the
sentence of Gods, which was now given, to wytt, to dye of that same
pestilence. Whereupon, sythens it was so, they thought that it was best, to
employ the small time that they had to live, in making good chere and at their
pleasure. In this calamyte than were the Athenyans, that dyed within the city
of the same pestylence, and without, the enemies put all to fire and blood.
Hereupon they brought many pronostications unto their memory and also au^sweres
of the Gods, that had been made before. Which they adapted and compared unto
this chance. But among other a verse, that the auncyentes said, to have
hard song in their yougth, which had been pronounced by an answer or oracle
of the gods in this substance. There shall come into Dorye, war with the
lymon, whereof was altercation, before that this chance happened. For some
said, that by this word lymon, famyne should be understood, the other
said, that it would signifye pestylence, but after that the chance was
chanced of the pestylence, every one applied the word of the oracle unto
that, And in my fantasye, if there yet came any other war in the countreye of
Dorye with famyne, men would apply it, as well to the same there, as they did
unto this here. They set fourth likewise the answer, that had been made by
the oracle of Apollo to the interrogacyon of the Lacedemonyans, touching that
same war. For having demanded who should have therein the victory, the
answer of the God had been, that those that should make the war with all
their strength, and that he would be their aid. And upon that same answer,
they made likewise their judgments and interpretations. For that same
pestilence began fourthwith, as the Peloponesyans were entered that same
year, into the land of Athenyans. And also it did no evil to the said
Peloponesyans, at the least, whereby it should be caused to be esteemed. And
furst it took in the city of Athens, and after spredde to other towns of the
countreye, as the same were peopled. And this is as touching the things that
happened by the said pestilence. But as concerning the warre^ the
Peloponesyans, after that they had all burned and wasted the plain
countreye, they came into the land, that is called Parolos, that is to say,
nyghe unto the sea. and wasted it likewise, unto the mount Laurus, Lauriusmo^s
where there be mines of silver. and furste they wasted the regyon, which is on
the cost of Peloponese, and after that same, that is on ye cost of E^bee and
of Andre. And yet Pericles perseuered still in the opinion, whereof he had been
the year precedynge. that no man should go fourth against the ennemys. But
after that they were entered into the land of Athenes, he caused to prepare a
houndred ships for to pillage and waste likewise in their country. Into
which he caused to be putt four thousand footmen, and upon other ships for
to carry horses, he caused to be set three houndred warryours horsemen with their
horses. which ships were than furst made at Athens of wood of old ships,
and in their compaignye went those of Chio and of Lesbos with fyfty other
ships. And Pericles departed from Athens with the said army by sea than,
when the Peloponesyans were in the region nyghe the sea of Athenes. So they
came furst to descend into the land of Epydaure, which is in Peloponese, the
which they pyllaged ouerall, and assieged the city, in hope to take it. But
seeing that they lost time, they departed from thence, and went into ye
regyons of Troizenide, Troezenis.
of Halyde and Hermyonide, in the which, they did the like as they had done in
that same of Epydaure. All which places be in the country of Peloponese on
the sea coaste. From thence, they went to descend in the country of Prasie,
which is in the regyon, nyghe to the sea, in the country of Laconye. which
country they pyllaged togedres with the town, which they took by force. And
that done they returned into their country of Athenes, fro^whence, the
Peloponesyans were than departed for fear of the pestyle^ce, which had
always continued in the city, and without, over the Athenya^s, so long, as
they were in the sea, and that the Pelyponesyans were in their land. Whereupon,
those same Peloponesyans, understanding by the prysonners the infectyon and
danger of the same pestilence, and perceiving also the burying of the dead,
departed hastily from the said land, after that they had tarried there, forty
days. During which time, they wasted all the same country. In the same
summer, Agnon, Agnon^
son of Nycias, and Cleopompus, Cleopo^pus.
son of Clynyas, that were Colleagues and compaygnions of Pericles in the
leadyng or governance of the army, departed by sea with that self same
hooste, that Perycles had carried fourth, and brought again for to go against
the Chalcydes, that be in Thrace. And finding in their way the city of
Potydee, yet assieged with their people, they caused the ingynes of Artillery
to approach to the walls. So they battered the^, and did all their best to
take it. But all that new succoure, and the other army yt was there before,
could do nothing, because of the pestilence, yt was entered among them. The
which, they that came with Agnon, had brought. For ye other had not before
parceiued, nor felt it. which Agnon, understanding that Phormyon that was with
in Chalcyde with a thousand and six houndred men, P^ormio.
was departed fro^thence, left the^, that he had found at the siege of
Potydee, and returned unto Athenes, having lost a thousand and forty fotemen
of the four thousand, that he had charged at Athenes. All dead of the
pestilence. The self same so^mer, the Peloponesyans came again yet an other
time into the country of Athenes. And atteigned to wast y^, which was abiding
there of the furst voyage. Whereupon, the Athenians seeing themselves so
oppressed, with out by war, and wtin by pestylence, began to change opinion,
and tos^^aunder and speak evil of Pericles, saying yt he had been author of
ye war, and that he was cause of al their myschefes. So they bente the^self
and agreed to require peace of the Lacedaemonians, but after yt there were many
messengers sent of ye one side and of the other, they could not take any
resolution. By occasyon whereof, not knowing what more to do in their case, they
yet again charged more soore, Pericles, who perceiving yt they were astonished of
ye estate, wherein their affairs were (for yt time very evil) and that they
did all yt, which he had foresene from beginning, being yet in his office of
Captain and praetor or chief of the army, caused them all to assemble, and
exhorted them to hope better, parforcing him self to reduce their anger unto
co^tentacyon, and their fear unto confydence. So he speaks unto them, in
this manner.

The narration and proposition of Pericles to the people of Athenes, for to
appayse and to exhort them, to poursue and follow the war, and to endure
the present incommodyties. The nynth Chapter.
THe anger and desplaysir that you have against me at this present, is not
otherwise chanced, tha^ I have thought before. For I do well understand the
causes, whereof it proceadeth. And th^rfore I am well wyllyng to cause you
here to assemble, for to reduce some things to your remembrance, and also to
complain of you, if you (wrongefully and without cause be angry against me,
or if you do leese your hearts and courage in aduersites. And as concerning
myself, I esteem and judge that the cytezeins be better in particular, when all
the city is in good estate: than when, all the citezeins particulerly be well,
and the common welt he is lost. For that, that when the common estate is
destroyed, he that is well in his particular, is no less destroyed, than the
other. And by the contrary, if he have any evil in his particularite, he saves
himself with the common prosperity. And forsomuche (as when it happens) that
the public welthe may suffer thaduersytes of particulers, but the particulers
can not remedy them of the commonaltie: Is it not more reasonable al together
to help it, than to habandone and leave it by faylynge of heart, and by
impacyence in particular aduersites, like as you presently do? And if you
blame me, saying that I gave you counsaylle to enter into this war: that
doing, you blame likewise yourself, that have followed my counsel. Be not
therefore angry again one, such a man as I am. before whom in my conceit,
you ought not to prefer any other. Be it for to know that, which is
needful, or for to execute it, nor also that has more love unto the city,
and that can be less corrupt with monney. All which things, be requisite
for a good cytezeine. For he, that understands things, and does them not,
that is as much, as if he did not vnde^stande them. And though that he have
both, yet if he be not affectioned to the common welthe, he shall say
nothing, that generally may profit. And be it that he have the third, yet
if he wol be corrupt, there is nothing that he sells not. Wherfor^ my
Lords, if you, knowing all these things to be meanly in my parsone, have
trusted in me before all other for this war: you blame me now wrongfullye.
For as it is f^lly to desire war when men be in prosperytye: even likewise,
when they be forced ayther to subject themselves incontinently to their
neighbors, or to do that, that they command them, or else to take the
hazarte of war for to keep their lybertye, in hoping the victory: they that
in this case, lose their courage and virtue, be much more to be blaymedde. And
as touching my self, I am always of the opinion, that I have been, and I will
not change it. And though that you do waver, yet it is full certain, that at
beginning ye were all of my advise. But sythens the euyls be come upon you, ye
do repent. And measuryng and judging my reasone after your imbecillite and
weakness, ye find it now evil. For that, that hitherto every one has feeled
the troubles and inco^modites of ye war, and that the common vtilite is not
yet apparaunte. By occasyon whereof, you arne so greatly changed, for
things of small importance, that your heart now begins to shrink and to
fail you. And you have not virtue and power, to endure the things, that you
have determined to endure. Also that chau^ceth commonly, that the things,
which happen suddenly and unthought on, do abate men's courage. Like as it has
chanced us in our adversities, and specially as touching the pestilence. And
yet nevertheless, having one so great and so noble city, in the which we have
been so well nourished and indoctryned, we ought not to leese our couraige for
incommodites that might happen, how great soever they were, another yet lose,
our reputacion and renomme. For like as men do hate the man, that affects or
purchases by ambition and presumption the honor and glory that apperteygneth
not unto him: right so, they blame him ye loses the honnour and the glory
that he had. Wherefore Lords we ought, forgetting the particular dolours
and passions, to defend the general lybertye. And notwythstandyng this, that
I have oftentimes before declared unto you, that they, which fear, that this
war should be long and dangerous, and that we should have the worse at the
end, be in error: yet I woll gladly at this present declare unto you a
thing, of the which, me thinks, you have never thought, although yt you
have it. I mean, touching the greatenes ^f your empire and seignyory, whereof
I have not been willing to speak in my former proposytions and narrations,
another I would have ^poken it now, for that, that it seems to conteigne some
spyce or kind of boastyng, if that I had not seen you astonyed against
reasone. It is that you think that your empire and seygniory, does not
extend it self, but over your allies. But I aduertyse you, that of two
parts of the land and of the sea that be in the use of men, you have fully
the half in your power. I mean, so far as you arne willing to use it. And
if you would enterprise further, you should have it at your pleasure. For
there is not at this day king nor natyon upon the earth, that can empesche
and let your nauygatyon, into what part you woll, having the army by sea,
such as you have. Likewise knowing that your puissance does not show it
self in the usage of houses and of lands, which you make a great matter to
have lost, as though it were a great thing, it is not comely and sittinge for
you to take sorrow, for that they are marred, but iudgyng and reputyng, that
it is but a small gardeyne ouertourned, and a small ornament of goods lost
(to the valewe of this great puyssance, whereof I do speak) to esteem it,
nothing at all. And furthermore to know, that by mean of your lybertye, if
that you holy and intierly keep it, you shall recover easily, all these
things. But if that we come into servitude and bondage of other people, we
shall both leese al yt, which we did hold in times past, and also we shall show
our selves, people of less heart, than our fathers have been. who have not
had them of their auncestres, but have gottonne and kept them with their
labors, and afterward, left them unto us. For it is much greater shame to
a man to suffer a thing to be taken from him, which he holds, than to fail
to get that, which he coueteth. Wherefore, Lords, it is mete for us to go
against our enemies, not only in good hope and confydence: but also in
despysynge them. For that, that the confydence, which comes oftentimes by a
prosperity, unthought on, more than by good prouydence, may chance unto a
man, that were not very wise. But he, that by good raysone has esperance and
hope to vaynquish his enemies, like as you have, has not only confydence to
do it, but more^uer he contempneth and despyseth theyme. And also when that
fortune and puyssance are egall, the dylygence and industrye that comme of a
couragyous heart, makes a man more assured in his audacyte. For that, that he
groundeth not him self so much upon hope of the virtue, which shows himself
in necessite, as upon the prouysyon and habundaunce of things that he says,
by which, men know the better the prouydence. Also it is conuenyent for all
with one accord, to provide for the suertye of his estate and seignyorye
(which is very playsante to all) without refusing of any labor or travail,
except you woll likewise refuse the honnours. And know, that there is not
question only to love the general lybertye, but also to lose all your
sygnyory and to be in danger to lose and to have to suffer through evil
wylles and grudges, which you have incurred in establyshynge and conseruynge
it. By mean whereof, those among you, which for fear of things present,
under color of virtue and prouydence make their reconing to live in rest,
without medlynge with the common affairs, do abuse themselves very greatly.
For we be not the more sure of our oune, by departing of our selves, for that,
that we have already used our empire and s^ignyory in form of tyranny,
which seems a vyole^t thing, and iniuryous even from the beginning, when it
is furste takenne. But there is great danger to forsake and leave it. And
those manner of people, that for fear of the war, do persuade to cease it:
by so doing they should lose both the city and themselves, and also should
leave those in lybertye, over whom they do rule. For without any fail, rest
cannot give suertye, if it be not moderated and tempred by travail. And also
it is not conuenyent for a city that wol rule and govern. Wherefore Lords
Athenyans, you should not suffer your selves to be seduced by such manner of
people, another be angry against me y^ have enterprysed the war by your
consent. And though the army of enemies has done that, that was to be
believed that they would do to you, not willing to consent and obey unto
them: and also though this pestylence is moreover comme upon you, which is
the only thing that we least looked for, and for the which, I am the more
hated by the most part of you, truly it is a great unright, that you
should will me evil. except, that at all times, wha^ any prosperyte shall
happene, which you shall not have thought on, that you would like wise
attribute it unto me. For of necessity, those things must be endured, that
chance by the will of Gods: and those that come by ennemys, by virtue. And
sense that it is the ancient custom of this city so to do, take heed, that
it fail not in you, chiefly understanding that this our city has a very
great reno^me among al people, for that, that it abassheth not at aduersites,
but has endured great labors and trauayles and loss of many good citezeins
in war. By mean whereof, it has acquyred and conserved until this present
day, this great puyssance and seignyory. From which, if we now do haband^ne
us, co^sydered, that by the course of nature all things discreace, the memory
shall be for ever lost, toward them, that shall comme hereafter, not of Athenes
al only, but of the Empire of Greeks. For that, that we be those among the
other Greeks, that have had greatest Empire, and susteigned more of wars, not
only against the other in particular, but also against all them togethers, and
that have had the rychest and most peopled city of al Greece. yet nevertheless I
know that they, that be fearful and faynte hearted, woll desprayse and blame
this, that I do say. But they that have good will and desire to do virtuous
things, shall find it good. And if those, that shall not be capable and
understand my raysons and declarations, conceive hate and envy against me,
that shall be no new thing. For that is always happened to all them that arne
reputed worthy to presyde, govern, and to command other. But he that
endures such envy and evil will in great affairs, is that same that
prouydeth well therefore, and in contempnynge the hatred, acquyreth honnour and
reputacyon in time present, and perpetual glory for time to comme. The which
two things, to wytt, the present reputacyon and the glory to comme, have
will, Lords Athenyans, Ioyfullye to embrase, and not to send any more,
heraulte nor messenger toward the enemies, another to lose your courage for the
present da^mages. For they that least trouble themself, and have the better
couraige in aduers^tes, and that resists there against most in effect, being
in common or partylar affairs, be those, that be reputed most virtuous and
most honnest people.

Of the virtues and laudable conditions of Pericles. The tenth Chapter.
BY such talk and words, Pericles enforced himself to appayse the anger of
ye Athenyans, and to cause the^ to forgett the euylls and do^mages, that they
had. And for effect, they all in general agrede unto him. In such sort, that
afterward they sent none Ambassadors toward the Lacedemonyans, but
desposed themself to the war. Nevertheless in particular, they were sore
agreued to endure all the dyffycultyes. to wytt, the common people, for that,
that the little goods which they had, was consumed by the war: and the rich
and noble men, for that they had lost the fair possessions and the sumptuous
houses, that they had in the feldes. And this was the most grief: that they had
war, instead of peace. By reasone of which things, they remytted not the
hatred that they had against Pericles, but condemned him in a sum of
monney. And nevertheless, within a small time after (like as is the custom of
the people to be varyable) did chose^ him again to be their Duke, and gave him
full puissance and auctoryte in all things. For although that they were now
weakened by the euyls and damages that they had suffered in particular: yet in
things, that concerned the weal and government of the common wealth, they
knew that they had need of him, and that he was the most suffycyent man, that
they had. Also for truth, so long as he had the governance, during the
peace, he admynystred moderately and defended it intierly, and also augmented
and amplefyed it greatly. And afterward, when there was questyon of the
war, he knew and understood right well the strength and puissance of the
city, like as it appears by that, which therein has be done. But since his
death, which was two years and a half after the war begone, men know
much more his prudence and providence. For he had always showed them, that
they should have the victory of that war, if they kept themself from
fayghtynge against the enemies on land, and did execute their feate by sea.
without always to search to get a new seignyory, and without putting the
city in danger. wherein, after his death, they did the whole contrary. And
moreover, touching the other things, that concerned not the war: they,
which had the administratyon, did every one after his ambition and particular
couetice, both to the great preiudyce of the common welthe, and also of
themself. For their enterpryses were such, that when it tha^ came to their
intent, it redounded to the honnoure and proffite of particulers, more than of
the commone. But chaunsynge to the contrary, it was the perdition and loss of
the common welthe. And the cause of this disorder, was for that, that during
the time, that the same Pericles was in auctoryte, he had the reputacyon, the
minds and affectyons, and assured fealty and trust. Also with out all
doubt, he was right wise, and would not be corrupt. For this cause he easily
refrayned and appaysed the people. For that also he showed himself toward
them, rather a compaignyon, than a duke and governor. Furthermore he got not
the auctoryte by unlawful means, another did speak any thing for to please,
but in keeping his gravity, when men proponed and set fourth any thing
invtile and v^profytable, he spoke frankely against it, though that, in that
doing, he incurred the indignatyon of the people. And so often, as he
understood, that they Imagyned to do any thing before that it were time, or by
crueltye, rather, than by reasone: he reprehended and resrayned them by his
grave speaking, and by his auctoryte. And also, when he saw them afraid for
any inconuenyent, he put them again in courage. In such sort, that in
appearance the governance of the town was in the name of the people, but in
effect, all the auctorytie was in him. Wherethroughe, after that he was dead,
it chanced yt those which succeeded in his place, being equalle in auctoryte,
did search every one of them to obteigne the principalite, over the other.
And to bring that to pass, they enforced them selves, for to please the will
of the people. Which doing, they committed very many great faults, like as it
chau^ceth in such cases in a great city, which has empire and seignyory,
but among other, the greatest was, that they made a navigations into Sycile.
For they offended, not only against them, whom they went to oultrage
(beginning to war, upon them which thing they should not have done) but
also against them, whom they had sent thither, for that, that they provided
not well in their case by means of the troubles and questyons that happened in
the city, by occasion of thadministration, and of the auctorytye^ for the
which, the princyyall did strive and debate, through iniuryes and through
accusatyons. And by that mean, the said army was defeated in Sycile. And also
afterward, was lost a great part of the army by sea with the apparayle
which they had set fourth again. And notwitstandynge the said loss, and that
they were trauaylled in the city by cyuile seditions and questyons, and that
they had gottone the Syciliens for enemies besides the other, and also that the
more part of the allies had habandoned and forsaken the^, and finally ye Cyrus
seen of the king of Perse was allied with the Peloponesia^s, and had given them
money for to make an army by sea: yet did they resist three years, and could
not be vainquyshed. until such time, as they being oppressed and troubled by
their cyuyle dissensyons, were constrained to render the^self. wherefore it is
clearly apparau^t, y^ when Pericles faylled them, they had yet such puissance,
yt with his conducte, they might easily have had the victory of ye same war.

Of some other exploictes of war, that wree done that same summer as well on
the one part as on the other, and how the city of Potyde was rendered by
composition unto the Athenyans. The.xi. Chapter.
ANd for to return to the narration of the said war of the Lacedaemonians
and their allies, that self same summer, they raised up an army by sea, with an
houndred ships, which they sent under the conduct of Cnemus Spartia^,
Cnemus.
into ye Isle of zeacynthe, which was right against Elyde, and was inhabyted by
the Achayans, that be in Peloponese, but it took party with the Athenyans, and
there pyllaged it all over, and went about to take the city, but seeing that
they could not, they returned. In that self same summer, Aristeus.
Aristeus of Corinthe and Polys Argyan in their particular name, Polis.
and Anteristes, Anteristus.
Nicolaus, Nicolaus.
Pratodemus, Pratodemus.
and Tymagoras, Tymagoras.
as Ambassadors of Lacedemonyens went into Asia, toward the king
Artaxerxes, for to induce him to be of their alliance in that same war. and
to lend them money to raise an army by sea. But before their goinge thider,
they came into Thrace toward Sitalces, son of Terreus, for to persuade him
if it were possible to leave the alliance of the Athenyans, and to take theyrs.
and in that doing to lead and conducte his horsemen with their fotemen, for to
raise their, s^ege yt the Athenyans did hold before Potyde. And so as they
were entered into ye royalme of Sytalces for to go to pass the sea into
Hellesponte, wyllinge to go to find Pharnaces, son of Pharnabasus, which
should bring them unto the king, they found with Sytalces, Learchus, son of
Callymachus and Ameniedes son of Philemon, Ambassadors from the Athenyans.
who persuaded Sadocus, son of Sitalces, who had been made cytezein of Athens,
yt he ought to take the said Ambassadors and other above named, and to render
them unto the^, for yt, that they went to the king, for to treat somethyng
against the said city. At whose persuasyon, the said Ladocus did send his men
after them. Who found them at the sea side where they were willing to embarque
themself from thence, and took them. Afterward, they brought them back to
the said Sadocus, who dely^ered the^ unto the Ambassadors of Athenes, and they
carried the^ unto Athens. And sone after the Athenians, fearing that Aristeus,
who had been cause and auctour of all the affairs that they had had at
Potyde and in Thrace, should yet ymagine moreover some thing against them, if
he eskaped, they caused him and all the other to dye the same day without any
process, and without hearing ye thing, which they would declare. And
afterward, did cast the^ from the height of the walls down into the
dyches. For by that mean they thought with good cause yt they did vengeance for
their citezeins and other their allies marchantes, which the Lacedemonyans had
taken upon the sea, and after that they had caused them to dye, had likewise
cast them into their dytches. For from the beginning of the war, those
Lacedaemonians did hold for ennemys all those, that they did take upon the sea,
whyder they held the party of Athenians, or that they were newter. and caused
them to dye without remissyon. About the end of that same somer, the
Ambrasiens having taken with them one good bend of strangers, went against
the Argyens, which be in the country of Amphilochie, Amphilochicu^.
and against all the said country, for a questyon, which they had newly had
with the^. And by this occasyon Amphilochus son of Amphiarus, Amphilocus.
who was of the city of Argos in Greece, at his return from the war of
Troy would not return into his country for the trouble and sorrow that he
had there, and so went to the goulphe of Ambracie, which is in the country
of Epyre, and there made a city, which he named Argos, in remembrance of the
same, whereof he was, and he added unto it for surname, Amphilotique, and he
named the whole countreye Amphilochie, which was right puyssant of people
among all the other cities of the country of Ambracie. But by succession of
time, having many questyons with their voisins and neighbors they were
constrained to retire and take the Ambracy^ns their neighbors into their
city, and compaignye. Which brought them tha^ furst, the Grekishe language. In
such sort, that they all did speak that same language. For before, they were
strangers as the other Amphylocyens yet be, the city excepted. Afterward by
succession of time the Ambratians chased the Argyues out of the city, and
kept it alone. who being expulsed went toward the Acarnanyans, and gave
them self unto them, and altogether, to wytt, the Acarnanians and the
Amphilochiens came to demand aid of the Athenians, for to recover the said
city, who sent them Phormio with.xxx. ships, Phormio.
which took the city, and pyllaged it, and after left it to the Acarnanyans
and to the Amphilochiens togethers. By occasyon whereof, the alliance did than
furste begin between the Athenyans and the Acarnanyans, and the questyon and
enemytye between the Ambracyens and the Amphilochiens of Argos, for that, that
the same Amphilochiens reteigned at that pryze many prisoners of the said
Ambratiens. who in time of this war, whereof we speak, assembled a great
army, as well of their own people, as also of Chaonyens and of other
strangers their neighbors, and went thither to descend before the city. And
they pyllaged all the territorye thereof. But they could not take it, and so
returned into their houses. These things were done that same summer. At
beginning of winter, the Athenyans sent twenty ships into the countreye of
Peloponese, under the conducte of Phormio, who departing from the port of
Naupacte, watched, that no ship might pass nor enter, nor also depart fro
Corinthe nor from Crissee. other six they sent under conducte of Melessander
into Carry and into Lycie, Melesander.
for to recover money of them. and to defend, that the marcha^tes ships of
the said Athenyans should not be spoiled and oultraged, by the^ of Plaselide
and of Phenice. Melessander, now being landed in the country of Lycie, he was
by this enemies vainquished and slain, togedres with one part of his people.
In the self same summer, the Potydyens seeing that they could no longer hold
and keep their town against the Athenyans that had so long kept it assieged,
for the necessyte of darthe and famyne wherein they were, which was so extreme,
that among other fylthy and abhomynable things that they did eat, there were
that did eat the one the other, and seeing also that for all ye war that was
made against the said Athenyans, that they did not retire from the said
siege: they came to speak with the Capytaynes of the said siege, for the
Athenians. which were Xenophon, Xenophon.

Hestrodorus.


son of Eurypedes, Eristiodus, son of Aristocles, and Phynomachus son of
Callymachus, Phenomachus.
and rendered themself upon these conditions. that they of the said town,
togethers with their men of war strangers should depart and comme fourth,
every of the men with one garment and the women with twain, and moreover.
every one had a certain sum of money to go fromthence. the which
composytyon, the said capytaynes did accept, considering the incommoditie
wherein their host was, by reasone of the winter, and also the great some of
monney which that same siege had now cost, which amounted to more, than two
thousand talentes. Thus the Potydye^s departed from thence under saulue
conducte into the country of Chalcyde, every one the best that he might.
wherwyth the Athenians were right evil contented, saying that they might have
had it at their will, and if they would. And yet nevertheless, they sent
thither of their citezeyns for to people and inhabyte it. All which things
were done in that same winter, which was the end of the second year of that
war which Thucidides has written.

How the city of Platce was by the Peloponesians assieged battred and
assailed, and by the cytezeins declared. The.xii. Chapter.
THe summer ensuynge, the Lacedemonyans and their allies came again, no more
into Attique, but they went before the city of Platee, under the conduct of
Archidamus king of Lacedrmonians. And they, having now planted their siege
before the town, and willing for to pyllage and waste the country, the
citezeins sent their ambassadors unto them, The oration of the Plateans.
which did speak in this manner. Archidamns, and you other Lacedemonyans, you
do evil and against your honnour, and the honnour of your fathers, to come
enemylyke into our land, and to assiege our city. For Pausanyas
Lacedemonyan, son of Cleombrotus, who delivered Greece from the domynation of
the Medes, with the Greeks that took the adnenture of the bataile in our land,
having made his sacrifyce in the myddest of our marquet place to the God
Iupyter the deliverer, in the presence of all the host, gave to the Plateans
their city and their territorye: to the end that they might live in their
liberty according unto their laws, and that no man should make war nor do
them violence unjustly, through couetyce to rule them. And he coniured and
swore all the allies and confederates that were there, to defend the^ with
their power against all men, that would attempt the contrary. This is the
^werdo^me and reward that your fathers gave us, for the virtue, which we
s^ewed in that danger. But you do holy the contrary, that comme hither with
the Thedayns, our capital enemies for to subdewe and bring us into seruytude
and bondage. Wherefore, we call to wytnes, them among you that were present at
that act, and also our domestycall Gods, and yours against you, if you do
any harm in our land. and also if coming against your oath, you suffer us
not to live in our lybertye, so as Pausanias ordained. and more they said not.
Whereunto Archidamus answered in this manner. The au^^swer of Archidamus.
You say right well Plateans, if the deeds were lyk^ unto the words. For as
Pausanyas than granted you, that you should live in your lybertye, and
after your laws, even ^o you should have aided yourselues with your power, to
have kept and set again into the self liberty, the other Greeks, that were
present at the act, whereof you speak, and parttakers of the dangers of the
war, as well as you. who have been subdued and brought into seruytude, by the
Athenyans. By occasyon whereof. al this army is assembled, and this war
begone. Wherefore so much the better you shall keep your oath, as you shall
the more aid to restore them into liberty. And if you woll not do it, at the
least, live as you have lived, heretofore. And labor your land in peace
without taking part with the one nor with the other. But receive them all as
friends, and help not to the war of one, more than of the other. with this
answer the Ambassadors returned into the city, and made their report
before all the people. By whose ordinance, they came again unto Archidamus,
and said unto him, that, that which he had demanded of them was impossyble
for them to do without consent of the Athenyans, for that, that they had
their wives and children with the Athenyans, and on the other part, that they
feared to put the city in great danger. and after yt the host should be
departed fromthence the Athenians, not content with that, that had been done,
should come upon them. And also that the Thebayns, who had not been co^prysed
in the oath, under color, yt the city ought to receive the^ with the one party,
and the other, would at an other time subdewe the^. Whereunto Archidamus
answered the^, that they should have good hope, and for to exchue all
dangers, they should put their houses, and all the city with his territorye
into their kepinge, and give them by account all the trees that were there, and
all the other things, that might be nombred togethers with the lymyttes of
their said terrytorye by declaration. And they with their wives and children
to go to dwell, where they should think good duringe the war. And license
us says he, to hold them in deposet in your name, and incontinent after the
war ended, we promys to render them intierly unto you, and nevertheless this
during, to labor your lands, and to give you of the fruictes that, which
shall be necessary for your living. upon this demand the Ambassadors
returned into the city, and there proponed and declared it unto the people,
who for resolution, made answer, that they so far, as lay in them,
accepted the offer, if the Athenyans were therwyth contented. But without furst
co^moning with the^, they would in no wise do nor agree unto it. And so they
demanded a certain term, for to send unto Athenes, and that in the mean
time there should no do^mage be done in their land. which thing was accorded
and parformed unto them. But when the Ambassadors, which they sent to
Athenes, were comme again, they made reaporte unto the people, of the
resolution that the Athenia^s had made unto the^, after all the declarations
and raysons of the one side and of ye other, which was of this substance. The
Athenyans do declare unto you, that sense that they have made alliance with
you, they have not suffered you to be oultraged nor wronged, and they
admonyshe you, that ye ought to have reme^^braunce of the oath, that your
fathers made unto them. For they arne not minded now to forsake you, but woll
aid you with their power, and therefore require you, to be faithful unto
them. For as for them, they intend not to innouate nor charge you with any
new impost. which answer being understand by the Plateans, they determined
not to habandone nor forsake the Athenyans, but to resyste the enemies,
although they should see them bourne and waste before their eyes, all the
goods, that they had in the countreye, and should suffer all the other
euyls, that might be done unto them. And therefore they would no more send
again their messengers toward the Peloponesyans, but from the walls made
their answer, that it was not possible for them to do that, which they had
required of them. Than Archidamus came before the wall, and protested against
them in this manner. The protestacyon of Archidamus against ye Plateens.
You Gods and saynctes, that keep the city and land of Plateans, I call
you to wytnes, that these here, be they, that furst break their oath, and
that the oultrage comes, not by our fault, if we come ennemilike into their
land, in the which our au^cesters having made their vows and sacrifyces, had
the victory against the Medes, by your help and favor. And that this, that
shall be fromhencefourth done against the^, it shall be through their wrong and
not through ours. For that, yt whatsoever declarations and exhortacions that we
could reasonablye make unto them, we could not prouffyt in any thing, nor
allure them with raysone. Wherefore vouchesaulf that they, which have furste
done the oultrage, may have the pain. And that they, that prepare themself
for to punyshe them iustelye, may do it. The form of ye douue or mount
After that he had made this protest and request unto the Gods, he suffredde
and lycenced his men at arms to begin the war. And furst, with the trees
that were incontynently cut down, he caused the town to be enclosed with great
bars and skins, to the intent that none should issue out nor enter therein.
Afterward, they began to raise up a bancke, and a mount, hopyng in small
time to acheue it, seeing the great number of people that helped to the work,
and by that mean, to take the town. And the form of that same douue or
mount was such. Furste, they made it with branches of trees, with grates in
form of baskettes, and they set them of each side of the mount, fastened and
susteigned with skynnes for to keep the earth and other matter, that was put
into it. And after they cast in, stoanes, wood, earth and every other
thing, yt might serve to fylle it. In which work, they continued.lxx. days
contynuallye, day and night, without cessyng from their busynes. For when they
one departed for to go to eat or sleep, they other came thither, every one in
his turn. And for to sollycite and cause the said work to be auaunced and
set forwards, were deputed and appoincted, the Lacedemonyans, which had
charge of the huyred souldyars, and with them the Dukes and capytaynes of all
the cytyes. When they of the town saw the mount so to heighynge and arise,
they began directly against it in the ynner side within their wall, to make
an other wall with stoanes with brecque, which they did take of the next houses,
that they plucked down for to do it with, and for to susteygne and uphold it,
they meddled it with pieces of wood, and withoutefourthe they armed and fensed
it with hydes, to the intent that in workynge they should not be hurt, and
also that if any fire were cast against it, it should not take in the wood.
In such manner, yt the workynge arose greatly on both sides. And nevertheless
they of the town, for to retarde and slack the workynge of thennemys, they
devised one such mete practique and mean: that is. That they persed the wall
at one part right anempste the mount, whereunto the ennemies had from the
same forged an other Ra^pare with wood and with earth, which came to ioigne to
the wall, for to comme in covert, and secretly unto the foot of the same
wall, after that the said mount had been acheued. And through that same
hoale, that they had made, they drew and conveyed away the earth underneath,
which the other did cast into it. Whereupon, after that the Lacedaemonians had
parceyued it, they made great panyars, and filled them with soft and moist
earth, and afterward did cast it instead of that, which was drawn away,
in manner, that men could not easily draw more away. Also when the Plateans
saw the remedy, they studied no further in that party, but they made great
mines and conductes within the earth through under the wall that went to
answer unto the mount. Through which mines, they drew without ceasyng,
the earth from the mount, and did it long before the enemies parceyued it,
though that they were all abashed to see that their mount did not greatly
heyghenne, for the marvelous quantite of earth, that they did cast into it,
and that it did fall and syncke in the myddelle. yet the citezeins,
considering that at length they could not draw away so much of the
earth, as the other, that were in greater number without comparysonne, might
cast therein: and therefore consideringe that they trauaylled in vain, they
devised an other remedy for to resist. yt is, yt at the same part of their
wall, where the enemies had approached with their Ra^pare for to assault, they
raised and erected wtin wards, an other wall, in manner of increasing or
adjoining, one unto the other. For the two ends came to join unto ye wall,
directly anempste the two ends of the mou^te of ye enemies and went
fromthence, enlarging inwardes, into the town. To the intent yt if the
ennemies did take ye quarter of the wall, they should yet there find an other,
against which, they should of necessity make an other mou^te, which should be
their double travail. and also should be in greater danger. On the othersyde,
the Peloponesians had erected two Engynes upon their mount, where with they
battered in two parts to wit, with the one the wall, that they of the town
did make within, which decayed it greatly, whereof the Citezeins were greatly
astonyed: and the other did batter the principal wall. Against which engynes
the citezeins used two remedies. The one was yt they had great snares of big
coardes, with ye which they did break the^. The other was that they had great
rollers of wood, which they fastened at two ends to chains of yronne, which
kept the said rollers at the top of the wall, hanged overthwart. And when they
saw the stroke of the Engyne coming, they let slyppe the ends of the
chains, that were fastened to certain Engynes, in such sort, that soubdainely
the said rollers came to fall upon the end of the Engyne that battred, and did
break his stroke. Whereupon, the Peloponesia^s, seeing that after all
attemptates, they could not by that mean easily batter the wall, and yet
though that it were battred, that there was an other wall within, and by that
mean, they should with pain take the town by battry: they determined to
enclose it round about with a wall. But before they did that, they would
assaye if they might do it by fire, which thing seemed easy enough unto them,
if that the wind served them, considering that it was very small. For they
studied all things, whereby they might have it without great expe^ce and
without long sieage. And therefore they filled with fagotts and with wood all
the dyche, that was between the mount and the wall in a very short time,
through ye great multitude of people, that were at doing of it. And caused it
to be carried and extended, so far, as they might within the town, and
afterward in the height did put in fire with soulfer and with powder. Whereby
there issued fourthwith one so great a flame, as had never been there seen
before, that had been kindled by man's hand. For sometime the fire took by
itself in the woods by the mountains, through the vehemente confrication,
freatinge and gatherynge of the trees, which happened by force of wind,
whereby arose a greater fire and flame. And that same fire was so great and so
sharp, that it faylled very little, that it had not burned all the town, with
them that were within, for there remained but one small part thereof, where as
the fire had no course. And if the fire had chased, as the ennemys thought, it
had been done. but it chanced clean contrary. For there soubdainly came a great
rain with great tho^ders, as it is said, that quenched it. The Peloponesians,
tha^ seeing that they were frustrated and disapoineted of that their enterprise
after ye other, they determined to leave one part of their people at the siege
before the town, and that the other should return, but furst they would
enuiron and compass about all the sides of ye walls. And for to have it ye
sonner acheued, they departed it amongst the^ by quartiers, giving to all the
bendes of every city, his quarter, and also made dyches, all alonge ye said
wall, as well wtin as without, and with the earth, that they drew out and cast
up, they made bricque. After that they had acheued ye same work, they left a
sufficient number of their people for to keep the half of that same wall, and
they left the other half, to be kept by the Beotyans, and after, the other
departed about the saison that the star named Acturus does appear, and every
man returned from thence unto his house. As touching the Plateans, they had
now before, sent away their wives you aged people, the children, and al those,
that were not mete to sarue for the war. In such sort, that there were
abydinge in the town, but four houndred and four skore Athenyans, and ten
women alonely for to make them their bread, and more there were not of any
estate nor condityon. The which determined for to defend the town. Such was
the preparation of the siege of Platee.

How the Athenians had an overthrow before the town of Spartole in the
country of Bottians. And the Peloponesians an other before the city of
Stratie in the country of Acarnanie. The.xiii. Chapter.
Xenophon.
THat same somer, in the beginning of the said siege, ye Athenia^s sent
Xenopho^, son of Euripides, and.ii. other capitains with two thousand foteme^
citezeins, and two hou^dred horsemen estrangers in harvest season, for to make
war against ye Chalcydyans and Bottians, which be in the country of Thrace.
who, being descended before the town of Spartole, Spartolus.
which is in y^ quarter of Bottia^s, they wasted all their corn, and yet had
intelligence and confederation with some of the^ of the town. that should have
let the^ in. But thoder that were not of ye confederatio^, caused a bend of
horsemen to come from the town of Olinthe. who, being aryued, went fourth with
the people of the town for to fight against ye Athenia^s. In which bataile ye
foteme^ Chalcydye^s, being well armed, were repulsed and driven back eue^ unto
ye gates. But the horsemen Olynthia^s and ye fotemen light armed, Olynthus.
with a certain small number of other fotemen, bearing Pauesses or Targots, that
were of the country, that is called Crusyde, C^usis.
repulsed the horsemen of the Athenyans. And as they retired on the one side and
on the other from that same battaille, there came soubdainly certain fresh
be^des of foteme^ well armed, which the Olynthie^s sent to increase ye aid of
the^ of the town. who, seeing ye said succor coming, took heart unto the^
again, specially the footmen light armed and the horsemen Chalcydyens, and a
fresh, with the succor of the Olynthya^s, that was come unto the^, they set upon
the Athenyans and so did repulse and force the^ to retire unto two co^paignies,
which they had left te keep their baguaige and their artillrie. And yet
neuerthelas, those Athenians defended themselves ma^fully, and always, as they
came lively upon their ennemis, they repulsed the^. But after that they were
returned to their said baguaige, ye other did chase the^ back again, to wit ye
foot men with shot, and the horse men with hand strocks, in such sort, that at
last they put the^ to flight, and had the^ long in the chase. In which chase,
there died many, beside those that were there slain at the battle, which
were in all four hou^dred and thirty, togidres with the three Capytains. The morrow
following, the Athenya^s after that they had recovered their dead men of the^ of
the town, they returned with the remenant of y^ army to Athenes. For ye same
victory, the Chalcydiens and Bottiens after that they had chosen out and buried
them that were dead on their party, they erected and set up an trophe or token
of tryu^phe before the town. Anon after this battle, the Ambracyens and the
Chaoniens, Ambraciote. Chaones.
desiring to subdue all the country of Acarnanie, Acarnania.
and to draw it from the alliance of the Athenya^s, they signefied unto the
Lacedemonya^s, that if they would send the^ any number of ships, which they
might cause the cities co^federated to fournishe, they might easily, with a
thousand of their souldiars, subdewe all the country of Acarnanie, for that,
that the one might not succor the other. And ye done, they might, w^out any
great difficulty, conquerre the Isle of zacynte and that same of zephalanie,
Zachintus. Cephalenia.
and moreover they had esperance, and trusted the rather to take Naupacte.
which doing the Athenyans could no more discourse and sail aboutes Peloponese,
Naupactum.
as they had accustomed to do. whereunto the Lacedaemonians did agree, and
immediately sent Cnemus, who yet was their capytaine general by sea, with those
few ships that they had, and the foteme^, and did write unto the confederated
cities on the sea side that they should with all diligence send their ships well
fournished into Leucade. Leucadia.
Now those of Corinthe, among the other confedered cities were most affectioned
to the Ambracyens, for yt they were their burgeoses, and therefore they made
extreme diligence to tacle their ships and to send the^ unto the^. likewise
did y^ Sycionie^s, Sicyonu.
and the other nighe neighbors. But those of ye Anactorians and of the
Ambratians, Anactoru. Ambraciote.
and also of the Leucadyans were sonnest ready at ye poarte of Leucade. Cnemus
and the thousand souldiars that he co^ducted, used so good dyligence that they
passed before Naupacte without that Phormyo capytaine of the Athenyans, Phormyo.
who had there abowtes.xx. ships to keep the passage and the country, did
perceue the^. So they descended incontynently in the land, nighe unto Corinthe
and they being there, sone after came unto the^ the succors of the said
Ambracyens, Leucadyens and Anactoryens, and besides them that were all Greeks,
there came thider a great bend of strangers, to wytt, a thousand Chaonyans,
Chaones.
which is a nation, that is not subject unto kings, but do live under Dukes,
whom they do every year chose of a blood Royal. Of whom were Capytaines
Phocyon and Nycanor, Phorius. Nycanor.
and with them, were the Thesprotiens, Thesproti.
which lived likewise without king. And the Molosses and Athytains, Molosse^
Antitanoe.
of whom was Capytayn Sabylinchus that than was tutor of Tharipus, Sabylinthus.
Tharipis.
king of the said Molosses, being in mynorytie of age. There was also Orydus,
Oroedus.
king of Paranees, which had under his bend with his men, a thousand
Orestyans, subgiettes of the king Anthiochus, Anthiochus.
which were come thider by his knowlaige and consent. Likewise Perdicas king
of Macedonie sent thider a thousand Macedoniens without knowlaige of the
Athenyans, Perdiccas.
which yet aryued not at the beginning, when the furst did. With this army
Cnemus departed from Corynthe by land, without will to tarry for the othere
that came by sea, and passinge through the country of the Argiues he pillaged
the country of Lymnea, Argiui. Limne^
which was not closed with walls. Afterward he came against the city of
Stratie, Stratus.
which is the greateste of all the country of Acarnanie, hopinge, that if he
migte have takenne that same, that he should afterward right easily take the
othere. When the Acarnanyans knew that there was come a great army upon them
by land, and that they atteded yet, for a more strength by sea: they sent no
succoures the one to the other, but every one prepared himself to defend his
city and his land, and all they together, sent to Phormyo that he should
come to succoure them. But he made them annswere that it was not lawful for
him to habandone and depart from the poorte of Naupacte, understanding that
the army by sea of the ennemys should depart from Corynthe. The Peloponesyans
than came with three bendes before the said city of Stratie, being determined
to assail it, if those within would not render or yield it. Of which three
bendes, ^pe Chaonyens and other strangers were in that same of the myddest,
and in the right hand were the Leucadyens with the Anactoriens and othere of
their bend, and in the last bend was Cnemus with the Peloponesyans and the
Ambrasyens. An^ the said bendes went marchynge by `dyuers ways so far
distante the one from the other, that sometime they of the one bend did not se
the other. And the Greeks went in battaille, kepinge their order, for to
advise bisore all things, when they should be before the town, to chose some
meteplace to lodge their camp. But the Chaonyans trustinge in their force, for
that, that they were holden and reputed most valyant of all the other
strangers in that quarter of the main land, they would not have patience to
lodge themself, but taking it for shame somuche to cocker themself, and hoping
with the aid of other strangers that were in their bend, to fear the people
of the town with their arryuall, and by that mean to take it, before that the
othere should there arryue, and so to have the hole hounour of that same
enterprinse: they aduaunsedde themself in their most, that they might, in
such sort, that they aryued in the sight of the town, a good space of time
enough, before the othere. which seeing, the Stratyans deu^sed among themself,
that if they could discomfytte and overthrow that bend: the othere would
fear afterward to come thider, they set embushementes without the town on
that part thereof. And after that the Chaonyans were between the town and the
Ambusshes, they set upon them on both sides so strongely, that they did put
them out of Array and unto flighte. And so did slay many and a great number.
when the other strangers that came after, did see the^ fly, they did the like,
and so did all fly, before that the Greeks did parceyue yt, who thought not
that they should have fought, but only have chosen the place to have lodged
them. But when they saw the^ so to fly, they retired into their bend. And
afterward, they locked themselves togider, and tarried there that same day,
waytinge if those of the town would issue fourth against them. which thing
they would not do, for that, that thoder Arcananyans had sent them no
succoure. But only they did throw against them with castes of slings, where
with all those of the country of Acarnanie do throw better, than the other
people. Also they were not armed, and therefore yt had not been good for the^ to
have issued fourth. Than Cnemus, saying that they came not fourth, when it did
draw nyghe upon night, he withdrewe himself in great fear, to the river of
Anapus, Anapus fluuius.
which is distant from the city, aboutes four skoore stades. And the morrow
followinge, having recovered the dead men of the Stratyans, he retired with
his army into the land of y^ Eniades. Oemniades.
who received him willingly, for the amytye that they had with the
Peloponesyans and fromthence they departed all, for to return into their
houses without taryinge the succor, that should come unto them. And the Stratians
did set up their Trophe in remembrance of the victory, that they had had
against the Barbarous or strangers.

How the Athenyans had a victory by sea against the Peloponesians, and how
the one party, and the other prepared them self for to combattre and fight,
one other time upon the sea. The.xiiii. Chapter.
ON the other side, the army by sea that the Corynthians and othere
confederates should have sent out of the goulphe of Crissee, to the succors of
Cnemus against the Acarnanyens if they would comme to succor them of
Stratia, came not. But were constrained, that self same time, that the
battaille was before Stratia, to fight against the.xx. ships that Phormyo
held and kept to defend Naupacte, who spied when they departed from the said
goulphe of Crissee, for to assail them in the high or main sea. whereof, the
Athenyans, who were not furnyshed to fight, but only had charged the men of
war for to pass with them into Acarnanie, doubted not. thinking that
Phormyo, that had but twenty ships, durst not assail thairs, which were
seven and forty. But as they sailed alongeste the cost of Epire, for to
trauerse into Acarnanye, which is opposite or direct against yt, saw the
Athenyens comme fourth from Chalcide and out of the floude of Euenus. The
fludde of Euenus.
Who came dyrectly against them, for though in the night they were hid in a
place, yet always they were in the moarnynge, at break of day,
apparceyuedde. And by this mean, the Corynthyans were constraynedde to fight
in the myddest of the destracite. Now the people of every city had their
capytaynes. And of them of Corynthe were Capytaynes, Machon, Macho^.
Isocrates, Isocrates.
and Agatharcydas. Agatharchidas.
and so the Peloponesians did bring their ships all into a roundell, locked
together, the fore parts forwards, and the powpes inwardes, keeping as much
space, as they might in the sea. for to empeshe and let the issue of ennemys,
and within that same rou^dell they bestowed the smallest and lightest ships,
for to cause the^ to go fourth in short space upon those of the^nemis when they
should see it to be mete. As touching the Athenyans, they brought their
ships all in a renge. And sailed closinge aboutes those of the^nemys,
faignynge to be willing fourthwyth to begin the bataile, and in passing
beyond them, they approached so strongly, that well nigh they hurkeled togider.
By mean whereof, ye other ioygned the^self and retired always more suerlyer
locked in their order. But Phormyo had defended or forbidden his men, that they
should not begin the bataille, until that he had given them a sign or
token. And this he did for that, that he thought well that the said
Peloponesyans could not maigntayne or continue that same order with their
ships, as they would have done, with their foot men, on land. And also that
the ships would hurkle togider and would empesche the one the other. Specially,
when the wind of the land should arise, which biganne come^ly at the break
of the day, which he attended, making in the mean seasonne a brag or
threateninge to be willinge to strike upon them. For he took it to be full
certain, that after that the wynd was rysenne, they could not be a moment of
one hour firm or sure together, and that he might than assail them, more at
this pleasure, for that, that his ships were lightest, like as it chanced.
For after that the wynd began to blow, the ships that were enclosed in the
myddell of the oder of thennemys, and the othere that were lightest began to
hurkle against the other, and successyuely the disorder came the one from the
othere. so that the people that were within, was ye more part occupied to lay
fourth plankes of wood, or their glayues specially before, for to defend,
that the ships should not hurkle against them, where they were. Whereby arose
a great cry of one sort, that cried and said vylaynye to other, in such
sort, that they could not hear nor understand the thing that was
commanded them. And yet they that understood it, could not turn nor
conduict their ships, so, as they were commanded, they were so greatly
oppressed and coustrayned. Also they were not yet instructed perfaictely in the
^eate by sea. Than Phormyo, saying the disorder, gave the sign or token of the
battle unto his people, who charged lively upon the ennemys, and at the
arryuall, they did ouerronne one of the Pretoryans galleys, to wytt, upon which
was one of the Capytaines, and so drowned it. And consequently all those, that
they encou^tred, at that the furste charge, they frushed or sonke them, with
such strenghte, that they gave not the ennemys leisure to ioynne themself
again together, another to recover their courage, but they fourthwyth fled
toward Patras and Dymen in the quartier of Achaie. Patre. vrbs. Dyme oppidu^.
And the Athenyans followed them so nighe, that in chasinge them, they did take
twelve of their ships and also did sleye a great number of their people.
Afterward, they returned into Mylocryte. Molycricum.
And after that they had erected and set up their throphee upon the
promo^tory or highest place, and consecrated a shipp to the god Neptunus, they
returned unto Naupacte. Also the Peloponesyans with the ships, that were
eskaped from Patras and from Dymen, returned to Cyllene, where the Athenyans
have their haven, to the which place Cnemus also came at his departure from
Leucade after the battaylle of Stratie with the other ships that should have
joined with them there. And they being there aryued, Tymocrates, Tymocrates.
Brasidas and Lycophron, Brasidas. Lycophron.
whom the Lacedemonyans had sent for to assiste Cnemus, and had wylled him
to use their counsaille in feate of the sea, and chiefly, that he enterprised
again a battaille upon the sea, to the intent that the ennemys, who had the
lesser number of ships, should not co^tynue masters. For they thought well
that that same battaille was lost, through fault of their people, by many
reasons. And chiefly for that, that it was the furst time that they had
fought in the sea. wherefore they could not have had the art and industry to
conducte themselves so well, as the Athenyans, who therein were all accustomed.
And likewise that the victory was not for that, that the Athenyans were more
puissant with ships nor with apparaille, but through the ignorance of their
people, which was the cause that they sent ye three personaiges above named,
through disdaigne and anger for to give Cnemus and his people knowlaige of
their fault. the which parsonnaiges, after that they were arrived, demanded
certain number of ships of the cities, and caused them, that were there, to
be repaired, like as they thought good. On ye other side, Phormyo sent his
messengers to Athe^s for to signefye the victory unto the Athenyans, and also
to aduertyse them of of the apparaille and preparation, that the ennemys did
make afreshe, and that it was needful that they should send fourthwith
renforte and more power of people, and of ships. which the Athenya^s did.
and sent him twenty ships with good number of people. By the conductor whet
of, they commanded him that he should incontynently and before all thing,
come with all the army into Crete. And this did they, for that, that a
citezein of Crete, named Nycias Gertynyus, Nycias.
that was their friend, had advertised them, that if they would send thider
their army he would cause them to win the city of Cydonie, who took the
contrary part. But he willed that this were done by mean of the Polichnytes,
Polichnyte.
who were neighbors of the said Cydonyans. Phormyo than, ensuyng the
commandment of the Athenyans, came into Crete, and from thence into Cydonye,
and with the Polichnytes he pillaiged and wasted all the terrytorye of
Cydonians, and also was constrained by force of contrary wyndes to tarry there
longer, than he was willinge. Duringe this time, the Peloponesyans, that were
in Cyllene, having prepared all that which they thought good for to comme
against their ennemys, they came to Panorme, Panhormus.
which is in Achaye, at which place, was the hooste of land that the
Peloponesyans had sent thider for to succor and aid that same by sea. On the
other side, Phormyo, with the.xx. ships that he had the day o^ the date of
the battle came directly unto the promountory of Milocryte. And lodged
themself all round about, without that same, for that, that it did take their
part and straight against it of the same coaste of Peloponese, there was one
other, distant or being a sunder the space of seven stades or theraboutes by
sea, which caused the mouth and the entrye of the Goulphe of Erissee. The
Peloponesians also came to an other promountorie of Achaie, which was not so
far distant from the city of Panorme. where they had their army by land.
And they had the number of.lxxvii. ships armed. Than the two armies, being
in sight the one of the othere, they kept themselves six or seven days in
their fort, for to make their preparations, and to advise of the manner of the
battle. For the Peloponesians, by reason of the fear, and remembrance that
they had of the former discomfiture, durst not issue fourth at large into the
main sea. Also the Athenyans would not enter into the distroicte, knowinge
that it was for their disaduauntage. And in the mean time, Cnemus and Brasidas
and the other capytaynes of the Peloponesians, saying that their souldyars were
astonyed and afraid by means of the former overthrow, they causedde them all
to assemble and did speak unto them in this manner.

The exhortation of the dukes Lacedemonyens to their souldyars. The.xv. Chapter.
IF there be any of you, lords Peloponesyans, that fears to come unto this
battaille by reasone of the other, which we lost: he groundeth his fear
another well, nor upon good cause. For our preparation and apparaille was not
than such, as apperteigned. For that men thought not to come to fight by
sea. But rather that voyage was only to carry and transporte our army into the
land. wherein, inconuenyences chanced unto us, which were not small, by
mysfortune, and it might be partly by ignorance, being the furste time that
you had fought by sea. wherefore, knowinge and consyderinge that we were not
vainquished by the force and virtue of our ennemys, but rather that there be
raysons to ye contrary: It is not raisonable, that we should now be destitute
of couraige. But we ought to consider, that albeit that oftimes men of
estymation do fail and lose by fortune of war: yet neuerthelas they have and
reteigne their virtue and hardynes of heart. the which they judge not to have
lost by the former fault and imprudentie. and likewise they be never
descouraiged nor tired. And as touching your part, truly, though you have not
so much knowlaige in this busynes by sea, as our ennemys have, yet have you
as much and more hardynes and virtue. And as touching the industry of them
here, whom you fear, if the same be acco^paigned with hardynes, yt shall know
well how to execute in great dangers, that, which it shall have learned by
exercise. But if that be lackinge, the art shall sarue nothing at all. For
fear takes away the memory. And the art, without the virtue of heart and
couraige, profits nothing in dangers. wherefore it behooves you, for somuche
as they have more experye^ce: to have against it, more audacytie. And for the
fear, which you have, for yt, that ye were vainquished, ye ought to call to
remembrance, yt you were not prepared nor disposed for to fight. And besides
this, consider, yt we have many more ships tha^ our ennemis, and that you shall
fight in ye sight of our army, yt is here on land, for to do us pleasure and
that by reasone, those, that be in greatest no^bre and best appoincted, should
have the better. Also we parceyue not one only raisone, whereby we should have
any fear, but the fault, that we heretofore have done, makes us by the
experience the better instructed. Have you all than good courage, as well
capytaines and souldyars, as maronners, and do every one his office, without
habandoninge and forsakynge the places, wherinto you arne ordained. For also
we, that be your dukes and heddes, wol not give you less co^modytie to fight,
tha^ those, y^ should conducte you to the other battaile^ nor also any occasion
or example to be weary and fayntharted. And if there be any, that shall show
himself such, he shall be punyshed according to his deserte. Likewise those,
that shall show themself to be valiant, shall be reco^pensed and reputed
according to the merytt of their virtue. By such words and declaratio^s, they
did animate and encourage the Peloponesia^s, their souldyars. On ye other side,
Phormio, seeing that his souldyars were also afraid for the great number of
ships that they saw against them, caused them likewise to assemble, and
comforted the^, sor that, that always he had assured them, that there could
not comme against them one so great an army by sea, that they were not hable
to resist. And they themselves, for that they were Athenyans, had conceived
this presumption in their mind, that they never would recueile before any
army by sea, that they should se of the Peloponesians, how great so ever it
were. But parceyuinge them to be afraid, he deliberated to put them again in
courayge, and so spoke unto them in this manner.

The Exhortation of Phormio, to the souldyars Athenyans. The.xvi. Chapter.
I Have devised to call you here together, seeing you somewhat afraid for the
great number of ennemys. which I find to be an evil thing, to fear the same,
which is not to be feared. For those here, have assembled this number of
ships much more great, than ours: for fear, that they have of us, having
remembrance of the victory, that we had last against them: and knowing that
they be not hable, so many for so many, to compare with us. And also they come
with thonely thing, wherein they have their affiance, that is, with great
number of fotemen (for that, that they have often had victory in battaille by
their mean) thinkinge that they woll do as much in the fight by sea. which
is an abuse. For this, that if they have any industry and perceuerance or
power in that same manner of fyghtinge, we have much more great, in this same
here. For of courage, we therein have the one as the other, but in that, that we
be experymented the one in the sea and the other by land, yt makes every of
us for his part more bold and audacyous, in that thing, wherein we have most
experye^ce. On the other part, the Lacedemonyans, for so much as they be heddes
and princes of other confederats, for to recover their honor, do constrayne
them against their will, to come afreshe to prove the fortune of battaille,
which thing they would not do willyngly, being vainquished. wherefore you
ought not by any means of the world, to fear the audacyte and hardy^es of
them, unto whom you have given greatest and most certain fear. as well for
that, that you have one time vainquished the^, as also for this, that they have
this same opynyo^ of us, that in resisting the^, we wol do some thing, worthy
of memory. And on the other part, they that be in greateste number, comme to
battle, trusting more in their force, than in their conducte. where they, that
parceue themself to be weakest and feblest of people and preparation (if they
be not forced to fight) ^uttinge their suertie in their understanding and
prudency, proceed most valyauntly in their busynes. which thing considered
by them here, they be more afraid of that, and not without cause, than they be
of our preparation. For also it has been often seen, that the greatest
puissance has been vainquished by the less, sometime through ignorance and
lack of knowlaige, sometime for lack of couraige and of conducte. The which
two things be not in us. And yet neuerthelas I will never be of opinion to
fight within the distraict, and that we should go thider to assail them. For I
know very well, that that, is not for thaduantage of them that have light
ships and small under conduct of good patrons and maronners, for to goo to
assail in a straicte place the^, that be in greater number under conducte of
new and inexpert people. Insomuche as a man should not go in such case to
assail them, but when he seith afar of, his aduauntaige. And also when he is
in such narow and straight place, he may not retire when he is in danger, and
for effect a man may not go and come again at his pleasure, which is the
industry and facyo^ of light ships and of good maronners. But rather a man
is constrained to ^ight, as in main land amongst footmen, in which case,
they that have greater number of ships, have the greateste advantage. But as
touching that, I woll thereunto have eye, so much as I may. And as concerning
you, it is convenient, that every of you hold and keep him in this place,
that has been appoincted him within your ships. And to obey readely unto
that, that shall be commanded. For this chiefly, that thoccasion of victory
consists and rests in the readynes and diligence to assail, when time is.
And moreover in ^ightinge take good head to your takle, and to keep silence.
which things be very requysitte and sittinge, in all battles, but above
all, in the sea. Charge therefore upon thies here, in kepinge the honnoure that
you have acquyred against them. And consider, that it is a question at this
conflicte of a very great matter, to wit, whider you shall deprive ye
Peloponesia^s of hope to sail from thens forwards, or yt you shall putt the
Athenyans in great fear to goo to the sea. And to end reasoninge, remember
you for one thing, that we have vainquished a great part of them here in
battaille, and that they that have been ones vainquished, have not the heart,
so sone assured in like dangers. In this manner did Phormyo instruct and
encourage his souldyars.

How in that same second battaille by sea, aither of the parties reputed
himself to have had the victory. The.xvii. Chapter.
THe Peloponesians, than saying that the Athenyans would not enter into the
destraict: for to bring them thereunto, whider they wou^d or not, as soon as the
day began to pepe out, they comytted their ships to the sail all in
battaille, in thickenes of four ships, to wytt, four ships ioygninge to
the hinder part of the othere, and they began to march inwardes within the
dest^oicte toward their land. Now there were twenty of the most light
ships, that marchedde bi^ore in that same order, that were in within the
poorte, to this end, that if Phormio, thinking that they would goo against
Naupacte, should march in that part for to go to succor the town, he
should be enclosed among the said twenty ships, and the othere, which
sail^edde more at large from the sea on the left hand. like as it chanced.
For Phormyo seeing that they made toward the ^owne, and knowing that it was
unprovided of people, was constrained to cause his people to be soubdenly
embarked, and to sail alongest by the land, trustinge in the foot men of
the Messeniens, which were already for to succor him by land. But when the
Peloponesians did see them to march by from the shoore to land, and that they
were now with in the destroicte, which was the thing that they demanded, they
returned all at ones against them. And geuynge token of battle, they took
their course against them with the greateste diligence that they could,
hopinge to enclose them and to take them all. But.lxx. ships of the Athenyans
that went before eskaped, and saved the^self in the main sea. The other, that
thought to save the^self by land, were taken by the Peloponesia^s and
destroyed. And ye people, that could not swymme to land, were slain. And
afterward they carried away the void ships with theirs. For there was but one
only taken with the people that yt carried, and neuerthelas of the other that
remaigned void, there were some saved by the Messenyens, that were on land.
who entered into the sea so far on foot, that they fought hand to hand with
them that would carye away the said void ships, and did take away one
part thereof. In such manner the Peloponesians had victory and wasted the
ships of the Athenyans, and moreover the twenty light ships, which they had
put on their right wing, gave chase unto. x^ which were eskaped after the
beginning, into the main sea, which they got a^, resarued one, and came to
ioygne themself again togider foranempste the temple of Apollo, tournynge the
foore parts of their ships against their ennemys, to the intent to defend
themself, if they came to assail them. The Peloponesians came after, singing
ye songs of victory, as people that had vainquished. Amongst the which one
ship of Leucadyans came a great space before all the other, geuinge the chase
to one of them of the Athenyans, which abodde behind. So yt chanced by
fortune, that there was one small carrecte at ancre, very nighe the poorte,
whereunto the Athens shipp, that was chased, came to ioygne for to save himself.
And as the same of Leucadyans, with force of sails and with oores did pursue
yt, he happenned bitwene them both and so was incontynently sonken, whereby
the Peloponesyans that had no doubt thereof, were somewhat astonnyed, and for
that, that they were not in battaill but followed at the bayt, as people that
had the victory, and gave the chase, they stayed a little and cessed to sail,
taryinge the other that followed them with fear, that if they approached more
nighe, the Athenyans would issue fourth upon them to their advantage. And so
going fair and properly with the sail, they entered into certain banks for
that, that they knew not well the place. which parceyuynge the Athenyans they
took courage again, and the one, encouraginge the othere, they came to charge
upon them, who knowinge the fault that they had done and that they were in
disorder susteignedde the brunte, a little at the beginning, but sone after
they turned the back and gave themself to flight toward the place,
fromwhence they were departed. Yet always there remained six, which the
Athenyans did take, and also recovered their empty ships that the self
Athenyans had that same hour fastened on ground, and of the ennemys they
did slaye one party, and the other part, they reteigned ^risonners. Amongeste
the which Tymocrates, Tymocrates.
who was wtin the ship of Leu^adie that was sonke, saying that there was no
remedy to save him, did kille himself with his own sword. And was cast by
the waves, into the port of Naupacte. The Athenyans, being returned to the
place fromwhence they were departed, did set up there their trophe on land,
and recovered the broken pieces of ships and the dead bodies that they found
thereaboutes, and having chosen out theirs, they rendered to the Peloponesyans
by appoinctment, those of their people. who on the other side did erecte and
set up an other troph^^ upon the promontory of Achaya, reputing themselves to
have had the victory, by cause of the ships of ennemys, which they had
taken and chased nighe the land, and of that same that they had sonke, the
which they consecrated and sacrefyced, nighe unto the said trophe. And that
done fearing that some new succors should come to their ennemys, they took
sail in the night, and went all (resarued the Leucadyans) to the goulphe of
Crysee. And into Corinthe, and so right shortly after, arrived at the poorte
of Naupacte, twenty ships, which the Athenyans sent from Crete unto Phormyo
for to strengthen them, the which should have arrived before the battaylle. And
this dependinge, yt came to the end of the summer.

How the Peloponesians failled to take the poorte of Pyreus secretly or by
stealthe. The.xviii. Chapter.
BUt before that the ships of the Peloponesyans departed from Corinthe and
out of the goulphe of Crisee, Cnemus and the othere rulers, through the
request and incouraigeme^t of the Megariens, would assaye to take the port of
Athens, named Pireus. which was not kept nor also closed. For that, that the
Athenyans that were much more puissant by sea, than all the other, feared not
that any would come to assail them in their port. And so they ordained, that
every of the maro^ners with an oar, and a line wherewith men bind them, and a
skin of that same, whereupon, they lie wtin the shipp, should go by land
from Corinthe, until the sea that is foranempste Athens. And fromthence they
should go all together to Megare with most diligence that they might. And out
of the place of Nysee, where is the hauenne of Megarians, they should toawe
forty galleys, in the which they should go soubdainely against the said
poorte of Pyreus, wherein were no ships, and there was also no great watch,
for that, that the Athenyans never doubted thereof. For it never chanced that
any ship did aboorde there openly or secretly that was not parceyuedde.
Having than the Peloponesyans well preparedde their case, they took their
journey. And being by night arryuedde at Nysee, they embarked themselves
upon the ships, that they found there, and raised up their sails for to
sail toward Pyreus. Without having any more fear of any manner of thing.
But they had (as it is said) the wind somewhat contrary. Now was there
upon the promontorie, which is against Salamyne, on the cost of Megare, a
bastillion which certain souldyours Athenya^s did keep, and in the sea benethe
them three galleys, which was there to empesche and let, that nothing should
enter nor issue fourth from the town of Megare, The which bastillion, the
Peloponesyans assaulted, and at the arryuall, did take the three galeys which
they found empty, and caryedde them away. Afterward, all at one time, one
party amongeste them entered into Salamyne, before that it was parceyued and
did pillage yt. But in the mean time, they, that were within the bastillion,
which yet defendedde themself, did kyndle liars for to make signs to them
of Athenes, that the ennemys were comme. whereof the Athenyans were somuche or
more afraid, than of any other thing, that happenedde unto them in all this
war. For they that were in the city, thought that Pyreus had been already
taken. And they, that were in Pyreus, reconed ye Salamyne being taken, there
rested nothing, but that thennemis would come also to take them, which thing
they might easily have done, if they had not been empesched by the wind, and
kept back by fear. But during this, at the dawninge of the day, all the
people of Athens issued fourth on a heap, and took their ships, that were at
Pireus, and after yt they were embarked, they sailed toward Salamyne with
the most diligence that they could, leuinge a good number of fotemen within
Pyreus. When the Peloponesians parceyuedde their coming, they advanced
themself to wythdrawe their butyne, pray, and the prisonners of Salamyne into
their ships. And that done, with the three ships that they had takenne in the
poorte of the castelle of Budore, they returned to Nysee. For they did not
assure themself well in their ships for that, that they had been long on dry
ground in the haven. wherefore they thought yt they were not for to endure well
the sea. And after that they were descended at Nysee, they returned by land to
Megare. And fromthence, to Corynthe. On the othere side, when the Athenyans
were arrived at Salamyne, seeing that the ennemys were now departed, they
returned likewise unto Athenes. And fromthence fourthwardes, they fournished
better their poorte of Pyreus, as well with closure, as with defense or watch.

How Sitalces king of Odrisiens entered the country of Macedonie for to
conquerre it from the king Perdiccas, and how he came again without doing
any great feate. The.xix. Chapter.
IN that same saisonne, aboutes beginning of winter, Sitalces Odrisien, son
of Tereus, king of Thracyens, enterprysed war against Perdiccas, son of
Alexander, king of Macedonie, and against the Chalcydyans, that be in Thrace,
by occasyon of two promyses, that the said Perdiccas had made unto him, which
he did not observe. The one for his name and proffytt, and the other in favor
of the Athenie^s. For the same Perdiccas, being in great extremyte, for that,
that on the one side, Philippe his brother would have chased him out of his
roiaulme with the help of the said Sitalces, and on the other, the Athenyans
were minded to move war against him, he promised to Sitalces many things if
he made the appoinctme^t bitwene him and the said Athenians, and gave no aid
to Phillip his brother against him. And moreover in making of the said
appoinctment with the Athenyans, the said Sitalces had promised the^, yt the said
Perdiccas should make war against the Chalcidia^s. which thing Perdiccas had
ratefied, and yet had not done yt. For thies two quarrels than, Sitalces
enterprised the war. And led with him Amyntas son of Philippe, for to
restore him to the roiaulme, togiders with Thambassadours of the Athenians. Of
whom, Agnon.
Agnon is chief that were sent thiderfor this cause. For also they had
agrede with Sitalces, to send immedyatly their army by sea, The mount of
Aemus.
and by land agayste the Chalcydyans. For to execute than this enterprise,
Sitalces assembled, with the Odrisians, all the Thracyens. Over whom he ruled,
which be bitwene the mount Emon and the mount of Rodope, The mount of Rodophe.
of the cost of the land. And the bridge of Euxin, and Helles bridge on the
sea cost. And afterward, the Getes and the other, that be beyond the said
moun^ Emon and on thisside the river of Ister drawinge toward the bridge
Euxin, The river of Ister
which border unto the Scytes, and live as they, the more part Archers on
horsbacke, which we call Hippotoxotes or Stradiotes. Besides this he
assembled the people of the mountaignes of Thrace, which live in liberty, and
do were their sweardes at their girdell, and cause themself to be called
gods, togiders with many of thinhabita^tes of Rhodope, which followed him,
partly for wages, and partly for curyosite and desire to se ye war. He caused
moreover to come, ye Agrians, the Leens and the other Peoniens, which be at the
further end of his empier and seigniorie until the Greens, and to the river of
Strymone, The mount of Rodophe.
which descends from the mount Scomie, The mount of Somius.
through the country of Leens and of Greens. which river makes the lymytt of
his roioulme. And fromthence, he took some other free people, which inhabytte
nighe the said mount Scomie on the North side, drawing toward the weste
until the river of Ostius, The river of Ostium
which yssueth out of the same mountaigne. Fromwhence run Nestus and Ebrus.
The river of Nes^us

The river of Ebrus

Abdeci.


the which mountain is untilled, barreyne and not inhabyted, nygh enough unto
Rhodope. And for to determyne the greatness of the empire and royaulme of
Odrysyans it extends from the city of Abderyans, The greatness and puissance
of the royaulme of ye Odrysians.
which is nygh the bridge Euxin, unto the river of Ister. And in that same
part, where was the most straicte on the sea side, in a ship, having
always a good wind, in four days and four nyghtes, and by land in the
most strayghte, which is from the Abderyans until the river of Ister, A man
may easily and well deliver his charge. But he must have.xi. days, for to
trauerse or go ouecthwarte it. This is the largenes of the royaulme on the sea
cost, but on the main land side, and of the places mediterrayne in the most
length, which is from Bizance until the Leens, and through above the mount
Strymon a man delivered as is before said, he may go it in.xiii. days. And
touching the revenue of the same royaulme, the increase, which Senthes son
of Sytalces leuyed, as well upon the estraungers, as upon the Greeks, that
inhabyted the said royaulme, as well in gold as in silver, amounted well nyghe
to four houndred talentes of silver every year besides the guistes that were
given him. which amounted not to much less, and besides the other things, as
clothes of sylke and of woolle and other moueables, which the paysans Greeks
and estraungers did give, not only unto him, but also unto Princes and Barons
Odrysians for annuelle rent. For me^ may see in that same royaulme of
Odrysyans, and also in all the remmenaunte of the country of Thrase, an other
sort than is used in the Royaulme of Persee. That is, yt the Lords be
accustomed more to take, than to give. And it is more shame for him, of whom a
thing is demanded, to refuse to give i^, than for him that demanded it, for
to be denied. And also the princes, oftentimes used that same custom
imperially and by constraincte, for unto them that refused to give them, they
denied all traffic and marchaundise. And by these means, that same royaulme
was comme to a marueillous greatenes. For it was the greaste yt than was in
Europe, from the goulphe of the sea Ioniu^ unto the bridge Euxin. that is to
wit of revenue and of riches. But of number of people and of good warryours,
it was much less, than the same of the Scythians. unto whom when they were
both joined and agreing togeders, another the Thracyens, whereof we speak, nor
any other one natyon, that was in Europe or in Asia, could not resist. Also
they have a prudencye and dylygence in their form of living, all of an other
sort, than all the other have. Sytalces than having so great and so
puyssaunte a royaulme, as we have declared, after that he had assembled all his
army and his preparation, he took his way for to go into Macedonie, furst
through his countreye, and after by the mount Cercyne, The mount of Circine
which is ouerall inhabyted. and departs the countreye of Synthyans, from the
same of Peonyens, and he follows the way that he before time had made, when
he made war against the said Peonyans, cutting the wood ouerthwarth the
mountaygne, leuynge on the right hand the said Peonyans, and on the left,
the Synthyens and Meedes. Having tha^ ascended again that same mou^taygne, he
came to Dobere, Doberus.
which apperteigneth to the said Peonyans, without that, that his host did
in any thing dymynysh it, though that many of the people were diseased, by
mean that many Thracyens followed the army without wages and without having
hope to gaygne, in such manner, that he had (as it is said) few less,
than a houndred and fyfty thousand men. whereof, about the third part, were
horsemen, of whom the more part and the better, were the Odrisians, and the
rest, Getes, and of the footeme^, the Matheriferyans, which be one of the
natyons, that inhabyte in the mount of Rhodope, living in liberty, were the
best warryours. But the number that followed of al nations, was so great,
that, at the syghte only, it was fearful. Being than all arrived at Dobere,
they so^ourned there certain few days, and made prouysyon for that, which
was necessary for them, for to assail the countreye of Macedonye, that was
benethe that mountaygne, The beginning of the Royaulme of Macedonye.
which did obey unto Perdicas. For all the Macedonyans were not in his
obeyssance. But the Lyncestes and the Eluniores, all which be Macedonyans,
although that they had alliance with him, and also did him some service, yet
they had their partycular Kings. For that, that Alexander, father of Perdicas
and their progenytours, surnamedde Temenides, departed furste from the city
of Argos, and came to the country of Macedonie. And at the beginning, took
that part, that presentlye is called, Macedonye marytimate, by force. And
chased out of the countreye, that is named Pyerie, the Pyeryans. Who
afterward came to inhabyte beyond the mount Strymone under the mount
Pangeus in the town of Phagrete, Pangeus.

Phagres.


and some other. Whereby, yet at this present, the countreye, that is under
the said mount Pangeus, drawing against the sea, is called Pyerienne. They
chased also out of the countreye of Bottiee, the Bottiens. who presently
inhabyte the borders of Chalcydyans, and also occupied a small portyon of the
countreye of Peonyans, nyghe to the floude, Azius. The floude of Agius.
to wytt, from the mou^taygnes, unto Pelle, and so unto the sea side. And also
beyond the said floude they took the regyon that ioygneth to the mount
Strymone, which is called, Migdonye, Migdonia.
from whence they chased the Edonyans. And out of the countreye of Eordie, the
Eordyans. Of whom they did slaye a very great part, the other wythdrewe them
self, about the city of Phiste, Phista.
where they yet, at this present, do inhabyte. Also they chased the Almopyans
from their land, named Almop^e, Almopia.
and beside those there, they subdewed and brought into their obeissa^ce and
subiectyon many other people of Macedonyens, which, yet at this present,
obey unto Perdicas, to wytt, those of Anthemont, of Grestonie, of Bisaltye and
other many countries, which all be called Macedonye. And all obeyde to
Perdicas, son of Alexander, when Sytalces went to make against him the
war, whereof we speak. The Macedonyans, understanding his coming, and
knowing that they were not mighty enough for to resist him, withdrewe them
self into their places and towns walled. Whereof, there was not than any
great number. For those that men do see there at this present, were enclosed
by Archilaus, Archilaus.
son of Perdicas, that reigned after him. And he caused the ways to be
repaired. And furnyshed the royaulme with horse, with harnoys, and all other
apparaylle of war, more than the eight kings, that raygned before him, all
togeders had done. The host of the Thracyans than at their departing from
Dobere, entered at the arryuall into the country which had been Philipps,
brother of Perdicas. And took by force the town of Idomene and them of
Gortynie, Idomene.

Gortynia.

Atalanta.


of Atlante and some other by composyty on, for the amytie that he had with
Amyntas, son of Philyppe, who was with him. After he came to the town of
Europe, Europus.
thynkyng to have taken it by force, but he could not. And so he departed from
thence, overthwart the country of Macedonie, which is of the right hand of
Pelle and of Cyrre. But he never entered diepe into the country, to wytt, into
Bottiee nor Pierie. but he ouerro^ned and pillaged the countries of Grestome,
of Migdonie and of Anthemo^t. The Macedonyans, seeing that they had not foot
men to match with the Thracyans, they assembled, certain good number of
horsemen of their neighbors, which dwelled in the mou^taignes. And although
that they were in much less number, than the ennemys, yet they came to
assaylle them. And on that side where they charged upon them, nothing abodde
them. For they were good warryours, and well armed. But being sone enuyroned
by the great number, although that they for a certain space defended
themselves, yet, seeing that a^ length they could not resist against so
great a number, they retired, and in that conflicte Sytalces did speak unto
Perdicas, and showed him the causes for which he made war against him.
After that, Sytalces, seeing that the Athenyans were not come with their army
by sea, like as they had promised, but only had sent toward him their
Ambassadors with certain guistes, thinking that he should not have
enterprysed nor executed that same war, sent one part of his army into the
quarter of Bottiens, and one other, into ye same of Chalcydians. who,
perceiving the coming of thennemyes, were retired into their towns. and
suffered them to waste and pyllage their country. And he, being in the same
quarter, the Thessalyans, that inhabyt on the southe side, the Magnetes and the
other, that be under the Empire of the said Thracyans, Ioynynge to
Thermopyles, fearing that he would come upon them, putt them selves in
armure. And likewise they, that inhabyted in the plat countreye beyond the
mount Strymon on the southe side, and also the Panyans, the Odonians, the
Droyans and the Dersians, all which, be people living in lybertye. And of the
other part, the bruyte was among the Greeks, enemies of Athenyans, that the
same Sytalces for the alliance that he had with the same Athenyans, had under
couloure of that war of Macedonie, assembled that army for to come against
them in favor of the said Athenyans. Whereupon the said Sytalces, parceyuynge
that he came not to the end of that, which he had enterprysed, and did
nothing but waste the country without conquerynge it, also that victuailes
failed him, and that winter drew nyghe, by the counsel and perswatyon of
Senthes, son of Spardocus, who was his cousynne Germayne, and the chyefe and
most puyssant of his army next himself, determined to return assonne, as he
could. Now had Perdicas gotten secretly the said Senthes to be his friend,
by mean that he had promised to give his suster unto him in marriage, togeders
with a great sum of monneye. By this mean than, Sitalces, after that he had
tarried.xxx. days, and no more, in the cou^treye of the enemies (whereof he had
consumed.viii. whole and entier days in the countreye of Chalcyde) he
returned into his royaulme with his army. And anon after, Perdicas, insuynge
his promys did give Stratonice his suster unto Senthes in marriage. Stratonice.
The enterprise of Sytalces did take such issue, and effect.

Of certain exploites of war that Phormyo did in the country of Acarnanie,
and of the beginning of the same country. The.xx. Chapter.
IN that self same winter, whereof we speak, after tharmye by sea of the
Peloponesians was retired and disseuered, Phormyo, with the people, that he had
at Naupacte in arms, sailled toward Astace. Astacu^.
and being there arrived, set on land three houndred of his maroners all
armed, with asmany Messenians. with whom, he entered into the country
mediterraine of Acarnanie. And out of the towns of Strate, of Coronte, and
out of many other, he chased the inhabytantes, that seemed unto him to be
affectioned, or parties with the Peloponesyans. And after that he had set
again Cynetes, son of Theolyte within Coronte,, he returned into his
ships with his people, and durst not go against the Oeniades, who only
amongst the Acarnanyans, had always been enemies of the Athenyans. For
fear, that he had to demoure and tarry there in winter seasonne. For that, that
the river of Achilous, The river of Achelous.
which descends out of the mount Pyndus, The mount o^ Pindus
and passes by the Dolopyans, by the Amphilochiens, by the plat country of
Acarnanie, and through the city of Strate, and after, by the country of
Oeniades, and than comes to descend into the sea: retourneth right against
the town of the said Deniades. In such sort, that the country there is
almost not habytable in winter, for men of war. By cause of the contynuall
crekes and washynges away of the earth, that it causes. And also there be
dyrectly against the regyon of Oeniades certain of the Isles Eschinadians.
which be very little dyfferente from the ouerflowynges of Achelous. Achelous.
For by the earth that the river, which comes from the mountaygnes as it
were a floude, does carye thither, some of the same, do ioygne unto the main
land, and the people of the countreye do believe, that by succession of time,
they so shall ioygne togeder. For that, that it oftentimes reygneth there,
whereby the river grows very gross, which caryeth always a great quantyte of
sand. Also the Isles there, be very thick or nygh joined togeder, so that
well nyghe, the one maigneteygneth the other togeder, by means of the refuse,
that the river brings thither, not by order and in a range. For than the force
of the river would break it. But one time in one place and an other time in an
other, so that men could skarcely depart from the same Isles into the sea,
and also they be small, rude and deserte. And it is said, that wha^ Alcmeon
son of Amphiaraus, had slain his mother, being by contynuall tourment of
horrible visions, constrained to wander through the world, and could not
arreste in any part, he was admonyshed by the oracle and answer of the God
Apollo, to go to inhabyte in that land. For the said oracle answered hi^ in
this manner. that he should never be delivered from those fearful vysyons,
until that time, that he had found for to inhabit, the regyon, that had
not been seen of the son, and that had not been land, before the death of
his mother. For yt, that all other land was profane unto him, and accursed
for the mysdede of murder, yt he had comytted in the parsone of his mother.
Who, after yt he had long studied, how that he might find this land,
aduysed with himself, that i^^ was the ouerflowinges of Achelous. In which place
after the death of his mother, was increased by the alluuyons or ouerwashynges,
land enough for his habytacio^, besides that, which was there before, by
means that he had now erred and wandered aboutes a long time after the death
of his mother. And so he inhabyted and reigned there, nygh unto the quarter,
where be at this present the Oeniades. And by cause of his son, named
Acarnanus, he called that regyo^ Acarnanie. This is yt, which we have
understood of Alcmeo^. And for to return to our hystorye, Phormion, being
with the Athenians, that he brought again out of the country of Acarnanie unto
Naupacte, went in the beginning of the first spring time to Athens by sea. And
carried away the prysonners, that they had taken in that war, which were
frank, and free, and not bond men. The which al were bought again or
redeemed. Also they led with them the wastes of the ships, that they had
taken. And thus passed the winter, which was the end of ye third year of
the war, whereof Thucidides has wryttonne.

Here ends the second book of Thucydides, and begins the third.
How the city of Mythilene, willing to rebelle against the Athenyans, was
by them assieged, and how they sent unto the Peloponesyans for to have
succors, and of an overthrow, that the said Athenyans had in Noricque. The
first Chapter.
IN the beginning of the somer, when the corn was already great, the
Peloponesyans entered again into the Attique war, under the conducte of
Archidamus their king, pyllagynge and wasting so, as they had accustomed, the
other years. Howbeit the horsemen, that were in the city, came fourth
oftetymes upon the footmen of the enemies lightly armed, which came there
the more part to run for to watch, that they should do no evil to the
places, nyghe to the city. And the said Peloponesyans demoured in that land,
so long as they had victuayles, and after, every man returned into his
quarter. But at the beginning when they were entredde: all the inhabytantes of
the Isle of Lesbos, (excepted them of Methymne) were rebelled against the
Athenyans. and turned unto the Peloponesyans, which thing they were minded
to have done, before the beginning of the war. But the Lacedemonyans were
not willing to receive them, and yet at that time did declare, that they were
not therein determined. For if they should do it, they were of force constrained
to fortefye their poortes, to make again and repair their walls, and to make
ships. And also they attended for victuayles, for archers and for other
prouisyons, that they had sent to seek in the country of Ponte. But the
Tenedyans, who were their en^emyes, the Methymnyens, and some particulars of
the city of Mytilene, (which for the parttakings that were in the town, were
become burgeoses of Athens) aduertysed the Athenyans that the cytezeins of the
said town of Mitilene, constrained all the inhabytantes of the Isle, to comme
unto them, and to retire into the city, to the intent to rebelle from the said
Athenyans. And that they made all the preparatyons to them possible, for to do
it, through the perswatyon of the Lacedemonyans, and of the Beotiens their
parents. In such sort, that if the said Athenyans did not fourthwith
provide therefore, they should lose the said Isle of Lesbos. Nevertheless those
Athenyans, consydering that it should be a thing very hard after the
pestylence, that they had had, so great, and having the ennemies in their
land, to make a new army and enterprise against them of Lesbos, who were yet
in their intier and hoole power, and had great number of ships: they would
not at beginning believe that it was so, for that they were not willing, that
it should be so true. And they rebuked them, which made reaporte thereof unto
the^, saying that it was nothing, and that they did ill to charge the said
Mytilenians. Notwithstanding after that the Comissaryes, which they had sent
thither for to know the truth, had reaported unto them, that they of
Mytilene, would not send away the people of the Isle that they had caused to
comme into their city, nor also desist and cease from the preparations for
war, which they made: fearinge that they would rebelle, were minded to
preuente it. And sent into that party, fourtye ships, which they had all
made ready for to send into Peloponese, under the conducte of Cleipides,
Cleipides.
son of Dynyn and of two other Capytaynes. For they were aduertysed, that
right shortly should be the feast of Apollo in Malaente, which is nyghe unto
the city of Mytilene, whereunto all the cytezeins or the more part of them
came yearelye. Wherefore if they hasted to go thither, they might take them
there so^bdaynely. and if they could not execute that, yet coming upon them
with that army, they might command them to deliver all their ships that
they had, and to beat down their walls. And in case they refused, to
denounce war against them, before that they should be provided and
fortefyed. For this occasyon the Athenyans did send the said fourtye ships,
and moreover reteignedde ten galeys, which the Myt^lenyans had sent unto
them, by virtue of the allyaunce. And all the men that were within them, they
put into prysone. Notwithstanding, one of the countreye, that was at Athens,
departed with dyligence by sea, and came into Eubee, and from thence, by land
unto Gereston. Where he found a merchants ship, which would depart
fromthence to sail unto the said Mytilenyans. Whereinto he entered, and had so
good wind, that the third day after his departure from Athens, he arrived at
the port of Mytilene. And incontynently aduertysed them of the town, of the
coming of the Athenyans ships. which understood, they went not fourth the
day of the feast for to go to Malaente. and also they caused with all
dylygence to repair their walls, where they were fallen down, and to
fortefye their port the best that they might. Anon after, arrived the
ships of Athens. Who seeing the apparaylle and preparatyo^ that the cytezeins
did make, expounded unto them the charge that they had to command them. That
they should deliver their ships, and beat down their walls. And seeing that
they did refuse it, they prepared themself to comme for to assail them.
Whereby they of the town, as people surprinsed and betrapped, although that at
beginning they issued to the mouth of poarte, making threatenynges to be
willing to fight: Yet after that they did see the ships of the Athenyans
coming against them, they retired and came to a parliamente with the
Capytaynes of the Athenyans. And finally they said, that they were content to
render all their ships, if they might have any good composition and
raysonnable appoinctment of the rest, with the Athenyans. Whereunto ye
Capytaynes did agree wyllynglye, fearing also that they were not mighty
enough for to subdue all the Isle. And upon this, they took truse. During the
which, they of Mytelyne sent in Ambassade unto the Athenyans, some of their
cytezeins. amongst whom, was one, that had discovered the reuolte and
rebellyon to the said Athenyans. Who afterward had changed opinion for to
se, if they could so well excuse the case and pourge the suspytyon unto the
Athenyans, that they would be content to call back their army by sea, which
was at Mytilene. And nevertheless on the other side, they sent other messengers
upon a gallyon to the Lacedemonyans, without knowelayge of the Athenyans,
which held the port assieged. For that, that their army kept themself on
the north side of the said port toward Malee. And this did the said
Mytilenyans, for that they had no hope, that they, which they had sent to
Athenes, should obteygne any thing to their intent. So the said
Ambassadors, that went to Lacedemonye, did make marvelous dylygence for to
persuade the Lacedemonyans to send succoure unto them of Mytilene. And in the
mean time, came again the Messengers, that were gone unto Athens. who having
made reaporte, that they could obteygne nothing, the city and all the Ysle
armed themself, for to resist. Reserved Methymne, which took part with the
Athenyan. And so did the Imbryans, the Lymnyens and some other of the Isles,
being their next co^federates. And having made one assault upon the camp of
the Athenyans, though they had not had the worse, yet durst they not demoure
nor abide upon the camp. Another afterward they durst issue fourth, but
they kept themself within the city, attendynge and lokynge, if any succoure
would come unto them from Peloponese or elleswhere. Certain time after,
arrived Meleas Laconyon, Meleas.
and Hermeonidas Thebayne. Hermeonidas.
Who though they brought them no succoure, were dyspatched for to come
toward the Mytilenyens before their reuolte or rebellyon, for to empesche and
let the coming of the Athenyans. But seeing that they had been prevented,
they caused themself to be brought pryuely upon a Brygantyne into the town,
after the battaylle, that was made at the assault, whereof we have spoken. And
they counsaylled them of the town, that they should send with them some
Ambassade upon a light galley. Which they did. Seeing than the Athenyans, yt the
Mytylenyens durst no more comme fourth, they took the more courage, and
co^^maunded their allies to comme and to strengthen their army. Who came
thither wyllingly, thinking that without great pain they should overcome the
Lesbyens. And so they besieged the city on two sides toward the land, and
they fyrmed their two sieges with walls. And moreover they did set a great
garnysone with ships at the entrye of two ports, so that they of the town
could have no usage of the sea. But on the land side they did keep all. For
the Athenyans occupied not but a very little about their camp, for so much as
they had made, their estaple of victuayles, and the soiurne of their ships at
Malee. In such sort were the affairs at Mytylene. In that self same
saysone, the Athenyans sent about thyrty ships from Peloponese under the
co^ducte of Asopius, son of Phormyon, at the request of the Acarnanians. Who
had prayed them that they would send to that enterprise some one of the
children or of the parents of the said Phormyo. Asopus
The same Asopius with his ships pyllaged and did fourrage many places by the
sea side in the country of Laconie, and after retired unto Naupacte with
twelve of the said ships. And the other he sent again unto their houses.
Afterward, having assembled all the puyssance of the Acarnanyans, he went
to make war upon the Ene^ades. And he by sea came to rushe upon the ships
of the Acheloyans. And the said Acarnanyens came by land, to pyllage all the
country. But seeing, yt he could not comme to the end of his enterprise, he
sent away his army by land, and he with his twelve ships took his course
for to sail into Leucadye. Nevertheless, being descended in Noricque, as he
would have retired into his ships, he was stayne, with one part of his
souldyars, by the people of ye town, with the aid of certain souldyours,
that they had in very small number. And the other, after that they had
recovered their dead of the Noricques, Nericu^.
and by this mean confessed that they had had the victory, they returned
fro^thence. In these entermedlynges, the Ambassadors, that the Mytylenians,
had furste sent unto the Lacedemonyans, having by those Lacedaemonians been
referred to the next assemble, that should be made of all Greece, in the place
of Olympe, to thyntent that they being hard in the presence of all the
confederates, the affayre should be determined by common advise: they coming
together at the time of the feast, when Dorycus Athenyan won the pryze, and
after that the feast and plays were acheued and ended, the confederates
being assembled to consulte of their affairs general, the Ambassadors were
called, who did speak in this manner.

The proposition and speakinge of the Mytilenyens unto the assemblye of the
allies and confederates of Greece. The.ii. Chapter.
WE do well understand, Lords Lacedemonyans and you other confederates, that
it is accustomed among the Greeks (which is very raysonable) that when they
wythdrawe in time of war, any, from the alliance of their enemies, unto
theyrs: they entreat the^ very well, so far, as they serve for their
proffyt. But afterward, consyderyng that they have betrayed their furste and
ancient friends, they repute them for to be unhappy or naughty people, and
think that they would do worser unto them. which thing were very raysonable,
if the things were egalle on the behalf of them, that do rebelle, and on the
behalf of those, whom they forsake. For if they be egall of force and
preparation, as of will and amytie there is no reasonable cause why they
should habandone nor leave the one, the other. But that has no place between
the Athenians and us. The which thing we will gladly declare, to the intent
that you esteem us not for noughtye and wicked. And judge, that we do
dyssolutely and cowardely, if we forsake them in time of war, having by the^
been honored in time of peace. For inasmuche as we come hytherfor to require to
be received into your allyau^ce, we woll gladly before all things both
iustyfye our case and also do our virtue to be known. For yt that the amytye
among the partycular people, and the confederatyon among the cytyes cannot be
honnorable nor pardurable, if there be not a mutuell opinion of virtue on both
parts. And in the rest, a conjunction and a conformity of manners and of
will. For where the wylles be dyscrepante and dysagreynge, the acts and
operations be likewise. Wherefore to the intent that you should understand,
how we have proceeded with the Athenyans, we made allyaunce with them, when
you departed from the armies after the wars of Medes, and that they pursued
the rest of the war and of the ennemys. Which allyaunce we made not with
them for to subdue the Greeks, but for to deliver them from the seruytude of
the Medes. For this cause, so long as they continued in good compaigny, we
have followed them with good and entier will. But when we knew that they
had forgotten their enmyte against the Medes, and that they went about to
reduce and bring their compaignyons and allies into their subiectyon: we were
afraid. Nevertheless for so much, as it was not laufull nor an easy thing to
those confederates to reallye themself togeders, for to wythstande the
vyolence, which the said Athenyans would do unto them, for the multitude and
dyuersyte of opynyons, that must be had in such case: all the other
confederates, except us, and them of Chio, have been by the said Athenyans
subdued and brought into their subjection and obeissance. And though that we
have sent of our people to their assemblyes and commandments, as their
allies and confederates, and be takenne and named for such, yet for truth we
never did take them for our laufull dukes and headdes. For that it was not to
be believed, sythe^s that they had reduced into seruytude the other, that were
comprysed in the self allyaunce, that we have with them: but that they would
do the like unto us, when they should see their oportunytie. For if we had been
all yet in our lybertye, we might have had more faith in them. But having
subdued the more part, it is to believe, that they would take it more
dyspleasauntlye, that we would repute our self egall to them in common
affairs, and that we alone would accompanye our self with them, where all the
other obey them. Co^sydered chiefly, that how much they arne become more
mighty, we do remain so much the worse accompaignyed. Another there is any
thing that makes so much the allyaunce to be faithful and pardurable, as
does the mutuell fear, that one of the allies has of the other. For he that
would vyolate and break it on his party, when he consydereth yt the other is
as puyssant as he, he fears to assail it. And that they have permitted and
suffered us unto this present to live in liberty, it has not been for any
other reasonne, but for that they went about to establyshe their
princyyalitie, rather under couloure of some reasone and of counsaylle, than by
manifest force. And also to the end, that if they made war against any of
them (that they had subdued for any fault, which they had done against the^)
they might iustifye them self, saying that if the same war had not been
reasonable, we and the other that were yet in lybertye, and had like
auctorytie as they: would not have gone thither. For this cause, they have many
times assembled a great puissance against people, very weak. To thyntente,
that having by a little and little reduced the one after the other, they that
remained, should be so much more weak. There, where if they had begone with
us (the other, stylle being in their entier and not subdewed) they could not
have done it so easelye. Also they would have had some fear of our ships,
and would have doubted, that y^ we had assembled them all togeder, and would
have drawn unto you or any other, that it should have been to their dommayge.
And on the other part, we be saulfe from them by flaterynge and enterteygnynge
their seigniorye by sweet means. And so endure all their gouernementes until
this present. But if that this war had not been begone, that could not
long have endured, as it may appear by thexample of other. What amytye
could this than be, or what confydence could we have had of true lybertye^
where the one do gratefye the other against their opinion, to wytt, they by
flattering us in time of war for fear that they have to dysplease us, and
to provoke our anger: and we do the like to them in time of peace, for the
self consyderatyon. And so yt, which amytie and benevolence has made stable
and faithful among other allies: causes fear between us. And for effect,
we have parseuered and continued in this allyaunce and socyete for fear, and
not for love. In such manner that the same of us, that sonnest had found
mean to break it without fear of daungier, was ready to declare himself,
to be the furst. And if any judge us, to have done evil to prevent and comme
before, and that we should have tarried until they had declared their ill will,
which we thought that they had had, considering that yet they had not showed
it: he takes it not well. ^or that might have had apparaunce, if we had had
the facultye and power to espy and tarry our turn, as they: and that in that
case, there had been no danger to be under them, being as puyssant, as they
be. But considered that they had always the mean and power to enterprise upon
us, when they should have wylled, it was reasonable that we should furste take
it, when we did see oportunyte. Thies be than the causes Lords Lacedemonyans
and confederates) for the which we depart our selves from the Athenya^s, which
we think clear and raysonable to al me^, yt understand the^, and sufficient
on our behalf for to put us in dread and fear. And to give us occasyon to
seek some succoure. which thing we had now determined to do before the war
began, and for that cause did send our messengers toward you, for to
demand your alliance. But being by you rejected and denied, we could not
obteygne nor execute it. Whereunto now having been moved by the Beotians, we
have done it readely and without delay. Persuadynge our selves that our
reuolte and tournynge from them is iustyfyed by two great reasons. The one to
the intent, yt not perseuering on the party of the Athenyans, we should not
be aydynge to subdue Greece, but rather with you the other, we should help to
defend his lybertye: ye other, for to defend our lyberty specially, and that
in time to comme, we be not subdued, as the other. And yet nevertheless we be
declared to be to swyfte or to hasty. Wherefore it is nedefulle, that you use
the more dylygence to succoure us, and that you show in effect at this
poyncte, that you will both defend the^, that you ought. and also that you
will noye your enemies, in all sorts that you can. which thing to do,
you have now greater oportunyte, than ever men had. For that, that the
Athenyans be unprovided, of men, by means of the pestylence: and of monneye,
by means of the war. And also their ships be dysparsed, some of them into
your quarter of Peloponese, and the other into ours, for to watch us. In such
manner, that it is not to believe, that they can raise any great number, if
you go to assail them presently at beginning of this summer by sea^ and by
land. But rather it is to believe, yt ayther you shal^e more mighty tha^ they
by sea, or at the least that they cannot resist your puyssance ioynned with
ours. And if there be any that woll say, that you should not put your land
in danger, for to defend ours, that is far from you: I say unto you,
that the same man, that estemeth the Isle of Lesbos to be far of, shall know
by effect, that the proffyt, that he shall have thereby, shall be nyghe. For the
war shall be made by this mean not after the sort that they think for. But
it shall be made in the place, from whence, Athens it self takes and rayseth
the monney and proffit. For their revenues is taken upon their allies. which
yet wolbe greater, wha^ they shall have brought us to their subiectyon. For none
of the other shall tha^ be bold to rebel more against them. And of the other
part our goods shall be theyrs. And also we shall be worse entreated than they,
that have been before time subdued. But if you succoure us redely, ye shall
have in your power a city habundante with great ships, whereof you have
need. And also you may more easelye destroy the Athenyans, in retyrynge and
wythdrawynge their allies. For the other, by our example, shall have more
audacytie to do the like. And also you shall take away the evil opinion,
that the people have of you, yt you woll not receive them, that come for to
offer themself to your alliance. Be abashedde than Lords, to defraude and
frustrate the hope, that the Greeks have of you, and also the religyon of the
God Apollo. In whose temple we be here, as people that require mercy and
franchyse. Receive us into your allyaunce, and suffer us not to be a pray
unto the Athenyans, to the partycular dangi^r of our parsones. For in
receyuynge us, shall follow the general proffite of the leage of Greece. And
if you hahand one and forsake us, there woll follow a dysaduauntage, yet more
general. Therefore show your self, Lords, such men, as the Greeks esteem
you to be, and as our necessyte requires. After that the Mytylenyens had
thus spoken, the Lacedemonyans and the other allies concluded to receive them
into their allyaunce. And those same Lacedemonyans, taking the charge to enter
again that same year into the land of Athens, commanded the other allies,
that they should be ready, as soon is they might, for to fournys^ both parties
of the army.

Thucidides. Of certain great preparations and some small exploictes, that
were done the same year, on the one side and of the other. The.iii. Chapter.
IN ensuynge this resolutyon taken at Olympe, the Lacedemonya^s nyghe the
dystreate of Peloponese, made their preparation of the fotemen, for to bestow
them in their ships. And afterward to cause them to assemble at Corynthe.
And from thence to send them by sea to the cost of Athens, for to assail the
Athenyans both by sea and by land. And used great dylygence to make their
said preparations. But thallyes of the countreye, used great negligence,
as well for that, that they were occupied to gather in their fruyctes, as also
for that, that the war began to noye them. When the Athenyans did
understand the preparatyons of the Peloponesyans, and that by that, they
therein did, it seemed, that they thought, that the puyssance of Thathenyans was
greatly debilitated and weakened: they armed an houndred ships, for to show
that they were yet more puyssant than thennemyes did think. And that without
retyringe and calling back the army by sea, that they had in Lesbos, they
had ships and power enough for to resist them of Peloponese, if they ^ame to
assail them. And within the said ships, they shypped all the cytezeins and
inhabytantes of the town, reserved the knights and the pryncypall governors.
Who, going against the country of Peloponese, passed by before the
destreate, to the intent that the ennemies might see them. And also landed in
the said country, where as they thought good. Whereby the Lacedemonyans that
were in the same distreate, seeing the nombre of the ships much more great,
than they did think: Imagyned that the Mytylenyans had feigned with them, with
that, that they had said, and they thought that they had enterprysed to
great a matter, considered, that the allies did not comme. Wherefore, and
understanding moreover, that the ships of Thathenyans, yt were on the cost
of Peloponese, did ^yllage the country about their city, they returned unto
their houses. And after, they caused ships to be made fourth, for to send
into Lesbos, and commanded the confederates and allies that they should
furnyshe to the nombre of thyrty ships for the said voyage. whereof they
gave the conducte unto Alcydas. On the other side, the houndred ships of the
Athenyans, when they understood that the Lacedemonyans were retired, they
returned likewise. And ye same army was the fairest and the best appoincted,
that the Athenyans had ever had. Although that about the beginning of the
war, they had well as great nombre of ships or more. For they therein had
one houndredde to defend Athens, Eubee and Salamyne, and they had asmanye that
went in and out about Peloponese, besides those, that they had at Potydee
and in other places, which they kept upon the sea, during all one summer.
Also the expenses of the same army by sea, and the same that they made at
Potidee, consumed greatly their money. For the men of mar yt defended
Potidee, which were at beginning.iii. thousand (and so many were they, ye
besieged it) and besides the^. ye.xvi. hou^dred, yt went with Phormio^: had.ii.
grotes of soulde every man by day, to wit ye one for their living, and the
other for the living of their servant, and so much all they had that were
in the ships. In this manner the A^henyans were furste at great expenses,
and also provided of such and so great number of ships, at the self time,
when the Lacedemonyans were in the dystreate. The Mytylenyans, with certain
souldyars of their allies, made war against them of Mythymne, hoping to have
it by treasone of some of the town. But when they had done their best on ye
side where they thought to have their intellygence and purpose, and seeing that
they were deceived, they went into Antysse, Antissa.
into Pyre and into Eresse, Pyra. Eressus
which cytyes they fortefyed in the best manner that they could, as well in
repayrynge the walls, as otherwise. Afterward they returned with great
dylygence to Mytylene. Soon after their departure, the Methymnyens came with
their power against Antysse, thinking to take it by force, but they were
repoulsed by them of the town and by certain souldyars estraungers, that they
had, with great loss of their people, and returned with shame. Of which
things the Athenyans being aduertysed, and also how yt the Mytylenyans did
hold the Isle of Lesbos at their will, so that the people, that were at the
siege, could not empesche them: they sent about the beginning of Autumpne,
Paches, Pachetes.
the son of Epicurus, with a thousand men of their people. Who being
enbarqued, they saylled until they were landed at Mytylene. Being at which
place, they enclosed the city with a simple wall. And in many places thereof,
they set up towers in manner, as it were assieged as well on the land side, as
of the same of the sea very strayghtly. And so winter drew nyghe. But for so
much as the expenses were very great, and that the common monney now faylled
the Athenyans, they began than (for to furnyshe the said siege) to set a
tax upon them, unto the sum of two hou^dred talentes. And so they sent
Lysicles, Lisicles
and certain other commyssaryes, with twelve ships toward their,
confederates, for to leuye on them a new aid. which Lysicles, having
exacted of many cytyes marytyme or nyghe the sea, a s^ffycyente great sum,
as he trauer^ed the country of Carye, through the land of Meandre, at
departure from M^unte, being now come to ye mountaigne of Sandia, Sandicollis.
he was by the Caryens and Antylys assaulted and slain, with one party of his
people.

How the Athenians, that were assieged within Platee, and one part of the
cytezeyns, did salve themself by great trauaylle and virtue, and passed all
the walls, dyches, and fortes of the Peloponesyans, that kept them assieged.
The.iiii. Chapter.
IN the self winter, the Plateans, being contynually assieged, and greatly
oppressed by the Peloponesians, and by the Beotiens, and not having any hope
of succors of the Athenyans, nor to save them self by other mean: aduysed
with the Athenyans, that were in the town assieged with them, to save them al
togeders over the walls of thennemyes, if they might do it by force of arms.
Of the which enterprise, the said Athenians were the inuentours, chiefly
Theenetus, The^enetus.
son of Timidas, which took upon him to deu^^e, and Eupoldyda, E^polpidas.
son of Dymalchus. But for that, that it seemed unto them to be to dyffycyle
and hard, the more half wythdrewe them self, so yt there remained not, but
about two houndred and twenty, yt did execute yt in the manner as follows.
They made ladders of the heigh of the said wall, which heith they took by
seeing and calculatinge the greatness and thyckenes of the brickes, wherwt the
wall was made. nombrynge the ranks thereof, from the top to the bottom,
which thing they might easily do by succession of time, there, where the
wall was uncovered on their side. And likewise they did calcuculate that
which might transcende and be over the ioynters or byndinge togiders of the
said bricques. And forsomuche as in that poinct one only man might well faille,
many enterprysed to do yt at sundry times. In such sort that they made their
ladders of that same highness. Now the said wall was double, to wit, the
one toward the town to keep them that they should not issue out, and the
other toward the field to defend, that the succors of the Athenyans should
not therinto enter, Distant the space of.xvi. foot, the one from the othere.
wherein bitwene both were the lodginges and sheddes of them that kept yt,
separated the one from the other, but so thick and so nighe, that the two
walls seemed to be but one, resarued that they had creueaulx all alonge, and
from ten into ten Creuaulx, there was a great tower, which held the one
wall with the other, so that one could not pass bitwene the walls, but
through the midof the said towers, wherein, they that kept watch in the
night, withdrewe the^self, when yt reigned or was foul wether. For that they
were there covered, and also they were not far from the Creueux or Looupe
hooles. Than they of the town, knowinge the manner of the watch, espied a
night when it greatly did rain and blow, and that there was no moon shine.
And under the conduict of those same, that had been inuentours of thenterprise,
they passed furst the dyche that was on their side, and came unto the foot of
the wall, without being parceyued of the ennemys, by rayson that the obsturite
and darkness of the night did let them to see, and the noise or brute of the
wind and rain, to hear. Also they went alonge, and separated the one from
the other, that their harnois should make no noise by touching together. And
also they were light armed, and they had but the left foot hoased for to keep
them from sticking in the mudde. Now when they had raised up their ladders
against the Creueux, where they parceyued that no body was, they that had
brought those ladders did furste clyme up. After, a dousenne other did amounte
armed only of their bodies with harnnes and with a dagger in their hand. Of
the which.xii. the furst and the chief was Amneas, Amnea.
son of Corebus. And six of the said.xii. that came after him, amounted to
the top of the two towers, bitwene the which, were the Creueux right against
ye ladders, that were raired up. After thies twelve, other did amou^te being
armed as aforesaid, and did moreover carry with them, darts fastened behind
their backs, that they should not empesche, nor hinder them to clyme up. Some
other, carried after them, targats or shildes to deliver them, when they should
be with thennemys hand to hand. But after that many were mounted up, they
that watchedde within the towers parceyued them, by means that one of the
Plateans in skailinge, did cast down a tyle from one of the Creuesses, with the
noise whereof, the watch did cry. At which their cry, the camp was so
afraid, that they came all to the wall not knowing what it was, by means of
the night, or of the foul whether. And on the other side, the Plateans that
remained in the town, issued fourth and came to assault the wall, in othere
places, clean contrary to the other where they skailed, for to deceive
thennnemys, in such manner, that they were all abashed what it might be, and
did not remove themself. Also they that watched within the towrs dust not issue
fourth, studying and debatinge amongeste themself what it might be. Yet the
three houndredde that had the charge to succor the watch, did light fire on
the cost of Thebes for to signefie the coming of the^nemis. But they that
remained within ye town, preue^tinge ye same, did likewise light a great
quantity thereof upon their wall, which they had prepared to the end, that
thennemys should not know, wherefore thyes fyers were made. And that their
compaignyons might by this mean save the^self before that any succor came
unto the watch. Duringe this time they that were furst mounted, did win the
two towers and did kille the^, that they found within, for to keep them, to
thinte^t that none of the^nemys should not come there. afterward they caused
the other to amounte, which yet were not mounted, and so repoulsed with
strokes of darts, and of stones, them, that came to succor the wall, as well
by low as at the top. By mean whereof, they that were not yet amounted had
leisure and occasion to rayre up a greater number of ladders. And moreover they
that had gaigned and gotten the height of the wall, did beat down the
Creuesses withinfourth, to the intent that they, that mounted, might more easily
leap up. And every of them after that they were above, did cast stones and
other darts against thennemys, that came upon the dyche side on the outside,
for to succor their people, that were upon the wall. In such manner, that
all they, that should pass fourth, did amounte. though that the last had
therein great pain. Afterward they all went down from the towers to the
dyche wythoutfourth, where they found on the othere side the three houndred
that had charge to succor the watch, and that had lighted the bekens. By
mean whereof they were in plain sight, by light of ye said bekens, and also it
did let the^ to see the other that were on the other side: whereupon being by
occasion hereof in fair sight, and also that they were upon the side of the
diche in discouert: they yt were wtin, did repoulse the^ with force of darts and
so did hurt many. Thus they all did pass ye diche, though with great
difficulty, for that the water was half frosen so yt there were great flakes
of Isse. And also it could not bear the^, and that was by mean of the south
wind that had thawed it. It rayned also, by reason whereof, the water was so
increased that it came in a manner unto their chynne. And they pourpously had
chosen y^ same time. After that they had passed ye dyche, lockyng or ioygninge
the^self togiders, they took the way, that leads to Thebes, leaving on the
side of the right hand the sepulcre of Andocratus. And this they did,
consideringe that the Peloponesians would never think that they would take
that same way, that did lead unto their ennemys, and also for that they did
see that the said Peloponesians had light with fyers and beakens, all full
upon the way toward Athens. But after yt they had gone six or seven stades
toward Thebes they left that way, and took on the side the way, that goithe
to the mountaigne of Erithre and of Nysie, and through that country of
mou^taignes, they came unto Athenes and were two houndredde and twelve in all.
For the other, saying the difficulty, retired into the town of Platee,
except one, that was slain in the dyche. The Peloponesyans, after that the
bruyt was paste, retired every one unto his lodginge in the camp. And as
touching them of the town, they knew not if their compaignyons were in
saulftie, or not. And for that, that they of their bend that were returned,
had said that they were all dead, they sent when yt was day, their Heraulte
toward them of the siege for to have the dead bodies, but understanding that
they were saulfe, they made no furthere poursute. In this manner, part of
them, that were within the town of Platee, did pass all the fortes and
rampares of the enemies, and saved themselves.

How the Mytilenians for fault of not being succored in time, as the
Pelopooesians had promised, did render themself to the Athenians. and ye
determynation that was made by those Athenyans to kylle them all togider, with
certain other things, that were done in the same time, by the people of the
one party and of the other. The.v. Chapter.
About the end of that same winter, the Lacedemonyans did send in a light
galley one Salethus unto Mytylene. Salethus.
who being landed at Pyreus, came a foot well nighe unto the camp. and entered
by night into the town through ye shallowe of a stream, which passed
overthwart the rampers of thennemys, whereof he was aduertysed. And he did
signefie unto the princypaleste and chiefest of the town, that he was comme to
advertise them, how the Lacedemonyans and other confederates should shortly
enter in arms into the land of Athens, and to send them foorty ships to
their succors, as it was ordeynedde, and moreover to provide in the mean time
with the^ in that, that was to be done in the city. By mean whereof, the
Mytilenya^s were slack or retarded to make any appoinctement with the
Athenyans. And so passed the fourth year of this war. In the beginning of
the summer following the Peloponesians, sendinge Alcidas their Capytayne
general by sea with forty ships for to succor the Mytylenyans, Alcidas.
they, with their confederates, entered a fresh into the land of Athens, to
the intent, that Thathenyans, saying themself assailed and thronged on both
sides, should have less occasion to send renforte or new strength by sea to
the siege of Mytylene. And of that army by land, Cleomenes was chief, Cleomenes.
in the name and as tutor of Pausantas son of Plistenactus, his younger
brother in years, than king of the Lacedemonyans. In which coming, they
destroyed afressh y^, that was increased again and newly spronge in the
countries that they had wasted, the years preceadinge. And moreover all the
quartiers, where they never had touched before. By means whereof the same
entry was more grievous to the Athenyans, than all the other before, except the
second. For somuche as the ennemys, attendinge news, that their army by sea
had done some great exploicte in the Isle of Lesbos, where they thought it was
than arrived, they did pillage and destroy all, as much, as they found
before them. But understanding afterward, that their enterprise of Lesbos
failled, having also lack of victuailes, they returned every one into his
quartier. In this mean time, the Mytileniens, seeing that ye succors of the
Peloponesia^s came not, and that the victuailes failed them, they were
constrained to take appoinctement with the Athenians. whereof Salethus himself
was the cause. who lokinge no more for the said succors, caused the armure to
be delivered to the people of the town, which had not yet before borne them.
to the intent to cause them to issue fourth upon Thathenyans. And when they
had received the armure, they would no longer obey the officers, but they made
great assemblies and came to the governors and rich people of the town,
saying, that they would that all the goods and victuailes should be putt in
commone and parted by the hedde, and that if they so did not, they would
deliver the town unto the Athenyans. which seen by the said governors, and
principallest: and fearing that the common people should make an appoinctement a
part, without includinge them therein (which thing they might do at their
will for that they were the stronger) they made all togiders their
appoinctement with Paches and the Athenyans. upon this condition that they
should receive tharmye into the city, and send their Ambassadors unto the
Athenya^s, to require grace, co^myttinge into their will and discretion the
satisfaction and amends, that those Mytylenye^s had to make for their offense.
And this during, and until thaunswere were comme from Athens, it should not be
laufull to the said Paches to kylle, bind nor take prysonner, any of the
Citezeins. which appoinctement notwithstanding, they that had been the
principallest conductours of the reuolte or rebellyon, after that the host was
entered into the town, they withdrew themself into the temples for franchise
and sanctuary. whom Paches did find a manner to cause to come fromthence and
sent them into the Isle of Tenedon, until that he had thaunswere from Athenes.
And after, he sent a certain number of galleis unto Antisse, which re^dred
itself unto his will. And further he ordened touching the hooste, as he
thought good. In thies entrefa^ctes, the forty ships with the Peloponesians,
that should come to the succors of the said Mytyleniens, kept the^self long
in secret about Peloponese, and also used very small diligence. Yet they
arrived at Delos before that the Athenyans parceyued them, and fromthence they
came to Clarus and to Myconus, Clarus.

Myconus.


where they furst did understand that the town of Mytylene was rendered and
geuenne over, and yet neuerthelas the better to know the troth of the matter,
they came unto Embatus, Embatus.
in the countreie of Erythreus. Being in which place, and understanding for
troth that it was than.vii. days passed sens the said city of Mytylene
rendered itself, they held counsel among themself for to determyne what
they had to do. whereupon Teuciaplus y^ Helye^, Thespe king of Te^ciaplus.
did speak in this manner. Alcide and you other my compaignions and
colleagues, which be here Capytaines of this army for the Peloponesians, this
is my advise, that we go straighte to Mytylene before that the Athenyans be
aduertysed of our coming. For it is to bileue that we shall find many
things ill warded and kept, as it commonly chances in a town newly takenne,
and specially on the sea side, whereby they doubted not that any succors
should comme, and we be very strong. It is also to believe that their souldyars
be disparsed and run out of order through the lodginges, as men have
accustomed, when they have the victory. wherefore I think and have good hope
that if we go to land there by night, and assail the^ soubdainly, with the
aid of the^ of the town (if there be any that be affectioned to our party)
we shall have honnour of our enterprise. And we ought not to fear the
daungier. But ought to remember that, that is commonly said of the feats of
war, which is that they be varyable. There is no other matter, but by those
means, as I do show you. For if the Capytaine do keep him self at his
defense, and espieth his enemy and can assaylle him with his aduauntaige, he
comes oftentimes to the best of his enterpryses. Thus did speak
Teuciaplus. But yet neuerthelas, he could not draw Alcidus to his opinion.
Some other bannished from Ionu^ and from Lesbos, which were in that army,
shewedde the said Alcidus, that since he feared the danger to goo to
Mytylene, he should go to take one of the Cities of Ionum, orelles the city of
Cumes in the countreye of Eolide, Cuma
from whence they might goo and cause the Ionyans to rebelle against the
Athenyans, for they thought, that they should goo into none place, where they
should not be receyuedde at their will and pleasure. And by this means, that
they should take fro the Athenyans a great revenue, that they leuyed upon that
country, and also should reco^er unto them, that, which should be sufficient
for to enterteigne and pay their army, if they tarried there any time. And
also they said, that they had esperance, ye Pissuthnes would turn to their
part. Pissuthne.
But Alcidus was not of this opinion, nor yet of the othere before. And unto
his, the gretest part of them, that were in that same counsaille, did agree.
which was, that since they had faylled of the enterprise at Mytilene they
should without longer taryinge, return into their country. which thing
they did. Being than departed from the port of Embatus, they came to arryue
at the Isle of Myonesus, Myonesus.
which is bilonginge to the Teyens. At which place he caused to be slain
many prysonners that he had taken in that same sailing on the sea. By reasone
whereof, when he was arrived at Ephesus, the Ambassadors of the Enyens, Ene.
that be in ye Isle of Samos, came unto him, and showed him that the liberty
of Greece was not well maigteigned to kille them, that were not ennemys, and had
not taken armure against them, but were allied only with the Athenyans through
necessity. And that if he continued so to do, he should never withdraw the
confederates from the Athenyans to the alliance of the Peloponesians, but
rather their friends would bicome their ennemys. Through which declaration,
Alcidus gave license to many prysonners, that he yet had of Chio and of other
places, which he had takenne right easily and without resistance. For that,
that when they did see the ships upon the sea, they fled not away before
them, but came toward them, thinkinge that they had been Athenyans. For they
never thought that the Athenyans kepinge the sea, the ships of the
Peloponesians ever durst pass Ionu^. After that, Alcidus departed in haste,
and as flyinge from Ephesus. For he was advertised, that he, yet being at
ancre at Clarus, was seen and discovered by two ships coming from Athenes. To
wit, by that same of Salamyne and by that other of Parale. Parala.
wherefore, fearing to be pursued by the army of sea of the Athenyans, he went
into the depthe of the sea, to the intent not to approach to any land with
his good will, until he arrived in Peloponese. Hereof were advertised Paches
and the Athenyans on all sides. And specially, by one certain messenger, that
was sent by them of Ethreus. For the cytes of Ionu^, that were not closed with
walls, were in great fear that the army by sea of the Peloponesians,
passing a long their country, though they were not willinge to arrest or
tarry there, that yet they would land for to pillage the towns, that they
found in their way. Likewise the ship of Salamyne and that same of Parale
affyrmed to have seen the army of thennemyes at Clarus. For this cause, Paches
sailed for to pursue Alcidus, and followed him with the greateste diligence,
that he might unto the Isle of Latmos. Latmos.
But saying that there was no hope to tarry him there, he returned back. And
he thought that he had got on inoughe that he found them not in the mean
sea, for than he should have been forcedde to have assaulted them, and to keep
great watch over them. And in retourning, he went unto the city of Notion in
the country of the Colophoniens by this occasion. Notion.
The Colophoniens holdinge that same city, Itamenes and certain strangers
with him, Itamenes.
had by means of one debate that was among the Citezeins occupied the fortres
of the town, which was in form of one Castelle, separated from the walls
of the other body of the town. And afterward, about that same time, that the
Peloponesians was last entered into the country of Athens a great noise was
afreshe moved, between them, that were comme newly to inhabitt in the city,
and the ancient Cytezeins. Through occasion whereof, they that kept the town
forte^ied themself upon the walls, that departed the town from the castelle,
and having with them souldyars estraungers, which Pissuthnes and the
Acardyans had sent them, they accorded with the^ that were in the Castle.
holding the party of the Medes, in manner, that all together should govern the
estate of the town, and the other, that would not hold that party, they
fled out of the city and sent unto Paches^ requirynge of him succors. who,
being arrived before the town caused Hippias to be called unto him, who was
capytaine of them that kept the castelle, that he should come to speak with
him upon such suertie, that if he would not do that, which the said Paches
should will him, he would send him ayaine hoole and saulfe within the wall.
like as he did. But when that he was aryued before him, he caused him
incontinently to be warded and kept without byndinge or chayninge him
otherwise. Afterward right soubdainely he caused his people to march against
the walls and rampares of the fort, where the Acardyans and the strangers
were. who doubted nothing. And so they were taken by the assault, and all
putt to death. After he caused Hippyas to be brought within the town, Hippias
without doing him hurt. But when he was within, he caused him to be slain
with arrows, and rendered the city to the Colophonyens, they being put
fourth, that had taken part with the Medes. Afterward, Thathenyans that were
founders of that same city, caused all the Colophonyans that were found in
their obeyssance to assemble themself together. And sent them to inhabitte
there according and ensuing their laws. At departure from Notio^, Paches
returned unto Mytylene, and brought again to the obeissance of the Athenyans,
the cities of Pyreus and Eresse. And found Salethus, who had hid himself in
the town of Mytylene. And sent him to the Athenians with the Mytylenya^s, that
he had sent to Thenedon, with all the other, that he could understand to have
been the authors of the rebellyon. Afterward he sent away the greatest part
of his army, that he had brought thider, and with the rest tarried there to
give order to the city of Mytilene, and to all the Isle of Lesbos. when they,
that Paches had sent, were arrived at Athens, the Athenyans caused Salethus
incontine^tly to dye, though that he promised to do many things. And among
other, that the siege which the Peloponesyans did hold yet before Platee,
should be raised. For the othere prysonners, the matter being put in
deliberation of the counsaille, yt was with great anger determined to cause to
dye not only the^ that were thider brought, but also all the Mytylenyens,
except the women and childrene, from foortene years downewarde, which should
be sklaues and bond men. For they esteemed the fault of the said Mytylenyans,
to be inremissible and not to be forgeuenne. For that that they rebelled,
though that they were not entreated as subjects, as the other were. And yet
they had greater despyte, for that the ships of the Peloponesians had had the
audacytie for to comme to succoure the said Mytylenyans, to pass the sea Ionum
with greater danger. which was a tokenne that the said Mytylenyens had
pourposed, and by long circumstance provided before, for that same rebellyon.
So they dispatched a galley to signefy to Paches the decree of the Senate, of
Athenes, and to command him to execute yt. Yet the morrow after, they
abhorred and repented themselves, consydering the cruelty of the decree. And
they thought it to heinous to destroy and kylle all the people of a city, and
not to extinquishe them, that had been authors of the evil of other. which
thing, being knowin by thambassadours of the Mytylenye^s and by the Athenyans
that favored them, they went with all diligence to the chiefeste of the
city, and with great wepinges and lamentacions, perswadedde them gentely to
putt the matter ones again into deliberation. For those principalleste were
well aduertysed, that the most part of the people desired that it might be
spokenne of again. So they caused the counsel to assemble, whereat were
spokenne many opynyons, but among othere (Cleon, Cleon.
son of Cleuntus whose opinion was consented to the day before. That all the
Mytylenya^s should dye) a man roughe and vyolent and that had great authorytie
among the people, did speak in this manner.

The narration and proposition of Cleon unto the counsaille of the Athenyans.
The.vi. Chapter.
I Have of te^tymes knowin, that the mean estate ought not to rule. But yet I
have knowin more in their variation. which I will show you in this matter of
the Mytylenyans. For yone think, that our allies goo as frankely and without
deceit in busynes toward you, as you go toward them. And ye parceyue
not, that the faults that you commytt, do suffer you to be seduced by their
speakynges and persuations, orelles by great pytie do put you in danger.
And also you get not, for all that, their good will. And ye consider not
that the empire, that you have, is but very tyranny, and that they that
obey you, do yt against their will, and also they wolle not be longer
obedyente, for that you pardonne the taultes that they have done against
you. And that your force and the fear that they have of you, do make them
obeissant, and not the goodness and mercy that you use toward them. But the
woorste that I see in our affayre is this, that in matters determynedde and
concludedde, there is no fyrmenes nor stabilitie. And we understand not, that
there is better gouernemente in a city that uses his laws fyrmely and
without reuocation (yea though they be evil) than in that same, that has
good laws and does not keep them inuiolablie. And that ignorance with sobrenes
and gravity is more worth, than knowlaige with inconstancy and rashenes. And
that the people, that be somewhat gross and more slack of understanding, do
admynistre well and conducte better an estate, tha^ they that be more hable and
sharper wytted. For thies woll always be wyser than the laws, and show in
all matters, whereof is question, by force of eloquence and of well speaking,
that they know more, than the othere. knowinge that in no othere matter they
can somuche show the excellency of their wy^te, as in those that be of
great importance. whereby many inconveniences have oftentimes chanced to
cities. where as they, that trust not so much to their knowlaige, woll not be
wyler than the law, and also knowinge that they be not eloquente enough to
answer, and to stir to all reasons with fair words: study more to judge
by reasone, and to come to the effect, than to debate the matters by
arguments and communication. whereby matters have been the better governed for
the more part. In this manner it is co^uenyent lords not trusting in our
eloquence and ability, not to persuade our people otherwise, than we know for
the truth. And as for myself, I am in the same opinion, touching this
matter, as I was yesterdaye. And I am abashedde of theyme, that have causedde
this matter to be putt again into deliberation, and by this mean suffer the
time to be lost and run to the proffitte of them, that have offendedde you,
and not to yours. For in delayinge of the punishemente, he that has
receyuedde the offense, does aswage his anger, and is not afterward so
sharp to revenge yt. where as when men take vengeance in their heat, they
exe^ute it the better according to the demeritte. And also, I am ambasshedde,
that there may be any that woll say the contrary to that, that has been
concluded. And will parforce themself to show, that the iniuryes and offenses
of the Mytylenyens, be proftita table unto us, and that our welthe redoundeth
to the Calamytie of our allies. For certaynely, whosoever will maigntaigne
that, shall show openly, aither y^ he will (for the great confydence that he
has in his wits and in his speech) cause other to bileue, that they
understand not the things, that be clear and manifest: or else that by mean
of some corruption, he will deceive you by his eloquence and fair speech. By
such means and dilations the city does proffitt other, but she puts
herself in danger. whereof you the other are the cause, that naughtely
introduced and brought in, thies disputations, and have been accustomed to be
regarders of words and harkeners of deeds, persuadinge your self, that the
matters must chance, like as he persuades you, that speaks best. And you
hold for more certain that, which you hear spokenne, than that you have
seen. For you suffer yourself to be led and deceived by artificial speakings.
And likewise you ar easy to be deceived by new words, and hard to execute
y^, which has been ones approved and concluded. And by this mean, you arne
subjects to vain things, and tarry to long in your auncyente customs. By
means whereof, every of you parforceth himself and studieth to know to
preach well. And those that have not this eloquence, woll follow them that
have it, for to show, that they understand no less the matters, than they.
And moreover if there be any one that speaks any thing subtle and
apparante, you ar ready to praise him, and to say, that you had thought
as much, before that he had spokenne yt. where you be slow and nyce to
provide for things, that might chance in that, whereof is spokenne.
Serchinge by a manner to speak an othere thing than that, whereof ye
entreat. and understand not sufficiently the matters present. Suffrynge
youreselues to be deceived through the volupte and delectation of your ears,
as they do, that amuse themself sonner to hear the sophistes and logycyans to
dispute, than to hear speak of the affairs of the city. From which
error, I will take pain to wythdrawe you, in causinge it to appear unto
you, that the city of Mytylene is that same, that has done you a singular
oultrage and displeasure. For if there be any city, that for that he could
not endure your Empire, or that were constraynedde by your ennemys, that does
rebelle against you, I am of opinion that yt should be pardonned. But if
they, that hold an Isle and a city very strong with walls, which fearethe
nothing but on the sea side, and also may well defend itself, having good
number of ships tacledde, and that be not our subjects, (but be by us
honored beyond and above all our confederates) have done it: what may a man
judge any othere thing, but that it is a very imagination against us. And
that yt may be better said that they have moved war, than to sayt^ that
they be rebelledde against us. For those may be said to be rebels, that
were constraigned by any vyolence. And that, which more is to be detestedde
and abhorred, yt suffysed not them to make us war with their own force, but
they have attempted utterly to destroy us, by the mean of our mortal
ennemys. without having fear, or consyderinge the great calamytees that be
chanced unto othere, that rebelled against us in times paste, after that we
had reduced them to our subjection. And also not fearing to putt themself
into new dangers, where they were in rest and in great felicytie. And the
audacyte, that they have had to enterprise this war, declares that they
have greater hope, than power, and less power than will, willing to prefer
their puyssance before reasonne. For without being in any thing offendedde
by us, they have takenne armure against us, for no othere reasonne, but for
the hope, that they have had to vaynquishe and ouertreade us. So chaunce^^^e
yt oftentimes (chiefly in cities, that in short time do comme, unlooked ^or^
unto great felycitie) that they become insolente and proud. And that the
prosperyties, that happen to men, by reasonne and after the common course (...)
^hynges, be moore fyrme and stable, than those, that chance by fortune and
^eyond thopynyon of the people. And by manner of speaking, it is more
dyfficile and hard for men to consarue and keep themself in prosperyties,
than to defend and ward themself in adversities. For this cause, it had been
good for the Mytylenyans, that we had not more honnoured nor estemedde them,
than our othere allies and confederates. For than, they should not have fallen
into so great oultrecuidance and presumptyon. Also it is a natural thing to
cont^^pne them, to whom a man is bound, and to have in admyratyon them, with
who^ they be not bound Let us procure than that thies here be punished
according to the greatness of their misdeeds, and let us not pardonne all the
people, by ymputynge the fault unto a small nombre. For they have all with one
accord takenne armure against us. For somuche as if any particulers would
have constrained them to do it, they might have fled and have had recourse
unto us. And if they so had done, they might, now have re^ourned into
their city. But they louedde more, to putt themself in danger and prove
fortune, at the appetite of the lesser nombre, and by this mean rebelledde
altogiders. You ought lykewy^e, as touching the surplusage, to have regard to
the consequence of our other confederatees and a^lyes. For if we punish not
^han more, that rebelle against us wyllyngly, than those, that do yt by force
and constraynete, there shall be no city nor town, that for the lea^^e
oc^asion in the world, woll not enterprise to do yt. Understandynge, that if
yt take good effect, they shall abide in liberty, and if yt take ill, they
shall be acquitedde good chepe. By means whereof, we shall be in danger to lose,
in all the cities, that we have, both the revenue, and also the parsonnes. For
though we shall well take again a city, that rebellethe: yette shall we lose
our reu^nue for a long time. during which our forces shall be one against
the othere. And if we can not reco^er yt, we shall have theyme there for
ennemys, besides the othere, that we now have. And moreover the time, that
we should use for to war against our enemies, we must employ and occupye
to reduce and re^ourme our subiec^es. wherefore it is not expedi^^te to give
them hope, that they may obteigne grace or remyssyon of us by fair
perswations, nothere for monney and corruptyon, under color that they have
offendedde by man's frailty. For they have not endommaiged us against their
wylles: but rather wyllynglye have conspyred against us. And that fault is
worthy of marcye and grace, that is not committed of a determined will. By
which raysons, I have from the beginning resisted this way, and also now do
speak against it to my power. That you revoke not that, which you have ones
concluded, and that you offend not even at ones in three things, which all
three be commonly right dangerous and pernicyous in a common wealth. to wytt,
in mercy, in voluptuousnes and in facility or gentleness. For mercy should be
used to them, that do the like, and not to them that have yt not, but rather
have brought themself in n^ce^site to be your perpetual enemies. And our
Orators and spekers, yt take so great plea^ure ^o know well to persuade: shall
have license to show the force of their eloquence in other matters of less
importance, and not in thies, where the city (for a small delectation, that yt
shall have to hear fair speakinges and disputations) may incur a great
danger. And yet shall be neuerthelas reputed to have spoken well. And as
concerning the use of equity and gentleness, that should be done to them,
whom we may trust to be in time coming, good and of a good will. And not
to them, who, after we shall have pardonnedde them, shall continue still our
enemies. And to conclude my speakinge in few words, if you woll bileue me,
you shall do to the Mytylenyans, that, which justice requires. And that
shall be proffitable unto you. And if you do yt not, you condemn yourself,
and yet do not gratefie them. For if they here have had just cause for to
rebelle, it must be confessed, that we rule unjustly. And though it so were,
yet must you, since you woll rule, take punishment of them here iniustly
for your proffitt, orells depart yourself from your domynyon. And being
eskaped the danger, live as wise men and just people. But if you woll
persevere in your seigniory, ye must recompense them according to their
desarte. And make them to understand, that you have the heart no less
offended and pricked to revenge you, being eskaped the daungere, than they have
had to stir you, and to conspyre against you. calling to your remembrance,
what you have to bileue of your selves. considering what they would have
done unto you, if they might have had the victory. Specially that they have
bigonne to offend you. And they, that without cause do injury and offend
other, do their best therein unto the last poincte, and go about to destroy
them utterly. Fearing the danger, wherein they should be, if they, that they
offend, might eskape. Insomuch as every man that parceyueth himself to be
wronged by him, that had no cause thereto, if he may skape it, he reue^geth
himself more angrely against him, than he would do against his mortal ennemy.
Be not than traitors unto your self. But consyderinge the inconveniences that
have very nighe chanced unto you by this matter, even as you have above all
things desired to take thies here: sens that you have taken them, render unto
them like punishemente And suffer not yourself somuche to relente and wax
gentle, for the estate and suertie wherein the things now be, that you forget
the wrongs that have been done you. But punish well thies here, according
to their deserte, for to give perpetual example to other your allies, that if
there be any one, that rebelleth, it shall cost him his life. For when they
shall know it, you shall take no more pain to fight against them, where you
ought to defend your friends. Thus spoke Cleon. After whom Dioditus son of
Eucrates stood up, Diodotus.
who, at the consultacion the day before, had chiefly spokenne against them,
that would that all the Mytylenians should be slain, and did speak in the
manner that followethe.

The proposition and opinion of Diodotus, contrary to that same of Cleon.
The.vii. Chapter.
I Praise not the opinion of them, that reprove this, that men putt again into
deliberation the matter of Mytylene, and that think yt not good, that men
consulte many times upon weighty affairs. But me thinks that there be two
things much contrary to good connsaille. To wytt, hedynes or haste, and wrath
or anger. For the one does things folishly, and the other furyously and
rashly. And also me thinkethe, that he that will empesche and let men to show
things by words, is without understanding. Or that he has some conceits
and deuyses, that be not well knowin. for if he think yt the things to come,
which be not yet parceued, may be otherwise understand than by words, he has
no understanding. And if he woll persuade any dishoneste and evil matter, and
for that, that he thinks, that he cannot make it good by words, wol astony
and choke with injuries and villenies those, that will say the contrary, it is
a great sign, that he affectith or favors the matter. But yet they be more
to blame that charge the againesayers, with corruption. For if a man obiecte
against him, whose opinion the greatest part of the counsel have not allowed,
that he understands not well the causes, he shall be reputed only ignorant,
and not a noughty parsone. but when it is objected, that he is corrupted and
brybed, though men allow his opinion, yet shall he be neuerthelas suspected.
And if it be not holden, he shall be not only reputed ignoraunte but also an
noughty parsone. whereby, the public welthe shall susteigne dommaige, for
that the people dare not speak nor counsaille freely for fear thereof. And it
seems, that it should be better for the wealth of the common weal, that there
were no man in the city that had the understanding and knowlaige to speak
well, than yt there were any, as if by this, the people had less occasions to
offend, which is hoole contrary. for a good cytezeine that speaks his
opinion, ought not to empesche nor fear the other, that they should not speak
against him, but in all equalytie and modesty show by reasone that his
opinion is the better. And moreover me thinks that a city that governs
itself by reasonne, ought not, another to do more honnour to him that
counsaillethe well above all the othere, nor yet lessen him of that, which he
had before. And likewise should do no shame to him, whose opinion was not
allowed, and yette less to punish him. For by that mean, he, whose judgment
shall be found good shall not care to say any thing, but that, which he
thinkethe to sarue him to get the honnour or favor of the people. And by like
raysons he, whose opinion is not approuedde, shall not be moved to change yt
for to gratefye the multitude. wherein we do clean contrary. For if there be
anny that may be charged to have been subournedde or brybed by gift or by
promise, though that he have good opinion and counsailleth the wealth of the
city: yet through suspytion of the said corruption (whereof there is none
appearance) we wol reiecte and forsake yt. And whatsoever thing he says, be yt
good or evil, yt is suspected. wherefore it is necessary that he, that will
persuade any thing to the comunaltie, as well good as evil, use lies and
cautels, whereby it followith, that because of thies disguysings and chalenges,
no man may proffytt him, that should speak of an open and manifest matter,
except he deceive. For if any give him any thing openly he shall be suspectedde
that he was willing to gain yt. which is not raisonne. For yt is expedyente
that we that be in this office, and that have the charge for to delyberate and
determyne great and waightieste affairs, should parceyue further, than you
othere, that mind not but things present and at hand. Consyderedde
specially, that for that, which, we say, we must show raysonne, where as
you that hear us, do render no account of that you hear. And if it were
ordeynedde that he that hears and suffers himself to be persuaded, should be
as much punyshedde, as he that speakethe and perswadethe, cetaynelye you should
judge with the more modesty and more raysonne. But when the matters be
desperate unto you, you punyshe through anger and wrath, him only, that
has given the counsel, and not you the other, yt have followed it And yet in
that doing you trespass as much, as he that has spokenne yt. As touching
me I intend not to speak in the favor of Mytyleniens for to speak against
or for to accuse any parsonne. And if we be in our good wits, there rests
no questyo^ of their mysdede, but alonly, to consulte well for our selves. For
albeit, that it appears unto us that they have trespassed, yet woll I not
counsaille that they shall be put to death, except it be expedyente for us. And
likewise, if they merytte to have grace, I would not be of the opinion that it
should be extended unto them, except it might be profitable unto us. And
forsomuche, as our consultation is more to have regard unto the time to come,
than to the time passed, and Cleon has said that it is requisitt, for to
wythstand the rebellyo^s fromthesfourth to follow, that thies here should be
punyshedde by death, I am of a contrary opynyo^ and that it shall be better for
us to do otherwise. And therefore I pray you, that for the colored raisons of
this man here, proponed in his opinion, for to enduce and persuade you to
follow it, that you will not to reiecte the utility of mine. For I parceue
well, that all his reasons, being consonant to rigor of justice, they may
more move your hearts and thoughts (which be now full of wrath and anger)
than mine. But it must be considered, that we be not here for to debate
iudicially with them, and for to know what reasone and ius^ice wyllethe, but
we be for to advise among oureselues, what shall be most to our proffite. Now
you know, that in many cities, pain of life is ordained, not only for so
great offenses, but also for much lesser. And yet neuerthelas there are
people that putt themself in danger of that pain, trusting that they shall
eskape yt. And there was never manne enterprysed such pretenses and
rebellyons, that thought not that he might acheue them. And there was never
city that rebelled, that thought not to have greater force and greater
preparatyon, than yt had of itself, or of his friends and allies. But it is
a natural thing to men for to offend, and there was never law so rigoroux,
that could let it. Although that new pains and punyshmentes have daily been
made and added for offenses, to see, if by fear thereof, the people might be
wtdrawin from trespassinge. And also it was not without reasone that in the
beginning, the pains were more light and easy, than they now be. Which,
through the contynuall transgression of the people, been in a manner at this
present all brought to the extremest punishment. And yet notwithsta^dinge,
we keep not ourselves from offending. wherefore there must aither be yet found
some pain more fearful, orelles this here, woll not keep men from
trespassinge. For to some, poverty gives audacite to do ill. some other, by
means of their riches, bicome insolente, ambycyous and couetouse, and the
other have other passions and occasions, which stir and induce the^ to
offend. And in effect every one is drawin by his inclynation and disordered
appetite, so v^hemently: that skarcely he may refrain nor moderate himself
for fear of any danger, that may chance. There be on the other part two
things, which greatly do hurt men, to wytt, hope and love. whereof the one
leads them, and the other acco^paigneth them. the one sercheth means for to
execute their ymaginations, and the othere perswadethe the prosperity of
fortune. And though thies two things be not seen with the eye, yet they arne
more puyssant, than the pain that is seen. There is yet an other thing,
which helps and serves maruelously, to incyte and provoke the affectyons
and wits to wytt, fortune. which by representing some occasion unlooked for,
although it be not sufficient, bringethe oftymes the people into great
danger. And yet more the cities, than the particular parsonnes. Forsomuche, as
there is questyo^ of greater things, to wit, of liberty or to increase their
empire. And moreover every man, parceyuyng him self to have the confederatyon
and compaigny of one people, has greater hope of him self. And for conclusyon
it is a thing impossyble and without raysone to think, that when humayne
nature is pricked and sturred by a vehement inclination to do any thing, he
can be wythdrawen from it by force of laws or by any other dyffyculte.
Wherefore it is not mete, that we ordeyne pain of death for offenders, upon
confydence, y^ that gives security and assurance for time to comme. Also it
is not mete, that we take from them, that hereafter shall rebelle, hope of
mercy, and license to repent them self, and to purge them incontynently of
their mysdede. And that it may be so, presuppose that there may now be some
other city, that may be turned against you, and that knows well that it
can not resist you. But has suffycyent, wherewith he may satis^ye the
expenses, that we shall make to recover it, and to pay us the trybute for the
time to comme, if we take it by composytyon. And if the same do understand
that there is no hope of marcye of you to be had, woll it not prepare it self
yet more strength to resist you and determyne to endure all extremyte of
assiege, rather than to render and yield yt self? Now than remember, why der
it be all one that a town renders it self unto your will incontynentlye, or
a very long time after his rebellyon. And what charge and what dommage it
shall be unto us, when they shall forsake to be reduced to our obeyssance, to
have them by length of siege, and yet when we shall have taken them, that we
destroy them, and by that mean lose our revenue, by mean whereof we shall be
egall to our enemies. Truly we ought not to proceed here to the punishment of
offenses, as judges to our oune dommage, but we ought to remember for the time
to comme, how we may draw and recover the revenue and trybute of our
cytyes, in mulctynge them moderatly, and to keep and conserve them, more by
gentleness and good intreatinge, than by rygoure of laws. Whereunto we do now
intend to do the clean contrary. For if any people, that were frank and free,
has been by force brought into our seruytude and subiectyon, and minding to
recover their lybertye do rebelle, as reasonably they may do, and afterward
has been recovered and brought again, you woll that all seuerytye be used
against him. Certaynely I am of contrary opinion, and think that the free
people, that do rebel, should not be sharpelye punyshed, but be well kept by
good means, that they do not rebelle, and to entreat them in such sort,
that they may have no occasyon to have such will. And consider moreover what
fault you shall commyt, in followynge the opinion of Cleon. you parceyue
that the people, of all the confederate cities, be affectyoned to your estate,
and that they turn not to your ennemies, although they be puyssante. Or if
any of the said cytyes do turn from you, the common people hates them,
that have been the cause thereof. And with this confydence of the love of the
people, you go about to make your war. Now if you kill all the people of
Mytylene, which have not consented unto the rebellyon (but when they might
have taken armure, and found themself most strong, have received you into
their town: furste you shall be in greatefull and oultragious unto them that
have well acquyted themself toward you, and afterward you shall do that,
that your enemies desire. For when they shall have drawn one city of ours
unto their party, all the people shall be theyrs. understanding, that if they
come into your hands, as much shall they be punyshed that shall not have
offended, as they that shall have done the worste that they might. Where,
though they had offended, you should have dissymuled and wynked at it, to the
intent that that, which we yet reteigne under the form o^ a fellowlike
living, should not be turned into host ylytie and enmytie. And in my opinion
it should be more proffytable for us, for the conseruatyon of our empire, to
endure to be oultraged and iniuryed with our knowlaige, than to cause our
people to dye, when it is not expedyent. Although we might do it by justice.
And it shall not be found verytable and true that Cleon has said, that one
self ve^geaunce may be both unjust and proffytable. And sythens that ye
perc^yue, that that, which I have spokenne is for the best. I am of advise
that without groundyng you upon any swetenes or benignyte (where unto I woll
not that ye have regard for the thing that I persuaded you but for the weal
of the ^ytye only) that ye keep yet this people here, that Paches has sent
prysonners, for to ordeyne hereafter thereupon all at leisure. And touching
the other, that you suffer them, to inhabyte the city of Mytylene. For that
shall serve you in time to comme, and now fear your enemies. Forsomuche as
he, that gives raysonable counsaylle, is more feared and more esteemed of his
enemies, than he, that by a rash crueltye does and commytteth insolente and
oultragyous things. Thus spoke Diodotus.

How the city of Mitilene was in danger to be utterly destroyed, and the
punishment which it received for his rebellyon. And how the Plateans rendered
them self to the will of the Lacedemonyans, with some other exploict of
war, that was done in that same year. The.viii. Chapter.
AFter these contrary opynyons, there were many altercatyons among the
Athenyans, so that when it came to give their voices, they were found equal
and parted, as much as the one side, as on the other, but yet at the end, that
same of Diodotus was allowed. And so they dispatched incontinently one other
galley for to go with all dylygence to Mytylene, doubtyng that if she used not
dyligence, the other, that was departed a day and a night before this, should
preuente it. In such manner, that when this last arrived, she should find
now the city e^tinguished. For which fear this latter galley was wayged and
victuaylled by the Ambassadors Mytylenyens. Who made great promyses to the
maronners, if they arrived sooner, tha^ the furste. Which by this mean, for to
make extreme dylygence, ceased not day nor night to sail. And in their
saylyng, they did eat their bread, sopped in wine and in oil, and also they
slepte by course, so that the shyyp went without cessynge. And it chanced
them so well, that they never had one only contrary wind, which was a great
fortune. By mean whereof, ioynned also, that the f^rste, y^ carried the evil
news, did not make very great dylygence, that same galley arrived very sone
after, that the other was aryued. And even at the hour when Paches read the
furst commandment, and prepared himself for to execute it, the later was
presented, which empesched the execution. In this manner the city of Mytylene
was very nyghe to utter destruction. And as touching the^, ye Paches had sent
as chief offenders, which where more than a thousand, they were all judged to
death, according to ye opynio^ of Cleon. And also ye walls of ye city of
Mytylene, were beaten down, and all their ships were taken from the^, and
moreover there was no trybute imposed or set through all the Isle of Lesbos, but
it was all (except the city of Methymne) divided into three.M. parts. Whereof
they did give and dedicate to the temples of the Gods, three houndred for ye
tenth, and to other they sent of their cytezeins by Lot for to inhabyte there.
And did ordeyne that the Lesbiens should pay them for every of the said
parties, two pound wayght of silver. And for that some, they were permytted to
labor the said land. Moreover there was taken, from the said Mytylenyans,
all the towns and lands that they had in the main land. Which afterward
remained in obedyence of the Athenyans. Such was the issue of the rebellion of
Lesbos. In that same so^mer Nycyas son of Nyceratus went by sea with a good
bend of Athenyens into the Isle of Mynouer. Nycias M^noa^
Which is right against and hard by Megare. And there was a castle, that
the Megaryens did keep for a forte, which Nicias minded to take, for to have
there a defense and recourse more nyghe, than that, which they had at Budore
and at Salamyne, and to the intent, that, when the Peloponesyans should issue
into the sea, they should not hyde their galeys there, as the Corsaireens had
many times done. And also to the end, that the Megaryens should have no more
any mean to enter into the sea. And so he came furste, departing from Niseus
to set his ships before ye castelle. Whereof he did beat down with
artyllerye, two towers, which were higher than the dongeon of the said castle.
And by this mean he made, yt the ships might pass wtoute danger between
the Isle and the said place of Nyseus. Nisea^
And moreover he made a wall ouerthwarte the dystreate, from the main land
that came to answer to the Isle nygh enough unto it. Through which men sent
succoure to the said Castle, for that they were maryshes. And after that he
had made his rampares and munytyons, within a very short time he left his
garnysons at the defense of the wall, and returned with the remenaunt of his
people. In that same summer, the Plateans, being in great necessity of
victuayles, and seeing that they could not resist the assault of the
Peloponesyans, they made appoinctment with them. For also the Capytayne and
Lieutenaunt of the Peloponesyans, being approached nyghe unto the wall, and
seeing that they were so feeble that they could not defend themself, would
not take them by assault, for that, that he was commanded by the
Lacedemonyans to take it by composytyon, rather than by assault, if he might.
To the intent, that if any appoinctment were made between the Peloponesyans
and the Athenyans, by the which it should be ordained that the towns and
cities that should have been taken by war of the one side and of the other,
should be rendered: those Lacedaemonians might excuse themself, for none
rendrynge of this, under color, that they got it not by war, but that it
was rendered unto the^ with their good will. And so he sent an haraulte unto
them, by whom he demanded, whyder they would render the town and the people
that were within to be at the will of the Lacedemonyans, and commyt unto their
dyscretyon, the punyshement of them, that should be found coulpable, so that
none should be punyshed, but that furste his cause should be known and judged.
Which thing they agrede unto, seeing them self in such extremytie, that they
could no longer resist. And by this mean the Peloponesyans did take the
city, and nouryshed the people that were within it with victuayles for
certain days, and until ye five judges which the Lacedaemonians had sent for
this matter, were there arrived. who without making any other particular
process, caused all them to assemble that were within the town. Afterward
they demanded of of them only, if sense the war begone, they had in any
thing well merited toward the Lacedemonyans and their allies. To which
demand they required that it might be laufull for them to answer more
amplye by common delyberatyon. Which thing was granted them. And so they did
chose Astimachus, Astimachus.
sone of Asopolaus and Lacon, Lacon.
son of Aimnestus, Aimnestus.
who was burgeois of the Lacedemonyans, and they did speak in this manner.

The proposition and defense of the Plateans before the Lacedemonyans. The.ix.
Chapter.
FOr the faith and confydence, that we have had in you, Lords Lacedemonyans,
we have committed our city and our parsones into your power. Not lokynge,
for such judgment of you, as we perceive, that m^n would do unto us, but
some other more cyuile and more gentle. And also we looked to have other judges
than you. And specially we hoped, yt it should have been liefull for us to
dyspute and debate our reasone and our cause. But we doubt greatly that we
have been deceived of both our thoughts. For we fear and not without cause, that
this disceptacion and debatyng be upon our life. And that you comme not to
judge of our case by reasone. Whereof we see an euydent tokenne, by this, that
there is no accusation proponed against us, wherein we may defend us. But at
our request, license is granted us to speak, and your interrogation has
been very brief. Whereunto, if we would answer according to the truth, our
answer shall be contrary and enemy to our cause. And if we answer
contrary to truth, it may be condemned, as faulse. And notwithstanding
that we see our ^ase in danger and perplexitye on a^ sides, yet be we
constrained to speak. And also it seems unto us better to incur the
daungier by saying some thing, than utterly to keep scilence, and to speak
nothing. For if they, that be in such case, speak not that they might say,
they have always the heart dyspleased, and they thy^ke, that if they had
spoken, i^ should have been cause of their welthe. But now it is to us (over
and above all the other dyffyculties) a thing right dyffycyle and hard to
persuade you that, which we woll speak. For that, that if we did not know
the one the other, we could cause things to be wytnes unto you whereof you
had not not know layge. But we speak before you, that know the troth of the
hoole. And we fea^e not that you will impute it unto us for offense, that our
virtues be less than yours, insomuche as you know us, but we greatly fear,
lest for to please other, a subda^ne judgment shall be pronounced against us,
which is already determined. This notwithstanding, yet woll we parforce our
selves, to show you the reasone and the right, that we have against the
ennemitie of the Thebayns and against you and the other Greeks, puttinge you
in remembrance of our seruyces and good deeds. And for to answer unto the
right brief interrogacy^, yt is made unto us, whyder during this war we have
in any thing meryted well toward the Lacedemonyans and their confederates, we
answer you, that if you demand us as ennemies, we have done you no injury
though we have done you no pleasure. But if you ask us, as friends, we think
yt you have more offended us, than we have offended you. For that, yt we have
not begone the war, although that we have ^ot in any thing yet broken
peace with you. And in time of the war with the Medes, we alone of all the
Beotyans came to assault the said Medes with the other Greeks for to defend
the lybertye of Greece. And notwythstandynge that we were people of main land,
yet did we fight with them nygh to Artenusus by sea. And afterward when they
did fight in our land, we were there with Pausanias. And of all the other
things, that were done by the Greeks in great danger, we were parttakers
further than ower puyssance stretched. And in partyculer, to you other
Lacedemonyans, your city of Sparte, being in great dread and fear, after
the earthequake, when the bond men did fly from Ithomus, we did send the
third part of our people to your succoure. Of which saruices to have none
remembrance, should be a thing to dyffycyle. Such were our works in the
beginning. And if sense, we have been enemies, that has been through your
defaulte. For when we were invaded by the Thebayns, persevering in amytye and
allyaunce, we had furst recours unto you, and you repoulsed us, saiynge that
you were to far from us, and showed us that we should have recourse to the
Athenians, which were our nyghe neighbors. Like as never by war you
suffered any oultrage, so arne you not to suffer for us. And if we had not
been willing to have departed from the Athenyans, yet had we not done you
iniurye. For considered, that they had aided us against the Thebayns, there
where it was not your commodytye to do it, it had not been honnestye for us,
to cast them up and forsake them, seeing chiefly, that they at our request
had received us into their allyaunce. And also we have received great
benefittes of them, and they received us as their burgeoses. Wherefore it was
reasonable yt we should obey them with our power. And if you and they (which
be dukes and capytains of your parties, have done any evil thing) having
your allies in your compaignie, the same ought not to be imputed to the^, that
have followed you, but to the Capytaynes, that have conducted them to do it.
And as touching the Thebayns, besides many oultrages, that they had done
before, they did co^mytt the last against us, which has been cause of all
these euylls, as you do know. For they came in time of peace, upon the day
of the solemn feast, for to invade our city. Whereby they received such
punishment, as they deserved. Like as it was laufull for us, and permytted by
the commone law and general saufgarde, used among all people. By which it
is laufull for every man to sley him, that comes to assault him, as enemy.
Wherefore if you woll punyshe us for that cause, that should be against all
justice. And you should declare your self evil judges, if that to make
your proffyte of them, because yt. they be your allies in this war, you
woll do justice at their pleasure. And have more regard unto your proffyte,
than to reasone. And howesoeuer that ye woll have regard unto your utility,
and consider these here, to have been proffytable unto you in this affayre,
yet have we been much more. And that not only unto you, but to all Greece,
when that you were in much greater dangier. For at this present, you have
both heart and puyssance for to assault the other, but than, the stranger
king did lay the yoke of bondage to all the Greeks, having these here on his
party. Whereby, reason would well, that you should lay to the contrary of
this our mysdede (if there be any thing mysdone) the service that our
cytezeins did for you. And the affectyon yt they may show unto you, which
you shall find much greater than the mysdede. And so much the more, that at
that same time there were few Greeks found, that would put their virtue in
danger against the forces of Xerxes. And they were hyghly praised, who being
assawlted and assieged, had no regard to their welthe, not her to conserve
their parsonnes and their goods, but delyghted more with great danger to
enterprise things worthy of memory, among whom we were reputed and honored
as the principalleste. whereby we have great fear to be destroyed and to
perish at this present, for having wylled to do the like, to wit, for
followyng the Athenians justly and according to rayson, rather than you
cautelously and by deceitte. And neuerthelas it is conueniente that one self
judgment be always given upon one self cause. And not to place nor establishe
proffytt in any other thing, but only in fay the and loiaultie of friends and
allies. For in knowing alwais their virtue, yt they have showed in things
passed, you may establishe yours proffitablie, being present. Consider moreover
that a great part of Greeks do at this present day, esteem and repute you to
be the true example and the mirror of virtue and wysdom. wherefore you ought
well to fear to give an wrongful sentence against us. For in that doing
(which cannot be hid) ye shall purchase great blame, having determined and
judged of us, yt be good people, otherwise than according to reason. even you
that arne reputed the best, and to have set in your temples the spoils of
them, that have so well meryted toward all Greece. And also yt shall be always
greatly imputed unto you, to have at the appetite and pleasure of the
Thebains, utterly destroyed the city of Platee. The name whereof, and for
great honnour and in remembrance of his cytezeins: your fathers did grave at
the altar of Apollo Delphicus. For we arne come to such calamyte and
perplexity, that if the Medes had vainquishedde, we had been destroyed:
and having had the victory against them, we be at this present
vainquished toward you, that be our great friends, through the Thebains.
And so we have incurredde two extreme dangers and calamytes, to wytt, to dye
for hunger than, in resistinge to yield us at the will of the strangers, and
now to defend our life in judgment. And we that have more heartily
tendredde the honnour of Greece, than our force might susteigne, be
habandonned, dispysed and for sakenne of all. And there is not one only of all
the Greeks, that were than present, our allies, that may aid us. And
specially we fear greatly, that you other lords Lacedemonyans, in whom we
have put our pryncipalle trust, be not stable and constante enough in this
matter. Therefore we pray you for the honnour and reverence of the Gods,
which were than favorers of our society and fellishipp, and in remembrance
of all the services and merittes toward all the Greeks: that you will
appease and mytigate your hearts toward us. And if you have at the
persuation of the Thebains, determined any thing against us, to revoke yt.
And the pleasure, that you have granted them, to slaye us all, repeal it for
to saulue us. In which doing, you shall purchase an glorious and honnorable
grace, instead of an cruel naughtynes. And also yt shall not be your shame,
for to give joy and pleasure to an othere. For it is right easy for you to
slaye us, but yt shall be very hard afterward, to abolish the infamye, that
you shall incur by that deed, for to slaye us unjustly, that be your
friends, and not your enemies, but through necessity. And in effect, if you
deliver us out of the danger and from the fear wherein we be, you shall
judge justly. Forsomuche specially, as we be yeldedde wyllingely into your
power, coming unto you, our hands holdenne up (in which case the laws of
Greece defend that men should be slain) and also that we have always and at
all times, desarued well toward you. And that yt so is, biholde in our
land the tombs of your cytezeins, that were slain by the Medes, which be by
us honored every year openly. And that not only with vulgar and common
honors, but with n^we habillementes and with all the fruits of our land,
which we offer unto them, as people, that be of one land, that is your
friend, and has been your con^ederate and some time accompaignedde too the
war. whereunto you shall do the hoole contrary through evil counsaille, if
you woll slaye us. For you ought to consider that Pausanias buried them in
this land, as in the land of friends, and among his allies. wherefore if you
slaye us and give our land to the Thebayns, what other thing shall you do,
but depryue us, your ancesters and parents of the honnors that they have, and
leave them in the land of their enemies that have slain them? And moreover
bring into seruytude that land, in the which the Greeks have recoueredde
their liberty. And also you shall leave the temples of the gods desert and
not inhabyted, wherein they have made the vows, by virtue whereof, they have
vainquishedde the Medes. And you shall take the furste aulters from them,
that have founded and edified them. which shall be certaynely (lords
Lacedemonyans) a thing abatinge and far inconuenyent unto your glory, to
manners, and common laws of Greece. For the memory of your progenytours and
our saruyces and merytes^ to have slain us, without being by us offended,
through the hatred of othere. And yt should be much more conuenable for you
to pardone us, and aswaginge your anger and displeasure, to suffer yourself to
overcome by a modestuous mercy. Consideringe and settinge before your eyes,
what evils you shall do and to what sort of people. And that such calamyttes
do very often chance to people, that have not deserved them. wherefore we pray
you (like as bicommeth us and as necessity constrayneth us) calling to our
aid the gods of our particular temples and those that be common to all Greece:
that you vouchesaulfe to receue us frendelye and to cease your displeasure at
our requests and declaratyons and have remembrance of your auncesters. For
whose memory and sepulcres, we require you, calling theyme unto our aid,
euenne dead, as they be that you will not to put us into the subiectyon of
the Thebayns, nor deliver your ancyente friends into the hands of your
natural ennemys. Aduertysinge you, that the self day, wherein we were in
danger to suffer extreme evil, is that same only, wherein we did so many
fair acts with your ancestres. But forsomuche, as, to a people that be in
such myserye and necessytye as we be, it is a miserable thing to make an
end of their speaking, though that yt preuayleth not to use yt by
necessytye, insomuche as afterward, when they have done, they attend and
look for the extremytie of death: yet in ceasynge too speak, we say to
you, that we have not rendredde our city unto the Thebayns. For rathere we
would have enduredde to dye by famyne, or by othere shameful death. But it is
to you (lords Lacedemonyans) for truth, to whom we be rendredde, putting
our trust in your faith. Wherefore if we cannot obteygne our request,
reasonne will, that ye serte us again in that state, wherein we were, to wytt,
in danger of that, which might chance us, putting you again in
remembrance, that from your hands you do, not co^mytt into the same of the
Thebayns, our mortal enemies, us the Plateens, which have been always
affectyonedde to all the Greeks and that have rendredde themself under your
part, and to your mercy. Butt rathere to be authors of our weal, to the
end that men may not say, that you that prete^de to put all the Greeks in
liberty, have utterly abolyshedde and extinguishedde us. In such manner
spoke the Plateens. Than the Thebayns, fearing lest the Lacedemonyans should
be mouedde with their speaking to grant theyme sum thing, demaundedde to
be likewise heard. For somuche, that in their opynyonne, to much audyence
and too long delay was grauntedde to the said Plateens for to answer to the
interrogation, that was made unto them. And after that license was grauntedde
them to speak, they began in this manner.

The oration and speakinge of the Thebayns, against the Plateens, and how they
were destroyed and slain. The.x. Chapter.
WE had not required this audyence (lords Lacedemoniens) if this people
here, had aunsweredde briefly to the interrogation made unto them, and if
they had not turned their talk against us by chargynge and blaming us,
and excusing themself without purpose, where no man accusedde them, and
highly praysynge themself, where no man blamed them. But now we be
constrained partly to deny and partly to faulsefie that, which they have
said. To the end that their oultrecuidance and presumptyon proffytte not
them: and our scilence and patience hurt us. And afterward you shall
judge, who shall have said the truth. And furst the cause of our enmytie
must be consyderedde. which is for that, that having foundedde and peopled
the city of Platee, the last of all the othere, that be in our country of
Beoce, with certain other towns, which we had won out of our said
country, and peopledde with our people, chasinge fromthence those, that were
there before: thies here only from the beginning disdaigned to be under our
empire, and would not obsarue ou^e laws and ordinances, which all the
othere Beotians did hold and keep. And parceyuing, that we would constrayne
them thereunto, they rendered themself to the Athenyans. through whose help,
they have done us very many dommages, whereof they have been well recompensed.
But touching this, that they say, that when the Medes entered into Greece, they
only, among all the Beotiens, would not take their party, which is the
matter, whereof they aduaunte themself, and that they reproach us the more:
we confess truly that they did not take part with the Medes, forsomuche, as
the Athenians did not take it. But by the same reasonne we say, that when the
Athenyans have holden against all the Greeks, they only among all the Greeks,
have been on their part. And also it is to be consideredde, how we did that
than, and how they have at this present, done this. For our city, at that
same time, was not governed by a lawful pryncipalite of a small number of
lords, nor yet by the common state: but by an othere form of lyuinge. which
is right odyous, both to all laws and to all cities. And differs not much
from tyranny, to wytt, by the puyssance of certain pa^ticulers, who,
trusting to enriche themself, if the Medes had obteigned the victory:
constraigned us to take their party. which thing neuerthelas the city for
troth did not universally. wherefore it should have no reproach, not being
than in her liberty. But sens that it took again and recovered her liberty,
and her ancyent laws, after departure of the strangers: It is to be
consideredde yt when the Athenya^s had assaulted Greece, and would have subdued
our country unto their domynyon, and in deed, when they occupied one part
thereof through occasion of civil dissensions: we after the victory, that we
had against them at Cheroneus, have not only delivered all the land of Beoce
out of their servitude, but also now of a frank courage, we be joined with
you to deliver the remnant of Greece from servitude. In contrybutinge as great
number of people as well fotemen as horsemen, as any other city of Greece. And
this is suffycyente for to purge and clear us of the crime, that they obiecte
against us to have takene part with the Medes. But we woll pain oureselues
to show, that you Plateans have more greatly offended Greece, and be worthy of
grievous punishment. You say that for to revenge you of us, ye became allies
and burgeoses of the Athenyans. Than were it conuenyent, that you should have
aydedde the said Athenyans against us only, and not against all Greece,
consyderinge that if they would have constrained you to yt, ye might have had
the Lacedemonyans, that would have defended and saved you, for the alliance
chiefly, that was made between you against the Medes, whereof you make so
great a buckler and defense. which also had been suffycient to defend you
against us, if we would have wronged you. wherefore without any doubt, you
have wyllingly chosen the part of the Athenyans. And after ye excuse
yourselfe, saying that yt had been shame for you to habandonne them, that
meryted well toward you. But it was much more shame to you, to forsake for
them, all the othere Greeks (with whom you had made oath and alliance) than
the Athenyans alone. And them, that would have delivered Greece from seruytude,
than those, that would bring yt into bondage. wherein ye have not rendredde
saruyce egally, nothere without your shame. Forsomuche, as if they come to
your aid, being by you required, yt was to defend you, like as you
youreselfe confess. But ye arue comme to theirs, for to wrong othere. And yet
neuerthelas, it is less dishonneste, not to render saruyce and pleasure in
like case, where one ought to do it by good reasone and justice, then only,
to will, to acquit it with an euille and unjust quareile. Than, having done
the contrary, you have suffycientlye declaredde, that the same, which you
only, among all the Beotieus, did in resistynge against the Medes, was
not only for love of the Greeks, butt rathere for that, that the Athenyans
did take the contrary part. fauourynge always that, which they have done
against all the othere Greeks. And now you will that those (against whom
ye have been with all your power at the desire and for the quarelle of othere)
should do you good. which is a thing v^reasonable. But rathere it is
convenient, that sense you have chosen the Athenyans part, that they aid
you, if they may. And it avails not that you allege the confederation,
that was made in that same time of the Medes, for to help you with.
Consyderedde that you have vyolatedde and brokenne yt, by geuinge aid and
succors to the Eginetes. And to certain othere, that should have been
subdewedde at the leage of Greece. And this you did not, for any
constrayncte, as we did, taking part with the Medes: butt you have done
yt with your good will, being always in your liberty, and living after
your laws, like as you do at this present day. And also you have not
regardedde the last request and sommo^s that was made unto you before ye
were assyegedde. to will you to be newter, and to live in rest and peace.
Thanne, what be all those among all the Greeks that may be more worthy to be
hayted than you, that would show your valyauntnes and employe all your
power to their damage. Declarynge by this clerelye, that if you have at any
time been good (as you have said) it was not of nature. For the true
inclynation of people is knowin when yt is permane^te by nature: as yours has
been, to persevere with the Athenyans in this unjust and dampened quarrel. And it
is enough for to show, that we followedde the party of the Medes, against
our will, and that you have folowedde that same of the Athenyans,
wyllinglye. As touching that which you have said afterward, that we have
wrongedde and assaulted you and your city unjustly, on your festival day and
during the treaty of peace, we answer you that euenne in this, we judge
that you have more failledde and offended^ than we. For if when we came unto
your city we had geuenne it assaulte^ or had destroyed your lands and houses
being in the feldes, it might well have been said, that we did you injury.
But if any your citezenis that were most noble and richeste of the city (for
that they desired to withdraw you from the alliance of strangers and to come
to the commen laws of the Beotiens) came to require us to go thither, what
injury have we done? for if injury be therein committed, it ought to be rather
imputed to them, that led our people, and not to them that were led, though
that in our opinyon there was no offense naither on the one side nor of the
other. Considered that they yt were Cytezeins, as well as you, and had more to
lose then you, did openne us the gates, and did let us into the City (and
that not ennemylyke, but peasablie) for ^o give order, that those among you,
that were worste, should not be more evil, and they that were good should be
honored according to their deserte. And so we came more for to moderate your
wylles, then to extermyne and hurt your parsons. And in reducyng you to the
furst and ancient fraternity that we had togyders, we would that you should
not have had enmity to any parson of the world, but that ye should have lived
in good peace and amity with all me^. And we show well that it was our mind,
for when we were within your town, we did not any act of enmity, another of
violence to any parsone, but we cawsed to be publysshed with the sound of
trompette, that all they, which would live after the common laws of the
Beotiens, should retire unto us, whereunto ye agred wyllyngly, and came to
treat and common with us. But afterward, seeing that we were in small nombre,
you entreated us not after that sort, yea, though ye than should and might have
had color to pretend that we had oultragyouslye used you to enter into your
City, without knowlaige and consent of the people. For you did not persuade us
by words and exhortacions to depart out of your City, and not there to
innouate or establysh any custom, without setting upon us ennemylyke, as you
have done. But contrary to the apoynctement and conuenaunt that we had
concluded togyders, ye came to assa^lte us furyously, and yet notwithstanding,
we ask none amends for them that were slain at that same conflycte, for it
may be said, that they in some manner were slain by right of war. But for
them that yielded them self unto you, and that ye did take living, promisinge
to save their lives, we maynteygne, that you caused them to dye vngracyously
and noughtely, and that you did without any doubt, an unjust and ungentle
act, in three manners within a very small space of time. To wit in breakyng your
promise and apoynctement, afterward in killing them with whom you had made
it, and thirdly by promising us deceitefully not to slay them: saying yt we did
no damage in your land. And yet nevertheless you have audacytie to say, that
we do you wrong, and that men would punyshe you against reasone. Truly ye
shall be declaredde innocents and absolved of pain, if these judges here woll
judge unjustly. But if they be good Judges, you shall receive punishment for
your misdeeds. which things we have called to remembrance, Lords
Lacedemonyans, as well for your interestes, as for ours, to wit for yours, to
the end that condempnynge theyme, you understand to have done justice. And
for ours, to the intent that men may know, that demandinge and requiringe
that they be punished, we have in nothing co^spyred nor done any thing worthy
of reprehensyon. And you ought not to be moved unto pytie, for the virtues
and ancye^t glories of thies people here, if they have had any. For such
things ought to help them, to whom men would do wrong. But unto them that
have done any vyllaynous thing, that same should double their pain, as to thies
here, which now have offended, without any reasonable occasion. Also the
lamentations and pytefull rehersalles that they make, in requiringe to their
aid, the sepoulcres of your ancestors, and bewaylinge the lack of their
friends, ought not to move you to pytie. For we do you to understand, that
our young citezeins were much more cruelly entreated by these here that slew
them. The fathers of whom, were partly slain, in Coronie, bringinge unto you
succor from Beoce. And the other that remain in their age, depryuedde of
their childrenne, desolate in their howses, require thereof much more
reasonably vengeance, than thies here require grace. For they be above all
othere worthy of mercy, that have sufferedde wrong against reasonne. But
they that have done yt, do merytt, that they, which have suffredde yt, should
rejoice themself by seeing their calamyties. Like as thies be here, who, for
their fault, be thus habando^ned, they being wyllyngly departedde from
their best friends and allies. And having iniuriedde us more through
hatredde and euylle will, than by reasonne, without having been by us in
anny thing offendedde. And yette they shall not suffer all the pain, that
they desarue though they shall be at the present punyshedde right sharply.
And this is not true that they allege that they yeldedde them selves with
their good wylles, holding up their hands against us in fayghtynge, butt
they be by express couenaunte remyttedde to your judgment. wherefore the
matters being such as we have said, we require you (lords Lacedaemonians)
that you would susteigne and help the law, which thies here have offended,
and to render unto us, that have been unjustly wroungedde, grace and reward,
according to our demerytte, for the saruyces that we have done through our
industry and trauaille. In such manner that it be not said, that we have
had the repulse of you, through the words of this people here And to
show example unto al Greece, that you ground not youreselfe upon words, but
upon deeds. For truly when matters be good of themself, there nedethe not many
words. But to color and mytigate a mysdede, it is very requysitt to use
artificial and sturrynge words. And if those, that have the authorytie to
judge, as it is with you at this present, having somarely knowin the
difficulties and doubtful causes, would thereupon ordeyne at ones, without
putting again the matters into disputatyon: men should not study somuche to
forge fair words in villaynous things. Thus spoke the Thebayns. After that
the judges Lacedemonyans, had heard both the parties, they determynedde to
persyste in their interrogation, to wit, if they had merytedde any grace
of the said Lacedemonyans, during the war. Forsomuche as yt semedde unto
theyme that in the time passedde, they were gouernedde reasonablye after the
laws and conuentyons of Pausanyas, until they refusedde the part to remain
newter, before they were assiegedde. And that sense they had refused yt, the
same Lacedemonyans were not bound by the said conuenauntes. And also the
said Plateens had by that mean, ill acquytedde themself toward them. So
they causedde them all to comme one after the other. And demanded of them, as
above. And seeing that they answered nothing, they caused the^ to be carried
fro^the^s into an other place. where they al were slain without that any one
eskaped. which were found of Plateens more than two houndred, and of
Athenyans, that were come to their aid, twenty and five, and the women carried
away prysonners. As touching the city, the Thebains did give it to the
Megaryans who were dryuene from their city, through the deuisions among them,
and unto other Platee^s, that had taken their part: for to inhabitt there. But
the year gone about, they plucked it down from the bottom up by the
foundations, and builded it new again nighe unto the temple of Juno, next
the which, they made a palais, the largenes whereof, was two houndred foot,
of all sides, in form of a cloister, having houses and habytations of all
sides above and benethe, wherein they did bestow, all the pla^kes, the ports
and the other fair ornaments of the houses, that they had plucked down. And
also furnished them with couches and beds, and did dedicate all unto the said
goddess, to whom moreover they edyfied a new temple, all of stone entailled
or karued, conteigninge an houndred foot of length. Touching the terrytorie
of the said city of Platee, yt was let to farm and to labor for ten
years, to wytt, to the Thebains, one small portione, and to the Lacedemonyans
the greateste part. which they did take for to do pleasure to the said
Thebayns. For also by this same cause, they were so contrary to the said
Plateens. Thinkinge that the said Thebains might help them greatly and do
the^ great service in that war, which they had bigonne against the
Athenyans. Such end, took the siege of Platee, foore skoore and thirtene
years, after, that the Plateens had made alliance with the Athenyans.

How the Peloponesians had an victory by sea against the Athenyans and
Corcyrians that took their part, by means of the deuysion, that was moved
among the said Corciriens. The.xi. Chapter.
IN thies enterfeates and busynes, the forty ships, that the Peloponesians had
sent unto ye succors of Lesbos, parceyuinge the coming of the army by sea
of the Athenyans, that came against them: they enforsed themself to retire
with the most diligence, that they could. Being chased by fortune of the sea
into Creta, and fromthens without order, making toward Peloponese, they
encountered in their way nighe unto Cyremus, thirtene galleys, which were of the
Leucadyans and Ambrasyans. whereof Brasidas, Brasidas.
son of Tallides, Tellides.
was Capytaine, and for his counseillour he had Alcidas who was comme thider to
him. For the Lacedemonyans, having failled thenterpryse of Lesbos, renewed and
strengthenedde again their army by sea, and sent them into Corcyre,
understanding, that the town was in division, and knowinge, that the Athenians
had in all, but twelve ships in that quartier, which they kept at Naupacte. For
this cause they ordoned to the said Alcidas and Brasidas, that they should
depart from the said place, before the Athenians should parceyue yt,
thinkinge that the matter should come to good effect, through the dissension,
that was among the Corcyriens. By occasion of this, that those among them,
that were takenne by the Corynthians in the bataylle by the sea, that was at
Epidanne, being by the same Corynthyans sent again unto their houses under
color to go to seek the raunsonne that their friends of Corinthe had
answered for them, which. amountedd to foore skoore talentes: but for the
troth, to practyse the other Corciri^ns and to bring again ye City into the
obeisance of the Corciriens, they did the best that they cou^de toward the
other Citezens for to cause them to depart from the alliance of the Athenyans.
So it chanced that duringe this time, arrived two ships at the port of
Corsyre, the one sent by the Corinthiens and the other by the Athenia^s. And in
both of them were Ambassadors from the said two Cities for to practyse and
get the Corciriens, which were heard, and had audyence the one after the
other. And the conclusion and answer of ye said Corciriens was that they
would remain allies and confederates of thathenians according to their pac^es
and co^uenauntes, and with the Lacedaemonians they would continue fre^des, as
they had accustumed. Which answer and deliberation was so made through the
persuacion of Pithias. Who tha^ had greatest authority in ye town, and had
made himself a burgeose of Athens. By occasion whereof, the other yt labored
to the contrary as we have showed, caused him to be called into Judgment
charginge him that he would bring the City into subieccion of the Athenians,
But he was absolved and discharged of that accusacion. And anon after, he
accused five of the said adversaries, the rychest of all, chargynge the^ yt
they had rased down the pales that were at the closture of the temple of
Jupiter and Alcinas, in which case the penalty was ordained by their law, to
be one s^ater, for every pale, which was to much for them to pay, for this
cause being condemned, they withdrewe themself into franchise within the
temple, for to obtain a moderation of ye said penalty. B^t Pithias did
empesche the moderacion, and exorted the other Citezenis to cause them to pay
it with the uttermost. Than those that were persetuted, considering that he had
the authority in the senate and that so long as he had it, the other would
take no other part but that same, that the Athenians did take, they assembled
together in good nombre, and with their daggers entered impytuously within the
senate, and so did slay Pithias and of the other as well senators, as private
Citeze^s, to the nombre of threscore. The other, that took part with Pithias,
saved them self in right small nombre and rendered them into the ship of the
Athenians, which yet was within the port. After that the coniuratours and
conspicers had done this execusion, they assembled and showed them that ye,
which they had done was for ye weal of the City, and yt they should not be
reduced to ye servitude of the Atheniens, and in the remenante they ought to
show themself newter between the Athenians and the Peloponescians, and to
signefye them and make answer to them both, that they should not come into
their port, but peasablie and with one shy^e only, and that they, that
should bring any more, should be holden and reputed for ennemies, which decree
being hy them so publyshed, and the people constryned to confirm it, they
sent certain Citezens to the Athenians to sygnifye unto the^ what was done
and to show unto them yt it was couenaunted that they should so do and also to
persuade unto the Corciriens that had withdrawin them self ^hyder, that they
should not purchase or procure any inconvenient, whereby troble might chance
unto the City. But they being aryued in the City, were incontinently taken as
sedecious people, to gyders with them, that had subourned and p^ouoked them
thereunto, and were sent prisoners unto Egine. In the mean time, the princypall
Citezeins of Corcyre, that took part with the Corynthyans, the galley and the
Ambassadors of the said Corinthians being aryued, russhed and furiously did
set upon the comynaltie of the City, which defendid it self, for acertayne
time, but at the end, they were vanquysshed and driven back, to y^ nygh to
night, they were constreyned to retire into the fortress, and to the high
highest places of the city, in which places, they being fortefyed, seized
them selves of the gate hillaicquus. The other that had had vic^ory seized
themselves of the markete place, round about the which, they had the more
part their houses, and of the gate, that is of the land side at the descente
and going down from the said markett place. On the morrow they had an
eskarmiche with strokes of stones and darts only. And every of the parties
did send i^to the feldes to practice and get the sklaues on his party,
promysinge to ge^e them lybertye, who more redely did chose the part of the
cominaltye. B^t unto the other, there came eight houndred men with succors out
of the quarter of maine land. And so they came again to battille, one only
day, bitwene two the furste. In the which, the comynaltye had the uictorye,
as well for that, that the place, wherein they did fight, was most to their
advantage. As also for yt they were more people in number. And morouer the
women of the town, who took their part, aided them maruelously by an
hardenes^ moore great, than their condition did suffer, in susteigning the
sturdynes and strength of the enemies, and casting tyles and stones from the
tops of the houses down upon them. The principal Citezinis, being than put
into disorder and flight, upon thentringe of the night, and fearyng lest
fourthwith the comynaltie wi^h great cry and force would come to get the port
and the ships which they had, and that doing should slaye them all, they
set fire in the houses that were upon the markett place and about yt, as well
in their own, as in the same of others for to empesche that the comunaltye
should not pass that way. By mean of which fire, marchandises, of a right
great price and valor, were burned. And if the wind had blown against the
city, it had been in great danger to have been utterly and holy burned, and,
by this mean the strife cessed for that night. And they kept them selves in
armure, as well on the one side as on the other, every man in his quarter. But
the ship Corinthyan, that was in the port, vndersta^^dynge that the
comynaltye had had the victory departed secretly, and ^ykewyse many of those,
that came out of the main land to the succors of the principal Citezenis,
returned privily into their houses. The morrow after, Nicostratus, Duke of the
Athenyans, aryued in the port of Corcy^e with twelve ships, and five
hundredth me^. Messenians, coming from Naupac^e, who, for to reduce all the
City into co^corde, entreated and trauaylled among them, that they should
agree and be fre^des, and that ten, only of them that had been the
principallest of the sedition, should be punysshed, and that they neuerthelas
should not abide Iudgeme^te, but save themself. And as for the rest that all the othere should tarry in the City, as before and that all with one accord
should confirm again the alliance with the Athenyans, to wit, to be friends
of friends, and enemies of enemies. After yt this appoinctement was so
concluded and agrede, the principallest and chiefest of the people, treated
with Nicostratus, that he should leave them five of the ships to defend, that
the other party should not rise nor stir. And moreover that he should charge
and take into his other ships, those that they should advertise to be of the
contrary part, and carry them away with him, to thintente that they might not
make any mutyne and insurrection, which thing he granted them. But so as
they made the roll of theyme, whom they would have charged upon the said
ships, they fearinge to be carried into Athenes wythdrewe themself into
franchise and sanctuarye, into the temple of Castor, and Pullur. And though
that Nicostratus did put them in comforce and exhorted them to come with him,
yet could he not persuade the^. By occasion whereof the people went into there
houses, and took all the harnes that they had, and had slain some, that they
encountered, if that Nicostratus had not empesched and let them, which
perseaued by the other, that were of that bend, they wythdrewe them selves
into the temple of Juno, to the noumber of foore houndred, whereby the people,
fearing, lest they would make some innovation and novelty, he persuaded the^
so, that they were content to be sent into a Isle that was foranempste the
said temple in the which, they should be furnisshed of that, that was
necessary for their lyuinge. The things being in such estate, four or five
days, after that the said Citezenis were carried into the said Islande, the
shypps of the Peloponesians that remained in Cyllene, after their return from
Iouiu^, whereof Alcidos was Capytanie and his counsaillor Brasidas which were
in noumber Liii. arrived in the port of Sybota, which is a City in the main
land, and at the break of the day, they took their way toward Corcyre,
which parceyued by the Citezenis, they were much astonyed, as well through cause
of their Ciuylle dessencions as also for the coming of the ennemys. And so
they armed three skoore ships with their people and sent them the one after
the other to mete with the ennemys, so as they were charged. How be it the
Athenyans prayed them that they would suffer them to go for most in the
Battaille and that they would come afteral togider. Now the Corcirians
saillinge thus despersed and out of order, after that they bygonne to approach
and draw nyghe unto ye Peloponesians, two of the same Corcyrians ships came
to Ioigne with them and they that were within the other did fight togithers
among themselfes without any order, which parcey^ed by the Peloponesians
they sent twentye of their ships against them, and the other made toward
the twelve of the Athenyans, among whom there was one of Salamyne and an
other of Parale. The Corcyrians, through the dysorder that was among them,
cast themself into a whele or rou^denes. But the Athenyans fearyng to be
enclosed by the multitude of thennemys ships, came not directly against the
main ^lete but charged upon one of the Corners and so did sincke one of their
ships, and afterward they did cast them self into a roundenes, and
sailled tourninge about the enemies trusting to put them in disorder, which
parceyued by the.xx. ships that were gone against the Corcyriens, and
fearinge lest yt should happene, like as it chanced unto them at Naupacte,
they came to the succors of their compaignyons, and all Ioignned togiders,
they made directly against the Athenyans, who retired fair and easily. But as
the peloponesyans charged lively upon them, the Corcirians did put them selves
in flight, and after that the conflict and battle had continued until night,
the Peloponesians had the victory^. Than the Corcirians fearing that the
ennemys having the victory would come to assail them in the City, or that
they would take with them the Citizens that were sent into the Isle, or do some
other enterprise with them, they did charge and take in, the said Citezenis, and
carried them again fro the Isle into the temple of Juno, and afterward they
did set watches in the town. Neuerthelas the enemies, though they hade the
victory, durst not come against the town, but with thirtene ships which
they had taken with Corcyriens, they retired into the port, fromewhence they
were departed, nor also the day folowinge they durst remove, although the
City was in great trouble, and that Brasidas was of opinion, that they should
have gone thither. For Alcid^s that was of greater auctorytie was of a contrary
mind, and they went fromethence to land at the promontorye of Leucynne, at
which place being landed, they did many euylles in the land of Corcyre.
During this time, the Corcyrians fearinge their cumminge, had a parliamente
with them that were retired into the temple of Juno how they might defend the
City and with some of them they had so much persuaded, that they had caused
the^ to enter into the ships, whereof they had armed thirtye, the best yt
they might haue^ for to wythstonde thennemyes if they had come. But they after
that they had pyllaged and wasted the territorye unto the south, returned into
the ships and so sailed away. And the night following, sign was made unto
them by his lyghts, that there was departed three skoore shypps Athenyans from
Leucade, which made against them, like as it for troth was. For the Athenyans
understanding the dessencion and mutyne, that was in the city of Corcyre, and
the aryuall of the ships that Alcydas co^ducted, they sent Eurymedone, son
of Thucleas with the said.lx, ships i^to that party, whereof Alcidas and the
Peloponesians being advertised, they took their way costyng the land, for to
go into their country with the most diligence, that they could. And to
thintente that it should not be perceived, that they took their course by the
main sea, trauessed, by the distreate of Leucade, directly upon the other
side. The Corcyrians being aduertysed, as well of the departure of the
Peloponesians, as of the coming of the Athenyans, set again within the city
of Myssena the citezenis, that were dryuene fromthence. And afterward caused
their ships to depart, which they had charged with their people, and they
saylled unto the port Hyllaiquus, and in saylynge alongest the land, they did
put to death all thennemyes that they found, which thing they parceyuinge,
that abodde afterward, they constraygned the Cytezenis which they had caused
to enter into their ships, to go out of them, and they went unto the temple
of Juno and persuaded them somuche that were wythdrawin thither, that there were
fyftye, that were content to put their case to Justice, and to come to defend
their cause in Judgment, the which al were condemned to death. Which thing
they understanding that abodde in the temple, did every one kill them selves.
Some hanged themself upon trees, other did slaye the one the other among
themself, other by other means, in such manner, that there eskaped not one,
and moreover during the space of seuene days, that Euremedon tarried there with
the three skoore ships, the Corcyryans caused all them of the City to dye,
that they took for their enemies under couloure that they would subuerte and
destroy the common estate. Some there were, which were slain for particular
ennymyties, some other by reason of monnye that was owinge them, by theyr^ own
debtours. And in effect there happened in that same town, all the crueltyes
and inhumanyties, that are wont to be seen in like case, yea and yet worser.
For it was found, that the fathere did kyl the son, and also men were slain
within the temple yt self, and also they drew men out of the temples for to
slaye them. Some there were which were chayned with yrons in the Chapel of the
god Bathus, where they dyed with a violente death. So much cruel was that
sedycion and mutyne.

The conspiraties and partialyties that arose, as well in the City of Corcyre,
as in all other cities of Greece, by means of the war that was bitwene the
Athenyans and the Peloponesians, and the execrable euilles yt thereby chanced.
The xii. Chapter.
THat seditious and civil dissension seemed somuche more cruel, for that yt
was the furst, that chanced in that same quartier, but afterward, it reigned
in manner, through all the Cities of Greece. For the more part of the people
took party with Thatheniens: and the most honest, the same with the
Lacedemonyans, which parcialitte and occasion of Cyuile dessention, they had
not had before that war. But during ye same they ceased not to call to their
aid, those of the one part, for to anoye the other For they that desired to
have mutation and change were well aysedde to have that color and occacion
whereby many great and heinous euilles chanced in the Cities, and shall happen
always as long as the people shall be of such nature and inclynacion, whither
they be the greatest, meaner, or of the other sort, after that the cases of
the mutacions and chaunses shall happen, which, thing chances not in time
of peace. For that, that the people have better opinion and will, as well in
public matters, as in particular, not being constrained to come to thies
forced ennemyties. But war, by bringing of lack and necessity of
victuailes, and wythdrawinge the habu^dance of all things, makes herself
maystres by force, and also easily draws unto her, the vyolence and evil
will of many, for to pursue and follow the condition of the time. Through such
means than, were, in that time vexed and troubled, the es^ates and governors
of the Cities of Greece, by reason of the cyuill seditions. And when it was
knowin that an Insolency had been done and committed in one place, the other
took couraige, yet to do worse, for to make some new matter, or to show that
they were more diligente and inuentiue, than the other, orelles more insolente
and desirous to revenge themself. And all the euylles which they committed,
they disguised and named by new and unaccustomed names. For temeritie and
rashness, they named magnanymytie and noblenes of courage, so that the rash
were named virtuous defendors of their friends. And slackenes and faintnes,
they named an honest fear. And modesty, they named covered pusillanimytie or
cowardenes. A hedlinge indignation, manhood and hardynesr. Prudente cosultacio^
and deliberatinge in causes, a sensed and clokedde deceate. And in effect he yt
showed himself always furious, was reputed a faithful friend, and he yt
spoke against him, was holden for suspect. He, that well executed his
enterpryses and vengeance, was reputed wise and of knowlaige, and yet more the
same, which prevented such like mischefe of his enemy, or that provided, yt
on his part not one man should shrynke from the faction and deed, or else that
should ones fear the ennemys. And in a total some, he that was most prompt
and ready to hurt an other, was most praised. And yet more. he, that instructed
other to do that to an other, that he thought not on. And also this compaigny
and consederation was greater among the strange people, than among parents,
for yt they were most ready to do any enterprise without any refusal and
excuse. ^or also they made not thies assembles and conspiracions by aucthorite
of laws, nor for the welthe of the common weal, but for a covetousness against
all reason. And the faith which they kept among themself, was not for any
religion that they had, but for to continue that pestelence, and that same
crime, in the common weal, If any of the compaigny said any good and honest
thing to ye contrary, they would not accept it for such, another as coming of
a noble courage. But if they might defend it with deed, they loved much
better to revenge the^ self than not to be oultraged. If they made any
appoinctemente with solemn oath: it endured, until one of the parties found
it self strongest. But for ye least occasion that he could find his
compayguion at his advantage, he was more Ioyefull to apprehende him under
color of that appoyntmente, than if he had defied him before, as well for
that, that it was moore sure, as also that it seemed unto him a great prudencie
to have ouercomed yt strife, through malice. For also this thing is more
comone, that the unhappy and evil (whereof the number is infinitt) may be
rather called industrious, than the simple and innocent, be named good. And
also commonly the people be ashamed to be so simple, and rejoice to be
ungracious. All which things proceeded of auaryce and couetice of other men's
goods. And there upon arose the conspiraties and partakynge. For they that
were Capitanes of the bendes for the cities, did take every one an honest
occasion of their partiality, to wytt, they that susteigned ye common estate,
said that it was a cyuill Equalitye. And they that maignteigned the
governance of a small number of particular people, said, that the rule of the
richeste men, was that same, that ought to be preferred. And thus did every one
debate to maigteigne the common weale^ as in words: but ye end of their debate
and question, and of the effect of their victory, was to enterpry^e all cruel
things, the one against the other, by violence or by form of Justice, and
with punishemente, not having regard to the common weal, nor to that, which
Justice required. But for pleasure that they had to see the evil, happene the
one to the other, it was compassed by faulse condempnacyons and vyolente
oppressyons being always ready and dysposed to execute soubdamely, their evil
intent with out having any regard, to the relygion of gods, in thing
that they had done nor what they had contracted. But he tha^ vnderconlour of
deceitful and crafty words, could best deceive the other, was most esteemed.
And if there were any that would be newter without taking the one part or the
other, he was ouertrodene by both parts, the cause was for that, that he took
not their part, or for envy that they had to see him in rest, and exempted
from evils, that the other susteigned. And in such manner, by mean of the
factions and bendes, all the country of Greece endured all sorts of euylles.
And the simplicity (whereof the noblenes was chief parttaker) was extermyned
and persecuted with great derisyon. And it was taken for an excelent thing,
to preuente the assaults and enterpryses the one of the other. And if at any
time they reconcyled themself together, there was no suertye in words, nor
fear and reverence to the oath, that they had made. But rather for the
diffidence and mistrust that they had, the one of the other: they loved better
to stand at their defense, fearing to be circumuented, than to give faith to
the promesses of their ennemys. And chiefly the rudest and lesser hable people
did very often provide better, for their case: than the more hable. For
knowing the inbicilitye of ye other and by that mean, fearing to be abused
with their words and surprised and circu^uented by their subtyl wits they
came furst rashely to the works of ye deed. Where the more wise and more
hable^ for the small estymacion that they had of the other, trusting that by
their wit and malice they would provide for things afar of, and also
willing to execute their enterpryses, rather by counsayll and knolage, than by
force, were very oftene circumuented and overcome. Many such examples of
audacite and rashenes were seen at Corcyre. And moreover they that were ruled
and governed did all things, more by violence and by oultrage, than by reasone
and by modesty. Taking vengeance of the unjust punishments that had been done
unto them or unto their friends. And likewise that, which the poor did that
woolde have enryched themself, or they which coueted the goods of their
neighbor. which they hoped to obteigne by exact and unlawful means (which
was one of the pryncipall causes of the said euyls) and also those, that were
not moved by couetyce, but rather by indignation and ignorance: thinkinge that
that was lawful, did all those things cruelly and without any bridle of
reasone. For that manner of insolent and troublesome lyuinge, did tread down
and vainquishe all laws, and the common and accustomed nature of men. And
declared well that they did trangresse and violate them wyllingly, inasmuche as
it showed itself more debile and weak, than angry and wrathful, and more
puissante, than all the laws, enemy of theyme that had most goods,
preferrynge vengeance before justice, and rapyne before innocentie, and
enuyinge the power, there as in nothing they could hurt yt, corruptinge and
violatinge for desire of vengeance, ye disposition of the laws. wherein all
men ought to have hope of health and comfort, without resaruinge to themself
any other mean to help themself in any affayr or danger that might chance.
Such things were done, and perpetrated among the Corcyrians, furste and
before that it was in the other cities, Eury medon with his people, being wtin
the same. who afterward departed fromthence. And after his departure, those,
of the city that were saved, which were to the number of five houndred, took
the walls, that were in the main land. And by that mean enjoyed their
lands. And moreover they went to ouerron the Isle, and did much hurt and had
great bowties and prays of the inhabytantes thereof, whereby the city came into
great necessity of victuaile. Afterward, they sent Ambassadors to the
Lacedemonyans and to the Corinthians, demanding of them succor for to reenter
into the city, but saying that they could have none fromthence, within a time
after, they assembled a certain number of ships and souldyars strangers,
with the which they entered into the Isle, and were there in all about six
houndred. And after yt they were landed, they did burn their ships, to the
end that they should not hope to return. Afterwarded, they went to win the
mou^te of Histonus. wherein they fortefyed themself with walls, so that they
governed the terrytorie, and did great damage to them that were within the
city.

How the Athenians sent their Army into Sicille, and of that they did. and
what happened unto them aswelle in the end of that same summer, as also
duringe the winter, and about beginning of the summer ensuynge, as well in the
said country of Sycill, as in Greece, and in their own land. And how the
Lacedemonyans did build the city of Heracleus. The.xiii. Chapter.
About the end of that same summer, the Athenyans sent twentye ships into
Sycille, under the conducte of Laches, son of Menalopus, and of Coriaphades,
son of Euphiletus, for that, that the Syracusains had war against the
Leotins. which Syracusyans were a^^yed in Greece, with all the cities of the
country of Dorya, excepted the Camerins. And the same Doriens had made
allyaunce with the Lacedemonyans, before that the war bigan, though they came
not thereunto. And in Italy they had ye Locria^s for their allies. As touching
the Leontins, they had in Greece, the Chalcydes and the Camerins, and in Italy,
those of Rhege which were of their nation. who, as allies of the said Leontins,
sent to the Athenyans, as well for thauncyente amyt^e, that they had with
theyme: as also for that, that they were Ioniens, prayinge them that they
would send some number of ships for to defend them against the
Siracusians. which did keep them from the vsuage both of the sea and also of
the land which thing the Athenyans granted, and sent them shypps vnd^^
color frendeshipp and affynytie, that they had together. But for ye troth,
it was only for to defend, that no victuales should be brought from that
quarter into Peloponese, and for to epsy if they had any mean, to subdue the
Isle of Sycile. The ships of Athenye^s being than arrived at Rhege, they
begone to make war, in compaignie of the Rhegins. But sone after, the winter
came upon them, which caused it to cease. At beginning whereof biggane again
the pestylence in the city and country of Athens. which was never clearly
cessed but only for certain seasons. But at that time, it continued all the
hole year. And before, it had endured in one course, two years long, which
was the thing that most enfeabled and destroyed the power of the Athenyans.
For their dyed of that pestilence more than fore thousand and foore houndred
fighters with ordenance, and three houndred horsemen, besides the remenant of
the people, that was innumerable. There was also great Earthquaks at many
times, as well in Athens, as in Eubee, and likewise in the country of Beoce,
but above all in Or^homenia. In that self winter, ye Athenyans, that were yet
in Sycile, and the Rhegins with their thirty ships, invaded the Isles, that be
called the Isles of Eolus, The Islands of Acoly.
for that, that in summer time men might not pass there, for that there was
no fresh water. And the same Isles be inhabited with Liparia^s, that were of
the country of Cnydus. But pryncipally they kept themself in one of the same
that is called Lipare, L^para.
which is not very great. And fro^thence they passed to the othere, to wytt,
Dydymus, Didima
Strongilus and Hierus, Strongile.

Hiera.


for to labor and sow them. In which Isle of Hierus, the people of the
country bileuedde that Uulcanus dwelled and used his forge. Uulcanus.
Forsomuche as in the night, me^ might see a great flambe of fire to arise,
and in the day, a great smoke. All which Isles be situated in the cost of
Sycile, and of the land Missena, and they did than take part with the
Siracusains. By reasone whereof, the said Athenyans and Rhegins went to
ouercomme them. And seeing, that they would not give up, they destroyed all
their lands. Afterward, they returned unto Rhege. And it was the fyfth year
of the war, that Thucidides has wryttonne. At beginning of the summer
followynge, the Peloponesians and their allies made a freshhe, their assembly
for to enter into the country of the Athenyans, and came unto the destreate of
Peloponese, under the conducte of Agide, Agis.
son of Archidamus, king of Lacedemonyans. But parceyuynge the earthquakes
that daily chanced, they retired, without entering into the said country.
which earthquakes were so great, that in the country of Eubeus, the sea did
so strongelye check and beat about the town of Orobie, Orobie.
that it ouerflowedde all the low part of the town. And although that it
wythdrewe afterward from one part thereof, yet it remained in an othere
part, and euersens has remained there. By which ouerflowyng, all the
inhabitants of that same town were drownedde and peryshed. Those resaruedde,
that found the mean to wythdrawe themself into the height of the city, and
the like alluuio^ and ouerflowing happened in the Isle of Atalantus, Atala^ta.
nighe unto the land of Locriens. In the whcih a castle, that the Athenyans
there had, was in part ouerflowed and beaten down. And of two ships, that
were there in the poorte, the one was clerelye frushedde in pieceas And
likewise unto ye town of Paperethus, Peparethum.
there came a goulphe of the sea, (and yett without annye Earthquake and
ouerflowynge) that did beat down one part of the wall, togider with the
paiais and many othere howses. Of the which al^^^yons and ouerflowynges the
Eearthquakes (as I think) were the cause. For on that side, where it most
troubledde and quaked, yt chasedde and repulsed the sea from it. which,
retournynge again with great force and violence, caused the allnuyons and
ouerflowynges. In the same summer many exploictes of war were done in
Sycille, as well by the strangers as by them of the country, and chiefly by
the Athenyans and their allies. whereof the mos^e notable and those, that I have
had knowlaige of, were, that Chariades, Chareda.
duke of Athenyans being slain in battle by the Syracusians, Laches, who
was capytaine of the ships, went with his people against the town of Mylus in
the country of Messanyens, Myloe.
in which, he had two compaignies of Messanyens, which having made two
embushementes against the said Athenyans and their allies, weere repoulsedde
and put to flight. And many of theyme slain. wherewyth they of the town
were so afraid, that the said Athenyans and their allies, coming before
that same town, they fell to a composition. By which they rendredde the
Castle. And promysedde to sarue and aid against them of Messane. which
Messanyens, parceyuing that power to come against them, rendredde theymselfe
likewise by composition, Geuynge hostages and all othere manner of suertye. In
the same summer, the Athenyans sent.xxx. ships about the country of
Peloponese, under conducte of Demosthenes, Demosthenes.
son of Alcisteins, and of Procles, Procles
son of Theodorus. And three skoore other they sent against ye Isle of Melus
with two thousand souldyars under conducte of Nycias, son of Nyceratus, for
that the Melyans refusedde to obey to those Athenyans, and to contribute to
their wars. And so they constraignedde them to comme thider by composytion,
after that they had destroyed their lands. And fromthence they passedde
into Orope which is appositt and foranempste the said Isle in main land.
Oropus
In which place being arryuedde, at the entering of the night, they came all
in armure out of their ships and went against the city of Tanagre in the
country of Beoce. Tanagra.
Into which place came o^ thoder side (euenne at one time) all the people of
Athenes under conducte of Hipponicus, Hipponicus.
son of Callias and of Eurymedon, Eurimedon.
son of Thucles^ who being all ioynned togider, planted their camp before
the town, where they did abide that same day, and did all kinds of
euylls in the country and round about yt. And the morrow after, they of the
town, issuinge fourth with ce^tayne succor that was comme to them from
Theme, they repoulsed theyme shamefully and slew a great number of them. And of
the harnes, that they took from theyme, they raised up a tokene of victory
before the town. Afterward they returned thider fromwhens they came, to
wit, the one, to the ships and the othere to the city. And they that
retournedde to the ships, after that they had pyllaged the sea coasts in the
country of Locryans, they returned into their quarter. In that same time, the
Lacedemonya^s did build the city of Heracleus, The fou^^datio^ of the city of
Heraclea.
in the country of Trachinie^ and peopled it with their people for this
occasion. The Mylyens be divided into three parts. Milienses^
whereof the one be the Paralye^s, the other the Hyeryens and the third the
Thrachynyens. Against which Thrachynynes, the Oetes their neighbors having
war they were from the beginning of opinion, Oetei.
to call the Athenyans to their aid. But not trustinge assuredly unto them,
they sent likewise to the Lacedemonyans, Tisamenus, Tisamenus^
their ambassador. with who^, they of Dorie, which is the Metripolytain city
of the Lacedaemonians sent asso their Ambassade, for that they also were vexed,
and troubled by the said Oetys. The Lacedemonyans having tha^ hard that same
Ambassade, determined to send of their people for to build ye said
habytacion, as well for defense of the said Trachiniens and Doriens, as also for
that it seemed to them, that it should be much commodious for the war that
they had against the Athenyans, for there is but a very small sea to pass
from thence, into Eubee, and also they may easily make there, their Army by
sea against the Eubeens, and also it should be a recours unto them, wha^ they
would go into Thrace. For which reasons, they set all their study for to
build the said habitacion. And after that they had demanded counsel of the
god Apollo in the temple of Delphos, they sent thither a great number of
laborers, as well of the country, as of the places nygh adioynyng. And also
they caused it to be publyshed through all Greece, that it should be laufull to
all them yt would go theder^ for to inhabytt there, except the Ioniens, and
the Acheens. And they gave the charge and commission, for to build ye said
colonie and habytacio^, unto three of their Citezeins to wit Leontes, Leon.
Alcidas and Damagontes. Aladas.

Damagon.


Who having, departed the quarters among them: that were come, enclosed the
town with wall on all sides, which at this present is called Heracleus,
distante from the mountes Thermopyles, forty stades, and within half a stade
nygh to the sea, And also they prepared and bygonne to make pierrs for to keep
ships nygh to the Thermopyles and the deltreate thereof, Thermopyle
for to be in greater suertye. The Athenyans from the beginning had some
fear of that same new city, understanding that it had been builded
foranempst the Isle of Eubee, for that that there was a right small space of
the sea, to trauers fromthence, unto the town of Cenee, Coeniu^,
which is the said Isle of Eubee. But yet it chanced otherwise, than they
looked for. For they had no damage by mean that the Thessalenyens, that ruled
in that same country, and they of the territorye, for whom the city was
builded, fearing to have neighbors more puissant than themself, bigonne to
vex and trouble the new Citezeins, so that in contynuance the more part were
constrained to habandone the place. And where as in the beginning the city was
strongly peopled for that, that the people were gone thither from all costs
very wyllyngly, thinkinge that it should be a ^ure and stable place being
fonnded and builded by the Lacedemonyans, yet in small time there remained but a
small number of the^, where of the chiefest, that those Lacedaemonians had sent
thither was greatly in fault, as well for that, that they discouraged many of
them, as also for that they entreated them rudely in many things whereby they
were more easly vauyquisshed by their neighbors.

How Demosthenes Duke of Athenians, being before Leucade departed from thence
to come to make war against the Etholians. And how he was by them overcome,
and some other things that were done by the Athenyans. in Sycille. The.xiiii.
Chapter.
IN that same somer, and during ye time that the Athenyans were before Melus:
thirty ships, that went saylling about the country of Peloponese, came
furste to land nighe to Ellomene in the country of Leucade. Ellomenus.
And there laid a little embusthement, by means whereof they did take certain
of the men of war, that were there in garnis^n, and afterward with all
their army, came before the city of Leucade, having all the Acarnanyans in
their compaignie, resarued those of Eniade, Oeniades.
those of zacynthe, zachinthii.
and those of zephalenie. Cephale^^ses.
And they had moreover fiftene ships with Corcirians. which altogider being
in so great puissance wasted and pillaged all the country and all the land of
Leucade, as well nighe, as a far of, and chieflye the temple of Apollo, which
was ioygninge to the city. And yet notwythstanding, the cytezeins, for the
evil that was done in their land, would not issue fourth, but kept themself
sure wtin their city. which seeing the Acarnanyans, made great instance to
Demosthenes, duke of the Athenyans, that he would assiege and lock them in
with walls. Hoping that the town might easily be takene. And by that mean,
they should be in suertie, for that the Leucadyans were their ancyent ennemys.
But Demosthenes, who for that time gave more creditt to the Messenyans, was by
the^ persuaded to leave ye enterprise and to go to make war against the
Etholiens, having so great an army, as well for that, that they were mortal
enemies of Naupacte, as also for that, that they said, that in vainquisshinge
and subdewynge the said Etholyens, they should after reduce and bring easily
all the remenaunt of the country of Epyre, to the obeyssance of the Athenyans.
And although that the said Etholians were a great number of people and good
warryours, yet it seemed to the said Messenians, that they might easily be
vainquished, as well for that their towns were not closed with walls, and also
were far distant the one from the other, whereby they might not easily succor
the one the othere: as also for that they were all ill armed and after the
slightest manner. And their advise was, that the Apadotes should be furst
assaylled, afterward the Ophioniens, and consequently the Eurytanyens.
Eurytanes
. which is the greatest party of Etholyens. which be people, in manner
sauaige and wild of manners, and of language. And they be commonly called,
Omophages which is as much to say, Omophagi.
as eating raw flesh. For having subdued them there, it semedde well, that
the othere might afterward be easily subdued. To this counsaille Demosthenes
consented, as well for the credytte, that he gave to the Messenyans: as also for
that it seemed well to him, that having the Epirates with him and the Etholyens,
he might without othere army of the Athenyans, come by land to war
against the Beotiens, taking his way through the contreys of Locres, of Ozoles
and of Cytynyans^ Cytinei.
and by the quarter of Dorie, which is on the left hand of the mount
Parnasus, Parnassus.
and discendynge fromthence into the country of Phocyens, who be ioygninge to
the country of Beoce, the which he hoped to induce and entreat to give him
passage and aid, for the auncyente amytie, that they had with the Athenyans,
orels to constraigne them thereunto, by force. Upon this enterprise, he than
wythdrewe all his army from before Leucade, and went fromthence by sea in to
Solye, Solion.
maulgre and against the will of ye Acarnanyens. Unto whom, having
co^munycated and rehearsed his enterprise, and saying that they allowed it not
to be good, but rather were angry against him, for that, that he had not
assieged Leucade: he went without them to his said enterprise with the rest of
his army, wherein were only the Cephalenicus and the Messenyens with three
hou^dred Athenyans marro^ners, ye he had in his ships. For y^.xv. shipys with
the Corcyrians were already departed. And he went from Oenone, Oenoe.
which is in the country of Locriens, who were confedered with Ozoles, and were
obliged and bound to the Athenya^s to sarue them with their power, wha^ they
should make war in the countries Mediterranie. which succors seemed to be
much vtile and profitable to that enterprise, for that, that they were
neighbors of the Etholyans, and armed themself all in one facion. And
moreover they knew all their country and their manner of fight. And Demosthenes
made his assembly in the temple of Jupiter Nemeus, Jupiter nemeus
in the which as men say, Hestodus the poet was slain by the paisa^s,
Hestodus
whereof he had no boubt. For that, that it had been showed him before, that,
that should happene unto him in Nemea, whereby, he thought that the Oracle mente
and understood of the city of Nemea. But experyence shows that it was in
that same place that was surnamed Nemyan. From that self place departed
Demosthones at the break of the day with all his Army, for to enter into
Etholye. And the furst day he did take the town of Potydanie, Potidanya
the second, that same of Crossilyon, Crossylyan.
and the third, that of Tithyon, Tichion
in the which he soiourned a certain small time, and fromethence sent the
bowtye that he had taken unto the City of Eupolion, Eupolio^
in the country of Locres, having in will, after that he had subdued all the
rest of the country and that he should be returned to Naupacte, to go
fromethence also to subdue the Ophionyens, if they would not yield with their
good will. But of that same preparacion, the Etholiens were suffyciently
advertised, and that from the time chiefly that he hade enterprised for to
ouerronne the^. Where upon incontynently, as they were entered into their
country, they assembled together from all parts, and chiefly came thither,
those of Ophionie, which be in ye vttermoste part of the country nygh the
Goulphe of the sea, The goulphe
yt is called Maliaquus. Malycu^.
And likewise the Bomiens and the Galliens during this time that they
assembled themself, the Messeniens, following the counsaylle, that they had
given to Demosthenes, perswadinge him that the said Etholiens were easy to
vaniquishe, they counsaylled him to go as soon as he might, to win the towns
and vyllages of the country, before the enemies were all assembled. Ensuyng
which counsaille, and trustyng in his good fortune (forsomuche as hitherto
nothing had chanced him to the contrary) without tarying succors of the
Locriens, which might have been very necessary for him, for that they were
people of trect, lightly armed, he went against the town of Egytie, Agitum
the which he did take without resystyng, for that that the inhabyta^ce had
forsaken it and were retired into the mountaignes, that be about the town,
which is situated in a high place, about soore stades, from the sea. Now
there was arrived the other Etholiens and were lodged in diverse quarters of the
said mountains, all the which, at one front, came to assail the Athenians
and their allies on all sides with great strockes of shot and casting with the
hand. And when the same Athenians, charged upon them, they retired.
Afrerwardes when they withdrewe themself, they followed them, and this manner
of feigh^inge endured a long time, wherein the Athenians had always the
woorste as well in assayllinge: as in defendinge. yet so long as their people
of shot, had wherewyth to shoot, they defended themself indifferently well.
For the Etholiens, that were ill armedde, when they perceived the said people
with shot to draw nighe, they retired. And after that the captain of those
people with shoot were slayne^ the other that now were trauaylled and weryed,
being also overcome by the enemies, they returned and put themself in flight,
togethere with the remenaunte of the Athenyans and of their allies. And in
flyinge they came to rest and pass through thee roockes, where no way was.
For Crenon Messenyan, Chromon.
that was their guide, was slain. By mean whereof there was many dead in the
flyghte. For that that the Etholyens, which were lightly armed incontynently
ouertoke them specyallye those that knew not whythere to flyee. And for that,
that one part was sauyde by passing thwart a wood, they put fire within it,
and were all burnedde. So that there was no manner of flyinge and of death,
that was not thanne seen in the host of Athenyans, And with great pain, a
very small number of theyme, that escaped from that battaille, might save
themself in the place of Eneone, in the country of Locres, from whence they
were departed. And there died of the confederates a very great number, and of
the Athenyans six skoore, all young men, and of the best warryours that
they had, togiders with procles, one of the best Dukes and Capytains. After
that discomsiture, they, that were vainquished, confessinge to the enemies the
victory: recovered their dead. And returned (that done) unto Naupacte. And
fromthence to Athenes. Resarued Demosthenes, who tarried there and in places
nighe adioygninge, for fear that he had of the Athenyans, by cause of that
overthrow, that he had had. In that same summer time the Athenyans, that
sailed aboutes Sycile, being comme by sea against the Locryens, and having
won one conflicte against him at the entry of a passage, which they kept,
they did take one of their towns that is sytuated upon the river of Haleces,
named Peripolyon. The river of Halex Peripolion.


How Eurylochus duke of the Peloponesyans, having failed to take the city of
Naupacte, at the perswation of the Ambracyans, enterprysedde war against the
Amphilochyens and the Acarnanyens. And how the Athenyans purefyed the Isle of
Delos. The.xv. Chapter.
Now had the Etholiens, after that they understood the enterprise of the
Athenyans against them: sent their messengiers to the Lacedemonyans and to
the Corynthiens, to wytt, Tolophus of Ophione, Tolophus.
Boriades of Eurytanie, Boriades.
and Tysander of Apodotie, Tysandrus.
for to require and demand their succors against the army of the
Athenyans, that was come to Naupacte. which Lacedemonyens sent them three
thousand of their allies, all well armed. Amongeste whom, there were five
houndred of the city of Heracleus, which they had newely builded and peopled.
And they gave the pryncipall charge of that army to Eurylochus and appoincted
to him, for compaignyons, Macarius and Menadatus, all which three were
Spartayns. who having assembled their army at Delphos, Eurylochus commanded
the Locryens and the Ozoles, Euriolochus.
that they should send him their peole, for that, Messarius.
that he would take his way fromthence, for to go to Naupacte, and also would
gladly wythdrawe the said Locryens and Ozoles from the amytie of Athenyans:
Menedatus.
having now already wythdrawne to his party, the Amphisses. who, for the
hatred and fear, that they had of the Phocyens, were the furste that yeldedde,
and had given hostages and pledges. And also they had induced and brought the
other, that were afraid of the coming of the said army, to do the like. And
specially the Myonyens, which were there neighbors on that side, where the
land of the Locryans is worste to go unto. And after those there, the
Ip^esia^s, the Mesapyens, the Tritaniens, the Tholophonians, the Hessees, the
Chalees and the Eanthiens. All the which came to that army with the
Peloponesians. Some other would not come thider, but did give only hostages
and pledges, to wit the Olpiens. And some othere would not do the one, nor
thoder, to wit, the Hyeniens, until that their town, named Polis, Polis.
was takene by force. Having than Eurilochus set in order all his case and
sent his hostages and pledges into the town of Cytyme, Cytinu^.
in ye country of Dorie, he marched with his host through the country of
Locryans, for to go against Naupacte. And in iourneyinge he took by force in
the said country of Locres, the town of Eneone and that same of Eupolion,
Oeneon

Eupolio^


which would not obey him. Being arryuedde in the land of Naupacte, entered
the succors of the Erholyens. And so they began to pyllage and waste all the
said land and all the vyllages, that were not walled. Afterward they went
before the city of Molictyon, whsche was a Colonie or habitacion of the
Corinthia^s, but neuerthelas they took part with ye Athenians, and so took it
by force. Now Demosthenes Athenyan was yet in that quarter of Naupacte, who
kept himself there, after the loss that he had had in Etholie. This same
man, understanding the coming of the enemies, went unto the Acarnanyens and
persuaded them so far, that they did deliver him a thousand me^ armed, which
he led by sea unto ye city of Naupacte, whereof he was in great doubt for
yt, that it was well walled and of so great defense. But there was not many
people wtin it. Howbeit the Acarnanyans did this against their will, at ye
request of the said Demosthenes, for the displeasure that they had against him
for that he would not assiege Leucade. when Eurilochus did understand that the
succors were entered into the city, and that by that mean he might not take
it, he departed fromthence with his army and went not into Peloponese, but
into Eolide, which is at this present called, Calydon, Calydo^.
and into Ple^^^rone and other places nigh adioygninge to the country of
Etholie. And being there, the messengers of the Ambraciens came to him, which
shewedde him that if he would, he might, with their aid, subdue and get the
city of Argos and the remenant of the countreye of Amphilochie, Argos
and afterward that same of Acarnanie. And that done that he might easily
bring to the allyaunce of the Lacedemonyans, all the country of Epire. For
this cause, and under hope of this enterprise, Eurylochus passedde not further
into the country of Etholyans, attendynge the succors of the Ambracyens. And
in the mean time the summer passedde. At the entering of winter, the
Athenyans, that were in Sycile with their allies, and all those, that did
take their party against the Syracusayns, came to assaylle the City of Nyse.
Nisa.
In the Castle whereof, the Syracusayns did keep their garnysonne, but
saying that they could not take it, they departedde. And in wythdrawynge
theymselfe, the people, that were in the Castle, issuedde fourth upon the
hyndermoste, and so did put theyme into disorder and did slay a good number
of them. After that, Laches and the other, Laches
that were in the ships, issued fourth into the land of Locryens nighe unto
the river of Caicinus. Caicinus.
At which place, they encountredde the Locryens, which Prorenus, Proxenus.
son of Capaton, did conducte. who repoulsed them and took three houndredde
of them and spoyledde them. And afterward suffredde theme to depart. In
that self same winter, the Athenyans, ensuinge some oracle or answer of the
god, did puresie and dedicate the Isle of Delos. Which a long time before,
Pysistratus the Tyrante had pourged and purified, Pisistratus.
and yet not all. But only that party, that might be seen out of the
temple, But than it was holy pourged by this manner. The manner of ye purginge
of Delos.
For they did take away all the sepulcres, that they there found. And made a
decree and forbodde, that fromthence fourth no humayue creature should be
suffredde to dye nor to be borne in all the Isle. But that they, that should
draw nigh to death, should be carried into the Isle of Rhenie. Rhenia.
The which is so nere to that same of Delos, that Polycrates, Tyrante of
Samyens, who governed many Islandes of that sea^ for that he was puissante with
ships, having takenne that same Isle, made a chain that trauersedde and
went thwart over from thence unto the Isle of Delos. And consecrat^dde all the
Isle to god Apollo. And after that last purification, the Athenya^s dedycated
in the honnour of god Apollo, one solemn feast from five years into five
years. Notwythstandinge that auncyently yt was accustomedde there to make
great feasts. whereunto came the Ionyans and the inhabitants of other Isles
nighe adioygninge, with their wives and childrenne, like as they now do in
Ehesus. And there they used tourneyinges, wrastlinges and other exercises, and
also al manner of plays with instruments of music, as it may appear by that,
which Homere says in his Proheme of Apollo, Homerus.
wherein he makes mention of himself, that he was blinded, and that he remained
in Chio. Chio.
Yet afterward by succession of time the said tourneynges and exercyses
cessed, and they went no more thider, but with instruments of musicque,
which the Athenyans and those of the Isles nighe adioynynge, brought thider to
the solemn feasts. But than the Athenyans brought them up again. And also
added the coursing with horses, which had been there never before.

How Eurilochus and the Ambrasians were by Demosthenes, by the Acarnanyans and
Amphilochiens discomforted two times in three days, an^ of the slouthfulnes
that the said Lacedemonyans used toward the said Ambrasians. The.xvi.
Chapter.
IN that same winter, the Ambracyans came into the Camp with their army, like
as they had promised to Eurylochus. And being entered into the land of Argos in
the country of Amphilochie with three thousand faightinge men: they took the
town of Olpas, Olpe.
which was situated upon a poyncted hill, and had a great wall to the sea
side. whereupon the Acarnanyans, founders of that town, did chose their
trybunall, for to judge and know of common matters, for that, that it was not
distante fro the city of Argos, but the space of twenty stades. which
parceyuedde by the Acarnanya^s, they sent part of their people for to succor
and keep the city of Argos. And with the othere part, they went to lodge
themself in a place which is in the country of Amphilochie, named Erenus,
for to defend, that the Peloponesians, that were with Eurylochus, should not
pass into Ambracie, and ioygne them self with the Ambracians, whom they knew
not. And fourthwyth, they sent to Demosthenes, which was duke of the Athenyans
in the country of Ethiole, that he should comme to them to be their capytayne.
And to Aristoteles, Aristoteles.
son of Tymocrates and Hiorophon, Hierophon.
son of Arimnestus, that had conducte of twenty galleys with Athenyans, who
than were about the countreye of Peloponese, that they should come to their
succors. On the other side, the Ambracyans, that were at Olpas, sent to their
city, that all the people should comme to their aid, fearinge, that
Eurylochus with the compaignie, that he had, might not pass through the
country of Acarnanyans and comme to ioygne with them. And that by that mean,
they should be by force constrained to fight without him, orells to retire
with great danger. Being than Eurylochus and the Peloponesians that were
with him, advertised of thenterpryse of the said Ambracians they departed from
the place of Proschie where he had lodged his camp, for to come and ioigne
with them. And leuing the way of Argos, he passed the mountaigne of Achelous
and came through the quarter of Acarnania, Achelous.
where was no men of arms, having on the right hand, the city of Stratie,
Stratos.
wherein was a good garnysone, and on the left hand the rest of all the
country of Acarnanie. And when he had passed, through Pythius, and through the
confins and borders of Medeone, and after through Lymnee (which all were of
the land of the said Acarnanyans) he entrede into the land of the Argaens
which were no more of Acarnanie, but were friends of the Ambracyans. And having
trauersed ye mount Thyamus (which is all sterile and barone) he came by night
into the city fro Argie. The mount Thyamus.

Argia.


And from thence passed bitwene the said city and the conntrey of Acarnanians
priuelye and secreatly, in such manner, that at the break of the day he came
to ioigne with the Ambracyans, and all togiders went to lodge themself before
the City that is named, Metropolis. Metropolis.
Sone after, the twentye galleys with Athenyans that were in Peloponese,
coming to the succors of them of Argos aryued in the poorte of Ambracie. And
fourthewithe Demosthenes, with two houndred souldyars Messenyans all well
armed, and three skoore A^chers Athenyans, togider with them, that were for
defense of the said galleis, landed, and came to make a cour^e before Olpas.
And on the otherside, the Acarnanyans and one part of Amphilochians (for the
other part was occupied against the Ambracyans) being arrived at Argos,
prepared themself for to go to fight with the ennemy. And understanding the
coming of Demosthenes, they came to ioigne with him, and made him their
Capitain, with the capytains, that they had of their country. who came to plant
his ca^pe nighe enough to Olpas, and to the camp of ye ennemys, so that there
was but one valley bitwene both, that defended and empesched them five days to
fight. The sixth day they prepared them self for to give battle on both sides.
But for that the Peloponesia^s were much more mighty in number of people, than
the other: Demosthenes fearinge to be enclosed with the multitude of enemies, did
set, in a low way covered with thick bushes, an embusheme^t of four hou^dred
men all well armed, and also armed lightlye. To whom he commanded, that when
they should see that the battle was bigonne, they should issue fourth and
come to stryke with great force upon the backs of the ennemys. And with the
rest he ordained his battaille as he thought good, and put himself in the
right winge with the Messenyans, and a small no^bre of Athenians that he had.
And on the lest winge he put the Acarnanyans euene as they were armed
togithere with the Amphilochians, which were all people of shot. On the other
side the Peloponesians and the Ambracyans were all myngledde, the one with the
othere, resaruedde the Mantynyans, which were altogider on the left side, not
at the extremytie and with the poyncte, but more forewardes. For in that wynge
Eurylochus had bestowed himself with the people dyrectely against
Demosthenes, who was in the right wynge on the othere side with the
Messenyans. The battaille than being bigonne, and they that were in the
ambushemente, parceyuynge that the Peloponesians that were on the left hand,
enuironedde and went about to enclose the Athenyans that were on the other
side on the right wynge, came to charge upon them at their backs, so that
they causedde them to forgette their virtue, and did put them into
dysorder and flyghte. And so shewedde the way to the greateste part of the
othere, that were with them in the right wynge, to fly as they did. For
seeing that same bend that Eurylochus conducted, which was ye strongest, in
disorder: they lost their courage to defend themself. And yet neuerthelas,
the Ambracians, that were in the right wynge, repoulsed their enn^myes in
their part, and chased them to the city of Argos. For also the same
Ambracyans be better warryours, than any of their neighbors. But as they
returned from the chase, saying their compaignyons almost all destroyed,
and thennemys, that came strayghte upon them: they retired with great pain
and danger into Olpas. And also there were many slain for that, that they kept
not order, resarued the Mantynyans, which kept always their order, in retiring
themself. And the battaille cessed nighe upon the night. The morrow after,
Menedeus, Menedeus.
that was that night chosen capytayne instead of Eurylochus that was dead,
found himself in great difficulty and perplexity of that, which he had to
do. For through the destruction that had been great on his side, he saw not
the mean to defend the town being assieged by sea and by land, another to
retire without great danger. For this cause he sent to Demosthenes and
Capytains of the Acarnanyans, for to demand the corpses of their men that
were slain, and also that those, that were in the town, men of war, might
depart fromthence with their baguage saved. who rendered unto them their
corpses, and caused those to be buried that were slain on their part, which
were about three houndred. And afterward they did set up their Trophee in
token of victory, but as touching the license to depart, they woolde not
grant it openly, but refused and denied it generally to all. Notwithstanding
they granted yt secretly to the Mantynians and to all the Peloponesians that
were of any estimation. Myndinge by that mean, to separate the Ambraceans from
all the soldiers strangers and also to diffame the Lacedemonyans and
Peloponesians unto all the Greeks, as faynte hearted and traitors, to make their
appoinctemente, without comprehending therein their allies. Than they that were
in the town, having engraued and buried their dead, with the most have that
they might, those that had obteigned license to depart, treated togithere
secretly the manner of their departure. During this time, Demosthenes and the
Acarnanyans were aduertysed that the Ambracyans, which were departed from
their city for to comme to the succors of their people, that were at Olpas,
according to the commandment given unto them at the beginning, like as has
been before said: were upon their journey for to come thider, through the
country of Amphilochiens, without that they had knowlayge of the news of the
destruction of their said people. So he sent part of his men to keep the
passages and the strong ways. And the remenant of his people, he ordained for
to succor them there, and to set upon the said Ambracyans, when they should
pass. Bitwene both, those, that had treated to go away, issued out of the
town in small bendes, faigninge to go to gather herbs and wood in the feldes,
and when they were a little departed from the town, they set themself to run
against the camp of enemies. which saying the Ambracyans, that were likewise
come fourth for to gather herbs and wood, followed them, as fast as they
might for to overtake them. But the souldyars Acarnanyans, which knew
nothing of the secrett appoynctement, that Demosthenes and their Capytains
had made with the Peloponesyans, thinkinge that all those, that issued fourth
of the town, departed frothence without license and without appoyntement:
prepared them self to follow them. And for that, that some of the Capytains
that found them there^ would have empesched them to run upon the
Peloponesians, saying that they had saulfconduict, there were of them that
enforced themself to strike them, and made their weapons ready against them,
thinkinge that they had deceived and betrayed them. Yet understanding, that,
the Peloponesians and Mantynyans alonely, had the saulfconducte, they suffered
unto them to pass and killed the Ambracyens. But there was great questyon and
difficulty to discern the one from the other, so that in the same tumulte,
there were slain about two houndred. The other saved themself with great
difficulty within the town of Agride. Agrais.
which was next unto them there. whom Salynthius, Salynthius.
king of Agriens, did reteigne as their friend. In this mean time, the other
Ambracyens that came to the succors of thies here, arrived at one place named
Idomene, Idomene.
which has two hills or tops. The greatest whereof, those, that Demosthenes
had sent before did take and occupy in the night seasonne, without that the
Ambracyans did apperceyue them. who did saise themself of the lesser, where they
kept them all that same day and night following, without doubting any thing.
In the mean time, Demosthenes, being advertised of their cominge, departed
from his camp after supper at the entering of the night with al his hooste,
whereof the one half he led with him. And the other half he causedde to go
through the mounteignes of Amphilochie, and used so good diligence, that at
break of the day he came to rushe upon the said Ambracyans, whom he found
yet all slepinge, as people assured, and that knew nothing of that, which was
happened. But thought at the beginning that they had been of their own
compaigny. For that, that Demosthenes, the better to deceive them, had caused
the Messenyans to march before the othere, and had commanded them, that they
should speak in languaige Dorique with those, which they found furste in the
watch, which thing they did. So that the said ennemys thought, that they
had been their own people, the rather for that, that they could not well see
them, insomuch as it was not yet day, until that the bend of enemies were
aryued. And they than did stryke upon them all at ones, and did slay a great
part of them. The other did fly by the mountaignes, of whom yet the more
part was slain. For that they found the Amphilochians that had gottone and
kept the passages. And forsomuche as they were lyghtely armed, and thies here
well armed, they ouertoke them inco^tynently. And those that kept the other
paths, clymed up to the high rocks and Cauarns, and cast themself down,
backwardes. Some there were that went to the sea side, that was there very
nigh, who being followed by their ennemys, and seeing the galleys of the
Athenians, which sailled, costing the land, they did cast themself into the
water, and swymmed to yield them unto the said galleys. For though they did
know that they were vessels of the ennemys, yet they had rather fall into
their hands (albeit that they had desarued to be slain of them) than into the
hands of the strangers or of the Amphilochia^s that were their mortal enemies.
The Ambracya^s being in this manner in disorder, were as in a manner all slain.
And a very small number saved themself within the town of Olpas. Olpa.
Aftere tha^ destruction, the Acarnanyans, having spoiled their dead, and set
up their Trophee in tokene of victory, they returned to Argos, toward
whom, came, the morrow following, a herault sent from the Ambracyans that
were saved within Agryde. For to demand the corpses of their people that had
been slain at the furst discomsiture, when they issued out of Olpas, with the
Peloponesians without saulfconducte. who, saying upon the camp, the dead in
so great nombre, was greatly abashed, how it might be that they were so many,
not knowinge any thing of the last murder, and thought that they were the
corpses of their allies. Than one of the ennemys, thinking that he was come
for them there that had been last destroyed at Idomene demanded of him,
wherefore he made so great admyratyon, and how many people he understood to
have been slain of his. And he answered, that aboutes two houndred. Than the
othere said unto him, thou seist well that there be in this same trophe the
arms not of two houndredde, but of a thousand and more that have been slain.
Truly said the heraulde, thies be not than of those that were in our bend.
But they be truly says the other, even the same, that were yesterday slain
at Idomene. How so said the Herault, we did not fight yesterday, but thies
here were slain before yesterday, yssuing out of Olpas without saulfconduct.
By my faith said the other, we did fight yesterday against thies here, which
were come from Ambracie for to come to the succors of them that were at Olpas.
Which thing, being understood by the Herault, and knowing the great loss
that the Ambracyans had had, he was so osto^yed that he returned without
pursuing further for the recovery of the dead. For also for truth, this was
one of the greatest destructio^s that chanced in all that same war,
specially in one only city and in so few days. And also I am not minded to
set the nombre of the dead, for that, that it seems unto me incredible, and
greater, than is conuenable to the greatness of that same town. One thing I
know very well and for mere truth, that if the Acarnanyans and the
Amphilochians had been willing to bileue and credytt Demosthenes and the
Athenyans, they had euenne at the same time, takene the city of Ambracie by
force. But they fearedde, lest if the Athenyans should take it, that they
should be tomuche hard and straighte neighbors for them. After this victory,
they departed the bowtie or pray bitwene them. Whereof they did give the
th^rde part unto the Athenyans, and the other two, they distrybuted among the
cities. But that, which the Atchenyans had thereof, was not greatly profitable
to them. For in their retournynge by sea, the most part was taken away from
them in their journey. And three houndredd complete harnoys, that be yet seen
hanginge in the temples of Athens, were those, which Demosthenes alone had for
his part, which he did give, after, that he was returned. which thing he
did more assuredly by means of that victory, than he durst have done
before, by cause of the overthrow that he had had in Etholie. After that the
twenty galleys of the Athenyans were returned to Naupacte, and Demosthenes
with the bend unto Athens: the Acarnanyans and the Amphiloch^a^s made
appoinctement with the Ambracyans, by mean of Salynthius, king of Agriens,
for an houndred years to comme, and gave suertie to the Peloponesians, that
were retired into Agride, confusedly or myngled togyders with the Ambracyans for
to return. And the form of the appoinctmente was this^ that the said
Ambracya^s should not be bound to make war with the Acarnanya^s against the
Peloponesians. Nor the Acarnanya^s with the Ambracyans against the Athenyans. But
only they were bound to aid themself, the one, the other, for the defense of
their land alonely, and moreover that the Ambracyans should render and restore
to the Amphilochiens, all the towns and lands, that they held of theirs and
that they should not give any aid, supportacion or favor to the Anactoria^s,
who were ennemys of the Acarnanyans. Upon this condition they ceased from
war, on the one side and on the other. Anon after arrived Xenoclides, son
of Entycles with three hou^dred men, that the Corinthians had sent to succo^r the
said A^bracyans. who with great difficulty had passed through the country of
Epyre. Thus passed the things that were done at Ambracie. In that same winter,
the Athenyans that were in Sycille, being landed and entered into Hiemereus on
the sea side, and the Sycilyans on the cost of the mountaignes, and having
there made sum bowtie and pray, and fromthence having passedde by the
Isles, Eolydes: they came again to Rhege. In which place they found
Pythodorus, whom the Athenyans had sent for to be Capytaynes of that same
their army. instead of Laches. For the souldyars Athenyans, that were in that
same army and also the Sicilians that were with them, had demanded of the
Athenians, greater succors, for that, that the Syracusains being mightyer
than they by land, yt were necessary that they should be so mighty by sea,
that they might defend themself, from being ou^traged. For this cause, the
Athenyans had charged foortyshipps with men for to send thider, thinkinge that
that same war should be the sooner fynyshed. Whereof they had only sent, one
lesser part before by Pythodorus, for to see and understand the estate of
causes, and after they should send him Syphocles, son of Sestratides with the
remnaunte. Being than Pythodorus arrived and having takene the charge of the
army, he went from thens to succor the city of Locres, which Laches had
taken. But he was enco^tred and vainquished by the Locryens. and so returned.
The furst spring time ensuinge, ye fire issued out of the mountain of Ethna,
which is the greatest, that is in Sycille, like as it had oftentimes done in
times passedde, and yt burnedde a little of the terrytory of Catagna, which is
situated under the said mountaigne. And by that that the people of the conntrey
did say, yt was fyftie years passedde, sens the fire came fourth in that same
sort. And yt was the third time in all, that that had chanced in Sycille,
sens that the Greeks were come thider for to inhabyt furst. Thies be the
things that were done that same year, which was the sixte year of that
war, that Thucydydes has wryttone.

Here ends the third book of the history of Thucydydes, and the fourth
begins.
Of certain exploictes of war that were done between the Athenyans and the
Lacedemonyans. And specially, how the place and Islande of Pylus was assieged
by the Peloponesians, and how the truse was made between them that were in the
army. The furst Chapter.
IN the beginning of the summer followynge, when the corn begins to ear,
ten ships of the Syracusains and asmanye of the Locryans did take the city
of Messine in Sycille, from the Athenyans. Through conspyratie of the
Cytezeins^ that had called them thider. which enterprise the said Syracusains
did, for somuche, as saying that same town to be very propyte and mete for the
said Athenyans for to enter into Sycille, they feared that by mean thereof,
they would land there with greater strength, and from thence would come to
assaille them and the Locriens: to have mean for to assaille on both sides
them of Rhege, that were their ennemys. which thing they did incontynently
after, and also to the end, that they should not give succors to the said
Messenyans. And moreover they were thereunto sollicyted by certain cytezeins of
Rhege, who being bannyshedde and fled from their city, were retyredde to
Locres. For the said City of Rhege had long^ been in great deuysyons, by
means whereof, they could not than defend them against the said Locryens.
who, saying the the oportunytie, came then to assail them and aftere that they
had ouerronned and pyllagedde all their terytorie, they retyredde with their
men on foot by land into their countreye. For the ships wherein they were
come, were gone to Missena for to ioygne with the other, that should be there
assembled for to make war on that side. In that self seasone, before that
the coarne was ripe, the Peloponesians entered a fresh into the land Atticque,
under the co^ducte of Agis, Agis.
son of Archidamus, king of Lacedemonyans and pyllaged yt after the
accustomedde manner. On the othere side, the Athenyans sent foorty ships
with new strength into Sycylle, whereof they committed the conducte to
Eurimedon and to Sophocles with the other that already were there. Eurimedon.

Sophocles.


Among whom, was Pythodorus, Pythodorus.
and commanded them in their way to give comfort and succoure to the
Corcyriens against thaire bannyshed men, which kept them self in the
mountaignes and warredde upon them without, and also against lx. ships that
the Pelloponesians had sent against them, that were in the said city,
trusting to take it by famyne for that, that it now was in great skarcytye of
vyctualles. And also grauntedde to Demosthenes, who had sens his return
from Acarnanie tarryedde at Athens without any charge, and desyeredde
greatly to have some, to use the said foorty ships about Peloponese, as he
should think good. Being than arrived in the countreye of Lacaonie, in
passing their journey, and understanding that the said Pelloponesians
ships were already arrived in the goulphe of Corcyre, they were of diverse
opynyons among themself. For Eurymedon and Sophocles were determined to go
fourthwythe to Corcyre. But Demosthenes said that they should furste go to take
Pylus, and having given order there, to draw unto Corcyre, and yet
neuerthelas, saying that the other two persysted and contynewed in their
opynyo^, he commanded them so to do. In this debate, there came soubdaynly a
tempeste of the sea, that constrained them to draw to the said place of
Pylus. And than Demosthenes shewede unto theme that yt was needful to close
that place with a wall, saying, that yt was the pryncypall cause that he was
come with them for, in that voyage. And moreover that yt was veary easy to do,
for there was power, stones and matter for to acheue shortly their work. And
that the site of the place was strong, and also had about yt a great
desarte country. For fromthence unto Spartus, there were well foore houndred
slades. And is sytuated in the terrytorye, which was sometime of the
Messenians, and was calledde Seraphasie. To thies reasones, the other two
answered hyme, that if he would ground upon y^, there were about Peloponese
many promontoryes, that were desarte, which if he would fortyfie, should be to
make the city of Athenes emptye of monny. But neuerthelas he replied unto
theme, that the same there was of an other ymportance, than the othere, for
that, that yt had a good hauone, and moreover that the Messenyans, that had
some time kept yt being set into yt again, might do great annoyance and
dyspleasueres unto the Lacedemonyans, by cause of their communycacyon of
language, and should keep the place dylygently and faithfully. And yet
notwythstandyng, seeing that he could not persuade yt, another to the souldyars
in gennerall, nor with the Capytaynes, with whom he had debatede the matter
a part: at length he held his peace and dydd speak no more. But durnige the
time that they tarryed their idle and vnoccupyede, attendynge that the sea was
appeasedde, the souldyours deuysedde a gain among themeself. And desyere
took them to enclose the said place with wall, and so they determynedde to
do yt. And having no masons nor yrone tools for to cut the stones, they
took the stones that they fonnde upon the place, and set them one upon the
other, so as they might best hew them, and ioygned them togider with earth instead of mortar. And for that, that they had no baskettes nor other
instruments for to carry it, they did bear it upon their back. Holding their
visage down toward the ground to the end that they might carry it ye better.
And for to keep it there, they ioigned their hands behind upon their backs.
and in effect they used all industry and diligence, that they could for to
fortefie the place with sides, yt it might be assailed before that the
Lacedaemonians could send thider succoures. For on some sides it was not to be
battred nor to be taken. Now ye Lacedaemonians did celebrate a veary great
solemn feast in the cite, when they were advertised of the same chance.
through occasyon whereof, they did not greatly pass on it. For it seemed well
to them that after they had acheued and fynished their feast, when they
should go to that part, that the enemy woolde fly from thence: or if they
defended themsel^e, that they should take them very easily. And on the other
part, their army that was yet in the land of Athenes, did somewhat retarde
and slack them: in such manner, that the Athenyans had respyte to fortefie
the place on the land side. And having therein trauailled the space of six
days, they left Demosthenes there with five galleys for to keep it. And they
with the other went their way toward Corcyre and toward Sycille. During
this time, the Peloponesians, that were in the land of Athens, understanding
the taking of Pylus, came again diligently into their land. as well for that,
that it seemed to the Lacedaemonians and to Agis their king, that they had war
eue^ in their house, ye enemies being at Pylus as also for that they were entered
to sone into y^ land of Athens, to wit, before ye corn was ripe. through
occasion whereof, they had great lack of victuailes. And moreover the te^pests
had been, during the time yt they were there, more great, tha^ the season
required. By means whereof, the men of war were all troubled. whereby it
happened, that though some other years, they had made no great taryinge in
that land, yet that same year they made yt more short, for they tarried
there, but fyftene days. In that same seasonne, Symonides, Duke of Athenyans,
having assembled a certain small number of their men of war, that were in
the garnysonne in the countreye of Thrace, and a good number of their allies
estrangers, took by secrett contract, the town of Eone in the country of
Thrace. which was a Colonie or a town founded by the Medes, but than was
their ennemy. Notwithstanding the Chalcydes and the Beotyans, being
aduertysedde of the case, came to the succoures of the town, and fourthwyth
did chase him away with great loss of his people. The Peloponesia^s, being
returned out of the country of Athe^s, the Spartains and their next
neighbors assembled togiders incontinently for to go to recover the place of
Pylus. But ye other Peloponesians went not thider so sone. For that, that they
were but newely come out of the country of Athens. And yet neuerthelas it was
commanded by general decree and proclamacyon in all ye country of
Peloponese, that every man should send to the succoures of Pylus, and also
commanded three skoore ships that were about Corcire, yt they should come to
that party. Which passing by the distreate of Leucade, used so good diligence,
that they arrived at Pylus, before that the Athenyans ships, that were at
Iacinthus, did perceive them. And on the othere side by land the army of ye
said Peloponesians was there ready. But yet that notwithstanding, before that
the said ships arrived, Demosthenes had sent two brigantynes to Eurymedone, and
to the other that were at the said place of Iacynthus, that they should comme
to succoure him, showing him the danger, wherein he was. who, immediately, as
they had the news, took their journey for to come thider. Duringe this time,
and before that they arrived, the Peloponesians prepared themself to assail
the place, as well on the sea side, as on that same by land, trusting to take
it easily. both for that, that the wall was freshly and newly made, and also
for that, that there were small number of people to keep it. And yet
neuerthelas for that they doubted that the ships with Athenyans, that were at
Iacinthus should come to succoure them, they determynedde, if they could take
the place before the succors came, for to enclose the entrye of tht hauon, in
such manner that the said Athenyans ships should not enter therein, which
thing seemed unto them very easy to be done, for that, that there was directly
against the rock, whereupon was sytuated the place of Pylus, a small Islande
named Factoria, which extended all alongest the hauon, and by that mean made
the hauon suer. And neuerthelas the entringes thereof was straight, so that on
the town side, where ye Athenians had made their rampars, there could enter
but two ships on front, and on the other side toward the land, eight or
nine. which Island was holy baraine, and by that mean not inhabited, and in
manner not freque^ted, conteigning fiftene stades or forlonges about. Than for
to empesche and stop the entrye of the said hauonne from the Athenians, they
bestowed such number of ships there, as they thought necessary for to occupy
all the front. which had their former part of the hauonne and the remenant
within. And moreover fearing that the said Athenyans should land people
within the said little Islande, they set there one part of theirs. And the
other abodde in the land, to the end, that the enemies might not land,
another in the land, nor in the Islande. And to the rest it was not possible to
succor the place by any other ways. For on ye other side, by the which it
was enuironned with the sea, there were no good depthes where the ships might
arryue surely. And by that mean they thought, that without faightinge and
without puttinge themself into danger and hazart, they might take that same
place in short time, being ill furnished of victuailes and of people. Now
they had ordained, that for to bestow and put within the said Islande, a
certain number of all the co^paignies, should be taken, that should be changed
every day. And so it happened, that the last that were sent thither, were to
the number of four houndred and twenty, of whom, Epitadas son of Molobee
had the charge. Demosthenes, saying that the Peloponesians prepared themself
for to assaylle as well by sea, as by land, preparedde himself to defend, And
furste he causedde the galleys that remained with him to retire under his
rampares and inclosedde them with pales. And he armedde the maronners that were
within them with mischeuous targottes or shieldes made in haste, the more part
of wyllos. For in such a desarte place, there was no question or hope to have
armure. And the same that they had there, had been gottone by force, from a
galley and in a brigantine of the Messenyans, that they had takene, passinge
that way with forty men of the said Messene, with whom they sarued themself
at that need with the othere. Having than placedde one part of his people,
as well armed as naked, to the keeping of the places ye were assured, by reasone
that the place, was not to be gottone or gone unto, and the other part, that
was greater, to the defense of the quartier that he had fortefied toward
the land: he commanded them, that if the footmen came to assail them, they
should defend themself and repoulse them. And he with three skoore of the
best armed and a number of people with shot, issued de fourth of the place,
and went out on the sea side, where he thought that the enemies would
parforce themself for to land and to pass through the rocks and hard
places: on which the wall of the town was most weak and feable, for to
battre and break it, it they could. For it was not greatly forcedde to make
a strong wall on that side, not thinking that the enemies should ever have
been strongest by sea. And he knew well, that if it were the strongest, so
that men might by that cost goo into the land, the place should be lost.
For this cause he went to that side of the sea for to defend yt, with the
number of people as before, whom he orderedde and set battaylle, the best
that he could, and afterward did speak unto them in this manner. The
ora^^yon of Demosthenes. to his souldyars.
It is needful for me that you, the othere that be put in this danger with
me, do show youreself sage and dyligente to consulte all the difficultees and
all the dangers, wherein we be. But it is necessary that we mind to
assaille valiantely our enemies with a good couraige and with a good
esperance to repoulse them, and to escape from all the dangers, wherein we
be. Forsomuche as in all causes of necessity, as this same is at this
present, men must not oftymes search after reasone, but they must be
soubdaynely hazardedde. And yet I do see in our affayre many things that be
for our advantage, if we will to stand to them and forsake not, for fear of
the great number of our enemies, the commodities, that we have against
them. For I esteem one part of the place that we hold to be, not to be comme
unto, and suffycyent for to aid us, if we woll defend yt. But if we
habandonne and forsake yt (how dyffycyle and hard soever it be) it shall be
easy to win, not being defendedde. True it is, that we shall have the
enemies somuche more sharp to fight with, if we set on them when they
be landedde, for that they shall parceyue that they may not retire without
great daungier. But consider you, that so long as they abide in their
ships without landinge, they be easily resistedde. And if they do land,
though they be in great number, they be not to be feared. Forsomuche as the
place is very difficille and uneasy for them, and the platt, where they must
fight, shall be right straight and very little. And by that mean, if they come
on land, the number shall in nothing sarue theyme for the incommoditie and
difficulty of the place. And if they tarry upon their ships, of force they
must fight in the sea in which fight there be many difficulties. Wherefore I
compense and esteem to be egall as much, the difficulties and dangers that they
have, as our small nombre. For this cause I pray you (my friends) that
bringinge to your remembrance, that you be Athenyans, and likewise that you
be people all experymentedde to fight with ships and on land: you woll
consider that he that remoueth not for fear of a wawe or sourge of the sea
that may comme, nothere of shypp, that makes unto him: shall never be
repoulsedde from one such a place as this. And likewise that you will stand
by it and repoulse your ennemys in thies rocks and hard passages, and defend
and keep this place, togyders with your parsones. The Athenyans discouraged,
being recomforted by thies short encouraigings and declarations, disposed
themself to defend every one in his quarter. On the other side the
Lacedemonyans, that were in camp on the land side, came to assail the
rampares, and on the sea side, those that co^ducted the ships, which
were.xliii. in nombere, whereof Thrasymelides, Thrasimelidas
son of Cratesicles Spertayne was Capytayne, came to invade the quarter,
where Demosthenes was with his men. The Athenyans also defended themself very
manfully on both sides. And as touching the quarter by sea, the Peloponesians
came with small number of ships by tournes or courses, one after the othere
for that, that it was not possible to bring thither a great number for to
land in the place, where Demosthenes and his people were for to repulse them,
if it were possible. And among othere Brasidas, who was Capytayne of one of
the galleys, seeing that the place was difficile and dangerous to aboorde, and
that for that cause the patrons of the galleys durst not approach, fearing to
bruise the vessels: cried with a loud voice. It is great shame to spare
your vessels, where you see before your eyes those, which have fortefied
yours, even your land with walls. And commanded them that they should rushe
to land, and in breaking their said vessels, they should set on their ennemys
and not to be agreued to lose their ships for to do saruice to the
Lacedaemonians, who had done them so many playsirs. But rather that they should
fasten them on some part that they might aboorde and going a land might win the place and the ennemys. Insayinge thies words, Brasydas constrained the
patron of the galley, whertin he was, to rushe against the land. But
parforcing himself to land by a pla^ke of a ship, he was by the Athenyans hurt
in many places of his body, so that he fell backwarde amongeste the rowers,
stark dead. But his shield did fall into the sea, and afterward was cast
by the wawes on land. Which afterward the Athenyans did hang in the trophe
or token, that they set up for that same victory. The other Lacedemonyans had
a right good will to land, but it was tomuche dangerous, as well for the
difficulty of the place, as for the great defense that the Athenyans made,
without fear of any daungiers. And fortune was so far led on both sides,
that the Athenyans empesched or lettedde the Lacedemonyans to enter into their
land, or into that same, specially of Laconia: and that those Lacedemonyans
forced themself to land in their proper land, which was than in the hands
of ennemys, though that in that season by the common report, the Lacedemonyans
were more puissant and more exercysedde in fyghtinge by land, and the
Athenyans in the same by sea. And the same endured all that same day and on
part of the day followynge, not contynually, but at diverse times. The third
day the Peloponesians sent one part of their ships into Asinus for to fatche
wood and stuf for to make and raise up a wall against that same, that
had been made by the Athenyans about the poorte, trustyng, that they might
by yt mean beat it down with Engynes or instruments, though yt were than
high, for that, that yt might be battredde on all sides. But this indurynge,
arryuedde the succors with ships of the Athenyans, that were at zachinthus, to
the nombre of.lx. by mean that there were comme to the succurs sum from
Naupacte, and four from Chio. which saying the land and the Islande shut or
locked up with footmen of the enemies and their ships, being within the
poorte, not willing to issue fourth, were in doubt what they should do. Yet
they went to ancre nighe unto the desarte Island, and there remaynedde that
same day. The morrow followynge they yssuedde into the main sea with all
their ships in battaille for to fight, if the ennemys would have yssuedde
out of the poorte, and for to set upon and assaille them within that poorte,
if they would not issue fourth. But those enemies, nothere yssuedde fourth
at large into the sea, nor also fournyshedde the entering of the poorte, so, as
they had determined at the beginning. But without remouinge from land,
replenishedde their ships that were by the sea side, and kept themself all
ready to fight with them that entredde into the port, which was suffyciently
great. Which knowin, the Athenyans came with force of oores directly against
them from sides of the entrynges of the poorte for to charge upon the galleys
of the said enemies that were formest in the sea, and so did put them to
flight. And for that, that the place was straight and narrow, they did break
one great part thereof and did take five, whereof one was taken with the people
in it. And moreover they pursued the other that were retired toward the land,
where of they did break some that were empty, and fastened them, and carried
them away with theirs in the sight of the Peloponesians. who, saying that, and
having to great sorrow for that same loss, and specially that their people
that were in the Islande, should be lost, did cast themself on their fete,
all armed, as they were, into the sea and came to wythdrawe their ships for
to keep them that ye Athenyans should not carry them away, with so great
courage, that it seemed to every one of them that al was lost, through his
fault, if he went not thider. And so the tumulte was great on both sides. And
in all parts new and contrary to the accustomed manner, both on the one part
and on the other. For the Lacedemonia^s through the fear yt they had to lose
their people, did in manner, as to say, fight from the land in the sea. And the
Athenians for the desire yt they had to ensue their victory, did fight out of
their ships hand to hand, as though they had been on land. And finally after
a long fight, wherein there was a great number of dead and hurt men on both
sides, they retired and departed. And yet ye Lacedemonyens saved all their
ships, except the five, that were taken at the beginning. And every man being
returned into his camp, the Athenians did restore unto the other, their
dead. And after set up a Trophe in sign of victory. And that done they
enuironned and compassed about all the Islande with their ships, where in the
four houndred and twenty Lacedemoniens were. whom they kept and did hold, as
captyue and takenne. On the other side, the Peloponesians that were from all
parts arryuedde for to succor Pylus: kept the town assieged in the quarter
toward land, when the news of this overthrow were understood and
declaredde at Sparte, it was determined by the counsaille, that the officers of
the city should go unto the places for to view and descryue, and afterward
to advise what was to be done, like as they were accustomed to do, when they
had received anny great loss. who having viewed the whole, and considering
that there was no remedy to succor their people that were in the Islande, and
that there was danger lest that they should be aither takene, or dead through
famyne, or by force: consyderedde the great number of people that were
against them they concluded to treat a peace with the Capytayne of the
Athenyans. Duringe the which, those Lacedemonyans should send unto Athens,
for to treat the appoinctement. Hopinge by that mean to recover theirs. And
so the truse was accepted by the Athenyans upon such conditions, that the
Lacedemonyans should give and deliver them all the shyps, wherwyth they had
fought at Pylus, and all those that had been there assembled out of all the
country of Laconie, and that they should another assail nor do annye dommage
unto the walls and ram^ares, which the said Athenya^s had made at the said
Pylus, by sea, nor by land. And by this mean that the Lacedemonyans should
suffer them to carry by sea unto their people, that were in the Islande, dailly,
a certain quantytie of bread, of wine and of flesh. To wytt, so much for
every free man, and the half for the sklaues, and as touching the flesh to be
at the discretion of the Athenyans. Without that, that it was liefull unto
them to carry thider, nor any shipp to pass thider, secretly. And yet
neuerthelas that the Athenyans should keep watch about the Islande, that none
man should depart fromthence. But this notwythstandinge it should not be
laufull for them to innouate any thing, nor to attempt against the camp of
the said Peloponesians by land nor by sea. And in case, that of the one side
or of the other by anny manner, there chanced any breach or contraue^tion,
great or little: the treuese should not be toward them understood to be
broken. The which should continue unto the rest, until the Ambassadors of the
Lacedemonyans should be returned from Athenes. whom those same Athenyans
should carry and bring again with one of their galleis. And at their
return, the treuese should be understood to cease. In which case, the
Athenyans should restore to the Lacedemonya^s the ships that they had delivered
and geuenne them, in that self form, that they had received them. In this
manner, the treuese was concluded, and in execution thereof, the Lacedemonyans
delivered to the Athenyans about.lx. galleys. And afterward the Ambassadors
of the Lacedemonyans were sent unto Athens. who being there aryued did speak
unto the Athenyans in the manner, as follows.

The Oration of the Lacedemonyans to the Athenyans, and the answer that they
had, and how, the treuese failling, they began war again. The.ii. Chapter.
THe Lacedemonyans have sent us hither (lords Athenyans) for to appoinct and
treacte of their people, that be in the Islande. Persuading themself that
that, which shall redounde to their proffit in this matter, shall also redounde
to your honnour. And we woll not make unto you longer oration, than we have
accustomed. For our manner of proceeding is, not to use many words, whereas is
no great matter. And also when the case and the time requires it, we speak
longer. to wytt, when it is needful to show by words, what is to be done.
wherefore we pray you, that if we speak a little more long, ye take it not to
evil intent, and think not, that in showing you, that you should mind to
advise and consult well of the matter, whereof is question: that we go about to
teach you what you have to do, as though we repute you ignorant people. And
for to come unto the matter, it is in your power to make your great proffitt of
that good adventure and prosperytie, that is chanced you by having our people
in your power. For you may thereby acquire and get great glory and great
honor, if you have regard, not to do, as many do, yt have not experymented,
what is of goodness and of evil. For when a good adventure had chanced unto
them unlooked for: they set their fantasy to greater things, trustyng that
fortune should always continue. But those, that have oftentimes experymented
the varyation and change of humayne chances, think most reasonably thereof.
And trust not so much to the present prosperyties. which thing is very
convenient for your city, and also for ours, for the long experyences of
things, that they have had. And although that you understand it sufficiently,
yet ye se the experience thereof in this present case. For we that obteigne and
have presently the prync^pall authority and dignity in all Greece, come hither
for to demand of you that, which lately was more in our power to give: as it
seemed unto us. And also we be not come to this inconvenient, through fault of
men of arms, another through presumption of our power. But (like as it
happens in worldly chau^ces) we have been frustrated and deceived of our
opinion, in that, wherein all lyuinge creatures be egalle, to wytt, in things
dependinge of fortune. wherefore it is not now needful, that for the present
prosperytie and for the increase of the puyssance, that has chanced you at
this present: you conceive opinion, that it ought to endure perpetually. For
all saige and aduysed men do hold it for most certain that there is
nothing so uncertain, as worldely felicity. and by this mean be always
more constant and determined to bear and endure all sinister chances and all
evils. And so no man should persuade himself, that it may be in his power,
to make war at his pleasure when he thinks good: but so as fortune
permytteth him. And such people, as take not greater couraige for the
prosperity that happens unto them, fail not very oftene. For that, that in
the great felicytie they be always in fear. And if you at this present do
so unto us, truly ye shall find goodness thereby. But if you do yt not, but
ra^ther refuse the parties that we do offer you, and afterward any
inconvenient do happene unto you, such as may daily chance, think not, that
you can keep that, which you have at this present gottene. Where as you may,
if you will, leave a perpetual memory of your puissance and of your prudencie.
For you see that the Lacedemonyans provoke you to make appoynctment and end
of war, offering you peace, alliance, amytie and all other manner of
familyaritie and benyuolence. In recompense of which things, they demand of
you their people, that be in the Islande, and yt seems to them that the same
is profittable to both parties. To wit, to you for to exchue the hazarte by
that mean, that may follow, wheder that they save themself, aither by any
occasion and adventure that may happene: or if they be takene by force, to
incur a perpetuell enmytie, which cannot so easelye be quenchede. For that,
that when one of the parties, that makes war, is constrained, by the other,
that has had the better, and is found to be strongest, to promys and swear
any appoynctment for his advantage: such appoynctemente is not so firm and
so durable, as yt should be, when he, that has had the victory, being in his
power of such appoynctment, would grant and agree to make yt honest, and
more modeste, than he, that had been vaynquished, did hope of. For he, that
perceueth curtoisie, woll not study to break his promys, as made for fear and
constrayncte. But having knowlaige of the courtesy, that the other has used,
he woll parforce himself to keep that well, which he shall have promysede,
and shall have shame to fail thereof. And this same courtoisie used commonly
the courageous men to them, that were most puissant, raythere than toward
them that were meaner or egalle with them. For it is a naturelle thing to
pardone him easelye, that renderethe and yeldeth him self with his good will,
and to persecute those, that be rebels and oulteragyous, though that yt were
not purposed, and that there might be dannger therein. Now, as touching this
present chance, certaynelye: yt shall be a good and honnourable thing,
aswelle for you, as for us, if we make now a good pea^e, better, than ever
was in any time before, rather than we should receive such oultrage of you,
as by mean whereof, we be constrained to bear unto you perpetuelle hatrede
and rancoure, as well in common, as in particular, and that before that you lose
the faculty to please us with things, that we do requier of you. Wherefore in
the mean seasone whilst the issue of the war is doubtful, let us make,
appoynctment. You, with your great glory and our perpetuell beneuolences:
we in excheuing a small shame, with an tolerable and mean loss. And sens
that we have chosene to have peace, in steed of war, we shall be cause to
make an end of all the great euylles and trauailles in all Greece. Whereof
they shall give you the charge and the blame, if you refuse this same. For
unto this hour present, they make war without knowing, who has been the
authoure or promotour thereof. Likewise, when the appoynctemente shall be made
(which is now for the moore part in your power) they shall repute
theym^elfe to be therefore bounden unto you. If you knowing that it is in
your faculty and power to make the Lacedemonyans (who require you thereof)
yo^re entier and perpetual friends, woolde chose to do unto them curtoisie,
rather than rudenes. And consider, what goodness may come thereof, for as you
know, when this same been accordedde by you, all Greece, that is inferior to
you and to us, shall approve and ratefie yt. Thus spoke the Lacedemonyans,
thinkinge, that the Athenyans had been before desirous of peace, if they might
have obteigned it of them. And by this mean that they should be all aised to
have yt, by delyueryng the people, that were in the Islande in their power. But
the Athenyans, perswadinge theymselfe, that by receiving of the said people
assieged, they might always have a better appoinctment with the said
Lacedemonyans: they would have greater parties of them, chiefly through
perswation of Cleon, son of Cleenetus, who had at that time great authorytie
among the people, and a great grace to speak. By whose opinion, it was
answered to the said Ambassadors, that furst and before all things, they, that
were in the Islande, must render themself with their armure, and should be
brought prysonners unto Athens, And that done, when the Lacedemonyans had
rendered unto the Athenyans, Nyse, Pege, Trezene and the countreye of Achaie,
which, they had not lost by war, but by the former appoinctment, that they
had made with the said Lacedemonyans, when they were very low: had been
constraynedde to leave and forsake them: the said prysonners might be
restored, and some reasonable appointment made to the contentacyon of both
parties. The Lacedemonyans said nothing against this answer, but they wylled
certain notable parsons to be deputed, with whom, they might debate upon the
hole matter. And afterward therein to be done, so, as should be aduysed by
them to be reasonable. Whereunto Cleon did holy replye, saying, that he knew
well that they had not had another than, nor before, any good quarrel, sithe^s
that they mystrusted to debate before all the people, but would speak thereof
in small compaignie. wherefore he was of opinion that if they had any thing
to speak (which they iudgedde to be reasonable) they ought to speak it
before all men. which the said Ambassadors would not do. For they did know
well, that it was not liefull nor conuenyente for them, for to speak before
all the people. And also for that^ that in so doing, if having regard to
their nec^ssitie, and to the danger wherein their people were, they would
have consentedde to any thing disaduantagious unto them, they parceyued well,
that coming to the knowlaige of their allies, it should engender great
displeasure unto them. wherefore, knowing that they could not obteigne of the
said Athenyans any reasonable thing, they departed from Athens, without any
conclusion. After their departure, the treuese were incontyne^tly expyred that
were made at Pylus. By reason whereof, the Lacedemonyans demanded that the
Athenyans should render to them the ships, that they had delivered by the
treaty of the treuese according to that, which thereby was appoyncted. But the
said Athenyans refused that to do, saying, that the said Lacedemonyans had
done against the said treaty, forsomuche as they had made assaults upon the
garnysons of the said Athenians. And charged them with some things, where
there was no appearance of raysonne, but all their foundation and ground was
for that, that in the said treaty it was concluded, that if one of the
parties did fail or do against anny thing therein, how little soever yt was,
that they should not help themself with the said treaty. And whatsoever
declaration or doleaunce that the said Lacedemonyans could make for to show
that it was against all reasone, and against the faith, which they had
promised, yet they could obteigne none other thing. And so they prepared
the^self to war, on both sides. And made all their stre^gthe for the feate
and affair of Pylus. In which place the Athenyans kept two galleys for
ordenary watch, about the Islande both day and night, compassinge it about
at all times, when the wind was not vehement and high, for than they kept
themself on the shoore of the sea. And also there was sent afresh, to their
succors and strength, twenty other galleys, so that they were in all.lxx. On
the other side the Peloponesians had their camp in the firm land, and
assailled oftentimes the walls of the town, and also espied and waited
contynually, if they might have any mean to save their people, yt were in the
Islande.

Of things that were done after that time in Sycile, as well by the Athenynyans
and their allies, as by them of the contrary part. The.iii. Chapter.
AFter the time that the things were so done at Pylus, as we have wryttonne:
the Syracusains and their allies in Sycille, having afreshe strengthened
their army by sea with ships (which they had made all new) and also with
those, that the Messenyans had sent them, made them war from the same
place of Mysena against the Regians, at the sollicitinge and pursuit of the
Locryans. who, for the ennymytie that they had against them, were now entered
into their country with all their puissance by land. And it seemed to the said
Syracusains that it was expedyente to assaye and prove the fortune of the
battaylle by sea, for that, that the Athenyans had not at that time any
great number of ships in Sycille. But it was to bileue that after that they
understood, that those Syracusains did enforce themself again, to subdue all
the Islande, they would send thider a greater number. wherefore they thought,
that if they had the victory by sea (as they hoped) they might easily get
the town of Rhege, before that the succors of the Athenyans should be comme,
assailinge it by sea, and by land. And that done, holding the said city of
Rhege, which stands upon a rock or promontory on the sea, from the cost
of Italy, and keeping Myssena, which is dyrectly against yt on the other
side of the sea, in the Islande of Sycile: they might easily defend, that the
Athenians should not pass through the distreate of Far: that separateth Italy,
from Sycile, which is called Charibdis. And it is said that Ulysses passed
that same way, coming from Troy. And not without cause it is so named,
forsomuche as it falls ympetuously and furyously, through the straites, that
be between the sea of Sycille, and the sea named Thirrene. And the Syracusains
came thider about night, with their allies, having in all a few more, than
thirty shippes^ for to give the battaille, to the Athenyans, who had.xvi. of
theirs and eight of the Rhegyans. But the Athenyans had the victory. And did
putt the Syracusains to flight. Who saved themself every man the best that he
could at Myssena. And yet neuerthelas there was no loss, but of one only
ship, by reasone that the night departed them. And after that same victory the
Locrians, that kept their camp before the city of Rhege, did raise it up,
and returned into their country. But sone after, the Syracusains and their
allies assembled again their ships and went into Pelloride, which is in
the terrytorye of Myssena, having there their fotemen. At which place, being
also aryued the Athenyans and Rhegyans, and saying the said ships of the
Syracusains void, they came to assaille them. But having entered one of the
same, and fastened it to one of theirs with graspes of yrone they lost theirs,
howbeit the people that were within it did save themself by swymmynge. And
although that as the Syracusains that were now entered within it, did make
toward Myssena, the Athenyans came a fresh to assail them, thinkinge to
recover the ship, yet they were bea^en of and repoulsed, and also lost one
othere of their ships. And by this mean the Syracusains, though that they
had been vainquished at ye other battle, wythdrewe themself with their honor
unto Myssena, without having more loss, than the enemies. And the Athenyans
retired unto Camerin, being aduertysed that a burgeois of the town, named
Archias, Archias
with his accomplices, would render that same town fro the Syracusains. In
thies countrechaunces all the people of Messena issued fourth, as well by sea^ as
by land for to go against the city of Naxe, in the country of Chalcyde,
which is in the terrytorye o^ the said Messanyens. And the Naxians, Naxus.
being the furst day issued to mete them by land, they were repulsed until
wtin their ports. And the Syracusains did give themself to pillage their
lands about the town, afterward, they assieged yt. And on the other side,
the morrow following, those that were in the sea, sailed for to aryue, at the
river of Acesine, Acesine.
where they la^ded, and made a great pray in that same quarter. which
^arceyued, the Sycilians, that kept themself in the mounteignes, assembled
togider and came to discende into the country of Mamertayns: and frothence
they came for to succor ye said Naxians. who, after that they parceyued them
coming, recovered their courage, and they, exhortinge the one the othere,
thynkyng that it had been the Leontyns and other Greeks dwellinge in Sycille
that were come to succor them, they issued afreshe out of the town with such
^trength, that they caused the Mamertayns to fly and did slay of them, more
than a thousand, and the other had much pain for to save theymselfe. For the
strangers and paysans, that kept the ways and passages, did kylle many of
them. And the ships, that were retired unto Messene, saylledde every one
into his quarter. through occasion whereof, the Leontyns and their ally^s with
the Athenyans, enterprysed to assiege Messena. For that, that they well
parceyued, that it was sore decayed. And so the Athenyans came by the one side
of the sea to assiege the walls. But the Messenians, with a bend of Locryans,
that was remaining there, for to keep the city under the conducte of
Demoteles, Demoteles.
set upon them, as they were in the lande^ put them to flight, and so did
slaye many of them. which seeing, the Athenyans issued out of their ships
for to comme to succor them. And charged upon the Mamertyns, in such sort,
that they repoulsed, and did drive them back even into the the town.
Afterward, leaving their trophee for a sign of victory, they returned to
Rhege. After that, ye Greeks, that inhabyted Sycille, without anny aid of the
Athenyans, prepared and gave themself to make war, the one against thoder.

How the Athenians had the victory at Pylus. The.iiii. Chapter.
THe Lacedemonyans than holdinge their siege before Pylus, and their people
within the Islande being assieged by the Athenyans, like as has been above
declaredde, the army of the Athenyans was in great perplexytie and necessytie
of victuailles, and of fresh water. for there was but one only well, which
was in the top and height of ye town of Pylus, which was also very small. In
such manner, that they were constrained to dygge at the ebbyng of the sea,
within the sand. Whereout they did draw such water, as might be drawin out
of such a place. and as for the rest, the place where they kept their camp on
land, was veary small. and the ships were not seure in the rode. By mean
whereof, some of them kept along the land for to recover vyctua^les, and the
other did ancre in the mean sea. And moreover they had great displeasur and
werynes, for that that the affayre endured longer, than they thought, from the
beginning that yt should have done. For they thought ernestly that those that
were within the Islande, not having vyctua^les nor fresh water, could not so
long defend yt, as they did, by the prouysion that the Lacedemonyans did
ordeyne for to succor them. Who did yt to be knowin by public and open
proclamacyon, that whosoever would carrye to them that were within the Islande,
meat, bread, wyne^ flesh, or othere victuayles, should have a certain
great some of monnye. And y^ he were a bondeman he should have lybertye. By
mean whereof, many did put themself in danger to carry yt thither. And chiefly
the sklaues, for the desire that they had to acquire and get lybertye. And
they passed by the sea of Peloponese, into the said Islande by all means that
they might. and the more part by night, and by y^ cost of the mean sea, and
pryncypallye when the wind came from the sea against the land. For by the
same, they came easily without being perceived by the gallyes of the enemies,
that kept the wa^che, for that that they could not well keep about the
Islande, when that same wind reigned. And for them, that came unto the
Islande, yt was aduantagyous on that side, for that that yt chased them unto
yt. And moreover they, that were wyth^n the Islande, reyceyued them in armure.
But all they, that adventured themself to go thyd^r when the sea was peasable
and calm, were taken. There were also cormarant^ of the sea, that passed under
the water from the poorte, unto within the Islande. And they took them with a
cord, made within of goat skyns and paper grynded with honny and stamped with
linseed. wherewythe they o^ the Islande repastedde themself and did so,
long before the Athenyans perceived yt. But at length parceyuynge yt, they
set there watches. And for effect, every one for his part used the best
dylygence, that he might, to wytt, the one to b^ynge vyctuailes into the
Islande, and the other for to empesche yt. In this mean time the Athenyans
that were in the city, understanding that their people which were asseged at
the said place of Pylus, were in great necessytie, and that those, that were
in the Islande hadd vyctuailes, they were in great care. For they doubted,
that by the winter, that came upon them, their people should suffer much,
being in a desarte place, for that, that in that time yt should be veary hard
to compass about all Peloponese for to vyctuaile them. And yt was not
posseble in that time of summer that remained and was to come, to furnyshe
theme of all that, that was necessary for their suffysance. Also their ships
had no^her port nor abydinge place, where they might be in suertye. On the
other side, they parceyued well that when they should dyscontynue and cease the
watch about the Islande, they that were within yt, would save themself in the
same ships that carried them vyctuailes, espyinge the time, when the sea
should be roughe. And the thing most that they feared, was that they thought
that the Lacedaemonians, parceyuynge themself to have the advantage, woolde
send unto theme no more to d^maunde peace. Wherefore they repented thems^lfe
right soore, not to have accepted yt^ when they required it. And for so much as
Cleon parceyued well that they had opinion that he had been cause of empesching
it, he said yt the affairs of tharmye was not in such sort, as they were
done to be understood. And for that, that they, that had made reaporte,
demanded that men might be sent thider to parceue the troth, it was
determined that he and Theogenes should go. Theogenes.
But Cleon, parceuing that if they so did, they should be forced aither to say,
as the furst: or that saying the contrary, they should afterward be found
liars: he persuaded the people, whom he saw well animated to that battle,
to send some strength of people, above the number, that they had determined.
Saying yt it was better to do so, than to lose time by tarying for them, yt
should be sent, until they were returned. For in the mean time if it were so
as the other did say, ye fresh strength, that should be sent thider, might be
arrived. And forsomuche as Nycyas, son of Nyceratus, who had ye conduct and
the charge of that army that was at Pylus, was his enemy: he said that if,
sending that same succors, they yt had the charge of that affair, were men of
courage, they might easily take them, that were in ye Islande, and that if he
were there, he doubted not, but that he would ^one do it. Than Nycias,
parceyuinge that the people had now conceived some displeasure with the said
Cleon, for that, that if he did know the thing so easy as he said, they
thought yt he should not refuse to go thider: and also saying that the said
Cleon charged him, he said unto him. That insomuch as he found the thing to
be easy, it were good, that he took the charge to lead the re^forte or fresh
stre^ghe ^hider. And he remitted unto him his place and his puissance right
wyllingly. And Cleon, thinking at the beginning that he did it not with good
heart and ernestly, but judging, that he would not do it, did not refuse it.
But aftere that he parceyued, that the other perseuered, he excused himself,
saying yt the other was chosene Capytaine for that, and not he.
Notwythstandinge when the people did see, that Nycyas would without any
fayninge leave his charge to the said Cleon and provoked him to take it, Nycyas
(as every co^monaltie is ioyeful of a nouation and change) they commanded the
said Cleon to accept it. who saying that there was no remedy to forsake it,
sens that it was so offredde: he finally accepted it. And said right
gloriously, that he feared not the Lacedemonyans, and that he would goo thider
without taking one man of Athens. But he would carry the soldyars of Lemne and
Imbricie, which were than in the city, all well armed, and some othere armed
with targattes, which were sent from Ene, with a certain number of Archers,
whom he would take in other places, to the number of four houndred. With the
which, and those that were already at Pylus, he auaunted himself that wtin
twenty days, he would bring the Lacedemonyans that were in the Island,
prysonners into Athens, orels would slaye them. At which so glorious
speakinge, the Athenya^s did laughe: and yet they were glad thereof, thinking yt
one of two things should happene: aither that they should by yt mean be
delivered from the importunity of Cleon, who was tedyous unto them already, if
he failled to do the thing, whereof he auaunted himself (as the most part
thought, that yt should so be) orells if he did it, that he should bring the
Lacedemonyans into their power. Being than the things so deliberated and
concluded in the assembly of the common people, Cleon was by the voice and
opynyons of them chosene, made and created Empereur and Capytayne of the army,
instead of Nycyas. And he named Demosthenes to be his adjoined compaignyon,
who was in the camp, for that, that he parceued that he was of opinion to go
to assail, wtin the Isla^de, those, that were there. Also the souldyours,
seeing the incommodytie of the place, and that they were more assieged, than
those, which they did assiege, desired to hazard the matter. And this also
gave them couraige thereunto, that they parceued the Isla^de to be already
discovered in many places, where the woods were burned. which at the
beginning, when the siege was there laid, it was so thick with wood, by
reason that no man had haunted it, that it was in a manner impossible to pass
through it. which was the cause why Demosthenes feared at the beginning to
enter into it. For it seemed unto him, that it was the aduau^tage of them, that
were within. for somuche as when he had landed there with great puissance
those, that were within hid and in covert in diverse places might do great
do^maiges to his people, which he could not do unto them that were hid
through the wood, and did know ye passages and paths thereof. And by yt mean
the faults that his people should commit, should be discovered. In such manner,
yt it should be in ye faculty and power of the enemies to issue fourth of their
embushme^t and come to assail them when they did se their aduau^tage. And
though that they were repoulsed into ye thick wood and being but a small
number, yet should they have the aduau^tage, for the knowlaige, which they they
had of the place. And moreover a certain number of the people that he had,
could not come there, where the greatest busynes should be. another there, where
succors should be set, for thimpeschement of the wood. And besides all thies
reasons, that moved Demosthenes, yet the overthrow, which he had at Ethiole,
which chanced him partly by like occasion of wood, caused him most to
fear. But it was happened, that some of of them yt were wtin the I^lande,
being come to the shore for to watch: did kind^e a fire for to sethe their
meat, and that the wind so arysed, that it kindled ye same fire, in such
sort, that it did burn very far into the Isla^de. By mean whereof,
Demosthenes parceiued yt there was a greater number of people, than he thought.
And seeing also, yt thentrie should be more easy by mean of the said fire, he
thought it best to assail them, as soon as he might, and so he prepared to do
it, and had already commanded them that were next the Island, to come to his
aid. And in ye mean time he was aduertysed, by Cleon, that he had the charge
of the army, and so he attended for him. And when he was come, after that they
had advised togiders, they sent an heraul^e to the Lacedemonya^s that were in
the camp before ye town, for to know of them, if they would be content, to
cause those, that were in the Island, to render themself with their armure, under
condition, that they should be well and suer^y kept, until the time that it
were determined upon thappoictement for all the war. And understanding by
report of the heraulte, that they would not accept the said party they
seiourned and tarried thereupon, one whole day. And afterward coming the
night, they bestowed the most part of their people wtin a ^mall number of
ships. whom, they did set wtin the Island about dawning of the day on both
sides to wit, on the side of the hauone, and of the same of ye mayn sea. One
part of which number, unto eight hou^dred or therabout incontyne^tly as they
were la^ded, did run with most diligence yt they could, against the chiefest
that kept watch that same night, which were about thirty. For the othere were
ye m^st part in a place discovered, which was in a manner, in the midst of the
Isla^de environed with water and Epitadas their captain with them. One other part
was at the other end of the Isla^de on the side from Pylus, which could not be
assailed by the sea side, for that, yt the Island was on that side high and
s^iepe up, in such manner, yt no man could skalen or enter there. And on the
town side it was uneasy to assail, by cause of an old castle that had
sometime been there made with a raw wall. which they wtin the Islande resarued
for their forte. if they were constraigned to haba^done and forsake the rest.
The affairs than being in this estate, as above, those that came to charge
upon the watch, came soubdainlp upon them and found the^ sleping, so that
before they could arm the^self, they were all slain by mean that they feared
not their la^ding. And though that they had parceued the galleys to compass
about the banks and coasts of the Island, yet they thought that it had been
those, yt kept the watch, as they had nightly accustomed. After that, when
the day began to be clear, the rest of the army, that was yet the in the
ships which were arrived at the Islande, that were to the number of foore
skoore or theraboute, landed all in the Islande. To wytt, those which were at
the furste siege, and those, that Cleon had brought, those resarued, that were
left to keep the camp and the munityons. Among whom, there was about eight
houndred Archers and as many caryinge targattes lightly armed, which
Demosthenes did appoincte all in that same sort. For he did set them in
diverse bendes, the one distant from the othere, at two houndred men for the
bend, and in some part less according to the capacytie of the places. And
he caused them to get every where the highest of the place for to do the
most displeasure to the ennemys. Compassing them on many sides, to the end,
that they should not know on what part to turn themself for the great
multitude of people, that they should see charged upon them on all parties. For
if they tournedde against them, that assaylled them at their back: they that
were before them, would run upon them. And the like thing did those that were
behind, if they marchedde against them that were before. And when they
tournedde upon them that were on the sides, they were assailled both by those
from before, and also by those, that were behind. And by that mean on every
part where they turned, they were always compassed behind with those that
were lightly armedde. who did attainct and set upon them inco^tynetly. And
the Archers did hurt them afar of with arrows, with darts, with stones,
cast with hand, and with slinges. And also they kept not their standinge
when men charged on them. For it is their custom to vainquishe by flyinge, for
that, that they did shote and cast without cessinge. And when the ennemys did
return, they were at their back. Such order did Demostenes keep, as well at
the entry into the Islande, as also after that he was entered, in all that same
fight. when Epitadas and those that were with him in mids of the Islande,
which was the greatest number, parceued that their watch, and those that were
in the former strength were discomfyted, and that all the company came hastily
against them, they did putt the^self in battaille, and would have marched
against the Athenyans that came in the front before them. But they could not
come hand to hand, another show their valyantnes against them. For the
Archers and throwers, and those that were lightly armed, who came on the sides
and wings, did empesche them. whereby, they parceyuynge that, marched not
against the said Athenyans. But kept them self in their order and removed
not, but when the said light armed did approach nighe unto them. For than they
repoulsed them, but in their flyinge they always defended them, and so were
driven to save themself through the rocks and straight places, and the
Lacedemonyans that were strongly armed, could not follow them. In such sort
they did fight a certain space of time, in manner of a escharmushe. And
afterward the light armed, parceyuinge that the Lacedemonyans were already
weary and slow to follow them so oftene, did take more couraige and a^dacytie,
and showed themself in greater number, for that, that they found not the
Lacedemonyans so sharp another so vaillyant, as they thought them to be at
beginning, when they were entered into the Islande. For than they went much in
great fear against them, for the great renomme of their hardynes, and so
they rushed with great cries, all at ones upon them, casting arrows stones
and othere shot, such as they had every one in his hand. At which cry
and manner of combat and fighting, the Lacedemonyans, who had not been
thereunto accustomed, were all astonished. And on thoder part, the powder of the
ashes, that came from the places where ye fire had been, was so great in the
air, that they could another see, nor by any mean avoid the shot that was
cast against them. In manner that they were in great perplexity. For their
sallettes and cappes of yrone could not cover them fro the shot, their
spears were brokene and frushed with stoanes that were cast against them,
and moreover they being enuyroned and assailed on all sides, did not see
those, yt assailed them, another they could hear what thing they were
commanded to do, for the great cry yt thennymys did make. So that they knew
not what to do, and also did not se any mean to save themself. Finally ye
more part of them being already hurt, they retired all togeders toward the
castle, which was in the end of the Islande, where there was one part of
their people. which parceyued by the light armed, they approached yet more
boldly with great cries and strokes of shot, and those that departed fro
the trowpe, were slain incontynently. But one great part saved them self
through the woods, and came to ioygne with them, that were at keeping of the
castle. And all togeder prepared themself for to defend that side thereof,
that was assaultable. The Athenyans followed them veary nighe. And neuerthelas
seeing that they could not assiege the place on all sides, for ye nature and
dyficultie thereof, bestowed them self in a place more higher. Fromewhence with
force of shot, and by all means that they could, they parforced themself to
chase ye other out of the castle. But they defended themself veary hardely. In
such sort that the combat endured the greater part of one day. Through
occasion whereof, they were all ouercommed of the one part and of the other,
with heat, drough and trayuaile. For the Lacedemonyans, had mean and power to
defend themself, for that, yt they could not be enuyroned nor assailed by the
sides. The matters, being in thies terms, and the duke of Messenyans, seeing
that there was no end, came unto Cleon and to Demosthenes and said unto them
that they trayuailed themself in vain to think to take thennymies in that
same sort. But if they delivered him a certain number of footmen lightly
armed and of Archers, he would take pain to enter secreatly upon the ennymies
at their back in some manner. Which thing they did grant him. Who, having the
people that he had demanded, led them the most secretly that he could
through the rocks and through ye brokene places of the Islande, tournyng
until he came to the quarter, which was not kept nor defended, for that, that
yt seemed to the Lacedemouyans, that yt defended yt self, by yt self, and with
the most pain of the world, he mounted and skaled up to ye height. Whereby,
the Lacedemonyans, seeing them to be taken behynd them, were greatly astonyd and
in manner without hope. And ye Athenians, yt assailed them before, did all
rejoice, as certain of the victory. In this estate the Lacedemonyans found
themself enclosed and slain on all sides, as those, which did fight against
Perses at Thermopiles, if comparyson may be made of great things, unto small.
For as those, being there surprised by small passages and paths of the
mou^teigne on all sides, were al slain: so thies, being here hurt on all parts,
defended themself no longer. But perceiving themself in so small number against
so great number of enemis, and being moreover faint and ouerco^me with famine,
droughe and with trauaylle: left and habandonned the defenses. In such
manner, that the Athenyans had now already gottone all the entrynges of the
place. which seen by Cleon and Demosthenes, and that, howmuch the less they
defended the^self, so much ye greater number of the^ was slain: they caused
their people to retire, desiring rather to carry the^, yt were yet lyuinge
prisoners unto Athens, if they would render themself to their will, than to slay
them. And so they caused them to be so^moned by the herault with a loud voice
to do it. And when one party did cast on the ground their shield clappinge
their hands, which was a tokene, that they accepted the party. And so made
treuese for a small space. Duringe the which, they came to parliament, to wit,
Cleon and Demosthenes for the Athenyans, and Stypho^ of Pharacie for the
Lacedemonya^s, for that, that Epidatas, yt had been their captain was dead,
and Hippagretus, who was chosen in his stead, was hurt and lay on the ground
among the dead, though that he was yet liuing^ For this cause had the same
Hippagretus been chosene after the law and custom of the Lacedemonyans for to
ordeyne and command according to the chance and as need should require. who,
being comme to the parlyamente with the said Cleon and Demosthenes, said unto
them on the bihalf of them that were with him and of his, that before accepting
the party, they would therein have the advise of their capytains and
compaignions, that were in the main land. And seeing that the Athenyans would
not agree unto it, they called with a loud voice, the heraults that were with
their said Capytains in the main land. And after that they had called three
times, one of the said heralds came unto them upon a ladder, who showed them
from the other, that they shuld^ denyse and take party in their affair
themself, so always that they should not make anny shameful appoinctement.
And thereupon having consulted among them what they had to do, they rendered
the^self with their armure to the pleasure of the enemies. and were all that night
and the day following, kept as prisoners. The other day after, the Athenyans
having set up their trophee in the Isla^de in token of victory, departed the
said prisoners among the bendes, delyuerynge them in keeping unto the
Capytaynes of that same bendes. And afterward preparedde themself to
return unto Athens. And rendered to the Lacedemonyans (who for that cause had
sent their heraulte) the corpses of the dead. And of all the number o^ four
hou^dred and.xx. yt were passed into the Islande, there were found but two
houndred and four skore, whereof there were syx skoore of Sparte, all the other
were dead. Of the Athenyans there was no great number slain, for that, that
there was no ranged battaille. The time, that the said Lacedemonya^s had been
in the Isla^de, f^o^ the same by sea, until this the last battle: were three
skore and twelve days. where they had provision of victuailes during the.xx.
days, that ye Ambassadors went to Athens for the appoictme^t. The rest of the
time, they lived with that, that was brought them secretly. And so there was
found in their camp wheat and othere victuailes, which they had yet in
stoare. For Epitadas departed them so, as was requisitt for the necessity. In
this manner departed the Athenyans and the Lacedemonyans from Pylus, and every
one went to his house^ And the promise, that Cleo^ had made yt to Athenia^s at
his departure (though it were folish and glorious) was parfourmed and
accomplished. For he brought the enemies prisonners to Athens within the
space of twenty days, like as he had promised. which was the furste thing
that happened in that war against the opinyo^ of all the Greeks. For they
never thought, that the Lacedemonya^s, another for famyne nor for other
necessity, that they might have: would have rendered their armure. But rather
than they would do that, to fight until the death. And if those that yielded
themself had been like unto them that had been slain, they had not been
so rendredde. whereby it thereupon chauncedde after that they were brought to
Athens, that one among them being asked by an Athenyan, in manner of derysion
and mockage, if those that were slain of their compaignie, were people of
estymacyon: he aunsweredde him in this manner. That the distaff was much to be
made of, if it knew men of honesty, wylling by the distaff to signefie the
arowe and shot. And to say, that those that were dead of their co^paignions,
were slain by strokes of shot so as they came at adventure. wherefore it
could not be judged if they dyed villaynously or no. Being than the said
prisoners brought to Athens, it was ordained that they should be kept in good
prysons until that some appoinctement were takene with the Peloponesians. And
if in the mean seasone, they came to ouerronne their land, that they should
be all slain. To the rest the Athenyans did leave their garnysone at Pylus.
And moreover the Messenyens sent thider from Naupacte, some of their people,
such, as they thought most convenient and mete for to be in that same place.
For that, that wha^ Messena was in his entier, that same place, was of his
terrytorye. And they that kept it, were robbars and thieves, and went pillinge
and robbing the country of Laconie, and did there many other mischeues,
somuche more easy, for that they did speak one self language. Of this war,
the Lacedemonyans were astonished, for that they they were not accustomed to make
it of like sort. And also of this, that their sk^aues rendered themself to the
ennemys. So they sent secretly Ambassadors to the Athenyans for to
understand and know if ^hey might recover Pylus and their prysonners. But the
Athenyans, who desired and affected greater things, after mamy goynges and
commynges, sent them again without doing any thing. This end had the
affairs at Pylus.

Of a victory that the Athenyans had against the Corynthians in their
land. The.v. Chapter.
INcontynetly after that victory, that same summer, the Athenyans went
against the country of Corynthyans with foore skoore galleis, caryinge a
thousand fotemen, all Athenians. And in the other plat ships, they carried two
houndred warryours, being hoorsemen. And besides this, they had in their
compaignie the succors of Milesyans, of Andryens and of Caristians. Andrii.
Of the which army, Nycias, Nicias.
son of Nyceratus, with two other compaignyons, was capytain. So they kept
along the land between Cherronese and Rhite. Cherronesus.
And parceued themself at dawning of the day to be foranempste one small
mountaigne, named, Soligius. Solygius.
Which, having in times paste been fortefyed, by the Doryens, made there from
war against the Eolyans, that were within the city of Corinthe. And there
is at this present day a Castelle, that has the self name of the
mounteigne, which is distant from the sea side, whereby the galleys did pass,
about twelve stades. from the city of Corinthe, aboutes three skore, and from
the distraict, twenty. To which distreate, the Corynthians that were
advertised of the coming of the Athenyans, were all gone, resarued those,
that inhabited without the said destroycte, on the cost of the fyrme land.
Whereof six houndredde were gone into Ambracya and into Leucade for to defend
them. The other were al gatheredde togiders to deskrie, in what quarter the
Athenyans would land. But those same Athenyans, being in the night passed by,
without parceyuinge, and understanding (by the signs that they, which were
in the watch did make, that they were landed on the other side of Soligius)
they parted themself into two bendes, whereof they did leave the one in
Centhrea for to succor Crommyon, if the said Athenyans did come to assail yt,
and the other half went to the succors of the other^ upon ye cost, where
the said Athenyans were landed. Now had the Corinthians made two Capitaynes
of that war. Whereof they did name the one Battus, who was gone with one
bend for to enter into the castle, which was not strong of walls, for to
defend yt: and the other, named Lycophron, went against the Athenyans that were
landed. And marched at ye arryuall, against ye right poynct and wyng of the
Athenyans, with whom were the Caristiens in the last bend. and so he
assailed them lively, and the battle was veary sharp even hand for hand. But
finally, the Corinthians were repulsed unto the mountaigne, where there was
plenty of heaps of stones, of the walls beaten down. From which place,
having the advantage, they repulsed thennemyes with great strokes of stones.
And after yt the said enemies had retired and recovered their brethe, they
caused their trompetts to sound, and descended afresh against them. And so
byganne again the battaille hand to hand more sharp than the furst. But they
being in the most heat thereof, came to ye succors of the said Corinthians,
one compaignie of their people. By whose help, they repoulsed the Athenyans
until the sea, where the Athenyans afreshe ioygned themself togiders and
repoulsed the Corinthians. In the mean time, the rest of the people did
combate^ and fight incessantly without resting, the one against the other, to
wytt, the right wyng of the Corinthians, wherein was lycophron, against the left
poyncte of the Athenyans, fearing that yt woolde^ go to assayll the castle of
Soligius. Thus the battaill long endured, with out knowlaige had, who had the
better. But finally, through the horsemen, which came to the help of ye
Athenya^s, the Corinthians were repoulsed and retired to the mountaigne. And
there not being pur^ued^ they unarmed them self for to rest, and refreshe
them. In this retreict many of the Corynthians were slain, and among them,
Lycophron. The othe^e, being retyredde to the heigh^e of the mountaigne: did
fortefye theyms^lfe wych the place. Also the enemies did not follow them.
but gave themself to spoil the deade^ and afterward, they raised up their
trophee, in sign of victory. Of all this battle the Corinthians, that were
abiding in Cenchrea, could see nothing. For that, that the mount Oneus did
empesche their ^ighte. Oneus^
But neuerthelas saying the duste in the air very thycke, and by that knowing
that they did fight, they came with all diligence to their succors, and
likewise the old people that remained in the city. whom, when the Athenyans
did see coming all against them, they thought that they were the neighbors of
those Corinthians that came to their succors out of the country of
Peloponese. So they retired into their ships with the spoil of their enemies
and the corpses of their people, that were slain: except two, which they
could not find nor know. Whom they recovered afterward by appoynctmente
of the Corynthyans. Of whom were slain in the furste battaylle, two houndred
and twenty, and of the Athenyans aboutes fyftie. At departure from the said
nyghe Islandes, the Athenyans went from thence into that same of Cron^yon, the
which apperteigned to the Corinthians, distant from Corinthe, the space of six
skore stades. and there they tarried one night and a day. During which time
they pillaged it holy. And afterward they went fro^thence, to Epidau^^,
Epidaurus.
and fro^thence they came to Methon, Methone.
which is between Epidaure and Trezene, Troezena.
and did take the distreate of Cherronese, where as Metho^ is. which they
enclosed with a wall, and (...) therein of their people in garnyson. who a long
time afterward commytredde robberies and pyllages in the land of the said
Trezenians and Epydaurians and also of the Halyens. And that done, the said
Athenyans retournedde into their country.

How they that were expoulsed out of Corinthe were taken by them of the town
with the help of the Athenyans and afterward cruelly slain. The.vi. Chapter.
IN that self saysone, Eurymedon and Sophocles, being departedde fro Pylus
with the army by sea, for to pass into Sycil^e, they came to land at Corcyre.
Being at which place, they issued fourth with them of the town against the
other cytezeins, that were driven and chased fromthence. who, being fortefied
in the mount Isthone, Isthone
had gottone all the countreye about ye town, and did unto them that were
within, many dammaiges and displeasures. So they repoulsed them and did take
the rampares and strong places that they had made, and constraigned them to
retire to a straight place in the hieghest of the mountaigne. Being wherein,
they rendredde themself upon this condition. that they should render all the
strangers that were comme to their aid to the will of the said Athenyans and
Corcyryans. And as touching those, that were of the town, they should be
surely kept, until that the said Athenyans had determined what they should will
to be done with them. So, that if one alonly among them were found to have
done against the said treaty, than it was brokene, as concerning all the
rest. Ensuinge the which appoinctement, being led into the Islande of
Ptichia, Ptychia
and the chief and pryncypall of the town, fearinge that the Athenyans woolde
have no pytie, and lest they would condemn them to death: did imagyn this
trompery and deceyte. For they sent into the said Islande some of the fre^des
of those, that were there. who did them to understand, that the Athenyans had
determined to render them to the Corcyryans, that were in the city. wherefore
they should do well and wisely to save themself. promysinge to fournyshe shyps
for to do it. whereunto they accorded. And so as they were entered into a shipp,
thinkinge to save the^self, they were takene by the Corcyrians. And for that,
that in so doing they had brokene the appoinctement, they were by the dukes and
capytayns of the Athenyans remytted to the will of the said Corcyrians,
although that they were aduertysed of the tromperie and deceyte. But they did
yt to the end, that they should have the better occasion to deliver them. For
somuche as willing to depart fro^thence into Sycille, they were angry, that
other people should have the honor to have carried to Athens, those prisoners,
which they had conquered and vainquisshed. Being than the said prisoners
rendered to them of the city, they were altogether put wtin a great edyfice.
And afterward they caused the^ to be drawyn out by twentys, all bound: and
passed through the men of arms which were ranged on both sides. And as they
passed through the streate, before they aryued at the place, where the said men
at arms were: those that had anny particular hatred against any of them, did
prycke him, passinge by, with their glaiues. And specially the sargeantes did
bounse and beat them, when they went to softlye. And finally, when they were
aryued in the myddeste of the men at arms, they were hackedde in pieces. In
this manner were slain at three times, to the number of threskore, before that
the other, that were within the prison, did know thereof. For they thought that
they were caused to issue fourth, for to be carried into some othere prysone.
But when they were aduertysed of the troth, they began to cry and call to the
Athenyans, that they should slaye them theymselues, if yt were their will, that
they should dye. saying that they would not suffer other, but them, to enter
into the prysone, wherein they were, so long as they had life and body. which
seeing the Corciria^s they would not break up ye gate. But they skailed upon the
house and uncovered it on all sides, and after with strokes of arrows did
slaye them within. But the prysonners did defend themself the best, tha^
they could. And many among the^ did slay themself with their own hands, some
with the arowes, that were cast at them, which they thruste into their
throtts, and the other did strangle themself with the clothes of their beds,
and wy^h cords and lines, which they had made of their habillementes. In such
manner, that as well by day as by night (which came upon them in thies
counterchaunces) they were all dead. partly with strokes of arowes, and
partlye with their oune hands. And ye morrow after, when it was day their
corpses were carried upon waynes out of the city and all their wives that were
found within that same edyfice, were brought into saruitude and bondage. In
this manner those, yt had made the mutyne and sedition in the city of
Corcyre, were slain. And that same sedition was by that mean fynished so
far as touched this war, whereof we speak. For of the other, that had been
there before, there remained not one Jot, whereby any suspytion might than be
conceived.

Of many victories and prosperities, that the Athenyans had in that same
saisone against the Peloponesians, and chiefly in the Islande of Cythere and
in Thyree. and of some other ma^ters. The.vii. Chapter.
AFter that, the Athenyans being arrived in Sycille, and ioigned with their
allies, they biganne war against their generalle ennemys. In that same somer,
the Athenyans and Acarnanians that were at Naupacte, did take by trahisone and
stelthe the town of Anactorye. Anactorium.
which was sytuated at the entrye of the goulphe of Ambracie, belonging to the
Corinthyans, which the said Acarnanyans did afterward keep, and chased
fromthence all the Corinthiens, and this endurynge the summer ended. At
beginning of winter, Arestides, son of Archippus, one of the Captayns by sea
of the Athenyans, who was sent to their allies, for to recover of the^ aid of
monney, whereat they were ta^ed: encountered upon the sea nyghe unto Eione,
which is in the quarter of Strymone, a galley, wherein was a Persian, that the
king Artaxerxes had sent in Ambassade toward the Lacedemonyans, namedde
Artapharnes. Artaphernes
And so he did take him, togyders with the letters, that he carried from the
said king, addressed to the Lacedemonyans, and carried him to Athens. And the
said letters were than translated out of the languaige Persian, into Greek.
which among many other things conteigned, that the king maruailled greatly
of the said Lacedemonyans and knew not what they mente. For they had sent
many messengers, whereof the the one had never spokene, as the other. wherefore
if they would speak plainly and clearly, they should send some with the said
Artaphernes, that should do him to understand, their mind and will. Certain
days after, the said Athenyans sent the same Artaphernes to Ephese with their
Ambassadors, which they sent toward the said Artaxerxes. B^t being there,
they had news of the death of the said Artaxerxes, and so they returned
him to Athens. In that self winter, they of Chio were constraigned by the
Athenians, to beat down a wall, which they had newely made about the town.
For suspicion that the Athenians had, that they ymagined some reuolte and
rebellion. Although that the said Chya^s were thereof sufficiently dilcharged,
and offered to give such suertie as they might, in nothing to do against the
said Athenians. And in thies counterchauses the winter passed, which was the
se^enth year of the war, yt the Chucidides has writtone. In beginning of
the somer ensuyng, there was an eclips of the son and in the same moves
chanced in Greece, a great Earthquake. And the outlawes of Mytilene and of the
Islande of Lesbos, having togiders a great number of people of the main
land, whereunto they were retired, and also of Peloponese did take the city
of Rhetoe, Roethium.
and anon after without doying there any damage, did restore it, receyuyng two
thousand Phocians stoters. And from thence they went to the City of
Antandros, Antandros.
which they did take by treasone of some that were in it. And their intent was
to set again at liberty the other cities, that be called Actees, which
were sometime founded by the Mytylenians and was then ruled and governed by the
Athenians: but pryncipally they would keep the city of Antandros, for that, it
was propice for them to make shyps, because of the wood and other matter that
was found there: and also in the Islande of Ida, which was there nigh unto
it. And moreover from that same, war might be easily made against the Islande
of Le^bos, which was also nigh, and likewise Pillage and get the villages of
Eoliens, that were in the main land. this was there intent. In that same
so^mer, the Athenians did send.lx. ships, and in them two thousand fotemen,
and certain number of horsemen and a nombre of Mylesiens and of some other
their allies, under the conducte of Nycias, Nicias.
son of Niceratus, Nicostratus, Nichostratus.
son of Diotraphus, and of Antocles, Antocles.
son of Tolmeus, for to make war against those of Cythere, Cychereis.
which is an Islande situated fora^^^pste the country of Laconie, on the cost
of Malea, Malea.
and was inhabyted with lacedaemonians, who every year sent thider thofficers
of the city of Sparte, togiders with a garnisone for the keeping of it. For
they sorowed greatly for it, for that, that it was there retraicre and their
estaple for their ships, that came out of Lybia and out of Egypt, and also
empesched, that no robberies were done in the country of Laconie by sea on the
cost, where it was in most danger. For that, that it lay opene and was
subject to the sea of Sycille, and to that same of Crete. Being than the
Atheniens aryued at the said Islande, with ten ships and two thousand
Millesians: they took at the ariuall one city of the said Islande which was
on the sea side, named Scandea, Sca^dia
and the rest of the army went through the Isla^de against the quarter,
wherein was the city of Malea. And first they came to the maistres town,
which is nigh the sea, named Cythere, where they found the Cythereans, who
attended for them, all in armure without the town. So they assailed them, and
after that they had defended themself a very small time, they co^straigned
them to retire into the upper part of the town, and sone after, they yielded
themself unto Nycias, and to the other Capitaines Athenians, their lives
saved, and already before that they yielded themself, some among them had
parlemented and spoken with Nicias for to advise what thing should be done, to
the end that thappoynctment should be made more suerly and the more readely.
And in effect the Athenia^s transported all the Cythereans into other places,
as well for that they were Lacedemonyans, as also for that, that the same their
Islande is dyrectely opposytt and foranempst the country of Laconia. Having
than the Athenyans takenne Scandea, which is in ye poort of the sea, and
^urnyshedde Cythere with their people: they went into Asina, Asina.
into Helos and othere places by the sea side, Helos.
where they landedde, and did great damages, for the space of seuene days,
that they did tarrye there. The Lacedemonyans, seeing that the Athenyans did
keep Cythere, and fearing lest men should come to assaylle theyme, they were
not of opinion to send into annye part a main army, for to fight against
the enemies, but to depart their people into diverse places, so, as they
thought to be necessary for to defend them, and also into some of them, for
fear, that they should not reuolte and rebelle. considering the loss that
they had made of their people in the Islande next unto Pylus, and also of
the town of Pylus, and of the city of Cythere, and the war, which was
mouedde against them, to be contrary to the^re opinion and vnprouidedde for.
By reasone whereof, they huyredde and souldedde three houndred men at arms and
certain nombre of Archers, which thing they were not accustomedde to do.
And yet nevertheless, if ever, in any other time, they were slack and slow to
make war: yett were they at that time, more slouthefull (resaruedde the
preparation for the army by sea which they had) though that they had to
do against the Athenyans, who reputedde nothing to be difficille, and hard
for them to ouercomme, but that thing which they would not enterprise. And
besides that they were strykene with great fear by many things, that my
shappenedde unto them against all reasone. whereby they were in fear to
incur one other such loss, as they had made at Pylus. For this reasonne,
they durst not enterprise any combat or fighting, thynkyng that fortune was
so contrary unto them, that all their doings should take evil success. And
that same fantasy came upon theyme for that, that they were not accustomedde
to have mysfortune. In this manner they suffredde the Athenyans to waste and
destroy their countries by the sea side, without ones remouynge themself, and
also without sendynge thither succors of other people, but only those, that
they had sent thider for to defend them. Iudgyng the^self to be weaker than the
said Athenyans, aswelle in number of people, as also by practique in the sea
Notwythstandynge, one company or bend of their people, which was in
garnysone at Corcyre, and Aphrodisia, Aphrodisia.
seeing a compaygnie of the enemies lyghtely armedde in disordere, they
chargedde upon them, and did slaye them all. But sone after they were
rechasedde, by them that were armedde and lost some of their people, togyders
with their armure. The Athenyans, after that they had set up their Trophee in
Cytheree, they went into Epidaure, and fromthence, having wastedde a great
part of the land of the Epidauriens, they went into Thyree, Thirea.
which is in the country, that men call Cymurya. Cymeria.
which departs the country of Laconie and that same of Argos, and was by the
Lacedemonyans geuene to labor unto the Egenetes, which were chasedde from
their country, as well for the saruyces that they had done unto them in time
of the Eartquacke, as also for this, that albeit, that they were subjects of
the Athenyans, yet had they always takene their part. Those Egenetes than
understanding that the Athenyans were coming toward the^ and arrived at
their port, they habando^ned and did forsake the wall, which they had made
by ye sea side, and retired up to the heyght of their town which is distant
from the sea about ten stades. And with them retired one bend of Lacedemonie,
which was sent to defend them, and also to help to make ye wall. But when it
came to the poyncte to enter into the town, they would not enter therein.
whatsoever instance, that the Egenetes made unto them. For yt they thought it
dangerous to enclose themself. But saying that they were not hable to resist
their ennemys, they retyredde into the hygheste places in the mounteigne. Sone
after, the Athenyans came with all their strength before the town of Thyree,
so did take it peasably and burnedde yt. And all the Egynetes, that they
found living, they chargedde in their ships, for to carye them to Athe^s,
together with Tantalus, Tantalus.
son of Patrocles, whom the Lacedemonyans had sent unto them, for to
govern, howbeit he was soore hurt. And likewise they carried thither, some of
the prisoners, that they had takene at Cytheree. which Cithereans were
afterward by the Athenyans sent into diverse Islandes. And upon those that
remaynedde in the town of Cytheree, was imposedde and set a trybute, yearly
of four talentes. As touching the Egenetes, for the ancyente hatred, that the
Athenyans had against them, they causedde them all to dye. And they did put
Ta^talus into prysone with the other Lacedemonyans, that had been takene in
the Islande.

How the Sycilians at the perswation of Hermocrates, made peace among themself
and sent again frothence the Athenyans. The.viii. Chapter.
IN that same summer, in the countreye of Sycile, treuese were made. furste
between the Camerins and the Gelians. And sone after, out of all the cities of
the country, Ambassadors were sent to Gele, for to treat of thappoynctement
between them. And after that many opynyons had been spokenne, diverse and
contrary the one to the othere, which every one did speak for his
particular intereste: making their doleaunces of the wrongs, which they
pretendedde to have been done in the city of Gele, Hermocrates, Hermocrates.
son of Harmo^ Syracusaine, which was the same parsone, that most
sturredde and prouokedde them to the appoynctemente, did speak unto them, in
this manner.

The Oration of Hermocrates.
I Am of a city (lords Sycilians) which is not of the least of the
country: and also is not much trauailled with war. wherefore that, which I
shall say, is not for that, that I do owe to have more fear of the war, than
the othere. But only is to show you what semethe unto me to be the commonwealth of all the country. And albeit that, to recyte unto you here, what
displeasure and what tourmente, the war is: and all the things that thereby
arne wont to happene, there is no man that can well express though that he
used a very long talk: yet so much there is, that as no man, for lack of
understanding and knowlayge, is constraynedde to enter hedlyng into it: so
also is there none that wolle refrain to make it, if he thinks thereby to
get: for fear of any ill that may come thereof. But it chances right
oftene, that those, which enterprise yt, do hope thereby more wynnynges, than
they wolle regard the difficulty and dangers thereof. And those, that do
consider most the inconuenyences, love better to be in hazarte of that, which
may happene, than presently, to susteygne, any pain or damage. And yet
nothere the one, nor the othere can obteigne the same, which they hope: but
through the benefytte and aid of the time. wherelore I think that to speak
of the appoynctemente, is a thing conuenyente for all men, and specyallye
for us in this saysonne, if we be well aduysedde. For if heretofore we every
one have enterpretysedde, the war, thinking thereby to make his proffytte,
and to provide for his affayre: we ought now, which be all in war and
stryues: to assaye, to comme again to the peace, wherein we were. And if we
cannot by that mean recover every one that, which apperteigneth unto him: we
may afterward return to the war, if we think good. But we must
understand if we be discreate and prudente, that this assembly is not made
pryncypally for to know of our particular questyons: but rather to deuyse (if
we may) to save and wythdrawe all the country of Sycille out of the hands of
the Athenyans, who in my fantasy deceive us all, and goo about to subdue us.
And consider and think, that they ought to be arbitrours and necessary
sequesters and procurers of our peace, more than my words and talk. For
that, that they have an army all priest more puissante, than all the othere
Greeks, which they may transporte right easily hither by sea with a small
number of ships, when they shall know your faults. which they do hope
of and dailly do lay wait for. And though that they do comme hyder as of a
good fellaushipp and alliance, yet for a truth, they do entreat us
ennemylike: and go about nothing, but their particular proffytt. And if we
do chose and accept the war, and call to our aid thies people here
(which do come with out being called) for to conducte yt: when they shall
see that we shall be well trauailled and have empoueryshedde, the one the
othere, they will repute yt to be the proffitte of their estate and
seignyorye. And than, when they shall see us brought low and decayedde, they
shall comme with a greater puyssance^ and shall bring us all into their
obeissance. wherefore if we be sage, yt is much better for every one of us to
call his friends and confederates, for to invade the lands of an other, than
to destroy our oune, which we now possess, and so, take the dangers and
parelles upon us. And we ought to consider, that the particular sedycyons of
the cities of Sycille, be not only dangerous to the same, but also unto all
the countreye, and to all us that be therein. For so long, as they do fight
the one against the othere, there be that lay wait to do us all
displeasure. Having than regard to thies respects and consyderatyons^ we
should reconcile oureselues every one particulerly with his enemy, and the
one city with the othere, and all togidre take pain, to save and deliver all
our country of Sycille. And we should not have fantasye, that some of us be
descendedde and come of the Doryens, which be ennemys of Athenyans, and that
the Chalcides, for the ancient parentage, which they have with the Ionyans, be
their good friends. For the Athenyans have not enterpretysedde this war, for
annye parttakynge of our factes: but for couetyce of the goods, which we all
have in Sycille. Like as we may well know by theyme amongeste us, which be
Chalcydiens. who calling them to their aid, although they never had
saruyce of them, nor amytie with them, yett be they comme readelye unto
their succoures, and have made alliance with them more wyllyngly, than with
the other. And yet neuerthelas the said Athenyans be to be pardonned, and arne
not to be blamed, if they go about to increase their estate and seignyorie.
But they be to blame, which arne tomuche prone and ready to obey and submytt
themself unto them. For it is a natural thing for every man, to will to be
ouere and govern those, that wolle submitt themself unto him, and to defend
themself from them, that will invade and oppress them. And there is not he
amongeste us, that vnderstandethe not thies things. And whosoever shall not
know that a common fear, ought to be eschewedde by a general and common
prouysion, he deceyueth himself greatly. And if we agree oureselues all
togider, we shall very easily bring oureselues out of this fear. For the
Athenyans do not assaylle us out of their land, but out of our own, to
wit, by those, that have calledde them. And by this mean we shall not
appease one war, by an othere war: but by a general peace, we shall
appease all our discordes, without anny difficulty. And they, that have been
called by us, being honestly comme for an evil intent: shall return
reasonably frustrated of their purpose. And this which I say unto you, as
touching the Athenyans, (all those, that have will to counsaille well) will
find it good. But as concerning the peace, which all honneste people esteem
the best thing in the world: wherefore should not we desire it? Think ye
not, that if anny of us has any goods, yea or anny thing contrary unto him:
that rest and peace be not better for him than the war? and that it be not
better for us, as well of the one part, as of the other, to depart from armure
and strife, so to use of our goods in rest, and to enjoy peace without
daungere of our honnours, of our dignyties and of all the othere goods, that
can be nombred and receyuedde by a very long talk, far better, than, as it
may be done, with the inco^modyties of the war? All which things
consyderedde, ye ought not, lords, to disprayse my sayings. But by the same,
every one ought to provide for his oune welthe. And if there be any man, that
hops to get any thing by the war, by right or by wrong: he ought well to
fear to be thereof deceived. knowing, that to many, which thought to revenge
their injuries and wrongs: or under confydence of puyssance, hoped to increase
their faculties and power: the whole contrary has chanced. which is, that
some lost their health, and some their goods. For it is not said, that
vengeance should always take effect, although it were enterprysed for a
just cause. Force also with a good hope and esperance, is not a thing
establyshedde, always to continue. But of^entymes temerytie and rashness takes
better effect, than profounde wit. And though this temerytie, be the
thing, whereby the people have most oftene been deceived, yet when yt
happenethe well, it is iudgedde to be right good. For this, that when there is
as much fear in them that assaille, as in those that be assayledde, aythere
party proceeds therein, more warrely and circumspectly. And so should we do,
lords: aswelle for fear of things to comme, as also of the Athenyans, who be
already fearefulle unto us, and provide in our affairs for the time to come.
And every one of us, presupposynge that the thing which he purposedde to
do, may be empeschedde by those two means, to send out of our land the
enemy, which is already vponne our shulders. And to bring that to pass,
we ought before all things to conclude amongeste us, a perpetual allyaunce,
or at the least a long treuese, in deferring our particular discordes and
differencies. And hold yt for most certain, that if ye will give faith and
bileue my words: by this mean every of us shall have his city in liberty.
By occasyon whereof, it shall be in our faculty and power to render to those,
that shall do us good or evil, according to their desaruynge. And by the
contrary, if you bileue me not: but rather wylbe in the obeissance of
strangers, there shall be no questyon to make our revenge. But those that
shall obteigne the victory at their will, shall be by necessity friends of
them, that be greatly their ennemys. And adversaries to those, unto whom it is
not conuenyent, that you be. And I, who (as I have shewedde you at the
beginning) am of a city, which is the greatest and most puissante of the
country, and make the war more by assaylynge, than in defending: am he,
which counsaylleth, that we agree and accord altogiders, having regard to
the dangers, that be for to comme. And that another we goo about to do hurt
somuche every one af us to his aduersarye^ as thereby we procure unto oureselfe
a greater: another that we should be so furyous through our domestical
contentyons, that we should persuade ourselves to be masters of our oune
counsaille and of fortune (whom we rule not, but as raysonne shall require,
ayther that we vainquishe, orelles that we be vainquishedde) that we rather do
it amongeste oureselfe, than to suffer it of enemies. For yt is no shame for
one Doryen to be vainquishedde by an othere Doryen, nor for one Chalcydian by
an other Chalcydian, being all neighbors, the one of the other, and
inhabytinge one self land, and one self Islande. And we be all named by one
name Syciliens, and so we shall make war among ourselfe, when yt shall be
requisitte, And after, when we shall have parlamented togyder^ we shall fall to
agremente. And if we be wise, we shall be neuerthelas of one opinion to chase the
strangers out of our country. For truly, when we shall be forcedde and
oppressedde partycularlye: we be all in danger universally. And we ought not
at any time hereafter to call our allies estraungers, for to aid us, nor
for to make appoynctemente and agree us. In which doing, we shall fournyshe
Sycille with two great benefyttes: the one for the time present: and the
othere for the time to comme. For we shall deliver yt from the Athenyans, and
out of the intestyne and inward war, wherein it is at this present: and for
the time to comme, we shall possess it frank and free, much less subject
to all espialles and to all pryuie waytinges than it now is. Thus did
Hermocrates speak. At whose perswation the Syciliens made appoinctement
togyders. In such manner, that they forsook the war on all sides, and that
every man did keep that which he possedde: resaruedde, that the city of
Morgance was rendered by the Syracusains unto the Camerins, Morga^tena.
payinge a certain sum of monney. And that done, those, which had called
the Athenyans, declaredde to the Capytaynes and pryncypalleste of them, that
they had comprysed them within the appoynctemente. And by that mean, they
contended them, and retournedde fromthence with their ships unto Athens.
where with the Athenyans were so dyspleasedde: that they comdempnedde the
Capytayns, to wit, Pthiodorus and Sophocles, into bannyshmente: and Eurymedon,
in monney, having opinion that it was their fault, that they had not
subduedde the Islande of Sycille, and that they had been induced and huyred
by gifts to return fromthence. For the Athenyans did than assure themself,
somuche in the prosperytie, that they had had: that nothing semedde
impossible unto them. For they thought that they might atteigne, as well
difficill and hard enterpryses, as the light and easy, and with a small
army, aswelle, as with a great. And of this their presumptyon, the felicity
was cause, which had chauncedde unto them in many things, beyond all
reasone. And that had brought them, into this vain glory.

How the Athenyans failled to take the city of Megare by intelligence and
confederation of some of the citezeins, and how it was succored by the
Lacedemonyans. The.ix. Chapter.
THat same somer, those of Megare, ennoyed as well with the war of the
Athenyans, which came upon them every year for to spoil and make waste in
their land: as also by the robberyes and pillages that were comytted and done
by some of their cytezeins, which were bannished for the sedytion of the
people, and kept themself at Pegne: Pegne.
they entredde into communication and purposed amongst themself to reteigne
and receue again the said bannished men, for to avoid and exchue, that the
city should not be lost through their differences and varyances. And the
friends of the exiles and bannyssed men, parceyuinge that the matter began to
wax cold, they made a new request, that the said exiles might be spoken
with. Than the chiefeste of the town, considering that the people could not
long endure the evils that happened unto them by means of the said
dissensions: they came to parliament with the dukes of the Athenyans, to wytt,
Hippocrates, Hippocrates.
son of Ariphron, and Demosthenes son of Alcisthenes, Demosthenes.
for to render the town unto them: thinking that there should be less danger
unto them in so doing, than if they should set again and receive the exiles
into it. And so they accorded with them, that they should furste take the long
walls, which extended from the city unto Nysee, Nysea.
where their port was. which walls conteigned about eight houndred stades of
lenghte: for to empesche, that the Peloponesians should give no succors to
the^ of the town, from the place, where they had their garnisonne, for
saulfgarde of the city. And that afterward, they should get the Castle,
which was on the highest place of the town upon a rock. which thing they
thought to be easy enough to do. And when they had ordained all their treaty,
they made preparation, every one for his part, for to execute it. And the
Athenyans came that night to the Islande, which is next of the city, named
Mynonue with six houndred men well armed, Minoa.
under the conducte of Hippocrates. And fromthence they came in the time of
night unto a dyche, nighe unto the which, was a brick keele, wherein the brick
was bru^te, for to build and repair the walls of the town. On the other side,
Demosthenes was in embushemente, nighe to the temple of Mars, which was a
little further of, with the Plateens lightly armed, and some other adventurers,
without, that any parsone had knowlayge thereof, but those, that were of the
treaty. And before that it was day, the said Plateens came fourth for to
execute their interpryse at the opening of the gates, which thing they had
used there a long time before, in this manner. The cytezeins were accustomed
(as people, which lived by pillages and by robberies) to draw in the night
time (by consent of the officer of the said long wall) a brigantyne in a
charett, the which they did cast afterward into the dyche and fromethence
conueyde it into the sea. And wha^ it came to the break of the day, after that
they had in the night time upon the sea, done what they might: they returned
with the brygantyne fromthence, and bestowedde it again before it was day, in
the charrett within the said walls, through the poorte itself, to the end, that
the Athenyans, who had their guard and garnisons in the Isle of Minoue, should
not parceue their theftes and robberies, not saying any ship within their
poorte. The said brygantyne, than being brought again, and the gate opened
for to bestow it within: as it was in the bestowyng of it, the Athenyans
issued fourth of their embushemente for to saise and take the gate, before
that yt might be shutt again, by cause of the stowage of the said brygantyne,
like as it was appoyncted with them of the town, that were of the intellygence
and confederation. who were there ready and did slay those, that were at the
kepinge of the said gate. And the Plateens and adventurers which were with
Demosthenes, were the furst that came to sease and possess the poorte and
entered into it by the quartier, where as presently is seen a trophee or
victory addressed and set up. And they repoulsed the garnysone of
Peloponesians. which having heard ye bruyt, was come unto the succors. And
this endurynge the Athenyans well armed, arrived. who were let in by those
Plateans, and as they entered, they mounted upon the walls. Against whom the
Peloponesyans resistedde with their power. But they were much less people,
and thereby many of them were there slain. And ye other retired feringe to be
circu^uented: chiefly for that, that it was not yet day. And also perceiving
that some of those of the city did fight against them, To wytt, those, that
were consenting to the trahisone: they thought that all were of like mind.
But yet they thought it the rather, for that, that the trompet of the Athenyans
made of his proper authorytie a cry, that all the Megaryans that would come to
render themself to the Athenyans and render their armure, should be sauedde
and not have annye hurt. For when the said Peloponesyans understood that
cry, they returned all to Nysee, in flight. Anon after, about dawninge of
the day, the said wall being takene, which extended unto the port, the
tumulte was great in the town, for those, that were partakers of the
trahisone, said that men should opene the gates and issue fourth against the
Athenyans. whereunto the people agreed. But they said it^ to the intent that
the said Athenyans should enter after that they were openedde. For so they
conuenaunted with them, and to the end that they might be knowyn among the
other, and that at the entrye, no man should do them evil and harm: they had
geuene for a tokene, that they should be oyncted with oil, for a difference
from the other. And they thought that it should be greater suertie for them,
that the gates should be opened, for that, that there were foore thousand
foot men well armed and six houndred horsemen Athenyans, which were comme
that same night from Eleusyne, ready for to enter into the town. Being than
those that were oyled come to the gates for to cause them to be opened: one
among them discovered the trahisone unto the othere, that knew nothing
thereof. whereby the tumulte and the fraye was greatte among the people. And in
effect they assembledde for all sides there, and were of opinion that the
gates should not be opened. saying that they durst not do it at othere times
when the Athenyans were come before their town, all though that they were more
puissant, than they than were, and that the town should not be putt into so
euydent a danger. And if any would do the contrary, that men should begin to
fight against them. And this said they, without making any semblante that
they had parceyued the trahysone, but by manner of advise and of good
counsaylle, for to exchue the dangers. And finally those of the people were
strongest at the gates, so that they would not suffer them to be openedde. In
such sort, that the conspyratours could not execute their trahisone. Than
the Athenyans, parceynyng that the gates were not opened unto them: thought
that there was some empeschemente. wherefore, considering that they were to
few people for to assiege the city, they went all against Nysee, and
enclosed it with walls. For they thought, that if they could take it before
any succors came thider, they might afterward very easily take the city by
composition. And so caused with all diligence workemenne to come from Athens,
togiders with Ironne and other necessary matter, with such expedition that
within a very small time they acheued the wall. Which they began at the
end of that same, which they had takene from the side of Megare. And from
thence, they wrought it on both sides of Nysee, into the sea, and fourthwith
did close it with dyches. For when the one was busyed at the wall, thoder were
occupied at the dyches. And did take the stone, the brick, and the wood in
the suburbs. Also they did cut down the trees, that were there about. And
where there lacked matter, they ramparde in, earth with pynnes of wood. And
also the houses, that were without the town, their tops being bette down,
did sarue them for towers and bullworkes. All which work, they parfaicted
and ended within that self day and the day following at the night. Which
parceyued by them that were within Nisee, and also that they had no vittailles,
for they made no provision, but as it was brought them out of the town day by
day: considering also that there was no hope to be succored by the
Peloponesians so readely: and moreover thynkyng that all the Magariens were
against them, they made composicion with the Athenians, to wit, that they
should render their armure, and every man depart with a small some of monney.
And that the Lacedaemonians and other estraungers that^ were there within,
should be at the will of the Athenians. In such manner, those of the town
departed fromthence. And the Athenians, having won Nisee, and broken the
long wall, that came from the city unto Nisee, they prepared themself for
to assiege and assaille the city of Megare. Now it chanced that in that same
seasone, Brasidas, son of Tellides Lacedemonien, was in the quartier of
Corinthe and of Sicione for to assemble people of the country of Thrace. who
understanding the taking of the walls of Megare, and doubting that the
Peloponesians, that were at Nisee, were in danger: he sent unto the Beotians
with all diligence and commanded, that they should come toward him
inco^tinently, with the greatest bend that they could unto Tripodisque.
Which is a burgage in the territory of Megare, under the mountaigne of
Gerania. From which place, he himself came with two thousand seven houndred
Corinthians well armed, foore houndred Philasiens, and seven houndred
Sycioniens, beside the other, that he had already assembled, not knowing yet
of the taking of Nisee, the which he understood there. And forthwith, before
that the enemies were advertised of his coming, for that, that he was arrived
by night, he went with foore houndred of the best of his compaignie, straight
to the city of Megare, faignyng, that he would take Nysee by stealth. But for
trougth, his pryncipall intent was to enter into the city, if he had
could, and to have furnyshed it. And when he was come unto the gates, he
demanded of the Megarians that they should let him in, geuyng them good hope
to take incontinently Nysee. But both the bendes, fearyng his coming, to
wit, the one for doubt, lest he should bring again the bannyshed into the
town, and chase them from thence: and the friends of the bannyshed, lest the
other for fear thereof, should fight against them, and that through
occasion of their difference, the Athenyans that were nyghe, there unto them,
should take the City: they were of opinion not to receive the said Brasidas,
but rather to see, who should have the victory, of the Athenians or of the
Peloponesians. For the partakers, of aither of the parties, did attend to
declare themself to favor that part, that shall have had the better.
Brasidas than seeing, that by no mean he could enter: returned toward the
other people of his army. And the same day before that it was clear, the
Beotians arrived, who, before that they had received the letters from
Brasidas, understanding the coming of the Athenians, were come fourth with
all their strength, for to succoure the Megarians. For that, that they esteemed
the danger to be common unto them. But when they were in the land of Platee,
having there received the letters from Brasidas: they were much more assured.
And so did send twelve houndred foot men and six houndred horsemenne, unto
Brasidas, and the other returned euey man unto his house. After that they were
all ioigned togider with Brasidas, they were about six thousand. On the
other side, the Athenians kept themself in battaille aboutes Nisee, resarued
the fotemen lightly armed, who being disparsed and skattered abroad in the
fields, were assailled and repoulsed by the horsemen Beotians even unto the
sea, before that the Athenians did know the coming of the said Beotians. For
they came never before, to the succors of Megare. Wherefore they doubted them
not. But anon as they saw them, they issued against them, and there was a
very long fight among the horsemen, so that it could not be well judged who
had the better thereof. And although that on the Beotians part, the
Captain and some other were slain, which adventured themfelf, even unto the
walls of Nisee, by occasion whereof, the Athenians having rendered the
carcasses by appoin^^mente, did set up a Trophee in sign of victory: yet
the battaille was not pursued by the one part nor the other. So and in such
wise, that one could not attrybute the victory more to the one, than to the
other. And so the Beotians retired to their compaignie, and the Athenians to
Nysee. After that, Brasidas having chosen a comodious place by the sea side and
nigh enough to Megare, lodged there his camp, and removed not, attending that
the Athenians should come to assaille the^. For he thought that they of the
city would regard and mark who should have the better, and that being there
ready to fight without assailling the enemies or putting any thing in hazarte,
he should have the victory. And as touching the city he thought to have done
enough. Forsomuche as if he had not come, the Citezens durst not have assayed
the fortune of the battaille against the Athenians, and by ye mean should have
lost the city. But seeing the succors to become, and that those Athenians
durst not fight, it seemed unto him, that they would accept him and his bend
into the city, and by that mean without effusion of blood, and without
danger, he should have that, that he was come for. Like as it happened
afterward. For the Athenians did rank themself in battaille nyghe to the
long walls, having the self opinion that the Athenians had: to wit, not to
fight, except he came to assault them, for that, that they thought, that there
was greater appearance and raisonne for them not to begin the battaill, than for
the other, considered, that they had had already many victories. Wherefore, if
at that hour being in lesser number they had hazarded it and the other had had
the victory, he would so have followed it, that the city should have been lost
thorugh the^, or that they should lose one great part of their army. And also
they persuaded the^self that the other should rather begin. For that, that they
were of diverse cities, whereby they presumed that they should not have patience
to refrain, as they that were all Athenians. In this manner, having long
attended on the one side and on the other, they retired and did withdraw
themself to wit, the Athenians to Nisee, and the Peloponesians to the place,
from whence they were departed. Than the Magarians those that were friends of
the exiles, parceyuyng that the Athenians durst not assaille thoder, they did
take courage, and with the pryncipallest of the town, openned the gates unto
Brasidas: and received him into the town, as having the victory. And came to
parlamente with him, whereby those of the other bend, were in great fear.
And anon after, the people that were come at commandment of Brasidas
retourded every man into his quarter. And he went fromthence unto Corinthe,
fromwhence he departed for to assemble his army in Thrace. The Athenia^s also
returned fro^ethence into their country. By occasion whereof, those, that had
been of the coniuracion and conspiracy and of the treaty, for to cause them
to come: parceiuing that they were discovered, withdrewe themself secretly out
of the city. And the other, having spoken with the parents of the exiles,
called again those, that were at Pegne, with great oaths never more to
remember the innuries passed. But rather to give themself with one accord to
the common weal of the city. But within a certain time after: they being
chosene to offices and governance of the town: when the musters of the people
were made, knowing the armure of them that had been the chief of thintelligence
with the Athenia^s, they apprehended of the^ to the number of a houndred, whom
they caused to dye by judgment of the said people. Whom they induced to
condempe them. And by this mean, the governance of the city was reduced and
brought, to the will of a small number of Citizens, having the favor of the
people, which state, though it begone, by sedicion and mutynerye, yet
afterward it endured a long ^asone.

Of a loss that the Athenians had of their ships. And how Brasidas passed
through the country of Thrace by the help of Perdicas king of Macedonie and
of certain his friends of the said country, for to come to the aid of the
Chalcidians. The.x. Chapter.
THat self same somer the Mytylenians, having purposed for to fortefye and
repayer the city of Antandre: Antandrus.
the two capitayns of the three, which the Athenians had sent to receue and
gather money through the lands of their party: Demedocus and Aristides,
Demedocus.

Aristides.


who were than in Hellesponte in thabsence of Lamachus (which was the third,
Lamachus.
and was gone into the sea of Pontus with ten ships) had consultacion
bitwene them of that matter. And it seemed unto them, a dangerous matter, to
suffer. Fearyng lest it should happene, as it had before time in ye city of
Sanmie whether, the exiles, that had been driven fromthence: had retired and
joined themselfes altogiders. And with the aid of the Peloponesians, who had
sent them maroners, they did great hurt to them of the city, and great
saruices to the said Peloponesians. For this cause, they went with their
ships and men of war against the said city of Antandre. And having
repoulsed and overcome, those, which were come again and returned thider,
who issued fourth against them in battaille, they did take it. Son after
Lamachus, which was goane into the country of Pontus, being there arrived
with his ships, within the floude of Calece, Calex.
which passes through out the land of Heraclien, by a soubdayne breach and
inundacion of the said river, that commethe out of the mountaignes: he lost
all his ships, and came fromethence with his people by land, trauersyng the
countries of Bythinie and of Thrace, which is beyond the sea of the cost of
Asia: unto the city of Chalcidonie: Chalcedan.
which is at the mouth of the sea of Pontus, apperteignyng to the Megarians,
In that same somer, Demosthenes, Duke of the Athenians, departing from Megare,
came with fortye ships into Naupacte for to execute the enterprise, which he
and Hippocrates had made togiders with certain Beotiens. Which was to reduce
the estate of that same country, to the governance of the common people: like
as that same of Athens was. Of which co^spiracie was principal author and
conductor, a citizene of Thebes, that had been bannyshed, named Priodorus. And
they had determined to execute it in this manner. That is, that those Beotians
should by treasone surrendre to the Athenians one town, named Syphas. Siphoe
Which is in the territory of the city of Thespie in the goulphe of the sea
Crissee. Thespes.
And on the other side some other should have delivered them one other town,
named Chironee, Cheronea.
which were subject to the Orchomenians, Orchomenia.
by the aid of the bannyshed men of the said city of Orchomenie. Who had
soulded and waged certain men of war, being Peloponesians. Now is the said
town of Cheronee, in thextre^myties and fourthest part of the country of
Beoce. Directly anempst Phanotide, Phanotides.
in the country of Phociens, partly inhabited with the said Phocians. On the
other side, that the Athenians should occupy and take the temple of Apollo in
the town of Delos in the country of Tanagrians, Delos,
of the cost of Eubee. All the which enterprises should be executed on one
day therefore named. To the intent that the Beotians, understanding the taking of
the other towns and fearyng to be in their oune houses, should not be so
bold to come to succor Delos. And the said Athenians thought, that if their
enterprise might come to effect, so that they might enclose the temple of Delos
with a wall, they might easily trouble the estate and the governance of the
Beotians. If not soubdainly, yet at ye least, with the time (keeping garnisones
within the said towns) that they would ouerronne and pillage the country. And
further having withdrawn thider all the bannyshed men and other nigh
adioyignyng, the Athenians might at times send thider succoure to them, that
were withdrawn thider. And the Beotiens, not having a sufficient army for to
resist, might give them law and manner to live at their will and pleasure.
And thenterprise should be executed in such sort. For Hippocrates, that led
and conducted the footmen should, at a day named, depart from Athens and
enter into the land of the Beotians. And on the other side, Demosthenes was
gone to Naupacte with foortye ships for to assemble people of the country of
Acarnan^e, and of other, adioignyng to them, and should be the self day at
Syphas for to enter into it, by the mean of the prattique. Having than
Demosthenes assembled a great number of people, as well of Eniades, as of other
Acarnanians, and also of other allies Athenians, that were come to be there
from all costs: he went first lo land at Salynthe and at Agree, Salynthum.

Agree.


where they looked and attended also for other people and prepared themself for
to come to his enterprise at Syphas at the day ordeigned. Now happened it,
that in that self ryme: Brasidas that was gone with a thousand, Brasidas.
and five houndred footmen for to give order to the affairs of the country
of Thrace being come, into the city of Heraclee in the country of Trachine:
Heraclea.

Trachine.


he damau^ded of the friends, which he had in the country of Thessale that they
should come to acco^paignie him, that he might pass suerly. So there came to
him, Panerus of Dorie, Panerus.
Hippolochidas of Thorile. Hippolachidas.
Strophacus of Chalcide, and certain other Thessalyans, which were in the
town of Melyte in the country of Achaye, Meltia.
and conducted him. And likewise Niconidas of Larisse, Nicomas.
parent of Perdicas, Perdiccas.
king of Macedonie, came to him for that self cause. For otherwise it had not
been possible for the said Brasidas to pass through ye same country of
Thessale, much less, than at any other time (though always before yt there
was danger in it) and somuche y^ more doubt was therein, yt he was in armure.
For thereby he had brought into suspicion y^ people of the country, that took
part with the Athenia^s. Whereby, if Brasidas had not had the conduct of the
geeatest of the country, which had accustomed to govern the people, more by
force, tha^ by authority and justice: he could never have passed. And yet
nevertheless he had much business with them. For those that took part with the
Athenyans, met with him at the river of Empee, Empeus.
for to empesche and stop his passage, saying yt it was oulrage and injury,
for him to pass without having saulfconducte of the people of the country.
Whereunto those of the country that co^ducted him, answered the^: yt the said
Bra^idas and the people would not pass by force. But that being there aryued
soubdainly, as their fre^des: they ought to suffer the^ to pass. And Brasidas
himself said, that he was their frende^ and passed through their country not
for to offend the^, but only for to go against the Athenia^s, enemies of ye
Lacedaemonians, and knew not yt there was any enmytie between the Thessalyans
and the Lacedemoens, whereby the one might not pass through the country of
the other. And that he would not (as in deed he could not) pass thorough
theirs, against their wills. But he prayed them heartily yt they would not
empesche nor hinder him. And by those words they returned, and he passed at
his pleasure. Notwithstanding those that did conducte him, counsailled, that he
should pass with the most diligence that he could, through the rest of the
country: without aresting in any part. To the intent that he gave no time and
leisure to the other paysantes to assemble togider, which thing he did. In
such sort, that the self day that he was departed from Mylett, Pharsalus.
he came unto Pharsale and lodged his camp nigh to the River of Apidane.
Apidanus.
And fromthence he came into Phacie, Phaciu^.
fro Pharsa, into Perebie. Peroebia.
In which place, those that had conducted him thider, left him. And was
conducted by the Perebiens (who be of the seigniorie and empire of the
Thessalians) unto Dyon, Dion.
which is a town under the mount Olimpus in the country of Macedonie on ye
cost of Thrace, in thobeissance of Perdiccas. In this manner Brasidas
trauersed the country of Thrace, before that any time was had for to empesche
or let his passage. And he went unto Perdiccas, who was in Chalcide, which
Perdiccas and the other Thraciens that were revolted and turned against the
Athenians, understanding their prosperity, and fearing to be by them
assailled, had required succors of the Peloponesians, principally those of
Chalcide, forsomuche as they feared that the Athenians would come first upon
them. And also for that they did understand yt the other cities, their
neighbors, that were not rebelled, did conjure and conspire already against
them for to overcome them. And as touching Perdiccas, albeit that he was not
their enemy declared, yet he feared the ennemyties, that he had had with them
in times passed, and for that cause demanded aid, of the Lacedaemonians against
the^. And also against the king of Lyncesters, whom he had determined wholly to
subdue. An other occasion there was for the which that army came out of the
country of Peloponese. Which was, that the Lacedaemonians, parceiuing the evil
chances that were happened to them, and that the Athenians had done many
enterprises in their country: they thought that there was nothing more
expediente to diuerte and turn them, than to make some alarm to their
allies. And somuche the more, that there were people that furnished to the
charges of ye army, and of other, that attended but their coming, for to
rebelle against the Athenia^s. And also it moved the^ much, the loss, that
they had at Pylus. For they feared lest the Esklaues would make sum mutyne or
sedicion. Wherefore they were well eased to send them fourth under this
color. For through the fear, that those Lacedaemonians had, to wytt, those
that had conducted and had charge of the affaries, as well of the young, as of
the common people, and above all, of the esklaues, on whom they laid most
watch: they had in times past^ caused a cry to be made, that those that had
done most vailliantly should stand aparte, giving them hope to enfranchise and
set them at liberty. But it was to understand their courage. Whereby being
chosen out of al them to the number of two thousand, and those brought with
procession crowned with flowers unto the temples, so as the custom was of
the^, to whom liberty was given: sone after, they were lost, and no man
knew, where they were become. Of whom also, they for the self fear, did
than deliver to Brasidas, the number of two thousand. And the other he had
carried out of the country of Peloponese, What y^ wit vndesta^ding and good
renome of a Captain of war is worth.
for, soulde and wages. For he desired greatly to have that charge, for which
cause, ye Lacedaemonians did send him, and also the Chalcides desired him
greatly, for that, that among all them of Sparte, he was reputed to be a
diligence and industrious parsone. Also he obteigned a great bruyte by that
charge. For he showed himself so honest a man and so good a iusticer and
pollitique in all things, that many towns and cities by reason thereof, came
to render themself to him. And some he took by diligence and treason, whereby,
that chanced to the Lacedaemonians, that they hoped of, to wytt, that they
recovered many of their lands, and caused some of those of the Athenians,
thereby to reuolte and rebelle. And for a certain time, did putt and absente
the war out of their quarter of Peloponese. And afterward, in the war,
that was bitwene the Athenians and the Peloponesia^s in Sicille, his virtue was
so known and esteemed, as well by experience, as by relacio^ of other, that by
that reason, many of those that took the party of the Athenia^s, desired to
take that same of the Peloponesians. For, seeing the virtue and goodness that was
in him, they persumed and judged, that the other Lacedaemonians should be all
like. And for to come again to the purpose, whereof we speak, after, that the
Athenians understood the coming of that same Brasidas into Pel^ponese, they
declared Perdiccas for their ennemy. For somuche as it seemed unto them, that he
had been cause of his coming. And they were more diligente to watch the people
of that same quarter, than they had been before. Perdiccas, than hauyug the
succors of the Peloponesians with Brasidas, brought them with his army against
Archibeus son of Bromerus king of Lyncesters Macedoniane, who was his
neighbor and his great enemy. Wyllyng to chase and utterly destroy him.
But when he was at the entryng of his c^untrey Brasidas said to him. That
before that he began the war against the said Archibeus, he would first
speak with him. For to know if by words and declaracions, he might bring
him to the devotion and amytie of the Lacedaemonians. For the same Archibeus
had caused to be signefyed by sound of trompette, Archibeus.
that for the differences that were bitwene him and Perdiccas, he would be and
stand to the judgment and saying of Brasidas. Also the Chalcydes, that
desired to bring the said Brasidas to their affair, showed and persuaded him
that he should not busye himself with a long and difficille war, at the
appetite and desire of Perdiccas. Considering specially that those men, that
Perdiccas had sent to Lacedemonie for to have succous, had proponed and
declared, that he would cause that many of his neighbors should be reduced to
the amity of the said Lacedaemonians. And therefore with good cause prayed him,
that he would be content to appoinet ye same difference for the public weal
of the Peloponesians, and of himself. Whereunto Perdiccas would not consent
saying that he had not called Brasidas, for to be judge of his questions, but
for to aid him, to discounfyte his enemies, such, as he should declare, and
that the same Brasidas did him great wrong to bear Archibeus against him.
Considered, that he susteigned half charges of all that army. This
notwithstanding Brasidas, against his will, came to parliament with Archibeus.
Whom he persuaded so by words and declaracions, that he returned with his
army. By reasone whereof, Perdiccas fromthence forward, instead that he paid
the moytie of the charges of that same army, paid no more, but the third
part. perswadyng himself that Brasidas had done him wrong thereof.

How the Athenians at the persuatio^ of Brasidas, left the party, of the
Athenians. And did take the same of the Peloponesians. The.xi. Chapter.
Soon after that, a little before the vintage, that self somer, Brasidas
having the Chalcydes with him, came to make war against the city of Acanthe,
Acanthus.
which was a colonie of the Andrians. And the citizens were in great
controversy, whider they should receive him into the city or not. To wirt
those, that took part with the Chalcides on the one side, and the common people
on the other party. But because of this, that the fruytes were yet in the
feldes, the common people, upon the perswation, was content that he should enter
into ye town alone, and speak what he would. And afterward they would
determyne what they had to do. Who, being entered and come to the assembly of
the people, he spoke very sagely, as he well could do. For that, that he was
a Lacedemonian, and said unto them in this manner.

The oracion of Brasidas to the Acanthyans.
THis, that I have been here sent with this army by the Lacedaemonians (Lords
Acanthiens) declares sufficiently: that the cause, for the which we have
proclaimed and published from the beginning, to have moved the war against
the Athenians: is true and veritable: to wytt, for to deliver Greece out of
servitude. And if we have slacked to come hither, being deceived by the hope,
that we have had to have vainquished ye Athenians more sonner: we ought not
therefore to be reprehended. Considered, that thereby ye arne not incurred into
any da^gier. And we come now wha^ we may, for to defeat the Athenians, with
you, through our power. But I am greatly abashed of this, that ye shutt me out
of the gates, where I thought to be by you receyuedde with great joy, and that
ye should have desired greatly my coming. For we other Lacedaemonians, thynkyng
of the occasion and chance of things, that we have made to come hither, as to
our good friends, and to those, that should desire our coming: we have
enterprised this voyage, without having regard to dangers, wherein we did putt
our self, by passing through so long space of land and of strange countries,
for to show the good will, that we have toward you. And if you have an
other will, or be minded to resist them, that should purchase the liberty of
all Greece: ye shall do naughtely. As Well for that, that ye shall empesche your
oune liberty, as also for this, that ye shall give ill example unto other, not
to obey and receive us. Which shall be a thing vn^yttyng for this city,
which is puissante and reputed prudente. That we being first addressed unto
the same, ye have notte had will to receive us. And also I cannot think
that ye have any reasonable cause to do it except it should be said that aither
I would persuade you to an vn^ust and unreasonable liberty: orells that we be
not puissant enough for to defend you against the Athenians, if they would
herefore invade you. Which thing ye ought not to fear. For if I, being come to
the succors of Nysee with this army that I have here, they durst not come to
fight with me, truly it is is not to be believed, yt they woll send hither so
great an army by land, as they sent thider by sea. And as to the other
poynct, I do aduertis you, yt I am hider sent by the Lacedaemonians, not for to
do hurt another damage unto Greece: but for to restore it into liberty. And I
have made great oaths into the hands of our officers, to suffer: al the^,
that I shall bring into our alliance to live in liberty, and after their
laws. Wherefore ye ought well to know, that I am not come for to draw you
by force or by deceit and trompery, unto our alliance: but the contrary, in
delyuering you from the saruitude of the Athenia^s, for to ioigne you in this
war with us, against the^. And therefore I think that ye ought to have
confidence in me that make unto you so great faith of that, which I speak.
And for to give you couraige, I am come puissante enough, for to defend you.
And if there be any that doubts herein, fearing for his particularitie, that
I woll not give and deliver the government of the town to any one particular
among you, I wou^d that he had more confidence and suertie, than thoder. For
I do certify you that I am not come to move any sedicion, nor mutyne among
you. But also me thinks, that I should not restore you into free and true
liberty, if changing your aunciente form of living, I should putt the common
people into the subieccion of any particulers, or any perticulers to the
subieccion of the common people. For that, that I understand well, that the
same dominion and rule should be more odious and hated unto you, than that same
of estrangers. And thereby unto us Lacedaemonians, should not be due any pleasure
nor huyer for the pain, that we have taken for your cause. But instead of the
glory and honor, that we attend and look for thereby, we ought to be blaymed,
and should be charged of the self vice, that we impute unto the Athenians.
Which should be somuche more vnsittyng and more worthy of reprehension unto us
than unto them: that we attribute to our selves this virtue, and praise, to
wit, not to use tromperie or deceit. Which thing they do not. For albeit that
deceit be vnsittyng in all men: yett is it more unseemly in them, that be in
most dignity. And also it is worse and more d^shonnest than violence it
self. For that^ that violence ouercometh by virtue, and authority of the
force, that fortune gives to the one, over the other: but tromperie and
deceyte proceeds and comes of an unreasonable, mischeuous and very malice. To
all which things we have a great circumspection and a great regard, in
treatyng and co^ductyng the great affaries. And also I wolle not that you trust
so much in my oath, as in the experience of things, and to that, whereof you
shall see the effects, correspondent to reasons, which is right requisitt for
you, as I have showed you. But also understand, that if you having hard this
my proposicion woll excuse yourself, saying that ye cannot do that, which we
woll: and that ye woll require us, as your friends, that we retire without
doing any hurt or damage unto you, pretending that you have this liberty
without danger and that it ought to be offered and presented to them, that may
have it without danger, and that none should be constrained to take it: I will
protest before the gods and the saints, which have this city in keeping,
ye being come hider for your wealth, I could nothing proffitt with you by
words. And I woll essay by wasting and destroying your feldes, whider that I
may constrayne you thereunto. Perswadyng my self to do it for a good and just
cause, and not wrongfully, for two necessary reasons. The one for the wealth of
the Lacedaemonians, to the end yt they should not suffer damage for your love,
permitting you in this sort, paying the monney, which you fournishe to the
Athenia^s: the other for ye weal of all the Greeks, to the intent that by you,
they be not let and empesched to recover their liberty. For if that were not,
we should well understand, that no man ought to be constraigned by force to
set himself again into liberty (and specially we Lacedaemonians) if it be
not, for some common and public wealth. And yet neuerthelas we wolle not have
any other governance or rule over you, but to deliver you from the subjection
of other. And we should do injury unto many: if by restoring to all other their
right of liberty, we should leave you in this estate, and should endure your
resiste^ce. wherefore Lords, take good advise herin, and be authors unto al y^
Greeks. And show them the way to recover their liberty, as well for to acquire
and get this perpetuell glory to have been the first: as also for to exchue ye
damage, that otherwise may chance unto you in your particular goods: and
moreover to the end, that ye give to this your city a right honest and glorious
name, to be a frank and free city. After that Brasidas had thus spoken unto
the people, they debated long, upon this matter. And finally they came to give
up their opinions by small bills secretly. And the greatest part were found
of opinion to depart from the alliance of the Athenians, as well for the
persuation of Brasidas, as also for fear to lose their goods, that were in
the feldes. And having received oath of the same Brasidas, that he had
commission of the Lacedaemonians, for to set them again into their liberty,
that should render themself unto him, and to suffer them to live according to
their laws: they su^^red his army to enter into the city. And the like thing
soon afterward did those of Stagire, Stagirus.
which is an other town and Colonie of the Andrians. These be the things that
were done the same summer.

How Hippocrates and Demosthenes, Dukes of the Athenians, made an entreprise
upon the country of Beotians. Wherein they always failled to their great
loss and disadvantage. The.xii. Chapter.
IN beginning of the winter, Hippocrates and Demosthenes, Dukes of the
Athenians, having ordoned and concluded their enterprise, touching the feate of
the Beoeians: yt the one, to wytt. Demosthenes should mete with the army by sea at
Syphas, Siphe.
and the other with tharmy by land at Delos, Delos.
like as is above declared: it happened by error, that they met not at the
day named in the said places. But Demosthenes, being first aryued at Syphas
with many ships of the Acarnanians and of the other allies: his enterprise
was discovered by an Phocian, named Nichomachus, Nichomachus
Who advertised the Lacedemonia^s thereof, and they advertised the Beocians,
which did putt the^self al in armure. And Hippocrates, not having yet done any
thing on the cost of the firm land touching the exploict of war: they all
came to the succors of Syphas and of Cheronee. Cheronea.
Whereby, those of the cities, that had made treaty with the Athenia^s, seeing
that the thing was discovered: durst make no inuocacio^. Nevertheless, after yt
the said Beotians were returned into their houses: Hippocrates, having caused
all the citizens and inhabitants of Athenians to putt them in armure, he came
to Delos, and assieged the temple of Apollo, in this manner. For they
inclosedde the outward part of the temple with dyches and with a wall,
which they made of earth, and thereupon they planted pales with pykes and
beyond the wall, they made rampers of bricque and of stone, which they took
of the houses nigh unto them, that they had beaten down. And upon the rampars,
they erected also towers and defenses in many places. In such manner that
there remaigned no part of the temple, that was not enclosed. For also there
was no other edifice and building about the same. For that, that an au^tient
cloistre, that had of auncie^tie been there: was wtin a short time before
fallen down. And that same work, they acheued and finished within two days
and a half, after that they were there arrived. And also that they had spent in
coming, but three days. And that being thoroughly made, the army departed
fromthence, and retired aboutes eight stades: as for to return into their
houses. And incontinently all the footmen lightly armed, which were in a right
great number, went their way. the other unarmed themself and abodde in a
village, for to repose and soiurne there. And Demosthenes, with a small number
of people, tarried at Delos for the keeping of the rampars, and to acheue and
finishe that, which was to do. Now were the Beotians in thies self days,
assembled at Tanagra. Tanagra.
Being than there assembled out of all the country: they were in doubt whider
that they should assaille the said Athenians or not. For of elleuene officers
and governors of the ^ayd country, ten said that it ought not to be done,
for so much as the said Athenia^s were not yet entered into the country of
Beoce. For the place wherein they reposed themself: was in the lymyttes of
Oropie. Oropia.
But Pagondas, Pagondas.
son of Goladas of Thebes, which was one of the said governors, and
Arianthides, Arianthides.
son of Lesymachus, who had at that time the charge of that assembly were of
contrary opinion. And specially the said Pagondas, who, estemyng and iudgyng
that it was for the best, to prove fortu^e by bartaille, persuaded to the
Beotians his opinion, by thies words.

The oracio^ of Pago^das unto the soldiers Beotia^s.
IT was not conuenable to any of you, that be in office (Lords Beotians) to
think that we should not fight against the Athenians, except they were found
within our land. For having dressed and appointed their munitions and
fortifications within our country of Beoce: and being departed out of their
nigh places, to the intent to trouble it: there is no doubt, but that we should
take them for enemies, in what part: that we shall find them. For out of
whatsoever part that they come: they have declared themself to be ours.
Wherefore if any one among you were heretofore of advise, that they should not
be fought with, let him change fromhensfourthe his opinion. For so much as
there ought not somuche regard to be had to the^, that hold their oune, and
wolle trouble an other man's for couetice to have more: as to those, ye wolle
invade men to take their land from them. And if you have learned of your
auncesters to repoulse your enemies of a strange nation out of your land,
both nigh, and a far of: truly you ought much more readely to do it against
the Athenians yt be your neighbors. For that, yt it is more conuenable for
every man, for to defend and keep his liberty and his right against his
neighbors, for to be egall unto the^: than against other, being more further
of. And therefore if these here do travail to bring into their subieccion and
servitude, those, yt be very far from them, why should not we hazarte and
adventure to fight unto the last man of us against the^ that be even their
voy^ns and neighbors? having before our eyes the example of Eubeens, and one
great part of Greece. And seeing how they have brought them into subjection,
why should we not consider that the other next adioigning do fight with them
for to keep and defend their lymittes? but if we be vainquishedde, there
shall be no lymitte in our territory. But rather it shall be holy co^fused. For
after that they shall be entered therinto by force: we shall be in danger^ lest that
they wolle possess and occupy it holy much more than the other borderers.
For that, that they there have already much land, and also do hold one part
thereof. And also it is the custom of chose, which trusting in their forces, be
minded to war upon their neighbors as the Athenia^s now do: to assaille
sonner those, yt be in rest, and go not diligently about to defend and keep
their land: than those that wolle be ready to mete with them, when they come
to assaille the^, and also to begin the war, if they see occasion, like as we
may see by experience. For after that we had vainquished them at Cheronee, when
they did possess our land through the sedicion and division of our people,
we have always holden all our country of Beoce in great suertie. Whereof, we
ought to have remembrance. And those that be of that time, should parforce
themself to be such, as they than were. And those, that be younger, descended
of those vailliante men, should not degenerate from their virtue, nor suffer to
perish in them, the glory that their auncesters, have purchased and acquired
for them. Having moreover confidence that that same God wolbe helpyng unto us:
whose temple they hold oultragiously assieged. Considering chiefly that the
sacrifices, which we have made, do give us a good significacion and hope of
the victory Let us think and study therefore, to mustre, and cause the
Athenians to know, that if they have obtained any one of the things which
they coueted, by force, it has been against people that defended not
themself. But when they enterprised against people, which have accustomed by
their virtue and magnanymytie to defend their land and their liberty: not
being minded unjustly to enterprise and subdue the liberty of other: they have
never returned without being fought with. Through thies words Pagondas
persuaded the Beotians to go against the Athenians, and incontinently dislodged
from their camp, for to mete with them forthwith, though that it was already
dark. And they came and lodged the^self very nigh, unto them. But there was a
certain small mount bitwene both, whereby the one could not see the other,
and there he did put his men in battaille for to go to fight against the said
Athenians. Now had Hippocrates (who remained at Delos) been advertised, how
the Beotians were issued fourth with great furye of the people. And so
commanded them that were in the camp, that they should keep themself in
armure, and should be at their defense, and sone after, he came thider himself
with the people that he had, reserved three houndred only: which he left at
Delos, all horsemen, as well for to keep the fortifications, as also for to come
to the succors of the army, if it were nedeful. The Beotians than having sent
auancurrers for to putt the enemies in fear and disorder, they came to the
high of the mountaigne and were in the view and sight of the enemies all
ready to fight. And they were about seven thousand well armed, and more than
ten thousand lightly armed, and aboutes a thousand and five houndred
horsemen, bearyng shieldes. And they had in this manner ordained their
battaille. That the footmen, that is, the Thebains and their allyes^ should
keep and be in the right poinct or winge. In the myddel were ^he Haliartians,
the Coromonians, the Copens^ans and the other, that inhabited nigh the water.
In the left wyng or point were the Tanagrians, the Thespyens and the
Orchomenians. As touching the horsemen, there were of them in both the poynctes
or wings, and likewise of the footmen light armed, to wytt, that where they
were, yt did bear ye shieldes: there was in every of the bendes.xxv of them,
and the rest so, as they were found. Thus was the army of the Beotians
ordoned. Concerning the Athenians, as to the footeme^ well armed, whereby they
were as puissant, as thennemyes: they made thereof a thick battaille of eight
men in a rank. And in the wings they had the horsemen, but they had than no
footmen lightly armed, another there in their at mye nor yet in the city For
those, that were first come with them in that same enterprise, (which were in
greater number than the enemies, though a great number of them were without
armure, as people gathered togider, as well of paysans of the fields, as of
estraungers who had takene their journey for to return to their houses) were
not come again to the camp, resaruedde a very small number. Being than all in
battaylle, as well on the one side as of the othere, ready to fight: Hi^pocrates
duke of the Athenyans, who was comme unto them even at that same poinct, did
speak to the Athenyans in this manner.

The exhortation of Hippocracrates to the souldyars, being at a poyncte and
ready to fight.
Lords, unto people of courage and of virtue: needs none great admonytion,
and a short speakinge suffices, which makes more to bring you to
remembrance, what you have to do: than for to exhort you unto yt. And above
all, have no imagination that we be come hither to putt you in this danger
in a forayne land: for an evil quarelle. For the war, that we make in this
land, is for the suertye of ours. Insomuche that if we have the victory
against them: the Peloponesians wol never come for to assail us in ours,
being disseuered and kept from the horsemen, which they do take here. And
likewise, by acquyringe and getting this land by one battle: you shall
deliver yours from dangers forever. March than forewardes like as is
conuenye^t, as well for your party, that every one of you to his glory, may be
named to be the masters of all Greece: as also for the virtue of your
ancestres: who having vaynquished thies people here in a battle nighe unto
Enyphyte: Oenophyta.
were lords of this land, for a certain time. So went Hip^pocrates
encouraiginge his people all in a rank, as they were in battaylle. But before
that they were in the mydde way: the Beotians, at the exhortation of Pagondas,
did begin to give the sign or tokene of the battle by their trompettes
and cornettes, and all at ones descended from the mountaigne in great furye.
which seen, Hippocrates caused his people likewise to march fou^the before
them, as fast, as they might run. And so the formoste came to the conflicte
and strokes And though that the hyndermost did not stryke, yet were they
as much trauailled as the othere, by cause of the sprynges, which of
necessity they should pass. Being than hand for hand, they repoulsedde the
one the other with targattes and bucklars. And anon the left poyncte or wynge
of the Beotyans, was recuyled and repoulsed by the Athenyans, unto the
myddeste. who did always set on them, for to destroy the othere, that were
in the same wynge. Chiefly, the Thespyans, which were in that quarter. And all
at ones, did slay the other, that had been repoulsed and were all in an heap
locked, the one against ye other. And they did hurt the said Thespyans, who
defended themself galliardly. In which stir and conflycte, many of the
Athenyans were there slain by their oune people. For that, that minding to
enclose their enemies, they brought the^self into the myddest of them: in
such wise, that the one knew not the othere, but finally that right poyncte
was holy repoulsed. And they, that saved themself, went from that wynge, to
render themself to the right poyncte wherein were the Thebayns. who did fight
so manfully: that they did repoulse the Athenyans from that same side, and
pursued and chasedde them a small space. In the mean time it chanced, that
both ye companyes of horsemen, which Pagondas had sent for to succor the
left wynge of his people, were comme (in the couerte of a small mountaigne)
with all diligence. And so being there within the syghte of the Ath^nyans,
which chased those of the said left wynge: they thinking that it was new
succors, that were comme to the said Beotyans: were all astonyed, so that they
did fly. And so ye Athenyans were putt to flight, as well on the one side, as
on the othere. The one, toward the sea of the cost of Delos, the othere
toward Orope, some against the mount Parnethus, Parnethus.
and other some into diverse places^ so as they hoped to save themself. whereby
there were many of them slain by the Beotians, chiefly by the horsemen, aswelle
of the same country, as of the Locryans, which in this conflycte were arrived
for their succors But the night, which did draw nyghe, saved many of them.
On the morrow, they, that were comme to Orope and to Delos, left there a
certain garnysone. and afterward they went alongeste the sea, unto their
houses. The Beotians, in remembrance of that same victory, raised and set up
their trophee in place of the battaylle, after that they had with drawin their
corpses and dead bodies, and spoiled those of the ennemys. And having there
left a certain nom^er of people in garnisonne: they went to Tanagre, where
they preparedde themself for to assaylle the Athenyans, that were at Delos.
toward whom they sent an heraulte. who, having encountredde in the way an
herault of the Athenyans, which came to demand their dead men, said unto
him that he should pass no further, but return with him. ^or he shoolde do
nothing, until he was retournedde. which thing he did. And the said
heraulte Beotian, being comme to the Athenyans, declaredde unto them the
charge to him committed by the Beotyans. which was such, that those Athenyans
had transgressedde greatly man's laws. By the which yt was defended to all
those, those should invade the land of an othere, not to enter into the
temples. And that notwythstandynge, the same Athenyans had enuyr onnedde the
temple of Delos and therein kept their people, which did violate yt and did
there all profane things. And specially, the water: the which it was lawful
for no man to touch, but only the priests for to make their sacrefyce:
they imploy^dde to othere uses. wherefore they publyshedde and declaredde it
unto them, aswelle on the bihalfe of the god as of theirs. Calling furthermore
and inuo^ynge all the holly sprytes, which had the keeping of the place: and
specially Apollo^ unto wytnes: that they should depart out of the said
temple with their baguage. whereunto the Athenyans answered that they would
make answer to the Beotyans by the heraulte, which they sent toward them.
who shewedde them in effect and substance, that they did no unlawful nor
profane thing in the said temple nor intended to do for the time to come, if
they were not thereunto constrained. For also they were not come for that
intent, from ^he beginning. But only for to repoulse those that did injury
unto them. which thing was laufull by the laws, specially of Greece. By the
which it was ordained, that those, that have the seigniorie and domynion of a
land, be it small or great: may also have the temples in their power^ for to
continue there the sacryfyces and ceremonies accustomed, as much as should be
possible. In ensuynge which laws, those Beotians and all the other Greeks,
when they had taken any land or town by war and chased the inhabitants
fromthe^ce: they kept the temples, which were before bilongyng to the same
inhabitants: as their own. And therefore the said Athenyans intended, if they
did get their land, to use the self right and law. And for that cause,
being in that same country, they took it to be good and lawful, and were not
determynedde to depart fromthence: but to keep it, as their oune. As touching
the water of the temple, if they had taken thereof for their use: yet it was
not done to have ini^^yed or oultragedde the relygyon of the temple. But
being there, for to avenge themself of those, that came to ouerronne their
land, they were of necessity constrained for to take thereof, to their use. In
which case, when there is true war: to those that be in necessity, it is
conuenable that God do pardone them: that which they be constrained to do of
necessytie. For recours is had to the gods and to the aulters, for to
obteigne remyssyon of sins, which be not committed wyllingly. And those be
esteemed evil and sinners toward them, which sin wyllingly, and not those,
that do any thing of necessity. But those ought much more to be esteemed
evil and contempnors of gods: which for rendrynnge of dead corpses, would
have the temples: rather than those: which for not rendering of holly things:
refuse to take that which raysone would to be rendered unto them. And this they
declared that they were not determined to depart out of the land of Beoce.
For they pretended to keep ye place, wherein they were with good right and not
by force. And yett ueuertheles, they demanded of the said Beotians, that they
should permytt them for to fetch away their dead men according to the
custom of Greece. To this demand and proposition the Beotians answered, that
if the said Athenyans did take it to be in the land of the Beotians, they
should depart with their baguage. And if they pretendedde to be in theirs,
they knew what they had to do. For the land of Oropie, wherein their people
were slain, was in the iurisdictyon of the said Athenyans. wherefore those
Beotians, not keeping their dead men against their will, they were not bound
to render them unto them, but departinge from their land, yt was very
raysonable, that that thing, which they demanded, should be delivered. In
this manner returned the heraulte of the Athenyans without doing any thing.
And anon after, the Beotians, having caused a certain number of slingers and
darte casters to comme from Malie with two thousand good souldiars on foot,
Malea.
which the Corinthians had sent unto them incontynently after the battaille,
and some other succors, which was comme unto them from Peloponese, to wit of
those, that were returned fro Nisee with the Megaryans: they departed from
thence and went to lay their camp before Delos. And they assailed the
fortifications and rampares of the Athenyans with diverse Engynes of Artillery.
The invention of a new Engine to assault and Bartre.
and among other, by one, which was cause of the taking of yt, the which
was of this facion. They did take a great piece of timber and made it hollow
all within, in such manner, that it was void and hollow all alonge.
Afterward they fastened yt with yrone at both ends. And also alengthe, very
artyfyciallye, aftere manner of a pipe, and to one of the ends they fastened
with chains of yronne a great cawdrone of brass, which hanged from the said
piece of timber, downewardes by the said chains. And at the end of the beam,
there was a hollow pype of yronne which turned and crooked downewarde
against the cawldrone, for to cast right into the cauldrone, the wind, that
came alonge out of the ingyne. the which, being so acheuedde and made as is
above said they caused it to be drawin and carried with great charettes unto
the wall, which the Athenyans had made, on that side, where the most part
was of wood. And in raysinge yt up, they did set the end, whereon the
cauldrone was, unto the side of the said wall full of cooles, brymstone and
pytche. And to the other end, which was on their side, they applied great
bellows, by blowynge whereof, they caused incontynently, through the wind
which passed along^ste through the Engyne into the caudrone, that all the
matter, that was within did lighten, and cast a great flame, wherwyth the
wall was anon fyred and burned. By occasion whereof, they, that de^ended
themself, were constraynedde to forsake it. And by this mean, the Beotians
did win it. And of those, that were wy^hin, there were taken two houndred
prysonners. Of the other, one part was slam, and the other saved themself in
the ships, that were in the hauone of the sea. Thus the temple of Delos was
recoueredde.xvii days after the battaille. And soon after returned the
heraulte of the Athenyans (which did know nothing of the said taking or
recouerey) for to demand again the dead men. To who the Beotyans did render
and deliver them without speaking unto him anny more of that, that they had
declared at the othere time. And there was found, as well of those, that were
slain in the battaille, as at the taking of Delos on the part^e of the
Beotians nyghe to five houndredde, and on the othere party of the Athenyans,
about a thousand. And amongst other Hippocrates, one of their dukes: besides
the forem^n light armed and the victua^liers, which were a great number. On
the other side Demosthenes, who was gone to Siphas by sea, seeing that his
enterprise had faylled him, he issued fourth of his ships with four houndred
men, as well of the Agryans and Acarnanyans which he had led away, as of
the Athenyans, into the land of Sycionians. But before the rest were landed
for to follow and to pursue those there: the Sycionyens, who issued fourth for
to defend their land: came to assail them, and repoulsed and did chase them
back, even into their ships, and so did slaye one part of them, and many of
them were takene prysonners.

How Brasidas duke of the Lacedemonyans, did take the City of Amphipolis
soubdaynly, and some other in the country of Thrace, by treatye and
apoynctemente. The.xiii. Chapter.
IN that same time, when the things were done at Delos, whereof we have
spokene: Sytalces, Sitalcis.
king of Odrysyans dyed in battaill against the Tryballes. with whom he began
to war. And Seuthes, Seuthes
son of Spardocus his brother, succeeded him as well in the realm of
Odrysians, as in other lands and seigniories, which he held in the countreye
of Thrace. And in that same winter Brasidas with the allies of the
Lacedemonyans in that said country, moved war against the city of
Amphipolis, Amph^polis.
, which was situated upon the river of Strymone. Strymon.
For that, that it was a Colonie of the Athenyans. And before that, they had
peopled with their nation, the place, where the city presen^ly stands,
Aristagoras Milesius, Aristagoras.
flyinge the persecution of the king Darius^ had furste inhabyted yt, but he
was chased fromthence by the Edonyans. And than the Athenyans.xxxii. years
after, sent thither te^ne thousand me^, as well of their people, as of other
assembled from all quarters, which were all destroyde by the Thracians nyghe
unto Dranesque. Notwythstanding.xxix years after, those same Athenians sent
thider again of their people, under the conducte of Agnon, son of Nycias.
who chased the Edonyans fromthence, and founded the city, such, as yt
presently is, which was before named, the new ways. And when the said Agnon
came thither to make it, he departed from a town, which the Athenyans had in
the mouth of the river, named Eionus. Eione.
wherein they made their estaple, and called it Amphipolis, by cause that it
was enuyronned on both sides with the river of Strymone, and so enclosed it
with a wall that went from one arm of the river, unto the other. And builded
it in a place of a conuenyent heyght: so that it was fair to se, aswelle
toward the sea, as to the land. Brasidas, than being at Arnes, Arne.
which is a town in the terrytorye of the Agryans: departed fromthence with
his army, and arrived about going down of the son in Aulone and in
Bromisque, Aulon Bromiscus.
on that side where the lake of Bolbus voydeth itself into the sea. Bolbe
And after that he had supped, he took his journey in the night (which was
very dark, and also it did snow, and was very foul whether) so that he
aryued before the city, without being parceued by them, that were within.
Resarued some, with whom he had intelligence, which were partly of the
Argylians, that be in the country of Andrie and were come thider, for to
inhabitt: and partly of other, which had be practiced and won, as well by
Pardiccas, as by the Chalcides. But pryncipally the Brasides, which was
adioygninge unto them, were of that intelligence and confederacy, and had been
always ennemys of the Athenyans: and espied and laid in wait to take pryuely
the said city. Those same than that were inhabitedde there as before is said:
having concluded the treasone with Brasydas, by consent of them, which than
had the governance of the city, did suffer him to come in. And the same night
they, rebellinge from the Athenyans, came to lodge with the army of Brasidas,
nighe the bridge, that was on the river, distant a very small space from the
city. which was not tha^ closed with walls: as it presently is. And though
that there was a number of people, that kept the bridge, yet as well by cause
of the night, as of the foul wether, and also of the soubdayne arryuall, he
repoulsed them easily and won the bridge, and did take all the cytezeins,
that dwelled without the city in the suburbs, except some small number,
which saved themself in the town, whereof, they that were within were greatly
afraid, and chiefly for that, that they greatly doubted among the^self, the
one, the other. And the saying is, that if Brasidas had as well approved to
take the city, as he suffered his people to pillage the suburbs: he had than
takene yt. But in the mean time that his people did give themself to
pillaige, those of the city assuredde themself, in such manner, that he
durst not pursue his enterprise, chiefly parceyuynge that they of his
intelligence did not discover theymselfe in the town. which thing they
could not do, forsomuche as the Cytezeins, who where in the greater number,
empesched and did let that the gates were not opened. And sent with all
diligence, by the counsel of Eucles, who than was Capytayne of the Athenyans,
unto Thucydides son of Olerus, the same that has writtone this history
(which at that time had charge for the Athenyans in the said country of
Thrace, with the said Eucles, Eucleus.
being nyghe the town of Thase, which was a colonie of the Paryans, distante
from Amphipolis about one journey by sea) that he should come to succor them.
which thing he readelye did, and came fromthence with seuene shypps, which
he found by adventure all ready in that part, to succor Amphipolis, if it
were not than takene, or if it were takene, for to take Eione. In this mean
time Brasidas, who greatly fearedde the succors of Thase by sea, and also
least Thucydides, Thucidides.
who kept in that quarter many mines of gold and of silver, by mean whereof,
he had great frendeshypp and authorytie with the principallest of the
country, should assemble a great number of people by land, he determined to do
his best to get the said city by practyse and co^posytion, before that the
cytezeins might have ye said succor. And for that cause he made it to be
cried and published with the sound of a trompett, that all they, that were in
the town, being citezeins or Athenyans, might if they thought good, abide in
their estate and liberty. Even so, as the Peloponesyans. And those, that would
not, might depart with their baguaige within five days. which cry being
hard, many of the pryncipall Cytezeins changed their opinion, understanding to
be by that mean in liberty. whereas the city at the present time was
governed, the most part by the Athenyans. And also they, whose parents and
friends were takene in the suburbs, which were in great number, all mean
people, fearing, that if they did it not, their said parents and friends
should be ill entreated, chy^fly the Athenyans, which parceyued that without
danger they might depart with their baguage, and looked for to have no
succors redelye: and the rest of the people, seeing that by this
appoynctement, they should bring and deliver themself out of danger, and
should remain in liberty: all with one accord did accept the party at
perswation of them, that had intellygence with Brasidas, although that ye
governors, which were for the Athenyans would have persuaded them to the
contrary. And by this mean, the city was rendered. That self same day about
the evening tide, Thucidides arrived with his ships at Eione. Brasidas, being
already within Amphipolis. who had taken the said city of Eione if the night
had not come upon him. And also at the break of the day he had taken yt, if
the succors with the said shypps had not arrived. But the same Thucydides,
being there arrived as is before said, ordained his case for to defend the
town, if Brasidas would have come to assaylle yt, and also that he might
wythdrawe and receive those of the main land, that were minded to comme to
ioygne with him. whereby yt chanced that Brasidas, who was descended a long
the river with a good number of shypps, having made his strength to get a
rock that was at the mouth of the same, nighe the town, and after to take yt
by the land side, was repoulsed from both sides, and was constraigned to
return into the city of Amphipolis, for to give order to the affairs
thereof. And sone after, the city of Myrtine, Myrcinus.
in the country of the Edonians, did render itself to his allyaunce. For
that, that Pittacus, Pittacus.
king of ye said Edonians was slain by the wife and children of Groa^es^
Goa^is.
and within few days, Gopselle and Esyne, Gopselus.

Oesuna


which were two Colonies of the Thasiens, did likewise render themself, and
that by the practique of Perdiccas, who arrived in the city of Amphipolis
incontine^tly after that it was takene. when the Athenyans understood the loss
of that same city: they were therefore very sorrowful. For that, that it had
been much propice and profitable to them, as well by reasone of the monney,
that they there leuyed, and of the wood that they did take fromthence for to
make ships: as also for that the Lacedemonyans, having before faculty and
power to comme to invade the allies of the said Athenyans, unto the river of
Strymone, by the conducte of the Thracyans, who did take their part, could
not pass over the water at the upper part thereof, for that, that it was deep,
nor also with boatts, so long as the Athenyans did keep their watch upon the
water at Eyone. But the Lacedemonyans, having gottene the city, and
consequently the passage of the river, might pass at their will and pleasure.
whereby the Athenyans were in great fear, that their friends and allies
woolde turn to take part with the said Lacedemonyans. Chyefly for this, that
Brasidas, beside that, that he declared and showed himself to be a man curtoys
and reasonable: did also publishe generally every where, that he had no charge,
but to restoore all Greece into liberty. By mean whereof, the other towns and
cities, that did take part with the Athenyans, understanding the good
entreatynge, which the said Brasidas vsedde and practysedde toward the
Amphilochiens, and that he presented lyberte unto every man: they were all
enclyned to reuolte and turn unto him, and to wythdrawe themself from the
obeissaunce of the Athenians. And thereupon did secretly send their
heraultes and messengers toward him, for to make their appoynctement: every
man, desyring to be the furste, thynking that there was none danger of the
Athenyans, who of long time had not any great garnysons in that country:
and thought not that their puissance had been so great, as they parceyuedde it
afterward to be by experyence. ^or also thies be people, that have accustomed
to conduct their affairs more, by an disordered affectyon, rather than by
reason and prouydence, and putting their esperaunce in that, which they
wylled: they followed yt without annye great purpose to effect. And that
thing which they wylledde not, they reprouedde under color of reasone. Also
they grounded themself greatly upon the loss, which the Athenyans had made
frankly in Beoce, through occasyon whereof, it semedde to them, that they
could not so soon send succors into that quarter, and the more by the
perswasyons of Brasidas, who did them to understand. that the said
Athenyans durst not fight against him nygh to Nysee, though that he had,
but this a^mie, that was there. Through thies reasons, and upon thies
ymagynations, they were all joyous for the present, to be in liberty under
the protection of the Lacedemonyans, whom they thought, having newely made
the enterprise in that same quarter, to be fully determined to follow it to
their power. On the othere side the Athenyans, consyderinge the danger, sent
fourthwyth succors into the said quarter for to keep and defend their land,
although it were winter time. Also Brasidas had wrytton unto them of
Lacedemonye, that they should send unto him succors. And in the mean time he
would cause to be made asmanye ships, as he could, in the river of
Strymone. But the Lacedemonyans did send him no succors, as well through
occasyo^ of the discord of the princypallest of the city: as also for that,
that the people desired to recover the prysonners, which were takene in the
Islande, and by that mean, rather to make peace: than to continue the war.

How Brasidas did take the city of Torone by treaty and intellygence, and
the same of Lecithum by force. The.xiiii. Chapter.
IN the same winter, the Megaryans recoueredde the long wall, which the
Athenyans had gottone from them, and subverted and turned yt vpsett down.
And Brasidas, after the taking of Amphipolis went with his army against a
place, named A^te, Acta.
which is set on high upon a mountaigne, named Athos, Athos.
which enters within the kyngly dyche, and extends unto the sea Egeus. In
the length whereof be sytuated many cities, to wit, Sana, Sana.
which is inhabyted with the Andrians, ad lies upon the said dych^ on the sea
side, foranempst Eubeus. And beyond them, be, Thysus, Thissus
Cleone, Cleone.
Acrothous, Acrothous.
Holophixus and Dius. Holophixus.
which be inhabited with people of diverse nations estrau^gers, which use two
languages, and in part, ye same of ye Chalcydia^s. but pryncipally of
Pelasgyans, and of the Thyrenyens, which had sometime inhabyted at Lemnus and
at Athens, and also of the Bisaltiques, of Crestonians, and of Edonyens, which
dwelled and kept themself in some of the villages in the said country: of
the which cities the more part rendredde themself unto the alliance of
Brasidas. And forsomuche, as Sanius and Dyus resisted him, he pyllaged and
wasted their terrytory. And neuerthelas, saying that he could not turn them,
he departed fromthence and went against Torone, Torona
in the country of Chalcyde, which did take part with the Athenyans by the
practice and sollycytinge of sum of the Cytezeins, that had promysedde to
let him into yt. And so he iourneyed all the night, that about the break of
the day, he arrived at the temple of Castor and Pollur, which is distante
from the city aboutes three stades, without that, that annye number of the
Athenyans, which were within the town for to keep it, did parceue anny thing
thereof in anny of the Cytezeins. Those resaruedde that were of the treaty.
Sum of whom, understanding his coming, did take and receive seuene of
his men only into yt: which bare no armure but their swerdes. and yet feared
not to enter without their compaignyons, which were in all to the number of
twenty unto whom Brasydas had geuene this charge under the conducte of
Lysistratus the Olynthyen. Lisistratus.
Those same men, than being mountedde and drawin up by the wall that go^the
toward the sea: they clymedde secretelye v^pe to the top of a high tower:
which was scituatedde vponne a hylle. and did slaye those, that were within
for to keep yt. And afterward did break up a little gate that was on the side
of Canestre. This indurynge, Brasidas with all the army was marchedde, a little
more nyghe unto the city, and attendinge and waiting the issue of the thing,
he had sent before one houndredde footmen well armed for to be ready to
enter into yt, fourthwyth as they should parceyue anny of the gates of the town
opened, and the sign, that they from with in the town should give, were
showed. which came right secretly almoost unto the walls. In the mean time,
they of the town that had made the treaty, preparedde themself, with the
seuene, that were entredde, for to get the city: and that the gate should be
openedde for them, which fyrmed and did shut in, the markett place. They than
parceyuynge the said houndred their compaignyons to be so nyghe: causedde to
be shewedde unto sum of them the passage, alonge the walls, and receyuedde
them in by the little gate, which was gottone. To the intent, that they, that
were in the city and knew nothing of the enterprise: parceyuynge themself
assaylled before and behind, should be soubdaynely the more afrayedde. And
after they had made the sign or tokene with fire which they had given to
Brasidas, they receyuedde the other of the said houndred into the city by the
gate of the markett place. when Brasidas did see the tokenne, he marched with
the rest of his people in the greateste haste, that he might, against the
city, making a much great noise and cry, for the more, to fear the
Cytezeins. And so some entredde at the gates, which they found openne, and the
other mountedde up by the beams that were fastenedde in the wall on one of
the sides, where it was brokene. And after that they were all entered, Brasidas
made strayghte fourth to the hygheste of the city, and fro^thence came to
disturb and ouerronne it, through all the parts and streets thereof, to the
end, that he might be wholly seized of yt. And in this doing, the Cytezeins,
which had not been consenting to the taking of yt, went about to save
theymselfe the best that they might. But they that were of the intellygence,
came to ioygne themself with the Lacedemonyans. As touching the Athenyans
that were in the market place, for the saulfgarde of the town, to the number
of fyftie Soldyars, there was one part of them taken sleping and was slain,
at the aryuall. The other, parceyuinge the bruyte, saved themself, some by
land and the other in two shyps: that kept watch upon the river, and went
fromthence unto Lecythum. where was one other garnysonne of Athenes. And took
at the arryuall the Castle of the city Marytimate or next the sea, which was
in the most straighte or narroweste place of the distreate. with whom, many
of the cytezeins of the said Torone did retire and withdraw themself, to
wit, of those, that were most affectyonedde to the party of the Athenyans.
The day comme and the city being wholly in the puissance of Brasidas: he
causedde it to be cryedde with the sownde of a trompette through the town,
that all they, which were retyredde with the Athenyans, might return in
suertie, and should recover their goods and continue in the rytes of the
city, like as they had done before time And on the othere side, he
commaundedde the Athenyans, that were within Lecythum, Lecithu^
that they should void and depart fromthence, for that, that it apperteigned
to the Chalcydians, suffrynge them to depart fromethence with their baguaige.
But they made answer that they would not depart, and yet neuerthelas they
demaundedde of Brasidas one day of trefues for to wythdrawe their dead bodies.
who grauntedde unto theyme two days, during the which, he furnyshed his
fortes. Likewise did the Athenyans, theirs. And besides this he did
assemble the cytezeins of Torone, and spoke unto them almost in that same
sort, as he had spokene to themof Acanthe in this substance.

The narration of Brasidas unto the Toronyans.
THat is, that he shewedde them, that raysonne would not, that they, which
had had intelligence with him for to let him into the city, should be
reputedde traiters nor evil doers. Forsomuche as they had done it nothere
for monney, another for to bring the city into seruytude: but rathere for to
restore yt into liberty, and for the great wealth of the cytezeins
generallye. Also yt were not raysonne, that they, which were not parttakers of
this goodness, should be depryued of their goods and faculties, for he was not
come thither for to destroy ye city, nor any of the Cytezeins: but for to
deliver it out of captyuitie. And for this cause he had done yt to be
known to them that were gone with the Athenyans, that they might comme again
into their goods, and into the estate, that they were in, in times passed. To
the intent that all men might know, that the amytye of the Lacedemonyans
(when they shall have prouedde yt) was not worser, than that same of the
Athenyans and should have cause to be somuche the moore affectionedde to their
partie^ as they should find them by experyence, more just and more
reasonable. Though that at the beginning they had been afraied, not having
yet experyme^ted the nature of the said Lacedemonyans. Praying and exhorting
them, that they would dispose themself to be their good and faithful friends
and confederates, from that hour, forwards. For if they afterward committed
any fault, they should be coulpable and punishable. which thing before time
they had not desarued, but rather they, that had by force holden them in
subjection, as the more strong. wherefore though they had euenne unto that
present hour been adversaries and contrary to the said Lacedemonyans^ yet
raysone would that it should be pardoned them. With such words Brasidas exhorted
and comforted the Toronyans. when the two days of trefues were passed, he came
to Lecythus and thought to take yt with assault. For that, that the walls
were very weak in every place, and in some quarters made of wood. Yet the
Athenya^s, that were within, defended themself valiantly the furste day, and
repoulsed the Lacedemonyans. The morrow followynge, Brasidas had caused to be
set up an instrumente for to cast fire into that part, where the walls were of
wood. which parceyuedde, the Athenyans raysedde up a tower of wood upon the
said walls in the self same part: and there caused to be set a great number
of vessels full with water, with instruments for to cast yt fourthe^ and also
great stones. But through the great number of people that mounted upon the
same tower, it did fall soubdaynely down to the ground. whereby and with the
brute that it made in falling: the Athenyans which were nyghe yt, were moore
displaysedde, than afrayedde. But they, which were furthere of: thinking that
the town had been takenne, fled away toward the sea into the ships,
that were in the poorte. Than Brasidas, parceyuy^ge that they had
habandonedde and forsakene the wall, assailed it on that same side, and took
the town without great difficulty, by that mean. And they, that were
encountered at the arryuall, were ^layne. Yet one party of the Athenyans
sauedde themself in the ships and saylledde to Pallenes. Pellene
Now had Brasidas caused to be cried before the assault with sownde of
trompett, that he would give.xxx. pounds in silver to the furste that should
have mountedde upon the wall. But persuadinge himself that the town was taken
rather by will of the gods, than by force: he did give that so^me of monney
to the temple of the goddess Pallas, which was in the same town. with which
monney, that same temple was reparedde, which had been destroyed at the
taking of the same town, with the other edifices. And yet afterward
Brasidas caused it to be builded again. And he was the rest of the winter, in
that same quarter, repayringe and fortefyinge the places, which he did
hold, and layinge in wait for them, which did take part with the
Athenyans.

How the Athenyans made trefues for one year with the Lacedemonyans. The.xv.
Chapter.
IN the beginning of the furste vere or spring tide, the Athenyans made a
trefues with the Lacedemonyans for one year. And that the Athenyans did:
thinking that during that season, Brasidas would not have practysed to
wythdrawe their lands, and in the mean time to have fortefyed them, and also
hoping to treat during that time a fynall peace, if they parceyuedde that it
should be good for them. The Lacedemonyans also persuaded themself that the
said Athenyans feared the said matters, like as it was true, and that having
by mean of trefues, repose and release of travails and pains, wherein they
had bene^ they would be more enclyned to the peace, and that in that doing
they would render the prysonners which they kept, which was the thing that the
said Lacedemonyans most desired and hoped to obteigne yt, making the trefues,
duringe the time, that Brasidas prosperedde. But so long as the war
continued, and that he did get of the ennemys, they hopedde not that their
said people should be releasedde and delivered. And so the trefues was
concluded in this form, for the Athenyans did deliver the articles, which
they demanded, and the Lacedemonya^s made the answer, such, as follows.

The form of the trefues bitwene the Athenyans and the Peloponesyans.
FUrst we woll that as touching the temple and the oracle of Apollo Pythicus,
that it be l^efull to all them, that will, of aither party to go thider without
fraud and without fear, for to have counsel of the god in the manner
accustomedde. This article was approved by the Lacedemonyans and by those of
their allies, that were there. who promised to do all that they might, that
the Beotyans and Phociens should approve and ratefie it, and for that cause
they sent their herault unto them. Secondarely touching the treasure of that
same god, which was pillaged and imbecilled, we woll that men proceed against
the transgressors for to punish them according to their demerittes, like as
has been accustomedde in such case, and that we and you and all other that
wylbe comprysed in the trefues, shall observe the ancient ordonances and
customs, as touching that matter. To this, answered the Lacedemonyans and
their allies, that they were content that if the peace were made, aither of
the parties should be content with his land, like as they presently did
hold yt. To wytt that the lymitts of the Lacedemonyans should be in the quarter
of Coryphasius between Bufrades and Tomeus: and ye same of the Athenyans, in
Cytheis. And that the one might not make allyaunce with the othere, that those,
which be at Nysea and Mynoa should not pass by the way that leads from Pylus
unto the temple of Neptune, and from the same temple, to the temple, which
leads to Mynoa. which way also, another the Megaryans might pass, nor those,
that were wtin the Island, which ye Athenya^s had taken. And that the one should
have no co^municatyon of marchandyse nor of other matter with the others, but
that the Athenya^s might use all that, that they had at the present in Trezena,
and all the other lands that remained unto them by the treaty, at their
pleasure. And also that they might goo by sea unto their lands, and to those
same of their friends at their pleasure. And as concerning the Lacedemonya^s,
that they might sail not with long shypps that go with sail, but with
galleys and other shypps that go with oars, of the portage of five hou^dred
talentes. Item that all heraults and ambassadors might go wtoute any
empescheme^ts with such compaigny, as they would, as well through the land of the
Peloponesians, as through the same of the Athenyans, and that as well by sea as
by land, for to treat thappoinctment. Item that none should receive any
fugetyue, bondsman nor fre, of the one nor other side. And as touching difference
that may arise, duringe the trefues, among them of the one party, against
those same of the other: the knowlayge and trial thereof apparteigneth to the
judge of the defendour, like as it was used before the war, and that they
should be voided and pacefyed by sentence, and not by war. To this answered
the Lacedemoniens and their allies, that they agrede to all the said articles.
Afterward followed one other of this substance. And if ye parceue yt there
may be had any thing more honnest and more reasonable than this, which is above
said, being returned in to Lacedemony ye may aduertyse us thereof. To this the
Lacedemonyans and their allies answered. They that shall go, having power and
authorytie to entreat the matters, may have the charge, and authorytie
hereof, like as you give it them. Afterward followedde. Thies trefues shall
endure for one year. And the subscription was this. It pleases the people and
the three magistrates. Pyraneus was than the officier, and Phenippus the
Grephier, Phenip^pus.
Nyciades Capytayne of the army. And Laches recyted and declared the said
trefues. which god grant to be to the goodness, joy and fortune of the
Athenyans. Like as the Lacedemonyans and their allies have accorded and agrede
unto yt, and have promised to keep it for one year, which shall begin this
present.xiiii. day of the month, Elaphobolion, that is December. During
which time the heraults and ambassadors may and shall go from the one side to
the other, for to speak and entreat upon means for to end the war. And
that the officers and lieutenantes at their request, should assemble ye
coun^aille and the people for that intent and purpose. And that the Athenyans
should be the furst for to send the Ambassadors for to talk and commun of
the said means, and to bring at their arryuall the ratifycation of the
people of Athens, by which they promise to keep and hold the trefues during
the said year. This same treaty bitwene the Athenyans and Lacedemonyans and
their allies was afterward ratefied and approuedde at Lacedemonye the.xii.
day of the monethe Gerastie. And the pryncypall authors thereof, were^ of the
Lacedemonyans, Thaurus, son of Ech^tymydas. Atheneus son of P^riclides, and
Philocharydas son of Erixidaides. On the party of the Corynthians^ Eneas
son of ^cythe, and Euphanidas, son of Aristonym^s. On the bihalfe of the
Scyonyans, Damotinus, son of Nan^rates and Onasymus, son of Megaces. Of
those of Megare, Nicase, son of Lecalus, and Menecrates, son of Amphidotus.
For them of Epidaure, Amph^as, son of Epoide. For the Athenya^s, Ny^ostratus,
son of Diotrophus, who was magistrate, Niceas, son of Nyceratus, and
Autocles, son of Tolmeus. In this manner the said trefues was concluded, and
during the same were made many treaties and parlementes of the peace.

How the trefues bitwene the Peloponesians and the Athenyans was brokene,
through cause of the cities of Scione and of Mende, which Brasidas takes by
rebellyon of the Citezeins, from the said Athenyans. The.xvi. Chapter.
During the time, that his trefues was entreated, and that the treaty was
confirmed (as is above said) the city of Scione, nyghe to Pallene, rebelled
from the Athenyans, and rendered itself unto Brasidas, under this color. Those
Scionians did say, Sciona
that they were Pallenyans, Pallena
borne auncyently out of the country of Peloponese, and that their
auncestres^ retournynge from the siege of Troy by sea, were by tempeste of
the sea, which than dispersed the Achiues, driven into that same quarter, and
there arrested themself and inhabyted. Brasidas, than understanding their
rebellion, went toward them by night, and causedde to goo a little before
him a galley for to discover: and he himself was in a brygantine, to the intent
that if he encountered a greater and more puissante than his, the galley might
succor him. And if he encountredde one galley, as puissante, as the same, that
went before he reco^ned that it would rathere match itsel^e with the said
galley, and by that mean, in the mean time, as the two galleys did fight
togiders, he might save himself. So he arrived in this manner without any
encou^tring at Scione. And there assembled the people. And did speak unto them
in the selfsame form and substance, as he had spoken to them of Acanthe and of
Torone. And he praised them somuche the more than the other: that albeit the
Athenians did than occupy the citte of Pallene, which was situated at the
distreate of Peloponese, and that they did hold the city of Potydee: and that
the same Scionians were all of the self Islande: yet neuerthelas they had the
heart to be restoared to liberty and out of the saruytude of the Athenians, of
themselves. without ^arying until necessity should cause them to know and
provide for their common wealth. For the which hardynes and magnanymytie, he
judged them to be people, for to bear and endure valiantly and virtuously any
other great affair, if it happenned unto them. And also he took it well, that
they should be always good and faithful friends of the Lacedaemonians. And by
that mean should be in all things praised and honored by them. Through which
words and declarations, the Scyonians did conceive and take great courage:
in such sort, that they all with one accord (as well those, that took the
matter to be evil at the beginning, as also the other) determined to susteigne
war against the Athenians, if the case chanced. And above many honors
which they did to Brasidas, they set a crown of gold upon his hedde: as to
the deliverer of Greece, and as to a man privately their friend and well doer:
they did give him a Chapelette or small garlande of vigne, and went to visett
him in his lodging, as was used to them, that had had the victory of a
battaille. But he arested not long there, but having left with the^ a small
garnisone, he returned thither, from whence he came. And son after, he
returned thider with a great army. To the intent to assaye, if he might with
their aid, get Me^de and Potydee, before the Athenians should come to their
succors, as he doubted, that they would do. But having already made the
treaty with certain of the said towns, before that he executed it, there
came unto him out of a galley Aristonymus. Aristonymus.
from the party of the Athenians. And Atheneus from the party of the
Lacedaemonians, who notefyed unto him the trefues. By occasion whereof, Brasidas
returned fromethence to Torone. At which place the said Ambassadors declared
unto him more amply the tenor of the tratie. Which was approved and received
by all the allies, that were in Thrace, as well on the one party, as of the
other. But Aristonimus, though that he approved all the said treaty, yet he
said, that the Scyonyans were not therein comprised, forsomuche, as they
rebelled after the date of the trefues. Whereunto Brasidas did replye, and
maignteigned that they rebelled before. And for effect said, that he would not
render them, so that the matter or thing remained, as broken. And after that
Aristonymus had reaported that same at Athens, all the Athenians were of
opinion to begin war against the said Scyonians and did prepare themself, for
to make it. Which thing being come to the knowlage of the Lacedaemonians, they
sent unto the^ ambassade, showing them, that they went against the treaty. And
that wrongfully they would recover the said ctie of Scyone. upon the reasons
that Brasidas did show, and that if they would go thider by force, those
Lacedaemonians and their allies would defend the said Scionians. But if they
would that the matter were putt and referred to knowliage and into judgment,
they were there with well contented. whereunto the Athenians made answer, that
they would not putt their estate in hazarte of judgment, but were determined
to go against the said Scyonyens, as fast as they could, thinking and holding
it for certain, that if they of the Islandes would rebelle, the succors of
the Peloponesians by land, could in nothing sarue them. And for truth the
Athenians had good quarelle, as touching that. For it was certainly found that
the rebellion of the Scioniens was two days after the conclusion of the
treaty. This was the decree, of the greater part and opinion of the Athenians
made, in followyng thaduys of Cleon, that men should go to take Scyone, and
slaye all the Citizens. And thereunto they prepared themself. But in the mean
time the city of Mende rebelled likewise, Menda.
which is in the country of Pallene, inhabited and founded by the Ericrians.
Which Brasidas received likewise, perswadyng himself to do nothing against
reasone, though that it was done during the trefues, forsomuche as the
Athenians did likewise the contrary. Which was the reasone, whereby those of
Mende had takene boldenes for to rebelle, knowing the will and deliberacion
of Brasidas, and also saying the experyence of the Scionians, whom he would
not forsake. And also considering that though that they: that had brought to
pass the treaty of the rebellion were in small number, and had great fear
to execute it: yet they left not to essaye it, and fearyng to be discovered,
had won the other, that were the greater party, albeit that it was contrary
to their expectacion. The Athenians, being advertised of this rebellion, were
yet more provoked and stirred, and prepared themself for to go to destroy the
said two rebelled cities. But in the mean time, that they made their
preparacions and before that they aryued, Brasidas had withdrawn the women
and childrene out of the same two cities. And had caused them to be carried
into the country of Chalcyde. And also sent unto the succors of the
cytizens, five houndred Peloponesians and so many Chalcidians, all well armed,
under the charge of Polydamydas, Polidamidas.
who attending the coming of the Athenia^s, provided for the fortificacion of
the said two towns, by one common accord in the best manner and facion, that
they could.

How Brasidas and Perdiccas having takene certene lands from Archibeus,
understanding, that the Illyrians came to overcome them, departed secretly.
And how Brasidas being forsaken by the said Perdiccas and his bend, saved
himself from the Illyriens, and how Perdiccas and Brasidas became enemies.
The.xvii. Chapter.
THis time enduryng, Brasidas and Perdiccas went against Archibebeus into
Lynceste, Linceste
to wytt, Perdiccas with a good bend of Macedonia^s and of other Greeks,
inhabityng the said country: and Brasidas with the rest of the Peloponesia^s,
that he had, and with some Chalcydians, Achanthians and other of the
confederated cities, so that there were footmen in all, about three thousand,
and horsemen, as well Macedonians, as Chalcydians, aboutes a thousand, besides
a great number of strangers, that did follow them. Being than entered into the
country of Archibeus, and understanding that the Lyncestians were imparked and
encamped in the field, they also did the like, and planted their camp
directly against the other, aither of the^ upon an hill, to wytt, the footmen
on high: and the horsemen allow, which horsemen anon came to elkarmusche in
the plain that was bitwene the two hills. And it was not long, till that
Brasidas and Perdiccas caused their footmen to discende from the hille. And
first came to ioigne themself with their horesemen ready to fight. Which
parceyuynge the Lyncestians, they did the lyke^ so that they came to battaille.
But those Lnycestians were sone repoulsed, and put to flight. Wherein there was
a great number of them ^layne. The other retired into the mountaigne. And that
done, Brasidas and Perdiccas, having there raised up their Trophe in sign of
victory, they kept the field two or.iii. days, attendyng the Illyrians. Whom
the said Perdiccas had soulded and waged for to come to his succors. After
that term passed, Perdiccas would that they should have marched further into
the country: and that they should have takenne the towns of Archibeus, But
Brasidas, who feared lest the army of the Athenians should come in the mean
season: and destroy those of Mende, seeing also that the Illynans came not, he
was of opinion to return back. And they, being in this difference, had
news how that the Illyrians, which had takene wages of the said Perdiccas,
had deceived him, and were gone to the saruyce of Archibeus. By occasion
whereof fearyng the coming of the Illyrians: who are warlyke people, they were
both of opynio^ to return back. But they agrede not of the way that they
should keep, so that they departed in the evening pryuely, without conclusion.
And Perdiccas retired fromthence into his camp, which was a little distante
from the same of Brasidas. And the night following, the Macedoniens and the
estrangers in Perdiccas camp, for the fear that they had of the coming of
the said Illyrians: for that, that the bruyte was greater, than the matter
required, ^lyke as it oftentimes chau^ceth, in great Armies) they departed out
of the camp without lyce^ce. And returned into their houses. And though that
Perdiccas at the beginning knew nothing of their deliberacion: yet after that
they had concluded it they came to him, and forced him to depart fromethence
with them. Without that, that he might speak with Brasidas, which had his
camp lodged far enough from him. Who understanding at the break of the
day: the departure of the Macedonians, and the coming of the Illyrians and of
Archibeus, he ordained his army in a quadrant battaille, and enclosed the
foot men lightly armed within the myddelmost, and afterward caused them to
march, to the intent also to have wythdrawen himself. And he with three houndred
of the youngest and of the most galliarde, tarried behind, for to susteigne the
chocke and charge of the currours, and of those, that should come to set upon
him, for to enterteigne and slack or keep back the first, until the other
marched more forewarde, and determined to retire and withdraw himself last of
all. But before the coming of th^nnemyes, he did speak unto his men of war
at few words, in manner followyng.

The exhortation of Brasidas unto his me^ of war.
IF I did not suspecte (Lords Peloponesians) that ye were astonyed of this,
that our friends have habandonned us, and that the strangers, in right great
number, do come for to overcome us: I would not enterprise to exhort you,
another would I teach you, how to use your self, as now I do. But forsomuche
as it seems to me, that for these two causes, which be right great ye be
somewhat abashed: I will speak unto you by manner of declaracion and
exhortyng, what I think herein. That is, that it is convenient for you to be
valyant and hardy in the war, not trustyng always in the aid of your
friends, and allies, but in your oune virtue: and also not to be abashed nor
fear the multitude of your enemies. For ye are borne in a citie^ wherein a
small number of people does govern a great number, and not the greater
number, the less. The which authority and puissance they have acquired by
many victories, which they have had in battaille. And as touching the
estrangers, of whom ye presently be afraid, for that, that ye have not proved
them, ye may well know that they be not very sharp or cruel, as well by
those, against whom, ye have fought for the Macedonians, as also by that,
that I have learned by common reaporte, and that I conceive of them by
conjecture. Now it is so, that those, that think the people, against whom,
they have to do, to be more strong and better warryours than that they ar^e,
when they have known the truth by experience, they afterward gooe more
boldly against them. And likewise if there be any virtue in the enemies,
whereof we be not advertised: let us assaille them the more assuredlye.
Wherefore as touching thies here, that come against us, they be to be feared
of people, that know them not: for the great number that they be of, which
is fearful to behold, and also horrible to here: for the great bruyte, that
they make, as well by cryinge, as also by shaking and clatterynge of their
harness. Which be all but only menaces and threatenynges. But when they come
to fight against the people, that be not thereof abashed, they show themself
not to be such. For they be not ashamed to recuyle and to habandone their
place, when they be straightly charged upon. For that, that they keep no order.
And by this cause it is as much honor for them to fly, as to assault.
Wherefore no man can judge their hardines. For where it is in the liberty of
any one for to fight or for to exchue fighting: truly he may always find
some good excuse for to save himself. And even so, thies being of this sort,
shall find it much more sure and easy for us, to fear us a far of by
their cries and great menacynges, without putting themself in danger: than
for to come nighe for to fight with us. And if it were otherwise, they would
rather come to the fighting, than to make all thies crakes. And for conclusion
ye see all the fear that is to be had of them. Which is great to syghte,
and to the hearing: but in battaille it is very small. Wherefore if ye
susteigne and withstand their power, when they come to charge upon you, and
afterward do retire by little and little in good order, you shall right
shortly comme in faulftie into a sure place. And shall know for the time to
comme, that the nature and manner of this people: is to make a far of, very
great craakes and menaces, and to show great hardines to them, that they do
parceyue to be ready to receive them: and to return and show themself
astonyed, when men ioigne nere unto them, and that they wolle fight hand to
hand. For in this case, they show their valyantnes, in saving and keeping
themself in suertie. After that Brasidas had thus exhorted and anymated his
people, he caused them to march in battaille, retyryng and withdrawyng himself
by little and little. Which parceyued by the strangers, they followed them with
all diligence, making great cries and great bruyte according to their
custom, thinking that they should have fled, and by that mean to have
cut of their way, and destroyedde them. But when they did perceive that
the Greeks did manfullye resist the auante courrers, which aboorded them in
some parts: and that Brasidas, with the bend which he had chosene, endured
and did susteigne all the puissance and strength of the other, whcihe came
for to charge upon them: they were all astonyed. And the Greeks having
withstanded the first charge, did afterward more easily repoulse the
other. And yet nevertheless after that the strangers ceased to assaille
them, they retired by little and little toward the mountaigne, in such wise,
that when Brasidas and they that were with him, were come into a large and
spacious plain, the bend of the strangers, that were ordained for to pursue
them, kept themself a far of. And as touching the other, they followed and
chased the rest of the Greeks, which fled. And those, that they did take out
of the trowpe were slain without mercy. And seeing that Brasidas could not
save himself but by an straicte passage, which was at the entryng of the land
of Archibe^s bitwene two rocks: they came to win it, and bestowed the^self
in the entryng, thynkyng to have stayed him there, and to have taken him. But
he parceyuyng their enterprise, commanded three houndred men, that were with
him that they should with the most diligence that they could without keeping
any order, run to one of the said rocks, to the same, that seemed unto them
most dangerous, and do their best for to win it, before that the enemies
should assemble themself there togiders in a greater number. Which thing they
did so virtuously, valiantly and so readely: that at the aryuall, they chased
the enemies fromthence, which now already had gotten the height and top of
it. By mean whereof, the other Greeks came easily to get the passage. For the
estraungers, seeing their people flying away: which were de^ected and driven
down from the said rock, and also that the Greeks had already gottone the
passage for to save themself: they followed them no further. And by that mean
Brasidas, keeping the height of the mountaignes for to pass in more suertie,
arrived that same day in the town of Armissa. Armissa
Which was in the obeyssance of Perdiccas. At which place being arrived, the
souldiars of Brasidas, for despyte and anger that they had, for that, that
the Macedonians were the first, that brake of, and went their way and had
habandoned and forsaken them: as they found their Oxen yoaked or their other
baguages that they had left in the way (like as it is to be bileued that men
do, when they fly, specially in the night) they vnyoacked the Oxen and took
of their baguages. that, which pleased them. Whereby Perdiccas parceyued first
that Brasidas was his ennemy. Through occasion whereof, he changed
fromthensforwardes the affeccion that he had toward the Peloponesians. And
yet neuerthelas did not fourthwi^h so declare himself, for fear of the
Athenians. But first he searched means for to make his appoynctmente with them.

How the city of Menda was taken by the Athenians, and that same of Scyona
assieged. And certain other things that happened about the end of the year.
The.xviii. Chapter.
When Brasidas was returned to Torona, he found that the Athenians had
recovered and taken Menda again. Whereupon considering that he was not
puissante enough for to defend Pallena, if he had gone thider: he tarried at
the said place of Torona, for to defend it. For in the mean time, that he had
been with Perdiccas, the Athenians issued for to come to the aid of the
Lyncesters, against Menda and against Sciona with fifty ships well
apparailled. Whereof there was ten of Chio, carrying a thousand men well
armed. Of their country six houndred Archers being Thraciens. And a thousand
other estrangers, togiders with a certain number of footmen, light armed:
whereof were Capitains, Nicyas, Nycias.
the son of Nyceratus, and Nycostratus, Nicostratus.
son of Dyotrephus Who being departed from Potydea with the said army, when
they were foranempste the temple of Neptunus, they went directly against
Menda. But those of the city, parceyuynge them coming, and having three
houndred men of Scyona with the garnisone of Peloponesians for their aid:
issued fourth of the city all in armure, to the number of seven houndred in
all, under the conducte of Polydamydas. Polydamydas.
And camped themself upon a little mountaigne which seemed unto them to be a
place very sure. And though that Nycyas, with six skoore men of Methone and
three skoore of the most gentle compaignions Athenians with all the archers
did their best to deiecte and remove them from the said place, thynkyng to
mount by certain pathwayes of the said mountaigne: yet he was so oppressed
with shot, that he was cons^rayned to retire. And Nicostratus, that would
have mounted by an other side with the rest of the army, was so sturdely
repoulsed, that it failed very little, but that all the army of the Athenians
had been put out of order and destroyed that same day. Whereupon parceyuyng
that they could not have the better against the Mendyans they retired into
their camp before the town, and the Mendyans in the night time withdrewe
themself into yt. The morrow following, the Athenyans went to ouercomme the
land of Sciona: and pyllaged all the villages, all the houses, and all the
feldes, round about the town so long, as the day endured, without that
those, that were within durst issue fourth, forsomuche as there was certain
dissension amongst them. The night followyng, the three houndred Scyonyans,
that were within Menda returned into their houses. And the day being come,
Nycyas, with the moytie of the army: went afreshe to overcome the land of the
said Scionyans. And Nycostratus with the rest came for to lodge himself before
the gates of ye town on the highest side, which is leadyng toward Potidea.
On the other side Polydamydas, who was within and had the defense of that same
quarter with the cytizeins and a number of estrangers being Peloponesians,
anymated and encouraged his people and did putt them in battaille, for to issue
fourth against the Athenians. But there was one of the town that did speak
against him, saying that it was not mete nor convenient for to issue fourth
another to fight. Wherewith he was so angry that he rushed upon him and rudely
used him. Which seen, they of the town, could not endure him. But did take
all armure for to charge upon the Peloponesians and them that were with them.
Who, seeing the furye, did fly, as well for fear of the people of the town, as
also of the Athenians (unto whom, in thies enterchances, the gates were
opened,) doubting that it had been arra^ne conspired against them. And they
that might, withdrewe themself into the castle, whereof they were seized in
times passed. In the mean time, the Athenians entered into the town (for
Nycias was already returned for to overcome it) and they did pyllage it
utterly. Thinking that the gates were not opened unto them, another by traictie
nor by general deliberation, but aither by fortune or else by particular
intelligence. And although the capytains had enough to do for to defend, that
they should not kylle all those, that were within, yet neuerthelas the bruyte
being appeased, the self capytaines commanded the citizeins, that they should
take again the gouerna^ce of the town, like as in times passed, they had been
accustomed. And of themself, that they should do justice on them that had been
cause of the revolt and rebellion. And afterward they enclosed the^, that
were within the castle with walls that extended unto the sea on al sides, and
therein did put gardes and souldiars. And afterward departed fromethence with
the rest of tharmy against Scyone. Against whom, they of ye town issued
fourth before their coming, with the Peloponesians, which they had, and lodged
themself upon a little hille, which was very nighe unto the wall, for that,
that without taking of it, men could not well assiege the town. But the
Athenyans did assaille them so lively, that they dislodged them. And by that
mean, having raised up their Trophe there in sign of victory: they laid
siege unto the towne^ and determined to enclose it on al sides. But they being
occupied in that work, the Peloponesyans^ that were within the castle of
Menda issued fourth by night. And in despite of them that held them assieged:
they passed by the sea coaste, and the more part came through the camp of the
Athenyans so that they entredde into Scyone. In thies enterfaictes^ Perdiccas
for despyte of Brasidas, made his appoynctment with the capytaynes Athenyans,
which thing he had determined from the return that the said Brasidas made
from Lynceste, having a good bend of Thessalyens his friends, by whom he was
always before time sarued. And for that, that Nycias required him, that in
declaring himself that he would do some good saruice for the Athenians, and
also for his own comoditie he would well empesche that the Peloponesians
should no more enter into his land, he denied passaige unto Isthagoras
Lacedemonyan, Isthagoras.
who conducted the army by land of the said Peloponesians for to ioigne
himself with Brasidas, and furthermore defended him, that he should not take
into his saruice, any of the Thessalyens. But that notwithstanding, that same
Isthagoras and Amnenias and Arysteus with him, Amenius.

Aristeus.


who were sent by the Lacedemonyans unto Brasidas for to see in what estate,
the cases were: did pass and came unto Brasidas, having in their co^paignie
certain young parsones. And though that it was defended by thordena^ces of the
town, that they, which had charge of any place: should no co^mytt it to any
other whatsoever parsone: yet neuerthelas, they appoyncted Clearidas, Clearidas.
son of Cleonymus to the keeping of Amphipolis, and to Torona Tellidas,
Telidas.
the son of Hegesander. The same somer, the Thebayns bett down the walls of
the Thespians, chargyng them that they had confederacion with the Athenyans,
which thing they were minded in times passedde to have done. But than yt was
more easy for them, for that, that in the battaille, which they had had
against the Athenyans, the more part of their young people were slain. Also
in that same somer, the temple of Juno, which was at Argos, was burned through
fault of Chrysis, Chrysis.
that was than Abb^sse. Who, going to light a lamp nigh to the crowns of the
goddess, fell a sleep: so that before she did awake: all was in fyerre. By
reasone whereof, fearing that the Argiues would do her some displaisir: in the
night time, she fled fromethence into Philontus. Whereupon the Argiues
according to their laws and ordenances did depose her, and in her place did
put one Phenides, Phayus
notwithstanding that the said Chrysis had been there presidente eighte
years and an halfe^ as the war had enduredde. Aboutes the end of somer,
the Athenyans having enuironedde Scyona with a wall on all sides, they did
put within yt good garnysonnes, and after retournedde unto Athens. The winter
followynge, was peasable bitwene the Athenyans and the Peloponesians, by mean
of the trefues. But the Mantynyens and the Tegetes, had battaylle togiders,
ayther having the aid of his allies, nigh unto Laodicum which is in the
land of Oristide, Laodicum.
of the which battaylle the victory was uncertain. For the right poyncte or
wynge of ayther party was brokene and put to flight. By occasion whereof,
aither of the said parties raised and set up their Trophe in tokene of
victory, and fromthence did send their spoylles, that they had gotten of
thennemyes, to be offered at the temple of Delphos. For there was also many
dead, aswelle on the one part, as of the other. And before, that yt might be
parceyued who had the victory or better, the night departedde them.
Neuerthelas the Tegetes kept the camp all that same night and did set up
(even at the same hour) their trophe upon that self place. And the Mantynyans
retired into Bucolion. Bucolion.
And within a certain time after, did ^ett up theirs dyrectly against the
other. About the end of winter, Brasidas enterprisedde secretly to have taken
Potidea. Having some intelligence and confederacio^ of some that were within.
And he came by night unto the wall, and raised up his ladders for to mount,
before that they of the town parceyued it. For he had espyeall there that when
the watch was changed, he that had the keeping of that same quarter of the
wall removed to go to an other place. Which thing Brasidas understood by
the sown of a little belle, which he of the watch did ringe departing from
his place, and carried it into the other quarter. Whereby whilst he was in
remouyng: and before that he was come again into his place, the ladders were
raised up. But as Brasidas would have mounted, the matter was perceived.
Whereby he was constrained to retire that self night with his army. Thus
ends the winter of that same year, which was the nyneth of the war, that
Thucydides has wryttone.

And so ends the fourth book.
How the Athenians by the conducte of Cleon did take the city of Torone
from the Peloponesians. And of one voyage that Pheax Athenyen made into Italy
and into Sycile. The first Chapter.
THE somer followyng ended the first year of the trefues, to wit, the day
of the feast of Pythie. During which time, the Athenyans chased out of the
Isle of Delos, those, that therein inhabyted, for that, that they thought, for
some ancient consideracion, that they were not good lyuers. And that there
rested, but only that, for ^accomplyshe the purgacion of the place, whereof we
have spokene herebifore. And that having taken away the sepulcres and
monumentes of the dead, they should also chase fromethence the living euylle
lyuers, for to please and pacefye the gods. And they, that were dryuene
fromethence: repaired into the town Atramyteum, Atramittu^.
in the country of Asie, to whom Pharmaces did give place for to inhabitte,
Pharnaces.
as they came thider. After that the trefues was ended, Cleon went with thyrty
ships into Thrace. Having in the same ships, twelve houndredde footemenne
all well armed, being all Athenyans, and three houndred horsemen with a great
number of allyes^ by consent of the Athenyans, whom the said Cleon had
thereunto inducedde and perswadedde. And being aryuedde before Scyona: which
was yet besieged, he did take a certene number of the garnisone which was at
the siege, and went therewith to the port of Colophonians, which was not
far distante from the city of Torone. And understanding by certain
fugityues, that Brasidas was not there, and that those, that he had left
there, could not resist his puislance: he descendedde from the ships and
came by land against the city, having left twentye of his ships, for to
enuirone and enclose the port. And he went directly against the new wal^les
and rampars that Brasidas had made, for to enclose the suburbs within the
town. And to the intent that it should have been all one forte, he did
beat down the old walls that deuydedde the town from the suburbs. So the
Athenyans did comme at the aryualle to give the assault to the walls.
Against whom Pasilelidas, who was left capytayne within for to defend the
town, resisted as well as he might with the people that he had. But seeing
that he could not preuaylle, and also fearing that those which were in the
ships about the port, should enter into the town by that same quarter,
which was holy vnfurnyshedde: and by that mean lest that he should be
takene both before and behind: he retired with the most diligence that he
might into the oldetowne. But the people of the ships that were landed at the
port, had already gottone the said town: and those that did give the
assault at the new wall, followed him fyerslye. And entered foot for foot at
his taylle into the old city, over the rubbys^he of the old wall that was
broken down. And so they did slaye a great number of Lacedemonyans and of
Cytizeins that they encountredde making defense, and did take one part of
theyme prisoners, among whom was Pasitelidas, that was the capytayne. Now
had Brasidas been aduertisedde of the coming of the Athenyans and came to
the succors of Torona with the most diligence that he might. Buc being in the
way aduertisedde of the taking of the town, he returned. And faylled to come
in time unto the succors, but the space of Iourneying of foorty stades or
thereaboutes. The Athenyens having gottone the town, did take the weomen
and children into saruy^ude and bondage, and as touching the men as well
Lacedemonyans as those of the town and other of the country of Chalcyde, they
sent them all to Athens, which were about seven houndred. Whereof the
Lacedemonyans were afterward rendered by appoynctmente, and the other were
delivered unto the Olynthiens for to change with like number of their people,
which were prysonners. In the self time the Beotians did take by trahisoune
the wall of Panacte, Panactum.
which was of the confynes and border of the Athenyans. And Cleon having
left a good garnysonne within Torona, went by sea unto Athon nyghe unto
Amphipolis. A^hos.
And Pheax sone of Erasistratus being thosene by the Athenyans capytayne of an
other army by sea, Pheax.
with two compaignyons went into Italye and into Sycile with two ships
only. And the occasyon wherefore they were sent thider was this. After that
the Athenyans were departedde out of Sycile: by the appoynctmente that the
Syciliens had made among themself, like as is before rehearsed: the
Leonty^s, had withdrawin into their city a great number of people, by
occasion whereof, the people perceiving themself so increased determynedde for
to part the lands of the town by the hedde, whereof the rychest and
pryncipalle men being aduertysedde, they chasedde the greatest party of the
common people, out of the city. Which went fromethence, some hider, some
thider, and left the city as void and desolate. And son after did render
theymeselfe to the Syracu^ains. who receyuedde them into their city as
citizeins. But afterward some among them whom it aggreued to be there: went
into their country: and soubdainely did take, one quarter of the city of
Leonee named Phoces and one other place without the town in the terrytorry
thereof, Phoces.
named Bricinias, Bricinnias.
which was very strong. And thider many of the exiles did comme for to
render themself and did defend themself within the walls the best that they
might, against them of the city. The Athenyans being thereof advertised, sent
the said Pheax and did give him charge, for to practice their allies and other
of the said country to dymynishe and abate the puissance of the Syracusains,
which daily increased, and for to succoure the Leontyns. Pheax than being
aryued in the country: did by his practique get the Camerins and the
Acragantyns. But afterward being comme to Gela and finding the causes
dysposed contrary to his opinyon, Gela.
he passed no further, knowing that he should do nothing there. But in his
retournynge alonge out of Sycile, he comforted them only with words,
passing those of Catana and those of Brycinnias, Catana.
and afterward returned fromethence into his country. But before, he had
as well at his coming into Sycile, as at his return, practiced certain
cities of Italye for to make alliance with the Athenyans. And moreover passing
alonge out of Sycile at his return he encou^tred certene citizens of Locres,
who returned by sea from Messana, Messana.
fromewhence they were dryuene by the Messanyans after that they had
continued a certene time masters of the city, by means of a sedicion and
mutynerye, that chansed in the city, soon after the appoynctment of the
Sycilians, by occasion whereof one of the parties parceyuing it self to be the
more feoble, called the Locryans, unto his aid. Who sent thider a good number
of their citizeins, which were by this mean masters of the city, for a
certene time through the aid of the part, that had calledde theyme thider,
but specially they were dryuene from thence and returned home, when Pheax
did encounter, Pheax.
theyme, as is above said. Who did them, no displeasure, forsomuche as in
passing his journey: he had appoyncted and made ally^nce with them of the
city of Locres in the name of the Athenia^s. Although that at the appoincmente
which had been before time made among the Sycilians, they alone had
refused the alliance of the said Athenyans, another yet at this present had made
yt, had it not been that they had than war against them o^ Itone and
Mele, Itones. Melei.
which were their neighbors and burgeoses. And sone after P^^ax arryuedde at
Athens.

How Brasidas had a victory against Cleon and the Athenyans nigh unto
Amphipolis, wherein both the capytaynes were slain. The.ii. Chapter.
Torona
CLeon at his departing from Torona, took his journey toward Amphipolis, and
passing his journey at his coming fourth of Eione he takes by assault
Stagirus in the country of Andria. Eione.

Stagirus.


And he thought to have takene Galepsus in the country of Thasians, Galepsus.
but he failled thereof. And so returned to Eione. Being at which place, he
commanded Perdiccas, that insuyng the alliance, which he had lately made with
the Athenians, he should come unto him with his puissance. And the like he also
commanded in Thrace unto Polles king of Odomantins, who than had a great
bend of Thracians to his souldeours, whose coming Cleon attended at the said
place of Eione. Which thing being come to the knowlaige of Brasidas, he with
his army did come for to lodge nygh unto Cerdyliu^. Cerdiliu^
Which is an high and strong place in the country of Argilians on the other
side of the River very nyghe Amphipolis. Out from which place all things
that his enemies did, might easelye been seen: like as they also might see
him. Cleon (euene as Brasidas thought) marched with his army against
Amphipolis, not passing annye thing of Brasidas, who had but a thousand
five houndredde Thracyans, huyred souldyars, togiders with the Edoniens all
well armedde, and a certene number of horsemenne, as well Myrcyniens as
Chalcydians, besides the thousand that he had sent into Amphipolis, and
they might be in all two thousand footmen and three houndredde horsemen, of
the which he did take a thousand five houndred and mounted to Cerdyliu^,
and he sent the other into Amphipolis to the succors of Clearydas. As
touching Cleon, he kept himself stylle without enterprisyng any thing,
until that he was constrained by the mean of that which Brasidas thought
would happene, that is, that his people should be displeased to tarry there
without faightynge, and reputed Cleon to be slack and of small knowlaige of
war, in comparisonne of Brasidas, whom they esteemed to be an hardye man and
a good Capatayne. And somuche the more, for that that they were vnwyllynglye
comme with him and against their wylles. Whereupon Cleon, understanding their
murmuratio^ and to the intent that they should be no further displeased to be
there: he led them from the same place wherein they were, all in battaylle
raye, in the self order that he used at Pylus, trusting that he should speed
well. For he also thought that the enemies durst not comme for to fight
against him. But he sayedde that he descendedde with his camp only for to
see the place and yet neuerthelas he attendedde a great strength, not somuche
for hope of vaynquishynge, in case he were constraynedde to fight, as for to
enuyrone the city and to assaille yt. Being than come with his army which
was fayer and puissant very nyghe to Amphipolis, he lodgedde himself upon the
top of an hylle, fromewhence he might see the country round about. And so
marked very diligently the Scyte of the city, chiefly from the cost of
Thracie, how the ryue^ of Scrym onie kept his course there, which he found
for his aduanntage: for that, that he thought, that he might return
fromthence when he would without faightyng. And on the other side, he did see
no man within the city, another those that entered another that issued or came
fourth of the gates. Which were all lockedde and shut in. Wherefore he
repentedde himself very soar, and thought that he had committed a great
fault: for that, that he had not brought his Engines of artillery for to
battre the town. For he coniectured that if he had had them there, he
might easily have takene it. When Brasidas understood that the Athenyans were
dislodgedde, he likewise dislodgedde from Cerdylium and entered with all his
bend into Amphipolis. Without making any semblante for to be willing ayther
to issue fourth or for to fight against the Athenyans, for that, that he
reputedde himself not puissante for to do it. Not only somuche for the
number of people, whereof he had well nygh as many as they: but also for the
preparacion and for the sort of the people. For in the army of the Athenyans,
there was all the force of the Lemnyans and of the Imbryans. Wherefore he
determined for to put in ure a cautell for to assaille them. For, to make a
moustre of his people although that they were in su^ficiente number and well
armed, unto the enemies ^he ^houghte that ^t should proffi^t him nothing, but
rather should give courage to the enemies for to despise and contemp^e them.
So he appointed for the guard and defense of the cy^ie unto Clearidas one
houndred and sy^^^e men, and with the remanante, he deliberated for to assaille
the Athenians, before that they should depart fromthence, thinking that they
should be more easy to be overcome being separated from their succors, than
if he tarried till their said succors did come unto them. But before the
executyng of his enterprise, he minded for to declare it well unto his
souldiars, and also for to exhort them manfully to do and follow it. And
therefore caused them all to assemble togiders. And afterward did speak unto
them in this manner.

The narration of Brasidas unto his souldiars.
Lords Peloponesians, forsomuche as ye be come out of a land: and country,
which for the hardynes, generosite and noblenes of the inhabitantes^ has
always lived in liberty and that ye, which be Doryans have to fight against
the Ionyans, whom ye have always found more feoble than your self, It is not
needful that I use many words, but only to show you, the facion and manner
that I have determined to keep for to issue fourth against my said enemies.
To thintente that considering that I am wyllyng to approve and essay fortune
with a small number of people, without taking all our puyssance: ye shall not
thereof be astonyed, fearing to be the weaker. For I conjecture that our
enemy, who despyseth us, thinking that we dare not enterprise to come to
fight against him, is amounted in that high place only for to see the
country: and keeps himself without any order as is all things assured. And
it happens oftentimes, that he, which diligently marketh therrour and fault
of his enemy, and determyneth manfully for to assaille him, not in ranked
battaille another in an appoyncted journey: but so as he parceyueth his
advantage, comes to the effect of his enterprise both to his honor and
proffitt. For also those secrett and soubdayne eskermouches that be made in
war, whereby specially a man deceives his enemies and does service and
succor to his friends, do give and attribute great glory unto the
enterprisers. Wherefore in the mean time that they be thus in disorder and
that they be in doubt of nothing, and before that they dissodge themself
fromthence (which thing I think that they be willing to do^ rather than to
tarry, I am determined to give the charge upon theyme, with this number of
people that I have, whylest they be in this waueryng. And in doubt what they
may do, before that they be resolved among themself, and for to enter if I
may: into the myddel of their army. And thou Clearidas, when thou shall see
that I shall be among them, and that thou parceyuest that they be astonyed and
afraid, opnene thou the gates of the town, and issue fourth soubdainely on
the other side, with the number of people, that thou shall than have, as well of
the town as estrangers, and come with the most diligence that thou may, to
the reskue, for to rushe and pass through them. For I do think that in this
doing they shall be putt in great fear. Forsomuche as they which come
suddenly afreshe unto a conflict, cause always more dread and fear, than
they which be in battle before. Wherefore for thy parte^, show that thou art
a man of sparte. And you our allies follow him manfullye: and think that
the noble fayghtynge consystethe in having good couraige, to fear to receive
shame, and in obeyinge to your Capytaynes. And that if this present day ye
show your self as valiante men, ye shall acquyre and get liberty, and
shall be from hencefourthewarde called compaignyons and allies of the
Lacedaemonians. And that doing otherwise, though you may eskape, to be all
slain, and your town destroyed. or at the best that may happene, ye shall
be in moore grievous seruytude than hitherto ye have been. And also shall be cause
for to let, that the other Greeks shall not recover their liberty.
Understandinge than of what ymportance this battaylle is, be myndefull to show
yourself people of virtue, and I wol declare for my part, that I can as well
fight being nygh and at hand stroackes, as I can exhort and encourage other
being a far of. Brasidas having thus anymated his people, he puts them
in order for to issue fourth with him, and likewise those, that should comme
afterward with Clearidas out of the gate of Thrace, as is before said. But
forsomuche as he had been seen by the enemies, when he descended from
Cerdylium, and also after that he was entered into the towne^ specially in
making his sacrefyce in the temple of the goddess Pallas, which is without
the town very nyghe unto the walls, Cleon was advertised that there was some
enterprise in hand, as he was in markynge the country round about the
town, like as has been before said. Which thing might easily be known
as well for that that it might clearly and plainly be seen that they that were
within the town, did arm themself, as also for that, that a man might see at
the yssuinge of the gates the marchinges and the traicte of the people and of
horses that issued fourth. whereof ye same Cleon was greatly astonished, and
soubdaynely descended from the place wherein he was, for to see, if it were so.
And after that he had knowin that it was the verytie, having already
determined not to fight until his succors, which he attended and looked for,
should have been arrived: and considering that if he did retire by the cost
that he had marked and devised, he should tomuche clearly been seen, he caused
a sig^e of retraytte to be geuene, and afterward did command his people,
that they should begin to retire from of the side of the left poyncte (for
on the othere poincte it was not possible) and that they should make toward
Eiona. But seeing that those of the said left poynct did march to slackly, he
caused them of the right poyncte wherein he was, to turn into that part, and
there he himself went, leaving by that mean the myddell of the battaille
nakedde and discovered, making the most dylygence that he might for to
retire. During this time Brasydas knowing that it was time to march,
parceyuinge specially the enemies to waver, he said unto them that were with
him, and likewise unto the other, thies people woll not tarry, for ye see how
their spears and their heddes remove to and from, and never people did that,
which were wylling to fight, Therefore open the gates, and let us with great
couraige charge upon them with the most diligence that we may. And fourthwyth
the gates were opened in that quarter, that he had appoyncted, as well those
same of the town as the same of the rampare and of the long wall, and issued
with his people in a great course, keeping the straight way, where a man may
presently see the Trophee in token of victory raised up. And so he rushed into
the middell of the battle of the ennemys, which he found holy astonyed for
the disorder and sore afraid for the hardynes of their enemies. In such
sort, that he did putt the^ incontynently to flight. And sone after, Clearydas
issued fourth by the gate of Thrace, like as he had been appoyncted, who
rushed in on the other syde^ whereof the Athenyans parceyuinge themself so
soubdaynely and contrary to their expectacyon assailed on all parts, were yet
more afraied, insomuch that they that were in the left poyncte, who had takene
the way of Eione, did fly wyhoute annye order. In this mean time Brasydas
charginge upon the right poinct, was soore hurt, so that he did fall to the
earth, but before that the Athenyans did parceyue yt, he was releuedde by
his men that were about him. And yett neuerthelas the right poyncte of the
said Athenyans kept it self most fyrme. But when Cleon did parceyue, that
it was no time to tarry annye longer, he fled, and so was encountredde by a
footeman of the enemies Myrciniens, who did slaye him. And yet neuerthelas
those that were with him stood in their defense against Clearydas at the
mountyng of the hill, and there they did fight valiantly, until that the
horsemen and fotemen lightly armed, as well Marcynians as Chalcydes came upon
the^, who with strokes of^ shot constrained them to forsake the place and to
fly. And by that mean all the hooste of the Athenyans was brokenne, and
fled away some one way and the other on the other side: every one the best
that he could toward the mountaignes. And they that could eskape retired to
Eiona. After that Brasidas was brought again into the city, before that he
rendredde the sprytte, he knew that he had had the victory and lived not
long after. As touching Clearydas he pursued the enemies as far as he could
with the rest of the souldiars. After he came again into the place of the
battaille, and when they had spoylledde the dead, they set up their
Trophee in the same place in tokenne of vyctorye. And that done they all
accompaygnyedde the body of Brasidas with the habillementes and othere
furnyture and buryedde yt within the city before the markett place, which at
this present is there. In which place, the Amphipolit^ins causedde
afterward to be edyfyedde for him a right honnorable sepulcre and a Chapel
as for a saynct. And decrede and ordained sacrifices unto him as sayncts had:
with tourneys and yearly honnors. And also they attrybuted unto him the title,
to have founded and peopled the city. And all thing that was found by
writing or by payntinge and grauynge, making memory of Agnon, who had been
their founder, they took away and defaced, reputing Brasidas to be their
delyuerer. And they did the rather this thing for to please the
Lacedemonyans, for fear that they had afterward of the Athenyans. For they
also thought yt moore their proffitt and their honnour for to exhybitte those
honnours unto Brasidas, than unto Agnon, for the enmytie that they had
against the Athenyans. Unto whom neuerthelas they did render their dead
corpses. which were found aboutes six houndredde. where of the othere were
found, but seuenne. By mean that this was not properly a battaylle, but a
soubdayne onsett, wherein there was no great reesistence. Aftere that the
corpses were rendredde, the Athenyans retournedde by sea unto Athenes and
Clearydas with his people abodde in the City for to give order in the
gouernemente thereof. This overthrow happened about the end of Summer. In
which self time Ramphias and Authocaridas Lacedemonyans conductedde by sea
nine houndred men of war into the country of Thrace, Ramphias.

Autocharydas.


for to renforce and strengthene the army of the Peloponesians. And they being
arrived in the city of Heraclee in the contreye of Trachine, Thrachinis.
whiles they were geuynge order for the affairs of the town, had news
thereof.

How the Lacedaemonians made peace for themself and their allies and
afterward how they made alliance among themself without the othere.
The.iii. Chaptre.
IN the beginning of winter those, that were with Ramphias passedde furthere
unto the mount Pierie, which is in Thessale. But they of the country denied
them their passage. By occasion whereof and also having understand the death
of Brasidas to whom that bend should have been brought, they returned home.
For they also thought, that yt was no time to renew the war, considering
that the Athenyans were returned and that they were not people for to
parfaicte and acheue the enterpryses of Brasidas. And on the othere side they
did know that at their departure from Sparta, the Lacedemonyans were more
enclynedde to peace, than unto war. And in effect after the conflycte at
Amphipolis and the return of Ramphias from Thessale, there was no exploicte
of war bitwene the Athenyans and the Lacedemonyans, for both parties desired
rather peace than war. To wytt, the Athenyans by cause of the loss that they
had had at Delos furst, and sone after at Amphipolis. By reasone whereof they
esteemed not their force, so much as they did at the beginning when it was spoken
of the appoynctment, which they refused, for that that they trusted tomuche in
their prosperytie, and also greatelye feared lest their allies seeing their
case and chance to declyne and decay, should reuolte and rebelle, and therefore
repented the^self heartily that they did not make peace fourthwyth after the
victory, that they had at Pylus. On the othere side the Lacedemonyans desired
yt, for so much as it chanced otherwise in the war, than fro the beginning
they thought yt would have done. For they did think that wasting the
terrytorye of the Athenyans, in short time they should have destroyed them and
brought them under. And also for the great loss which they had made at
Pylus. which was the greateste that they of Sparte had ever had. And somuche
the more, for that that the enemies that were within Pylus and within Chitera
ceased not to ouerronne and pillage their country there next adioygninge. And
besides that, their sklaues oftentimes rendredde themself to the said enemies,
and also were contynuelly in fear, lest the other would do the like, by
encouraigemente of those, that were gone fro them. There was also an other
reasone, that is, that the trefues which the said Lacedemonyans had made for
thirty years with the Argyues should shortly expyre, the which they were not
minded to continue, except the said Argyues would render to them the land of
Cynuria. Cinuria
And also they parceyued theymselfe not to be puissant inoughe for to make
war both against the Athenyans and against them, and somuche the moore for
that they fearedde lest some of the cities that did take their party in the
country of Peloponese, would turn from their side, like as afterward it
happened. For thies respects and reasons both the one and the other party
desired to have peace. And chiefly the Lacedemonyans for to recover the
prysonners which were taken in the Islande. who had been the cause, wherefore
(even from the beginning that they were taken) the said Lacedemonyans procured
and labored the peace. But the Athenyans being pufte up and set in pride
with their prosperytie, would in no wise hear thereof, hoping to do greater
things, before the war should be ended. But after yt they were ouerthrowin at
Delos, the Lacedemonyans, thinking that at the self hour, they would have
been more tractable, accorded the trefues of one year. mindding, duringe that
same, to entreat the peace orelles a longer trefues. And aftere that,
happenedde the ouerethrowe of Amphipolis, which helpedde well to the peace.
And somuche moore that Brasidas and Cleon were therein slayne^ who were the
pryncipall and chief that empeschedde the peace on boeth sides. To wit,
Brasidas for that, that he had good fortune in war, whereby he hopedde the
increase of honnoure. And Cleone for that, that he thought that his faults
and offenses should be moore manyfeste in time of peace, than in time of
war, and thatt men woolde not give somuche faith unto his inventions and
euylle opynyons, if yt were peace. Whereupon thoose two being faylledde,
remaynedde the two pryncypall men of two Cities, whereof aythere of theyme
greatelye desyredde peace, hoping by mean thereof for to obteigne the
pryncipalytie in the said Cities. To wit, Plistoanax son of Pausanias
king of Lacedemonye, Plistoan^x.
and Nycias son of Niceratus Athenian, Nycias.
which was the best Capytayne that they for that time had for the war,
and the same that had done the best feats. wherefore he thought yt best
for to make peace, in this mean time, that the Athenyans were in good
prosperytie, to the intent that he had no cause of lose (by annye
inconvenience) his good fortune, and also that he himself and the Cytezeins
might be fromthence fourth in rest and tranquillity. And that he might
leave his good renomme aftere him, that he never did nor counsailledde the
thing, whereby the City could find him euille. which thing might chance
otherewise, if causes were commyttedde to the adventure of war: the dangers
whereof be eschuedde by the peace. And as touching Plistoanax he desyredde yt,
for that, that he was suspectedde from the beginning of the war, that he
returned fromthence and had brought again the army of the Peloponesyans
out of the countreye and terrytorye of the Athenyans. By mean whereof all the
damages that were afterward happenedde to the Lacedemonyans, were imputedde
unto him. And furthermore he was chargedde that he and Aristoteles his brother
had entysedde a dyuyneresse that was at Delphos, Aristocles.
and pronouncedde the aunsweres of the god Apollo, so that she in the name of
that god and as inspyredde by him, had answeredde unto the Messengers which
the Lacedemonyans had sent thider for to understand and know the will and
opinion of the god touching the war, in this manner and substance. The
discente and lignage of Jupiter being half gods, should bring again
their generatyon, which is in an other land, into their own: orelles should
labor the land with coultours of silver. And this did he, forsomuche as
he was bannyshedde into Lycea, for the suspytion that was had of him that he
had takenne monney for to return out of the countreye of Athenes, in which
place of Lycea he taryedde a long time. But by mean of the said answer of
the god, he was calledde again and received into the City with the honnours
that were accustomably made unto kings at their entering. Now for to abolishe
and take away this infamy, he heartily desired peace, for he thought that
c^ssynge the inconuenyences of the war, no occasion should be had for to
reproach another to impute the said things unto him: specyallye the Cytezeins
having recoueredde their prysonners. And that as long as the war
enduredde, the murmuratyon should always continue. For it was neuere
otherewyse, but when the people do parceyue the incommodytyes and
aduersytyes of war, they murmr always against the Princes and Rulers. So
this parliament and treaty of peace endured all the winter. And when yt came
about the end of winter, the Lacedemonyans made semblant for to reyse up a
great army, and sent through all the confederatedde cities for to warn
the^ that they should make their appare^l and preparation for to begin the
war again at the coming in of the spring time, for to put the Athenyans
into greater fear, and to give them occasyon for to conde^cende and agree to
the peace. By mean whereof, aftere many talks and disputations, the p^ace
was concludedde bitwene them in this substance, that ayther of the parties
should render that which he had takene from the other, resarued that the
Athenyans woolde reteigne Nysea, which was granted to them for that that
they demanded that Platea should have been restored unto them, and the
Thebains said to the contrary yt they had not taken yt by force, but that they
of the town did give yt to them with their good will. And the Athenyans did
say the like of Platea. ^or this cause all the confederates being assembled
by the Lacedemonyans for this matter, they were content that the peace should
be concluded, and in making the same, that Platea should remaigne to the
Thebains, and Nisea to the Athenyans. Except the said Beotians, the
Corynthians, the Elians and the Megarens, which were not content with this
peace. But that notwithstanding, by common decree, yt was concluded and sworn
by the Ambassadors of the Athenyans at Sparta, and afterward confyrmed by
the co^federed cities on both parties. which were wyllinge to keep yt in the
form and substance that follows.

The form of the peace bitwene the Lacedemonyans and the Athenyans.
FUrste as concerning the publyque and common temples, that yt be liefull to
every man to go unto them at his pleasure and without any empeschement, and
therein make his requests and consultatio^s unto them that have been accustomed
and that men may send thider ^or that purpose all messengers asw^llty sea as
by land. And as touching the temple of Apollo, which is in Delphos, that
those that have the charge thereof shall en^oy^ their laws, pryueleges,
customs, lands, rentes and revenues, even so as they have accustomedde. Item
that the peace shall be fyrme and sure without deceit, fraud or male engyne,
bi^wene the Athenyans and the Lacedemonyans, and their friends, allies and
confederates for the space of fyfty years. And if there chance anny
controversy or question bitwene them that it shall be voided and determined by
justice, and not by war. And also it shall be sworn by oath on both parties by
such conuenaunt, that though the Lacedemonyans and their confederates do
render Amphipolis unto the Athenyans, yet that the inhabitants of that same
city and of the other that shall be restoredde to the said Athenians, may, if
they think good, depart fromthence with their baguage and goods, whider they
woll, and that those cities which Aristides has made tribu^a^ies shall be free
and frank. Item that it shall not be lauful to the Athenia^s nor their allies
another to go nor to send in arms to the said cities that shall be rendered unto
them for to do them hurt, as long as they woll pay the accustomed trybute.
And those shall be thies cities that do follow, Argilus, Argilus
Stagirus, Stagirus.
Acanthus, Acanthus^
Scolus, Scolus
Olynthus and Spartalus, Olynthus.

Spartalus.


the which remaynedde newter without being allied another con^edered to the
Athenyans another Lacedemonyans, resarued that if the Athenyans could induce
and persuade them by good means, and without force and constraynte to be their
allies, it should be lawful for them to do it. Item that the Cyuernyans, the
Sanyens and the Syngyens may abide in their cities, euene as the Acanthians
and the Olynthians do. Ite^ that the Lacedemonyans shall render to the
Athenyans Panactum, Panactum.
and the Athenyans to the Lacedemonyans, Coriphasum^ Coryphasum
Cythera, Cythera
Metones, Metones.
Pteleus, Teleus
and A^alanta^ A^alata
togyders with all the prysonners that they have of theirs, aswelle in the
cyt^e of Athenes, as elleswhere in their land and power, and also those,
which they hold assieged at Scyone, aswelle Lacedemonyans as Peloponesyans,
or of their friends of whatsoever part they may be, and generally al those
that Brasidas had sent thy der. And moreover that if there were anny
Lacedemonyan or of their allies in prysonne for whatsoever matter within the
City of Athenes or other place of their power, that he shall be relesed. And
that the Lacedemonyans and also their confederates shall do the like on their
party to the Athenyans and their allies. And as touching the Scyonyans, the
Toronyans: the Sermylians, and the other cities, which the Athenyans do hold,
they shall consulte togiders and shall thereupon deuyse whatte shall be done with
them, and shall cause them to make oath to the Lacedemonyans, and to the other
confederatedde Cities. And boeth the Cities shall make yt the one to the
othere, like as they have accustomed, to wit the greateste that they may
make, conteignynge in effect that they shall keep the said Chapyters and
treaties justly and purely. And the same oath shall be renewed every year, and
shall be put and wryttonne in tables of Stoane at Olympus, at Pythye in the
distreacte and within the City of Athenes, and likewise in the City of
Lacedemonye in the place namedde, Amycleus. Item if there be annye thing that
is not determynedde, which neuerthelas shall afterward be found reasonable
for boethe parties: that same may be addedde by the Athenyans and
Lacedemonyans. And this appoynctemente was acceptedde at Sparte, when
Plistolas did govern and was chief offycer of the town, the.xxvi day of
the month Arthemesius. And it was accepted at Athenes when Alceus did govern
the.xv. day of the month Elaphenolius. And on the bihalfe of the
Lacedaemonians did swear unto it, Plistolas, Domagestus, Ehion, Metagenes,
Acanthus, Daithus, Isthagoras, Philocaridas, zeuridas, Antippus, Tellis,
Alcinadus, Empedias, Menus and Lamphias. And for the Athenyans, Lampon,
Istimonius, Nicias, Laches, Enthymedus, Procles, Pythodorus, Agnon, Myrtillus,
Thrasidas, Theogenes, Aristocetes, Iolcius^ Thimocrates, Lion, Lamachus, and
Demosthenes. And this appoynctemente was sworn about the end of the winter,
and the beginning of the furste spring followynge made ten entier years
and some days over aftere the beginning of the war, which was at the
first course and invasion that the confederated Peloponesians made into the
land of Athenes. which war me thinks best, for ^auynge the moore
certainty thereof, for to distingue and deuyde by the time of the year, that
is to wy^te, by the two seasons of winter and summer, rather than by the name
and changinge of the officers of the pryncipalle Cities. And for to account
truly it shall be found that this war from the beginning such as above,
until the said appoinctemente, endured ten summers and ten wynters, which
be ten whole years. Ensuynge this appoynctemente the Lacedemonyans rendered
incontynently the prysonners, which they had in their power, for it happened
to them by lot or chance to render furste. And so they sent their
ambassadoures, to wit, Isthagoras, and Menas, toward Clearydas for to
command him that he should render to the Athenyans the City of Amphipolis,
which he did hold, and unto the othere cytes confederatedde for to make,
confirm and execute the said appoynctmente. Which thing many of the said
cities refusedde to do pretendynge that it was not for their proffytt.
Clearidas also for to gratelie the Chalcidians re^usedde to render and deliver
up the said city, saying that he could not do it without them, but
neuerthelas he went fromthence with thambassadours to Lacedemonie for to
excuse himself, if they would have charged him for that he obeyed them not,
and also for to essaye if thappoynctmente might be reformed or amendedde in
that poyncte. But understanding that it was concorded and concludedde, he
forthwith returned to the said place of Amphipolis by the commandemente of
the Lacedemonyans. Who commandedde him expressly that he should redelyuer the
city to the Athenyans, or if the citizeins made any difficulty therein, that
he should comme fromethence withal the Peloponesians that were within it. As
touching the other confederated cities, their ambassadors being comme to the
Lacedemonyans, they showed them that the said appoynctement should be
pr^iudicial unto them, and that they would not keep it, if certain articles
thereof were not reformed. Neuerthelas after that the said Lacedemonyans had
heard them, they would not in any poyncte change that which they had done.
But sent them away without other depeacche. And sone after they made
alliance with the Athenyans. Forsomuche as the Argiues had refusedde to enter
into alliance with them. For they thought verily, that without the Athenyans,
they could not do them any great hurt. And that the more part of the
Peloponesians would not meddle with the war. But rather if they might they
would ioigne with the Athenyans. Being than for a certain time debated and
reasoned of the said alliance in the city of Sparte by thambassadours of the
Lacedemonyans, it was finally concluded in the manner and form that follows.

The form of the alliance.
THe Lacedemonyans shall be allied with ye Athenyans in such fourm-that if annye
one estranger enter into the land of the said Lacedemonyans for to do
dammaige therein, the Athenians shall aid them with all their puissance in all
the sorts that they may, and if the said estrangers wasted their terrytorye,
they should be reputed common ^nnemyes as well of the Athenyans, as of the
Lacedemonyans, and they shall together war against him, and likewise make
their appointment or atonement togiders. And they shall do the foresaid
things diligently and loyallye without fraud or ill meaning. And the
Lacedemonyans shall do the like toward the Athenyans if anny estraunger do
come to assaylle them in their land. And moreover if the bondemen or esklaues
of the Lacedemonyans do comme to as^aile the Athenyans, they shall be likewise
bound for to aid them with their power. which allyaunce was sworn by the
self parsonaiges, which had sworn the peace, and they bound themself to
renew the said oaths yearly as the othere, and to write them in two tables of
stoane, which should be set the one in the other city of Sparte nyghe the
temple of Apollo, in the Court that is calledde Amycleus: and the othere in
the City of Athenes nyghe to the same o^ Mynerna. And furthermore yt was
spoken, that if during the said alliance yt seemed good to the said parties
for to add or change annye things in the said articles, they might do it
by common accord. This alliance was made right soon after the treaty of
peace, and that the Athenyans had rendered their prisoners that they had
takenne in the Islande. In the beginning of the Summer, which was the end of
the tenth summer after the beginning of the war.

How the peace between the Athenyans and Peloponesyans was not kept. And how
the Corynthyans and some othere cities of Peloponese made alliance with the
Argiues against the Lacedemonyans. The.iiii. Chapter.
THis peace, made between the Lacedemonyans and the Athenyans after that the
war had dured ten years, like as has been said: was kept only
bitwene the two cities. For the Corynthiens and some othere Cities of
Peloponese woolde not hold yt. And soon after moved a new mutynerye and
questyon between the Lacedemonyans and the other confederates. And by
succession of time, those same Lacedemonyans came into great suspytyon of the
Athenyans, pryncipally by reasone of certain articles of alliance which were
not well executed. Neuerthelas they kept them self from entering the one into
the land of the othere ennemylyke the space of six years and six months
holy. But afterward they endommaged themself greatly the one the other at
diverse times without breaking utterly the allyaunce. But they enterteigned yt
by tre^ues, which were right euylle kept the space of ten years, and the
same expyred were constraynedde to comme to opene war. The which Thucydides
has wrytonne by orderlyke as it was made from year to year, as well in the
winter as in the summer until the Lacedemonyans and their allies had subverted
and destroyed the Empire of the Athenyans^ and taken the long walls of the
city and the port Pyreus. which war, the furste and the second being
comprysed, endured in all.xxvii. years. Out of the which term a man can
not by reasone subtray or take out the time that the treaty of peace
enduredde, for he that shall regard whatte was done cannot judge that the same
year had annye effycacytie, considered that it was not executed nor observed
of the one side nor of the other, in things that were namely spokenne of and
appoynctedde. And on the othere part both the one party and the other did
transgress therein in the war that was made at Mantynea and in Epidaure and
in many othere things. Also in Thrace those which had been allies were
enemies, and the Beotians made trefues for ten days only. wherefore he that
shall truly account the ten years, that the furst war endured, and the
time that passed by trefues, and how long the second war endured, he shall
find the reconynge of the years to be such as I have showed and certain
days over. The which term was pronostycated by the aunswers and oracles of
the gods. For I remember to have oftentimes hard say of many people commonly
that the same war should endure three nyneths of years. During which time I
lived in good health of my parsone, and of my understanding and did take
pain to understand all that than was done although I was in exile during the
said time, the space of ten years after that I had been sent Capytayne
of the army by sea unto Amphipolis. And forsomuche as having been present at
the things as than was done on the one side and on the othere in the time that
I haunted the war, I had no less knowlayge during the time that I was
bannyshed, in the country of Peloponesyans, but I had better leisure to have
understanding and to write the truth thereof. wherefore I woll declare the
questyo^s and controuersyes that happened after the said ten years and also
the disturbance of the trefues, and so unto the end, all that was done in the
said war. After than that the peace was made for fyftie years and the
alliance bitwene the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, and that the Ambassadors
of the cities of Peloponese which were come to Lacedemonie were returned into
their houses, like as has been above said: the Corynthyans practiced to
reallye themself with the Argiues. And at the beginning they did speak with
some of the pryncipalleste of the city of Argos, showing them that insomuche
as the Lacedemonyans had made alliance with the Athenyans their mortal
ennemys, not for to defend the liberty of the Peloponesians, but for to
bring them again into seruytude: it was very expedyente that the Argyues
should devise thereon for to defend the common liberty, and to persuade unto
all the fre cities of Greece, that would live in their liberty and occordinge to
their laws: that they should make alliance with the^, for to give aid the one
to the other, when yt should be needful, and for to chose people and
capytaynes that should have authorytie for to provide in all affairs, to the
entente that the enterpryses should be secrette, and that the commons
specyallye should not be aduertysedde of the affairs, whereunto yt should be
thought that they woolde not consent: for there were many of theyme (said
the s^yde practisans of Corynthe) which for the hatredde that they have
against the Lacedemonyans would reallye themself with the said Argiues.
Which things having been reaportedde by the said partitulers of Argos to
the officers of the city, and by those officers unto the commynaltie: a decree
was made, whereby they did give unto twelfe men, which they did chose of
theirs, full power and puissance for to contracte and conclude amytie and
alliance in name of the Argyues with all the free cities of Greece, resarued the
Athenyans and Lacedemonyans. with whom they might treat nothing except they
furste aduertysed the commynaltie thereof. And this the said Argiues did as well
for that that they perceived that war should be by them made we the
Lacedemonyans, forsomuche as the end of the trefues approached: as also that
they hoped by that mean to make themself Capitains and Princes of Peloponese,
for that, that the pryncypallytie and the gouernemente of the Lacedemonyans was
already hated and desplaisant to the more part of the said Pelopenesyans, and
they bega^^^ to contempne and despise theyme, for the losses which they had
had, and for the dammaiges that they had received in the war. And on the
other side the Argyues were among all the Greeks the rycheste, for that, that
they had not meddled with the war precedinge, by cause of this, that they had
alliance with both parties. By mean whereof during the said war, they were
enryched and increased greatly. By such manner than went the Argyues,
drawing to their alliance all the other Greeks, that would allye themself unto
them with their good will. Among whom the Mantynyans were the furste and
their adherentes, for that, that they had (the war endurynge with the
Athenyans) subtrahed one party of the countreye of Arcadie from the obeyssance
and amytie of the Lacedemonyans, and had tournedde it unto them, whereof they
doubted greatly lest the said Lacedemonyans would have remembrance, though
that, for that time they made no semblante thereof. wherefore before that anny
other inconuenyent happened unto them, they were right willing to ioygne
themself with the said Argiues, considering that it was a great and a
puissaunte City aswelle of people, as of riches, suffyciente inoughe for to
resist the Lacedemonyans, and alsoo was gouernedde by the estate of the
commynaltye aswelle as that same of the said Mantynyans. At whose example,
many other cities of Pelopenese did the like. For they assuredly thought
that those Mantynyans woolde not have done yt, but that they had understood
some thing therein more than commonly was knowin, and also in despyte of the
Lacedemonyans, against whom they were dyspleased, for many causes. But
pryncypallye for this, that in one article of the peace, made between the
Athenyans and the said Peloponesyans, yt was spokene and confyrmedde by oath,
that yt there were annye thing, which seemed for the best to be takenne away
or changedde, those of the two cities, to wit of Athenes, and of Lacedemonye
might do yt, without therein making anny mention of the other confedered
Cities of Peloponese. which thing did putt all the Peloponesyans into great
suspytion, lest the said two Cities had accordedde and agrede for to
subdewe them. For they verelye thought, that if they had estemedde theyme,
as their allies and confederates, they should have couched and comprehended in
the said article the othere cities of Peloponese, aswelle as those two.
which was the pryncipall cause that inducedde them to make allyaunce with the
Argyues. The Lacedemonyans understanding that by little and little the said
cities did confederate themself with the Argyues, and that the Corinthiens
had been promoters and causers of that same matter, they sent certain
ambassadors unto them for to show unto them, as to the chief of that
coniuration and act, that if they departed from their amytie and alliance for
to ioygne themself with the Argyues, they should do against their oath, and
moreover should do against reasonne, for that they woold not approve the
treaty of peace, made with the Athenyans, consideredde that the more part of
the confederated cities had allowed it, and that by their allyaunces it was
ordaynedde that the same which was done by the moore part, should be holden
by the othere, if there were none empeschemente of the gods or of the
saynctes. Upon this declaration, the Corynthyans before making answer to the
said Ambassadors, had caused all their allies to assemble, to wit, those,
that had not yet accepted the treaty of peace, and by common deliberation
said unto the said Lacedemonyans that they woolde confederate theymself
against them, and shewedde them certain things, wherein those Lacedemonyans
had done theyme wrong by concludynge the said treaty of peace. specially
for this, that by the same it was not prouydedde that the Athenyans should
restore unto them Sellie, Anactorium nor annye other places, which they
pretended to be takenne from them by the said Lacedemonyens. And on the other
part, that they were not determined for to habandone the^ of Thrace, who, at
their desire and perswatyon, had rebelled from the Athenyans, for that, that
they had promised them particularly by their oath not to forsake them,
as well at beginning when they rebelled with those of Potydea, as also at many
times afterward. wherefore they reputed not themself to be infractors or
brekers of the alliance, that they had made with the said Lacedemonya^s, though
they would not accept the appoynctemente made with the Athenyans, considered
that they might not do it, without being perjured toward the said
Thracyans. And by the Chapitre of their alliance it was ordained, that the
lesser party ought to accept that, which the greater party should do,
except, that yt were empesched and let by the gods or by saynctes. which
thing they reputed to have happened in this case. For by doing contrary to
their oath, they should offend the gods, by whom they had sworn. And
this is it, which they answered concerning this article. To the remanante,
as touching the alliance of the Argiues, they made them answer, that having
thereupon consulted with their friends, they would do that thing that they
should find to be just and reasonable. The Ambassadors of the said
Lacedemonyans being upon this despeche departedde: the Corynthyans caused those
of the Argiues to come into their counsaille. which were already in the City,
before departure of the other, and showed them that they ought not to defer
or put of to make allyaunce with them: but that they should comme again in the
next counsaille for to conclude yt. In this mean time the Ambassadors of the
Elyans arrived, who furste did make alliance with the Corinthians. And
fromthence by their ordenance they went to Argos. where as they made the like,
for also they were dyspleased with the Lacedemonyans for somuche as before the
war with the Athenyans, certain Arcadyans making war against the Leprates,
they had recours to the Elyans, and promised them that if they would succoure
them they woolde give themself unto them after the war fynished, and that
after the said Arcadyans should be rechasedde, that they woolde also give
them the moytie or one half of the fruictes of their land. By occasyon
whereof the said Leprates being delivered from the war, the Elians
conuenanted with them that had lands for to labor, that they altogithere
should pay one talente of gold, which should be offered in the temple of
Jupiter in Olympus. which trybute they paid without contradictyon until the
war bitwene the Athenians and Peloponesians. But afterward they refused to
pay yt, taking their excuse upon the charges, which they did susteigne by
mean of the war. And for that, that the Elyans woolde have thereunto
constrained them, they repaired to the Lacedemonyans, unto whom the said
Elyans were content for to commyt the questyon. But afterward fearing
least they woolde judge against them, they made no further pursuyte therein
before them, but went to ouerronne the land of the said Leprates. That
notwythstandyng the said Lacedemonyans did pronounce their sentence, whereby
they did declare that the said Leprates were in nothing bounden to the
Elyans, and that those Elyans wrongfully and for an evil cause had ouerronne
their land. And the said Lacedemonyans parceyuinge that the said Elyans woolde
not obey their judgment, they sent their people to the succors of the said
Leprates. By occasion whereof the Elyans pretended that the Lacedemonyans had
done against the treaty of alliance, which was made between those
Lacedemonyans and the othere Peloponesyans, by the which yt was provided that
the lands, that ^uery of the said Cities did hold at beginning of the
said war should remain unto yt^ saying that those Lacedemonyans had
wythdrawin from them the said town of Lepreates. which was their tributayre.
And upon this occasion they made alliance with the said Argiues. And soon
after the Corinthians and the Chalcydes that be in Thrace did also make yt. The
Beotians and Megarens were in wauerynge to do the like, pretendynge to have
been smallye esteemed by the said Lacedemonyans. But afterward they did
take better aduysemente considering, that the manner of living of the Argyues
(which was the gouernemente of the common people) was not so conuenable for
them, as that same of the Lacedemonyans, who did govern themself by a
number of people, that is to say, by a counsaylle, which had all the
authorytie.

How the Athenyans and Lacedemonyans entermeddledde and used their traffic
that same summer, living in doubt and dissimulation the one with the othere,
and of certain feats and treaties that were made during the said summer on
both sides. The.v. Chapter.
During the summer, whereof we speak, the Athenyans did take the city of
Sycione, and did slay all the men of.xiiii. years and upwards, and did
deliver their land to the Plateans for to labor, and moreover did reduce
and bring again to Delos the Cytezeins that were dryuene and chasedde
fromthence, having regard as well to the dommaiges, which they had susteigned
through the war: as also to the oracles of the gods. The Phocyans also and
the Locrians began to war among them. And the Corinthians and Argyues that
already had made allyaunce togiders, came to the city of Tegee, Tegea.
hopyng for to wythdrawe it from the obeissance and alliance of the
Lacedaemonians. And by mean thereof (considered that it had a great
terrytorie) to withdraw all Peloponese. But the Corinthians parceuing that
those of Tegee would not depart from the Lacedemonyans for anny evil will
that they before time had had against the same Lacedemonyans, they returned
very quickly, for they feared that no othere woolde afterward render
themself unto them, sens that those there had refused yt. And yet
notwythstandynge they sent unto the Beotians, for to require them, to be
wylling to reallie themself with the^ and with the Argyues, and to the rest
that they should govern themself by common accord. And moreover for somuche as
the said Beotians had takene a trefues of ten days with the Athenyans,
soon aftere the conclusyon of the peace of fyftie years, whereof we have
spokene here before: they required them that they woolde send an Ambassade
with them to the Athenyans, to whom they would go for to compryse them in
the said trefues: and in case they woolde not do ytt, that the said Beotyans
should renounce the said trefues, and should not afterward make annye treaty
of peace nor of trefues without the said Corynthyans. whereunto the Beotiens
made answer, that as touching the allyaunce, they would consulte and
determyne upon yt. And as for the rest that they woolde send of their people
with theyme to Athenes and woolde require the said Athenyans to be willing
to compryse the said Corinthyans in the trefues of ten days. But the
Athenyans made answer that if the said Corinthyans were allyedde with the
Lacedemonyans, they were suffyciently allyedde with them, and that they nededde
no other thing. Parceyuynge which answer the said Corinthyans made
instance unto the Beotians that they should renounce the trefues of ten
days, but they would not for all that do it. And finally, the Athenyans were
content to make trefues with the Corinthyans without anny alliance. That same
summer the Lacedemonyans with their army under conducte of Plistoanactes,
their king, went against the Parrhasiens which be in the country of Arcadie,
Parrhasii.
subjects of the Mantynyens called thider by certain of the cytezeins, by
mean of a sedition and mutynery which was amongst them: and also to thintente
to raze down the walls, which those Mantynie^s had made in ye town of
Cypselle, Cypsele
wherein they had put garnison. which town was in the countreye of Siritide,
Siritiu^
in the terrytorie of the said Parrhasiens, in the land of Laconye. The
Lacedemonyans being than comme into the said land they did pyllage and waste
it. Which perceived by the Mantynians, they left the guard of their city
unto the Argiues. And they with their puissance went for to succor their
subjects, but seeing that they could not defend them both they returned
fromethence. And by that means the Lacedaemonians restored the Parrhasiens into
liberty, and rased down the said walls, afterward they retournedde
fromethence into their houses. And they being retournedde the men at arms
arrived, which were gone with Brasidas into the country of Thrace, whom
Clearidas brought again by sea after the peace made. And it was by decree
publisshed and declared that all the esklaues which had been in that same
war with the said Clearydas should be frank and free, and might go to
dwell where they would. Whom he sone after did send with certain other for
to inhabitt in the town of Leprea in the territorye of Eliens in the country
of Lacedonia being already in war with those same Elyens. Lepra^
On the one part the said Lacedaemonians did desgraduate and declaire those to
be deffamed and dishonered, that were takene by the Athenyans in the Islande,
for that they rendered themself with their army unto the enemies. Amongst
whom there were some, that had been chosene into offices of the town. And
they did this, fearyng lest that they, for doubt that they had to be reputed
to have been faynte hearted, should not enterprise to make change or mutac^on
in the town if they came to auctorytie. And so they pronounced them to be
unable for to obteigne any office, for to use merchandise and for to demand
annye thing in judgment. And yet neuerthelas shortly afterward, were
auctorised and habled again unto it. In the same somer the Dyctidiens did take
the city of Thyson, Dictidienses.

Thissus Atho.


which is in the country of Athos being confederated with the Atheans. During
all the same somer the Athenyanes and the Peloponesians used and traffiqued
merchandises togiders, although they suspected the one the oother. Chifely the
Athenians and the Lacedemonyans from beginning of the peace, forasmuch as
they had not rendered nothere on the one side nor of the other, that, which was
accorded and agrede upon. For the Lacedemonyans, who should first have
restored, had not rendered Amphipolis nor the other places, another also had
constrained their allies in the country of Thrace for to accept the said
tratie of peace, another likewise the Beotians and the Corinthians, though that
they said continuallye, that if the said confederates would not accept the
treaty, they would ioigne themself with the said Athenyans for to constrayne
them thereunto, and thereupon had assigned and prefixed a day. But there was
no mention thereof in writing, that those, that would not ratefie and accept
the said treaty, should be reputed enemies both of the said Athenians and
Lacedemonyans. But the Athenya^s parceiuing that the said Lacedemonyans did
parfourme nothing of that which they had promised, in effect they had no
good opinion that they would keep the peace. And for this cause they likewise
delayde to render Pilus unto them and also repented that they had delyueredde
the prisoners that they had takene in the Islande. And so reteigned likewise
the other towns which they should have rendered by the said treaty, until
the time, that the Lacedemonyans had accomplished on their party. Which
Lacedemonyans did excuse themself, saying: that they had done all that they
could. For they had rendered the prisoners which they had and also had
withdrawin al their men of war which were in Thrace, and for effect
obsaruedde all that was in their power, but as for to restore Amphipolis, that
the same was not in their puissa^ce. And to the surplusage, promysedde that
they would parforce theymself to cause that the Beotians and Corinthians
should enter into the treaty and that Panacte should be rendered to the said
Athenyans. And likewise all the Athenyans, that were prisoners in the country
of Beoce required the same Athenyans that they would be willing to render the
city of Pylus, or at the least, if they would not render it, that they should
withdraw the Messenyans and the esklaues, which they had put within it, like
as the same Lacedemonyans had withdrawin their men of war, which were in
Thrace: and that they should keep the place with their oune people, if they
would. In this manner during the same somer, passed all their affairs, to
wit chiefly by dissymulacion, and neuerthelas did live without war:
communicatyng or entremedlyng the one with the other.

How the Lacedaemonians having, against the form of the treaty agrede upon
with the Athenyans, made alliance with the Beotians without the same Athenians,
they the said Athenians made the like with the Argiues, the Mantynyans and the
Eolians. The.vi. Chapter.
THe winter followinge, the Governors of the city of Sparte named Ephores
being changed, under whom the peace was concludedde: and new being chose^ in
their stead which were against the same: there was an assembly made in
Lacedemony: whereat were the ambassadors of the confederate cities of
Peloponese, those of the Athenians, those of the Corinthians and those of the
Beotians, in the which many things were debatedde, but fynallye, they
departedde without any resolution. Neuerthelas every man being retournedde to
his house, Cleobolus and Xenares which were those two of the Ephores that than
governed and desired to break the peace: had particular devises with the
Beotians and with the Corinthians, exhorting them to have parfaicte knowlaige
of the said matters, and chiefly to the Beotians, that even so as they had been
the furst that had made alliance with the Argiues, that so they should be
willing al togiders to ioigne themself afreshe with those same Lacedemonia^s,
showing the^ that by the same mean they should not be constrained for to
accept and keep the alliance with the Athenians, and that before the emnitie
with the Athenians, and before that they had brokene trefues, the same
Lacedaemonians had more desired the amity and alliance of the said Argiues
than of the said Athenyans, for that, that they did always mistrust them, and
desired greatly to be assured thereof understanding, that their alliance should
be to those Lacedemonia^s right propice and me^e for to make war without
Peloponese, praying the said Beotians yt they would agree and be content to
restore Panacte to the said Lacedemonia^s, to the intent yt by mean of having
of that same city, they might recover Pylus, if it were possible. And by mean
thereof begin again afterward more easily the war against the Athenians.
Thies things being signefied to the messe^gers of the Beotians and of the
Corinthia^s by the said Ephores and certain other their friends of Lacedemony:
they made their report thereof to the counsel of their cities. But before that
they arrived, two of the chief officers of Argos came to encounter and mete
the^ upon the way, and had many deuyses with the^ for to understand if it were
possible that the Beotians would enter into their alliance, like as the
Corinthia^s, the Mantiniens and the Eliens had done. Saying that, if that were
done, they should be hable for to make war against the Athenians, orels
well by mean of the said Beotians and other their confederates: for to come
to some good appoynctmente with them. Which things were right agreeable to the
Beotians for that they did agree unto the same, that their friends of
Lacedemonye had charged them, and that those Argiues consented to the thing,
which the other desired. And so they stayed upon resolution with them, that
they would send their ambassadors into the country of Beoce, and that done
they departedde. The Beotians being aryuedde in their country, they reapported
to the governors of the city, all that, which they had vnderstandedde,
aswelle of the Lacedemonyans as of the Argiues, wherewith those governors were
well pleasedde for that, the amytie both of the one and of the other was very
mete and conueniente for them, and that of themself, the said parties did
agree unto one self end, without knowing the one of the other. Soneafter
came the ambassadors of the Argyues. Unto whom, after that they had been
heard, they made answer, that they would send ambassadors unto them for to
treat of the alliance. In this mean time, those Beotians, the Corynthians,
the Megarens, and the ambassadors of them of Thrace assembled themselfes
togiders, and concluded amongst them an alliance, for to succoure the one the
other against all those, that would war against them, and that they might
not make war, peace nor other treaty with any parsone, the one without the
othere. And also it was appoynctedde that the Beotians and Megarens, who were
already allyedde, should make allyaunce upon the same conditions, with the
Argiues. But before that the Governors of Beoce should conclude the said
things, they should make reapporte thereof to the four counsailles of the
said country: who had all the auctorite, persuading theyme that they should
be willing to consent to the alliance with the said cities and with all the
other that would ioigne with them, and showing them that it was for their
proffytte. Which thing the said counsaylles would not at the first brunte
agree unto, fearing that it should have been against the Lacedemonyans, if they
should have allied themself with the Corynthyans, who had rebelledde and were
departedde from them. For the said governors had not aduertisedde them of
the deuyses, which they had had with Cleobulus, Xenares and their other
friends of Lacedemonie. Which were, that they should furste make alliance with
the Argiues and the Corinthyans, and afterward should conclude it with the
Lacedemonyans. For the said governors thought assuredly that without declaring
that same unto the commons of the said four counsailles, they would have done
that, which the said Governors would have counsailledde them. But seeing that
it chanced otherwise therein, the Corinthyans and the ambassadors of Thrace
retournedde fromethence without doing any thing. And the governors of the
Beotians (who were determined, if they could have obteignedde and perswadedde
the same furste unto their people for to essaye afterward to have made
alliance with the Argiues) saying that they could not obteigne it, did
speak nothing thereof. Also the said Argiues, who should have sent their
ambassade, did not send it. So that the things remaynedde undone by a
necligence and through defaulte of sollycytynge. The self same winter, the
Olynthians did take the town of Mecyberne with assault, Mecyberne.
wherein the Athenians kept their garnysone and pillaged it. After that, many
parlamentes being made bitwene the Athenyans and the Lacedemonyans, upon the
obseruaunce of the articles of the peace, specially upon condition of the
places on the one part and of the other: those Athenians, hopyng that if they
did render Panacte unto the Lacedemonyans, they would have restoredde unto
theyme Pylus: sent an ambassade to the Beotians, prayinge theyme that they
would deliver the said town togiders with the prisoners that they had of
theirs. Whereunto the Beotians made answer that they would not do it,
except the Lacedemonyans would make particular alliance with them, aswelle
as they had done with the sayedde Athenyans. Whereupon the Lacedemonyans,
though they did know, that it was against the alliance that was made with the
Athenyans, whereby it was prouydedde that the one should not make peace nor
war without the othere, yett for the desire that they had for to recover of
the Beotians, Panacte, hoping, by mean thereof to have Pylus: and also for
the inclynacion, which the officers than had, more to the said Beotians than
to the Athenyans, to the intent to break the peace: they made and accordedde
the said alliance aboutes the end of the winter. After the which made, in the
beginning of the furste spring time, which was the.xi. year of the war,
the Beotians rasedde and utterly destroyedde the said town of Panacte. The
Argiues parceyuynge that the Beotians had not sent unto them the ambassadors
for to make the alliance, like as they had promysedde, and that they had beaten
down Panacte and made particular alliance with the Lacedemonyans: they had
great fear least they alone should remain in war with the said
Lacedemonyans, and lest all the other cities of Greece would reallye themself
with them. For they thought that that, which the Beotians had done at
Panacte: was by knowlaige and with will of the said Lacedemonyans and also of
the Athenyans, and that they were all of one alliance. With which Athenyans
those Argiues had no more hope of appoynctmente. For that same, which they
had thereof had was, thinking that the alliance which was bitwene them
and the Lacedemonyans, should not have endured. For this cause being in great
perplexity, and fearyng lest that they should be forced to susteigne war
both against the said Lacedemonyans and Athenyans and also against the
Theagites and Beotians, forsomuche as they had before time refused the
appoynctemente with the said Lacedemonyans, and coueted the Empire and the
authorytie over all Greece: they sent their Ambassadors to the said
Lacedemonyans, to wytt, Eustrophus and Eson, Eustrophus.

Aeson.


whom they thought to be great friends and very agreeable to them, for to treat
the appointement. For they thought that when they should be allied with them,
to what souer end ye matters should fall or come, they should be well assured
for the time that than ran. Being than the said Ambassadors arryuedde at
Lacedemonye, they made their proposition to the counselle, demaundinge peace
and alliance. And for to treat yt, they did require that the difference that
they had with the Lacedemonyans, by cause of Cynurie (which is in the
terrytorie of the Argyues, and has under ytt woo cytyes, to wit, Thyree and
Athenye, and also is peopled with Lacedemonyans) might be committed to some
city being newter, or to some notable parsonage trusty to both parties.
whereunto the Lacedemonyans did incontynently make answer, that they should
speak no moore thereof. But if the Argiues woolde, they were content to make a
new treaty with them, in all things, such as the former was. Whereupon the
Argiues made a certain refusal, saying that they were well content to make
the appoyntemente, such as above: prouydedde that yt should be liefulle to
aythere of the said parties, notwythstandynge the said appoynctemente, to
make war against the othere when yt should seem good, through cause of the
said City of Cynurie, except that the othere party were empeschedde with
pestylence or with othere war, like as at othere time yt had been
conuenauntedde between theyme, than, when they had a battaille, whereof
aythere of the parties pretendedde to have had the vyctorye, and so, that the
war should not exceed the lymyttes of the sayede City, and of his
terrytorye. Which request seemed at the beginning to the Lacedemonyans, very
folyshe, but neuerthelas in the end they did agree unto it. For that, that
they desyredde the amytie of the said Argiues. But before the concluding of any
thing, albeit that the ambassadors had full power and might, yet wylled
they that they should return from thence to Argos, and that they should
propone and declare the said treaty to the commons, for to know if they were
agreeable unto it. And if they were, that they should comme again at a day
appoynctedde for to swear to the said appoynctmente. So the ambassadors
departed from Lacedemony. But in the mean time that they should have
returned, the Ambassadors that the Lacedemonyans had sent to the Beotians,
for to recover Panacte, and the prisoners being Athenyans: to wit
Andromedes, Phedimus and Antimenides, they found that the said Panacte was
rasedde and pluck down by the Beotians under color, as they said, that
there was an auncyente treaty bitwene them and the Athenyans, confirmedde by
oath, by which it was ordonneide that neither of the parties, should inhabitt
in the said place. And as touching the prisoners, they rendredde those that
they had of the said Athenyans. Unto whom those ambassadors did send
them again. And as concerning Panacte, they showed them, that they should no
more fear that any their enemy should abide there, insomuche as the town
was pluckedde down, thinking by that mean that they had well acquitted the
promys that they had made for to render it. But the Athenyans were not
therewith content, and shewedde them that they had not accomplyshedde that,
which they promysedde in rendrynge of the town being destroyedde: and
moreover in having made alliance with the Beotians. For it was directly against
that which was spoken and agrede upon bitwene them to wytt, that they should
ioinctly togiders constraigne all the confederatedde cities for to accept and
ratefie the said treaty of peace, to wytt, those, that would refuse it. By
means of which things and of many other they used the said ambassadors with
gross words, and sent them again without other conclusion. The Athenyans
and the Lacedemonyans being than in this difference: they that were not
content to have peace with the Athenes, they sought means to break it
incontynently through occasion thereof. And amongst other Alcibiades son of
Clymas (who though he was yett young, yett for the memory of his
progenitors, which were men of worship, was greatly bilouedde, and had
great auctorytie in the city) the same counsailledde the people, for to make
alliance with the Argiues, as well for that, that it semedde prossitable for
them, as also for this that through the highness and fierceness of his heart,
he was not content that the peace had been made with the Lacedemonyans by
Nycyas and Lachetes, without making estimation of him for that he was young.
And somuche the more he was offended with them, that they had renewed and
establyshedde again the amity with them which his grantfather had brokene
and forsakene. And for despyte thereof he declared himself than to be against
the said treaty of peace: and said openly that the Lacedemonyans were not to
be trusted unto, and that the appoynctme^t that they had made with them was but
for to withdraw the Argiues, fro their amytie, and afterward for to begin
again war against them. And seeing that the people grudged against the said
Lacedemonyans, he sent secretly with all diligence unto the Argiues, signefying
them, that it was the best time that ever might be for to pursue the alliance,
for the Athenyans desired yt, and that they should come without any delay and
bring the Elyans and the Mantynyans for to conclude it, assuring that he would
aid them with his power. The Argiues having the news, and understanding that
the Beotians had not made alliance with the Athenyans, and also that those
Athenyans were in great discord with the Lacedemonyans, they left the
practique of their ambassadors, that treated the peace and alliance with the
Lacedemonyans: and did give the^self to the same of Athenians. The which they
reputed better and more proffitable for them than the other: for somuche as the
city of Athens, had always and of all auncientie been their friend, and
further did govern it self by the common estate, like as they did, and
moreover might show them very much aid and favor by sea if they had there
war, for that that therein it was most puissante. And so they incontinently
did send their ambassadors with those of the E^ians and of the Mantynyans to
Athens for to treat and conclude the alliance. In that same time, the
ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians arryuedde at Athens, to wytt, Philocaridas,
Philocaridas.
Leon and Eudius, Leon.

Eudius


who seemed to be most affeccionedde to the Athenyans and to the peace. Which
were sent as well for fear that the Lacedemonyans had, lest those Athenyans
would make alliance with the Argiues, for despyte of them, as also for to
demand that they should render unto them Pylus instead of Panacte, and also
for to excuse themself of the alliance, which they had made with the Beotians,
and for to show them, that they had not done it for any evil purpose nor to
the prejudice of the same Athenians. Which things were by the said
ambassadors proponed to the counsaylle of Athens. And besides that, they
declared that they had full power to conclude and appoyncte upon all their
difference and controversies. Which saying Alcibiades, and fearing lest if
the things were publyshedde and declared unto the people, that they would
consent to that, which they said, and by that mean refuse the alliance of
the Argiues, he ymagyned one such tromperie and deceit for to empesche it.
That is that he did speak secretly to the sayedde ambassadours^ and said
unto them that they should not in any manner of the world declare to the
comminaltie that they had full might to trauaille and entrete upon all the
differences, promysinge them, that if they would so do, for to give and
restoore Pylus unto them, and that he had the mean and authority for to
persuade it unto the commons, like as before time he had had to cause them to
deny it to the other ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians. And moreover he
promysedde that he would appoyncte and appease all the other differences that
they had togiders. And this did he, to the intent, that he might withdraw
them fro the practique and knowlaige of Nycias. And also that by this mean he
might caliumniate and accuse them toward the commons that there were in them
another truth nor loyaultie, and by that doing to enduce the same commons for
to make alliance with the Argiues, the Mantynyans and the Elians, like as it
chanced. For when the ambassadors did comme to the assembly of all the
people, being demandedde if they had full power for to proceed upon all the
differences, they said, nay. Which was whole contrary to that, which they
had sayedde to the counsaille. Whereby the Athenyans were so mouedde, that
they would no more hear them. But did cleue unto Alcibiades, who bigonne upon
this occasion, for to charge them with more, than before. So that through his
perswation, they caused the Argiues and the other that were comme in their
compaignie, to enter for to conclude alliance with them. But before the matter
was establishedde fully: the earth quaked, by occasion whereof, the thing was
put of or remytted until the ne^te day followyng. At which day Nycyas
perceiving himself to be deceived by Alcybiades, as well as the Lacedemonyans,
who were enduced to deny unto the commons that, which they had said to the
counsaille, left not of for all that, to show afreshe unto the assembly,
that the alliance ought to be made and renewed with the Lacedaemonians, and that
men ought to send unto them for to know more amply their intent, and in mean
time to differ the alliance with the Argiues. Declaring unto the^ that it was
their honor, and the shame of the Lacedaemonians, for to differ the war, for
that, that they had the better, wherefore it was to their advantage that they
aboade in that reputacion, where the Lacedaemonians, who remained with the
loss, had occasion to dsire war. And so he persuaded them in that sort that
it was concluded for to send an ambassade unto the said Lacedemonyans. In the
which among other was named that same Nycyas. And those ambassadors had
charge to say to the said Lacedemonyans, that if they were willing to enter
frankely into the business and for to enterteigne the peace and alliance, that
they should restore to the Athenians Panacte hoole, entier and reedefyed. And
furthermore that they should depart with Amphipolis, and from thallyance of
the Beotians. And if they would not enter into the peace, so and under the
conditions that were spoken: that is to wytt, that the one of the cities might
not make treaty with an other city whatsoever, without the other: declaring
unto them furthermore, that if they would proceed against the said treaty of
peace and alliance, doing contrary to that, which was agrede upon: that than
those Athenyans had already concluded to the alliance with the Argiues, which
were at Athens, attendynge the resolution. And many other articles,
conteigninge doleance against the said Lacedaemonians, for that they had not
kept and obsarued the said treaty: were given by instruction to the said
ambassadors for to make declaration thereof to the said Lacedaemonians. The
said ambassadors, than being come, and having expounded their charge to the
Lacedemonyans, and for the last article having signefyed, that if they would
not forsake the alliance of the Beotians, in case they were not willing to
accept the treaty of peace, as is before said, the Athenyans would conclude
the alliance with the Argiues and the other of their intelligence: they were
forced to answer, through the perswation of Xenares and of his faction, that
they would not depart from he alliance of the Beotians. And nevertheless being
required by Nycias for to swear again to keep and perform the treaty of
peace and amytie, which was made bitwene them they were not therewith content.
And that did Nycias fearing to have returned fromthence without having any thing
done, lest that he should be charged to have been cause of the said treaty of
alliance, like as it chanced afterward when he was come home again. And
moreover inco^tinently as the Athenians had understand his reaport, and that
there was in effect nothing done: at the perswation of Alcibiabes, they
concluded the alliance with the Argiues, which were there, holding them for
oultraged or iniuried by the Lacedaemonians. The tenoure of which alliance does
follow.

The tenor of the alliance bitwene the Athenyans, and the Argiues, the
Mantynyens and the Elyans.
Alliance has been made by the Athenians, with the Argiues the Mantynians and
the Elyens for a houndred years, as well for the^ as for their friends, over
whom both the one and the other party does preside and govern, without fraud
and deceit, as well by sea as by land, to wit, that ye one party may not
make war nor endomage the other, nor their allies, nor subjects under any
color or accasion whatsoever it may be. And moreover yt if any estranger
during the said time shall have entered ennemylike into ye land of the said
Athenia^s, the said Argiues, Mantynians and Elyens shall be bound to come to
succoure the^ with all their puissance, fourthwith as they shall be thereunto
required by the same Athenia^s. And if it chanced that the said estrangers
were already departed from the land of the Athenians, yet these Argyues,
Mantyniens and Elyens should repute them for enemies, as well as the Athenya^s.
And that it shall not be lawful to any of the said co^federed cities to make
any appoinctme^t with the said common enemies without the will and consent of
the other. And the Athenians shall do the like against those, that shall come
to assail the said Argiues the Mantynians and Elyans in their land. And
furthermore that none of the said cities shall permytte nor give congie or
license to pass through his land nor through that same of his friends nor
allies, over which they preside or govern, another yet by sea: unto any
warryours for to make war, except it be deliberated and agrede by all the
said four cities and set fourth in their name. And that if one of the said
cities demands succors and aid of the people of the other: that the same
that shall send the said succors, shall be bound to furnyshe the said succors
with victuailles at his expenses the space of.xxx days to be reconned from the
first day that the said succors shall be arrived in that same city that
demanded it. But if the city have thereof need for a longer time, it shall be
bound to give soulde to the said souldyars, to wytt, three half pence of
monney, for the day to every foot man and to the horsemen a grote. And by that
mean the same city shall have the auctorite oner the said men of war, and
they shall be bound for to obey it so long as they shall be therein. But if any
army were made fourth in name of all the said four cities, the Impery thereof
should be common to all four. The which treaty of alliance the Athenians
shall be bounden presently for to swear in the name of them and of their
confederates and allies. And afterward the like oath shall be made in every of
the said three cities and of their allies in the most straict form that they
may have in every of them after his custom upon the aulters of their temples,
after that the sacrefice shall be made apperteigning to the same, in such
substance as follows. I swear for to hold and keep the alliance according
to the form and tenoure of the treaty, which has been accorded: justly,
loyally and symplie, and wolle not do to the contrary: under any color, art
nor ymaginacion that may be. And the said oath shall be made in the city of
Athens, by the people of the senate and Trybuus. And afterward shall be
confirmed by the treasorers. In the city of Argos by the senate and by the
four skoore of the great counsaille. Of Mantynea by the artificers, by the
senate and by other officers and shall be confirmed, by the diuynours and by the
capytaynres of the war. At Elea or Elides, by the artificers, by the
threasorers, six houndred of the great counsaille, and shall be confirmed by
the conseruators or kepers of laws. The which oath shall be yearly renewed, to
wytt, first by the Athenyans, who shall go for that intent and purpose, to the
other three cities thirty days before the Olympyades. And afterward the
other cities shall go to Athens for to do likewise, te^ne days before the
great feast, that is named Panathenea. And the present treaty with the oath
shall be wryttone in stone and set in a public place at Athens, in the most
euidente and open place of the city. At Argos in the markett place by the
temple of Apollo. At Mantinea and at Elides, in the markett place night by the
temple of Jupiter. And moreover at the next Olympyan feast it shall be set up in
the name of all the said four cities in a table of copper. And the same cities
may by common accord add to this said treaty hereafter that, which they
shall think good. In this manner the alliance and confederation was concluded
bitwene the said four cities, notwithstanding that there was nothing said nor
any mention made, that for the same any man should depart from the treaty
of peace and alliance made bitwene the said Athenyans and Lacedemodya^s.

How after many enterprises and exploictes of war, that were made bitwene
the allies of the Lacedaemonians on the one part, and those of the Athenians of
the other: the said Athenyans at request of the Argiues, declared those same
Lacedemonyans to have done against the treaty of peace and of alliance, and to
be pariured. The.vii. Chapter.
THis alliance and confederacion was not agreeable to the Corynthyans. And
being by ^he Argiues their allies required to ratefie and swear unto it, they
refused that to do. Saying that the same was suffycient, which they had made
with the said Argiues, Mantynians and Elyans. By the which they had promised
not to make peace^ nor war the one city without the other, and for to aid,
by defending, the one the other without passing further, and to give the^ aid
in assaillinge. And by this mean the Corynthians departed from that same
alliance and did take new intelligence with the Lacedemonyans. Al which
things were done in that somer, in the which Androsthenes the Arcadian did win the best prize with wresteling at the feast Olympian. Androsthenes.
At the same feast, the Elyans defended and enterdited unto the Lacedemonyans
that they should not sacrefice in the temple nor also enter into tourneying nor
wrastlynge: except they paid the penalty and amends, wherein they were by
the said Elyans condemned according to the laws and statutes of Olympiades,
by this reasone: that they said that the said Lacedemonyans had putt and
bestowed harnnes within the wall of Phircus and had set their men of war
within Lepreum during the treaty made at Olympus and against the tenoure
thereof. Phircus.

Lepreu^.


The which mulcte and amends did amount unto two thousand pounds of Silver,
to wytt, for every one of the said men of arms, who were a thousand, two
pounds, like as the treaty did bear it. Whereunto the Lacedemonyans
answered that they were unjustly condemned, forsomuche: as when they had
sent their men of war unto Lepreum, the treaty was not publyshedde. But the
Elyans replied that they could not be ignorante thereof, for the same treaty
had already been in their hands, and they themselfes were the first that had
denounced and signefyed it unto the said Elyans, and yet neuerthelas in going
against yt, were comme to make the said exploicte of war against them
wrongfully? and against reasone, without that, that the same Elyens had
innouatedde any thing against them. Whereupon it was by the Lacedemonyens
argued. That if it were so that the said Elyans understood when they came to
denounce the said alliance to the Lacedemonyans that they had already done
against the same, it had not been needful further to have showed yt unto
theyme (as they had done) after the time that they pretended the said
exploictes of war to have been done by the same Lacedemonyans. And that it
should not be found that after the same denouncyng, they had innouated or
attempted any thing. But the Elyans persisted neuerthelas in their opynion,
the said allegacion notwythstandyng. And yet for all that offered them, that if
they would render Lepreum unto theyme, they would be content to remytte one
part of the amends, to wytt, that same that ought to be applied to them, and
also of the other, which ought to be applied to the God Apollo, and to pay it
for them. The which offer the said Lacedemonyans would not accept. Which
parceyued, the Elyans made the^ yett an other offer. To wytt, that insomuche as
they would not restore Lepreum, to the intent yet that they should not remain
excluded from the same feast of the temple, that they should swear upon the
great altar of Jupiter before all the Greeks, for to pay the said amends, if
they than could not pay it. But the Lacedaemonians accepted this party as
skle^derly as the furst. By reason whereof they were excluded and prohibited
from sacrifice and to be present at the plays for that feast, and made their
sacrifices in their city. And all the other Greeks came and assisted and were
present at the playes^ resarued those of Lepreum. And yet notwithstanding the
Elyans, fearing l^ste the Lacedemoans should come to the temple and would
sacrifice by force, they caused a good number of their people to come in armure
for to keep watch in the temple. And with them were sent from Argos and from
Mantinia two thousand men in armure, to wytt, from aither city a thousand,
and besides that, the Athenians sent thider the horsemen that they had at
Argos, attending there the festyuall day. The which neuerthelas had great fear
to be assailled and beaten by the Lacedaemonians. And specially after that one
Lacedemonya^ named Lychas son of Arceselaus had been skourged with rods by
the sargeantes upon the place of the combat: Lychas
for that that his wagone having been confiscated to the Beotians: for that, yt
it had run in the said place with the other: which thing was not liefull the
play and the combat being forbyden to the Lacedaemonians, in despraysing and
co^tempning the said judgment, for to give it the better to be understand
that he would well that every one should know that the said charett was his,
he had openly upon the place crowned his wagoner. Whereof the other had great
fear, thinking that he durst not have done it, if that he had not perceived
some enterprise of the Lacedemonyans, Who neuerthelas sturred not for that same
time, and in such sort passed the feast. After the which, the Argiues and
their allies did come to Corynthe, to pray the Corynthians that they should be
wylling to send unto them for to enter into their alliance. In which place
metinge likewise the ambassadors of the Lacedemonyans, they had very much
talk of the treaties togiders, but finally hearing a thonder, as they were
assembled for to entreat thereof, they departedde without any conclusion, and
every man retournedde into his city, and no other thing was done for that
same somer. In the beginning of of the winter followynge, the Hera^lyans that
be in Trachine had a battaille against the Enyens, the Dolopes, the Melyans
and some other people of Thessale: who all were their voysins and their
enemies. For that that the said city was founded^ peopled and builded for
none other end, but against them. And for that cause from beginning that
yt was buyldedde, they never ceassedde to ymagyne for to destroy it. Of which
battaille the Heraclians had the worse and therein dyed many of their people,
and among othere Xenares of Gnide Lacedemonyan, who was their leader and
capytayne general. And so passed the winter: which was the twelfe year of
the war. In the beginning of somer, the Beotians did take the city of
Heraclea into their hands, and did chase fromthence Hegesippidas the
Lacedemonyan, Hegesippidas.
who had the governance thereof^ saying that they governed it not well, and that
they feared that the Lacedemonya^s, being occupied in Peloponese, lest the
Athenyans should take it. Wherewith the Lacedemonyans were right euylle
contentedde toward those Beotians. In the same somer Alcibiades, Duke of the
Athenyans with the aid of the Argiues and other their allies went into
Peloponese having a small number as well of men at arms, as archers. and of the
confederates such number as he found in readiness. and trauersynge the said
country of Peloponese, he gave order for that, which seemed necessary for the
season. And among other things he persuaded those Patras that they should make
walls from their town to the sea, and he was minded for to have made one on
the side that was toward the cost of Achaia, but the Corynthians and the
Sycynians, which parceyued that the same should make against them, did
empesche it. In the same somer was great war bitwene the Epidauria^s and the
Argiues, vndercouleur of this, that Thepidaurians had not sent an offeringe
to the temple of Apollo Pythius, as they were bound to do, the which temple
was in the jurisdiction and power of the Argiues. But in truth it was for
this, that the said Argiues and Alciabiades did search some occasion for to
take and occupy the said town, if they might, aswelle for to be more sure
against the Corynthyans, as also for this, that from out of the port of
Egyne, they might trauerse thider more easily and more directly: than for to go
from Athenes to enuyrone the promontorye of Scellea. Scellea
And so the Argiues preparedde theymself for to go into armure and with force
to recover the said offrynge of the Epydauryans. In that same time, the
Lacedemonyans yssuedde fourth into camps with all their puissance. And
assembledde themself at Leutra, Leuctra
which is a town in their territorye, under the conducte of Agis son of
Archidamus their king, Agis.
who was willing to conducte them against Lycee, Liceum
although he had not discoueredde his intent to anny parsone in the world.
But in sacrefyinge for their voyage, they could not find that the gods
would be propice or favorable to them therein. By reasone whereof, they
retournedde fromethence, every man into his house. And neuerthelas before their
departure, they concludedde among themself that they should assemble togiders
again in the month followynge, which was the month of June. And after that
they were disassembledde or disseuered, the Argiues issued with all their power
about the end of May. And having iourneyedde all that same day, they entered
into the land of Epidaure, and so did piliage and waste it. Which
parceiued, the Epidauriens sent unto the Lacedemonyans and their oother allies
for to have succors. Of whom, some excusedde themselfes that the month,
which was to them assigned for to reasse^ble themself, was not yet come. The
other came to the confynes of the Epidaurie^s, and there rested, without
passing any further. And in the mean time that the Argiues were in the land
of the Epidauria^s, there came to Mantinea the ambassadors of the other
cities, their confederates, at the instigacion of the Athenians. And after that
they were al assembled, Euphanidas the Corinthia^ proponed and showed,
Ephamidas.
how that the effects, were not like to the words, insomuche as they
observed the words of peace and yett neuerthelas in the mean time, the
Epidaurians and their allies, were assembl^d in armure against the Argiues.
Wherefore it was reasonable, that the men of war should retire on both sides,
and after yt, the treaty of peace should be renewed. Whereunto the ambassadors
of the Athenians did accord, and by that mean caused their people, which were
in the land of the Epidauria^s, to retire. And afterward they reassembled
themself altogiders for to create of the peace. But being departed without
conclusion, the Argiues marched afreshe in armure to ouerrone and pillage the
country of Epidauriens. And in the self time the Lacedemonia^s issued for to
go against the Carya^s, but not having ye sacrifices propice or favorable for
the voyage, they returned fro^thence. As touching the Argiues, after yt they
had brent and wasted about the third part of the land of Epidaurie^s, they
retired, With whom Alcibiades was come fro the city of Athens, with a thousand
men. Understanding yt the Lacedemonia^s were issued into the feldes. Who being
advertised yt they retired, returned likewise himself, and in thies
entrefaictes passed that same somer. In the beginning of winter the
Lacedemonyans sent, secretly and without knowlaige of the Athenians, by sea,
three houndred me^ to the succors of the Epidaurians, under the conduct of
Hegesipidas. Through occasion whereof the Argiues sent to the Athenians to
show them that though, that it was said and ordained in their alliance, that
none of their confedered cities should suffer to pass by their lands, nor by
their seas anny enemies of the other marmure: they had neuerthelas suffered the
people of the Lacedemonya^s to pass by their sea for to go into Epidaure.
Wherefore it was reasonable that the Mantynyans and their sklaues should pass
in their ships and be transported unto Pylus. And that doing otherwise, they
should do them wrong. Upon which demand Alcibiades and Laconicus caused to be
grauene in stone and to make declaracion by the Athenians, Laconicus.
how the Lacedaemonians had broken their appoynctmente and falsefyed their
oath. And under this color, they embarked the esklaues of the Argiues at
Eraine, and landed the^ in the land of Pylus, without doing other thing for
that winter. During yt which, the Argiues were in war with the Epidauriens,
but there was no rengedde battle, but only inroades, escharmouches and
encountringes. And coming upon the end of wyntere, the Argiues came by night
with ladders for to take the town of Epidaure by assault, thynkyng that there
had been no people of defense within it, and that all had been in the
feldes, but they found it holy otherwise, and retournedde fromethence
without anny thing done. In this manner passed the winter, which was the
end of the thirtenth year of the war.

How the Lacedaemonians with their allies being pressed and ready to fight with
the Argiues and their friends, before the city of Argos: A trefues was taken
by the chief men capytayne for. iiii. months, without consent of the of
war. And how the said trefues were broken on the bihalfe of the Argiues at
perswation of the Athenyans, and how they took the city of Orthomenia.
The.viii. Chapter.
THe somer following the Lacedemonyans, seeing that the Epidaurians their allies
were trauailled with war, and that many places of Peponese departed from
their amytie, and other were in great variance, and that if they made no
provision therefore their affairs would always grow from evil into worse:
they al armed themselves togiders with their bondemen under conducte of Agis
son of Archidamus their king, for to go against Argos having with them the
Tegetes, with all the other Arcadians, that were of their alliance. And to the
other allies of Peloponese: and of other places, they commanded that they
should be at Philunte. Philunces.
Which thing they did, that is to wit, the Beotians with five thousand footmen
well armed, and as many light armed, and from the other places, every man sent
thider according to their puissance. And chiefly the Philisiens, forsomuche as
the asse^blie was made in their territorye, they sent al thider asmany of their
people as they could make. The Argiues understanding the enterprise of the
Lacedaemonians, and that they did go unto Philunte, for to ioigne with their other
allies: they came to mete the^ with their puissance, having in their
co^paignye, the Mantynians with their allies and three thousand Elya^s well
armed, and did entounter the^ nigh to Methydrie, Methydrium.
which is a town in the country of Arcadie. And so aither of the parties did
his best to win the mou^taigne, and the Argiues prepared themself to give the
battaill before yt the said Lacedemonia^s should have been ioigned with those
that were at Philunte. But Argis in the night departed fromthence for to go to
the said Philunte. Whereof the Argiues being aduertysed, they departed at ye
break of the day and went fro^thence straight way unto Argos, and fromthence
to the way that leads to Nemea, Nemea.
by the which they thought, that the Lacedemonyans should have passed. But
Agis, who doubted thereof, had taken an other way more sharp and more
difficille, having the Lacedemonyans, the Arcadyans and the Epidaurians with
him. By the which way they came for to descend into the land of Argiues by
one other cost. And the Corynthyans, the Pallyans and the Philasians by an
other cost in the said way. As touching the Beotians, Megarens and
Sycionians yt was unto them ordonned, that they should descend by the said
way that leads unto Nemea, whereunto the Argyues were gone, to the intent
that if the said Argyues would descend into the plain for to go to repoulse
the Lacedemonyans that came the low way, they should charge upon them at
their backs with their horsemen. The affairs than being so ordonned, Agis
entered by the plain into the country of the Argyues, and pyllaged Samynthe
and some small villages there abouts, Saminthus.
which parceyued the Argyues yssuedde fourth of Nemea at the break of day
for to go ^o defend their goods, Thrasilus.

Alcypro^


and having in their way encountered the Corinthyans and the Philasians, they
killed a certain number of the said Philasians. But there was well as many of
theirs slain by the Corinthians. On the other syde^ the Beotyans, Megarens and
Scycionians did keep the way, whereunto they were appoyncted, and did come
strayghte way to Nemea, frowhence the Argyues were already departed and
descended into the plain. And after that they were there, saying their goods
pyllaged and wasted, they did put themself in arraye for to fight against
their enemies. who also did the like on their party. But the Argiues did
find themself enuyronned on all sides, to wit, on the side of the plain
with Lacedemonyans and other, were in their compaigny, which were between them
and their city, from of the side of the mountaigne, with Corynthyans,
Philasie^s, and Pallians: and from of the cost of Nemea, with Beotyans,
Sycyonyans and Megarens, and alsoo they had no horsemen. For the Athenyans
that should have brought theyme. were not yet arrived, and also they thought
not to have had so great affayre, another that there had been so many ennemys.
But rather they hopedde, being in their land and within view of their city
to have obteigned a glorious victory against the Lacedaemonians. The two
armies than being ready to combat, two of the Argyues, to wit, Trasylus
that was one of the five Capytaines and Alcyphron, who had great acquayntance
and a house at Lacedemonye, came to speak with Agis for to empesche that there
should be no battaille, offryng on the bihalfe of the Argiues, if the
Lacedemonyans pretended any quarrel against them, for to obey to the right,
provided that they should do the like for their party, and that done for to
enter into alliance with them. Which offres ye said two Argyues did make of
their pryuate authoryte without knowlayge or co^sente of the othere. whereunto
Agis made them answer, likewise without thereunto calling anny other parsone,
but only one of the judges or threasurers of the army, who was appoynctedde to
him for a compaignyon in that same war. and amongst them four they concluded
a trefues for four months. During the which time, the causes above said should
have been treated upon. And that done Agis retired with his people without
speaking otherwise to any of the allies nor also with the Lacedemonyans. All
the which did follow him for that, that he was general of the army, and for
to obsarue the souldarly law and disciplyne. But that not wythstandynge they
blamed him greatly, for this, that having one so great and apparante occasyon
of victoire, considered that the enemies were enclosed on all sides, as well
with footmen, as also with horsemen, he departed fromthence without doing
there annye thing worthy of so fair an army, which was one of the greatest
that the Greeks had yet made in all that war, and retyredde all unto Nemea,
where they soiournedde certain days. Being in which place yt was judged by
all the Capytayns and chief of war, that they were puyssaunte enough for to
defeat, not only the Argiues and their allies, but also much more people if
they had been there, and fromthence they returned all thoroughly angered, every
one unto his quarter. But yet the Argyues were more displeased against the
twoo^ which had accordedde the appoynctme^t for their party, saying that
the Lacedemonia^s should never have had so honneste occasion for to wythdrawe
themself to their aduauntaige, for they thought that having so fayer an
army, as well of their own people, as of their allies: and moreover being
within the view of their city, they should easelye have defeated the said
Lacedemonyans. Being than departedde fromthence, they went altogyders into the
town of Charadrus, Charadrus.
in the which, before that they entered into their city, and would leave of
their armure, they were willing both to know of the war and to determyne of
the questyons of the war and of the mylytary and souldearly causes. And so
they concluded among other for to stoane Thrasylus. But he saved himself
within the temple, and yet neuerthelas they confiskated all his monney that he
had there. In thies enterfaictes, and they being yet there, aryued a thousand
fotemen and five hou^dred horsemen, whom Lachetes and Nicostratus brought unto
them from Athens, unto whom they said that they should return, for it
greuedde them to break the appoinctemente that had been concludedde with
the Lacedemonyans, in whatsoeuere manner, that it had been made And although
that the said Capytaynes of the Athenyans demanded to be presentedde with
their people unto the comynaltie of Argos, yet the said Capytaynes of the
army woolde not agree unto yt, until that the Mantynyans and the Elyans,
with great request, had obteignedde yt of the Argyues. Being than
brought in before the commons of Argos and before the allies that were yett
there, Alcibiades, who was general of all the bend, shewedde them that they
had no power to make peace nothere treatye with the enemies, without their
consent, and since that he was there acyuedde at the term that he had
promised with his bend, that they ought to begin the war again. And in
such manner he persuaded them by his oratyon, that they departed all at that
present for to goo against Orchomenia, which is in the country of Arcadie,
except the Argiues. who, albeit that they had been of the same opynyone,
were neuerthelas slack, but soon afterward they did follow the othere,
and all togyders did lay siege to Orchomenia, and vsedde all the force that
they might, for to take yt, aswelle with Engynes of artillerye as otherewyse,
for they had great desire to take the same town for many reasons: but
pryncypallye for this, that the Lacedemonyans had bestowedde there within yt,
all the hostages that they had takenne of the Arcadyans. The Orchomenyans
fearing to be takenne by force before that the succoures might comme unto
theyme, for that, that their walls were not strong, and that the enemies
were in right great number: they made appoynctemente with them, by mean
whereof they became their allies, in rendrynge the hoostages that were within
the town, and in delyuerynge some for theymselfe unto the Mantynyans. Aftere
that the Athenyans and othere allies had takenne Orchomenia, they deuysedde
whider they should goo at their departure fromethence. For the Elyans woolde
that they should have gone into Lepreum, the Man^ynians into Tegea, unto whose
opynion the Athenyans and Argiues did agree, whereupon the Elyans despised the^
and retournedde fromthence into their houses. The other abodde at Mantinea and
preparedde them self for to go to Tegea, where they had some co^federation
with certain of the people of the town, who should have brought them into it.
The Lacedemonyans, after that they were returned from Argos, blaymedde greatly
Agis, for the trefues that he had made, and that he had not brought the said
city into their obeissance: having the fairest occasion and the best mean
that ever they might have had, nothere without great pain could have.
For yt seemed unto them very difficille and hard for to assemble again at an
other time, one so fayere an army of their allies as that same was there. But
when the news came of the taking of Orchomenus, they were much moore angry
and anymated against him. In such sort that they determined to beat and
battre down his house, which thing had not been seen in the city, and for
to condemn him in a houndred thousand drachmes, so great was their anger
against him. Yet notwythstandinge he so excused himself and made unto them so
many requests, thereby promysinge to recompense that same ^aulte, by some
other great saruyce (if they would let him have the charge of the army
without doing that, which they had determined against him) that they were
content to leave to him the said charge, without doing him other evil. But
neuerthelas they made a new law, which never before had been made, w^ereby
they created twelve counsaillours of the said city of Sparte, for to assiste
him, without whom, he might another conducte an army out of the city, nor
make peace, trefues nor treaty with the enemies.

How the Lacedemonyans and their allies did win one battaille against the
Athenyans, the Argiues and their other allies in the land of Mantynyans.
The.ix. Chaptre.
IN this mean time did come a messenger from Tegea. who brought them news
from those in the town, that if they were not right shortly succored: they
should be constraynedde for to render them^elfe unto the Argiues and to their
allies. whereof the Lacedemonya^s were greatly astonyed and thereupon did all
arm themself, as well fre as bond, with greater diligence than ever they had
done, and went fromthence to Orestiu^. Orestiu^
And on the other side, they commanded those of Menalia and the other
Arcadyans, which took their part, that they should goo by their shorteste
way unto Tegea. And they, after that they were aryued at Drestie at their
departure from Orestium, Destri^
they did send again thider well the sixte part of their people, for to keep
the city: among whom were those, which were to old and to young. The other
marched straighte fourth to Tegea, and they being there arrived, sone after
came the Arcadyans, and beside this, they commanded the Corynthyans, the
Beotians, the Phocyans, and the Locryans^ that they should be at Ma^tynea with
most diligence that might be possible for them. Now there were some of them
there, which were nyghe enough for to come thider by and by. But for that,
that of force they must pass through the land of the ennemys, they were
constrained to attend and tarry for the othere, and yett neuerthelas did use
the best dyligence that they could for to pass. The Lacedemonyans with the
Arcadyans that they had, invaded the land of Mantynea, and there did all the
evil that they could. Having lodged their host bi^ore the temple of Hercules,
the Argiues and their allies being thereof advertised, did comme to lodge
themsel^e in a high place, strong enough and hard for to aboorde or to
enter upon, and there they preparedde themself for to comme to the battaille
against the Lacedemonyans, who likewise marchedde in order for to combat. And
being with in the cast of a stoane or of a darte, nighe unto the enemies,
one of the most auncyente of his bend, seeing that they went for to assault
their enemies in their force: cried greatly and with a loud voice unto
them, Agis wolle amend one euylle, which he has done, with one othere
moore greatte, willing to give it to be understand, that thynkinge to amend
the fault which he had done at Argos, he woolde hazarte that same battaylle
against reasonne. Agis than understanding this, for fear that he had to be
reprehendedde and rebukedde, if that he had assailled the enemies in their
forte, or else rathere for this, that it seemed unto him not to be to purpose: he
retyredde with his people without fyghting. And when he was in the land of
Tegea, he dyuertedde and did turn the water, from the river that passed
through that countreye, into the land of Mantynea. By reasonne of which
river, the Tegeans and the Mantynyans had oftentimes had question, ^or
that, that yt wasted the lands, in that part thereof, where it had course.
This did Agis, for that, that he woolde by that mean constrayne the Argiues
and their allies, to descend out of their forte, wherein they were lodgedde,
for necessytye of water, and to cause theyme to come into the plain, to the
end that he might combat in a reasonable or indifferente place, and so he
aboode in that same place for to diuerte and turn away the water all that
day. The Argiues and their allies were furste abashedde of this, that the
Lacedemonyans were so soubdaynelye departedde, and could not think the cause
of their departure. Afterward seeing that they were retyredde, and that they
had not pursued them, they chargedde their Dukes and Capytaynes therewyth,
saying: that furste they had suffredde them to pass by appoynctemente, when
they might have destroyedde them before Argos, and now that they were fled,
that they would not follow them, and by that mean, the enemies had with
their ayse saved themself, and that they were deceived and betrayed by their
said Capytaynes. who were through that murmuration much troubled, and yet
neuerthelas did afterward depart out of their forte, wherein they were with
their people, and descendedde into the plain, to the intent for to pursue
their enemies. And the day followynge, they marchedde in battaille,
determynedde to fight against them, if they might mete or find theyme. On
the othere side the Lacedemonyans, who were returned from the river into their
furste Camp, nygh to the temple of Hercules, parceyuinge them to comme
toward them, were more afraid, than ever at any time before, within the
remembrance of man, they had been. For that, that the thing was so soubdayne,
that skarcely they had space ^or to put themself into battaylle array.
Notwithstanding they took heart of grace and recovered their espryttes
in^ontynently, and every man did putt himself in order at commandment of Agis
their king. who had, by order of their laws, all the authorytie to command
and ordeyne the Dukes of the army, which were the chiefeste under him. And
afterward, the Dukes commanded the Trybunes, the Trybunes the Centurions,
and the Centurions the Dixeniers or rotter men, rulers of every number of
ten, for such is their order. By means whereof, whatsoever was requisyt to be
done, was quickly executed, for a great part of the people that be in their
hooste, have charge the one over the other, and so there be found many that
have charge of the affairs. At that same time the Scirites by their oune
accord placed themself in the left poincte. Scirites.
For such, from all auncyente, was the order of the Lacedemonyans, and with
them, those, which had been in Thrace with Brasidas and those that had newly
been affranchised and putt into liberty. After them there were the othere
Lacedemonyans in bendes according to their order, and ioigninge to them the
Arcadyans. And in the right poynct, the Menalyans, the Tegeates and a small
number of Lacedemonyans. who kept the poyncte, and the horsemen the wynge. On
the othere side the right poyncte was commyttedde to the Mantynians, for that,
that the feate was done in their land. After them, were the Arcadyans of
their party, and a thousand ordenarye Souldears. unto whom the Argiues
did give ordenary soulde or wages, for that, that they were well experymented
for the war, and after them, were all the Argyues, and successyuely the
Cleonians and the Orneates their allies, and finally at the end of the left
poyncte were the Athenyans with their horsemen. Such was the order of both the
battaills, and albeit that the Lacedemonyans were of the greater appearance, yet
could I not for truth descryue the number of the people, nothere of the one
side nor of the other, another of them both togiders. To wit, of the
Lacedemonya^s for that, that they do their feats very secretly and in great
silence: and of the other, for that, that they make them so great, that that,
why the they say, is not to be believed. But yet neuerthelas the number of the
Lacedemonyans may be coniectured by this, that seven bendes of theirs did fight
besides the Scyrites, who were five houndred. In every of whychebendes, were.v.
Centuries, and in every Centurie, two Manipules, and in ayther Manypule there
were four men a front at the poinct. But more inner in the depth thereof,
there were more or less according to the discretion of the capytaynes and
Bandoliers. And yet neuerthelas every order was of the thicknes of eight men,
and the front of all the former several bendes was ioygned and locked egally in
length, and there were four houndred, forty and eight men in the furste
poyncte, besides the said Scyrites. After that they were thus all set into
battaille array, as well of the one side as of the other, every capytayne
exhorted and encouraiged his souldears, the best wise that they could: to
wytt, the Mantinians declared to their people, that the questyon was, o^
losinge their seignyory and liberty, and of their coming into seruytude. The
Argyues showed unto theirs, that the questyon was to defend their
princypalitie, which was egall to the same of the other cities of Peloponese,
and also for to revenge the oultrages and iniuryes, that their voysins and
ennemys, had oftene times done unto them. The Athenyans proponed unto theirs
that it should be their honnour (since they did fight with so great number
of their allies) to show that they were no worse warryours tha^ the other, and
also if they could at the self instante vainquyshe and destroy the
Lacedemonyans in the country of Peloponesa, their estate and seignyorye should
forever be in the greatter suertie, for there should never be any people that
durst comme to assaylle them in their lands. Such were the sayings and
perswations that were made to the Argiues and their allies. As touching the
Lacedemonyans they were all assured people and expert in war, werefore they
had no need of exhortatyon. For the memory and recordynge of their many and
cheualerour feats did give the^ more hardynes, than a short declaratyon
(though yt had been well garnysshed with words) could have done. This
passed they, began to march the one against the other, to wytt, the Argyues
and their allies with great impetuosytie or fiercenes, and with great wrath
and anger. And the Lacedemonyans all at leisure and pace by pace after the
sound of the trompets. whereof they had great number dispersed into many
places of their battaille, for such was their custom and ordenance, to carry
many of them, not for any relygyon or deuotyon as many other do, but for to
march in better order at the sound of the said trompettes, and also to the
end that they should not be putt into disorder at the encountrynge of the
enemies, as it chauncethe oftentimes when two great armies do encounter the
one, the othere. But before that they did come to the encountrynge or metinge,
Agis king of the Lacedemonyans deuysedde with himself for to do a thing for
to empesche and wythstande that, which had always been used when two
battailles did encounter. For those, that be in the right poyncte of ayther
side, when they comme to encounter the enemies that be in the apposytte or
directly against the left poyncte, they spread themself in lenghe for to
enuyrone and enclose the^. For that, that ayther party fearinge to abide in
discouert of the right side, which the shield does not cover, he wardeth
himself with his shield that is next him on the right hand, and they think
that when they be most locked togiders, they should be most in covert and in
suertie, and he that is foremost in the end of that same right poynct, shows
to the other the way to do yt, for insomuch as he has none at his right hand
for to ward him, he takes the most pain that he may, to exchue the
enemies on that side that is openne or discovered, and for that cause does the
best that he can for to auaunce the end of the contrary poyncte, that was
opposite or dyrecte against him and for to enclose and enuyronne it, for that
he woolde not be assailled on the side, which is discoueredde, and the othere
for the self fear did follow him. Now the Mantynians, who kept the right
poynct of their side, were in much greater number, than the Scirites. Also the
Lacedemonyans and the Tegetes, who kept the right poyncte of their side, were
in much greater number, than the Athenyans that kept the left poynct of
theirs. For this cause Agis fearyng lest the left poincte of his people
should susteigne damage by the Mantynyans, who were in much greater number,
he made a sign to the Scirites and to the Brasidians, that they should retire
out of their order, and ioigne themself to the Mantynians, and fourthwyth he
commanded two Trybuns, that were in the right poyncte, to wit, Hipponoides
and Aristocles, Hipponoides.

Aristocles.


that they should depart out of the place, wherein they were in their
bendes, and that they should readely bestow the^self in rome of the said
Scirites and Brasidians, thynkinge that by that mean, his right poyncte
should remain yet well provided for, and the left should be greatly
strengthened for to resist the Mantynyans. Nevertheless they woolde not do it,
as well for that, that they were already nighe hand to hand with the enemies,
as also the time was very short for to do that, which they were commaundedde,
through occasyon whereof, they were afterward bannyshed out of Sparte, as
nyce and slothful. The Scirites and the Brasidians being than separated and
retired out of their order according to the commandment of the king Agis,
and the same king, seeing that the other two bedes did not come into their
place, he comau^ded them again, that they should putt themself into their
former order. But it was not possible for them so to do, another for those of
that poynct, fromwhence they were departed, to receue them, being already all
locked togider and nigh unto the enemies. And yet neuerthelas the
Lacedemonyans shewedde themself in all things the better warryours, and more
experimented in war, than the other. For when it came to fighting hand to
hand, the Mantynyans, that had the right poincte, at the arryuall did put
the Scirites and the Brasidians to flight, and with their allies and the
thousand souldiars of the Argiues, they charged upon the left poincte of the
Lacedemonyans, which they found naked and void with the said two bendes, and so
repoulsed it and constraigned the Lacedemonyans, that were after them there, to
take flight, and chased them into the maresses that were nyghe unto them,
wherein there were some of the most aged slain. And so in that part, the
Lacedaemonians were vainquished: but as for the remenante and chiefly the
middell of the battaill, wherein the king Agis was, having about him three
houndred chosen men, which were named, the knights: the things went whooly
otherwise, for they chargedde with such foorce upon the pryncipall and most
ancient of the Argiues and upon the thousand souldears, which were named the
five Cohertes or bendes, and likewise upon the Cleontyns, and upon the
Orneates, and upon some Athenyans, that were in their bendes: that they caused
them to lose the place, and truly many without makyng^ resystence, seeing
the ympetuosytye or fiercenes of the Lacedemonyans, did fly, whereby a number
of them were oppressed and strangled in the prease. The Argiues and their
allies being in flight, their battaille was brokenne on both sides, whereby
the Athenyans, that were in the left poynct were in great danger. For that,
that the Lacedemonyans and the Tegeates, which were in the right poyncte of
the enemies, had enclosed them on the one side, and on the other, their allies
were vainquished, and had not it been for the succor, which they had with their
horsemen, they had been all destroyed. And also in thies enterfaictes, Agis
being aduertysed, that those, that were in the left poyncte of his battaille
dyrectly against the Mantynyans, and the thousand souldears Argyues, were in
great parille: he commanded all his people that they should go to succor
them, which thing they did, by mean whereof, the Athenians had leisure to save
themself with the Argiues, which had been vainquished. And as touching the
Mantynyans and the thousand sonldyars of the Argiues, they had no heart any
longer to poursue against them, that were opposite or directly against them, but
yet saying their people beaten or ouercomme, and the Lacedemonyans that came to
ouerronne them, they did likewise fly, and therein many of ye Mantynyans were
slain: but the more part of the thousand souldyars, Argiues, saved themself
in retyringe all fayer and easily without flying in disaraye. For also the
customme of the Lacedemonyans is to fight a^grelye and long until they have
putt their enemies to flyghte, but afterward, as they see them fly, they
follow not them long. And such was ye issue of that same battayl, the which
was the greateste and most sharp among all the othere that the Greeks had
had togider, for also the same was between the most puissance Cities of
Greece. After the victory, the Lacedemonyans, spoilled furst ye dead bodies of
the enemies of their harnes, wherwt they dressedde their Trophee, and than
they spoilled them of their habilleme^tes and apparel which they carried away,
and that done they rendered the Cariogns to the enemies, that required them. As
touching theirs, they caused them to be carried into the town of Tegea, and
there they caused them to be honnorably engraued or buryedde. The number of
them that dyed in that battaille, was, of the Argiues, Orneates, and Cleonyans
aboutes leuene houndred, of the Mantynyans two houndred, and of the Athenyans
and Argyues asmany: amongeste whom, were Dukes and Capytaines of the same
Athenyans and Argiues. On the Lacedemonyans part, there was not so many, as
there needs any great memory of them, and also the number is not well known
but it is commonly said, that there dyed of them aboutes three houndred. Now
was it happened, that at the hour, when the battaille should be made,
Plistoanax the other king of Lacedemony issued with the old and young people
of the City, Plistoanax.
for to comme to the succors of the othere. But being comme to Tegea, and
there understanding the news of the victory, he returned, and so
contremanded or wylled the Corinthians and othere allies, that be out of the
distraict of Peloponese, which came likewise to the succoures of the said
Lacedemonyans to repair homewardes, and geuyng license to certain estrangers,
that were with them to depart, they afterward celebrated their feast, which
is named, Carnea. And by this mean they revenged and blotted out the infamy
and shame, which they had received of the Athenyans, aiwelle in the Island, as
in other places, (whereby they were reputed nyce people and evil warriors)
through this only victory, and yt was known that that, which before time had
happened unto them, was through fortune of war, but that their virtue and
force therein was such, as had been accustomed. It chaunsed also that the day
before the said battaille, the Epidaurians, thinking that the Argiues had been
al gone to that same battaill, and by that mean, that the City remained void
or desolate, they came with all their strength or power for to enter into their
land, and did slay some of their cytezeins, that were left for defense of the
city, which came fourth against them. But three thousand Elyans which did come
to ye succor of Mantynyans, and a thousand Athenyans, which likewise came to
ye succor of theirs, togiders with those that were eskaped from the battaille,
ioigned themself togider, and went all against Epidaure. And in ye mean time,
that the Lacedemonyans made their feast of Carnea, they assieged the said
city on all sides, departing the quartiers among them, and they enclosed yt
with walls. And the Athenyans in the quarter that was geuene or appoyncted to
them, after that the other did cease to work, they fortefyed the temple of
Juno, which was without the city in their said quarter, and therein placinge a
good garnysonne they afterward retournedde fromethence into their houses.
And so the summer endedde.

How the peace was made bitwene the Lacedemonyans and the Argiues, and
afterward the alliance. And of some other things that were done as well on
the part of the Lacedemonyans, as of the same of the Athenyans without anny
declaration of war. The.x. Chapter.
IN the begynnyge of the winter followynge, the Lacedemonyans, having
celebrated their feast of Carnea, the issued into the feldes and went
toward Tegea. Being in which place, they sent of their oune mind their
messengers unto the Argyues for to treat the appoinctmente. Now there was in
the city of Argos many (that were the chiefest) with the Lacedemonyans, the
which furthere desired to abolishe the estate and governance of the common
people, which was in the city, and to bring it unto a small number. And
after the battaille lost, found many of the people of their opinion. And
for to do that, they would furste make peace with the Lacedemonyans, and that
done, afterward make the alliance, by means whereof they hoped to subdewe
the people. The Lacedemonyans did than se^de Lychas the son of Arcesilaus
for to treat the peace, for that, that he had a house in the town, to whom
they gave charge for to demand of them the one of two things: to wit, in
what force, they would make war, if they woolde have yt, or peace, if that
they desired peace. whereupon there were great altercations, for that, that
Alcibiades was there, who trauailled to the contrary with his power. But
finally, they that took part with the Lacedemonyans, had furste so declared
their minds and used such diligence, that they induced the common people to
make and accept the said peace, in manner that follows.

The form of the peace bitwene the Lacedemonyans and the Argiues.
IT pleases the counsel of the Lacedemonyans to make peace with the Argiues
in this manner. to wytt, that the Argyues shall render to the Orchomenyans,
Orchomenu.
their childrene, to the Menaliens their Cytezeins: and those that were within
Mantinea, to the Lacedemonia^s. And further, that they should wythdrawe their
people, which they had before Epidaure, and raze down the wall, which
they had there made. And if the Athenyans would not wythdrawe theirs
fromthence, they should be reputed enemies, as well of the Lacedemonyans, as of
the Argiues. And likewise the Lacedemonyans, if they had any child of the said
Argiues or of their allies with them, they should render and deliver them. For
perfourmance of which things, they should make oath the one to the other, and
this much is it, as touching them. As concerning the remenant, that all the
cities of Peloponese small and great shall fromhensforwardes bein liberty,
and live according to their ancient laws and customs, and if anny
estrangier shall will to enter into the said country of Peloponese in armure
against one of the said cities, the other shall succor yt, so as it shall be by
them aduysed with a common accord. And as touching the allies of the
Lacedemonyans that be without the said Peloponese, that they be and remain in
the estate, wherein those of the Argyues be, every one in his terrytorye, and
that when annye succoure shall be demaundedde by the allies of the one of the
parties, and that they shall be assembled for to make it, after that declaration
shall have been made of the present articles, it shall be in their liberty,
aither to fight with them, or to return into their houses. which articles
were accepted by the Argiues. And that done, the Lacedemonyans departed from
before Tegea and returned home. Sone after, those, that had treated the said
peace being gone and come many times, the one unto the other, it was finally
concluded between them, that the Argiues should make alliance with the
Lacedemonyans, forsakinge the same, which they had concluded with the
Athenyans, the Mantynyans and the Elyans, the which was accorded in the manner
that follows.

The form of the allyaunce between the Lacedemonyans and the Argyues.
IT has pleased the Lacedemonyans and the Argyues for to make allyaunce and
confederation between them, for fyftye years in this manner. To wit, that the
one party shall do and mynyster right and reasone unto the other egally
according to their ancyente laws and customs. And that the cities that be in
Peloponese, free and living in liberty, shall and may enter into this
alliance, to hold their terrytorye and to exercise their justice, like as
they have accustomedde. And all the othere Cities, that be allied with the
Lacedemonyans, being without Peloponese, shall be of the self sort and
condytion, that the Lacedemonyans be in: and likewise the allies of the Argyues
of the sort and condytion of the same Argiues^kepynge their terrytory. And if
it be needful to send anny succors to anny of the said confederated cities,
the said Lacedemonyans and Argyues shall mutuelly deuyse, what shall be expedient
and raisonable, to wit, if any of the said cities have question and difference
with other cities, that they may not be of this alliance, by reasone of their
lymitts or otherwise. And if any of the same confederated cities, had any
difference the one against the other, the same different shall be commit to one
of the othere cities, that shall be found trusty and indifferent unto both
parties^for to be friendly judged after their laws and customs. In such form
was the alliance made. By mean whereof all the differents that were bitwene the
said two cities were extinguished and appeased. And so they concluded bitwene
them not to receive any herault another any Ambassador of the Athenyans, into
another city, but ye furst they should void their people out from Peloponese,
and raze down ye walls, that they had made at Epidaure, and that they should
promys, nothere to make peace, nor war, but by one common accord of both the
said cities. Now the said Lacedemonyans and Argyues had purposed to do many
things, but principally they were willing to make an enterprise into the
countreye of Thrace. For that cause they sent their Ambassadors unto
Perdiccas for to wtdraw him to their alliance. whereunto he would not at the
furst front agree another depart from the amytie of the Athenyans,
notwythstanding that he had great regard to the Argyues, for that, that he
was borne in their city, and therefore he did take a time for to deliberate and
consult upon it. And thereupon the Lacedemonyans and Argiues renewed the oath
that they had with the Chalcides and also added anew oath. Chalcidenses.
Afterward the Argiues did sent their Ambassadors to the Athenya^s, for to
sommone and command them to forsake and raze down the wall that they had made
at Epidaure. Who parceyuinge that the army, which they had left there was
small, in comparyson of the othere, that was departed fromethence: they sent
Demosthenes, Demosthenes
for to cause their people to retire. who being there arrived, faygned to make
a tourney without the town, and by that mean caused the other that were in
garnyson within, to issue fourth, and when they were with out, he locked the
gates against them, and afterward caused them of the town to assemble
togider, and renewed the alliance, which they had with the Athenyans, and in
that doing, rendered the wall unto them for which the question was. After that
the alliance was made between the Lacedemonyans and the Argiues, the Mantynyans
refused at the beginning to enter into it: but seeing that they were to weak
for the Argiues, sone after they made appoynetemente with the Lacedemonyans,
and left the towns that they held in their liberty. That done, the
Lacedemonyans and the Argyues, ayther of them sent a thousand of their people
to Sycione, and there did take the governance from the common people, and
committed it into the hands of a certain number of the cytezeins, and the
Lacedemonyans were principal and chief doers thereof. And sone after the like
was done in the city of Argos to the intent, that it should be governed after
the self order used in the city of Lacedemonie. which things were done
about the end of the winter, the spring time approchyng, in that same year,
which was the ^ourtenthe of the war. The summer followynge, they of
Epitedie, Epitedie^ses.
which be in the country of Athon, rebelled from the Athenyans, and reallyed
themself with the Chalcides, and the Lacedemonyans did give order in the
affairs of Achaia, which were not well to their contentacyon. And mean time
the people of Argos, who had already conspyredde to recover and take again the
government, espying the time when the Lacedemonyans exercysed themself all
naked according to their custom: they arose up against their governors in
armure, and some of them they did slay, and the other they bannished, who,
before that they were chased or driven fromthence, had sent unto the
Lacedemonyans, to have their aid, but they slacked tomuch their coming
through cause of their said exercise or plays, notwythstandinge they sone
after deferred or put them of, and issued fourth into the feldes for to succor
the said governors. But being arrived at Tegea, and understanding there that
the said governors were driven away, they returned fro^thence and acheued or
made an end of their said plays. Afterward ambassadors were sent unto
them, as well by those, that were chased fromthence, as also by those, that
gouernedde the town, the which were heard by ye Lacedemonia^s in the presence
of their allies. And after that the things were at length debated, it was
declared, that the governors were wronfully and without cause bannished, and was
concluded to go thider in armure, and by force to place the^ again within the
town, but the execution being to long delayed, they, that were within the
town, fearing to be ouercomme and takene, reallied themself afreshe with the
Athenyans. thinking to be by them guarded and defended: and that done, they
caused soubdainelye the walls to be made from the town unto the sea, to the
end that if they were empesched or let to have victuails by land, they might
yet have them by sea, andthys they did (having intelligence with some of the
Cities of Peloponese) in so great diligence, that there was not man nor woman,
young nor old, small nor great, that employed not himself therein. Also the
Athenyans sent thider all their masons and carpenters, so yt the said walls,
were acheued and fynished at the end of summer. Which parceued, the
Lacedemonyans assembled all their allies, except ye Corinthians, and in the
beginning of winter they went to make war against them under conducte of
their king Agis. And they had also some intellygence in the town of Argos, but
saying that it came not to effect, they took the walls, which were newely
made and not fully fynished, by force, and rasedde them down. And afterward
they did take a small town, that was in the terrytorye of the said Argos,
named Hysias, by assault, and did slaye all the notable or best men that they
found within it, and afterward returned fromethence into their houses. And
sone after the Argyues issued fourth of their town with all their force
against the Phliasians, and pillagedde all their land, for somuche as they
had receyuedde their exiles or bannyshedde men: of whom some had there,
houses and heredytamentes, and afterward returned fromthence into their
town. That same winter, the Athenyans made war against Perdiccas in
Macedonie, under color of this, that they said, that he had conspired against
them with the Lacedemonyans and the Argiues, and that when the same Athenya^s had
prepared their army for to send them into Thrace against the Chalcydes and the
Amphipolites under the conducte of Nyrias, he had dissembled with them, in
such sort, that the said enterprise could not be executed, and by that
mean he was declared their enemy. And in thies entrefaicts passed that winter,
which was the end of the fourtenth year of that same war. At beginning of
the summer followynge, Alcibiades with twenty ships passed into Argos, and
there being entered into the city, he took three houndred of the burgeoses of
the town, which he suspected to take the part with the Lacedemonyans, whom
he caused to depart and to be carried into the Islandes which the Athenyans
gouernedde in that same quarter.

How Lytie of Meleas was as sieged and finally taken by the Athenyans, and
some other things that were done that self same year. The.xi. Chapte.
IN that same time the Athenyans also sent an othere army by sea with thirty
ships of theirs against the Islande of Meleas, in which ships there were
twelve houndredde men well armed, three houndredde Archers and twentye light
horses, and moreover there was in that same army, six ships of those of
Chio, and two of those of Lesbos, besides the aid which they had of their
othere allies, and of those of the self Islande, which amountedde to, aboutes
a thousand, five houndredde men. Now were the Meliens Burgeoses of the
Lacedemonyans, and refused to be under the obeissaunce of the Athenyans, like
as all the othere Isles of that same sea. Notwythstandynge that from the
beginning they were not so declaredde against them. But for that, that the
Athenyans would constrayne them to declare themself and for that cause had
burned and wasted that their land, they shewedde themself openly their ennemys
and entered in war against them. The said army being than arrived in the
said Islande, Cleomenes.
Cleomedes son of Lycomedes and Tisias son of Tysymachus, Tisyas.
who were the Capytains, before they did any dammaige to them of the Islande,
they sent certain of the Ambassadors unto them of the city for to speak
with them, who were heard not before all the commons, but before the officers
and those of the counsaille only. So they declaredde their charge, and were
answered, and the matter debated between them, like as herafter follows in
manner of a dyalogue.

The conferringe or talk that was bitwene the Ambassadors of the Athenyans,
and of the officers of Meleas, for to treat the appoynctemente between them.
The.xii. Chapter.
FUrste the Athenyans did speak in this manner. Sirs we parceyue well, that
you are not willinge that we should speak before all the commynaltie, but
only in this assembley, fearinge lest though that we should have had by long
oration declared in presence of the whole commynaltie, all true and reasonable
things: yet that not wythstandynge, that same commons, not having otherwise
debatedde the matter from poyncte to poyncte, might thereby be induced to
commyt some error. wherefore yt is expedient that ye do yt like, to wytt, that
ye declare not your purpose rashly or all at ones, but from poincte to poinct,
so that if you shall see, that we say any thing, that is impertinent or
unreasonable, ye may answer thereunto, and tell us your opynio^ therein. And
before all things declare unto us, if this manner of speaking, which we do
propone unto you, be to your contentatyon or not. The Melyans. Truly lords,
this facyon of speaking aparte and debatynge causes with leisure, is not to be
blaymedde. But there is one thing that semethe unto us contrary and
repugnante to this, and that is, that ye come not to speak of war to
follow, but of the same that presently is already. wherefore we parceyue well,
that you wolbe judges of this present communycation. And that the end
thereof shall be such, that though we vainquishe you by reason, and therefore
do not agree to your will, yet you will war against us. And if we consent to
that which you wolle, we shall remain your subjects and in your bondage.
The Athenyans. Uerely if ye be here assembled for to debate of matters, that
may chance, or for any other matter: than for to provide for the estate and
wealth of your city in the estate, that the things be: it is not needful
that we speak further therein, but if ye^ be come for this purpose, we wolle
speak thereof. The Melyans. It standethe with all reasone, and also to be
licencedde, that people that be in such perplextie, should show many reasons,
and change many purposes, having regard to many things, considered, that the
question is of our wealth. Wherefore it it please you, we wolle debate togider
in such sort, as you have reherced. The Athenia^s, Since than it is
convenient so to talk, we wolle not use doubtful terms, as if that by right,
the governance over you bilonged unto us, by reasone of the victory, that we
sometime had against the Medes, nor by long words, for to show you, that we
have just cause to move war against you, for the iniurye that we have
received of you. Also it it not nedeful that ye declare unto us that ye be
burgeoses of the Lacedemonyans, and that ye have in nothing offended us, hopyng
by that mean to persuade us to desist and leave of our enterprise. But ye
must treat of possible things accordingly as we and you understand the
affair and busynes that presently is in hand. And to consider that among
people of understanding the just and reasonable causes be debated by reasone,
when there is no necessity on the one side, more than of the other. But when
the more feoble debate matters, which the stronger part does demand of them:
it is convenient for them to accord unto the less evil. The Melyans,
Sythence than, that ye wolle, that, without debatynge with reasone, men speak,
to make the best, that may be, according to the estate of things: It is
reasonable, not being hable to do better, that we consarue that, wherein
consists our common wealth, to wytt, our liberty. Also it should be
convenient and honorable for a man, that is continuallye in danger, so that he
persuade an other, that he should content himself with that, that he may
advantage and save by his wit, and by his diligence according to the time, and
to accept it likewise himself, wherefore you other Athenyans, ought well to
take heed, for this, that forsomuche as ye be of more power, than the other,
that if one such adversity chanced unto you, somuche your ruin sh^lde be
somuche the greater example of other, for your punishment should be somuche the
greater. The Athenyans, we fear not the abolyshynge of our empire and
seignorie. For those that have accustomed to rule other: as the Lacedemonyans
have done, be not so cruel toward them whom they vainquishe, as they be,
that have been accustomed to be ruled, when they rebel, if they have the
victory against them, to whom they were subject. But as the danger thereof
resists to us, so leave it to our parelles and fortunes, and let us speak
of that, which apperteigneth to the augmentacion of our empire, for which
cause we become hider, and for the wealth of your city. And as touching that,
we woll tell you plainly our intent. Which is, that we wolle govern you, and
yet not be molestuous nor importunate unto you, and in this doing save you,
as well for your wealth, as for ours. The Melyans, how may that be, that it
should be as much our profytt to be your subjects, as to yours to be our
Lords? The Athenyans. Truly it is your proffytt, to do rather so, than to
suffer all the extremyties of war. And ours, to have you to our subjects,
rather than to slaye you. The Melyans: And if we be newter without medlynge
with the one party or with the other, and that we be your friends instead of
thies questions, being now your enemies, wolleye not be therewith
contentedde? The Athenyans: No truly, for it should be more damage to have you
for friends, than enemies, for this, that if we should accept you for
friends, it should he a argument or declaration of our weakness and ympotency,
whereby the other, over whom we govern, shall esteem us the less. The
Melyans: Than those, that be under your empire, be of this mind that they
desire that those, which have nothing to do with you, should be your subjects
as they be. And also, that your colonies, if there be any of them that have
rebelled against you, that they should be brought again into your subjection.
The Athenyans: And wherefore should they not have that opinion, for they
think not, that the one nor the other wythdrawe themself from our obeisance
by any reasone, but only when they parceue themself to be puissante enough for
to resist us, and that we for fear dare not assaille the^. Whereby, besides
this, that when we shall have subdewed you, we shall have greater number of
subjects: Our empire shall be also thereby more puissant and more assured, for
that, that you be islanders and people of the Islande, and be reputed puissant
by sea, wherefore if we subdue you, ye shall be afterward most feoble. The
Melyans. And you, do not you put and repute your suertie to be in your force
by sea? but insomuch as you persuade us, that we should leave aparte reason for
to obey to your intent and proffitt, we woll likewise show you and take pain
to do you to know, that the thing which we demand for our proffytt, shall
redounde to yours, for you may well understand, that by subduing us without
other quarelle, yt shall cause all those of Greece, that have been newter, to be
your ennemies, for that, that seeing what ye shall have done, they shall fear
lest afterward, you would do the like unto them, by which doing you augment
your enemies, and constrain those to be adversaries, that were not wiliynge
unto it. The Athenians. It is not so, as you do understand it, for we think
not that those, which live in liberty, be it in maine land, in any part that
it may be, or in any Islandes, that be not subject to any other parsone, as you
be, may be so sharp or so to be feared, as the other, that be subjects and
obey by force, when they be ill minded: for that, that they, which live in
liberty be more necligent to defend themself, but those that be subjects,
through their disordered passions, for a small occasion, do put oftentimes
their estate and ours in danger. The Melyans: If you than, for to encrese your
empire, and those, that be in subjection, for to exempt themself out of
saruytude, do put your self in so many dangers: truly it should be much more
great shame and greater slacknes to us, that be yet in liberty, for to suffer
it to be lost. The Athenyans. That is otherwise, and you shall not do wisely
if ye follow that counsaille, for your forces be not like unto ours, so that
ye should not be ashamed to submytte your self unto us but insomuche as ye be
weaker than we, ye should devise for your wealth. The Melians. It is true, but
also we know, yt the fortune of war is most often common or indifferent,
as well to the weak, as to the strong, and that it stands not always with
the greater number. And on the other part, he that re^dreth himself subject,
another has hope, nor recovery: whereas he that stands at defense, hops
always well. The Athenia^s: hope, which is the comfort of them, that be in
danger: though yt she bring damage to the^ that use her, where there is
appearance or lykelyhode of recouerye: yet does she not utterly destroy the^, as
she does those, that putt all their trust in such thing, as of his nature is
dangerous and full of hazard, for all at one time she causes herself to be
knowin by the^, that trust to much in her, and leueth theyme no manner mean
to defend theyme. Whereby you, that parceyue your self so weak and in in
such danger: ought to keep your self, from ytt, and not to do as many
have done, who having some good mean to save theymeselfe: when they parceyue
that they be without appearance of hope, return to other uncertain abusions,
as be visions, diuinacions, Oracles and other like, which by vain hope,
bring men unto perdition. The Melyans, we know right well that, which you
understand clearly. And that is, that it shall be a hard thing for to resist
your puissance and your fortune, which is much greatter than ours, and that
the thing shall not be egalle, Neuerthelas we trust in fortune and in the
grace of God, consideredde that ye have another reasone nor good quarrel
against us, and also we hope that if, of our self we be not puissant enough
for to resist, that yet we shall have succors from the Lacedaemonians, with
whom we have made alliance, who shall be constrained to do it, though that they
have had no other interest, than for their honor, considered yt we be their
burgeoses and parents, by which reasons ye may know that we have not hitherto
been over much bold. The Athenyans, we also doubt not the benignity and
goodness of the gods, forsomuche as that which we do, and repute to be just:
is not against thopinion of men, and also is according to the deliberation and
will of the gods toward men, and of those men, the one toward the other.
For as touching the gods, we believe that, which other do commonly bileue of
them. As concerning men, we know, that by natural necessity, he that has
overcome an other, remaigneth his lord. The which law we have not made,
another have we been the furst that have used ytt. But rather we use it so, as
we have seen, that other have used yt. and we wolle leave it perpetuallye unto
them, that shall come after us. And we be full certain, that if you and the
other had power and faculty to do it, as we have, that ye would do the like.
Wherefore as touching you, we fear not, but that we be stronger, than you. As
concerning the Lacedemonyans, we know that ye take in good part the opinion
that you have of them, as people finally experymentedde of euylles, that for
their honnoure, they wolle come to succoure you, but neuerthelas we praise not
your follye. For the same Lacedaemonians, among themself and in things that
concern their laws and domestical customs, use oftentimes virtue, But of
such sort, that if they governed with other, men might allege many
examples thereof. Notwithstanding for to show you the so^marie: they be the
people of all those, of whom we have knowlage, that most repute that, which
pleases them, to be honest, and that, which is for their proffytt, to be
reasonable. Wherefore it shall not be your commodity, to rest or trust in
their fantasies which be without any reasone, in this question, that is of
your wealth. The Melyans, whatsoever you do say: we do bileue certainly: that
although their honor did not move them, yet for their singular proffytt,
they woll not habandone nor forsake this city, which is their colonie. For by
that mean, they should be desloyall and unfaithful unto their friends and
allies of Greece, and should procure the proffytt of their enemies. The
Athenyans, ye presuppose than and confess, that there may be nothing
proffitable, that is not suer: and also that no man should enterprise for his
proffytt, if therein were not suertie: but rather for honor, that is to be
done, which is honnest and reasonable, ye, though that there were danger
therein: the which thing the Lacedemonyans do least regard of al men in the
world. The Melians: verily we hope, that they woll take thaduenture and putt
themself in hazart for us. For they have cause to do it more for us, that for
any other, both for that, that we be next neighbors to Peloponese, and
thereby may best aid themself by us in their affairs: and for this also, that
they may most trust in us, for parentage, that we have with them, being
discendedde of their cyetzeins. The Athenyans, it is true. But the certainty
of succors consists not to be had from them, that ought to give it, for the
confidence and benyuolence that those have in the^, which require it, but it is
to be considered if they be the stronger, whereunto the Lacedemonia^s have more
regard, than any other people. For they mistrusting their domestical
puissance, cause the succors of their allies to come for to resist even their
voysins or neighbors. wherefore it is not to be bileued, that parceiuing us to
be strongest by sea, they woll put themself in adventure to pass into this
Islande. The Melia^s: That is true, but they have other people enough for to
send hider. And the sea of Crete, is so spacious and large, that it is more
diffici^e for them that keep it, to encounter those, that wilcome thider: than
for them that come, to keep themself secrett from them, and if this reason
moves them not, they have yet an other mean: to wytt, for to enter into your
land and into that same of your allies, to wytt those, against whom Brasidas
has not been. And by that mean they shall give you occasion to labor to
defend your oune land, and not to trouble the same, wherwt ye have nothing to
do. The Athenia^s, you make your prouf to your cost, if that you abuse yourself
in such things, the which you know sufficiently by other experiences. in y^
the Athenyans never raised their siege from before any place, through fear,
but we do well parceiue that whatsoever ye have said, which you were willing
to speak for your wealth, ye have not hitherto touched one only word, thereof, in all the purposes, which you have taken. And yet it is the only purpose, which
the people being in your condi^ion, ought to keep, and whereunto they ought to
travail to come: for yt, which you propone with so great instance, be al
things to follow, and you have very short time to defend or deliver your
self out of the hands of them yt be now ready to destroy you, wherefore me
thinks yt you declare your self to be wholly destitute of your wits, if you
cause not us to withdraw ourselves without longer debating, and devise among
your self some other party, yt may be better for you, without co^tynuinge in
the shame, whereof ye be afraid. For yt has oftentimes been cause of great
inconvenience unto them, which thereon have arested in great dangers. And many
be found, that, considering y^ things whereunto of necessity they should
come, if they yielded the^self: have abhorred the name of seruytude, which they
reputed to be dishonest, and have rather endured the name to be overcome,
which they reputed more honorable. Whereby they afterward in effect
incurred, through their tomuche knowlaige into incurable calamities, and so
have received greater shame by their symplenes and folly, than they should have
had by fortune, if they would have endured it. whereunto if ye be wise, you wol
have regard. And so ye ought not to repute nor take it for shame to give place
or submyt your self to one so puissant a city as Athens is, which demands
but a thing reasonable, to wit, yt you should be his allies in paying him
trybute. And sense yt choice is given you, aither to prove ye hazart of war,
or to put your chance in suertie: ye ought not by fantasies and contencions to
chose the worser. For as it is wisdom (and also commonly it prospers) not to
be willing to give place or to submytt himself unto his egalles, when that a
man may honestly defend him: euene so is it, to relente toward them that be
the stronger, and likewise for the mightier, for to use humanity and modesty
toward the weaker. Withdraw your self therefore aparte without us, and
consider diligently that you consult of the wealth, or of the loss of your
party, even at this instant, and that you have no longer lesure, and that by
the conclusion yt you shall take therein, you shall make it happy or unhappy. For
this purpose yt Melians did withdraw themself aparte, and after y^ they had
consulted togider and determined again to deny the demand of the Athenia^s,
they answered in this manner. The Melians. Lords Athenyans we be of none other
opinion than lately we were, and we cannot be willinge to lose in so short
time: the liberty which we have kept and enjoyed, from seven houndred years
hitherto, which arne passed sense our city was founded: but rather with the
fortune, which has aided us unto this present day, and with the aid of our
friends, chiefly the Lacedemonyans, we be determined for to defend and
consarue our city, prayinge you neuerthelas to be content, that we may be
your friends, without being enemies of the other, and in this manner making
treaty with us, afterward to withdraw you out of our land. And when the
Melyans had thus spoken, the Athenyans, who had withdrawin themself, from the
conferring or comunication, answered them in this manner. The Athenyans, we see
well that you alone, through your opinion and evil counsaille, do hold the
things to comme, for more certain than those, which you se before you eyis,
and you think that you see in effect, already, the things that lie, in the
determynation of other, as though they were in execution, whereby through to
much trustinge in the Lacedemonyans and in fortune and puttinge your cause in
vain hope: ye shall fall into greater ruin. In this manner the ambassadors
of the Athenyans returned fromethence into their camp, without having
concluded any thing: Whereupon the Dukes and capytaynes parceiuinge that there
was no hope to win the town by composition preparedde themself to take it by
force. So they departedde themself by bendes into the towns borderinge nighe
about, and enclosedde the city with a wall, round aboutes, and that done,
leauinge a good garnisone aswelle of their people of Athenes, as of their
allies and both by sea and also by land: the more part of the army
returned fromethence. In that same time, the Argiues being entredde into the
land of the Phiasians were circumuented by them of the town and by the
bannyshmedde men of the said Argiues, who were in an embuschemente, in such
manner that there were slain four skore of their people. And on the other
side, the Athenians, that were within Pylus, made a course before the city of
Lacedemony and caryedde away fromethence a good bouttye. And yet for all this
the Lacedaemonians reputed not the trefues broken, another would begin war, but
only they made a decree, by which they permytted, that their people might
likewise ouerronne and pillage the land of the said Athenia^s. And there was
not of all the cities of Peloponese, one, that made war against the said
Athenians, but only the Corynthians, who made it for their particular
quarelles. The siege than being before the city of Meleas, they that were
within yssuedde fourth in a night upon them, that kept the siege next to the
side of the markette place, and did take the wall that they had made in that
quarter, and slew a number of them that kept ytt, and moreover carried away a
good quantity of corn and of other victuailles into the town, and
afterward locked themself again within without doing any other thing during
that summer, Whereupon the Athenyans were afterward more vigilant to keep
better watch in the night. And in thies enterfaictes that same somer passed.
In the beginning of the winter followynge the Lacedemonyans, having determined
for to enter into the land of the Argiues, in favor of the banysshed men, for
that they had not the sacrifices propice or favorable, they returned to their
houses, but that notwithstanding, some of the Argiues, that attended their
coming, were takene upon suspicion by thoder cytezeins, some other of their
oune will bannysshed the^self, fearing to be taken. In this season, the Melyans
also yssuedde an other time, out of the other side of the city, and did
likewise take the wall that the Athenians had made in that same quarter, by
mean that there were few people for to keep it, by occasion whereof, the
Athenyans sent thider a greater strength: under the conduct of Philocrates
son of Eudemus, who having made great preparations for to give assault to
the town, they that were within, by mean of a mutyne and trahisone that was
amongst them, yielded themself to the will of the Athenyans, who did putt to
death all the men that they could find of.xiiii. years and vpwardes, and
the women and children they did take for sklaues, and carried them away unto
Athens. And they left of their people in the town for to defend it, until
they had afterward sent five houndred housholdes for to inhabitt therein.

Here ends the fifth book of the history of Thucydes, and begins the
syxth.
Of the Isle of Sycille and by what people yt was inhabited. And how the
Athenyans enterprysed to send their army by sea for to conquer it. The first
Chapter.
THat same winter the Athenyans determined to send again into Sycille^ an
army by sea greater than that, which Lachetes and Eurymedon had before time
led thider, to the intent to subdewe it, if they could, the more part of
them not knowinge the greatness of the Isle, nor the multitude of people that
inhabited therein, as well Greeks as strangers, and they enterprysed a new
war, which was but little lesser, than the same of the Peloponesians. For the
same Isle conteigneth in circuyt, somuche, as a great ship may saylle in
eight days. And notwithstanding that it is so great, yet is it not distance
from the firm land, but twenty stades or thereaboutes. It was inhabyted
from the beginning, by many and diverse nations of people, whereof the furst
were the Cyclopes, Cycoples.
and the Lestrigonyans, Lestrigones.
who held only one part of the same, of whom I cannot tell, what nation of
people they were, fro^whence they came, nor whider they went, another any other
thing have I learnedde thereof, but that, whereof the poets make mention, and
every one of theyme, presupposes, to have knowlaige of the same people. After
those, the Sycanyans were the chief that inhabytedde there, who said, that
they were the furste inhabitants and that they were borne in that same land,
but the truth shows it self clearly to the contrary, that they be
Hyberiens, nyghe unto a river, that is in the said country, namedde Sycania,
Sicani.
and being chased out of their oune country by the Lyguryans, did withdraw
themself into Sycille, which they named by their name, Sycania, where as
before it was named Tinacria, Tinacria.
and yett at this present, those of that nation hold some places of that same
Isle in the weste part thereof. Sense after the taking of Troy, certain
Troyans which fled fromethence, for fear of the Greeks, withdrewe themself
thider into the quarter of the Sycaniens, wherein making their abode, they were
all, as well Troyans as also Syracusians, called Elmyans, Elymy.
and did hold two cities, to wit Erix and Egesta. Erix.

Egesta.


Next unto those, certain Phocians came to inhabytt there, to wytt, those
which in their return from Troy, Procentes.
were by fortune of sea, cast into Lybia, and fromethence, passedde into
Sycille. As touching the Sycilians, they came out of Italy: being chased
fromethence by the Opicians, which thing is very lykely, and it is commonly
said, that they passed in small boats, with the tide when they parceiued that
it sarued them, for that, that the passage is very short. And that it may be
so, there be yet of the Sycilians in Italy, which was so named by a king of
Arcadie, that was called Italus. Italus.
Thies Sycilians were passed in so great number, that they vainquished the
Sicanians in battaille, and caused the^ to retire into a quarter of the Isle
that is toward the Southe, and therewythall they did change ye name of the
Isle and called it Sycille, where as before time it was called Sycania for also
they occupied the greater part of the good places of the same Isle: and held
it from their furst coming until that the Greeks came thider which was aboutes
three houndred years. During which time the Phenycians came for to inhabitt in
a certain small country of the Isle, Phenices.
and in certain small Islandes nigh thereunto, for to trade merchandise with the
Sycilia^s, but afterward many Greeks, being passed by sea into the same, they
left their sailling, and lodged the^self with in the Isle, and there founded
three cities in the co^fynes of ye Elymyans, to wit, Motia, Motya.
Solois and Panhormus, Solois.

Panhormus


trusting in the amity that they had with the said Elymyans, and also in this,
that on the same side there was a very small space of the sea for to pass out
of the same Isle into Chartage. In this manner and by such number of diverse
strange people, the said Isle of Sicille was inhabyted. As touching the Greeks,
the Chalcides, Chalcidenses.
which came from Eubea, under the conduct of Theocles, Theocles.
were the furst that came to inhabytte here, and founded the city of Naxus,
Naxus.
and without the same they made the chapel of Apollo Archageti, that is yet
seen there, into the which, wha^ they purposed to go out of the Islande, they
came furste for to make their vows and sacrefices there. The year after the
coming of the said Chalcides, Archias Corynthian, Archias
that was descended of Hercules came to inhabyt there, where Siracusa is having
furst chased fro^thence the Sycilians, which held that part of the Isle. Now
was the same city at that time all in main land, without that, that the sea
did touch it in any part, but long time afterward, that was added unto it,
that enters into the sea, and is presently seen enuyroned with a wall, the
which by succession of time was greatly peopledde. Five years after that,
Theocles and the Chalcydes issued out of Naxus, and came to chase away the
Cycilians that held the city of Leon and did take it, Leon.
and the like did in the city of Catana, Catana.
fromewhence they chased Euarchus, Euarchus.
whom, those of the country named to be founder thereof. In that same time
Lampis came from Megare, La^pis.
for to inhabytt in Sicille, and lodged himself with the people that he had
brought thider in a river, namedde Pantatius in a place named Trotylum.
Pantacius.

Trotylum.


Afterward he came to abide with the Chalcides in Leon for a short time, and
they governed the city togiders, but being fallen into dissension, they chased
him away: and so he came with his people to tarry in Thaspo, Thapsus.
where he dyed. And after his death, his men forsook the place, and under the
conducte of a king of Sycilians, namedde Hyblon, Hyblon.
who: by trahyson had delivered the country unto the Greeks, they came to
inhabytt in Megara, Megara.
and so were, after the kings name, called, Hyblans: who, two houndred, Forty
and five years, after that they came thider, were chased fromthence, by a king
of the Syracusains, namedde Gelon. Gelon.
But before that, about an houndred year after that they came thider, they
foundedde the city Selinus, Selinus.
under conducte of Pammillus. Pammillus.
Who, being chasedde from Megara: which was their Capytall City, with the
other of his nation, retired thider. As touching the City of Gela, Gela.
it was founded and peopledde by Antiphenus of Rhodes and Eutimus of Crete
commonly bitwene theyme both, Antiphemus.

Eutymus^


who brought thider, aither of theyme out of his country, a certain number of
householders, aboutes.xlv. years after that Syracusa began to be inhabyted,
and namedde that same city Gela, because of the river that passes by nigh
unto it, that is so named, where, before time, the place, where the city is
sytuated was closedde with wall, and was called, Lyndia. Lyndia.
Aboutes a houndredde and eight years afterward, the said Gelyans having
furnysshed the said city with Doryans, they came to inhabytt in the city
which is presently called Agragas, Agragas.
under the conduct of Ariston and Pystilus, Aristonus.

Pistilus.


and they so named it, by cause of a river that passes there, which has the
like name, and they establysshed there the government of the city according
to the laws and customs of their country. As touching the city of zancla,
it was furst inhabytedde by certain thieves or robbors that came out of the
city of Cumes, that is in the country of Opica in the land of Chalcidia, but
afterward a great multitude of Greeks aswelle out of the sayedde country
of Chalcidia, as also of the rest of the Islande of Eub^a, being there landed,
it was called Cumes. Cumes.
And Perieres of the said city of Cumes in Chalcide and Cratemenes of
Chalcide were capytaynes of the said Greeks that came to inhabytt there.
Perieres.

Cratemenes.


And that same city was auncyently called zancla, for that, that it was in
form of a cycle, which, the Sycilians name in their language, zancla^ zancla.
notwythstandynge, these people were afterward driven out of the same city
by the Samyans and certain other Ionyans: who flyinge the persecution of the
Medes, passed into Sycille, but sone after Anaxilas, Anaxiles.
who gouernedde those of Rhege chasedde theyme fromthence, and inhabytedde the
city with diverse sorts and nations of people, and calledde it Messena,
Messena.
which was the name of the cytie^ wherein he was borne. The city of Imera was
founded by the zanclians, Imera.
who under conducte of Euclydes and of Sacon, Euclides.

Sa^on.


did people it with certain people of their nation, but sone after, came
thider many Chalcydeans and also great number of Syracusains, who were
chasedde out of their city by their adversaries, the which were called
Miletides, Melitide.
whereupon through the menglynge of the said two nations, one myngled
language was made of them two into one, to wytt, the one half Chalcydien, and
the other half Dorien, but the manner of lyuinge was after the laws and
customs of the Chalcydians. As touching the cities of Acre and of Casmene,
Acre.

Casmene.


the Syracusains founded and peopled the^ to wytt, Acroe: aboutes.lxx. years
after that Syracusa was inhabited, and Casmenoe about.xx years after the
fundatio^ of Acroe. And aboutes, Cxxxv. years after the fundation of Siracusa,
the same Syracusains did build and people the city of Camarina under the
conduct of Daston and Menecoles, Camarina.

Daston.

Menecoles.


but within short time after, the said Camerins, rebel^ing against the
Saracusains, were by them driven fro^thence. And by succession of time,
Hippocrates, Hippocrates.
who governed Sela, having taken certain prisoners of the Siracusains, had,
for their ransom and deliverance, the said city, which was desarte and not
inhabyted and furnysshedde it with people, but within short time after, it was
destroyed an other time by Gelon, and afterward by him made again and
peopledde. Being than the Islande of Sycille holdene and inhabytedde by so
many nations, and by so great number of people: the Athenyans neuerthelas
enterprysed to invade yt, to thintente and for couetice without all doubt for
to occupye and subdue yt, notwithstanding that they did it under an honnest
color to succoure the Chalcydians, specially the Egestyans, Egestani.
who had sent their ambassadors unto Athens, for to require succors of
the^, for that, that being happened a certain different bitwene them and the
Selinuntia^s because of a certain marriage, and also for their limittes: those
Selynuntians had had recourse to the Syracusains, for that, that they were
their friends, and allies, who empesched and kept from the said Eges^ya^s both
the sea and the land. For this cause the same Egestains had sent unto the
Athenians, puttinge them in remembrance of thauncyente amytie and alliance that
they had made with Lachetes Duke of the Athenyans in the war of Leontyns,
praying them that they would send their army by sea for to succoure them,
and for to enduce and parswade them to do yt: they alleged many things, but
principally: that if the Syracusains were suffered to do the^ the said wro^ges,
they would afterward chase fromethence the Leontyns and their allies, and by
that mean would make themself Lords of all the Islande, whereby it might
chaunse, that the said Syracusains^ who be descended of the Doryans, that be in
Peloponese, and were by them sent into Sycille) should come to succor the said
Peloponesians against those Athenians, for to beat down and destroy their
puissance. And therefore showed the said Athenia^s, that they should do wisely,
for to prevent the said inconvenience, in good time to succor their said
allies and to resist the force of the Syracusains. And moreover did offer to
fournishe them with monney for to make the war. The which declaratio^s being
many times made by the Egestians unto y^ people of Athens, it was ordoned to
se^de furst ambassadors into Sycille for to learn, if the Egestians had
somuche monney as they reaported, and further what preparation they had for
war, and likewise for to enquire of the puissance and condition of the
Selenuntins. Which thing was done.

Of certain small exploictes of war, which were done in that same winter
in Greece. And how the Athenyans enterprysed to go with their army into
Sycille, for to conquer it. The.ii. Chapter.
THat same winter the Lacedemonyans, for to aid the Corynthians, issued fourch
with their army, and entered into the territorye of the Argiues, which they
pillaiged in many parts thereof, and carried fro^thence a small number of
beasts and a certain quantity of corn, and afterward, made an
appoinctment and trefues for a certain time, bitwene y^ said Argiues, that
were in the city and the eriles or bannisshed men, whom, they lodged again
in the city of Ornee under this covenant, Ornee.
that the one should not atte^pte any thing against the other, during the said
time, and that done, they returned fro^thence unto their houses. Shortly
after, the Athenians came thider with thirtye ships: wherein were seven
houndred souldiars, and ioigned themself with the Argiues, who issued out of
their city, so many of them as could were armure, and they al togiders went
against Ornee with such strength, that they did take it in one day, but yet
neuerthelas, the night before, they, which were within, seeing that the siege
was far enough without the town, they al saved themself. By occasion
whereof, the Argiues, the morrow after, fyndyng the town void, did utterly
raze it down. And that done they retournedde fromethence into their houses.
But the same Athenians that were come thider with them, did embarque themself
again, and sailled fromthence against Methone, Methone.
which is in the confyns of Macedonia, where they charged or did take in
certain other souldiars aswelle to their ou^e people, as of the Macedonians,
horsemen, that were bannysshedde out of the country: and kept themself aboutes
the lands of the Athenians, and altogether entered into the land of Perdiccas,
and passed through, pillaigyng and wastyng it. Which parceyued, the
Lacedemonyans commanded the Chalcidians, that be in Thrace, that they should go
to succor the said Perdiccas. Which thing they refusedde to do, saying that
they had the tresues with the Athenyans, for ten days, dnrynge the which,
the winter endedde. Which was the.xvi. year of this war which. Thucicides
has wry^tone. In the beginning of the somer^ the ambassadors, which
chathenyans had sent into Sycilie, retour^ed. And with them came the Egestians,
who brought three skore talen^es of silver vncoigned, for one months payment
of.lx. ships, which they demanded of the Athenyans. The said ambassadors,
being than come before all the people, proponed many things for to persuade
them to do that, which they demanded, and amongst other things they
affirmed, that they had in their city gr^ate habundance and plenty of gold
and silver, as well in the treasoury, as in their temples, which was not true,
but yet neuerthelas at their persuations, the people agrede to aid them with
three skore shypps, which they demanded and with a good number of men, and
also delivered to them of the principallest of the city for their heddes and
capytaynes of that same army with ample power, to wytt, Alcibiades son of
Clynyas, Nycyas son of Nyceratus, and Lamachus son of Xenophenes, Lamachus.
unto whom they did pryncipally give charge to succoure the Egestyans against
the Selynuntyns, and further that if they parceyued that their case did
prosper, they should set again the Leontyns into their entier possessions, and
moreover that they should do in that same country of Sycille all that should
seem unto them to be best for the public wealth of the Athenians. Five days
after, the people were assembled again togiders for to advise how that same
army by sea might shortly be set forwards, and thereupon to deliver to the
Dukes and capytayns thereof, that, which should be necessary. Than Nycyas, one
of the said Dukes who was appointed unto that enterprise against his will, for
somuche as he knew well, that it was determined without reasone, and for
coue^ice to conquer and subdue the Islande of Sycille, and of the other part,
for that, that it was a very hard enterprise: he advanced himself
fourthwarde, and did speak in this manner.

The oration of Nycias before the people of Athens, for to dissuade and break
of, thenterpryse of Sycille. The.iii. Chapter.
THe present assembly has been made, for to advise upon the manner of
sendynge fourth an army by sea, and how that it must be conductedde. But in
my opinion, it should furste have been determined, whider the same enterprise
ought to be made or not, and men should not conclude in a matter of so great
ymportance, at one so soubdayne a consultacion, another thereupon give knowlaige
to strangers that we would begin war, for a matter, which in no poynet
touches us. And albeit that as concerning my particularytie, I may acquire
honnoure by being there, and also I doubt my parsone, as little, as anny man
of the compaignie: yet have I always iudgedde him to be good and a wise
tytezeine, that has regard both to his parsone and also to his gods, for
that, that he is willing to be of power to sarue in the common welthe, both
with the one and with the other. And therefore like as in time past, I have
never, for couetice of getting glory, spoken otherwise than so, as I have
knowin to be for the best of the party: even so will I at this present does
like. And though perswadyng you to keep that, which is to be kept, and not to
put in hazarte things certain, for the things uncertain, I know well
that it shall not be through thefficacite of my speech, which cannot be of
so great substance, as for to move your hearts: yet neuerthelas I will show
you, that this your soubdayne enterprise is not at this time in seasone, and
that the things that ye enterprise, be not so easy as they be geuene to be
understood, for it seems unto me, that in dooynge this enterprise, you
leave in thies parties mannye enemies, and also go about to cause theyme to
comme fromethence hider more largely, for this, that if you ground youreselfe
upon the appoynctemente, that you have with the Lacedemonyans, and that there
be annye suertie therein, I aduertyse you that so long as we remain in
prosperity, the name thereof shall endure. But if it myshappene in anny manner
unto our army, which we send fourth, incontynenly they will set upon us,
forsomuche as thappoynctemente which they have made with us, has been
concluded for fear and to their disadvantage. And on the other part there be
in this matter many doubtful and ambiguous points, and also there be many of
the contrary part, which have not acceptedde it, and such truly: as be not of
the meanest, of whom some b^ declaredde, our enemies, the other do not yet
stir, by mean of the trefues of ten days which they have, who, if they
shall see our force and strength departedde into two (as we be minded to do
it soubdaynely) they will fourthwyth be our enemies and ouerronne us, and
also will really themself with the Sycilians, like as they have of long time
be wylling to do. Wherefore good advise ought to be taken herin, and not to
repute our city to be so puissante, as thereby we should put it ayther into
danger, another to couett an new empire, until we shall have well established
the same, which we presently have. And if we be not of power to subdewe the
Chalcides in Thrace, our subjects, tha the rebelled against us, nor assure our
selves of any other in the main land, of whom we be not well assured: how
will we so readely go to succor the Egestains, under color that they be our
allies, now being in trouble. Whom (for so much as they be of so long time
departed from our alliance) we may pretend to have iniuryed us. And though
well that, having the victory against their enemies, we shall recover them,
yet shall we not by theyme be greatly aided, as well for that, that they be far
from us, as also for this, that they be many in number. Wherefore it seems to
me that it is an folly, for to assaille and assist them there, whom, though we
shall have vaynequished, we another shall be hable to defend and keep as friends,
another enterteigne in our obeisance. And if we have not the victory, we shall be
in worse estate than before the war bigonne. On the other part so far as
I can understand of the affairs of Sicille, it seems to me that the
Syracusains, although that they obteigne the principality in the same
country: yet be they not hateful another hurtful unto us. Which is the poyn^t,
whereupon the Egestians do ground themself. And if paradue^ture they at this
present do come toward the Lacedemonyans for to gratetie the^, yet
notwithstanding it is not to be believed that they: who, have an estate for to
lose, will for the quarelle of an other strange empire, enterprise war
against an other. For this, that they may well think, that when the
Peloponesians shall have, through their aid, destroyed and extinguished our
estate and empire: they will also afterward destroy theirs. Moreover the
Greeks, which be in that same country: be in a maruaylous fear of us, so
long as we be not there, and yett shall be in greater, if that we shall show
theyme our army in their view and afterward do withdraw it. But if we
enter into their country and receive there any shame or damage, they will no
more esteem us, but rather wolle ioigne theymeselfe with the other Greeks for
to comme to assaylle us in our country. For you know well, that things be
somuche in greater admiration of men, as they be further from theyme, and
somuche they have the lesser esteminge and reputacion, as they be the more
approved and knowin, like as may be seen of our selves, for that, that having
victory against the Lacedemonyans and the other Peloponesians, where as we
were in great fear to resist their power, we now already esteem them so
little, that we presume to go to co^quere Sycille, though that they be our
enemies. Which is not wisely done, for no man ought to extole himself, nor to
take tomuche courage for the adversity of his ennemy: but rather refrayning
his courage and his glory to trust in his puissance. And also ye ought to
consider that the Lacedaemonians for the shame, which they have received of us,
do study, no other thing, but how they may cause us to comytt some folly: by
mean whereof they might revenge their shame and recover their honor, and
somuche the more, as they be more couetouse of glory and of virtue, than any
other people. Likewise (Lords) we ought to consider that this question is not
here moved for the Egestains, which be strangers and Sycilians, but how we
shall keep our self from a city, which for that, that it governs it self by
a small number of people, is ennemy to ours, that is governed by the
generaltie. And also we ought to think, that we have a small respite for one
so great a war and grievous malady: which may bring us into great sorrow.
And if we be increased with number of people and with riches, we should keep
and employe them for ourselves, and not for thies bannysshed men, which repare
unto us to have succors, who have spokenne fayer and have lied, to the danger
of their neighbors: consideredde that they do give us nothing but words. For
if they, through our aid, have the victory, they may (if it seem good unto
them) mock us, and evil acknowlaige the saruice that we shall have done them.
And if it chance otherwise, they shall bring us with them into ruin and
destruction. And if there^be any one of them, that has been by you chosene
with their consent for to have charge of this army, which parswadeth you, this
enterprise for his particular proffytt, and paraduenture, through youth,
desires to have this glory, for to be in more estimation, and for to show a
great number of horse that he nouryssheth: ye ought not to will to satisfy
the desire and prouffytt of one particular: to the great danger and peril of
the city, but rather to consider that by such people: the common wealth is
dimynysshed and the particulers be destroyed. And moreover this matter is so
weighty and of so great importance, that it ought not to be treated and
consulted by a young man so soubdainly. And for the fear, that I have, seeing
many in this assembly, that do assist him and be come at his request: for this
cause I pray and erhorte the most ancient, that they suffer not the^ specially
to persuade their young people, that it should be shame for to dissuade and
break of the war, and that it should be imputed unto them for
pusyllanymitie, cowardenes and lack of couraige, and that it should be an
euylle thing not to have regard of his friends, being absent, for the same
should chance to them that persuade to make the war: if that it should take
effect, for that, that ye well know, those things which be done for
affeccion happene not oftentimes so well, as those same do, which be done by
good and mere delyberation, wherefore and to theintente that we putt not our
estate in the danger, wherein it lately has been, we ought to answer to the
Sycilyans, that they abuse not their Empire, concerning us, beyond the
lymyttes, which it presentlye conteigneth, to wytt not to pass or ercede the
goulphe of the sea of Ionia, from the coaste of the land, nor of the other
coaste, that same goulphe of Sycille, and furthermore that they govern their
land and seigniory, amongst themself, as they shall think good. And on the
other side, that the Egestians should be answered, that inasmuche as they have
begone to war against the Selynuntyns without us, that they also make an
end thereof without us. And for the rest, that we ought not to make new
allyaunces of the sort, that we have accustomedde. For we always do aid the
unhappy and those, which be in necessytie: and when we require succors and
aid in our own affairs, we cannot have it. And thowe, Threasourer, if thou
reputest thy self worthy to have admynistration of the affairs of the city,
and wilt be a good cytezein: thou ought to put this matter again into
deliberatyon, and to demand the opynions of men therein and ought not,
another to have shame nor fear for to revoke the law and deliberation already
made. For there be so many good witnesses in this so great an assembly, that
thou shuldeste not fear to be reprehended for having again demanded the
opynyons herin, insomuche as it is the medecyne of a city evil counsailled.
And the manner, of a good offycier for to rule and govern well, is to do for
his country all the best that he may, or at the least to his knowlaige, not
to do ye thing that may be prejudicial unto it. Thus spoke Nycias, and after
him many othere Athenyans did speak, whereof the more part were of opinion
that ye enterprise of the war should be executed, ensuinge the furste
deliberation, some were of the contrary opynyone, but above all, Alcibiades
persuaded the said expedytion, as well for to contrary and inuey against Nycias,
whom he hated, as for other reasons, which mouedde him, concerning the
admynistration of the common wealth, and specially for that, the same Nycias had
made mention of him in an evil sort, though that he had not named him unto
them by name. But principally for the desire that he had to be chief of that
same army, hoping by mean thereof to subdue furste Sycille, and afterward
Carthage, and also to acquyre glory and richesse in that same conqueste, if it
chanced well according to this expectation. For being in great estymation
and favor of the people, and by his ambition wyllyng to keep a greater train
than his revenue might supporte, he nouryshed horses, which was afterward,
in part, cause of the euersion of the empire of the Athenyans. For many
cytezeins, seeing his superfluytie, as well in his fedynge, as also in his
appareille and garments, and moreouere his arrogancye and highness of his heart
in all things, that he admynistredde: became his enemies, estemynge that he
woolde make himself lord and tyrant. And although that he conducted the
affairs of war valyantlye, yett for that, that the particulers were the more
part contrary to his works and particular enterpryses, they went about to
co^mytt the admynistration of the common affairs into the hands of an othere,
whereupon did follow the ruin of the city. The same than Alcibiades put
fourth himself and did speak to the people of Athens in this manner.

The oration of Alcibiades unto the Athenyans, for to persuade the enterprise
of Sycille. The.iiii. Chapter.
IT apperteignethe unto me (lords Athenyans) to be Emperor and Chief of your
army, more, than unto any other. And I am constrained to begin my talk in
this sort, for that, that I have been thereunto prycked by Nycias. And without
that, it seems unto me conuenyent. For the things, for the which, I am
renommed and esteemed amongeste men, besides this, that they redounde to the
glory of my ancesters and to mine: bring also honnour and welthe unto the
commmon wealth. In this that the Greeks, which have been at the feasts and
solempnites of Olympus, seeing the magnificence and sumptuousnes of my facyon of
living, esteemed thereby our city to be most puissant, most opulente, and rich
of itself, where as before they thought, that they might easily have subdewedde
it. For I was last at the said feast with six chariots well appoincted.
which thing no man has yet done with such a number, and also I did win the
first pryze of the course, the second and the fourth. And moreouere I made
the apparaille so sumptuous and so noble, as apperteigned to such a victory.
All which things be hon^orable, and that declare unto the people, the
puissance and richesse of the land and city of him that makes them. And
albeit that such works and other like, for which I am esteemed, engender
great envy by the other cytezeins against me, yet to the wayfayringe men and
estrangers, they show a great argument of puissance and richesse. And also
me thinks that the fantasy of him: that goith about by such means and at
his expenses, to do honnour, not to himself only, but also to this country: is
another hurtful nor prejudicial to the common wealth. And also he ought not to
be esteemed for evil, that has such opynyo^ of himself, yt he will not only be
agall to other, but rather wylleth also to excede them by such means. For he
that is unfortunate, fyndeth no man, that therein will be his compaignyon, if
than we be dispreasedde of the othere, when we be unfortunate: they ought also
to endure and suffer, if we esteem them not much in our felycitie, and to
wait to do the like, toward us, if they think good, when they shall be
in like estate. Neuerthelas I am not ignoraunte that such people and othere,
which excelle in anny honnoure and dignytie be greatelye enuiedde. Specially
of their egalles and matches, and also somewhatte of othere, which have
accompaignyedde with theyme: but that is, for the time that they be in this
life only. For aftere their deceasse, the renomme and prosperytie, that they
have had, is of such effycacytie to them that comme aftere, that many
glorefye themself to have been their parents, and specially sum say, that
they be of them, which be not, and many other repute themself honnouredde to
be of the land, town and country, whereof they have been, and for to name
them their fellow Burgeosses and country men. And though, for the honnorable
things that they have done, I have attemptedde to imytate and follow such
parsonaiges, and for this cause have lyuedde more honnorable, than the othere:
yet ye see for all that, that I bear myself in the affairs of the common
welthe no worse than othere of the Cytezeins. And truly ye shall find, that
the puissance of the Peloponesyans being assembledde, I have without your
great daungier and expense, constraynedde the Lacedemonyans one day at
Mantynea to put all their estate in hazarte with one battaille. Whereof
though that they had the victory, yet the hazarte was so great, that unto
this present, they have not recovered suffycyente audacytie against us. And
this my yongth and ignorance, which seemed nothere by reasone nor by nature, to
be of power, to resist the puissance of the Peloponesians: has caused, and
aptly to speak, has geuene such opinion of my audacytie, that at this
present there ought no doubt to be had of yt, another fear that it should
be dangerous to the party. but rather so long, as I shall be in vigoure and
auctorytie with this audacytie, the fortune and admynistratio^ of Nycias shall
seem good and prosperous. And ye may serve yourself both with the one and
also the othere, as ye shall think good. And for to come to the matter,
whereof is questyon, it is not nedeful that ye revoke your enterprise of
Sycille, for fear to have to do with many people. For though that there be
many cities in ye same country, yet they be peopled with me^ of all soortes. who
be easy and accustomedde to change their estate and gouernemente. And there is
none that prepares harnois for his parsone, another that makes ^ortresses in
necessary places for defense of the country: but every one, having opinion to
be of power to persuade other to believe whatsoever he will say, or if that he
cannot persuade them, for to trouble and subvert the estate ayther by practyse,
or else by mo^ney: prepares himself to do yt. Wherefore it is not to be bileued
that one such a tourbe and assembly of people, woll with one will hear what
shall be spokene. The words of him that speakethe be, that they assemble for to
conclude anny thing with a common accord but every one prepares himself to do
that, which he understands aftere his appetyte and will, and specially when
there is anny mutynery or discension among them, as I understand, that
there is at this present. And also they have not so many men of war, as it
is reported, for such things be always made more great tha^ they be. And
verily the other Greeks, being hertofore all togider, have not been in so
great number, as one nation of them bosteth itself only to be. which thing
has well appeared in this war, and that Greece has been deceived by the
^aynynges of poets, touching the number of people. For though it has been
all in armure, yet skarcely could it bring to the camp such number of
people, as was suffycient. Being than the affairs of Sycille in such sort as
I say, like as I have heard spokene by many people, the enterprise shall be the
much more easy for you, and chiefly for this, that there be many Barbarous and
strangers, who, for the ennymytie, that they have against the Syracusains woll
ioygne themself with us in this war: and also we owe not to fear such
busynes here, that it empesche us in that same there, if we woll provide
reasonably in our case. For it is fully certain, that our progenytours
(having those for enemies, which are named, that they will declare themself
against us, when our army by sea shall be in Sycille) and also the Medes: have
neuerthelas acquiredde and got on this empire, that we now have, and that by
none othere mean, but in being puissante by sea, which is the only
occasyon, through which the Peloponesians have lost their hope to vainquishe
us, and moreover if they shall determine for to enter into our land, they may
do it, although that we shall not have sent thither this army by sea. And also
they cannot thereby hurt us with their army by sea, for that same of ours,
which shall remain, shall be yet so puissant as theirs. Wherefore being required
by our allies and friends to go to their aid, we cannot show them any
reasonable cause, wherefore we should not do it: and in not doing it, why they
should not reprove us and say, that ayther it is grievous unto us to do yt,
orells that we have under vain and fryuolus excuses, refused the aid, which
we be bound to deliver them by our oath. And also we cannot pretend against
them, that they have not succored us in our wars, for we aid them not in
their countreye, to the intent that they should comme to aid us in ours, but
to the end that they should busye our enemies, which be there with them in
war, and do them somuche anoyance, that they have no power to comme to
assaille us in thies parties. And by such mean, we and all other, that have
acquyred great empyres and seigniories, have encreasedde and maygnteyned them,
in geuinge promptely and liberally succors, to them that have demanded yt of
theyme, were they Greeks or Barbarous. For if we refuse to give aid to them,
that require it of us, or if we woll debate, to what sort of people we should
accord or refuse: in that doing, we shall not obteigne great things. And
this, which we have acquired, we shall putt in dangier. Furthermore men ought
not to attend to defend their fortresses, until he that is the stronger
comme to assaille them but rather to prepare them in such sort before the
chance happene, that he fear to come thider. And also it lies not in our free
will to appoinct an limit to our Empire, for to say, that one shall pass no
further. But rather since that we have yt, it is needful to wait that we be
not circu^uented of the one, and also to defend ourselfe from the crafts and
deceittes of ye othere. For if we have not domynion ouere the othere, we be in
daungier to be ruled by them. And also we should not desire nor take rest in
that sort as the other do, except we likewise determyne to live of that sort,
as they do live. Co^^sideryng the which things, and that in executinge our
enterprise, we shall increase our estate and seignior^e, we ought to mount
into the sea and to go thither, for to beat down the courage of the
Peloponesians, when they shall parceyue that we, contempninge and despysinge
them, shall pass into Sycille, without willing to use the rest that presently
we may have. ^or if the enterprise dotake good e^^ecte (as it is to be bileued
that it shall do) we shall obteigne the empire over all Greece, or by the woorst
that may chance, to the proffit both of us, and our friends, we shall greatly
endommage the Syracusains. And how soever it happene^ having our ships in
those parties, we may without our loss or dammaige, ayther abide there, if we
have the better: or else comme again fro^thence, when we shall think good, for
all the Sycilians woll rule themself after our will. And the talk of Nycias,
who pretendethe to prefer rest before trauaille, and to sow division and
sedytion among you, ought not to bring the young men to be at contention
with the old, but rather ye ought all with one accord to ensue and fo^lowe
the acts, deeds and examples of our ancesters. And like as by counsaillinge
and consultinge the young wyche the old upon general affairs, they have
increased and established our Empire in that estate, wherein y^ presently is:
you should by the self means and reasons now assay for to increase and
enlarge it, and to esteem, that another the yo^gthe nor the age, is any thing
worth, the one without the other: but rather to consider, that the fe^ble, the
strong and the mean, when they be all togider well agreinge, do cause the
common wealth to tryumphe. And to the contrary, when a city is ocyous and yyle,
yt destroys and corrupts it self even of it self. And that like as all
other things ware aged by rest, even so shall our dyscyplyne do: but by
exercysing us in diverse wars, it maignteigneth and amendeth by many
experyences. For a man obteigneth not science for to defend and ward himself
by speakynge^ but by accustommyng and exercysynge himself in labors and in
feats of war. And for effect and conclusyon my opinion is, that when a
city, which has been accustomedde to busynes and trauailles, does give
itself to live in rest: yt comes shortly unto destructyon, and that those
amongeste all other be most assured, which rule and govern their commone
welthe, always of one sort, after their auncyente laws and customs, yea
though they be not in all parts good. After that Alcybiades had thus spokenne
the Ambassadors of the Egestains, and of (...) Leoti^s came fourth. Who with
great instance required that the succors might be sent unto them, remembringe
the oath, that the Dukes of Athens had made unto them. Whereupon the common
people, having heard their request, and the perswation of Alcybiades, was
yet more enclyned and encourayged for to execute the said enterprise. Which
parceyued by Nycias, and that there was no remede for to revoke it according to
his opynion by ye mean^: he thought that by an other mean he might have let^ed
the enterprise, to wytt, by declarynge unto them, that a great preparation was
to be made for the executyon of yt. And so did speak unto them in this manner.

The narration of Nycias unto the Athenyans, meaning by an indirecte or
contrary perswatyon to break of, the enterprise of Sycille. The.v. Chapter.
INsomuche as I parceyue you all determined (lords Athenyans) for to execute
this enterprise: I desire that it may come to pass according to our hope.
And therefore I will show you mine advise, in that, which seems to me to be
done at this present. For as far as I understand, we go against many
cities both great and puissante, the which be not subjected the one to the
other, and which desire not to change their estate and manner of living (for
this is to be done of those, that be in great servitude, for to comme to more
liberty and ease and that hope to be delivered fro subjection) and somuche the
less, they being frank and free, will bicomme our bondmen and subjects.
Amongst the which cities, there be many inhabited by Greeks. Of the which,
Excepted Naxum and Catana, the which I hope well that they will turn to our
side, for the affynitie, that they have with the Leontins, I parceyue not, that
there be many of the other, of whom we may assure us. And also there be
seuene, which be well provided and fournishedde with all things necessary for
war, as much as the army shall be, which shall be s^nte thider, and specially
Silenus and Saragosse, against the which, we pryncypally do go. For besides
this that they have there force and strength of warryours and Archers: they
have moreover great number of ships, and be all full of maroners and of
people for to sarue in them. And also have great quantytie of gold and silver,
as well in common in the temples, as in partyculer. And furthere, over and above
this that they have in the country: I understand that certain Barbarous or
estrangers, be contrybutours unto the Syracusains. They have also great number
of horses, which thing we have not, and also they have great habou^dance of
corn without having need to have thereof from other places. Wherefore it is
necessary for to send thider not only number of ships, but also strong
warryours (if ye entende to do there any thing of importance) for to resist
their horse men, who will wythstande and empesche our landynge: and that
chiefly, if the cities of the said country do for fear of our army co^spier
and confederate theymself togiders against us. And if we have no other
succors of horse men, than of the Egestains, I know not how that we shall
well resist those horse men, being our enemies. And forsomuche as it should
be great shame to us, that our people should be constrained to return
fromthence, being utterly repoulsed, ayther else to have made the enterprise
so slaightly, that after the aryuall it should be mete for them to demand
renforte or new succors: it shall be much better to go now thider, so well
provided and furnyshed, as ye case requires. and to consider that we go into a
far country, where we must fight to our disadvantage. And also ye pass
not through a countreye of subjects, nothere of people, whom ye have aided.
And how than can ye hope to have aid or comfort of victuails or of other
things as in the land of friends? But we must pass alwais through contreis and
seigniories, and skarcely in four months in winter, we may have news of
them, nor they of us. which is the reason, wherefore I say, that it behooves
us to send great number of people from among us, both of our subjects and
allies, yea and of the Peloponesyans, if we may recover or get any of them,
ayther for practique or for monney, and also a great number of Archers for to
resist their horsemen, and besides this, to have great haboundance of ships,
for to carry victuails and other necessaris, togiders with mylners and bakers in
so great number, that they may always grind and bake by courses. In such
sorte^ that in whatsoever part they be in land, though yt they may not sail
they may alwais have means yet to live. For also we must have so great number
of people, that one only City may not be hable to lodge and susteygn them. And
in effect they must go provided of all things, in most plenty that shall be
possible, without trusting to any estranger. And above all they must have
much monney. For though that the Egestains here do preach, that they have
great quantytie thereof, yet know you, that it is in words and not in
effect. And if we depart fromhence, before that we be well provided, as well
with men as with victuailes, and all other things (trusting to that, which the
Eg^stains do say) we shall be skarcely puissante for to defend thies here, and
to vainquishe the other. Wherefore it is conuenyent that we go thider, prepared
as if we would build a city in a strange country and of enemies, and to
determyne from the furste day that we shall enter into the land of Sycille
for to make ourselves masters thereof or if we fail so to do to hold it for
most certain to have the whole country for enemy. Wherefore, for the fear
and knowlaige that I have of the things above said, and consyderinge that
this matter must well be consulted upon, and parforce ourselves to be daylly
more happy and happy, which is a thing very hard, being men, I will (going
in this enterprise, putt the affayre in as little hazart that I may, and that to
do, I will be provided and fournyshed of all things necessary. In such
sort, that I commyt not the matter to fortune. Which shall be a thing assured
for our city, and helthsome for them, that shall have charge of that
enterprise. And if there be any of an othere opinion, I remyt unto him
fromhensfor wards both mine authorytie and my charge.

How the people of Athenes at the perswation of Alcybiades concluded the
enterprise of Sycille. And how the army, after that it was levied, departed
out of the port of Pireus. The.vi. Chapter.
NYcias did so speak, to the intent, aythere to turn the people from that
same enterprise, for the greatenes and difficulty of the matter: or else to go
to yt in good suertie, if thereunto he were forced: but whatsouer difficulty
that he set before them, the Athenyans woolde in no part lose their desire
and purpose, which they had to that navigations and journey: but rather were
the more heated to set it forwards, than they were before. And so it happened
unto Nycias, the whole contrary of that, that he thought. For every man thought,
that he counsailled sagely: and that in doing yt which he had said, the case
should be well assured. whereby they all had yet greater affection and
towardenes to the voyage, than before. To wit, the ancyentes, for so much as
they thought, that ayther they should subdue Sycille, or if the worste
happened, that they should be so puissant, that they could incur no danger.
And ye young and galliart men, for that, that they desired to go to see the same
strange land, assuring themself to return and come again fromthence in
sauluetie. And generally ye mean people and souldiars, for coueteousnes of the
soulde or wages, which they hoped to have in that same army: and also
continually after the conqueste, for the increase, which fromthence should
follow by that mean unto their Empire. And if there were any, that was of an
other opinion, parceiuing the inclynation of the whole city thereunto, he durst
not say to the contrary, but rather held his peace, fearyng to be judged to
have cou^sailled noughtly. So there was some one of that assembly, that said
unto Nycias with a loud voice, that he neded to preche no more therein, but
that he ought to declare, what army he judged ^o be necessary for that same
enterprise. who made him answer, that he would thereupon consulte with his
compaignyons and colleagues, more at leisure. But neuerthelas at the furst
brunt, there were no fewer at the least to be requiredde that an houndred
galleys of Athenes, for to carry their souldyours, and some good number of
other, which they might recover of their allies: upon all the which there must
be at least five thousand good warryors, and more if it might be, and besides
that^ a certain number of Archers, as well of their own, as also of the
country of Crete, togiders with all other prouysions, necessary for such an
army. Which things heard, the common people, even at the self hour by a
general decree, did g^ue full power to the capitains and emperor of that same
army for to provide for all things, to wit, as well for the number of men, as
for all other things necessary as they should think expedyent. After which
delib^ration they attended diligently all things that was to be done in the
city, and sent unto their allies to do the like on their party, for the
city was already recreated of ye grief and damage, which it had had, as well by
the pestilence, as by the contynuall war. And also was greatly augmented
as well with people, as with monney, by means of the trefues: by occasion whereof,
the matter was much sooner and more easily executed. The Athenyans than being
attentyse and diligent to prepare that, which was necessary for ye same
enterprise, all the hermes or pictures yt were in the city were in one night
broken by the borders, and the greater part in the visaige. Thies hermes were
certain statuers of stone entailled or carved foore kante w^^e^ which were
commonly set at the encringe into churches and other sumptuous edifices as well
public, as private, the number whereof was infynitt, without that, that any man
could know or have any manner of token who had done it, or who was the author
thereof, although that there was great huyer offered to the^ that should have
revealed or vttred the deed. And also it was proclaimed every where that if
there were any parson, that had knowlaige of any thing, which had been committed
against ye religion of gods, he ought to utter it without any fear of whatsoever
estate he were, were he cytizein or stranger, free or bond. For they esteemed
that case much more, than it meryted: for that, that it seemed to the^ to be an
evil ^igne for that same voyage, and a pronostication of a coniuration or
conspyracy for to change the common estate and government of the city. And
although that it could by no mean be knowin, who did the act, yet neuerthelas
certain pryuate persons cytezens and servants came and declared, that there had
been in times paste certain other statures and images, broken by the yongth of
the town, who did it ayther through childishnes, orells through rashness, and
also yt in some particular houses, men did induely make sacrefyces: wherwt
they, under a manner, charged Alcibiades. Whereunto those, of whom he was hated,
did wyllyngly give ear: for that, that they thought, that he empesched them to
have authorytie over the people, and that if they might remove him, they
might easily have yt. To this intent they made the thing more grievous, and
did sow and dyuulge it through the town, that those faults, which were
comytted in sacrefyces, and the breking of images, concerned the subversion of
the common wealth. And they founded their opinion against Alcibiades by many
tokens of his facyon of lyuinge, and of the favor that he had toward the
commons. For the which they concluded that the same act could not have been
done without him. Whereunto he answered to the contrary, offrynge himself to
stand to the law and for to suffer such punishmente as appereigned, before
his departure, if he were found coulpable. And if he were found innocent or
giltles, he desired to be absolved before he proceeded in that same voyage,
saying that yt was not reasonable that informations should be taken or any
process made in his absence, but rather if he had offended, that he should be
condempnedde to death. For also he said that it should not be wisely done of
them, to send a man fourth with so great authorytie and puissance, charged
with one such a case, before that he was purged. But his haters or enemies,
fearing least if the matter were knowin before his departure, that those that
should go with him in ye enterprise, should not bear him favor, and that the
mean people, who was favorable unto him, should wax faint toward him,
forsomuche as through his cause, the Argiues and some of the Mantynyens were
accompaigned to the Athenyans for that same voyage and enterprise: perswadedde
the contrary, and that the accusa^yon should be delayedde until after the
return of the army, trustinge duringe his absence to imagyne and compass
against him greater troubles, and to bring yt to pass they caused new
Ambassadors to comme, who hasted the expedition of the said army, in such
sort that yt was concluded that it should be so done. And the same army
lanched fourth and took sea about the myddell of Somer for to sail into
Sycille, having many marchantes ships as well of theirs as of their allies,
for to transporte victuailes and other preparation of war, which had been
ordened, before that they were all ready at the port of Corcyre, to the
intent that all to giders might pass the sea Ionu^ by the promontory of
Lapigea. And those Athenyans and other their allies, which than were at Athens,
at the day, that they had takene, were ready in the port of Pyreus about
break of the day for to embarque them self. with whom did issue forth the
greater part of the people, as well of the cytezeins as of estrangers, some for
to accompany their children and their parents and the other their friends, all
having both hope and sorrow. To wit, hope, that the voyage should be
proffitable: and sorrow, insomuche as they thought, that they should not see
again a good part of those, that went so far a voyage, and also goinge
thider, they should leave those, which aboade at home, in many dangers, and
did put and offer theymselfe into many othere, on which dangers they than
thought much more, than they had done in determinynge the voyage. And yett
neuerthelas they conceyuedde such confydence, by seeing one so great a
puissance togiders, that the mean people (yea euene those: that had another
friends nor parents there) and all the estrangers did comme for to see that
spectacle or sight, which they esteamed woorthye to be seen, and greater than
any man would have thought. Also in very truth for an army of one only
city it was better appoincted and more sumptuous, than any othere yt had ever
been seen. For although that the same, which Pericles in times paste did lead
into Epidaure, and the other that Agnon did conduct into Potidea, were as
puissant as well in number of ships, as also of people, for so much as in the later
there were had four thousand warriors fotemen and three houndred horsemen all
Athenyans: one houndred galleis of theirs and fyftie, as well of the Lesbie^s as
of those of Chio, besides many other co^paignyons of their allies: yet
notwithstanding thappareill and preparation was much lesser, for that, that
the voyage was not so great as this. And for that cause, and also that the
war was to endure long in Sycille, they had much the better provided and
fournished it, as well with people, as with al other things. Whereunto as well the
City generally, as also the particular patrones and capytains of the ships did
employ themself with all industry and diligence. For ye city did pay a grote
a day to every maroner, of whom, there was a right great number in so great
quantytie of ships, to wit foorty long galleis^ which carried their
souldyars, and three skore other that were light. And above the said soulde that
the commons paid, the said capytains and patrons did give an other salary to
those that drew the longest Oars, and also to othere ministres, of their
particular purse. And on the other part thappareil and preparation as well of
armure^ as of enseignes and of accoustrementes was much moore pompuous and
gorgeous than the same of the other had been. For that, that every patron going
in so long a voyage parforced himself to cause, yt his ship should be both
swiftest and also best and most gorgiously esquipped and trymmed. Also ye
souldears that were appoincted for the same voyage took pain to deck themself
as well with har^ois as with other things, every man to his uttermost best. And
also they were moreover attentife and covetous of glory, to wit, which of them
might be preferred before the other in order. In such manner that it seemed that
the same army was made for an ostentacion and show of the puissance of the
Athenyans, to the praise of all the other Greeks, rather than for to fight with
the enemies against whom they wente^ For truly, he, that should make the
estimation and account of the expenses that were made in that same army,
as well by the city generally as by the capytaynes and souldyars in
particulere, to wit, of the myses and charges, which the city had debursed
for that preparation and what capytaynes they sent thider, and of that same,
which the partyculer parsons had made as well in their harms, as appareil, and
the captains and patrons every one in his ship, and of the provision, which
every man made for to succor himself for a long time over and above the
soulde or wages that he had generally, and further of the great quantytie of
marchandyse, the which aswelle the souldears did carry for to aid themself
therwith^ as also many merchants that followed them for gaignes and winninge:
shall find that the same army emporteth the valeur of many talentes of the
country. The which army did bring into great admyration, those, against
whom they went, aswelle for the greatness and sumptuositie of it in all things,
as also for the hardynes and audacytie of them that had enterprysed it:
which seemed a strange and a marvelous thing for one only city to have durst
to enterprise one such a thing: which for troth exceaded their port and
force: and specially being so far from their housene. Aftere that the
souldears and the othere people were embarked and all the ships charged,
silence was commanded with the voice of a tro^pet. And than they made their vows
according to the custom unto the gods, not every shipp aparte, but all
togiders by the mouth of the tro^pett, and afterward they drunk in cups of
gold and of silver, the one to the other, as well headds and capytayns, as
souldears and maroners. And the like vows did those make, which were on land,
for the army in general, and particularly every man for his parent and friend.
And after that the instruments of the ships and the souldears had sownedde
and song their songs to the praise of ye gods, and acheued and fynished al
their mysteries, they launched fourth, and departedde in the beginning, all
togyders rainged or set in order in form of a horn, afterward they
disseuered themself, every shipp saylinge according to his force and swiftnes,
and they came furst to aboorde at Egine, and fromthence went straight to
Corcyre, in which place the other ships did attend and tarry for them.

Of diverse opinions that were among the Syracusains for the army of the
Athenyans. And the Orations, which Hermocrates and Athanagoras made unto the
people of Sarragosse, and the conclusion that thereupon was taken. The.vii.
Chapter.
IN thies entrefaictes, the Siracusains, albeit that on many sides they were
aduertysed of the army of the Athenyans that came against the^, yet they could
not believe yt. And in many assemblies that were made of the commons for this
matter, diverse and many reasons and opynyons were spokene, as well by those that
bileued the said enterprise, as by the^, which byleued it not. Amongeste
whom, Hermocrates son of Hermon perswadynge himself to have certain
knowlaige of the said army, putt himself fourth and did speak in this
manner.

The Oration of Hermocrates.
Lords, it may be, that thys^ that I shall say unto you of the army of the
Athenyans^ who come against us, shall seem incredible unto you: even so as
that, which has oftentimes been already spokenne by many other. And also I am
not ignorant that they, which show and reaporte thynges^ that excede the
appearance of truth, besides this that they cannot persuade that to be true,
which they say: they be moreover reputedde and holdene f^r fantastical and
mad. But yet notwythstandynge, I will not fear thereof for to say and speak
for the welthe of the commonweal, (saying the daungier, wherein I parcey^e yt
to be) that, which I know furthere therein, than anny othere, that has
therein spokenne. That is, that the Athenyans, of whom ye maruaylle so
greatly and wolle not bileue yt. They comme against you with so great a
puissance aswelle of ships as of people, under couloure to give aid to the
Egestains and to their allies, and to set the bannyshed Leontyns again into
their houses: but in truth it is for coue^yce to make themself lords of
Sycille and chyefly of our City. ^or they think well that if they have it in
their power, they shall easily subdewe the othere. Wherefore yt must be
thought on, how we shall honnorably resist, with the people that we have at
this present, against this great puissance, which wolle not long slac^e to
comme. And not to set the thing at naught through willing not to believe
yt, nothere by that mean to suffer oureselues to be betrappedde, as
vnprouydedde. And if there be annye amongeste us, that estemethe not this
thing incredyble, but takes it to be true, I woll not for that, that he have
doubt or fear of the audacytie of the Athenyans, another of their puissance.
For suerlye, they shall receive as much dammaige of us, as we of them, if we
provide therefore. And in this, that they do comme with so great number of
ships and of people, is not for our disadvantage: but rather it shall
redound to our proffit, chiefly with the other Sycilians, who seeing those
Athenyans so puissant shall be the sooner on our part, and rather than on theirs.
And also it shall be our great glory to have ouercommed one so great an army,
if we can do yt: or at the least to have empesched and brokene their
enterprise, whereof I have no doubt, but that yt shall not comme to their
pass. And also me thinks, that we may reasonably hope the one or the othere.
For it has not been oftene found, that an army by sea, be it of Greeks or of
Barbarous or strangers, that went so far from home, prospered well. Also
the number of people, which they bring with them is not greater, than the
same o^ our cytezeins and of those, that inhabitt without in the feldes without
the city, who, for the fear, which they shall have of the enemies, woll
assemble unto it out of all parts. And if those, that comme to assault
othere, through fault of vyctuailles or of othere necessary things be
constraynedde to return fromthence, without doing that, which they
intended, ye, although that it happene more through their error, than through
the valyantnes of those, which came for to assault them: yet the glory
thereof remains always to those assailled. Which is the reasone, wher^by
the said Athenyans, of whom we speak, have acquyred so great glory against
the Medes, who, being comme against them, had oftentimes the woorsie, moore
by myschance, than by the virtue of the said Athenyans. And we may hope that
the like shall happenne unto us. Wherefore, Lords, having this firm hope,
let us use dylygence for to prepare oureselues to our power and for to
provide for all things necessarye^ and moreouere for to send unto the othere
Cities of Sycille for to confirm and enterteigne in good amytie, those, which
be our allies, and for to make new allyances with the othere. And we should
not only send Ambassadors unto the Sycilians, but also to the other
estraungers, which inhabytte in Sycille^ showing them that the daungier is
common, as much to them as to us. And also we should send fromthence into
Italy for to pray those of the country to aid us, or at the least not to
^eceyue the Athenyans into their land. And me thinks that we should not
only send into Italy, but also unto Chartage. For unto them, that be always
in fear of their estate, yt is easy to persuade, that the Athenyans having
subdewed us, may without difficulty go against their city. Wherefore,
considering that if they neglecte or set this thing at naught, their estate
may in time to come be in danger: they wolle aid us openly or secrettelye,
in whatsoever manner that yt may be: which thing they may do if they
wolle, better than annye people that be this day upon earth, for that that
they have force, power, go^de, and silver, which is the most necessary
thing in all affairs. We ought also to send to the Lacedemonyans and to the
Corynthians to pray them, that they will, both to send succors hythere,
and also to move war against the Athenyans there in those quarters. And also
I will tell you one thing which semethe to me most necessary and
conuenyent. That is, that we should require all the Sycilians (if you think
it good) or at the the least the most part of them, that they come with all
their ships victuailledde for two months, to ioygne themselves with us to
goo to encounter the Athenyans at Torrente or at Lapigea, for to declare unto
them, that it is not a questyon for them to come so easily into Sycille, but
that they must first pass the Sea Ionum. By which doing, we shall putt
them in great fear, and into great thought. For So Much specially as we
shall issue fourth of the land of our allies before them for to defend ours,
for ye Tarentins woll receue us into theirs, as friends. And it shall be very
hard for those Athenyans, having so long a sea for to pass to goo with so
great an army always in order, and by that mean we may there assault them
to our advantage. For some of the ships may not in fast follow the
othere. And if they will discharge those, which be the heuyeste, for to haste
them to ioygne with the other, when we shall assault them: of necessytie they
must do yt with oars and with sails, and by that manner, that the
maronners shall trauaylle themself beyond measure. Whereby they shall be most
weary, and by consequent the more unable to defend themself, if we wol
assault them. And if we think yt not good to be done, we may retire unto
Tarente. And on the other part, if they comme with a small provision of
victuals, as for to give only one battaylle by sea, hoping afterward
fourthewyth to get the land, they shall have great need thereof when they
shall find themself to be in desarte places. And if they wool soiourne
therein, they shall be assy^gedde. And if they enforce theymself to pass
furthere, they shall be constraynedde to forsake and leave one part of the
apparaylle of their said ships, and also besides this, not being assuredde
to be receyuedde by the othere Cities, shall be in great sorrow. Which causethe
me to believe, that if we encountredde theyme and that they parceyuedde that
they could not land here as they thought: they woll not depart from Coreyre
But rathere in consultynge togider upon their affayre, and in sendynge espyes
for to know what number of people and of ships we have, and in what place we
be, the winter shall comme upon them, which shall aythere break of and
utterly let their passage: orelles seeing our preparatyon greatter, than
they thought, they shall desyste and leave of their enterprise. And somuche
the moore that I am enfourmedde, that the pryncypal of their Dukes and
Capytaynes and that knows most in war, comes hither against his
opinion, and therefore wolbe right well contended to return fromhence, if we
make on our bihalfe anny good occasyon or honnorable moustre. And also the
bruyt of that, which we wolle do, shall be greatter, than the effect, for
that, that in such case men ground their opynyone upon the bruyte of the
people. And when that he, which comethe to assaylle, is met by him that
should be assailledde, it puts him in to more fear, than if the other
preparedde only for to defend himself. Forsomuche as he parceyuethe himself
in daungier and studyeth to defend himself, where as he thought, but to
assaylle: which thing shall now happenne to the Athenyans, when they shall
see us comme against them, where they thought to comme against us, and also
not to have found anny resistance in us, which they had some occasion to
think, forsomuche, as notwythstandynge that we have been allyedde wy^h the
Lacedemonyans, yet we have not troubled them by war. But if they parceyue us
to take couraige, and to do clearly otherwise, than they imagyned, they shall be
more astonyed for to see one thing so new^ and contrary to their expectation,
than of the power that we for troth shall than have. And therefore I pray you
Lords, that ye will believe me herein, what is the best that ye may do. And
that is, that ye take couraige to do that, which I have said. And if ye wol
not that, yet at the least prepare without further prolonginge, all things,
which shall be necessary. And conceive in your mind in that doing, not for to
esteem the enemy that comes to assaylle you: which thing cannot be
declared, but by showing yt by fayer and notable feats. And those feats be
declared, if that fearing the ennemy, preparatyon were made against him in
such sort, that men might be in suertye. Taking this marime or chief
poincte, that the best which may be done, is to provide for things before
the danger, even as if it were present and seen. For also the enemies do truly
come with a great army by sea, and be already nygh at aboordinge, and there
rests only, but this, that they arne not seen. Thus did Hermocrates speak.
But yet notwythstanding his sayings, the people abodde in great altercation,
for some said that it was not true that the Athenyans came, as Hermocrates
said. The other said y^ although they did come, yet could they do no damage,
but that they should re^^yue more largely of it. Othere did utterly despise the
thing that mockedde at yt. And there were very few, that did give faith to
that: which Hermocrates had spoken, and that had fear of things, that were to
come. Than Athenagoras, who had greatest auctorytie among the common people and
that could best persuade the^ in that same time, stood fourth and did speak
unto them in this manner.

The oration of Athenagoras to the Syracusains. The.viii. Chapter.
Whosoever will say: that the Athenya^s be so far out of their wits, as to
come assault us, or that if they do come they shall not fall into our hands,
^e is truly aither tomuche fearful, orelles he understands not well the
affairs of our common wealth. And also I marvel not somuche of the temery^e of
them, that sow thies news amongst us for to make us afraid, as of their
follye, except that they persuade themself not to be perceived. But it is the
facyon of them that have particulerly any fear in themself, to go about to
putt it into the commons heads, for to hyde and cover theirs under shadow of
the comynaltie. Herunto tend the news and the bruyte that presently run
abroad, the which be not come rashely: but have been maliciously sowedde by
those, which be customers of the like things. But if you be well aduysed,
ye wolle not make any foundation or conjecture upon the speech of thies people
here, but rather ye will make conjecture by the quality of those, of whom it
is spoken, whider they be experymented and sage people, as I do esteem the
Athen^ans to be. Wherefore knowing them to be such, I think yt not credyble,
that being not yet delyueredde from the war of the Peloponesians, they
should haba^done their country: and come through gayneys and Lustynes of heart
to begin here new war, in nothing less than the other. But as touching my
self, I am of opinion that they owe to repute themself happy that we go not
to assault them in their country: so many^ and so puissante cities being in
this Islande. And admytt that they shall come, as it is reaportedde, yet they
ought to think that Sycille is more suffycient ^or to beat and destroy them,
than the Peloponesians be, forsomuche as they be better provided of al things.
And specially our city alone is more puyssante, than all the army which is
reaported to come against us: yea truly two times as much, consideredde that
they may not bring hither any horsemen, and also I believe that they shall get
none in thies parties, if it be not a certain small number: that the
Egestayns may deliver them. And of fotemen they cannot also be in so great
number as we have of them, since that they must transporte theyme by sea.
For it is right hard and dyfficille that so great number of ships, as be
necessary for to carye victualles and other necessities for so great an army,
as is required for them that woll to subdewe and and overcome, one so puissant
a city, as ours is, may comme hider in suertie. And I find the thing so
far unlike the truth, that albeit the Athenyans had an Colonie peopled
with their people, even so great as this city is, in whatsoever place here
adioigning, and that fromethence they would come to assault us: yet skarcely
they should return fromehence without shame and damage. Wherefore with much
greater reason it ought to be hoped, coming from so far against all Sycille,
the which I take for hole certain, that it wolle declare it self intierly
their enemy. For they shall be constraynedde to keep themself in their camp
in whatsoever part where they shall land at thearyualle out of the sea,
under such suertie of their ships which they wolle have at their b^ckes,
without to be so bold as to enter further into the country: for fear of our
horsemen, whereof we have great number, in such manner that with pain they
shall abide on land, somuche do I esteem our men better than thiers. The
Athenyans understanding the which things, study for to defend and keep
their land, as I am certainly aduised^ without thinking to come for to win
ours. But we have some people in this city, that go reaportyng liberally
things, which another be in ure, nor never shall be. And this is not the furst
time that I have attayncted the^ of like cases. But many other times I have
found them to have sowed such news and also woorse^ for to putt the mean
people (who of their nature be light of biliefe) in fear, to the end to take
and usurp by that mean and under the same color, the empire from the
city. And I fear greatly least they will so ostene make such inventions,
until the matter by some mean shall come to their intent, and that we shall
show ourselfe so nyce and so slothful, that they shall be trappe us before
that we may remedy it, and that we have not the heart to chastise theyme,
though that we know their euylle will. Forsomuche as I parceyue that by
such occasions our city is oftentimes troubledde with seditions and
mutyneries, whereby ensuych Cyuill battailles, by which it has been more
often troubledde, then by war of estrangers, and also has been some time
subdewedde by certene tyrants or euylle rulers of this self city, but if ye
wolle follow me, I will take pain to remedy it, in such sort that in our
time, we sha^le not need to fear this danger. And that aswelle by declarations
which I will make unto many amongst you, as also by punysshynge of the
seditious, that ymagyne such things, and not those only that shall be
conuictedde and attaynctedde thereupon (for it is right difficile for to find
out such things, but also those that at other times have enterprysedde the
like, although that they have not had power to execute theyme. For he, that
wolle prepare to defend himself against his enemy, ought not only to have
regard to that, which his enemy does: but rather to that, which may be
presumedde that he entendeth to do in time coming. And if he do not so, he
may furste receive damage thereby. And it seems unto me that thies people,
that goo about to putt the general estate and gouernemente of this city into
the hand of a small number of men: may not well be knowyn from their
euylle will: but by dooynge of three things, to wit, by rebukynge and
discovering in some part their deeds, partlye in keeping them from
executynge of them, and partly by causynge their enterpryses and wits to be
understand by conjectures and by reasones. And truly I have oftentimes
musedde with myself, what thing it is, which you the other young men do
intend, to wit, whider yt you now presently coueite to have charges and
Empires. For the same is not reasonable by our laws, the which have been
made for to empesche and let that you may not have theyme, not for to do
you wrong or shame, but only for the ymbecillitie and weakness of your age,
for ye may obteigne theyme, when you shall be of due age. Can ye not endure
to be in the self degree that the other cytizeins be in? And how can this
be reasonable, that people of one self city and of one self estate should
not enjoy like honnours and prehemyne^ces? There is peradventure some one, that
will say: that the common estate can another well nor egallye be
counsailledde, and that those, which be rychest and most puissante, be
always most sufficient for to govern the estate. To whom I furste answer,
that the common government is the gouernemente of all the city, where the
gouernemente of a small number is but only of one part thereof. Afterward I
say: that for to defend generally: the rich me^ be most mete, but to give
counsel, those which have best wits and that understand most, be the best:
and the comynaltie well assembled, after that yt has herd all the opynyons,
does thereupon judge much better. And all things, that be deparred, beit
particulerly or vniuersally^ be egallye departed in the common estate, where as,
when the small number governs, it departs the dangers and the charges unto
many: but of the proffyttes it gives but a small part unto other, but takes
them holy to it self. And that is it, which those, that be this day the most
rich and most puissant in the city (specially the young people) do couey^t,
which is a thing impossible in so great a city. And they, who do desire it,
be aither out of their wits, if they understand not that they desire the
destruction of the city: aith^r else be of the most ignorante of all other
Greeks, that I have knowin. And if they do understand it, they be tomuche
unreasonable for to desire it. Therefore understanding yt aither by my speech
or of yourselues, vouchsaulf to study all for that, which apperteigneth to
the common wealth of the city. And to consider that they among you which be best
and the most rich, have more part in the common wealth: than the remnante of
the comynaltie. And that if you goo about to accept the contrary: ye putt
yourselfe in danger to be thereof utterly depryuedde, wherefore ye ought to
reiecte and cast out thies bryngers of false news, as people already knowin
for such, and not to suffer them to prouffitt to any means, by their
inventions. For though the Athenyans should comme, yett is this city puissante
enough for to repoulse them. And there be officers sufficient for to provide
therefore. And if the thing be not true (as I do think) your city for
fear of such conterfeated news, will not purt it self in subiec^ion of
people, that for the occasion hereof, go about to be your Dukes and superyours:
but rather understanding the troth thereby, shall judge their words and
enterpryses, equipollente or like in effect to the deed. In such manner that
it shall not lose his liberty for the bruyt, which now ronneth, but rather
shall enforce it self to keep it, for the good order that it shall give in
things to come. Thus did Athenagoras speak. And after him other would have
spoken. But one of the pryncipall officers and rulers of the city would not
suffer any parsone to speak, but he in brief words concluded the matter,
saying in this manner.

The conclusion of one of the officers of Sarragosse.
IT is another wytt nor wisdom to use such pryckyng and oultragious talk,
the one against the other, another for them that speak it, not for those,
which give ears to hear it, but rather we should have more regard to thies
news yt be common, to the end for to give order aswelle generally: as
particulerly for to resist those which come against us. And though happily it
were not true, yet could it in nothing noy nor hurt the city to prepare it
self with horses, with harnnes and with all other things that be requysitt for
the war. And for the rest, we other officers wolle use diligence to provide:
and also understand the enterpryses of the enemies. And further we wolle
send to the other cities of Sycille and devise in all other things as we
shall think expediente for this case. And we have already provided therefore,
and wolle advertise you of that, which shall herafter come to our knolaige.
Upon this conclusion, the counsaille departed.

How the army departed from Corcyre, and how yt was euylle received aswelle
in Italye as in Sycille. The.ix. Chapter.
IN the mean time that thies things were debated at Sarragosse, the Athenyans
and their allies were all assembled at Corcyre. And before their departure
fromethence, the Dukes and capytaynes having made their moustre, did determyne
in what order they would pass the sea, and after that they were landed, how
they would depart their host. And so they departed all the said army into
three parts, of the which three, the Dukes should have the conduct, so as
should happene to every of them by lotte. And that they did, fearing that if
they should go all togiders, they should not find a port sufficient for to
receive them, yea though another water nor other victuales should not fail
the^. And besides this the same bendes, being so departed, should both make the
greater show and also should be more easy to conducte and govern having
every one his captain a part. Afterward they sent there ships, to wytt
of every bend, one, before into Sycille and into Italy for to learn what
cities would receive them as friends, and commanded them that they should come
agyne to mete them by the way to make them answer what they had declared unto
them that they would do. After that all the same was so done and ordained, the
Athenyans with that great preparation departed for Corcire, and took the way
toward Sycille, having in all one houndredde thirty and four galleys with
three oars, and two Rhodiens with two oars. Of the which with three oars,
there were one houndred of Athens, whereof three skoore were light galleys, and
the other carried the men of arms. Those of Chio, and the other allies of the
said Athenyans did fournishe the rest of the ships. As touching the number of
people, that were in the said army, there were in ye hole some five thowsande
and one houndred fotemen, whereof fyftene houndred were Athenyans, who had seven
hou^dred servants for the navigations or sailing and of other, as well allies, as
subjects, and specially of the Argiues five houndred, of the Mantynyans, and
other Mercenaries or huyred soldiers two houndred and fyftie, and of archers
in all four houndred and four skore, whereof the four houndred, were
Rhodyens and the four skore of Creta. There were also six thousand men light
armed, of Megara, and thirty horsemen, upon a bark, for to carry horses. Such
was the Athenyans army by sea at the beginning. And besides this there were
thyrtye marchandes ships caryinge vituailes and other things necessary for
the sayedde army, besides a great number of other, of diverse sorts, which
followedde the sayedde army for feate of merchandise, which were at Corcyre,
and all togiders passedde the goulphe of the sea Ionium. But afterward, they
departedde theymeselues and aboorded one party at the promontorye of Lapigea,
one other party at Tarente, and the other in diverse places in Italye, so as
they perceyuedde the landynge propice, and mete for them. But yet neuerthelas
they did not find any city, that would receive them for merchandise nor
otherwise, but rather did only permytt them to land for to refresh themself
with water and with other things, excepted the Tarentyns and the Locryans, who
suffredde them not to make any descente in their land. In such manner they
passedde without resting themself until they came to aboorde at the
promontorye of Rhegium in the extremity of Italye. In which place being
refufedde to land, and being already strongelye assembledde, they lodged
themself without the town, nyghe unto the temple of Diana, and thider they of
the said town sent unto them victuailes and other necessaries for their
monney. And there having brought their ships into the port: they for a
certene time soiourned, and in the mean time spoke unto the Rhegyns
perswadynge theyme that they would aid the Leontyns, consyderedde that they
were Chalcydes, like as they were. Who answered that they would not meddle
with the war of the Sycilians, but they would earnestly do in all things as
the other Italyans commonly would do. Notwythstandyng the which answer, the
Athenyans, desiring to execute their enterprise of Sycille, attended the
answer of the shyppes^ which they had sent to Egestes, for to understand the
affairs of the said country: and chiefly touching the monney, which the
ambassadors Egestayns had vaunted and bragged of to the Athenyans, that
should be found in their City, whider it were for truth or not. In thies
enterfaictes the Syracusains had news from many quarters, and pryncypallye by
the Brygantins (which they had sent for to espy and discover) how the
army of the Athenyans was arrived at Rhege. Rhegiu^.
So they were no more hard of bileue, but rather used all diligence that they
could, for to make al preparations for to defend them, and sent unto all the
other Sycilians, to some ambassadors, and to other, people, for to defend and
keep theyme. And moreover they withdrewe into their tycie all the ships, that
they might, from all coasts for defense thereof, and made monstre of their
people, and a description of their harnnes and of their victuaile, which they
had in the city. And for effect prepared all other things that was
possible for them, euene so, as if the war had been already bigonne. In
this mean time, the three ships, which they had sent to Egeste, came
again to them to Rhege, who made reaporte unto them: that there was none other
monney in the said city of Egeste, than the same, which they had
promysedde, which might amounte to the some of thyrty talentes only,
wherewyth the Dukes Athenyans were all astonyedde and discouraiged, seeing that
at the Aryuall the pryncipalle did fail them, whereupon they were foundedde,
and that Rhegians refusedde to enter into the war with them. Who were the
furst that they had aboorded, and those, whom they might hope sonnest to win, aswelle for that, that they always had been parents of the Leontyns
and of one self nation, as also for that, that they were always affectyonedde
to the party of the Athenyans. Whereby Nycyas was in nothing abused. For he
had never other opinion of the Egestayns, but that they would abuse the
Athenyans, but the other two capytaynes found theymselues deceived, who had
been abusedde by the cautell and craft that the Egestayns had used, when the
furst ambassadors of the Athenians was sent unto them for to see their
treasuer. For after that the said ambassadors were landed and come into their
city, they brought them into the temple of Uenus, which is in Eryce. and
there showed them basyns, the censars and other hallowedde vessels that were
in the sayedde temple: togiders with the offerynges, vows and other moveable
riches, which were of great valeur. And for that they were of iyluer, they
made a great monster and appearance, that there had been a great some of monney
in that same city insomuche as being so small: there was somuche in that
same temple. And besides this in diverse houses, where the Athenya^s that came
in that ambassade were lodged, and upon their ships, their hoastes shewedde
them great quantity of vessels of gold and of silver, as well for saruice
at the table, as for the kytchyne, which they had for the most part
borowedde of their neighbors, as well of the self country, as of the Phenicians
and of the Greeks faignynge, that it all was there oune^ and that it was their
manner of living. Whereupon, the said Athenyans perceiving so great quantity
of vessel and so rich in all their houses, and as all of one sort, were all
astonyed. And after that they were retournedde to Athenes, made reaporte that
they had seen a meruelouse quantity of gold and silver. And by that mean
the Athenyans were abused, whereby, after that the men of war, that were at
Rhege understood the truth to be contrary by the messengers that they had
sent thider, they became hateful and seditious against them. And thereupon the
Dukes consulted togyders of the affair. And the opinion of Nycyas was that
they altogider should go fromethence to Selynunte. To which place it was
pryncipally ordeynedde that they should go in favor of the Egestayns. And if
being there the Egestains made whole paymente of all the army, that they might
consult what they had to do. And if they made not the said payment, that than
it should be demanded of them, that at the least they should victuale the
three skoore ships which they had required for their succors. And in that
doing that men should abide there until that they had reconcyled the said
Selynuntyns with those Egestayns aither by frendeshyp or by force. And after
that, yt they should pass through before the other cities of Sycille for to
show the puissance of the Athenyans, and also to give courage and hope to
their friends, and that done to return fromthence all into their houses
without otherwise to soiourne in that same quarter except that in short time
or by some opportunity and occasion, they might do some advantage and saruice
to the Leontyns, and withdraw any of the other cities to the alliance of the
said Athenyans. For it seemed unto him that doing othewise, they should putt
the estate of Athens in danger by that expenses only. But Alcibiades was of
contrary opinion, saying that it should be tomuch great shame, to be come with
one so great a puissance into a country so far of, and to return
fromthence without doing any thing there. Wherefore he was of advise that
heraultes and trompettes should be sent unto all the cities of the country
except Sarrogosse and Selynunte, for to advertise the^ of their coming, and to
essaye for to win them, to wit, for to cause the subjects of the said
Syracusains and Selynuntyns to rebelle against them and to withdraw the other
unto the alliance of the Athenians. And by that mean to have victuailes and
people of theyme, and before all the other they should essay to get the
Mamertyns, for that that they were most nighe to the right landynge for to
come out of Greece, and also there was a great port and right suer, whereunto
the said Athenyans might wichdrawe themself and retire in suertie: and
fromethence practice with the other cities. And after that it should be learned
what they were that would be ernest against the said Syracusains, and those,
that would be to the contrary: to go against the Syracusains and against the
Selynu^tyns for to constrayne them, at the least, to wytt, the Syracusains, to
apppoyncte with the Egestayns, and the Selynuntyns, that they should permytt
the Leontyns to abide in their city and houses. As touching Lamachus his
opinion was that men should go as soon as they might against Sarragosse and
assault them being unprovided, before that they might prepare, for to resist,
and whilst, that they were astonyed, like as without fail, they would have
been at the beginning, for that, that an army is always fearefull^ at the
aryuall. But if it delayeth to go to assault his enemies, they consulte, upon
their affair, and in so doing do recover their courage. In such manner,
that afterward they despise those, which were fearful, unto them,
wherefore he concluded, that those men that would fourthwith, and without
delay, come to assault the foresaid Syracusains whileste they were, in that
same fear, should have the better thereof, and should putt the sayedde
Syracusayns in great trembling and fear, aswelle for the vieu, of the same
army which should seem at the furste syghte to be of much more people than
there was, as also for fear of the euylles which they should consider to be
like to happene, if they were vainequyshedde in the battaille. And somuche the
more that it was to bileue that many of the citizeins should be in the feldes
which doubted not the coming of the said army, who retyrynge hastily into
the City shall leave behind theyme much of their goods in the feldes, and
also many of them shall be takene before that they may retire, whereby, having
afterward assieged the city, men shall not lack monney. And on the other
part, by this doing the other cities of Sycillle, upon that poyncte shall
choose the rather to make alliance with theyme, than with the sayedde
Syracusains without taryinge or attendynge which of the two, shall have the
victory. He sayedde moreover that in all euentes and chances (were it that
they retyredde, or that they assaultedde) that they should make the station
and soiourne of their ships at Megare, for that, that it was desarte and
nyghe enough to Saragosse, aswelle by sea, as by land. Thus Lamachus, did
speak, and neuerthelas he came again to the opinion, of Alcibiades. Who,
after these things, sailledde with his ship to pass before the city of
Mamertyas, and requyredde theyme to enter into alliance with the Athenyans,
whereunto they would not consent, nor suffer him to enter into their city,
neuerthelas they offredde to cause victualles to be delyueredde to be sold
without the city for him and his people, who perceiving that, without
resting there, retournedde fromethence to Rhege. And after that he was
aryuedde, with other the Dukes, they causedde incontinentlye one part of the
army to be embarquedde within three skoore ships which they victuailledde
sufficiently. And leaving the rest of the people, and of the ships at the
port, of Rhege, with one of the same Dukes, the other two went with the said
three skoore ships strayghte to Naxe, Naxus.
whereinto they were receyuedde by the Cytizeins. And fromethence they went to
Catane but there they were not receyuedde, for that, that there was one part
of the cytizeins, which took party with the Syracusains. For this cause they
were constraynedde to retire unto the contremounte, of the river of Teria, The
river of Teria.
where they soiournedde all the same day. And on the morrow after, they
altogether went fromthence tylle before Syracuse. having their ships in
order in form of a cornette, whereof they sent ten before toward the
great port, for to see if there were any ships of the enemies. And after
that they were nyghe the entering of the said port, they causedde it to be
cried with the sound of a trompett, that the Athenyans were come thither, for
to restore the Leontyns into their houses, because of the amytie and parentage,
that they had with theyme. Wherefore they declaredde to all those of the
said natyon of Leontyns, that were within Syracuse, that they might retire to
the said Athenyans, as their friends and been factors. And after that they
had made that cry, and well regardedde and consyderedde the Syte and the
facyon aswelle of the City as of the poorte, and also of the country round
about, for to know on which side they might best assiege yt, they all
retournedde from thence to Catane, and again demaundedde the cytizeins, that
they should suffer them to enter into the city, as their friends, who, after
that they had holden their counsaille, made answer that they would not suffer
the army to enter but if the Dukes and heddes would enter in their simple
estate: they would receive them wyllyngly and should hear what they would
say wh^che thing was done. And the common people being ass^mbled. for to give
audyence: even as they were amasedde to here Alcibiades, ^ho spoke unto them,
the men of war entered soubdaynly by a false gate perceyuyng that it was evil
walled, did beat it down, and without making any bruyte or noyce, went
ch^apening and buying through the town, that, which was necessary for
theyme. Which perceived, certene of the cytizeins, that took party with the
Syracusains, were greatly astonyedde, and fled secret^y out of the town, but
there was no great number of theyme, and all the other agrede to make alliance
with the Athenyans. And by this mean all the other, which were abiding at
Rhege, were commanded to come thider. And they being aryuedde, after that
they haddde fortefyed and furnysshedde yt, they did putt them into yt. And
hearing that the Syracusayns preparedde their army by sea, they altogiders
dislodgedde themself fromethence and went straight way toward Syracuse. But
seeing that there was no preparation of shyppes^ they retournedde fromethence:
and came the way of Cameryne. And after that they were nyghe the entryng of
the port, they causedde it to be cryedde with the voice of a trompett, that
they were come. But for all that, the Cameryns would not receive theyme,
saying, that they had sworn, not to suffer the Athenyans to enter into their
^oarte, with more, than with one ship, except, that they themsel^ had
requyredde them to come thider with a greater number. Thus they returned
fromethence without doing any thing. And in their return they landed in
some one quarter of the territorye of the Syracusains for to pyllage it. But as
they were bu^ye^^ that pillage and in disorder, the horsemen, that were in the
city, yssuedde fourth against them, and did slaye some number of those,
which were lightly armed, and the other, retired to Catana.

How Alcybiades being adiournedde for to answer at Athenes, to certene
crimes, which were obiectedde against him, went fromethence into Peloponese.
And incidentlye how Hipparchus, the brother of Hippias, sometime Tyrante or
euylle governor of Athens, was slain. The.x. Chapter.
AFter that the Athenyans ships, were retired to Catana, one ship of
Salamyne, sent by the people of Athens, arrived, for to adiourne Alcibiades to
come to answer to many crimes and trespasses that openly were objected and
laid against him, and with him certene other that were in the Acmye, who were
likewise chargedde by tokens, to have been his accomplices, aswelle for to
violate the mysteries of sacrifices, as also for to cut a sonder and deface
the pictures or images called Hermes at Athenes. Of which things, after his
departure with tharmye by sea, the Athenyans ceased not to pursue the
inquyrie. And they arested not only upon the proves and apparent conjectures,
but rather geuynge faith to all light suspicions, upon the saying of
certain unhappy men and of evil name, they did take many of the most
honest of the city, whom they did putt into prysone, groundyng themself upon
this, that it were better to go serchyng and verefying that same matter by all
sorts of conjectures, than for to suffer a man to eskape, of whatsoever good
renome that he were, through fault of saying, that the accusations, which
were against him were not suffyciente, and so that he should not be
conuyctedde. For that the people had herd say, that the tyranny of
Pysystratus had sometime been hard and cruel about the end of his
government, Pysystratus.
and could not be extinguyshedde, another by the people, nor by Hermodius,
Hermodius.
but by the Lacedemonyans. By reasone whereof they were in great fear and
suspicion of the things abouesayed, and did take all in euylle part. Albeit
that for troth the enterprise of Arystogiton, Aristogiton.
and Harmodius, did take audacytye, for dishoneste love, as I will show
herafter, and will declare, what the Athenyans, and other Greeks, speak of
their tyrants or evil rulers, and of things, which they have done hedling,
and at their plaisure without knowing in any thing, the troth, for the thing,
was this. Of ye tyra^nye of Pisistratus and of his infa^tes in ye city of
Athens, and how it was extinguished.

Hippias


Pysystratus being in his old age dead, Hippias who was his eldest son (and
not Hypparchus, as it has pleased some to say) succeeded him in the
pryncipalitie. Now there was in the city of Athenes, a young man, namedde
Harmodius, excellent in beawltie. Of whom, by mean thereof, Arystogiton (who
was a man of a mean condition) was amorous, and mysusedde him carnallye. So
the same Hermodius, was accused by Hipparchus, son of Pysistratus, of that
same lewdenes and shamefulle matter. Whereof he being conuictedde, did
complain to Arystogiton, who for fear, that he had to be depryuedde of his
boy, and of his lewdenes: by the auctorytie of Hypparchus, enterprysedde under
color to be willing to usurp the tyranny of the city, for to keep the
said boy, and to wythstande that he should not be takene, from him under
couloure of justice. In this mean time, Hipparchus, Hipparchus.
went about for to withdraw the said Hermodius by ^aier speech and
flateryes, and perceyuyng, that he could nothing proffytte by that mean,
preparedde himself to bring him to shame by justice without using of annye
force, for also it was not lawfulle for him to do it, insomuche as the tyrants
of that same time had not yet taken upon them greater auctorytie over their
subjects, than by form of justice. By occasion whereof, and also that those
which vsurpedde such tyrannycall gouernemente, excercisedde theymselfe in the
remenante in all virtues and in all prudencie: Those same tyrauntes were not
greatly noisome nor displeasante. For also they did not extorte of the
cytizeins any other trybute, but the twentieth part of their revenue, wherewyth
they made many fayer reparations in the c^tie, and also susteignedde many
great wars against their neighbors. And as touching the other things,
they left theyme intierly unto the cytizeins according to their auncyente
laws, forprysed and resarued only this, that they found manner by their
auctortye, that one amongst theyme was always chosene by the commons unto the
pryncypall offices of the city, whereby some of them be found to have yerelye
offices in the city Athenes. And Pysystratus, son of Hyppias, who had the
name of his grandefather, holding the seignorye after the death of his
father, dedicatedde, in the myddelle of the markette place, the temple of the
twelve gods and that same of Apollo Pythius. And he caused to be defacedde or
blottedde out one Epigrame or Epytaphy: which was set up in the markett
place, which was afterward repaired and enlarged by the commons. And yet
neuerthelas the said Epigrame was not utterly defaced, but only duskened or so
rased, that yet it might be read, though that with some difficulty, which
was of this substance. The Epigrame, which Pisistratus sets in the temple of
Apollo Pythius, that Hippias left for remembrance, of his Empire. And this,
which. I have said, that Hippias son of Pisistratus obt eignedde the
seigniorye after his father, insomuche, as he was eldest, I can affirm yt
clearly to be true, by this, that I have inquired, and serched more of the
common renome of that same time, than any other. And every man that woll search
and inquier may know yt, by this, that it is not found, that any of the
legytymate sons of the said Pysistratus, had any childrene, but only he, as
it may he parceyued, by the ancient monumentes, or graves that be in t he
said temple, and also by an Epi^aphie, which is in the castle of Athenes,
grauene in stoane, making mention of the noughtynes, of the said tyrants,
wherein no mention is made of any children of Hipparchus, another of Thessalus,
Mhessalus.
but well of five children, which Hippias had by Callis, Callis.
daughter fo Hipperchide. Also it is like to be true, that he maryedde the
eldest of this children, furst: and also being eldest, it is to bileue, that
he succededde, next in the Seigniorye, and tyranny. And it seems not unto me
to have any appearance, that if Hipparchus, had been slain, possessyng the
Seignyorye: that Hippias incontmently after could have obteigneddde yt, and
also exercise it the self day, that the other dyedde, but rather having
already a long time vsedde his auctorytie imperially toward the subjects,
and lived frendely and discretelye with his adherentes and friends: feared not
to reteigne and keep his Seigniorye and pryncipalytie, whatsoever thing had
happenedde to his brother: euene so, as his said brother would happily have
done, if that the chance had happenedde to that same Hippias, for that, that
he was already exercisedde and accustomedde, in the Seigniorye. But that,
which gives this reaporte to Hipparchus and causes theyme, that came after
to bileue, that he had obteigned, the pryncipalitie and Seigniorye of Athens:
was through cause of the myschance, which happenedde unto him, by occasyon of
that, which is before said. For parceyuynge that he could not wythdrawe or
bring Hermodius to his will, he ymagined against him one such work and
despyte. The same Hermodius, had a young suster, a maydene, who coming in
an assembly of other maidens, of her estate, to a certene solempnytie that was
made in the city, carrying a paynyer or baskette, as the other did: Hipparchus,
by his ministers, causedde her to retire and to be putt out of the sayedde
compaignie, saying that she was not calledde, to the said solempnytie, for
she was not worthy to be there, willing to do it to be understand, that she
was no maydene, whereby Hermodius, was more and more, grudgedde and spiteful,
and Aristogitonne also for his sake. And so, they cogiders with the accomplices
of that same conspiratie determined, when it should be expedient for to execute
it, but they taryedde the day of the feast, which is calledde, the great
feast of Pan, for that, that on the same day yt was permytted to every
man, without any susspycion, to wear harnnes, through the town. And so yt
was concludedde amongeste theyme, that on the sayedde day: the same Hermodius
and Arystogiton, should charge upon Hipparchus, and the other accomplices, upon
the guard or sargeantes. And albeyt that the same accomplices were in small
number, yet for to keep the thing secrettt, they persuaded theymselfe that
when the other cytezeins, that should be assembled, should see them charge upon
the tyrants or governors, though that they knew nothing of the enterprise,
being yet in armure, they all would ioigne with theyme for to recover their
liberty. Than, when the feast day came, Hippias was in a place, a part,
namedde Cerannicus with the souldyars of his guard, and ordained the ceremonies
of that same solempnitie as it apperteigned. And as Hermodius and Aristogiton
came directly unto him with their daggers for to slaye him, they parceyued one
of their accomplices, that was speaking with the sayedde Hyppias very
famyliarlye (for that, that he was gentle to give audience) whereby they were
afraid that their said compaigny on had discovered the enterprise, and lest
they should be incontynently takene. And so determined before that they would
be empeigned or laid hand upon, to take vengeance on him, that was cause of
their conspiracy. To wytt, Hipparchus, if they could. And fourthwith entered
into a place, called Leocorus, wherein Hipparchus was. And so they russhed upon
him with such a furye, for hatred and disdeigne, which they had against him,
that they did slaye him incontinently. And that done Aristogiton at beginning
sauedde himself among the souldeours and guard of the tyrants,
notwythstandynge he was afterward takene and soore hurt, but Hermodius was
slain upon the place. Hippias being aduertifed in the said place of Cerannicus
of this matter: did not soudainely repair unto the place, where the chance was
committed, but went straight way thider, where as the people of the town
being armed were assembled for the pomp or solempnytte, before that they had
any vnders^andynge of the deed. And making good chere, and showing a joyful
countenance euene as as no such thing had been done, he caused ^o comaunde
them, that they should all withdraw themself without armure into a certain
place, which he caused to be showed unto them, which thing they did, thynking
that he would have said something unto them. And fourthwith, as they were
there, he sent his souldears, and guard, for to take from them, their armure,
and to apprehende those, whom he had^ in suspection, pryncipally them that were
found wearynge daggers. For the custom was in that same solempnytie, to carye
spears and targottes only. In this manner, through foolyshe love, the furste
conspiracy was bigonne and enterprysedde against the Tyrants of Athens, and
executed foolyshly for the soubdayne fear, which they had, that enterprysedde
yt, to have been discovered, whereby great euylle insuedde afterward to the
Athenyans. For in time followynge, the tyrants were more cruel, than they
had been, for that that Hippias fearing to be circumuentedde: causedde many
of the cytizeins to dye, and also prouydedde himself with allyances and
frendeshyps, without the town, for to wythdrawe and save himself, if annye
mutation or change happenedde within the city. For this cause, he married his
daughter, named Archedice, Archedices.
unto Hippoclus son of Eantydes, Hippocius.

Ea^tides


Tyrante of Lamsaque, for that that he knew that the said Eantydes had
great amytie with Darie, king of Persie. The Sepulcre or grave of which
woman is yet to be seen in Lamsacque aforesaid, whereupon was an Epitaphe of
this substance. Here lies Archedice, daughter of Hyppias defendoure of the
Greeks, who, although that she was daughter, wife and suster of Tyrants,
did not yett therefore annye proud or violente thing. Neuerthelas three
years arter this, which we have spokene, Hippias was chasedde by the
Lacedemonyans and by the Alemonides out of the Seigniorye and tyranny of
Athenes. And went fromethence with his good will unto Eantides in Sigee and
unto Lampsaque, Sigeu^.
and fromethence unto the king Darius, and twentye years after (being than
very old) he did come with the Medes against the Greeks at Marathonie. The
people of Athenes, bryngyng thies ancient things to remembrance, was more
sharp and more chafedde to enquier of this same matter of the dyssyguredde
images and of the corrupted sacrefices, fearing to come again into subjection
of tyrants. And persuaded themself that the said excess and misdeeds had
been done to the same entente. By occasion whereof many great personages of
the city were putt into prysone. And the persecution and wrath of the commons
encreasedde dayllye to apprehende, and imprysone men, until that one of them
that had been takene and was reputed for most coulpable, at perswation of
one of the other prisoners, discoueredde the thing, were it truly or
faulselye, for the troth could never be knowyn another than nor afterward.
But somuche there was, that he was perswadedde, that if he discoueredde the
case, by accusynge of himself and of some other, he should putt the rest of
the city out of suspicion and of danger. And also by so doing should be in
suertie for to escape and to be delyueredde. By this mean he confessedde the
case of Hermes or pictures, as touching himself, and also accused a compaignie
of other, whom he declared to have been partakers thereof, whereby the commons,
thynkyng that he had said the truth, were right joyful. For they were
tomuche angry, that no knowlaige could be had of a deed, done by so great
number of people. And so he, that had confessedde the matter, togiders with the
other, whom he had not chargedde: were fourthwyth delivered. And of those,
which he had charged, al they that might be taken were putt to execution by
sentence or judgment. The other, that fled fromethence, were condempnedde
of contumacye to death, and a huyer was lymytedde and appoynctedde for all men,
which did slaye theyme. And yett was it not knowyn for truth, whider that
those, which had been executed, were gylty or not. Neuerthelas in all the rest
the city reputed itself to have gaigned and profytedde greatly. But the
commons were displeasedde, with Alcibiades, who was accused of this chance, of
the images by his enemies, to wit, by those same, that had charged him
therewith before his departure. And taking it to be true that he had been gilty
of the case, of the Hermes or pictures, they easily persuaded themself, that he
likewise had been partaker of the other case of the sacrefices with the other
accomplices and conspirators against the commons. And the suspection did grow
somuche the more, that a certene small number of warryours being Lacedemonyans,
did in that self time come until the distreate of Peloponese, for to appoynte
and entreat of some matter, with the Beotians. Whereby the Athenia^s had
suspicion, that it had been through consent of the said Alcibiades, under
color of the said treaty, and that if the same Athenia^s, had not prevented
to take the said citizeins, whom they had taken upon suspicion, the city had
been in danger to be taken and betrayed. And the suspicion was so great, that a
great watch in armure, was for one night, kept in the city of the temple of
Theseus. In the self time the gestes and friends of the same Alcibiades, which
were in the city of Argos, were suspected, to be willing for to invade the
commons, which thing, being by them signefyed unto the Athenyans, they licenced
the said Argiues for to slaye the citizeins of Athens, which they had in their
city of Argos, who were delivered unto them, for hostage, and by them to be
sent unto certain Islandes. In this manner, Alcibiades was suspected, on all
sides. Whereupon they that were willing to cause him to come to judgment,
for to condemn him to death: purchased to cause him to be adiournedde or
somoned in Sycile, togiders with the other, of whom has been spokene, and gave
charge unto the Messenger: that he should comaunde him to follow him
incontinentlye, and not to take him, for fear that they had as well of the
compaignions of war which he had under his charge, as also that the affair
of the enterprise of Sycille should not be troubledde, and yet most
pryncipallye that the Mantynyens, and the Argiues (who at the desire of the
same Alcibiades accompanyedde the said Athenyans in that same enterprise)
should not be mouedde or lost. Than Alcibiades, percey^ynge the comaundemente
and adiournynge, that was made unto him, mounted into a shypp, and the other
also adiourned did mount with him, and departed fromthence togiders with the
ship of Salamyne, which was comme for to adiourne them: fayning to be willing
to saille in compagnie unto Athens. But after that they were in Thurie, they
followed it no further: another afterward were seen by those of the said shipp
of Salamyne: who, having carefullye inquired, what way they were gone, and not
learning any news thereof, they saylled fro^thence their right way. Sone after
Alcibiades departed from Thurie, and sailled fromthence to land in Peloponese:
being already bannyshedde from Athens. And so after, he and the other, which
were in his compaigny were condemned for contuinacye unto death by the
Athenyans.

How after the departure of Alcibiades, the other two Dukes Athenyans, having
done certain small things in Sycille, did come to assiege the city of
Saragosse and had a victory against the Syracusains. The.xi. Chapter.
AFter the departure of Alcibiades, the other two Dukes Athenyans departed all
the army into two parts: and aither of them. did by lot take the charge of
the one of them. And afterward they both togiders with all the host, went
fromthence unto Selynunte, and to Egeste for to know if the Egestians were
determined to deliver the monney, which they had promised, and also for to
understand the affayre of the said Selynuntyns and the question or difference,
which they had with the Egestains. And they saylled a length the sea, having
the Isle of Sycille of the cost of the sea Ionum on the left hand, and came
to aboorde before the city of Imere: the which only in that same quarter is
inhabyted with Greeks, nevertheless they woolde not receive the said
Athenyans, who, at their departure fromthe^ce, sailled to a town named
Hiccara. Hiccara.
The which, though that it were inhabytedde with Sycaniens was yet ennemy to
the Egestains. For this cause, they pillaged yt, and afterward did set of the
Egestains within it. This dependinge arrived the horsemen of the Egestains,
with whom the fotemen Athenyans came by land within the Isle, pillaginge and
robbinge until Catana, and their ships came unto them coastynge alongeste the
sea, wherein they charged their butyes and pillage, as well of beasts as of the
other. Nycias at departure from Heccana, went incontynently to Egeste. where
he received of the Egestains thirty talentes. And having given order for
certain other things, returned fromthence into the army. And beside that
some, that they had taken for the said butye, which was sold, they received
one houndred and twenty tale^tes of gold. Afterward they went enuyroning the
Isle, and in their passage did give order to their allies that they should
send them the number of men, which they had promysedde. And so they came with
the moytie of the army before the town of Hibla in the terrytory of Gela (the
which took the party against them) thinkyng to take it, Hybla.
but they could not, and in this mean time, the end of Somer did come. At
beginning of the winter, the Athenyans prepared themself for to come to
assiege Sarragosse, and on the other side the Syracusains prepared theymselfe
for to come to mete them. For insomuche as the Athenyans did not at beginning
come to assaylle them, they took daily more and more courage. And somuche the
less they fearedde and esteemed them, that they had enuironned and compassed
about the other country by sea very far from their city, and also could
not take Hybla. Hybla.
whereupon the said Syracusains were so puffed up, that they required of their
Dukes that they should conducte them unto Catana, where the enemies were,
insomuch as they durst not come thider unto them. And the light horsemen
Syracusains, which ronned daylly unto the camp of the said Athenyans, among
other reproaches, which they used, demanded of them, if they were not more
comme to inhabitt rather an other man's land, than for to restore the Leontins
into theirs. The Athenyans, knowinge such things, essaiedde to wythdrawe those
Syracusains so far, as they could, from their city, to the intent that the
more with their ease, they might in one night with their ships, saille to
land before the town, and lodge their camp in place, where they should
think most mete. For they knew well, that if at landing out of their ships,
they found the enemies in order and prepared for to defend their landinge:
orels if that they would take their way fromthence by land unto the said
city: they should have much more difficulty. For their horsemen might do great
dammaige unto their fotemen being light armed, and also to the rest of their
footmen, considered that they had yet small number of horsemen there. And doing
as they had enterprysed, they might without any great empeschement take the
place, which they desired, before that the horsemen Syracusains should have been
returned, which place had been taught and showed unto them, by the bannished
men of the same city, who followedde them, to wit, nyghe unto the temple of
Olympus. And for to execute their enterprise, they vsedde one such a cautelle.
That is, that they sent one (whom they right well trusted) unto the Dukes of
Syracusains, knowinge also that they would give faith unto that, which he
should show them, fayninge to be sent from certain of the princypalle of the
city of Catana, whereof he was, whom the said dukes did well know) saying that
they yet held their party, and that if they would, they would cause them to
have ye victory against the Athenyans by such mean: for one party of the
army of ye said Athenyans kept the^self wtin the town without armure. So that
if the said Syracusains, issued fourth, at one day named, out of Sarragosse
and arrived at the break of the day with all their puissance: those same
Catanyens, whom he named unto them with their accomplices, should easily enclose
the Athenya^s, that were wtin the town, and also would put fire into their
ships, which were in their port. By which doing, if the said Syracusains would
rush out and charge upon them that were in the feld, which was without the
town, enclosed with Pales, they might take it without any great difficulty,
and destroy all that they should find wtin it: saying moreover that there were
many cytezeins of Catane of this intellygence and conspyratie, all ready and
determined for to execute it: who had sent him thither. The dukes Syracusains,
which were bold, and besides that had already desire to go unto the enemies in
their camp, did lightly bileue the epsy. And having taken a day with him,
when they would be at Catana, they sent him again unto them, from whom he said
that he was come. And at the said day failled not to issue fourth all the
people of the city with the succors of the Selynu^tyns, and some other their
allies that were already come, and for haste they went fourth without order
altogiders for to lodge nygh to Catana upon the river of Symethe in the land
of Leontyns. Symethus.
Than the Athenya^s, understanding their coming, did charge all their people,
that they had, as well Athenyans, as Sycilians and othere, in their ships, and
saylledde by night, toward Sarragosse. where they arrived at break of day
within the great port, before the temple of Olympus for to land there. In
this mean time, the horsemen Syracusains, which were goone to Catana,
understanding that all the Athenyans ships were departed out of the port of
Catana, aduertysed the fotemen thereof, and all togyders did take their way for
to return to the succors of their city. But for that, that the way was
long, before that they could aryue, the Athenyans had already landed, and
taken their lodging in the place, which they had chosen: out of the which,
they might defend themself to their aduantaige, with out being in dangier
before that they had made their rampares, another yet by making of them,
insomuche as they were shadowed covered or defended with walls and buildinges
in that same quarter. And moreouere there was many trees, a standing water,
and hollow or broken places. So that none could come upon them out of the same
quarter, specially horsemen. And on the other part, they had already hewed
down a great quantytie of the said trees, which they had carried to the sea
side, and there planted and locked togiders in manner of ouerthwarte crosses,
for to defend and let, that no man should issue fourth into theirs ships
Moreover in that same quarter, where their camp was most low, and where the
coming therinto was most easy, they had rampared it with great stoanes and
with wood in haste, so that yt was very hard to enter there, and afterward
they did break the bridge, which they had made for to goo unto their ships.
All which work they did at their ease, without this, that annye man issued
out of the city for to empesche them, for they were all gone fourth and were
not yet returned from Catana, of whom the horsemen were the first that came
again, and sone after all the people that were issued fourth, and came
directely against the Athenyans, to present them bataylle. But seeing that
they issued not fourth, they wythdrewe and went to lodge themself on the
othere side of the way, which leads to Heloryne. The morrow after, the
Athenyans issued fourth for to fight, and they ordained their battaille in this
sort. For at the right poyncte they set the Argiues and the Mantynyans, at
the left, the other their allies, and in the myddell the Athenyans. And also
the one moytie of the army was of the thicknes of eight renkes in the fronte^
and the othere moytie, which was on the side toward the Pauillyons or Tents,
as much, the whole being foore squared. And a certain part was ordained to
comme to succor that same moytie that was the riere ward, if they should see
that the other were oppressed, between thies two battailles, they bestowed the
baggage and the me^ that were not mete to fight. On the other side, the
Syracusains did putt all in armure, as well those of the town as estrangers,
whom they had well armed. Among whom, were the Selynimtyns that came furst
thider. And after, those of Gele, which were about two houndred horsemen, and
those of Cameryne aboutes lxx. Arbalestriers or crosbowes. Also they did put
all their horsemen on ye right poynct, and after followynge, the archers or
slyngers. The battails than being ordered, for that, that the Athenyans should
first begin to march, Nycias, went ronnynge to and fro a lenghe without
his battaylle, and did speak to every renke in this manner.

The exhortation of Nycias to his souldears. The.xii. Chapter.
WHat needs it, Lords, that I make great exhortation for to fight
valya^tly, unto you, that be here ready to do yt. Truly the preparation,
which I see here, seems to me to have moore effycacytie for to give you
courayge and audacytie, than all the talk, that anny man living could use,
if that we were evil appoincted. Now be we here, Argiues, Mantynyans and
Athenyans, the most principal and superiors of all the Islanders and
inhabitants in the Islandes. How can we than in so great a number of such
friends and allies not have certain hope of the victory, specially having to do
against common people and those, which be not chosen as we be? And also thies be
Sycilia^s yt dispyse us afar of, but being nighe unto them they will not tarry
us, insomuch as they have less of knowlaige and experience, than of audacytie.
I wol also y^ every of you do bring to his remembrance, that we be here in a
strange land far from ours, and not being our friend, the which we cannot
obteigne without the victory. For his cause I will exhort by all reasons
contrary to the same, by the which I presuppose that our enemies shall be exhorted
by their capitains. For they woll show the^, that they have to fight for
defense of their own land. And I do show you that we be in a strange land,
in the which we must ayther vainquishe, orels have no great hope for to
return into ours, for they have plenty of horses that will oppress us
greatly, if that we break our array. wherefore, as me^ valyant and hardy, be
willing to assail the enemies manfully, remembering your ancyent virtue and
force, and setting before your eyes, that the necessity, wherein we be, is
much more to be feared, than the puissance of our ennemys. After that Nycias
had thus spoken, he caused his men to march against thennemys, who looked not
yt they should have so sone presented them ba^taill. For this cause, some o^
them were gone into ye city, which was very nigh their ca^pe. who, nevertheless
incontinently as they had knowlaige of thaffaire, issued fourth and came to
ioygne the^self with their men, not in their order, for that they could not
do. But where as they came, there they mingled themself with the other, and
showed as well in that same battaill, as in all other affairs, that they lacked
not another heart nor bardynes, more than those, that did assaille them: but
rather did defend the^self valyantly, so long as they perceived any mean to
be hable to do it. And when they were constrained to retire, they did it
unwillingly and slackly: but howsoever it was, not thinking at that present,
that the Athenia^s would have come to assail them, and by that mean being
soubdainly taken, they armed themself hastily and came to mete their enemies.
And the Archers, slyngers and ^asters of darts, bigan first thescarmouche by
chasing and recueilling, as well on the one side as on ye other, for a certain
short space, so as such people, which be lightly armed, be accustomed to do.
Afterward the southsayers and dyuynours on both sides, showed aythere unto
his nation that the significations of the sacrefyces were good. Upon which
knowlaige, they caused the token o^ battaill to be given, and the one marched
against the other in their order, such, as has been above said, very fyersly,
and with great couraige. For ye Syracusains considered that they did fight for
their country, both for their present wealth, and also for their liberty in
time coming. As touching their enemies the Athenyans, they did fight for to
obteigne an other man's land, and not to bring damage to their own, if they
were vainquished. The Argyues and the other their allies, not subjected to
those Athenyans for to do the^ ye saruice, for the which they were come to the
same voyage, and yet every of the^ desiringe to return frothence victoriou^ly
into his house. And ye other allies, that were subjects of ye said Athenia^s,
did also fight joyfully and with good courage, principally for that, that
except they had ye victory they hoped not to be hable to save themselves. And
although y^ none other reasone had moved them, yet they hoped that in saruinge
well and valya^tly, they should be better entreated of their lords, ^auyng
aided them to conquer a land so far of, as Sycille. Being than after the
strokes of shot, come hand to hand, they did fight a good space without that,
that ye one or the other of the parties did recuille or give back. But being
in the same conflicte, there soubdainly came a great rain with loud
thondringes and thick lightnynges out of heaven. Whereof the Syracusains, which
than did furst fight, were much astonyed, for that they were not used nor
experimentedde in war. But they, which were moore wonted to such things, did
attrybute it unto the time of the year and passed not of it. Whereby the
Syracusains were yet more astonyed^ fearing least their enemies had takene
the same for a token or prophecy unto their advantage and that it came in the
dissauor of them. So it happened that the Argiues furst, and afterward the
Athenyans on the side where they were, made a charge so sharply upon the
Syracusains, that they did put them into disorder: and sone after to flight.
Nevertheless they followed them not far, for fear of the horsemen, which were
in great number and had not been brokene or putt out of order. who, after
that they parceyued sum o^ the said Athenyans to follow their people to
far before the other, they repoulsed them stourdely. For this cause the
Athenia^s pursued the Syracusains being in flight, somuche as they could, all
locked togiders. Afterward they retired in the self order into their camp,
and there they reised up their trophee in sign of victory. And the
Syracusains retired the best that they could, likewise into their camp. And
fourthwith sent a good number from them to the temple of Olympiades, which was
thereby, fearing least the Athenyans would come to pillage it, for that, that
therein was great quantyte of gold and silver. The othere retired into the
city. Nevertheless the said Athenyans went not against the said temple: but
having received and brunned the cariogns of their men that were dead at the
battaill, they tarried there that same night. And on the morrow the Syracusains
knowing to have been vainquished, they sent unto them for to dema^de their dead
men, which were in a^l as well of their cytezeins^ as of their allies about
two houndred and three skore, and of the Athenyans togiders with their allies
aboutes fyftie. whose boanes, after that they were burned, they did withdraw
and carried them to Catana^ togiders with the spoilles of the enemies, and by
this mean they retired, for that, that they were already in winter, which was
no time to make war. They could not also conduct nor endure it with out
horsemen: whereof they at^ended a good number, as well from Athens, as from their
allies, and also monney for to fournishe necessaries. They hoped al^o duringe
the winter, for to practique and win, thro^gh favor of that same victory,
many cities of Sycille unto their party, and moreover to make prouysyon of
victuailles and of all other things, for to come again to lay their Siege
to Sarragosse immediately after the winter. Thies were in effect the causes,
which mouedde them to comme for to winter at Catana, and at Naxe.

How the Syracusains having chosen new^ Dukes, and geuene order in their
affairs, they made an assault against them of Catana, and how the Athenyans
faylled to take the City of Messane. The.xiii. Chapter.
AFter that the Syracusains had caused their dead men to be buried, the people
was assembled. In the which assembly, Hermocrates, son of Hermon, who was
esteemed as greatly wise and prudente, as any man of the city, and moreover
valyante and experymented in matters and feate of war, made unto them many
declarations and perswations for to give them courage, The declaration of
Hermocrates unto the Syracusains.
and that they should not be astonished for the loss, which they had had,
showing unto them that the same loss was not chanced to them through lack of
courage, but through fault of order, and also that yt was not so great as by
reason it should have been, consyderinge that on their side, there were none
but common people and men not often experime^ted in war: and the enemies were
the best practysedde of all Greece, and such as used the craft and feate of
war, more than of any other thing. Also the multitude of their capytaynes
did noye them greatly. For there were five of them that had not great
obeyssance of their souldyars. But in case that they would chose some small
number of more expert and of more me^e parsons for Capitains, and during that
same winter assemble a good number of souldyars, fournishyng the^ with harnes,
that had not thereof, and moreover would exercise themself in feats of arms
during the said time: he had good hoope, that they should have the better
against their enemies, addyng good order and conducte unto their couraige and
hardynes, which things be necessary for war. To wytt, order and conducte,
for to know, foresee and exchue the dangers, and hardynes for to execute that,
which shall be devised by wit. And also it were necessary that the Dukes and
Capytayns (which are to be chosen in small number as is above said) should have
power in the feate of war, for to order and do therein, euene as yt should
seem to them to be expedyent: for the welthe of the city, geuynge them other
such, as is requysite in the same and like cases. For by this mean, the
things, which should be needful to be holden secrett, may be kept close,
and moreover the prouysyons may be made without any contradiction. After that
Hermocrates had ended his aduertysements, all the people found them good, and
did chose himself for one of the Capytayns and with him Heraclides, Heraclides.
son of Lysymachus and Sycanus son of Excrestus. Sycanus.
whom also they did chose Ambassadors for to go to the Lacedemonyans and
Corynthians for to persuade them that they should ioygne togiders with them
against the Athenyans and that they should make so strong and fierce war in
their countreye, that they should be constrained to habandone and forsake
Sycille, orels that they should send to the said Syracusains succors by sea.
In this mean time, the army of the Athenyans, which was at Catana, went
fromthence against Messane, hopinge to have taken it by treaty and
conspyracie of some of the Cytezeins. But they were deceyuedde of their
enterprise, for that, that Alcibiades, who knew ye said treaty, after that
he was departed out of the host, holding himself in all poynctes assured, that
he should be bannyshed out of Athens: had secretly discovered the treasone of
those of the said city, which took part. with the Syracusains. who having
furste slain the transgressors and afterward moved the commons against them
and their accomplices: obteygned what they woolde, to wytt, that the Atheuyans
should not be received into the city. who, aftere that they had been in the
camp.xiii. days before the said City, parceyuinge that the winter increased
and waxed more bitter, and that they began to lack victualles, also that
their enterprise faylled them: they retyredde to Naxe and to Thrace, where
they forcefyed their camp with diches and pales, and there passed that same
winter. During the which, they sent a galley unto Athens, for to demand
new succors with horsemen and with monney for the spring time followynge,
that they might be hable to issue fourth into the feldes. On the other side,
the Syracusains, duringe that same winter, enclosed with walls, all the
suburbs, which was on the side of Epipole, Epibola
to the intent, that if by fortune they lost an other time the battaille in
the feldes, they might have the greater space for to retire within the closure
of the City: and besides that, they made new rampares aboutes the temple of
Olympus, and of the place called Megare: and therein they put a good garnyson.
And moreover in all sides, where men might descend from the sea to land
against the City, they made strong cross bars and pales. After that,
knowinge how the Athenyans had embarked the^^self nighe unto Naxe for to
winter there, all the people issued fourth against Catana, and they pillaged
all their terrytorie, and rased down and burned all the lodginges and camp of
the Athenyans, that they had made, when they were there: and afterward
returned fromthence into their houses.

How the Athenyans and the Syracusains sent Ambassadors toward the
Cameryns, ayther party for to withdraw them to their alliance, and the answer,
which they made to them both. And also the preparations and practiques, that
the Athenyans made that same winter against the Syracusains. The.xiiii. Chapter.
THies things thus done, the Syracusains being aduertysed that the Athenyans
had sent to the Cameryns, for to confirm the alliance, that they had in
times paste made with Lachetes, at that time Duke of Athens, they sent thider
likewise for their party: for they had not very great confydence in them
insomuche as at the other battaille, they had showed themself very cold in
sending their succor, whereby they had great doubt, least they would send no
more in time to come: and also least they would take part with the Athenyans,
seeing them to have had ye victory in the said battle, under color of the
said auncye^t alliance. Hermocrates with some other Ambassadors being than come
thider for the Syracusains, and Euphemus and certain other for the Athenyans,
the same Hermocrates did speak before the people of Camaryne, who was
assembled for that purpose, in this manner, in presence of the Ambassadors of
Athenes.

The Oration of Hermocrates to the Camerins.
WE be not sent hither unto you Cameryus, for doubt that we have, that ye be
afraid of this army of the Athenyans: but for fear least through their
artificial and subtille words (before having been by us advertised) they
should induce and allure you to their purpose. which is to do under the
color, which you have parceyued, the thing that we all do suspecte. And as
for me I am right certain that they be not come for to restore and set the
Leontins again into their houses: but rather to chase us out of ours. For it
is not to believe that they, which drive those same of Greece out of their
cities, be come hider for to set again those of this country into the same,
out of which they be chased. Another that they have so great care, as they say,
for the Leontins, as for their cousins for that, that they be Chalcydes, seeing
that the self Chalcydes (of whom thies be descendedde) be by them brought
into seruytude and bondage: but rather under the color, whereby they have
obteigned those there, they would presently obteigne the country in thies
parties. For being voluntarely chosen capitains of tharmy of Greeks for to
resist the Medes, by ye Ionians and other Colonies of their allya^ce, they
have reduced and brought them into their obeissance. Some under color yt they
had forsaken tharmy without license Some other by occasions of wars and
questions that they had amongst themself and the other under such other
colors as they did find for their purpose, when they did see opportunity. In
such manner that it may be said for troth, that the Athenyans made not war
against the Medes for the liberty of Greece, nor the other Greeks to enjoy
their own, but rather they did make it to the intent that the Greeks should
sarue to them and not to the Medes. And those self Greeks for to change the
lord, and not for to change him that ruled most strong for the same that
ruled more weakly: but only him that imagined most evil, and how he should
govern him, that intended best. And albeit that the same City of Athenes be
greatly worthy of reprehension and reproach: yet we be not come hyder to
procure it before people, which know enough of their will: but rather for to
rebuke us other Syciliens, which have before our eyes the example of the
other cities of Greece, that they have subdued: and yet notwithstanding think
not to defend ourselves from them, another to reiecte and cast of the fallaces
and sophemes, that they would deliver us, to wit, that they be come for to
aid the Leontins, as their cowsins, and the Egestains, as their allies.
Wherefore me thinks that we should the sooner think on our case, and do them
to know, that we be not Ionyens, Hellespontyns nor Islanders: which have
always accustomed to be subjects of the Medes, and also of other, so that they
do but change the lord, into whosoever hands they fail. But we be Doriens of
a free nation and come out of Peloponese, which is a frank country and
inhabyting in Sycille. And ought not to abide until we be taken town after
town, knowing that by this only mean we may be taken, and that for this
cause they have prepared themself, and by that mean they goo about to separate
and set us asonder, some by their practices and under the color of their
alliance, to set some to war against the other, and in speaking gracyous and
joyful words, to do all the evil that they may unto us all according as they
shall find occasion. And if there be any one among us, that persuades
himself that the evil, which comes to an other, that is not his next
neighbor, is yet very far from him, and that it shall remain there without
coming to him, and that it is not be, to whom the Athenyans be enemies, but
well they be the Syracusains, and that by this mean it should be folly to put
his part in dangier, for to save mine: I say unto him, that he understands
not well, and that he ought to consider y^ defending mine, he defends his
own propre as much as mine. And somuche he does it more assuredly and more to
his advantage, that he has me in his co^paigny before that I be destroyed, for
so I may help him. Also, whosoever has such fantasy, he ought to consider,
that the Athenyans be not comme for to revenge themself of the Syracusains for
any ennemytie that they have to them, but rather under color hereof, to
confirm their amytie with you. And if there be any, which enuieth us or that
fears us, for that, that it is the custom, that the more puissant be always
enuyed or feared of the more feoble, and therefore it seems to him, that if we
receive any damage, we shall be moore tractable and more gracious, and that he
nevertheless shall remain the more in suertie: truly he trustethe in the
thing that is not in the power of his intent and will. For men have not
fortune in their power, even as they have their will. And therefore if it
happene otherwise, than he thinks: which has such fantasy, peradventure
that for the grief of the evil that shall come upon himself, he shall desire
at an other time to enjoy me and my goods like as he has done before time:
that shall be impossyble for him: since that he shall have forsaken and refused
to be with me in dangiers of fortune, that were as much his, as mine, not in name
and in word: but in effect. For he, that aydeth us in this affair, he in
name defends our estate, but in effect he defends his oune. And truly
reasone wolleth well, that ye other Camerins, which be our neighbors and in
the self danger, wherein we be, should consider thies things here and ought to
have come to our alliance more readely than ye have not done, and that of your
own good will for to comfort and admonish us that we should not lose our
coura^ge for any thing that might chance us, and allege and declare unto
us, the self same things, that ye woolde have alleged, if the Athenyans had
surst come against you: which thing ye nor the other have not yet done. And
if ye woll say that you woll keep and use reasone somuche toward us, as
toward our enemies for fear to offend the one or the other, and take
your occasyon upon the alliance, which you have with them: Truly ye have not
made that same allyaunce for to go to assaylle your friends at their pleasure
and appetite: but rather only for to succor the one the other, if any did
come to assaille you. For this cause the Rhegins, though that they be
Chalcydes, have not been willinge to ioygne with thies here for to restore the
Leontins into their houses, who be Chalcydes as they be. And if those there,
without having any reasonable excuse, but for that, that they have had this
justification or proof so well colored of the Athenyans, for suspected,
governed themself herin wisely: woll you (having reasonable cause for to
excuse you) bear favor and proffitt unto them, that naturelly be y^ure
enemies, and habandone and forsake those, which be your neighbors and your
parents, for to ioygne youresel^ unto thies here? Certainly ye shall do
against reasone, if ye woll aid this puissance of enemies, which ye ought
rather to fear, although that if we were ioigned and united togider, we should
have no cause to fear: but justly if we separate or deuyde oureselues the one
from the other. Which is the thing that they attempt for their power, for
that, that they be come into this country not only against us, but rathere
against all. And yet they have not done against us that, which they
wylledde, though that they did vaynquishe us in battaille, but after their
victory, they went fromthence. Wherefore it may be clerly knowin, that when
we shall be ioigned togiders, we ought not greatly to care for them, and chiefly
attendyng the succors that is to come from the Peloponesyans, which be better
warryours than thies here. And truly yt ought not to seem to anny to be good
for you, not to busye youreselfe or not to meddle, another for them nor us,
and that the same shall be reasonable as touching us, consyderinge that ye be
allied together, and also the more suertie for you. For though that the right be
at the furste sight like and egall between them and us as concerning you for
the reason abouesaide: yet the deed is greatly diverse. For if they, against
whom war is made for fault to have been by you succored, be vainquished, and
the other vainquishors and ouercommers: what other thing may be said, than
that by your absence, the one has been ouercomed and the other have not been
prohybited or left to do evil. Therefore lords, it shall be much better done
for to aid those, whom men would oppress, which be your parents and
neighbors, in defending the common wealth of all Sycille, and not to suffer the
Athenians to offend: than not to meddle with another party. And for to show
you in few words all that we woll say, insomuche as there need not many
words, for to declare to you or to any other that, which ye understand of
yourself: we pray and require you for to aid us in this present busynes. And
we protest that if you do it not: ye shall suffer us to be wasted and destroyed
by the Ionyens our perpetual enemies. And being Doryens, as we be, ye
habandone and forsake us noughtly. And if we be vaynquyshed by the Athenyans,
it shall be your fault, and they shall have the glory of the victory. And as
touching the huyer or reward, it shall be none othere, but the same, that has
geuene the victory. And if we ouercomme, ye shall suffer the pain, for that,
that ye have been cause of the dangeire, where in we shall have been. Consider
than the whole, and chose ye presently aythere to incur and submit yourself
into the servitude presented without any danger, or in ouercommynge this
people, both to eskape with us from being their subjects, and also not to be
for a right long time our enemies. After that Hermocrates had thus spokene,
Euphemus the Athenyan arose up and did speak in this manner.

The Oration of Euphemus the Athenyan to the Camerins. The.xv. Chapter.
WE were comme hider, Lords Camerins, only for to renew the ancyent amytie
and allya^ce that we have with you. But since that this same Syracusaine has
charged and maliciously spoken against us, It is here needful to speak of our
Empire, and how, by good and just cause and reasone, we have obteygned it:
whereof this same here, who has spoken, bears good wytnes by that, which he
has said, that ye Ionyens have al ways ben enemies of the Doriens: but it
must be understand, how it is. We be truly Ionyens, and the Peloponesyans
Doriens. And for that, that they be in greater number than we and our
neighbors, we have trauailled to keep oureselues, that they should not bring
us into their subjection. For this cause, after the war of the Medes, having
our army by sea, we wythdrewe ourselfe from the Empire and conducte of the
Lacedemonyans, which were capytaines of all the army of Greece, for that, that
it was not more reasonable that we should be under them, than they under us,
but for that, that they have been more puissant than we. And consequently
being made princes and superiors of Greeks, who before time were subjects
unto the Medes: we have kept and maignteigned our reygne: knowing that when
we shall have as much puissance as they, for to resyste their force, that than
we shall in nothing be bound unto them. And for to speak more clearly, we
have upon good cause brought into our obeissance and subjection the Ionyans and
the Islanders, though that they be our parents, as the Syracusains do say.
But it was for this cause, that they came with the Medes against our city,
which is their Metrip olitaine and from whence they be descended, for fear of
losing of their houses and domestycall goods, and had not the hardynes to
forsake their towns and Cities, for to conserve and keep their liberty, as we
did, but rather they loved better to be bondemen and subjects of the Medes for
to save their goods, and also to comme with them against us, for to bring us
into the self seruytude and bondage. For thies reasons we have well deserved to
have the seignyorye and rule over the other. For also for truth and without
any difficulty we fournished in that same war more ships, and showed more
heart and courage, than all the other cities of Greece. And chiefly we desarued
to have the rule and dominyon over y^ Ionyens, who did unto us the evil that
they could, being ioygned with the Medes. Wherefore if we desire to increase
our force against the Peloponesians, and not to be more under the conducte and
charge of others: we truly desarue to have and obteigne Empire and lordeshyppe,
as they, which all alone chasedde away the Medes, or at the least for the
general liberty, have taken and susteigned the dangier of other, as well as of
ours, and specially of those here. And moreover it is lawful and without
reproach for every man to search his wealth by all means that he may: which is
the cause wherefore we be come hider unto you, knowing also that that, which
we demand of you, is as much proffytable for you, as for us: and for to show
you what it is, wherefore thies here do blame us, and whereof they would make you
afraid. For we know well that those, that for fear have suspytion of anny
thing, be ready to persuade at the beginning by sweet words: but
afterward when it comes to the deed and busynes, than they do, as they find
if for the best. And in effect we keep and enterteigne our Empire and
authorytie, for fear, as we have said, and for the same cause we be comme
hydere for to conserve our friends, not for to put them into subiectyon and
seruytude, but for to defend, that othere should not bring them into theirs.
And men should not be abalshed, that we have made so greatte an army for to
aid and defend our friends, another ought yt to be said that we would not make
to great cost for a thing that touchethe us but little. For we do repute and
think that when ye shall be of power for to resist the Syracusains: our estate
shall be in much moore suertie from the Peloponesyans: for that, that they shall
have somuche the less succors from the Syracusains, and that is the
principal thing, for which your allyaunce and amytie saruethe, for the
which also it is reasonable and conuenyente that the Leontyns be restoredde
and set again into their howses, and that they be not subjects, as their
parents the Eubeyans be: but puyssante for to susteigne war against the
Syracusains for us, for we be puyssance enough of oureselfe for to susteigne
war in Greece against our neighbors. And the Chalcydes, who be our
subjects, and for whom this Syracusaine blaymeth us (saying that it is not to
be bileued, that we be wyllinge to set again into liberty thies here,
holding the othere in subiectyon) shall sarue us well, for in exemptynge them
from delyuerey of men for the war, they shall fournyshe us with monney: and
likewise the Leontins shall aid us that be in this countreye of Sycille and
our other allies and friends, chifly those, which live in liberty. For it
must be understand, that a man that rules by tyranny and a city that has
Empire, repute nothing dishoneste, that may be proffytable unto them, and
estemeth nothing his, that he has not in good suertie, and in all things he
reputeth the othere, his friends or his enemies according to the chances and
occurrantes of times and of affairs. Now it should not be proffytte for us at
this present for to anoye our friends, but rather to enterteigne them in power
and authorytie, to the intent that our enemies may be thereby more feoble.
And this ye may and ought to bileue by the form of lyuinge, which we use with
our otherallyes in Greece. For we entreat them so, as we parceue it to be for
our most proffit. To wit, of those of Chio and of Mantinea, we take ships,
and as for the rest we leave them in their liberty. Some other we handle more
rygorously and constrayne them to pay us monney. And some other we treat
symply as friends and allies, and not as subjects in any other manner of thing,
although that they be Islanders, and also easy to subdue for that, that they be
nigh to Peloponese and by that mean lie opene to all invasions. Wherefore by
that, which we do there, men may believe what we wol do here, and that, for our
proffit chiefly, we woll make you strong for to keep in fear the Syracusains,
that would subdue you, and not only you, but all the other Sicilia^s. Which
thing they hoped to obteigne by their force orels through lack, which you
should have of people, if it chance that we should return without doing any
thing, which is the thing, wherefore they attempt and go about to bring us
into suspytion with you, and so it shall happene if you take their party.
For we shall have no more mean to pass into thies parties, seeing them so
puyssante. And without us they shall be tomuche puissante for you. And if this
which we say seems to any man not to be true, the appara^ce there of is
manifest by this, that the first time, that ye sent to us to dema^de succors,
ye alleged none other fear but that if we came not to succor you, the
Syracusains would subdewe you, whereby afterward we should be in danger.
wherefore do not suffer yourself to be induced and persuaded for to persevere in
our allya^ce by that same reasons, chiefly that you have alleged when ye
required it: nor to take suspicion for that, that we be comme with a greater
army by sea, for to be more puissant against thies here, for that is a thing
unreasonable: but rather ye ought much more to have suspytion against thies
here. For, as for us, ye know well that we can not tarry here without you.
And though that we would be evil and ungracious, and bring our friends into
our subjection, yet could we not keep them so, as well for that, that the
navigations is far of from Greece hither, as also that t^ere is much
difficulty for to keep your Cities of Sycille, which be great, and also
have many people in the main land. But as touching thies here: they be not
to be feared of you, somuche as we, for their host. But they be more to be
feared, than our host, for their people, which be gross. whereby being
your neighbors, ye be always in danger, for that, that they wait for you
contynuelly, and be ready at all occasions to ouerronne and set upon you,
like as they have already declared toward many other Sycilians. but newelye
against the Leontyns, and yet presentlye having the audacytie to encouraige
you against us, which be comme hither to keep theyme from doing it and
from subduynge of Sycille, thinking you so far out of your wits, that
you woolde give faith unto their tromperies and deceitts^ where as we exhort
you for your wealth, both much more truly, and more certenlye. Prayinge you
that ye lose not the proffitt that ye may have of one of us, and that ye woll
well chose to which ye may best trust and above all to consider that thies
people have at every hour the mean for to subdue you without aid of
other, by the multitude of their people. And that ye shall not have oftentimes
the mean for to chastise and bring down and keep them under, such as ye
have at this present, having such succors of your friends and allies. The
which if ye suffer to return without doing any thing, or that it be
repoulsed or sent away beaten: truly the time will come that you shall wish
to have one of the lesser parties, wha^ that shall proffitte you nothing. But
to the end, that you and the othere Syciliens do not creditt the slanders and
charges that they here do falselye lay against us, we be right wyllinge for
to cy^re, painte and declare with the troth the causes, wherefore men woolde
bring us into suspytion: praying that having heard and understood them
somarely, ye vouchesafe also to regard and mark theyme. For we wolle not
deny that we rule and govern some our neighbors: but as touching ye
Sycilians, we be here for to defend that they should not be subdewed, fearyng
afterward to be enda^maged by the^, that shall be lords over them. And how
much more lands we have for to keep, so much the more regard, we be
constrained to have to our affairs. And for this cause we be come at this
time, and to ye other voyages which we have made into this quarter, for to
defend and save Harmeles those, yt should be oppressed, not of our fre will and
proper motion, but at their prayer and request. wherefore you which be at this
present judges and arbitratours of our deeds, although that it be right hard
for you euene at this present to judge thereupon: ought not to cast of or
repoulse us, but rather hereof to make your proffytte, as ye parceyue that you
may do it. And to consider that this thing shall not damage egally unto all,
but shall bring proffytt unto many Greeks without any damage. For through
the puissance, which we have ready, for to succoure, and revenge the
opppessedde, though they be not our subjects, the other, that lie in wait
for theyme, and would do theyme violence and wrong, be forced to forbear,
and live in rest. And by this mean, those, which be in doubt to be
oultraged, and wrongedde, be in suertie, without annye their expense.
Therefore, lords, forsake not this suertie, which is common to all those,
which should be oppressedde, and necessary at this present for you, but
rather with our aid, render to the Syracusayns, that which they have done to
other, bringing theyme again, unto the equality, of their neighbors, and
set upon theyme sharply, having oportunytie: that ye be not always in
pain to defend you, from theyme. Thus did Euphemus speak? Now the
Cameryns, were in such disposition at that time, that they louedde the
Athenyans, and would wyllynglye have takene their part: but for that, that
they suspectedde them to be willing to trouble, and usurp the Empire of
Sycille. And as touching the Syracusayns although that they had had
difference and variance oftymes with theyme, for this, that they were so nygh
their neighbors: yet for that selfcause, they had sent unto theyme some of
their people, horsemen, to the intent, that if they had had the victory,
they should not have reprochedde theyme afterward, that it had been done
without them, and also in time coming they were willing for to aid theyme,
rather than the Athenyans, though it were but smally. But after that the
Athenyans had had the victory, for to show that they esteemed the said
Syracusains no less, than those that had been vainquisshed, after that they
had consultedde and debatedde the matter amongst theyme, they made unto
theyme both one self answer, egall as much for the one as for the other. To
wytt, that the war being between the^ that were both their allies, they were
determined not to break their oath with the one, nor with the other, another to
give aid unto aither of the parties. And upon this answer, the ambassadors
departedde fromethence. In thies enterfaictes the Syracusains made all the
preparasions that they coulde^ for the war. And as ^ouchynge the Athenyans
they wyntredde at Naxe, and neuerthe^as practiced by all means the cities of
Sycille for to draw them to their party, whereof a great party, chiefly of
those, that were in the platt country, and that were subjects of the
Syracusains, rebelled against them. And out of the frank and free cities,
which were further in the main land, they allied theymself incontynently with
the Athenians, and sent them succors, some of monney, some of men and the
other of victuailles. And of the other, that would not do it of their free
will, some were constrained by siege, and the other they kept that they could
have no succoure from the Syracusains. And during that same winter they
dislodged from Naxe, and came again unto Catana, where they made again their
lodging in the same place where they were before, which the Syracusains had
burned. Being in which place they sent an embassade in a gelley to Carthage,
for to make alliance with them, if they could, and likewise to the cities, which
be alongest the sea, Thyrrenium, whereof some did ^yberally grant to make
alliance with them in that same war against the Syracusains. Moreover they
demanded of the Egesteins and of their other allies of Sycille the greatest
trowpe of horsemen, that they could make, and of the residue that they should
make great provision, of wood, of yrons and of other things necessary for to
make a wall before the city of Sarragosse, the which they were al determined
for to assiege incontinently, winter being passed.

How the Lacedemonyans at the perswation of the Corinthians and of Alcybiades
granted to the Siracusains for to send them succors. The.xvi. Chapter.
ON the other side the ambassadors, which the Syracusains had despeched for to
go unto the Lacedemonya^s, in passing by the sea alongest Italy, they
parforced theymselfe to allure and draw the cities Marytymate or by the sea
side to the alliance of the said Syracusayns. Showing them that if they
suffredde the Athenyans so to prospere, they might afterward be thereby in
danger. Fromethence they came to descend and land at Corynthe where they
declared their charge, which was in effect, for to pray them, that, as their
parents and cousyns, they would send them succors, which thing they
granted them redely and before all the Greeks, and ordained ambassadors for
to go with them to the Lacedemonyans and for to persuade them to begin war
afreshe against the Athenyans, and to send succors to the said Syracusayns.
And so they altogiders came to Lacedemonie. At which place, sone after aryued
Alcibiades and the other bannysshed out of Athens, who came to Cylene in the
country of Eliens, from Thurie, where they furste aboorded, and fromethence
to Lacedemonie under suertie and saulfconduct of the Lacedemonyens, who had
willed him to come unto them. Without which suertie, he feared to come thider
for the treaty, that he had made with the Mantynyens. So it chanced that the
counsaille of the Lacedemonyans being assembled, the Corynthians, the
Syracusains, and Alcibiades did declare and speak all to one self end. And
forsomuche as the said Lacedemonyans, though that they were wyllyng to send
an ambassade to the Syracusayns for to empesche and let them to take party
with the Athenyans, were neuerthelas not willing for to send them any
succors: The same Alcibiades for to move and stir theyme to that affair,
did speak to theyme in this manner.

The Oration of Alcibiades the Athenian to the Lacedemonyans.
IT is nedeful, Lords Lacedaemonians, before that I propone or declare other
matters, to speak of that, whe^wt I may be charged. For if you hold me
suspected by reason thereof, ye woll not give faith nor creditt my words
speaking of the common Wealth. My progenitors, having by occasion of certene
accusation renou^ced the fredome and civility of this your city, I have
since had will to recover yt, and for cause thereof, have honored and
saruedde you in many things, but among other in the loss, that you had
at Pylus. And I perseueringe in this affection toward your city, ye made the
appoynctment with the Athenyans, by mean whereof ye increased the puissance of
my enemies, and did unto me great dishonnoure, which was the thing,
wherefore I wythdrewe my self unto the Mantynyens and the Argiues, with whom
being bicome your ennemy, I did endomage you wherein that I might^ And if any
amongst you hated me against reason, that I than did hurt you, truly he
ought now to forbear and cease, if he consider the things well. And if any
other have evil opynion of me, for so much as I have susteigned and defended the
estate and gouernemente of the common people, he has less reasone for to
hate or suspecte me for that, for we other Athenyans be always contrary and
enemies of tyrants. Now all that, which contraryeth or is against them, is
the common people, for this cause the common auctorytie has always remained
among us, and during the same I have oftymes been constrained to follow the
time. And neuerthelas I have contynually takene pain for to moderate and
refrain the license and audacytie of them, that would against the form of
reasone, conduct and order things at their will, for that, that there have
always been in time paste, and yet presently be some, men that have seduced
the common people, in persuading them unto that, that was for the woorst. Which
be those, that have chased and dryuene me away, although that in the time, that
I have had auctorytie, I have always counsailledde and persuaded good things,
and that, which I had learned to be for the best, to the end to conserve the
city in liberty, and prosperity like as they have found it. For all they
that have knowlaige of the common estate, know what it is, but yet I, who have
al ways despised and abhorred yt, know more thereof. And if it were needful
to speak of the madness and rashness of it, I would tell nothing thereof, which
has not been experymented: but it seemed not to me to be a thing right suer
for to enterprise to will to change it, being by you assieged and warred
against. And this is enough spokene of the things, that may engender suspicion
and hate of me toward you. Therefore I will now speak of the affairs,
whereupon ye ought presently to deuyse. Wherein if I understand annye thing
further than you, whereof it be nedefulle to advertise you, ye shall therein
pronounce judgment. We be gone to Sycylle in purpose furste to subdue yt, if
we may, and after those there, the Italians, and also that done, for to essay
to rule and govern the allies of the Chartagyans, and theymselfes also if we
may. And if that were come to our intent in all or for a good part, than we
would come to conquer and subdue Peloponese, having in our aid and service,
all the Greeks that be in the countries of Sycille, and of Italy, with great
number of estrangers and barbarous people, which we should have had in
soulde or wages, and specially of the Iberyens, who be without annye doubt at
this present the best warryours, that be in that same quarter. And on the other
part we would have made great number of galleys in the quarter of Italy,
where there is great quantytie of wood and of other stuff, for to make
theyme, to the end that we might hold the said country of Peloponese
assieged, as well by the sea with the said gallyes, as also by land with our
foot men, trusting to take part of the cities of the same country by force,
and the other by length of siege, which thing seemed to us very assured. And
having subdewed the said country, we hoped easily and right sone to obteigne
the Empire and seigniorye of all Greece, causyng the said lands by us conquered
to fournyshe us with monney and victualles besides the revenue which has been
levied in these parties. Now you have understand of the army by sea, that
is in Sycille, which thing is showed unto you by a man that knows fully and
holy our ends and ententes. The which though I be departed fromethence the
other Dukes and capytaynes woll put in execution if they can. And if you do not
withstand it, I perceive nothing there that may empesche them, insomuche as
the Syciliens be not accustomed to war. And yet neuerthelas when they be
ioigned alll togiders, they may resist and eskape. But the Syracusains, who
have been al vainquished in battle, and cannot now saille by sea, may not
alone resist and withstand the host of the Athenyens, which presentlye is
there. And if this city were taken, all Sycille should afterwars be sone
subdewed, yea and consequently, Italy. That done, the danger, whereof I have
made mencyon unto you shall not be far of from you, nor so retarded or
slacked that you shall not perceive yt coming. Wherefore none of you ought to
persuade himself that this question is for Sycille only. For without doubt,
the question and varyance is for Peloponese^ if ye do not readely provide for
it. And for to do that, it is requisitte to send right sone thider an army
by sea, in the which the very maroners ought to be warryours. And that
which is pryncipall, that there be for capytayne, a courageous man of Sparte.
For the presence of him shall be for to enterteigne in your amytie, those that
be there at this present, and for to constrayne the other, there. For that,
that they, which be your friends, shall have by this doing more hope, and
those, that be in wauerynge or doubt, shall have lesser fear to comme to
your alliance. And moreover ye ought most openly to begin war against the
Athenynans. For in that doing, the Syracusayns shall know, that ye care and
be myndefulle for their affair. By occasion whereof, they shall take more
couraige for to resist, and the Athenyans shall have the lesser mean for to
send succors to their people, which been there. And also me thinks, that
ye ought to take and to fortefye soubdainely with walls the town of De^elea,
which is in the terrytorye of Athens, insomuche as it ^s the thing, that the
Athenyans do most fear. And yet neuerthelas it is the only town, whereof no
part has been touched, during all this war. And truly a man cannot
endomage his enemy more greatly, than to do that unto him, which he
perceyueth, that he fears most, for it is to be bileued, that every man
knows and fears those things, which may be most prejudicial, and hurtful
unto him. And therefore I wolle give you to understand the proffytt, that
shall be yours by enclosyng the said town with walls, and the dommage that it
shall bring unto your enemies. And also I will show only the most weighty
thereof sommarely or in few words. That is, that when ye shall have fortefied
that same place wtin our land, many of our towns shall render both themself
unto you, and also ye shall take the other more easily. And moreover, the
revenue which we perceive of the mines of silver at Laurium, and the other
revenues that are taken as well of the land, as of the Jurisdiction shall
cease, and specially those, which we do levy of our friends, who perceiving
you to come against us with all your strength, will praise us very smally.
All which things be in your power for to cause to come readely to effect, if
you woll, for yt, that I think not to err in this matter, but that they may
be easily done. And none of you ought to blame me another to repute me evil, if
having been hertofore your great ennemy and chief or capytaine of our people:
I come and speak now bitterly against the common weal of my country, another
also to suspect me, nor to preseume that the same, which I say, is for to
acquire and get your favor, because of my bannishment. And I am exiled for
troth, and it is through the malice and naughtynes of them that hate me, but
it shall not be to your damage, if ye woll bileue me. And I ought not to repute
you at this present somuche my enemies, who, sometime being our enemies,
have endomaged us: as those, which have constrained my friends to be my
enemies, not now as I am oultraged and wronged: but than when I had
auctorytie over the people, wherefore being by them chased out of my country, I
recoen that I do no longer against it as mine, but rather I think y^ I labor
rather to recover that which no more is mine. For he ought to be more truly
reputed the lover of his country: which for the desire that he has to
recover yt, does all that he can, for to return thider: than he, that
being unjustly chased fromethence, dare not goo for to invade yt. For the
which reasons I repute my self such (Lords Lacedemonyans) as with whome^ ye
ought to sarue yourselues in all dangers and in all travails. For you know
that it is a common proverb, that he, which being enemy does endomage: if it
becomes frende^ may also proffyt. And somuche the more, for that I know the
affairs of Athens, and also do well nygh understand yours by conjecture.
Therefore I require you insomuche as there is question of things, which be of
so great importance, that it grieve you not for to enterprise, to reyse, and
leuye two armies, the one by sea, for to go into Sycille, and the other by
land, for to go into the country of Athens. By which doing, ye may with a
small puissance atteigne great things in Sycille, and clearly subuerte the
puissance of the Athenyans as well present as for to come, whereby your estate
shall be herafter both in whole and all suertie, and also ye shall have the
superyorytie over all Greece: not by constraincte, but wyllyngly. After that
Alcibiades had thus spokene, the Lacedemonyans, who, without that, had
already purposed to make war against the Athenyans (though that they went
about delayingly and were not fully resolved) were by the said declarations
greatly establyshed in that same opynion, presupposing that they had been
advertised of all things according to the truth, by him that knew yt
well. And so fromthensforth they conceived in their fantasy for to take and
fortefie Decelea, and for to send incontynently some succors, into Sycile,
and did chose Gylippus, son of Cleander, for chief of that same enterprise,
to whom they commanded that he should treat with the ambassadors, of the
Syracusayns and with the Corinthians. And by their advise, he launched and
sailled fourth, with the best, and most soubdaine and ready succors that he
could get, and did give order to the Corynthyans that they should send
theyme two galleys fourhwith unto Asine, and moreover that they should putt
the other (which they had appoyncted to send) in estate to make saille as soon as they could, so that they might be ready: when that it should be time
to saille. And upon this determynation the ambassadors departed from
Lacedemonie. In thies enterfaictes the galley which the Dukes Athenyans had
sent from Sycille unto Athens, for to demand renforte or new succors of
victuailes, of men and of monney: aryued. And they, that were come, having
expounded and declared their charge, yt was ordained that the said new
succors should be sent, and in that mean time drew nere the end of the
winter, which was the.xvii. year o^ this war, that Thucydides has wryttone.

How the Athenians having furst made certene preparations, they came to
assiege the city of Sarragosse. And of many victories which they had against
the Syracusayns by making and assailling the rampars and fortefyinges on both
sides, and how the succors of the Peloponesians came into Sycille, and some
other matters and affairs. The.xvii. Chapter.
AT begynnyge of the spring time, the Dukes Athenyans, that were at Catana
departed and sailled to Megare, that is in Sycille, which the Syracusayns did
hold. But after that the cytizeins were chasedde fromethence, under Selon the
tyrante, Selon^
as I have above rehearsed, it was not peopled again. And so the Athenyans
landed there and pillaged the country, and went fromethence to assawlte a
castelle which was there by, thinking to have rasedde it down. But seeing
that they could not, they retired to the river of Tyrea, Terea.
which they passed and pillaged likewise of the platt country that was on the
other side of that same ryuer^ and did sley a certene small number of
Syracusayns, which they enco^tredde in their way, and afterward they
reysedde up their Trophe in sign of victory. And that done they embarquedde
theymself again, and retournedde fromethence to Catane, where they made
provision of victuailles, and afterward they departed fromethence against a
town of Sycille named Centoripia, Centoripia.
wherinto they were received by appoynctmente, and at their yssuynge fourth
fromethence burned the corn of the Teynessians, and Hybleans, and retournedde
again to Catane, where they found two houndred men at Arms, without that,
that they had any horses: but only the harnnes, and accoustremetes, or
apparel for horse (thinking that the country of Sytille should have furnished
horses) and thirtye Arbalestriers on horseback, togiders with three hou^dred
talentes of monney: which was sent unto them, from Athens. That same year, the
Lacedemonyans, having made an army against the Argiues, as they were in the
field for to go against Cleonarus, Cleonarus.
there came soubdainly an earthquake, which caused them to return
fromethence. Which perceived by the Argiues, after that the other were
returned, they issued fourth into the territory of Thyree, Thyrea
which is in their fronture, and pillaginge yt, the butye was so great, that yt
was sold for.xxv. talentes and more. In that same season, the commons of
Thespie did arise against the officers. Thespia
But the Athenya^s sent inco^tinently of their people thider, who did take one
part of the Mutyns or sedicious parsons, and on other part fled fromthence
unto Athens. During that same somer, the Syracusains, being advertised that
the succors of horsemen were come to the Athenyans, and thinking that having
the same they would inco^tine^tly come to assiege them: aduysed and remembered
that there was a very little fro the town, a place named, Epipole, Epipole
which was ha^ging from al sides against the town. But above, it was plain
and spacious, and there was but certene entrynges, by which men might mount
up. whereupon considering that it was impossible for to close yt with wall,
round aboutes, and also that if the enemies did get yt, they might
fromthence do many enylles into the town: they determined to fournishe the
entringes, for to defend that the said enemies should not take them. And so
the morrow following they moustred all the people before all the compaignions
and Colleagues, of Hermocrates in a meadowe that is nigh the river, which is
called, Anapus
Anapes^ Out of which people, they did first chose six hou^dred men for to
keep and defede the said place of Epipole. Of whom they gave charge to
Dyonulus bannisshed out of Andrie, and said unto him that if annye thing
chanced in that affair, he should be incontinently succored. That same
night, the Athenyans having made a reuiewe of their men, about br^ake of the
day, departed from Catane, and came to land in a place named Leon, Leon.
which was no further dis^ante from Epipole, than six or seven stades, and
there lodged their footmen on land, before that the Syracusains perceived it.
And on thoder side the army by sea, came to ancre and bestow themeselefe
under a rocky place of the sea, that is in a small straight, which does enter
into the sea, and is enuyroned on all sides, resaruedde one small quarter
toward the land, and that same place is calledde Thapsus, Thapsus.
and is very nigh to Sarragosse. And so they enclosed incontinently, the
entering that leads to land, with paales or boordes for to be in suertie on
the land side. That done, those^ that were landed, did come in a great course
unto Epipole, and got yt, before that the Six houndredde men, which were
appoynctedde for to goo thider: were there, for yett they were all on foot,
where the moustre was made. And yet neuerthelas one great party of the people
did run for to succoure the sayedde place, but pryncipally the Six
houndred, whereof Dionulus had charge, and he with theyme. Now there was
from that same foot, until the place where the enemies already were,
aboutes.xxv. stades, so they were receyuedde by the enemies, and repoulsedde
in such manner, that they were constraynedde for to retire into the city, and
there were slain of theyme about three houndred, amongeste the which, was
Dyonulus, whose Corpses the Syracusayns demanded, and by that mean
confessedde the victory unto the enemies. Who, having raised up there, their
Trophee, the morrow after came to present and offer battle before the town.
But seeing that none yssuedde fourth, they reysedde and erected a castle in
the top of Epipole in a a place, called Lapdalum, Lapdalum.
which is on the coaste of Megare, for to wythdrawe thither all their
vessels, monney and baguage, when they issued aither against the town, or to
make any work. And sone after three houndred horsemen came unto them from
Egeste, and about one houndred from the Naxians and other Sycillians, and
they had already of their oune, two houndred and fyftie, which had
recoueredde horses, as well of the Egestain guifte, as in other places for
monney and so they had in all six houndred and fyftie horses. Having than put
garnysone within Lapdalum, they went fromthence against Syca, Syca.
the which within very small time they enclosed with walles^ whereof and of
their great diligence, the Syracusayns were all astonyedde. Neuerthelas for to
show that they were not afraid, they issued out of the city into the field
for to present battaylle to the enemies. But their Capytaynes, parceiuing
that they were in disorder, and that it was hard for to bring theyme again
into order, caused theyme to retire into the town, except one part of their
horsemen, that remained without for to empesche and let the Athenyans to
gather stones and othere stuff for to make the wall, and also that they
should not overcome the country. But the horsemen Athenyans to^ider with a
bend of foot men assailled them and did put them to flight, and slew a
certain number of them, whereupon for cause of the said victory, they set up
yet an other Trophee. The day followynge, the Athenyans, being in their
camp, some of them wete busyed in making the wall on the South side, and
some other gathered togiders stoanes and other stuff, nighe the place called
Trogylum, and went laying and dischargyng yt always in that quarter, where
the wall was lowest, from the greatest port unto the othere sea. Which
parceyued by the Syracusains, they determined for to issue no more altogiders
against their enemies, mynding not to hazard tomuche. But they purposed to
make and reyse up an rampare without the wall of the town in the quarter,
where the Athenyans raised up their wall. For it seemed unto them that if they
might have sonner parfaicted and ended their said rampare for to repoulse their
enemies, than they their wall, having therein put their good ward and watch:
they might send part of their men for to win and get the entringes, and
afterward to fournishe them, which doing they thought that it might be that
the Athenia^s should ceasle their work for to come altogiders against them. So
they did issue fourth of the city and began to labor at their ra^pare,
beginning from the wall of the town and continuing al alongest that same of
thennemyes. For making of which work they cut down great quantity of
Olyue trees within the court of the temple, whereof also they made towers upon
the said rampare. For they yet did keep the quarter toward the sea, for yt,
that the Athenyans had not yett caused their ships to come out of Thapsus,
into the great poorte, out of the which place of Thapsus, they causedde to be
brought by land vyttuailles, and othere things necessary. The Syracusayns
having than parfaycted their rampare, without that the Athenyans had done the^
any empeschement or let (for so much as they had lettes enough by making their
wall, and also feared that if they should attend and give themself unto two
busynesses, they might be repoulsed) they retired into the city, and left a
number of people for to keep the rampare. On the other side the Athenyans did
break the conductes, by which the water entered into the town. And on the
other part having espied that of the Syracusains, that were left for to keep
the rampare, some of them at high none time retired into their pauillions,
some went into the city, and the other that tarried in the said rampare, did
keep very ill watch, they ordained three houndred of the most chosene of their
people on foot, well armedde, and a certain number of the best lightly
armedde, for to go to assaille the said rampare. And in one self instan^e,
they parted all the army into two parts, aither party having his capytaine,
whereof the one went against the city for to repoulse the cytizeins if they
would have issued fourth for to succor their people, and the other against
the ra^pare on the side of the small poorte named Pyramyde. The affair being
thus ordained, the three houndred which had charge for to assawlte the
rampare, did take it, for they that should have kept it, did habandone it, and
retired to the wall, which was nigh unto the temple, who were followed so nigh
by the Athenyans, that they entered one with an other in with them. But they
were sone chased away again by those of the town, which came to the succors.
In which conflict, some Athenyans and Argiues were sla^ne, and the other in
retyryng, did raze and break down the rampare and carried away the wood that
they might carry with them into their camp. Afterward they raised up an
Trophee in tokene of that same victory. The day following they enclosed with
wall a rock cut out of stoane, which was in the place of Epipole, above over
a marreys, out of the which men might see into the great port, and they
extended and did draw the same wall from the rock along from the plain and
from the marreys unto the sea, Which perceived by the Syracusains, they issued
fourth again for to make in the opposite or directly against it a rampare,
with pales and dyches for to empesche that the enemies might not extend their
wall. Who having acheued their wall about the rock, determined for to assaille
ones again those that labored at the rampare and at the dyche. And so
commanded the capytaine of the ships, that he should govern them from Thapsus
into the great poorte. And they at the break of the day descended from
Epipole, and came to trauerse and pass over the plain, which was at the foot
thereof, and fromthence, the marreys, in that part thereof, that was most dry,
with doors and hardelles that they cast above for to susteigne and keep them
from synkyng, in such sort that they did win again the rampare and the
dyche from the Syracusains, resaruedde a certene small part thereof, and
vainquished those, that were committed to the keeping of yt, whereupon those,
which were in the right poyncte retired into the town and the other toward
the river. But the three houndred footmen, that had been chosene to assaille
theyme (as at the other time) wyllyng to enclose theyme, prepared theymeselfe
to run with all their force against the bridge of the river, which parceiued
by the Syracusains (among whom there was a good number of horsemen, they made
straight against the said three houndred, and repoulsed them. Afterward they
charged upon the right poynct of the Athenyans, with such strength, that they,
which were in the former rencke were afraid. But Lymachus who was in the left
poyncte, seeing the danger came to succoure them, having a certene number of
shoters or slingers and Argiues^ who, having passed the dyche, and not being
followed by his men, was slain by the Syracusains, and five or six that had
passed with him. The which so dead, the same Syracusayns would have ^aryed
them beyond the river into a suer place, before that that they might have been
recovered, but the other were so diligente yt they were forced to leave them.
In the mean time, those, which at beginning were fled into the town,
seeing the defense, that the other used, they took heart again, and issued
fourth in the battaille against the Athenyans, and sent a number of them
against the wall, which the Athenyans had made about Epipole, thinking that
there had been no ward, as for troth there was not, whereby it happened that
they did get as much of the wall as was made in ten days, and had
gottene the rest, if Nycyas had not soubdainely come to the succors of it,
who was left there, for that, that he was ill disposedde. The same man
perceiving that there was no remedy for to keep and defend the wall for
lack of men, he commaundedde his servants to putt fire into the wood and
matter that was set before the wall, and by that mean, the rest thereof was
saved. For the Syracusayns durst pass no further because of the fire. Seeing
also the Athenyans, that had chased away the other bend of theirs, to come
ronnynge against theyme, and moreover that the ships that came out fro
Thapsus were already entredde into the poorte: knowing also that they were
not puissante for to resist the Athenyans, nor for to empesche and let them,
that they should not fynyshe their wall, they retyredde into the sea. And
that done, the Athenyans did again reyse up there an othere Trophee, for
that, that the Syracusayns confessedde and grauntedde theyme the vyctory, by
demandynge the Cariongs, and Corpses of the dead, which were rendredde to
theyme. Amongeste whom was Lamachus, and those that had been slain with
him. All the army of the Athenyans aswelle by sea, as by land being than
aboorded, they enclosed the city with a double wall, from Epipole until
the sea. And they being there, plentye of victuailles was brought unto them
from all coasts o^ Italy. And many allies of the Syracusayns, which at the
beginning had refused to ioigne with those Athenyans, came to render theymself
unto them and from the coaste of the sea Thirrenium, there came unto them
three galleis with new strength, whereby the affairs were in such estate,
that they assured theymeselfe for to have the victory, considered specially
that the Syracusayns had no more hope to be of power for to resist, another by
force nor by the fight, not having news that annye succors should comme
unto theyme out of Peloponese. So they had many parlementes aswelle among
theymeself, as also with Nycyas (who, after the death of Lamachus remaynedde
only Capytayne of the Athenyans) for to enter into some treaty with the said
Athenians, yett was there nothing therein done nor concludedde: although that
many words thereupon had been spokene, like as yt is to be believed to be,
among people that be ambiguous or doubtefulle and that perceive theymselfe
assieged and oppressedde more and more. And that aswelle with Nycyas, as the
one to the othere, forsomuche as by cause of the necessyties, wherein they
were, the one mystrustedde the othere. In such manner, that they deposedde and
set of the Dukes, whom they had chosenne at the beginning, under couloure
that the loss which was happenedde, was through their fault or mys^ortune^
and they did choose othere in their stead, to wit, Heraclides, Heraclides.
Eucleas and Tellias. Eucleas

Tellias


In thies enterfeates Gylippus Lacedemonien was already aryued at Leucade with
the Corynthyans ships, fully determined to come with all diligence to succor
the Syracusayns. But being advertised that the city was already enclosed on
all sides, by many that agrede all thereupon (though that it were not true) he
lost both hope and fantasy of the affairs of Sicille. And yet neuerthelas
for to save Italy, he saylledde fromethence with two galleys with
Lacedemonyans, and with him Pythus Corynthien with two other galleys of
Corynthe, with all diligence to Tarente. And the Corynthyans saylledde after
more softely with ten other of their galleys, two of Leucadyans, and.iii. of
Ambracians. Gylippus than being arryuedde in the poorte of Tarente, he went
fromethence into the City of Thurie, as Ambassadoure of the Peloponesians for
to wythdrawe and bring theyme unto their alliance, bringing his father to
their remembrance, who had sometime gouernedde their estate, but seeing that
they would not thereunto consent, he returned fromethence alongeste Italy,
and when he was in the Goulphe of Terynee, there came upon him a southe wind,
whereunto that same Goulphe is greatly subjected, so that he was by force
constrained to return into the port of Tarente, into the which he wythdrewe
his ships, and repaired those which had been bruised by fortune of the sea.
Nycyas was aduertysed of the coming of Gylyppus, who understanding the small
number of ships that he had with him, passed not of them, like as also ye
Thuryans had not done. And it seemed to him that he was rather comme as a
Corsaire or Pyrate for to pyllage in the sea, than for to succoure the
Syracusains. In that same somer the Lacedemonyans with their allies began war
against the Argyues, and pillaiged one part of their land, unto whom the
Athenyans sent thyrtye ships with succors. And by that mean did euydently
break the treaty which they had not before done. For the inroades and
pillages, that they had made unto that same hour, were more in manner of
theft, than of war. And they were not willing to ioigne with the Argyues and
Mantynyans against the Lacedemonyans. But rather, though that they had many
times been sore labored unto by the Argyues for to enter in armure with them
into the land of Laconie, at the least that same, which they held, and for to
pillaige a certain small quarter of that, the which the Lacedemonyans did
hold, and afterward to return fromethence without doing anny otherthyng:
yet they had never been wyllyng to agree or consent unto it. But than having
made three chiefes and capytaynes of their army, to wit Pythodorus,
Pythodorus.
Lespodius, Lespodius.
and Damarathus, Damaratus.
they entered into the country of Epidaure ennemylyke, and pillaged Lymere,
Limera
Prassie and some other small towns of that same quarter. Prassie.
Whereby the Lacedemonyans had afterward more lawful excuse to declare
theymself their enemies. After that the Athenyans were returned from Argos
with their army by sea, and the Lacedemonyans with theirs by land, the Argiues
went to ouerronne, the land of Phliasie. And after that they had pillaged and
wasted one part thereof, and slain a certene number of the Paysans, they
retournedde fromethence.

Here ends the Sixte book of the history of Thucidides and the Seventh does
begin.
How Gylippus entered into the city of Sarragosse, with the succor of the
other cities of Sycille, which took his part, lost one battaille and did
win an other against the Athenyans. And how the Syracusains and Corynthyens
sent Ambassade to Lacedemonie for to have new succors, and likewise Nycyas
writes to the Athenia^s for the self same cause. The first Chapter.
AFter that Gylippus and Pythan had repaired and new tacled their ships at
Tharente, they departed fro^thence for to saille toward the Locryans in the
west quarter. And being advertised, that the city of Sarragosse was not yet
enclosed on all sides, but that men might enter into yt by Epipole, they were
in doubt whither they should draw to the right hand of Sycille and essay for
to enter into the city, or for to keep the left hand, and furst to go to
aboorde at Imera, and there to assemble the most people that they might,
aswelle of those of the town, as of other Syracusayns, afterward to goo
fromethence to succoure the said Syracusayns. And finally they arrestedde and
concluded to go to Imera, Imera.
specially being advertised that the foore Athenyans ships, which Nycyas had
sent, were not yet arryuedde at Rhege, which Nycyas had sent thider,
understanding that those same were yet at Locres. So Gylyppus and Pythan with
their ships passed the distreate, before that the other were arryuedde at
Rhege. And afterward saillynge alongeste from Missena they came directlye
unto Imera. Being aryued in which place, they entreated and persuaded the
Imerens to enter into their alliance, and to fournyshe them with ships, and
harnois for their men, that lacked it. And afterwardts they sent unto the
Selynuntyns, that they should be in a certene place, that they named unto them,
assuring them, one bend (not very great) of their people to go with the^. It
happened also that the Gelians and some other Sycilliens were the more
encouraiged for to enter into this alliance of the Peloponesyens, than they had
been before time, for that, that Archonides, Archonides.
who had gouernedde some of those Syciliens, was dead a small time before, who
in his life time, had great amytie, confederation and intelligence with the
Athenyans, and also for the bruyte which was, that Gylippus came diligently
and manfully with his people to the succors of the Syracusayns, who having
taken aboutes seuene houndred of his oune men, as well souldiars, as maroners
which he had armed, a thousand Imeryens as well well armed, as lightly armed,
and a houndred horsemen, a certene number of Selinuntyns all horsemen or
lightly armed and also a right small number of Gelyens, with some other
Syciliens to the number of a thousand: marched toward Sarragosse. And on the
other side the Corynthians departed from Leucade, for to come with the most
diligence, that they could, into that same quarter, with all the other ships.
Amongst whom, the same, whereof Gongylus was Capytaine, Gongylus.
arrived first at Sarragosse, although that he was the last that departed. And
sone after arryuedde Gylippus, who understanding that the Syracusayns were in
doubt for to enter in treaty with the Athenyans: advertised them of the
succors, whereof they were right ioyfulll and all recomforted. So they did take
couraige again, and yssuedde with all their strength out of the city for to
me^e Gylyppus, who attended and tarried for them already in the way. Who,
having in his journey taking by force the town of Igete, Igeta.
came wholly in order, as for to fight, toward Epipole, and being aboorded on
the coaste from Euticle, by the which the Athenians were at the furst time
there amounted, he ioigned with the Syracusains, and altogether marched
toward the wall of the Athenians, which at that hour conteigned seven or
eight stades, from the camp of the Athenyans unto the sea, and also it was
through out double, except in some place nigh the sea, where they yet builded.
And of the other side toward Trogile, they had already brought plenty of
stoanes and othere stuff and in some place acheued and fynysshed their work,
in some place half set it up, and in an other place there was nothing done
from the beginning, for that, that on that side the largenes was so great. In
such danger were already the Syracusains, when the succors came unto them.
The Athenyans than perceiving Gylippus and the Syracusains to come so
soubdainly against them, they were at beginning afraid, neuerthelas they
afterward recovered their couraige, and came all in battle against
thennemyes. But before that they approached, Gylippus sent an heraulte for to
declare unto theyme, that if they would depart out of Sycille within five
days, he was content to make treaty with them. Which thing the Athenyans
regardedde not, but sent again the heraulte without annye answer. Than
both parties preparedde theymeself to come to battle, But Gylippus, seeing
that the Syracusayns were in disorder: and that he could not well bring
theyme into renckes, he deuysedde for the best to wythdrawe theyme into a
place more spacious. Nycyas also on the other side caused not his people to
march fourth, but rather made theyme to keep all in bataylle ray upon their
walls and rampares. Which perceyuedde, Gylyppus retired with his people into
a mount named Temenitie where he lodgedde his camp. Temenites.
And the morrow after he conductedde the greateste party of his men in
battaylle euene hard to the walls of the Athenyans, for to defend that the
one should not succoure the othere. And on the othere side he sent one part
of his people against one of the Castelles which the Athenyans did hold,
namedde La^dalum, the which they did take and slew all those, that they
found within, without this, that the other Athenia^s could parceyue any thing
thereof. And the same day the Syracusayns took a galley of the Athenyans, as it
would have entered into the great port. After that, the Syracusayns begone a
wall from the city until the heigh of Epipole. And they raised an other
fromthence overthwart that same of the Athenyans, for to let and defend the^
(if they would suffer theyme to acheue and fynyshe it) from enuironynge and
enclosynge the town on all sides. But they having acheued the wall, which
they determined to make fro their camp unto the sea, were retyredde into their
forte in the vppermoste part. But for that, that one part of their wall was
low, Gylyppus went with his people in the night, thynkinge to take it,
neuerthelas being perceived by them which warded yt, who kept their watch
without, and met him, retired softely without making any noise. And
afterward the Athenyans did heighthen the said wall, and appoincted their
oune people to the warding thereof, and those of their allies unto other
places. It semedde moreover unto Nycias to be expedient to enclose with wall
the place, that is called Ple^myryu^, Plemmyriu^.
which is a rock in the promontorie foreanempste the city, the which
enters into the sea, and comes unto the entering of the great poorte. For it
semedde unto him that if he had fortefyed it, the victuailles and other things
that came by sea, might come more easily, having garnysone so nyghe unto the
poorte, where as at that hour they could not abide, but afar of fromthence.
Whereby if any alarm should chance to be made on the sea side, they could not
so sone come unto the succors. And that did he, intending to aid himself
moore with the army by sea, than with that same by land, sythens that
Gylippus was come. And so he charged one party of his army into his ships,
and brought them to the said place, which he caused to be enclosed and
fortefyed with three walls and rampares: and afterward he bestowed one part
of his baggage there: and underneath the same they might wythdrawe his ships
both great and small: by occasyon whereof many of his maronners fromthence
forwards, through fault of fresh water, did dye, for that, that they were
forcedde to fatche their water afar of, and moreover when they issuedde
fourth to fatche wood, the horsemen Syracusains, that kept the teldes,
dyddeslaye them, specyallye those that were in a town in Olympus, the which
were placedde there for to defend that the Athenyans, which were in the said
place of Plemmyrum should do no hurt. In thies entrefeates Nycias,
understanding the coming of the galleys with Corinthyans: sent, twenty of
his for to preuente and soubdainly to mete and take them. Geuyng them charge,
that they should at tend and lie in wait for them, between Lo^res and Rhege,
and there in the distreacte of Sycille that they should assault them. In the
mean time Gylippus caused likewise the wall between the City and Epipole, to
be raised and fynyshed, and for to make yt, he aydeth himself with the suffer,
which the Athenyans had for themself gathered together. And that done, he
issued many times out of the city with his people and with the Syracusayns in
battaille. And the Athenyans on the other side did the like. And when it seemed
unto him, to be time to assaille, he went furste for to charge upon them. But
insomuch as the combat and fighting was among the ra^pares of both parts,
which was a place nothing easy for the horsemen, whereof the Syracusains had
great number: the Syracusains and Peloponesians were vainquished. For the which
victory, the Athenyans, having rendered the dead, raised and set up a Trophee.

An Oration and ouerthwarte declaration of Gylippus unto his souldyars and men
at arms.
NEuerthelas Gylippus, aftere that same battaille, assembledde the men of
war, and showed them, that the loss chanced not through their fault, but
rather through his, forsomuche as he had takene from them the aid of their
horsemen and of their Casters of darts, causing them to fight in one so strayte
a place, wherein they could not help themself, wherefore he was determined
to cause them for to issue a fresh to fight in a place more reasonable,
prayinge them to remember that they were Doryens and Peloponesyans, and that it
should be their great shame to be vaynquished and chased by the Ionyans and
Islanders and other people gathered togiders out of all sorts, being in as
great number, as they. And afterward when he thought it time, he led them
fourth again to battaylle. Nycias also had determined, if they would not have
issuedde fourth to have gone to present them battaille. For he was determined
not to suffer them to fynishe their rampares and walls that they made nygh unto
theirs: the which were already so far forwards, as thiers, and they
parceyued well that if they suffredde that they should extend them further,
those same Athenyans should be more assieged by the Syracusains, than the
Syracusains by them, and in danger to be vainquished. Therefore he likewise
issued fourth to the battaille. Now Gylippus had ordeynedde his horsemen and
casters of darts to be more further ^ro the walls, tha^ they had been at the
other time, in a spa^ious place, where the walls and rampares on both sides
failled from the coast of thennemyes. Who after the battaill was begone, came
to russhe and charge upon the left poinct of the Athenyans and put them to
flight: whereby it chanced that the Syracusains and Peloponesians, had the
victory, for that, that the other party, saying the Athenyans fly did the
like, and wythdrewe themself into their fortes and holds. And the night
ensuynge, the Syracusains made their wall egall with the same of thennemyes,
and yet further and greatter, so that the enemies could not empesche nor
let them, but that they might make and extend their said wall, so far and
so large as they woolde, and though afterward they had been vainquished in
battle, yet could they be no more enclosed with wall. Sone after arrived the
ships of the Corynthians, of the Leucadyans, and of the Ambracians, to the
number of twelve, whereof Thrasonides the Corynthian was chief, Thrasonides,
who had deceived the Athenia^s ships that came to rencounter them, and
aided the Syracusayns to fynyshe their wall, which they had begone unto
the same, that came ouerthwarte yt. That done Gylippus, perceiving the town to
be in suertie, did go fromthe^ce through the other cities of Sycille,
practisinge the^ to enter into alliance against the Athenyans, those, that were
in doubt, or that utterly abhorredde the war. And besides this the
Syracusains and the Corynthians that were comme to their aid, sent
Ambassadors to Lacedemonye, and to Corynthe to have new succors, in
whatsoever manner that they might: were it in galleys, in Barques or other
ships, what that they were, so that they brought men of war. On the other
side the Syracusains, presupposinge that the Athenyans woolde likewise send
some new succors to their camp equipped and tacled their ships for to
fight with them by sea, and made all necessary preparatyons for war. Which
parceyued by Nycias, and that the force and strength of his enemies did daylly
increase, and his decrease and lessene: he determined likewise for to send to
Athens to do them to understand the estate, wherein they were in the camp:
which was such, that he reputed them to be but vainquished and destroyed, if
ayther that they were not caused to retire, orels that succors were sent unto
them so puissante and mighty, as they were. And ^earynge that those, which he
sent, should not happily have eloquence for to expou^de and declare their
charge, or that they should forgett one part thereof, or rathere should fear
to tell the whole for displeasynge of the comynaltie, he determined to
aduertyse the whole by his letters, presupposynge, that when the commons should
intierly understand the troth, they would determyne therein as the case
required. And so the Ambassadors went fromthence with his letters and
instructions unto Athens. And in the mean time Nycias took more care and
study to ward and keep his camp, than for to go to assaille his enemies. In
that same somer Euetion Athenyan Duke with Perdiccas and many Thracyens,
Euetio^.
went to assiege the City of Amphipolis, Amphipolis.
but saying that he could not take it by land: he causedde Gallions to pass
and mount up the river of Strymone: Strymon.
which he made to comme out of Imereum, and this endurynge ended the summer.
In beginning of winter the messengers, which Nycias had despeched,
arryuedde at Athenes, and having declaredde their charge, they afterward
answered to that whereof they were demanded: but furste they presented the
letters of Nycias, which were of this tenoure.

The tenor of the letters of Nycias to the Athenyans, and the prouysion that
they had made upon the contenue of the same. The second Chapter.
You have been advertised (lords Athenyans) by our former letters of all
that, which before time has chanced in thies quarters. And presently I right
heartily require you to vouchesaulfe to be infourmed of the estate wherein we be,
for to determyne well therein. Which is such. After that we have had certain
victories against the Syracusains and made a wall nighe to their city, within
the which wall we now be, Gylipvus the Lacedemonyan arrived with an host,
as well of the Peloponesyans, as of certain other cities of this country of
Sycille, whom at the furst encontring we vaynquished: but afterward through
force of the horsemen and casters of darts, which he has, we have been
constrained to retire into our said wall where we now remain without doing
any thing, for that, that we could not continue our said wall about the
said city, the enemies being in so great number: for we might not lead all
our people unto the field, forsomuche, as it was necessary to leave always
one part of them for to ward our walls and tampares. And on the othere side
the enemies have all ready reysedde up, an simple wall nighe unto our
wall, which lets us for to fynishe yt, except that we should furste with
a great puissance, beat and raze down the said wall by force of arms. In
such sort, that we, which hold this City assieged, be more assieged on the
land side, than they. For by mean of the great number of horsemen that they
have, we cannot issue far out of our camp. Moreover they have sent
Ambassadoures into Peloponese, for to have new succors of people. And
Gylippus is goone to the Cities of Sycille, which be not yet on their party,
for to practyse and win them. And by that, which I can learn, they have
determined for to assault our rampares and fortes, all at one instante,
as well by sea as by land. Also ye ought not to judge and think it strange
that I do say, that they will assault us from the coaste of the sea. For
though that our army by sea was at the begyn^ynge great and excellent,
aswelle for that, that the ships where very whole and clean, as also our men
helthfull and gallant: yet neuerthelas at this present our said ships, by
having long ben in discouert and abroad, be in a manner utterly putrefyed and
rotten, and a great part of the maronners dead, and also it is not laufull
for us to bring our said ships a board or to shore for to repair and new
tacle them, for that, that our enemies have as great number thereof, as we, and
more: so, that they threatene dailly for to assaille us, which thing they
woll do without any fault, for yt is in their power to do it, when they woll,
and also they may bring their ships to shore, much more easily than we, for
that, that they keep not themself togyders: which thing was never hitherto in
our faculty and power to do: to wit, to go to assaill them at our will. For
albeit that we had great number of ships, yet neuerthelas we could skarcely
ward ourself, before that our said ships were all together, as they now be.
Forsomuche as if we had left any small part of our ward, we should not
have had victuailles, the which also we can not at this present skarcely carry
without dangier, for that, that we must pass alonge by the city. Through
the which diffyculties, if we have hertofore lost of our maronners, we yet do
now lose more of them, when they goo to fatche water, wood and other
necessaries, or for to ouer^onne and pyllaige anny part a far of: for they
be oftentimes betrapped by horsemen their enemies. And that, which is worse,
in the mean time that our people do fight, the esklau^s, which be with them,
and the souldyars strangers that have been putt in his ^^ ^^ by force, do
forsake them and run away. And the self same, that become of their own
good will in hope of more than to fight, seying the army by sea of thennemys,
and also their puissance by land, far otherwise than they thought: some of
them go to the enemies upon some color, and the other thider, where they may
eskape, which thing is right easy for them to do, for that, that the Islande
is very great: some other have boughte of the esclaues of Hicatrie, who^ they
find means by practyse that they have with the capytains of the ships, to
cause to sarue in their place: and by that manner they corrupt the disciplyne
and order of the sea. And for that, that I do speak to men that understand
what belongs to the sea, I say for conclusyo^ that the flower and gallantues
of this great number of people by sea, cannot long endure. And also there be
few good Pylottes and patrons to be found, which can conducte and well
govern a ship. And amongst all thies difficulties there is an other that
also causes me greatly to sorrow. And that is, that albeit that I am chief of
the army by sea, yet can I not give order therein: for your brains and wits,
lords Athenians be ill to be corrected, and also we cannot get other for to
replenishe our ships. which thing our enemies do easily. For they have many
cities that take their party. And as touching us, there is none that takethe
ours, resarued Nare and Carana, which be not very puissaunte. Wherefore we be
constraynedde to aid oureselues with that small number that remaynethe with
us, of those, which we chargedde at the beginning. And if it chance that the
Cities of Italy (who deliver us victuailles, knowing the estate, wherein we
be, and that ye send us no succors) return from us, to our enemies,
without fail, we shall be destroyedde without faightynge. I could write
(Lords) things more pleasante unto you: but not more profitable, if that ye
be willing to determyne well herein, understandynge our affayre. Whereof I
greatly doubt, for I know well your nature, which is such, that ye hear
wyllyngly playsante things: and when it happenethe otherewyse than you
thought, ye impute the blame to those, that have the charge of the affairs.
And yet nevertheless I think it best to write the truth, that ye may
provide therefore. And also I am willing to declare unto you, that for the
things, whereof you have given us charge in this interpryse, ye cannot in any
thing charge the chyefeste and Capytayns, nor also the souldyars. Wherefore
seeing that all Sycille conspyrethe now against us, and that they look for
new succors out from Peloponese, ayther determyne for to call us again
home, consyderedde, that we be moore weak than our enemies, even in the
estate, wherein they only now be: orells for to send us succors afreshe,
that be not less of ships, nothere of men than this same here: and also of
monney in good quantytye, and moreover an othere generalle or chief in my
steed: for that, that I cannot susteigne the charge, by cause of a disease of
the reyns, which troublethe me greattely. And also me thynkethe that reasonne
wylleth yt, for so long as I have been in good health, I have done you
many good saruyces. And for conclusyon whatsoeuere thing ye be willing to
do, do yt between this and the spring time without longer delay: for this,
that the enemies within shoorte time wolle wythdrawe to their party all the
Sycilyans. And though that the matters of Peloponese goo but softelye
forewardes: yett take heed lest yt happene unto you, like as oftene before
time it has chancedde, which is that partly ye shall be ignorant therein, and
partly ye shall know their enterpryses so late, that ye shall be betrapped,
before that ye can find remedy therefore. Such was the tenor of the letters
of Nycias: which seen, so far as did touch the sending unto him of a
successor in his charge, they were not of that opynyo^, but according to that,
that they should send him colleagues and co^paignyo^s, they did chose two of
those, that were with him in the army to be ayding unto him in the mean time,
to wytt, Menander and Eurymedon, Menander.

Eurymedon.


to the end that being ill at ease: he should not be ouercomed with his
charge. As to the rest, it was determined for to send new succors, as well
of shypps, as of men, and as well of maronners, as of men of war, and as well
of theirs, as also of those of their allies. And moreover they did appoyncte
also two new generals or chief Capytains with the said Nycias: to wit,
Demosthenes, Demosthenes
son of Alcisthenes and Eurymedon, Eurim^^don.
the which Eurymedon they sent abowte the myddell of October into Sycille
with ten ships, and six skoore talentes of silver for to set fourth ye
other that were there, and for to signify unto them the succors that came
after: and that the Athenyans tendered greatly their case. As concerning
Demosthenes he tarried for to cause that succors to be dispatched, which was
ordained and appoyncted, to the intent, that in the beginning of the spring
time, he might embarque himself with the said succors, and specially to
constrayne the allies of the Athenyans to fournishe ships, men and monney for
their portion.

How the Peloponesians did enter ennemylike into the country of Athenyans
and enclosed the town of Decelea with walls. And of the succors that was
sent into Sycille, as well on the behalf of the Athenyans, as also of the
Peloponesyans. The.iii. Chapter.
AFter that the Athenyans had appoyncted their said prouysions for Sycille,
they sent twenty galleis about Peloponese, for to defend and wythstande,
that no ships should pass fromthence out of Corinthe into Sycille. For the
Corinthyans after that the Ambassadors of the Syracusayns, which were comme
for to require new succors were arrived understanding the affairs of
Sycille to be in better estate, did yet take more couraige, and seemed unto
them that the army, which they had sent before, was come all in time. For
that cause they prepared for to send thider renforte or new succors of men
in the platt Barques, and the Lacedemonyans with the rest of the Peloponesians
did the like. So the Corynthyans armed xxv. galleys for to accompaygnye their
Barques, and to defend them against the galleys of the Athenyans, which
attended and lay in wait for them in the passage at Naupacte. As touching the
Lacedemonyans, as they prepared their succors, being vrgently moved as well by
the Syracusains, as by the Corynthyans: understanding moreover that the
Athenyans sent new succors into Sycille, for to empesche that, and chiefly
through the counsel of Alcibiades, they determined for to enter into the land
of the said Athenyans, and at the beginnynge to mure and wall in Decelea. And
the Lacedemonyans enterprysed that same with the better couraige, by cause that
they thought that the Athenyans having great war in two coasts: to wytt,
in Sycille and in their oune country, should be the moore easily subdewed and
vaynquished. And also that they had just quarelle, forsomuche as the
Athenyans had furste broken the appoinctement: which thing was whole
contrary to the other former appoynctement. For the rotture or breach began
on the bihalf of the Lacedaemonians, for that, that the Thebains, had invaded
Platea, without breaking the appoinctement. And though that it was ordonned by
the same, that war should not be moved against him, that submitted himself
to the judgment of the other confederated Cities and that the Athenyans
offredde to stand thereunto: yet always the Lacedemonyans would not accept
the offer: by occasion whereof, they thought that, with good cause, they had
received many mischances in the war, which than was made, and specially at
Pylus. But after the last appoinctement, the Athenyans had sent thirty ships
out of their sea and wasted one party of the terry^orie of the Epidaurians and
of the Prasyens: and also of some other countries, and kept men at Pylus, who
robbed and spoylled the confederates without any ceassynge. And when the
Lacedemonyans sent unto Athens for to demand restytution of the goods, that
were takene, and in case of refusal that they should commytt the thing to
knowlaige according to the artycles of appoynctemente: yet would they never
do yt. For this cause yt semedde to the Lacedemonyans, that as the fault and
offense of the breach, which was in the former war, was committed on their
bihalfe, so was i^ now in the party of the Athenians: by mean whereof they
went against them with the better heart. And so they commanded to the other
Pelonesyans that they should make prouysyon of Irons for the walls at Decelea,
in the mean time, that they prouydedde for other matter thereunto necessary:
and moreover constrained them to fournishe monney for to send succors into
Sycille for their portion, like as the self Lacedemonya^s did. And in thies
enterfeats ended the winter, which was the.xviii year of the war, which
Thucydides had wryttonne. In beginning of spring time, the Lacedemonyans with
their allies entered soubdaynely into the land of the Athenya^s, under conducte
of Agis son of Archidamus king of the same Lacedemonyans. And at the furste
arryuall they wasted and pillaiged the platte country, that was at the
entering, and afterward did give themself to enclose Decelea with wall, and
delivered to every of the Cities confederated according to his quantytie, to
make one quarter of the said wall. Now the same city is afar of from
Athens aboutes seuene skore stades, and well nighe as much out of the country
of Beotie. And for that cause, being enclosed with wall and garnished with
men, one might, out of the same, pillage and ouerronne the plat country unto
the City of Athens. In this same time that the walls of Decelea was in
buildinge, the Peloponesyans, that tarried in the country sent the succors
into Sycille in their Barques. To wytt, the Lacedemonyans, six houndred of the
most gentle compaignyons of their esklaues, and of their laborers, under the
conducte of Eurytus of Sparte. Euritus.
The Beotians three houndred, under the conducte of zenon and of Nycon of
Phebes and Egesander the Thespian. xenon.

Nycon.

Egesander.


Thies here were the furste that at there departure from Tenara in Laconium
lau^ched into the mean sea. Sone after, the Corynthians sent five houndred
men, as well of their people, as of the Arcadyans, which they had soulded or
hnyred, of whom Alexarchus the Corynthian was Chief: Alexarthus.
and with them, there were two houndred Scycionians under the conduct of
Sargeus Sycionien. Sargeus.
On the other side the.xxv. galleys, which the Corynthians had sent the
winter precedynge against the twenty of the Athenyans that abodde at Naupacte
for to keep the passage, were foranempste the said Naupacte, so long as the
Barques, which ca^yedde their souldyars passed by. At the self same beginnynge
of the spring time, when the walls were buildinge about Decelea: the
Athenyans sent.xxx. galleys about Peloponese under the conducte of Charycles,
Charicles.
to whom they comomaunded, that he should go fromthence in their name unto the
Argiues to require them that they woolde send and fournishe with men for to
fylle the said galleys according to their alliance: and on the other side in
ensuing their determynation touching the affairs of Sycille, that they should
send thider Demosthenes with.lx. ships of theirs, and five of those of Chio.
In the which there was twelve houndred warryours Athenyans, and of the
Islanders, asmanye as they could assemble: and of their othere allies, all
those that they might recover being men of war: and command the said
Demosthenes that in passing he should ioygne with Charicles, and both
togiders should pillaige and ouerronne the country Marytimate of Laconie. The
which Demosthenes, sailled fromthence straight to the poarte of Egyne, wherein
he attended those of his souldyars, that were not yet come, and likewise the
return of Charicles, who was gone unto the Argyues.

How the Syracusains and the Athenyans had a battaille within the port of the
City, as well by sea as by land, whereof both parties had victory in diverse
respects, and of many other combats and feats of war, which were done in
the same Siege. The.iiii. Chapter.
IN the self time, that the things abouesayde were done in Greece Gylippus came
again to Sarragosse with great number of people, that he had assembled, and
wythdrawin out of the Cities of Sycille, wherein he had been. So he
assembledde the Syracusains and shewedde them that yt was expedyente that they
should arm all the ships that they could, for to fight against the
Athenyans by sea, saying that he hoped, in that doing, to do some thing
woorthye of memory. And Hermocrates did likewise exhort them thereunto:
saying that they ought not to fear the Athenyans by sea, for this, that they
were not naturallye men of war, as the othere. For the City of Athenes was
not upon the sea, as Sarragosse, but rathere it was much furthere in the main
land, and that that same, which they had learnedde by sea, was for fear of
the Medes, who constrained them to adventure in the sea, and to hardy men, as
the Athenyans be, those seem terrible, which show themself, as couraigious,
as they. And even as they sometime feared their neighbors moore by their
great audacytye than by their power was required, so may they find of the
souldyars, their adversaries, which shall do the like unto them. And in making
thies perswations unto the Syracusains, he told them, that he knew well their
hardynes, by the desire, which they showed to have to go against the army by
sea of the Athenyans: of the which feate, that should be so unlooked for of
them, they shall be so astonyedde, that that same shall proffitt more the
Syracusains, than the science and exercise by sea, which those Athenyans have
vsedde so greatly, shall advantage theyme. By such words and declarations
Gylippus and Hermocrates and sum other that followedde theyme about the
night, did put his footmen in order without the town, to the intent that
at one time he might assaille the enemies both by land on the cost of the
wall that is in Plemmyriu^, and also the ships on the sea cost. In the
morninge.xxxv. galleys of the Syracusains issued forth out of the little port,
where their haven was, for to goo to the great port, which the enemies did
keep: and.xlv othere to saille enuironing and compassynge about the said
great porte^ and also for to go to assaille Plemmyrium, to the end that the
Athenyans perceiving themself assailled on both sides, should be more
troubled: who seeing that, fournished incontinently.lx. galleys that they had,
whereof they soubdaynly sent.xxv. against the, xxxv. of the Syracusains,
which came toward the great poarte for to fight with theyme: and with the
other they saylled against those that compassed it aboutes, with the which
they meddled incontynently in the poarte, and did fight a long time. The
Syracusains enforsinge themself to enter into the poarte, and the other to keep
and to defend theyme from yt. In this mean time the Athenyans, that were in
Plemmyrium, being descended down of the rock unto the shore of the sea for
to see what should fortune of the battaille, that was in hand: Gylippus upon
the break of day, came to assaille the said place of Plemmyryum, from the
side of the land with such force, that he took one of the three walls, and
soon after did take the other two, for that, that those, which had the ward
and defense thereof, saying that the furste was so soon taken, did not defend
them. And they, that were at the ward of the furste wall, after that it was
taken, fled fro^thence and with great danger retired into galleys, which
were always kept at the foot of the rock, and partly in a Barque, that was
found there, and in the same retired into their camp: though that a galley of
the Syracusains, to wit, of those, that were already entered into the port
followed them very nyghe: for the Syracusayns had already the victory in the
great port. But in the mean time that the othere two walls of Plemmyrium
were takene, it chauncedde that the Syracusayns were vaynquishedde. Whereupon
those among theyme that fled away, through cause of the other vyctorie, had
their retraicte moore easey. And the vyctorye was in this sort. For the
Syracusayns galleys, which did fight in the mouth of the great poarte
(having repoulsed those of the enemies, that were against theyme) sailledde
in at the entrance without anny order, so that the one empeschedde and did
let the othere. Which parceyued by the Athenyans, as well those, that did
combat without the poarte, as also those that were vainquished within,
ioygnned themself togiders, and russhed as well upon those, that were within the
port, as also upon those, that were with out, with such force, that they
caused them to fly. Whereof they did synke elleuen, and did slaye all those
that were within, resarued three, which they took prysonners: and three other
ships they br^sed. After that same victory, the Athenyans, having
wythdrawin the shipp wrackes of the enemies, they raised the trophee in the
little Islande, that is Plymmirium, and afterward retired into their camp. On
the other side of the Syracusayns, by cause of the three walls, which they had
taken in the said Plymmyrium, they raised up three other trophies. Of the
which three walls, they battred and rased down that same, which they had
last taken, and the other two they rampared, and did put therein good
garnyson, and ward. In taking of the said walls, many of the Athenyans were
slain, and many taken prisoners: and moreover all their monney, which was a
great some was also taken, for they kept this place, as for a forte, to
wythdrawe and ward all their treasure, and all their munytions and
marchandises, not only of the Seygnyory, but also of Capytaynes, and of
merchants and of particular souldyars. And among othere things there were
found the sails of forty galleys, and three other galleys, that were wythdrawin
thider. That same taking or loss did afterward cause many great dammaiges
to the Athenyans, and chiefly for thys^ that through the occasyon thereof they
could not bring the victuaills into their camp without danger. For the ships,
which were there, did fight and empesche them always, which thing did
give give unto the Athenyans great fear, and also great displeasure. Aftere
this battayll, the Syracusains sent.xii. gallleys, under the co^ducte of
Agatharcus Syracusain. Agatharchus.
The one whereof did carry certain Ambassadors which the said Syracusains
sent into Peloponese, for to signefye unto the Peloponesians both what had
been done, and also how they were in good hope to have the vyctorie against
the Athenyans, and also for to provoke them that they should send succors unto
them, and should ernestly follow or take that same war unto heart. The other
elleuen were sent into Italy, for that, that it was bruyted, that certain
ships chargedde with stuff and with munytions were sent to the camp of the
Athenyans at Sarragosse: the which ships, those Syracusains did encounter,
and took the most part thereof, togiders with that, which was within them.
Whereof the stuff that was therein charged, for to make ships, they brunt it
upon the shore of the sea, nigh unto Caulonia. And that d^ne, they saylled unto
the poarte of Locres: being in which place, aryued one barque, that came out
of Peloponese, charged with men of war, Thespyens, which were sent to the
succors of the said Syracusayns: the which they did take into their galleis,
and afterward did take their rayce or votage for to return into their
country: and so they encountered at Megara twenty Athenya^s galleis, that
espied them there in the passage: the which did take one of the said elleuen,
and the other that eskaped, did come to Sarragosse. After that, an other light
combat, was made between the Athenyans and the Syracusains in the poarte of
Sarragosse: to wycte, a rampare of wood, which the said Syracusains had made
before the old hauon for to keep their ships within in suertie. Before the
which, the Athenyans brought a great navy with ten thousand, chargedde,
well armed and appoyncted for to susteigne all strokes of shot and of
Artillery. And behind the same were small Barques, within the which, and
also within the said nauye, were men that had Engynes, wherewyth they rased
down the pales and plankes of wood of the said rampare, that were fyxed and
planted within the sea. Where against the Syracusains resisted with great
strokes of shot, which they dyschargedde and did cast out of the said
hauone. Also those of the said nauye, did the like against theyme. Fynallye
the Athenyans brake down a great part of the said rampare, although that
they had great pain and difficulty therein, for that, that there was great
pieces of wood that were hoolye hyddene within the watere, which were so
plantedde of a set purpose, to the intent that if the ships of the
enemies woolde comme there, they should stryke and bruise theyme, and should be
by that mean in danger. And though the Athenyans had plongeors or diverse
that dyuedde for to cut them under the water: yet neuerthelas aftere that they
were wythdrawyn, the Syracusayns caused other to be replantedde. And the one
did daylly make against the othere some new enterprise and invention, so as
it is to be byleued of two armies that keep ca^pe the one nigh to the othere,
and moreover they made many eskarmuches and small combats in all soortes, and
by all means that were possible to do. Now the Syracusains had sent
Ambassadoures to the Lacedemonyans, to the Corynthyans and to the Ambracyans,
sygnefyinge unto theyme the taking of Plemmyryum, and also the battaille that
they had upon the sea. Certefyinge that the victory, that the Athenyans had
had against them was not chanced, through the valyantnes of those same
Athenyans, but for the mysorder of themself. Wherefore they had good hope to
remain in the end victorious: but so, that they might be aydedde and
succored. And thereupon required that they would succor the^ with ships and
with men, before that the army, which they Athenyans should send thither for
new succors, might arryue there. For in that doing men might destroy
those, that were in the camp before the coming of those same thider: and
thereby end the war. This was the estate of the affairs of Sycille.

Of the necessity wherein the City of Athenes was through the war. And how
certain Thracyans that were comme to their saruyce, being for fault of monney
returned and sent home, did destroy the City of Mycalesus, and afterward
were well nygh all destroyed. The.v. Chapter.
IN this time whilst the affairs abouesayd, were done in Sycille,
Demosthenes having assembled the souldyars, which were ordonned for to go to
the succors of the ca^pe, that was before Sarragosse: caused them to be
embarked at Egyne, and fromthence came sailing alonge from of Peloponese and
ioygnedde himself with Charicles, who attended or waited with.xxx. ships for
him, wherein the men were chargedde, which the Argiues had sent for their
portion. And fro^thence they saylled straight toward the land of Laconie:
that is to say, of the Lacedemonyans. But furste they landed in the country of
Lymera in the terrytorie of Epidaure, Limera
whereof they wasted a great part. Fromthence they came to land in the said
country of Laconie of the coaste of Cytherea, foranempste the temple of Apollo:
where they did some damaige, and enclosed with a wall a distraicte, like unto the
same of Corinthe, which is called Isthmus, Isthmus.
to the end that the esklaues of the Athenya^s might withdraw thider and save
themself, when they woolde fly from their lords: and also for to keep there
thieves and pirates, that should pillaige the country round about, like as
they did at Pylus. But before that the wall was made Demosthenes saylled
straight to Corcyre, for to levy there the men that should come out of that
quarter: and to pass fromethence straighte into Sycille, and he left
Charicles there, for to parfaict and fynishe the said wall, with his thyrtie
ships Who, incontynentlye after that it was acheued, and that a good garnysone
was put into it, departed fromthence for to follow Demosthenes. The Argiues
also did the like. In that same summer arrived at Athens.xiii. houndred
Thracians, which were surnamed Macherophoriens, that were of the descent of
Dyacus, all well armed, and wearinge targettes, the which were caused to comme
with Demosthenes into Sycille: whom for that, that they were come to late,
after the departure of Demosthenes, the Athenyans determined to return and
send again into their country. For they thought it to great charge for to
keep them there for the war, which they had at Decelea, for that, that every
of the^ would have a groate for y^ day. And the monney began greatly to
consume in Athens, for this chiefly, that after the Peloponesyans had altogider
mured and fortefyed the town of Decelea, in ye same somer they did putt into
it afterward garnysons out of all cities, which were changed by quartiers,
whereby many great evils and losses as well of monney, as of othere goods,
happened to the Athenyans: by mean of this, that where at other times, when
the Peloponesians came to ouerronne their land, they tarried not therein long,
and aftere that they were returned, the Athenyans were not empesched to
labor their land nor to enjoy yt at their will. After that the said town
was enclosed and the garnysone put within yt, they were contynuelly vexed,
and as in manner assieged by the said garnysone, which ceased not to
ouerronne and pyllaige some time in small number and sometime in great, and
very often times for to have vyctuailles, and other things necessary. But
above all, so long as Agis king of Lacedemonie was there with all the army,
they were maruaillously endommaged, for he never suffredde his people to be
idle, but contynuellye caused them to course and go into the land, in such
sort that they made meruaillous waste and pillayge in all the land of
Athenes. And besides that the skla^es which they had, fled from them to the
said Peloponesians to the number of twenty thousand and up wards, which were
all or the moore part people of occu^acyons and handy craft men. They lost
morouer almost all their beasts as well great as little. And also their horses
were in a small time so trauailled that they could not sarue long. For their
horsemen were contynually in the feldes, as well for to resist the enemies that
were at Decelea, as also for to ward all the regyon of Athens, from pillage,
whereby some of the said horses were morefounded and the other lamed and tired
with ronninge so oftene into that same land, which was dry and hard: and
also many of them were hurt, as well with strokes of darts, as also with other
strokes. And in the remena^t, the victuails yt were brought into the city out
of the quarter of Eubea and of Oroppe, which were wont to pass by Decelea,
that was the next way, were forced to come by an other coaste more further of,
so that they compassed about the land of Sunium by sea, which was a thing of
great charge and expense, by occasyon whereof, the city was in great
necessytie of all things, that were requisitt to be brought thither from
without. And on the other part, the Cytezeins, who were all retired into the
city, were greatly trauailled by mean of watch, that was conuenyent for them
to make without cessynge, as well by day, as by night. For by day there was a
certain number incessantly upon the heighte of the walls, who were contynually
changed, and in the night all the watch was in harnes, resarued the horsemen,
the one upon the walls, and the other in and through the town, as well in time
of summer, as also of winter, which was unto them a pain intolerable. And so
much the moore, that at one self time, they susteigned two great wars. And
yet nevertheless they were so obstynate, that no man, y^ had not seen it, could
have believed it. For albeit that they were assieged even unto the walls by the
Peloponesyans, yet for all that they woolde not forsake nor leave of the
enterprise of Sycille, but euene so, as they were assyegedde, they woolde
stylle hold the City of Sarragosse assiegedde, the which was for a City
nothing less, tha^ Athenes: willing by that mean to declare their
puyssance and their audacytie, much moore great than the othere Greeks had
opinion thereof from beginning of the war. Of whom some judged that those
Athenyans should susteigne the war for two years, the other for three years
at the furtheste and that than it should have cessed. But no man thought that
it should have endured longer, if it chancedde that the Peloponesyans woolde
have entered into their land. And yet neuerthelas from the furste time that
they were entredde therein, until that they sent into Sycille, were seuentene
whole years. And that notwythstandinge they were not so decayed by the said
war of.xvii. years, but that they enterprysed yet the other, which was not
less in the opinion of men than the furste. And the said city of Athens
being troubled as well for the town of Decelea^ as by the other means here
above declared, yt was come into great indigence and lack of monney: through
occasyon whereof, they exacted and leuyedde that same year of their subjects
in places nyghe the sea, instead of trybute, which they took by Anticipation,
the twentieth part of their valeur: thinking that the same should render unto
them more monney, than the ordenary trybute. So was it nedefull^ for the
expe^ces were somuche the greater, as the war was more great: and also their
rent failled them or was decayedde. For this cause, incontynently as the
Thracyens that were comme to their succors, were arrived, as has been said,
they returned or sent them away for lack of monney, and gave the charge to
Dytrepus for to conducte them by sea: Dytrepus.
to whom they commanded that in retournynge them, he should find the manner
that they should do some damaige in Eubea, and in othere places by the sea side
of thennemys, alongest by whom they should pass: for it was conuenyente for
them, to pass the distraict of Eubea, which is called, Euripus. Euripus.
The which Dytrepus being landed with the said Thracyens at Tanagra, he
pillaiged somewhat right soubdainely, and after caused them incontynently to
mount again and carried them into Chalcyde in the country of Eubea, and
toward night passed the distraict and sailled for to land in the country of
Beoce. In the which being landed, he caused all his men, all the night to
march toward the City of Mycale: Micalessus.
and caused therein to hyde themself within the temple of Mercuryus^ which is
distant out of the said city abouts.xvi. stades. And after that it was day, he
caused them to march straight toward the said city. The whiche^ though
that it was great, yet neuerthelas he fourthwyth did take for that yt was not
warded. And also the Cytezeins had no doubt of annythynge. For they never
thought, that passengers by sea would have come so far into the land, For
this cause they had ill walls about their town and also they were fallene in
some parts and in other very low. And morouer for that, that they feared none
enterprise, they locked not in their gates. The Thracians than being entered
into the town did pillage it utterly, as well ye temples and holly places, as
the pryuate houses and profane places, and this, which yet was worst, they did
slay all that they found lyuinge, as well the people of all sec^es and ages, as
also the beasts. For it is the nature and facyon of the Thracyans, which be
people among all other, most Barbarous, to do all sort of cruelty, in
whatsoever place that they be, without fear. And among the othere they
committed and perpetrated one right great myschiefe. For being entered into
the place, where the children of the town were at skoole in right great
number, they did slaye them all. And that mischief was so great and so
soubdaynely and vnlokedde for, chancedde, that there was never in one City a
greater. Whereof the Thebayns being aduertysed, they all yssuedde fourth
incontynently upon them, and found them yet nyghe unto the town, and did
put them into greatte fear, and in such sort, that at beginning they
forsook all their bowtye, and afterward were chasedde fromethence, until the
distraicte and there many of them were slain, that could not sone enough
enter into their shippes^ by cause of this chiefly, that those, which were
within the said shippes^ parceyuynge the enemies to approche^ had withdrawin
them into the sea out of danger of shot, whereby those that might not enter,
and that knew not or could not swim were all slain: and there was the
greateste slaughter. For vntille that they were arryuedde at the shoore of the
sea, they retyredde all togider and in good order after their custom, so that
they defended themself well against the horsemen of the Thebains which were the
furst that assailled them, in such sort that they lost not many of their
people. But after that they were arrived at the sea side in the sight of their
ships, they did break their order, for to get into the said shyps. Some
were also yett found in the said city, which remained for to pillaige yt,
who likewise were all slain, so that of.xiii. houndredde Thracyans, that were
there, was saved but two houndred and fyftie. And of the Thebains and other,
which were comme with theyme, there were dead aboutes twenty all horsemen.
Amongst whom was one of the officiers of the Beotians namedde Straphondas,
Sti^phonda
and all those that were found within Micalessus, received this cruelty and
calamytie, which was greater than chanced to annye town or city during that
same war, by all that time that yt endured.

Of that which Demosthenes and Eurimedon Dukes of the Athenyans did in their
voyage, sayllynge to the succors of the camp, that was at Sarragosse. And of
the succors that arrived for those of the town. And also of a battaylle by
sea, which the Athenyans had against the Peloponesyans nigh unto Naupactum.
The.vi. Chapter.
ANd for to return to that, which was done in Greece, after that Demosthenes
had enclosed with wall that place, whereof we have spoken, in the country of
Laconie, he departed fromethence for to pass into Corcyre, and in saillinge he
found in the poarte of Phia, Phia.
which is in the country of Elyens, one barque charged with men of war,
being Corynthians, which would have gone into Sycille, which he sonke, but
the people saved themself and afterward recovered an other, wherein they
passedde into Sycille. Fromethence Demosthenes passed into zalinthus and
through Cephalenie, zalinthus.

Chephalenia.


where he did take men of war, which he embarked. Afterward he came
fromethence to Naupacte, whider he caused the Messenyans, to come, and
fromethence he trauersed and passed into the land of Acarnanie, which is on
the other side in the main land, and there came unto the towns of Alizea and
of Anactoryum, Alizia.

Anattorium.


which the Athenyans did hold. And he being there, it chanced that Eurymedon
came again by the same sea of Sycille, whider he was sent that same winter
for to carye monney unto the army, who came to find the said Demosthenes, and
said unto him amongst other things, that he had learned, that the
Syracusayns had recovered Plemyrium. Sone after Conon, Conon.
that was capytayne of Naupacte came unto them, who showed them that there
were.xxv. galleis of the Corinthians foranempst Naupacte, which kept themself
there, and ceased not to come to provoke him, and demanded nothing but to
sight. And therefore desired them that they would deliver him suffyciente number
of their shyps. For he had but.xviii. galleys with the which it was not mete
for to fight with.xxv. Whereunto Demosthenes and Eurymedon did agree, and
delivered him ten of their lightest galleis, with the which he returned
fromthence and they went to their enterprise for to levy and gather people,
to wytt, Eurymedon, who had been already appoyncted for colleague and
compaignyon to Demosthenes, into Corcyre, where he causedde.xv. of his galleys,
to be fynysshed with the people of the country: and Demosthenes through the
country of A^arnanie, fromwhence he led asmanye archers, as he could into
Sycille. After that the ambassadors of the Syracusains, wh^che had been sent
unto the cities of Sycille for to have succors, had done their ambassade and
had persuaded unto many of them the thing which they demanded, and le^ied the
people of the said cities for to carye them to Sarragosse. Nycias, who was
advertised thereof, sent unto the cities, which to^e his part, (by which the
said men of war should of necessity pass, and specially to the
Centoripins, Centoripini.
and to the Alcyes) that they should not suffer them to pass, Alyciei.
but rather empesche theym^ with all their power, for they could not well
eskape annye other way, for that that the Agragantyns denied them passaige.
Unto which request the said towns obeyde, and bestowed men in embushmentes at
the passaiges in three places, who secretly betrapped the said men of war, in
such sort that they did slay aboutes eight houndred of theyme togiders with
all their ambassadors resar^ed one which was a Corynthyan, who brought theyme
that were sauedde to Sarragosse, which were about a thousand five houndredde
And at the self time arrived other succors for the Syracusayns, to wit, of
Camerins, who sent fy^e houndred men well armed and six houndred Archers, and
the Gelyans five ships, wherei^ we^e foore houndred Arbalestriers and two
houndredde horse. And for effect (the Agregantins, that took part with the
Athenyans excepted) the most part of all the country of Sycille (although
that ytt was not knowyn nor declared until that present time) sent succors
to the said Spracusayns, who neuerthelas for the lost, which they had made
of the said eight houndred men at the passages of Sycille durst not so sone
invade the Athenyans. During this time Demosthenes and Eurymedon, having
assembledde a great number of people aswelle of Corcire, as of the main
land, they passed the sea Ionium and came to aboorde at the promontorye of
Lapigia, out of which place and of the Islandes Choreades there adioigninge,
The Islandes^ Choreades.
they leuyed one houndredde and fyftye Arbalestciers of the nation of
Messapiens by consent of Artas Lord of the place, Artas.
with whom they renewed the amytie which had been auncyently bitwene the
Athenyans and him. Being come fromthence to aboorde at Metapontum, Metapontum
which is in Italy, they perswadedde the people of the town to deliver theyme
three houndredde archers and two shyps by virtue of their ancyent alliance.
Fromethence they came to aboorde at Thuria, Thuria.
where they ler^edde that those, which took part with the Athenyans were
newely dryuene away: so they arrested there certain days with all the army
for to understand if there remaynedde anny parsone of the parttakers with the
Athenyans within the said City, and also for to make straicter alliance with
theyme, to wytt to be friends of friends, and enemies of enemies. Aboutes
this time the Peloponesyans, that ancredde with the.xxv. galleys foranempste
Naupacte, for suertie of the barques that should pass thereby, transportyng
the succors, that the said Peloponesyans sent to Sarragosse: apparrilled
theymeself for to fight against the galleys of the Athenyans, which were in
the poarte of Naupacte, and had also furnysshed other ships, in such sort
that they had almost as great a number, as the Athenyans, and came to ancre
in an hauone of Achaia, calledde Rhypica nyghe to Erimeum, Rhypica Erimeu^
which is in form of the moon encrea ynge, and they had bestowed in the
rocks, which were at the sides of the sayedde hauone, their footmen, aswelle
of the Corynthyans, as of the people of the country: In ^uche manner that the
army by sea remaynedde in the ^^ddelle well wardedde from the land all
togiders, whereof Polyanthes Corynthien was chief. Polyanthus.
Against whom the.xxiii. Athenyans galleys did come which were in the poarte
of Naupacte, whereof Diphilus was chief, Dyphylus.
which parceyued, the Corynthians in the beginning kept theymeself in their
sort without marchynge further. But afterward when they thought good, they
marched against the Athenyans. The one army did faight long against the other,
in such sort that three Corinthians galleis were sonken and as touching the
Athenyans although that there were none of them drowned^ yet there were seuene
of them frusshedde and bruised in their foore parts with the beckes of the
Corynthyans, that was more strong than theirs, and also the Oars broken on
the one side, in such manner that they were utterly destroyed and unprofitable
for to saille. And in effect the battle was of such sort, that every of the
parties pretended to have had the victory. Neuerthelas the Athenyans received
their ship wrackes, but being charged with a great wind, they retired the
one of the one side and the other an other way, to wytt, the Peloponesians
into their hauone, where they were in suertie by mean of their people that
were in the land, and the Athenyans unto Naupacte. After which departure the
Corynthians did incontinently reyse up a Trophee by cause of the ships
which they had destroyed and crusshed in greater number than those, which they
had lost, reputinge theymselfe not to be vainquishedde, for the self reasone,
for which the enemies reputed theymeselfe also not to have vaynequished. For
that that it semedde to the Corynthyans not to have been vainequished, except
the victory of thennemyes had been great. Also the Athenyans to the contrary
held themself as for overcome, if they had not great victory. Notwythstanding
after that the Peloponesians were gone out of the said hauone and their
footmen departed fromethence, the Athenyans raised up a trophee in Achaia, as
victoryous, although that they were more than twenty stades a far of the
place, from Erimeum, where the Corynthyans ships were. This issue had the
battaille by sea bitwene them.

How in the mean time that Demosthenes and Eurimedon were in their voyage for
to come to succoure the camp of the Athenyans in Sycille, the Syracusayns had
a victory by sea against the said Athenyans, that kept them a^^ieged.
The.vii. Chapter.
AFter that the Thuriens were allied or confederated with the Athenyans, as
has been abouesayd. Demosthenes and Eurymedon caused them to fournyshe seuene
houndred men well armedde and three houndred darte casters, the which they
embarked and commanded them, that they should go fromthence straight into the
quarter of Crotonia. And they, after that they had takene mouster of their men
nigh the river of Sibaris, Syberis.
led them through the land of the Thuriens against Crotonia. But being
arrived in the river of Hylias, Hylias.
they found certene messengers of the Crotoniens, which declared unto theyme,
that their Lords were not willing that they should pass through their
land. By occasion whereof they took their way toward the sea, alongest the
said river, and being arrived in the quarter, where it enters into the sea,
they lodged there their host, where their ships aryued, Wher^to being all
mounted they sailled fromthence alongest that same coast, practysynge all the
cytyes that were upon the same, except the city of Locres, and finally they
came to the place of Petra, Petra.
which was in the land of the Rhegins. In this mean time the Syracusains,
being advertised of their coming, enterprysed afreshe for to prove and essay
the fortune of battle by sea, and also appoyncted a good number of footmen
by land. Now they had dressed a good number of ships of an other sort,
than they had done in the furst battle, for that, that in the same, they had
learned and parceyued the fault of those, which they than had, whereupon having
provided for the same fault, they hoped well to have the victory, for they
had shortened the beckes and poynctes of the foore parts of their shyps for to
make them more ^irme and more stiff, and also they had armed the wastes or
sides of their said shyps with great pieces of wood of.vi. Cubittes of length
as much within, as without, of the selfesorte, that the Corynthians had done
with their ships, when they did fight against the Athenians at Naupacte. And it
seemed well unto them, that by that mean coming against the Athenians ships,
which should not be made of that same sort, but should have their foore
parts longer and more subtle, for that, that they come not right for to
schocke with the poynct but went more sydelyng for to strike on the sides,
their ships should be as good and better than the othere. And that having to
fight within the poarte with great number of ships, there should not be space
for to saille by tourneying or in course, but must of necessity come afronte,
whereby the poynctes of their shyps being strongest and better armed with Irone
than the other they should easily crushe and bruise them. And by that mean they
hoped that the same, which at the other battaille had caused the^ to lose
through ignorance of their maroners: should now cause them to have the
victory. And also those same Athenya^s should not have faculty and power for
to withdraw their ships at their will, for afterward to come again to
schocke on those of the enemies as they had done the other time, except
that they should withdraw theyme from the land side, and yett from the same
coaste they could have no great espace for to do yt, and also they should
find the Syracusayns on the shoore, which should be ready for to endomage
them and for to succor the same Syracusains, and moreover being in a straict
place, they should empesche and let the one the other, which thing had always
causedde great anoyance and hurt unto the Athenyans in all their battaylles
by sea, for that, that they could not wythdrawe theymself so easily, as the
Syracusayns, who had the small poarte wholly in their power, and also kept
the mouth of the great poarte empeschedde, and by that mean, they had the
main sea, where the Athenyans had for all their feate, but only the great
poarte, which was not spacious enough, and also they had Plemyryum against
theyme, which was in the mouth of the said great poorte. In this manner the
Syracusayns deuysedde their affair in good hope to have honor thereby for the
reasons abouesayed^ and did execute yt in the form, which follows. For
Gylippus a little before the said battaille, dydsett fourth of the city his
footmen very nyghe the wall of the Athenyans from the coaste of the same
city. On the other side, those, that were at Olympus, aswelle horsemen as
footmen lightlye armedded, and darte ca^ters came likewise against the said
wall on both sides. And sone after, the shyps of the Syracusayns issued
fourth, aswelle their oune, as the same of their allies. When the Athenyans
perceived the said shyps of the enemies for to come fourth, they all were
thereby greatly trowbledde. For having seen the footmen a little before
marchyng toward the wall, they thought not^ that there should have been anny
other busy^es. Neuerthelas they gathered themself all togider and did putt
themself in battaille, some upon the walls and some other within, some for to
resist the easters on horsbacke lightly armed, some within their shyps and the
other on the shoares of the great port, and alongest the banks for to
succor their ships. And after that the ships were charged, which were
found to be.lxxv. they marched against the othere, which were foore skoare.
And so they did fight togiders all that same day, giving great aflaultes, the
ships of the one party, against the other, without that they might do any
thing of great importance another of the one side nor of the other, but that the
Syracusayns did sink one or two ships of thennemys and finally toward
night departed, and every one retyredde into his quarter. And they of the
town, that were come out of the town against the walls of the Athenyans
did the like. The morrow after the Syracusains did nothing, and also showed
that they would do nothing. For this cause Nycias, having seen that the day
precedinge they were egall, doubtinge least that they would have ones again
essayed fortune, he commanded the patrons and capitains of his ships that they
should repair their ships, those which had been by any means crusshed or
bruised. Afterward he caused his platt barques to be wtdrawin, which he had
made to be enclosed in a corner of the great port with pales for to be in
suertie, and caused them to be cast and lanched into the sea distante and
separated the one from the other, the space of a days labor of ground, to
the end that if by faightynge any of his galleys were oppressed, he might
recover the said barques. In such preparations and other like, the Athenyans
consumed that same day and the night following. The morrow following the
Syracusains came fourth aswelle by sea as by land in the same sort as they
issued fourth the day before, resarued that they came in a better hour, and
also did fight the greatest part of the day in the manner that they had done
in the former battaille, without that it were perceyuedde that the one party
had in any thing advantage of the othere. Than Ariston Corynthian, which was
the best maronner and patron that was in the army of the Syracusayns
causedde yt to be knowin unto the other capytaynes of the ships, that they
should send with all diligence of their men into the city and he would do
the like for to give order that men should constrayne those which had
victuailles ready to bring them to be sold to the sea side, to the intent
that they might cause all their people soubdaynely to be repasted, and
fourthwyth to mount again into their ships and to assail the enemies
unlooked for or unprovided, which thing was done, and in a right short
space, great habundance of victuailles having been brought to the sea bank,
they retyredde fair and easily for to dyne. The Athenyans perceiving which
thing, and thinking that they had retired as vainequished, they retired
likewise, and landed some for to make the dynner ready, and the other to do
other busynes, not thinking that for that same day, there should have been
any battaille by sea. But sone after they did see the Syracusayns, which had
dynedde, to come soubdainely against theyme in great haste, whereof they were
greatly abashed, and yet neuerthelas embarked theymeselfe again tumultuously
and out of order, as fast as they could, the most part, before that they
had eatene any thing and came to mete the said enemies. And when they were in
sight and very nyghe the one unto the other, they planted theymself aswelle on
the one side as of the other for to deuyse aither of theyme, how they might
assault his enemies to his advantage, neuerthelas the Athenyans reputing yt
for great shame, that the enemies should surmount, excel and pass them in
endurynge labor and trauaille, they did furste give the sign of battaille
and came to give charge upon their said enemies, who received theyme with the
poyncte of the foore parts of their ships well armedde, and well
strengthened, like as they had determined, in such sortte, that they crusshed
a great part of theyme and did break the poyncte of their oars, and
afterward out of the top castelles of the said ships, with great
stroackes of stoanes and of darts did greatly hurt those, that were within.
But the small light shypps of the Syracusayns did them yet more hurt, which
came to assaille and hurt them with castynges of darts and with hand strokes
on all sides in such manner that the Athenyans were constrained to putt
themself into flight and with the aid of their barques retired into their
camp, for the Syracusayns durst not follow them ^urther than to the ^ayd
barques, for that, that they had their saille yardes lyfted up so high with
Dolphins of lead hanging in them, that the shyps of thennemyes could not
aboorde them without danger to be crusshed which thing happened unto two of
them, which came to boldly upon them, and one other was takene with the men
that was within yt. But seuene of the Athenyans shyps were sonken and many
crusshed, and moreover a great number of their people dead and takene. By
reason of the which victory, the Syracusayns raised up their Trophee,
perswadyng themself fromethensforwardes to be stronger, than the Athenyans by
sea, and that they should be in short time as strong with footmen as they,
through occasyon whereof they prepared themself for to assaille them at an
other time.

How Demosthenes and Eurimedon being arrived in the camp before Sarragosse,
and having by night assaulted the rampares of the Syracusayns at Epipole, were
repoulsed and had great loss of their men. The.viii. Chapter.
IN thies enterfeates, Demosthenes and Eurymedon arrived in the camp of the
Athenyans with.lxxiii. ships as well of their oune as of their allies, which
carried about five thousand warryours fotemen partly of their people and
partly of their said allies and subjects togiders with a great number of
other barbarous and strangers and slyngers, archers and darte casters, as well
of Greece as of other countries, whereof the Syracusayns were greatly astonyed,
and parceyued no mean to be hable to eskape and resist one so great a
puissance, since that the Athenyans being assieged in their country by
mean of Decelea, had neuerthelas sent thider one so great succors, as
puissant as the furst, whereby they judged their puissance not to be withstand,
and considering also that their furst army, which had been repoulsed and
beatene in the former battaille, did recover couraige by the coming thereof.
Demosthenes, after that he was arrived, did immediately give order for to
execute his enterprise and to employ his force as soon as he could, for
avoiding the error which Nycias had before comytted, who, being come into
such reputation that all Sycille was thereby afraid, yet neuerthelas for
that, that at the arryuall he came not before Sarragosse, but consumedde many
days at Catana, he both lost his reputacion, and also Gylippus, by mean of
his retardance and slackenes had had time for to bring to Sarragosse, the
succors of Peloponese before his aryual. Which succors, those same
Syracusains should not have had another yet demanded, if Nicias had assieged the^
at the aryual, repucing the^ not to be puissa^te enough for to defend their
town against the force of the said Nycias, though neuerthelas they afterward
did know the contrary, but that should have been to late when they should have
been enclosedde on all sides, in such sort that the succors could no more
have comme unto them in time. Demosthenes considering which things, and also
that thennemyes should be greatly afrayedde of his coming, he would, that
self day that he arryuedde, do some feate. And seeing that the wall, which
the Syracusayns had made ouerthwarte, that same of the Athenyans for to
empesche and let that men should not fynyshe yt, was all syngle and that one
might easily beat it down: after that he had gottene Epipole, and the
rampares that were there made, wherein were noe people, that might resist his
strength: he hasted for to assault it, trusting in a small time to see an
end of the war, for he purposed aither to take Sarragosse by force, orelles
to lead and carye again all that same army into his country without any
more trauaillynge all the Athenyans, aswelle those that were there, as the
other that remained. In this enterprise the Athenyans entered into the land of
the Syracusayns, and furst did go for to overcome the quarter of Anapus, which
they pillaged, and wasted, and also kept yt at their will as they had done
before time, for that, that no men war issued fourhe against theyme, another
by sea, nor by land, except the horsemen and darte casters, which were in
Olympus. Afterward it seemed good to Demosthenes for to assaille the rampares
of the enemies with engynes of artillerye, but the Syracusayns fourthwyth
after that the said engynes were nyghe unto the rampares, did set fire
therein: and those, that were deputedde for to assa^^le them in diverse places,
were repoulsed, by occasion whereof he caused his people to retire, and it
seemed not expediente unto him to lose any more time there, but rather to
assault Epipole, which thing he persuaded Nycyas and his other colleagues to do,
but. he could not do it in such time, but that the enemies should
parceyueyt. For this cause they commanded that every souldyar, should make
prouysion of victuailles, for five days for himself, and moreover they caused
all the masons, and carpenters that were in the host to assemble togider, and
a great number of people, for to gather and carye stoanes togiders with all
things that were necessary for to build and reyse up walls and rampares,
and a great quantity of darres, shaftes and of all things to cast with the
hand, to the intent to beat down incontinently a fortress in the said
place of Epipole, if they could take it. That done in beginning of the night,
he, Eurymedon and Menander marched with the greatest party of the army
against the said place of Epipole, and left Nycyas for to ward the walls,
and so they came very nigh from the rock unto the place that is calledde
Euricleus, before that the watch of the Syracusayns, which was at the furste
wall, parceyued theyme, and took the furste wall of the enemies, and did
slaye one part of theyme that wardedde yt. The othere, and the more part
sauedde theymeself, and certefyed the coming of the enemies unto three wards
that were there, to wytt, that same of the Syracusayns, that same of the other
Sycillians, and that same of their othere allies, but pryncipally and furste,
the six houndredde Syracusains, that warded that same quarter, who, though
that they defended themself valyantly, were yet neuerthelas repoulsedde by
Demosthenes, and by the Athenyans, and all with one power chasing them they
followed them to the other wards, that they should not have space to lock
themself togider again another to the othere for to defend themself, with
such diligence, that they took all the said rampares and bullwerkes and
immediately began to raze them down from the heighe of them. Than the
Syracusayns and Gylippus, seeing the audacytie of the Athenyans, to be so comme
for to assault their rampares in the night, they yssuedde fourth of their
quarters which they warded, and came to give charge upon them but at the
beginning they were repoulsed. Neuerthelas afterward the Athenians marching
further without order, as people which had the victory, and also for that,
that they feared, that onles they used diligence to execute their enterprise
and to beat down the rampares, the ennemys should have leisure to assemble
themself again, they hasted the most that they might for to break and grind
down the said rampares. But before that they had fully repoulsed the ennemys,
they were repoulsed furst by the Thebayns, who furst sustained their force and
afterward by the othere, so that they were putt to flight, wherein there was
great disorder and loss and many dangers and difficultes which might not
well be seen for that, that yt was night. For euene of things, which be done
in the day time, men cannot know for troth the certainty of the whole by
those that were thereat, for that, that skarcely any one man can declare what
was done where he was and most nyghe unto him, wherefore it is impossible to
know distinctly what has been done in a conflicte by night bitwene two
great hoastes. And although that the moon did shine that same night, yet
the clerenes was not so great that one might well know two men, though
that he did see the parsones, another judge which was friend or enemy. And
somuche the less that they were many and in great number locked togiders in
a small place, aswelle of the one side as of the other. But in effect the
Athenyans being in one quarter repoulsedde by the othere, that followedde
their furste victory, the one mountedde upon the rampares of the Syracusayns,
the othere came to the succors of their people, and knew not whider that they
should goo, for that, that being the furst in flight, and the cry great, a
man could not understand nor see by annye tokene by cause of the night, and
moreouere in repoulsynge the enemies, whom they encountredde made likewise
great cries. On the other side the Athenyans did search and would have
chosene out their people, and for that, that they were in flight all those,
which they encountredde they suspectedde to be their enemies, and having none
other mean to know the one the othere, but by the cry of the night in
demanding the one after the othere, they made great bruytt whereby great
trouble did likewise ensue, and also they declaired by that mean unto the
enemies their said cry, who, insomuche as they had the victory and were
not afraid, as the Athenyans were, did know theymeselfe the better, by
mean whereof, if annye of the said ennemy^s did find theymeself in small
number among any great floate of the Athenyans, they took up their cry,
and by that mean eskapedde, where the Athenyans, which knew not the same of
the enenemyes there as they were found weakest, were slain. And furdermore
there was one thing, which troubled them more than all the rest, to wytt, the
sound of instruments and the songs which men did sing for the victory.
For the enemies and those that were with the Athenyans, as the Argyues, the
Corciriens and all the other Doryans did sound and sing all of one facyon,
whereby at all and asmanye times as that was done, those same Athenyans knew
not on which side ytt was done nothere to what purpose. By all the which
things trouble was so great amongeste theyme, that after they encountredde
togider, they did fight, before that they could know the one the othere,
and those, which fled, knew not what way to keep. Whereby yt chancedde
that there were many of them, that tombledde down of the rock into hollow
places, and where the way failled theyme, being pursuedde and oppressed by
the enemies did slaye theymself, for that that the place of Epipole was very
high, and there were few comynges and ways thereunto, the which were also
very straight, so that yt was very hard to keep them being in flight,
specially the lower way. And also of those, that had eskaped unto the
plain, they, which had been at the siege from the beginning, for that,
that they had knowlaige of the places saved theymselfe in their camp. But
they that were newly come, could not keep the way, but rather went wandrynge
through the feldes, who being parceyued by the horsemen their enemies, after
that it was day, were all slain. The day followynge the Syracusayns reysedde
up two Trophies, to wytt, the one at the entering of Epipole, and the othere
in the place, where the Thebayns made the furste resistance. And the Athenyans,
confessing unto theyme the victory, demandedde their dead men which were in
right great number, but yet there was found much more harnnes, than there
were dead people, for that, that those, which fled in the night, by the
small rocks, and were constraigned to leap from a great heighe down, in
many places did cast of their harnes for to be more easy, whereby there
were many, which sauedde theymself.

How the Athenians after many consultations, being determined to ^eyse up
the^ siege, and to depart fromethence, taryedde still through a superstition.
The.ix. Chapter.
This unhoped victory caused the Syracusayns to recover and take again both
heart and audacitie, as before time. whereby understanding that the
Agragan^yns were in some division among^st themself they sent thider Sycanus,
for to essaye whider that he could wythdrawe them to their alliance. On the
other side Gylippus went by land unto the cities of Sycille, for to demand of
theyme renforte or new succors of men, hopyng by mean thereof, and for the
victory, which the Syracusains had had at Epipole, to take the walls of the
Athenyans by force. During this time, the Dukes and chiefeste of the army of
the Athenyans were in great sorrow, considering the overthrow that they had
receyuedde by the incomoditie of the camp, and of the army which was in
such necessity, that all generallye were grieved and werye of that same siege,
specially because that it was all full of maladies, and diseases, by two
reasons. The one, for the seasone of the year, which was than most subjected
to diseases. The othere by reasone of the place, where the camp was, for there
were marresses and low places, and in the rest very incomodious. For the
which reasones, Demosthenes was of opy^yon that men ought not to tarry there.
For since that yt was my shappenedde of the enterprise of Epipole, which he
had made, yt semedde to him better for to depart fromethence, than for to
tarry there, forsomuche as the sea was than good, and by reasone of the ships
which he had brought, he was more strong by sea, than the enemies. And on
the othere side ytt semedde unto him more convenient and more necessary to
saylle for to defend their proper land, where the enemies had enclosedde
and fortefyedde a town: than to consume the time and a great quantytye of
monney at the siege of a town in a far country, whereby there was no hope
to take ytt. Such was the opinion of Demostthenes. But Nycyas, although that
he knew all thies difficulties, yett he^ would not confess theyme publicly
in tthat same assembly, another agree that the siege should be reased and
brokene of, fearing least yt should comme to the knowlaige of the enemies.
And moreover he had yet sum hope, for that that he knew the affairs of
the city better than anny of his colleagues and compaignions, and considered
that the length of the siege was more to the disadvantage of the Syracusayns
than unto theirs, for that that they consumedde so much monney, markedde
specially the great army, which they susteignedde by sea. And also that same
Nycyas had secret intellygence and confederation with some of the town
which wylledde him secretly, that he should not dislodge. For all the which
respects he maignteignedde the matter and interruptedde the opinion of those,
that would that the siege should have been reysedde, attendynge what might
chance, and said openly that men ought not to break yt, and that he would
never consent thereto forsomuche as he knew well, that if they should do yt
without license of the Athenyans, they would not be therewyth contentedde.
And that those which should judge upon them whyder they had done wellle or
evil, should not be of theyme that had been in the camp, and that had
seen the necessities of the army: but they should be othere people, which
would not give faith to that, which the souldyars would say: but sooner to
those, which should accuse theyme and charge theyme by sought or studied
means. And chiefly the most part of those same souldyars which were there
and cried that men ought to depart, when they were returned to Athens, would
say wholly otherwise, to wytt, that they had not been of the opinion for to
depart, but rather that the Dukes had been corrupted for money, wherefore he,
which knew the nature of the Athenians, would not put himself in hazard to
be condemned, as slothful and naughty but he loved much better to endure
the danger of his parsone against the enemies, if need required it. And
besides that, he showed the^ that the ennemys were in much worse estate than
they, for so much as they were at great charge and expenses for to waage huyred
souldyars and also for to enterteigne one so great an army by sea which they
had already susteigned one whole year for to ward, and defend the towns of
their alliance, and also were in great necessities of victuailles and of all
other things, in such sort, that it should be impossible for them to
susteigne longer that charges. For he knew for truth that they had already
spente more than two thowsande talentes and also were yet in great debte, and
that if they failled never so little in payment of the huyred souldiars, they
should be destroyed, for their force was more of estrangers than of their oune
people, which thing was all otherwise among them, wherefore he concluded that
they oughte^ to continue the siege and not to depart from yt, as though they
were most nedy and lacking monney, where as they were much better fournysshed
thereof. Such was the speaking of Nycias, having for right certain the
necessity of the ennemys, chiefly of monney, and also groundynge himself,
upon that, which, they, with whom he had intelligence and confederation in
the town, had required of him, to wytt, that no man should remove, and
trustyng moreover in the army by sea which they than had much more puissant,
than when that he was vainquisshed, before that the renforte or new succors
was arrived. Notwithstanding Demosthenes perseuered still in his opy^ion to
reise the siege and for to depart fromthence into Greece. And although it was
devised not to remove out of the said country without license, yet he was of
opinyon that they should retire to Thapsus or to Catana. Out of which places
they might come for to oueronne and pillage the land of the enemies and well
enterteigne theymeself and also should have the sea at their commandemente for
to be hable to goo and to comme and to fight at their ease when yt should be
requisitt, where as they were constraigned and locked up aswelle by sea as by
land. And for conclusion, it seemed not to him that in any whatsoever manner,
they should tarry longer there, but that they should incontinently depart
without longer tarying Eurymedon agrede to his opinyon. But notwithstanding
that which he made, Nycyas caused the thing to be delayed. And somuche the
more, that it was ymagined that the same Nycyas, who had more knowlaige of
thaffaire, than any of the other: would not have cleued so unto that same
opinion without some great reasone. And by that mean the army remained
there stille. During this, Gylippus and Sicanus did come again to Sarragosse,
to wytt, Sicanus without having been hable to do any thing with the
Agregantyns, for that, that he, being yet at Gela, the party, which held
with the Syracusayns, had been chased away by the other party. But Gylyppus
coming from the cities of Sycille brought a great number of men of war
out of the said country, and also those, which the Peloponesians had sent
ymmediatly after the beginning of the spring time in the barques, which were
descended at Selynu^te, coming out of Lybie, whither they were come to aboorde
in that same voyage at their departure out of Greece. And having been aided
and succored by those of Cyrena, with two galleys, and two good Pilotes and
maroners, were come to the succors of the Euesperites agay^ste the Lybyans,
E^esperite.
who made war against them, and having vainquishedde the said Lybyans were
comme to land, at new Chartage, fromewhence there is a right small space by
sea, unto Sycille, so that in two days and one night, at their departure
fromethence they were come to land, at Selinunte. That same succors being
than arrived, the Syracusayns made theymeself eftsoon ready for to assaille
the enemies aswelle by sea, as by land. On the other side the Athenyans,
seeing the succors that was come into the town, and that their case proceeded
from evil into worse, chiefly by the maladies which increased, more and
more, they repented theymself greatly that they were not sonner dislodged. and
also Nycyas did no more speak so stiflye against it, but only said that the
cause ought to be kept secrett. According unto whose opinion it was caused to
be knowyn through all the army the most secretly that might be, that they
should give order to their case, for to dislodge, when they should hear the
sign of dislodgynge. But in the mean time as they preparedde theymeselfe, a
Clipse of the moon, being at the full, did happene, which thing many of the
Athenyans did take, for an evil pronostication and dissuaded greatly to the
Dukes for to depart. But above all Nycyas, who was greatly geuene to such
fantasies, made a great matter thereof, and said that they should not in anny
manner of the world depart until.xxvii. days after, for such was the
counsaille and advise of a stronomers and dy^inours. and upon this occasion the
enterprise of departnre was brokene of.

How the Syracusains having had an other victory by sea against the
Athenians, they enforced theymselfe for to enclose them within the poorte,
which they did keep. The.x. Chapter.
THe Syracusayns, understanding the determynation of the Athenyans and how^
they would dislodge, were so much the more attentife and diligente for to
let theyme, that they should not depart. For insomuche as they enterprysed
for to reyse up pryuely: yt was good to know that they parceiued themself
the more feoble and weak both by land, and by sea. And moreover the
Syracusains would not suffer, that at their departure fromethence, they should
goo to lodge theymself in any place in Sycille, out of the which they might
do them more euylle, than fromethence, where they were. For this cause they
deliberated to constrayne them to fight by sea ymmediatly as they should see
their advantage, and so embarked there men and causedde them to tarry there
certene days. The day being come, which semedde unto them propice and
mete, one part of the men of war yssuedde fourth furste against the walls
of the Athenyans, and certain of the warryours aswelle footmen as horsemen of
the Athenenyans issued fourth by some of the poortes to mete them, although
that they were in a small number, by occasion whereof they were right sone
repoulsed, and a certene number of the said footmen and.lxx horsemen or
theraboutes of the Athenyans were taken and some of the other, and that done
the Syracusayns retired. The day followyng, they issued fourth against them by
sea with.lxxvii. shyps, and came also by land against the said walls. On the
other side the Athenyans issued by sea, with.lxxxvi. shyps in battle, whereof
Eurymedon had the right poyncte, Eurymedon.
who coming to the conflict, went about to enuirone and compass in the shyps
of the Syracusayns, and that to do, he did put his poynct at large toward the
land. By mean whereof those Syracusayns had better leisure for to charge upon
the Athenyans shyps that remained in the myddest naked and destitute of the
aid of the said Eurymedone, and so did put them to flight after the aryualle,
and afterward did come to give charge upon the ship of the said Eurymedon,
which was inclosedde in a corner of the port in the most depthe, and so
did sink it with the said Eurimedon and with all the other that were wythi^
it, and that done, did give the chase unto all the other ships and followed
them even unto the land. Gylippus, seeing which thing, and that the ships
of thennemyes were already passedde their enclosure with paales which they
had made in the sea, and also the place, where he had his army at the sea
side, for to defeate^ and destroy those, that would descend to land, and to
the end that the Syracusayns might more easily take the ships of the
enemies, when the sayedde Syracusains should parceyue that the land was
kept for their friends, he came with one part of his men unto the mouth of
the poorte for to aid the Syracusayns, but the Tyrsenyens, who had by fortune
than the keeping and ward of that same quarter for the Athenyans came to mete
them) and at the beginning, repoulsed and did put the foremost to flight, and
chased them unto a marreys that is called Lysimelia) neuerthelas the other
part of the said Syracusains and of their allies did ^one after come for to
succor those there. On the other side the Athenyans also issued out of their
ca^pe with great strength as well for to succor their said people, as also for
to save their ships, and there was a great battaille: but finally the
Athenyans had the victory and did slay a great number of the other. And also
saved one great part of their ships, nothwithdinge there were.xviii. of
them takene, and they that were with them, slain. And moreover myndinge to
burn the rest, they did fylle an old Barque with dry wood, and with the
other matter mete to fire, afterward they set it in way toward the said
ships, having a good wind, which did drive the Barque into that same
part. But the Athenyans, seeing that danger, used such diligence as well to
quench the fire, as to keep of the said Barque, that they eskaped the same
danger. For that same battalle, both parties raised up a Trophee, to wytt the
Syracusains, for the taking of the ships, which they had recouered^ and
also for the men, which they at the beginning had taken and slain before the
Athenyans walls and the Athenyans for that, that the Thyrsenians had repoulsed
the formoste fotemen into the marreys, and afterward they and the other of
the Athenyans party, had repoulsed the whole bend of the Syracusains, when
they had the victory by sea. The Athenyans parceyuinge the Syracusains, who at
beginning were all afraid of the succors, that Demosthenes had brought, to
have had one so great victory over them, were all thereof astonyed, and
dasshed out of couraige: fors^muche chiefly as it ther^n was chansed whole
contrary to that, which they thought, namely to be vaynquished in the sea by
a lesser number of ships than they had: and than they were yet more angry,
and all the Athenians repentedde themself, that were in that same army, to
have enterprysed war against the Syracusains, who governed by the
cominaltie, and in that same sort, as they of Athenes, and also were puissante
as well of ships, as of footmen and horsemen. Whereby those same Athenyans
could not hope to have therein any party of those that were wtin, another
through hatred of the common government secretly with them, nor also for to
vainquish them easily, being as well provided with all preparations of war, as
they, and by thies reasons they were not only the more angry, but also in
great sorrow for their affayre, and somuche the more they lost their
courayge, that they parceyued themself to have been vainquished in that
party, whereof they doubted least: to wytt^ by sea. On the other side the
Syracusains fourthwyth after the victory, compassynge about the great port,
wherein the Athenyans ships were, determynedde for to shut up the mouth of
the entringe, in such sort, that the same Athenyans should no more issue
fourth, without being parceyued: for they studied no more to save themself,
but for to empesche that the enemies should not save theirself, considering,
as the trou^he was, that at that present they had the better: and that if
they might vaynquishe as well by sea as by land, they should acquire and
obteigne a great glory and renome in all Greece: which should be in part
delivered out of the seruytude and bondage of the seruytude and bondage of the
said Athenyans: and partlye from fear to tomble into yt: for having had
such a foil or overthrow, they should neuere after be hable for to susteigne
war against the Peloponesyans: whereby those self Syracusayns having been
cause thereof, they should be had in great admyration, as well to the living,
as to those that should come after. And not for this reason only, it seemed
unto theyme to be a laudable thing to make their strength for the intentes
and ends, as is abouesayde, but also for this, that in that doing they should
not only vaynquishe the Athenyans: but rather many other their allies, and
also the vyctorie should not sarue for them only, but for them also, which
had been aydynge unto them. Of whom, by occasyon thereof, they should be
fromthensforwardes Dukes with the Lacedemonyans and the Corinthyans: having
putt their city, into so great dangier, and showed so great puissance by
sea. For many other Cities and nations did come togiders for to assault and
defend that same city. The one to be participant of the prays and buttes,
not of that same City only, but of all the Isle of Sycille: The other for to
keep and consarue their goods and estates. And they that meddled not therein for
the one nor the other party, did yt more for some fantasy, or for some
parentage, which they had of the one or with the other, than having regard
aither to the proffitt or to the necessytie, either else to that, which might
chance. And for to know parfaictly or distinctly^ what they were, which
entermedled and met togyders in this war, as well of the one side as of the
other, they were thies, that follow.

The Cytyes and people which entermedled, met, or took part togiders in the
war of Sycille, as well on the one one side, as of the other. The.xi. Chapter.
TThe Athenyans, which be Ionyans, having enterprised the war against the
Syracusayns, who be Doriens, had with them, those of their own speech, and
that lived in the sel^ laws, to wytt, the Lemnyens^ the Egynetes, to wytt,
those, that than inhabyted in the city of Egyne, the Estiens, which held the
city of Estie in the country of Eubea, and many other their allies, the one
lyuinge in liberty, and the other trybutaires and captyues: to wytt, of the
subjects and trybutairies of the said country of Eubea, the Eretriens, the
Chalcides, the Styriens and the Caristiens, and of the Islandes, the Cyens, the
Andryens and the Teyens. And of the countreye of Iome, the Mylesiens, the
Samyens and the Chiens, the which Chiens were not subject to the tribute of
monney another unto other charge, but only for to fournishe ships: and all the
above said were in a manner Ioniens and of the faction or parttakers with the
Athenyans, except the Caristians, which were nombred among the Dryopes. And yet
neuerthelas for that, that they were subjects of the Athenians, they were
constrained to come to this war against the Doryans. And besides this, the
Eolians did come, among whom the Metymniens were not trybutairies, but only
bounden to deliver ships, but the Tenediens and the Aeniens were trybutairies.
And those here, although that they were Eoltens as the Beotiens, and that they
had been founded or set up by the^, were neuerthelas constrained to come to ye
same war against ye Dorie^s. And moreover there came thider the Elyens,
amongst whom the Methymnie^s were not trybutairies, but only bounden for to
deliver ships, but ye Tenediens and the Athenye^s were trybutaires. And those
same, although that they were Eoliens, as the Beotie^s, and that they had been
by the^ founded or set up, neuerthelas they were constrained in that same war
to be against the^ and against the Syracusains. There was none other of the
Beotians, resarued the Plateans, for the deadly enmytie, which they had
against them, by cause of the ini^ries, which they had done to them. There
came thider also the Rhodyans and the Cytheryens, which both were Doriens,
although that the same Cytheriens had been founded by the Lacedemonia^s, and
neuerthelas did give aid to ye Athenyens against the Lacedaemonians, yt were with
Gilippus. And likewise y^ Rhodiens, which were Doriens, as descended of ye
Argiues, were against ye Siracusains, although yt they were also Doriens, and
against the Geliens, which were their Burgeoses, for that, yt they took party
with the Siracusains, but both ye one and the other did it by force. And besides
those, of the Islandes, that be about Peloponese, were on that side the
zephalenyans and the zacinthiens: who, although that they were frank, were
neuerthelas for that, that they were Islanders, constrained to hold with the
Athenyans, though that the said Corcyriens were not only Doryens: but that,
which more is, they were Corynthiens, and neuerthelas were against the
Syracusains of their nation, and Doryens, as they, and against the
Corynthians, their founders, as well for thobligation or bond, which they
had with the Athenyans, as also for ha^red, which they had against the
said Corynthians. And likewise there were those of Naupacte and of Pylus, who
named theymselfe, Messenyens, for that, that the said places be holden and
possessed by the Athenyans, and likewise the bannisshed men of Megare, although
that they were in small number, who were enemies of the other Megarens, that
be called Selynuntyns, by inconuenyences and aduersytie of fortune. All the
othere, that came together in this same war with the Athenyans, except the
above named^ came thider more with their good will than by constraincte, for the
Argiues did it not somuche for them by virtue of their alliance, which in
nothing extended thereunto, as for the ennemytie, which they had against
the Lacedemonyans. And likewise the othere Doryens that made war with the
Athenyans, against the Syracusains, which be also Doriens, did it more for
their present singular proffytt, than for any other cause. As touching the
other, that were Ionyans, they did it for the ancient enmytie, which they had
against the Doryens, as be the Mantyniens and Arcadyans, which came for wages.
And neuerthelas those of the said country of Arcadie, that were allied, with
the Corynthians, did hold those, that were with the Athenyans, for ennemys,
and likewise those of Creto and of Ethosie, of whom there was of both sides,
all huyrlinges, in such sort that it chanced that the Cretes, that had
builded the City fo Gela with the Rhodyens, at that time were not for the
Gelyens, but being waged by their enemies, were against them. Some Acarnanyens
also, as well for hope of gaynes, as also for the amytie, which they had with
Demosthenes, and for the affection that they had with the Athenyans, took wages
of them. And thies be they, that pursued the party of the Athenyans in that
same war out of the country of Greece until the goulphe of Ionu^. As
touching the Italians, thider came the Thuriens and the Metapontins, who were
comme into such necessity by their domestical dissentio^s, that they went
to sarue in that war for to get wages, unto whatsoever part they were
required. Of the Syciliens there were Naxiens and the Cataniens. And of
Barbarous or estraungers, the Egestains, who had been cause of that war, and
many othere, that inhabyted in Sycille. And of those, which inhabited without
Sycille, some of the Tyrrhenyens for that, that they were enemies of the
Syracusains. For whose aid on the contrary part were furste the Camerins nygh
neighbors, and the Gelyans, which were further distante. As touching the
Agrigentins that were their next neighbors they took the contrary part.
After those same there were Selynuntyns, and all those, that keep themself in
the quarter of Sycille, which is foranempste Lybia. And of those that be in the
quarter of Thyrrenie, there were the Imeriens. Irenei
who only in that same quarter be of the nation of Greece, also there came none
other people out of the said quarter to the aid of the Syracusains: but out of
the whoole Islande did come all the Doryens, that were in their liberty, and
of Barbarours or estrangers, all those that had not takene part with the
Athenyans. As touching the Greeks, that were without the Islande, the
Lacedemonyans sent thider for Capytayne a Cytezeine in their city of Sparte,
with a bend of Esclaues and of Lybertyns, that had been set out of bondage
into liberty. The Corinthiens sent unto them ships and men of war which
thing none of the other did. For the Leucadyens specially that were their
allies and parents sent thider but men, and likewise the Ambracyens. Of the
Ambracians there came those, which the Corinthians soulded or wages, and the
Sycionyens, which were constrained to send thider. And of those, that be without
Peloponese, the Beotia^s did come thider. Besides the which strange nations,
and that came to their succors from without or outwardes parts, the cities of
Sycille sent thider a great number of people of all sorts, and great
quantity of ships, of harnes, of victua^ls and of all other necessaries for
war. But in a manner of speaking, the Syracusains fournished more people than
all the rest, as well for the greatness and opulentie of the City, as also for
the danger, wherein it was. Such was the succors that came to the aid of
both the parties, which were there when the battaille, whereof we have above
spoken, was made: and afterward, there did none other come thider from any
other place. The Syracusains and their allies, being now glorious and
fyerce, for the victory, which they had had: it seemed unto them that it
should be their great honnour to destroy all that same army of the
Athenyans, which was so great, and to keep them from saving themself both by
sea and by land, and so they did fourthwyth enclose the mouth of the great
poarte, which conteygned about eight stades, with galleys, with Barques, and
with all other sorts of ships, which they did put into order by their
ancres, and fournyshed them with all things that was necessary for to fight,
if that the Athenyans would have issued fourth by force, and they provided for
all things largely and dyligently.

How the Athenyans were eftsoon vainquished in a battaille by sea, by the
Siracusains and their allies, so that they could not save themself by sea.
The.xii. Chapter.
THe Athenyans, perceiving themself enclosed by the Syracusains, and
understanding the rest of their enterprise: they thought, that it was veraye
needful to consul^e and deuyse vpone that, which they should have to do. And
so the Dukes assembled all ye capytains, patrons and other conductors or
loadesmen of their ships, as well for to deuyse thereupon, as also upon the
prouysyon of victuaills, whereof they were at that present in great
necessity, for that, that having determined to depart fromthence, they had
commanded those of Catana, that they should send them no more. And also they
had no hope to recover any more thereof in any other place: except that they
might defeat the army of the enemies by sea. For this cause they determined
to habandone and forsake the furste wall, which they had made in ye most
height against the city, and for to wythdrawe themself, as nighe as they
could from without the poarte and there to enclose and forte^ie themself as
strongly, and closely as they might: so that they might have sufficient space
for to wtdrawe their vtensiles and their sick people, and fournish the same with
men for to ward it, and to putt all the other souldears, which they had, into
their ships, as well good as badde, togiders with all their baguage, to the
intent for to fight incontynently: and if they had the victory to saille
fromthence straight unto Catana: and if they were vainquishedde in the Combat
by sea, to burn all their ships, and to depart fromthence by land to the
next place of friends that they could find, were it of Greeks or estraungers.
The which things being so determined, were incontyne^tly executed and put in
ure. For fourthwith they forsook the furste walls that were next the City,
and descended toward the poarte: and caused to embarque all their people of
whatsoever sort that they were suffycient and hable for to fight: which were
in all, and of sorts a houndred and ten ships, within the which, besides
the men of arms, and the Archers or casters of darts, was wythdraw in all
that they could gathere together, whereof they might have need. After that all
this was done, Nycias seeing his warryours astonyed and discouraiged, for that,
that contrary to their opinion, and whooly contrary to that which had always
chanced unto them before time, they had been vainquished by sea, and that
without having provision of victuaills were constrained to take the hazarte
against all the accustomed order, he caused them all to assemble and did speak
unto them in this manner^

The speakinge and exhortation of Nycias to his souldyars.
Lords Athenyans, and you other our allies, that be here, This battaille,
that we must presently make, is common to us all, for that, that every man
laboreth here for the wealth of himself, and of his country, like as also our
ennemys do. For if we have the vyctorie in this battaille, that we must make
by sea, we may return fromthence every one into his countreye: wherefore we
ought to goo unto yt joyfully, and not to be astonyed and dyscouraiged, another
do, as men do that have no experyence: who when they been vainquished in one
battaille, have no more hope to ouercomme: but rather think that it shall
always so chance unto them. But you, that be here Athenyans, men experymented
in so many wars, and also you other our allies and perpetual friends: ought
to consider that the yssues and chances of wars, be uncertain, and to think
that the fortune may as well comme in our favor, as she has been of the other.
And upon this hope, trustinge in the promise of so great number of people, as
you be here, to prepare yourselfe to render unto thennemys that, which they
have done to you in their former battaille: and so far as touches us your
capytains and heddes, be ye assured and certain that we omytt not to do any
thing, that may be necessary or conuenyent for the affayre, but rather having
regard to the qualytie of the poarte, which is straicte, whereby at the other
time, the disorder chanced unto us, and also to the castelles and tables of
their ships, wherewyth they did great euilles unto us, we have provided for
all with the patrons and capytayns of the ships, according to the opyrtunytie
of the time, the best, that has been possible. And also we have put within
our ships a multitude of Archers and slyngers of darts, much more great than
we should have done if we should have fought at large in the sea: for that,
that to keep and observe the discipline and order of the sea. yt is much
contrary to ouercharge the ships with people: but that same shall be here
proffitable for us, forsomuche as we shall fight in our ships as though that
we were on land. And also we have devised, that it is nedeful (for that, that
we have not had time to make again and tacle our ships anewe, for to resist
the thickenes of the poyncts of theirs, and of the pieces of tymbe, that come
fourth of theirs: which was the pryncypall cause of our overthrow) to have
graspes of yrone, if we may fynishe them, for to fasten and wythholde theyme
when they shall comme to schocke upon us, to the intent that they shall not
retire. For we be brought unto this, that it is conuenyent for us to fight with
our ships, as if that we were in the main land. Wherefore it is expedient
that we do not disseuer ourselves from the ships of our ennemys when we
shall be ones assembled, and also that we suffer not them to depart from ours,
considered specially that all the land is our enemy, resarued that same
little part nigh unto the poarte, which we have garnyshed with our people. The
which things having in memory, ye ought to fight so long as you shall
have aither force or strength, and not to suffer youreselfe to be repoulsed to
the land. And after that you shall have accroched any ship, determyne not
to suffer yt to eskape until you have destroyed all the warryours within yt.
And I exhort you all so to do, not only the maronners: but also the men of
arms, and somuche the more, that this is the work rather of those that have
for to fight in the ships, than of those, that must conducte and govern
them: and for you it is convenient to vainquishe at this instante, like as ye
have done many other times, fayghtinge on land. And as touching you
maronners, I pray and require you, that ye be not faynte hearted another
discourayged for the loss, which you have made at the other battaille, seeing
that you have greater preparation for war in ships, than you at that time
had: and much greater number of people, but rather be myndefull to go
couraygyously to the busynes, and to repute yourselues worthy for to conserve
your honor. And those among you that be holden for Athenyans by the talk of
the language, and also for the self form of lyuinge, though that ye be not
of them, and by that mean have been in great reputac^on in all Greece, and
besides that, partakers of our empire every one in his parsone, in somuche as
was expedyent for his proffitt, to wytt, for to have obeyssance of your
subjects, and for to be in suertie of your neighbors: ye ought now to take
good head, not to habandone and forsake at this stroke our empire and
seygnyorye, whereof you only be parttakers and compaygnyons, and to contempne
those, whom you have so oftymes vaynquished, to wit, the Corynthians and the
Syracusayns. None of whom have ever had anny audacytie for to resist us, so
long as our army by sea was in his vigeur and force, and to show them, that
your hardynes and science of saillinge, is greater in your parsons (although
you be diseased, and that you have been vaynquished) than in theirs, that be
hoole, and also have had the victory. And for those, among you, that be
Athenyans, I bring to remembrance that we have another more here in our
arce^all or ha^on, nor other ships like to thies, which we have here, another
other warryours on land: but that small number, which we have left there
with our baguages. wherefore if we have not the victory, our enemies will go
incontynently against them, who shall not be hable for to defend both
against those, that shall descend out of the ships of the ennemys, and against
the other, that shall come from of the land. And by that mean ye shall come
partly into the power of the Syracusains, against whom ye know well for what
intent ye be come, and partly of the Lacedemonyans, which be with them.
Wherefore being brought to such terms or issue that you must chose aither
to vainquishe, or else to come to this extremytie, I pray you, that if ever
in times passed you have showed your virtue and hardynes, be wyllyng to
parforce yourself to show it now, and to have remembrance all togiders, and
every one for himself, that here is and lies all the army by sea, all the
ships, all the force of men: and for effect all the city, all the empyer:
and fynallye, all the great renomme of the Athenyans. For to warrante and
defend all the which things, if there be any of you, that excedeth and
surmounteth the other, be he of any industry or experyence, or of hardynes, he
shall never show himself in better time, than in this journey, nor more unto
the need of himself and of othere. After that Nycias had thus spoken, he caused
his people incontynently to mou^te into their ships, whereof Gylippus and the
Syracusains were suffycyently aduertysedde for that, that they perceived theyme
with the eye to prepare for to fight: and were aduysedde of the graspes of
yronne, that they did putt into their ships. Wherefore they provided
themself of remedies, as well against that, as also against all the other
preparations of the ennemys. For they covered the former part, and the most
part of their deckes with Copper, to the end that the graspes should not fasten
in them, but rather should slip and slide above of the copper. And after that
all their case was putt in order, Gylippus and the other capytains exhorted
their souldyars or warryours with thies or like words.

The exhortation of Gylippus and of the Syracusayns to their men at arms.
You know, Lords Syracusains, and you other our friends and allies, that
we have hy^herto done in this war, as men of honesty, and that yt is
needful at this present to do yet greater things. For if that had not been,
you should not have been so ready to have employedde youreselfe therein.
Neuerthelas lest there be anny that understands not fullye the affayre, I
wolle well declare yt unto him. The Athenyans came from the beginning hither
to the intent to subdewe Sycille furste, if they might, afterward
Peloponese, and consequentlye the remanaunte of Greece. Who, albeit that they
had a great and puissant Empire, and that they had been moore puissante
than all the othere Greeks that had been before thies, which presentlye be:
yet you have many times vainquishedde them by sea, which was whooly in their
power: which thing no man ever did, and yet at this present you shall
vaynquishe them, as it is fullye apparante. For when any people do find
theymselfe vainquished in the thing, wherein they perswadedde themself to
excede the othere, they loose greatelye their reputatyon. And
fromthensforwardes there opynion and hope is thereby lesser in themself, than if
they had not from the beginning had such presumption and confidence. And
perceiving themself depryued against their opinion of the glory, which they
attrybuted to themself, the heart coueteth it yet more than the force, like as
it is to be bileued that it is now chanced to the Athenyans. And by the
contrary, you that have had the hardynes to resist them by sea, although that
you had not great practyse therein, be become more hardy for the opinion,
which you have conceived through your prowess. For this, that you
vaynquished them, that were reputed ye most puissant and most exercysed
therein, whereby you ought to have double hope, which shall proffytt you
greatly. For they that go to assaill in great hoape, come unto yt much more
joyfully. And if our enemies have learned of us to make the apparaylle and
preparation of their ships, as we had made ours at the other battaylle, the
same ought not to aba^^he us. For we be therein already accustomed: and so
they shall not find us n^^e to seek in the thing that they shall do. And
somuche as they shall put greater number of people in the Castelles and
ouerlopps of their shypps, they shall be the more oppressed, as in a battle by
land. And also the Acarnanie^s and the other archers or darte casters shall not
know how to aid them with their darts and shot, being all bestowed and by that
mean there thronged: and the great number shall make their ships
unprofitable and letting the one the other, shall put themself into disorder.
And it may help them but smally that they have greater number of ships than
we, another you ought for that to be estonyed. For how much that they have
greater number thereof, they may somuche the less understand that, which the
heddes and capytains do comau^de them. And on the other part the engynes and
ar^i^icialles, which we have prepared against them, shall help us well. And
albeit that we think well that you know suffyciently by that you have
understood of their affayre, in what estate they be, yet neuerthelas we wol
aduertyse you, that they be nighe in despair, as well for the myschances that
be cha^nced unto them, as for the necessity, wherein ye parceyue them, in such
sort, that they trust not somuche to their preparation, as to this, which is
their only refuge^ to wy^t, to the temerytie of fortune: and they be
determined, ayther to pass by force through the mids of our ships, and by
that mean to get into the depth of the sea, or well if they faille thereof, to
cast themself a shoore, and to take their way by land: as people, which be
in such estate, that force constrayneth them to chose of two parties, that be
nothing woorthe, the lesser evil. Against thies people than so confused, and
that fight against fortune, who has already declaredde herself against them,
it is conuenyent to fight with all ernestye, as their mortell enemies: and to
determyne to do two things all at one instante, to wytt, by assuring your
estate to revenge you of your ennemys, that be comme to invade us: and to
discharge our maletalent or wrath upon them, and fourth with to repoulse our
ennemys, which be two things, that have been accustomed to be pleasant to all
people. And that those here be our mortal enemies, there is not one of you,
that understands yt not. For they be come hider for to bring us into
seruytude, and if they had ouercomed they would have used both toward us all
cruelty, and also toward our wives and children all villeny, and also would
have replenished our city with all deformytie and confusyon. For which reasons
none of us ought to have pytie of them, notherrepute, that this should be our
proffit to suffer them to depart without putting ourselves into danger: for
also happily if they have the victory ^hey will also depart fromhence, with
out that therein may be any danger for us. But if we do that, which we ought and
should be willing to do, to wit, that we chastyse them, and that we set all
Greece again in liberty, yea more greatly than it has been: truly we shall
have made a glorious co^bate: and also it happens not oftene, that one may
have so faier, nor honnest occasion to put himself in danger of a battaille,
to wytt, that in having the worse, a man should not lose but little, and in
having the better, should gain much. Gylippus and the other Dukes Syracusains
having exhorted their people with such or like speakynges caused them to be
embarked after that they did parceue that the Athenyans had embarked theirs.
But Nycias, which was astonished of the danger, wherein he parceyued the affair,
which was drawinge very nyghe, and knowinge what inconveniences had
accustomed to chance in so crue^l battails, another held any thing for
sufficiently and well provided on his side, nor it seemed to him that he had
suffyciently spoken unto his men. So he eftsoon caused to be called the
patrons and capytains of the ships every one a part, namynge them
honnorably, as well by their names, as by their surnames, and also adding the
names of their fathers, and so, as he knew that every of them had the bruyt
of any honnorable thing, and bringinge him in remembrance thereof, prayed him
not to lose his good renome in the same journey. And those, whose ancestors
had done any great thing, that they should not extin^uishe nor abolish the
honor that they had acquired, by virtue of their said aunceters, bringinge
moreover to their remembrance the liberty of their country, which was the
frankest that was known, and where every one might live at his will without
being subject to the commandment of any parson: and many other things,
which in such case have been accustomed to be spoken by men carried here and
there, without having regard to speak the thing that men might judge to be
autentique and profounde, but as people estonyed do speak with great exclamation
that, which seems to sarue in their case, not remembering therein the danger of
their wives, of their children, of their temples, and such other things, as
people of virtue have accustomed to speak. And after that he had spoken all
those words, the which he always reputed more necessary than suffycient, he
went with them and led the footmen to the shore of the sea: and so caused
them to keep the best order that he could, for to give couraige to those,
that were within the ships. And Demosthenes, Menander and Eurymedon that were
chiefest of the army by sea, made with their ships straight to the mouth of
the poarte: the which the ennemys had already garnished and possessed, to the
intent to break the order of the said ennemys, and for to skatter their
ships for to get into ye depth of the sea. But on the other side, the
Syracusains and their allies came in a manner with a like number of ships,
partly against the mouth of the said poarte, and partly about the same, for
to empesche them on all sides, having moreover their footmen in the shoore of
the sea for to succor them to whatsoever part their said ships should
come to land. Now Sicanus and Agatharcus, which kept the two poinctes,
were Capytayns of the army of the Syracusains, to wytt, of the right and the
left, and in the myddest were Pythen and the Corinthyans. The Athenyans than
as they came to the mouth of the poarte, at the furst arryuall repoulsed the
ships, which were there ioygned togiders: for to defend them not to issue,
and parforced themself to break their lyens and chains, wherwyth they were
fastened togiders. But the Syracusains and their allies came on all sides to
russhe upon them, not in the mouth of the poarte only, but euene through
within the same. And so the combat was most cruel and moore dangerous, than
annye of the othere former had been: and men did hear the cries of the
chiefest and capytains, that commanded the maronners to sail with great
strength. And every one on his side enforced himself to show his art and his
industrye, and likewise the men of war, that were in the castells and upon
the deckes of the ships, parforced themself to do their endeavor, as well as
the maronners, and for to keep well and defend every one the place, that was
appoyncted to him. But forsomuche as the combat or battaille was made in a
veraye strayghte and narrow place, for that, that there was both of the one
side and of the othere few lesser than two houndred ships, which fought
togiders all within the port or in the mouth thereof, they could not oftene
come with great strength o^ oars, the one to the other. For none had mean
to retire nor to recharge themself, but rather did myngle the one ship with
the other, so as they encountered, were it in flyinge or in assaulting. And as
oftenne as the one ship assaultedde the othere, those, that were in the
Castelles and planchers of the same, did cast plenty of darts, shot and
stoanes the one against the othere: but as they ioygned themself togyders,
they came to fight hand to hand, and enforcedde themself to enter the one
into the ships of the othere, which thing chancedde in many of them, for that
the place was narrow: and in some places there were two against one through
constraynct, and the governors and patrones studied the one to war upon
those of thennemys, and the other to defend theirs, and that not by courses or
tourns one after the other, but all at one istant and on all sides, whereby the
bruytt was so great and maruaillous, that it was great horror and fear unto
those, which did fight, and also they could not understand, the one the
other, although that the Chief and Capytaynes of the one side and of the
othere made exhortations to their people, as well for silence, as also for the
instructione of the sea and for the great ardor and desire that every one
had for to vaynquishe. For the Athenyans cryedde to their men, that they
should break the order and the bands of the ships that stoppedde the issue
of the poarte, and if that ever they had had virtue or couraige, they should
show yt at the same hour, if they had care for their proper wealth and to
return into their country. And the Syracusains, and their allies declaredde
unto theirs, that it was the hour for to show their virtue for to defend
that the enemies should not save theymselfe and for to consarue and increase
the honnoure and glory of their nation. And the Capytaynes themself when
they parceyued anny to goo slackelye, or those that were within, not to do
their endeavor: they called the patrones by their names, and demanded, to
wytt, the Athenyans, whider that it seemed unto them that the land, which was
the most ennemy that they had in the world, were more suer, than the sea,
which they might get and purchase within a short time. And the Syracusains,
whider that they would fly before those, that did not fight, but only for to
fly away the^self, in whatsoever manner that it were. In the mean time, that
this combat or battaille was made by sea, those, that were on land at the
shoore of the sea, were in great and diverse thoughts and fantasies. For the
Syracusains parceyued that it was questyon of gettinge much more great
honnour, than they thought on from the beginning. And the Athenyans feared,
lest it should yet chance unto them woorser, than to them that were in the
sea, for that, that all their baguages were in the ships, which they feared
maruayllously to lose, and how much the more the combat or battle was
variable and the victory uncertain, they were constrained to have diverse
opynyons, and to make diverse countenances or gestures. For being so nygh, that
they might see manyfestly: those, that did see in any poinct their people, that
had the better, lifted up their hands to heauon, and prayed the gods with a
loud voice, that they woolde not defraude nor frustrate them to the victory.
And to the contrary, those, that did see theirs to be vaynquished, did weep
with complayncte and pytuous cries. And when the combat was doubtful and
sharp, so that one could not judge, who should have the woorste thereof, they
made gestures and signs with the body such as their desire imported, as
though that, helped their men, for fear that they had, least they should
lose: and for effect they did almost such acts with their bodies, as if
they themself had foughten, and they were in the self sorrow, as they that did
fight. Also they perceived in that same conflict many, that for a small
occasyon saved the^self, where they were discomforted. And specially the
Athenyans, being on land, so long as their men did fight hand to hand in
the sea, perceived not only the combat or faightinge, but forsomuche as they
were nighe, they heard distinctlye, the complainctes, lamentations and
clamors, as well of those that vaynquishedde as of them, that were overcome: and
all other like things that men might see and hear in a right sharp conflicte
of two puissant hoastes. And those, that were in the ships had and suffered
beside the combat, the like sorrow and trauaille, Finally after that the
storm had long endured, the Syracusains and their allies did put the
Athenyans to flight, and as they did see them turn the back, with great
cries, and with great force they chased them unto the land. And those of the
Athenyans that might save and cast themself on land, with the most dyligence
that they could, they retired into their camp. And likewise those, that were
on land, saying that there was no more hope, with great cries, wepinges and
lamentations they ronned all at one instant, some to the ships, for to save
them, the other, to the walls, which they yet did keep, the other and the
more part was in doubt of their life, and regarded on all sides, how and
where they might save themself. And shortly the fear and the fraye was so
great at that same instant, that never before that time, they had had the
like. And the Athenyans did suffer and receue woorthely, that, which they had
caused the Lacedemonyans to suffer and receue at Pylus: where, after that they
had vainquished the army by sea of the same Lacedemonyans, they destroyed
them. And as the Lacedemonyans did than enter into the Islande, even so the
Athenyans retyredde at this time to land, without having always any hope for
to save themself, except that it were by some case or mean unthought on.

How the Athenyans and their allies after the overthrow departed from their
camp for to go fromthence by land, into the lands and cities of Sycille,
that took their part. The.xiii. Chapter.
AFter this so sharp and cruel a battaille, wherein there was great number
of ships takene and destroyed, and of men slain: The Syracusains and other
their allies having the vyctorie, recovered the shippwrackes and the dead
bodies, and being retournedde into the town, they did reyse up their trophee.
As concerning the Athenyans, they were so astonished of the euilles that they
had seen, and did see before their eyes, that they had no mind for to
require the shippwrackes and dead bodies, but only studied how they might
incontynently save the^self that present night, whereby they were in diverse
opynyons. For Demosthenes was of advise that they should embarque themself in
the rest of the ships, which were left them, and that they should at the
break of the day eskape through the self poarte if they might. For they had
yet greater number of ships, than the ennemys, to wytt, aboutes.lx. where the
enemies had but fyftie. To the which counsaille and advise, Nycias agrede.
But when they would have caused the people to be embarked, the maronners
refused yt, for the fear, which they yet had of the combat, wherein they had
been vaynquished, and yt seemed not to them that they could any more have
better, wherefore they were forced to change opinion, and all with one accord
determined to save theymselfe by land. Hermocrates the Syracusayne doubted
greatly the same: Hermocrates.
and therefore consyderyng that yt should be a dangerous thing, if one such an
host did retire and ioygnedde togider again in any part on land, whereby
they might begin a new war: he went unto the officers of the town and
said to them, that there ought to be had good regard that same night, unto
the departure of the ennemys: declaring unto them by many reasons, the dangers,
which might thereby happene. And that it seemed to him that all the men that were
in armure in the town, aswelle of the country, as strangers should issue
fourth and go to get the passages, by which the said Athenyans might save
themself. And of that same opinion were the othere, knowinge that he did say
the truth: but they considered that the compaignyons, which had fought all
the day, were trauaylledde and desired rest and therefore would not wyllingly
obey unto that, which should be commaundedde them touching the same, and
somuche the less as the morrow followyng was the feast of Hercules, in the
which were prepared great sacryfices for to render unto him thanks for the
same so great a victory: which doing many, according to the custom, were
minded to rejoice and refreshe themself by eatinge and drynkinge: wherefore,
any other thing should have been moore easy to persuade them, than to issue
fourth that same day in armure, for ye which reasons, they agrede not to the
opinion of Hermocrates: who, saying that he could not bring them unto it, and
considering that the enemies that same night by retyrynge, might get the
passages of the mountaigns, which were strong and difficille, devised one
such a sutteltie. For he sent some of his compaignyons horsemen very nighe
unto the camp of the Athenyans, so that they might well hear them and
faygninge to be of those of the town that affectioned the Athenyans (whereof
there were many that certefied news to Nycias) and that they were come thider
for to do it, said that it was to be signefied unto him, that he should not
remove for that night. For the Syracusayns, had garnished the passages so, that
in the night there should be danger therein for the disorder of his men^ but the
day being come, marchinge in battaille and in good order, they might more
easily get the same passages. Those, which had heard thies words, sent them
to the Dukes and capytayns of the camp. who, not thinkinge that there had been
any deceit therein, determined for to soiourne there that same night, and also
the morrow followynge. So they did it to be knowin to all the warryors, that
they should ordeyn and make ready all their case for to depart within two
days, without carrying any thing but only that, which should be necessary for them
for the usage of their parsonnes. During this time Gylippus, and the
Siracusains sent to fournishe the passages, by the which they thought, that
the said Athenyans should pass. And specially at the passage of the ryuers,
they set good garnysons, and also likewise in the other straight or narrow
places. On the other side, those of the town issued fourth into the port, and
recovered the ships of the Athenians, whereof they burned some: which thing
those same Athenians had before determined to do and of the other, every man
did take, what he woolde and wi^hdiewe them to land without this any parson did
speak against him. After that, Nycias and Demosthenes, having ordained their
case, as they did think good, departed fromthence the fourth day after the
battaill, which was a thing right grievous and right heavy to them all, not only
for this, that they had lost all their ships, and that from a great hope, which
they had had in ye beginning for to subdue that same cu^trey, they were brought
into a great danger, as well of themself as of their city: but also for this,
that it was an hard and miserable spectacle or sight to forsake their camp
and their baguages, whereby their hearts and all their spirits were ouerco^me and
adnichillated, and thought made the^ right heavy and astonyed. And on the other
part their co^paignions being dead, and remaining in the feide without buryal,
when they did se any of the^, that brought them horror, sorrow and fear: but
they had yet more compassion of the hurt, lamed and of ye sick men, which
they let, thinking that they were moore unhappy, than those that were dead.
Also the poor and miserable, perceyuinge the other to depart, did weep and
cry, prayinge their compaignions by their names, that they would carye them
awaye^ and when they did see any of their parents, domestical or special
friends, they followedde and kept theyme back the most that they might.
And when they could not follow theyme furthere they cryedde and wept,
blaiming and cursynge them. So that all the hoaste was full of sighings and
tears, whereby the departure was greatly, and much retarded. Although that
considering the great euylles, which were chanced unto them, and that they
feared to come unto theyme, did putt theyme into great sorrow and care, and
much more yet than they made semblante for. And besides this that they were
all sorrowful and afraid, they were moreover angry, the one against the
othere. And in a total some they were all as people, that fled out of a
right great city, which had been taken by force, for they were all togider
when they departed, aboutes, Foortye thousand, without speaking of maroners
and of the other, who, caryedde every man that, which he might. The men of arms
aswelle on foot, as on horse, carried every man the victuailles under their
harnnes (which was a thing, that they had not accustomed, the one for fear
that they could not recover it, and thoder for fault of varlettes and
esklaues, for the most part of them were fled to the enemies, partly already
before that time, but the most part after that same overthrow. And also the
victuailles which they tarried were not suffyciente for their necessity, for
that, that it well nyghe failled them in the camp. And although that in other
places, and othere times, such darthe and skarcenes might be somewhat
tolerable for that, that it is common and egall as much to the one, as to the
othere, and is not accompaignedde with myschief: yet to those there, it was
somuche the more grievous, when they considered the glory wherein they had been,
and the mysery and desolation whereunto they were fallen. For truly this same
great novelty chanc^dde than to the hooste of the Greeks: that they were in
fear to be destroyed by them, whom they were come to s^bdue. And where they
departed out of their country with great melody of joyful songs, of diverse
instruments, making great vows for the victory, whereof they had suer hope:
they all returned fromethence mourning and making pituous groans, and all
other contrary things, for that, that the maroners, which were come to saille
by sea, were than on land, renked with the footmen, neuerthelas, all things
were tolerable unto theyme, for the great danger, wherein they parceyued
theymself to be brought. Whom, Nycyas parceyuynge so discomforted and faynte
hearted, did goo comforting them again, and declarynge unto them many things,
saruynge to the case, so as he found them assembled togider, cryinge unto
theyme more, with a loud voice, than by manner of exhortacion or declaration,
for to cause theyme to recover their couraige and for to proffytt them in the
estate wherein they were, as he knew well to do. And so did speak unto them
these or such words.

The declaration of Nycyas to the men of arms.
IT is conuenyente for us (Lords Athenyans) and you othere our allies to
have good couraige and good hope, although that we be in the estate, wherein we
are. For many have eskaped much greatter mischief and danger than this same
is, wherein we be. Wherefore you ought to take greater couraige, not blaymynge
yourself beyond reasone, be it for the loss that you have made, or be it for
the shame, which you endure. For as for me, I am in nothing in better
condition, than any of you the other be, another in force, for that, that ye
may see how that I am weakened with my disease: another yet in goods. For
though that herebifore I was well provided of victualles, and also of other
necessaris: yet as this present, I have no greater provision thereof, than the
least of the bend. Howbeit forsomuche as I have made great sacrefices to the
gods and used great goodness and courtesy to men, ytt gives me yet audacytie
to hope well hereafter. But I do see you estonyed and afraid to much more
than is convenient to the dignity and condition of your parsons, for the
euylls and damages which you have receyuedde, the which peradventure shall
amend. For our enemies have had enough, both of felycitie and also of good
hap. And if anny God has been angry, and displeased toward us, for that,
that we be come hider to make war, we have been suffyciently and to much
ponysshed. And it has been hertofore oftentimes seen of people, that came to
assaille other in their houses, that having done their endeavor in war, have
neuerthelas had tolerable mysfortunes and inconveniences: wherefore we ought
to hope that God woll do better for us hereafter, for that, that we desarue
better to have mercy of him than vengeance. In the rest you ought to consider
the force of your self, what number you be and in what appareille of armure,
and to persuade yourselfe, that in whatsoever part ye be togiders, you euene
you have beatene yourselues, and that in whatsoever cy^ye of Sycille that you
arryue, you shall be easily received aither for love or by force, and also ye
shall not easily be dryuene away after that you shall have been thereunto ones
retyredde, and for to pass suerly, you shall have regard to march in best
order and with greatest diligence that you may without to think on other
thing, but that in whatsoever part you be constrained to fight, if you
obteigne the victory, there shall be your walls and your city. And also it
is conuenyent for to continue and auaunce our journey a day and a night without
arrestynge us, for we lack victuailles. And after that we shall have aryued in
whatsoever town of this country, we shall be in suertie, for that that they
shall persevere in our amytie and alliance, for the fear which they have of
the Syracusayns. And also we have already sent unto them for to advertise
them to mete us and to bring us victuailles. And in effect judge and
determy^^e you (my friends and compaignions) that it is necessary for you^ to
declare yourselfe honnest and virtuous people. For if you do otherwise, you
shall not find any place in this country, which shall not be your enemy
and wherein you shall save yourself. But if you the othere, that be not
Athenyans do valyantly, ye shall see in sh^rte time the thing, which you
somuche desire to see, and you, which be Athenians shall resuscitate and
reyse up the great puissance of your city, although that it be greatly
decayed. For the walls and the shyps be not the city, without men, but rather
the men without the same. Such de^^arations, Nycias did make to his souldyars
here and there when he parceyuedde any bend that went not in good order or
that followed not nighe unto the othere, and by that mean aither constraynedde
them, orelles induced them to march as yt apperteignedde. The like
declarations did Demosthenes make to his men, and marched all in a foore cante
battle. To wytt^ Nycyas and his men before, and Demosthenes with his after.
And in the mids were the banguages and the company of unmeet parsones, which
were in great number.

How the Athenyans and their allies being departed out of their camp, after
the overthrow for to go fromthence by land, were followed by the Syracusayns
and their allies and finally utterly destroyed. The.xiiii. Chapter.
IN such manner, the Athenians and there allies marched until the side of the
river of Anapus, Anapus
where they found the Syracusayns and their allies, which waited for them,
but they repoulsed them, and passed against their will: notwtstanding the
horsemen and archers or darte casters followed them, and oftentimes contended
and did fight with them until they arrived that same day in a place, where was
a high hylle, Fortye stades out of Sarragosse, where they lodged that same
night. On the morrow in the morning they departed about break of the day,
and after that they had iourneyedde aboutes.xx. stades^ they descended into a
plain, and there logded themself that same day, as well for to take some
victuailles, and howsen that were there, for that, that the place, was
inhabyted: as also for to take fresh water for to carye with theyme, for in
all the way, which they had passed, they found but little thereof. In this
mean time, the Syracusayns aduansed themself to get an othere passage, by the
which, it was convenient for the said Athenyans to pass, which was a very
high rock, that was hangyng, and not to be come unto, on two sides, whereof
the top was named Lepas. The morrow after, those same Athenyans, and their
allies, being in the way, were eftesones greatly troubled, by the horsemen
and archers, or darte casters of the enemies (whereof they had great number)
which came chasynge, and assayllynge them by the sides, so that skarcely they
could journey. And finally after that they had fought a long time, they were
constrained, to retire into the same place, fromwhence they were departedde,
but with much greater disadvantage, for they found there no victuailles, and
also the lodging, was not so easy, as yt had been the day precedynge, for the
oppression, which the enemies did make against theyme. And neuerthelas,
the morrow in the morning, they took eftsoon the way, and whatsoever
empeschemente the sayedde enemies made against them, they passed further
until the said passage, which they found closed with wall, and above upon
the same a great bend of footmen, bearyng the most part shieldes and
targettes, and though the place was very straight, yet the Athenyans marched
fourth straight, and trauaylled themself for to get yt by force. But being
repoulsed by the great number of enemies, that were in the aduantagious
place, to wytt, on high on the rock, fromwhence they might the more sturdely,
cast their darts and their shot: they were constreyned to retire and plant
themself there, without doing any thing, for that chiefly that in that same
war, there was great thondrynges and rain, like as commonly it did in the
same country after ye harvest time, which was already bigon, whereof they were
greatly astonyed, and somuche the more, that they judged, that the same was a
prenostication of their destruction. Gylippus than perceiving that they were
planted there, he sent one party of his men by a side way, for to reyse up
soubdainely a wall, in the way, wherethrough the Athenyans were come, to the
end to enclose them at their backs, but they, that parceyuedde it, sent
thider a a bend of theirs, which empesched and repoulsed them: and that done
they also retired nigh to a field, which was nigh to that same passage, where
they soiourned that same night. The day following, they being eftsoon in the
way, the Syracusayns and Gylippus came to charge upon the^ on all sides, and
so did hurt many of them. And when the same Athenyans charged upon them they
returned. And as they were returned back, and put themself to journey, they
came afreshe to charge on the hyndermost, whereby they did hnrte many of them
for to cause the whole army to rest and tarry, but every man defending best
himself, against the charginges, iourneyed from five to six stades, until
they came unto a field, where they rested, and the Syracusains returned
fromthence into their camp. Nycyas and Demosthenes, parceyuing than that their
case was in evil state and condition, as well for lack, which they generally
had of victuailles, as also for the great multitude, which they had of
their hurt people, and that they always had, the enemies before on all
sides, which cessed not to assaille them, they determined to goo fromethence
that same night secretly, not by the way which they had bigonne, but by an
other clean contrary leadynge unto the sea, which did go crokedly, from
Catana to Camerin and toward Gela, and certain other cities which be wholly
apposit or directly the one against the other, and of the other side of
Sycille, as well Greeks, as barbarous. And so they did lighten great fyers in
diverse places through their camp for to cause the enemies to understand,
that they moved not. But as it chances always in such case when a great
host dislodgeth it self for fear, chiefly in the night, and in the country
of enemies, and also having them very nygh, all the camp was generally in
great fear, terror and tumulte. Neuerthelas Nycias, who had the former ward
with his men, departed furst keeping good order, and he iourneyedde a good space
before the other, but one party of the bend, which Demosthenes conducted, and
as in a manner the moytie thereof, skatered abroad and did break their order
in their passing. Notwtstanding they iourneyed somuche, that at the break ^f
the day, they were at the sea side, and did take away which was named Eloru^,
Helorina.
alongest that same sea, by which they would have gone unto the river of
Cyparis, and afterward a longest the same, Caciparis.
through the high country, keeping the^self far of from the sea, hoping yt
the Syracusains whom they had demanded to come to mete the, would have come to
encountre the^ there. But they being arrived at the ryuers side, found that
there was a certene number of me^, which the Syracusains had sent thider for to
keep and defend that same passage, which had stopped the other side of the
water, with paales and with rampares for to empesche and let the shallowe
passages, howbeit they were few people, and were incontinently repoulsed by
the said Athenia^s, who having passed that same river, iourneyed unto an other
river yt is called Erineus, Erineus.
keeping the way that the guides had taught and appoyncted for the^. During
this time, ye Syracusains and their allies, when the day was come,
understanding yt the Athenia^s were departed fro^thence in the night, were
very angry, and had suspicion yt Gilippus had been consenting to their
departure, and yet neuerthelas did put the^self in way for to poursue the said
ennemys with all diligence following their tracke, which was right easy to
know, so that they did overtake them about the hour of dynner. And the furste
that they found were those of the bend of Demosthenes, who being troubled in
the journey, which they had made that same night, went most softly and without
great order, and so the former of the Syracusains did begin to eskarmouche
against them and with their horsemen, who environed them incontinently on all
sides and constrained them for to ioigne togiders all in one place. And so much
the more that they were already separated into two bendes, for that, ye Nycias
who knew well yt it was no time to arrest therefore to fight, was with his bend
already before him more than a houndred and fifty stades, and caused his men to
auau^ce forwards the most that they might without arres^inge in any part, but
wha^ they were forced for to defend the^self. But Demosthenes could not do
so, for that, yt he was empesched by many means, insomuche as he was departed
out of his lodging after the other, and insomuche as he had the artiere ward,
he was ye furst yt the ennemys, should have assailled. For this cause he was
constrained to give himself as much to keep his me^ ready to fight, being
advertised yt the Syracusains followed the^, as also to cause the^ to pass on
their way, in such sort, yt by slacking his journey, he was ouertake^ by his
ennemys, whereof he and his people were afraid and astonyed. And so much the
more yt he was overtaken in a place, that was environed with rampars, and in a
way where there was Olyue trees on every side, whereby they were incontinently
troubled with strokes of darts that ^^^ir ennemys did cast against them on all
sides, who would not assaille them for to fight hand to hand with all their
strength, for that, saying them in dispaier of their wealth, it seemed unto the^
not to be good to put the thing in hazarte of the battaille, but rather it was
that, which thennemys should most desire. And on the other part knowing to have
already almost the victory in their hands, they feared to commit any fault.
For it seemed well unto them that without faighting in rancked battaille, in
suffrynge by such means their enemies, they should have them without doubt
at their will and pleasure. Having than escharmouchedde by such mean all the
day with strokes of darts, and knowing that they were discouraiged, an
heraulte was sent unto them from Gylippus, the Syracusayns and their allies.
Which did furste to understand, that if there were any of the Islanders
cities that would wythdrawe and come to them, he should be saved. Whereupon
there were some bendes that withdrewe theymeself, but very few. And
afterward the like offer was made unto Demosthenes, that to all those, that
would putt of their armure, life should be saved, and should not be put into
close prysone, nothere any necessity of victuailles, the which party they
all did accept, which were found about six thousand and at the arryuall,
every man consigned and delivered the monney, which he had, the which they
laid down within four crowns being vppermoste, whereof they had plenty.
And fourthwith they were led unto Sarragosse. During this time, Nycyas had
iourneyed all that same day to the river, Erineus, having passed the which, he
was lodged upon an high hille, very nigh unto yt. In the which place he was,
the morrow after, over takene by the Athenyans, who signefied unto him, that
Demosthenes, and his men had rendered themself, admonysshynge him to do the
like, whereunto Nycyas would not give says or creditt, but demanded them that
they should be content that he might send one of his horsemen for to bring
the true repoarte thereof unto him, which they granted unto him. And
afterward being infourmed by his said horsemen, he sent to show unto
Gylippus, and the Syracusains that he was content to make appoynttment with
them in the name of the Athenyans, if they would suffer him to pass with his
men, to wytt, to render and repaye unto them all the charge, that they had made
in that same war and thereupon to deliver them for hostages a certene number
of Athenyans, whom, repaying the said monney: they would buy a gain at a
talent for every hedde. But Gylippus and the Syracusains would not accept the
said party, but they assailled them with strokes of darts on all sides so
long as the day endured. And notwithstanding that they were by that mean
evil entreated and also in necessity of victuailles, yet they determined to
depart fromthence that same night^ and had already taken their armure for to
march, when they understood that the enemies had parceuerance thereof by the
sign of the battaille, which they had caused to be given in their camp. So
they did putt their armure of, except three houndred or theraboutes, which
passed by force, overthwart the watch of the said ennemys hopyng to save
theymself for that night. The day being come, Nycyas took his journey with
his men. But as he did begin to march, the enemies assailled him with hand
strokes and with shot on all sides, as they had done, the day precedynge.
And yett neuerthelas susteigninge the strokes, aswelle of the said darts and
arrows, as also of horsemen, they iourneyd still further, hoping to get ye
river of Assinaris, Assinarus.
as well for that, that it seemed, that the same being passed, the should goo in
more suertie, as also for to drink, for they all were troubled, with thirst.
Being than arrived within the sight of the same river, they russhed all
soubdainly into it, without keeping any order, but so as ed^ry man might cast
himself furst into yt. But thennemyes, which followed, p^^forced themself for
to let them to pass, whereby the disorder was very great, for so much as in
passing soubdainly and in a great trowpe, the one empesched the other aswelle
with their parsones, as with their harnois and weapons. So that ye one did
soubdainely swymme, and the othere were so entermedledde together, that the
river did carye them awayt, and the enemies which kept both the sides,
which were very high pursued them on all sides, with strokes of darts, and
with hand. In manner that a great number of theyme were slain, specially of
the Peloponesyans, who rested in the depeste of the water, for to drink the
better at their ease. By mean whereof the water was incontynently troubledde,
as well with blood of those, that were hurt, as with the mudde which they
removed by passing. And yet neuerthelas they ceased not to drink for the
great thirst, that they had, but rather they did fight amongst theymeselfe
for drink, where they did see the water most clear. Finally the river being
replenysshed with dead men, which tombled the one upon the othere, and all
that same army destroyed, to wytt, some by the river, and the other that were
eskaped by the horsemen: Nycias rendered himself unto Gylippus, trusting more in
him, than in the Syracusayns. And submytting himself to the will of him, and of
the other Peloponesians, he prayed him that he would not suffer, the othere
men of war, which were not yet dead, to be slain. Which thing Gylippus
granted unto him: and defended, that no man should slaye anny more of the
Athenyans, but that they should be takene prisoners. And so all those, that
were not hid (of whom was a great number) were taken prisoners, and the
three houndredde which were skaped in the night, were likewise taken by the
horsemen, which were afterward sent unto them, but when they were all
togiders, there was no great number, of them. For the most part unclothed
theymselfe and fled fromthence by diverse ways, whereby all Sycille was
replenyshedde, for that, that they rendered not themself by composition, as
those with Demosthenes: but a great party of them did dye. And in effect,
that same slaughter was so great or greater than any other that had been made
in Sycille at any time before during that same war. For besides those, that
were slain by faightynge, there was a great number, slain in flyinge by the
ways, orelles so hurt, that afterward they dyed, neuerthelas many did save
theymself, some that same day, and the other the night followynge, the which
retired into Catana. The Syracusayns than and their allies, having takene of
the prisoners, the most that they might, retired to Sarragosse, being arrived
at which place, they sent the prisoners into an castelle, namedde Litothomia,
Litothonia.
the which they reputedde the strongest and most suer of all the other, that
they had. But they soon caused Demosthenes and Nycyas, to dye against Gylippus
will. Who reputed, that it should have been great honnour unto him, and for
great glory besides the victory, at his return to bring the Dukes of the
enemies prisoners to the Lacedemonyans, whereof the one had been their mortell
and sharp enemy at the overthrow of Pylus, and the other had been friend
and favorable unto them in the self matter. For when the Lacedemonyans, that
were takene at Pylus, were brought to Athens, Nycias purchased their
delyuerance of his power, and used all the humanytie that he could, and
moreover he purchased the appoinctmente, bitwene the Athenyans, and the
Lacedemonyans, so far as he might. whereby those same Lacedemonyans did
bear him love, which was the cause, wherefore he rendredde himself unto
Gylippus. But some of the Syracusayns, which had intelligence and
confederation with him during the siege, fearing lest that by torment^s he
should be constrained to tell the troth thereof, like as the bruytt was, and
that by the same mean in the prosperity of the victory, some new brabblyng
should chance in the city: and the other, specially the Corynthyans, doubting
that by plenty of monney, considering that he was very rich, he should
win and corrupt the kepars, and by that mean eskape, and afterward make
new war against them: they persuaded so unto all the allies, that yt was
concluded to putt him to death. For such or the very nigh like cause, Nycias
was slain, a man of all those, that has been of my time, that least desarued
it, for that, that all the mischief that had happened to him, was for his
virtues, wherein he did bestow and apply all his mind. As touching the
prisoners, that were led and carried into Lythotomie, they were very rudely
entreated at the beginning. For being in so great number in a low and
narrow place being opene, they were destroyedde, furste with the heat of the
son in somer, and afterward Antumpne coming, by cause of the nights,
which began to be cold, by the soubdayne change of the time: they fell
into great diseases, ioigned, that in the same straight place, wherein they
were all togiders, they were constrained to do all their necessites, and
chiefly those that dyedde, as well of wounds as of sickness, were all there
buried the one with the other, whereby the stenche was intolerable. And
besides this, they had great skarcytie of drink and of meat, for they had
but two small loaves a day, and a small measure of water every man. And in
effect, they suffered and endured all the euylles in that same place, that is
possible to suffer in that same case, the space of, lxx, days. Afterward,
they were all sold, resarued certene number of them which were Athenyans, and
a certene small number of Italians, and of Sicilians, which they found to
have been in their compaignie. And although that yt be difficille to show the
number of all theyme which for troth were prisoners, yet it is full certene
that they were more, than seven thousand. Which was the greatest loss that
the Greeks had made in that same war, and for that, that I can have learnedde
(aswelle by hear say as also by histories) that ever before time had been
made. Whereby the act was more glorious to those, that had the victory, and
more miserable to them that were ouercomedde. The which being wholly and in
all sorts destroyed and with great loss in all parts, remained so as yt is
said, destitute both of footmen and of ships. And of one so great number
of men of war, that there were but very few, that returned fromthence into
their country. Such was the issue of the war of Sycille.

Here ends the Seventh book of the historye of Thucidides, and the eight
begins.
Of the provision which the Athenyans made, having understood the
destruction of their people in Sycille, for to susteigne war against the
Peloponesians, and how the more part of Greece, togiders with the king of
Persie, did reallye themself togiders against the said Athenyans. The furst
Chapter.
When the news of the same overthrow and destruction did come to Athens,
there was not well nigh one parson, that would almost bileue them, though
afterward those, which were come and skaped fromthence, did witness it. For
it seemed unto them impossible, that one such an army might have been so utterly
destroyed. But after that the troth was learned, the people began to enter
into fury and into great anger against the Orators, which had persuaded that
same enterprise, as though they themself had not determined it, and likewise
against the Augurers, and diuinours, which had done them to understand that
the same en^erpryse should be fortunate and that they should subdue all
Sycille. And for effect beside the sorrow and displaiser, that they had for the
same loss, they were in great fear, for that, that they parceyued themself
deprived, as well in particular, as in general of a great compaignie of good
warryours, as well fotemen as horsemen and of the most part of their young
men, better than they had annye left of them. And also they had no shyps in
their hauone, another monney in their treasure, nor maroners ne workmen for to
make new shyps, and for effect they were in a total despeir of their wealth.
For they did think that the army by sea of the ennemys, that should return
out of Sycille, would come straicte for to aryue at their port of Pyrreus,
having had so great a victory, and having their force doubled by the friends,
and allies of the Athenians, whereof many were revolted and rebelled with the
said ennemys. Wherefore the said Athenyans, did look for no less, but that the
said Peloponesians would come to assaille them even in that same journey both
by sea, and by land. And yet notwithstanding, they were not advised to show
themself fainte hearted, nor to forsake their busynes, but rather to assemble
and gather togiders the most shyps that they could out of al costs, and for
to do it, to amasse and gather togiders monney by all means and also wood and
stuff for to make ships, and moreover to assuer their friends and allies,
chieflye the Eubeyens, and moreover to restreyne the expenses and sumptuositie
of their living in the city, and to treat a new counsaille of the most
auncyentes, that should have the auctorytie and charge to provide for the
affair of war in all cases above all the other. And for effect they were
attentife and diligent to make all necessary provisions, as people being
afraid do generally make, and for to execute that which was devised and
determined. And in thies enterfeates the somer endedde. The winter followinge
in manner all the Greeks did begin to make new sorrows for the great loss
that the Athenyans had made in Sycille. For it seemed unto them that had been
newter in that same war, that they should not persevere in that same
newtralytie, but rarher take party with the Peloponesia^s, although that they
were not thereunto required, for that, that they judged that the said Athenians
would have come against them, if they had obteigned the victory in Sycille.
And on the other part it seemed unto theyme for troth that the rest of the
war should be the sonner acheued and endedde, and also that it should be
great honnoure unto them to be parttakers of the victory. And as touching
those, that were declaredde to be with the Lacedemonyans, they offered theymself
more readely than they had before time done, hoping that the victory
should bring theyme out of all necessities and out of all dangers. And also
those, which were subjects of the Athenyans were the more determynedde for to
rebelle and for to do agayn^^e them further than their power extended for a
great hatred and evil will which they had against them, and also for
this, that for any reasone that men could allege, they would not understand
that those Athenyans might eskape to be destroyed and overthrown the somer
followinge. For all the ^hiche things the city of Lacedemonie did conceive
great hope to obteigne victory against the said Athenyans. And specially for
that, that it was to bileue, that the Sycilians being their allies, and having
so great number of ships, as well of theirs as of those, which they had
gottene fro the Athenyans, should come in the spring time unto their aid. And
so having hope on all sides, they determined not to make anny delay in the
war, making their account that if they had the victory at that same time,
they should be always in suertie and out of the danger, wherein they should
have been, if the Athenyans had gottone Sycille. For it is fully clear, that
if they had subdewed it, they would have made themself Lords of all Greece.
Followynge than this determynation, Agis king of the Lacedemonyans, Agis.
departed that same winter out of Decelea, and sailled by sea through the
cities of the allies, for to cause them to contrybute monney for to make new
ships. And passing through the great Goulphe of Oetes named Melinee, Oetei.

Melineus.


he took there a great prize of theyme, by cause of the auncyente ennemytie,
that the Lacedemonyans had with them, which prize he turned into monney.
And that done he constreyned the Achees, the Pththiotes and the other nygh
borderyng people, Pththiotes.
subjects to the Thessaliens, to deliver a good some of monney and also
certain number of hostages, for that, that he suspected them, against the
will of the said Thessaliens. Which hostages he sent into Corynthe, and for
effect the Lacedemonyans ordained one houndred galleys to be made by them and
their allies, and taxedde unto every one for his rate a portion, to wit, to
them, xxv, and to the Beotians asmanye, to the Phociens, Locriens, and
Corynthyans, xxx, to the Arcadians, Peloponesians, Sycioniens, Megarens,
Trezeniens, Epidauriens and Hermioniens, xx, and moreover they made provision
of all other things, to the intent to begin war incontinentlye, as the
spring time should come. On the other side the Athenyans that self same
winter, ensuynge that, which they had determynedde, used all diligence to make
and tacle ships, and those that had matter or stuff, did furnyshe yt
without difficulty. They moreover enclosedde their poarte of Sunium with
walls, Suniu^.
to the end that the ships, that should bring them victuallles, might come
in suertie. And they habandonedde and left the rampars and fortes which they
had made in Laconique when they went into Sycille, destitute and void. And
in the rest they devised to refrain expenses in all that, wherein it should
sem^ unto the^ that they might excede. But above all things they were myndeful
to keep and defend that their subjects and allies should not rebel.

How the Lacedaemonians were required and instanced by those of Chio of Lesbos,
and of Hellesponte to send unto them an army by sea for to resist the
Athenyans against whom they were wylling to rebel, and the order that thereupon
was given. The.ii. Chapter.
IN the mean time that thies things were done on the one side and on the
other, and that they were attentife and diligent in their prepation as much, as
if the war should begin at the self hour, specially the Eubeens, before all
the other allies of the Athenyens, sent messengers unto Agis for to iogine with
the Lacedaemonians, who received them gentlely, and commanded two pryncipall men
of Lacedemonie to come unto him for to send them into Eubee, that is to wytt,
Alcamenes sone of Stenclaide, and Melanthus, Melanthus.
who came with foore houndredde freemen. The Lesbyans also, which desired to
rebel fro the^, sent likewise unto Agis to demand men of him for to send
into their town, who at the perswatio^ of the Beotians agrede unto them and in
the mean time suspended the enterprise of Eubee. And he sent Alcamenes, who
should go thider, unto Lesbos with, xx, ships, whereof Agis furnished ten and the
Beotians ten. And Agis did all this, without causinge the Lacedemonyans to
know any thing thereof. For he had authority to send people to what place
that he would, and to assemble and levy likewise and for to recover monney
and employ yt so as he should think expediente, so long as he should be at
Decelea. During which time all the allies did obey him, somewhat more than the
city of Lacedemonie, for that, that having the army at his will, he caused it
to go whider he would. And so he agrede with the Lesbyans, as it is abouesayd.
On the other side those of Chio, and those of Erithree, which were minded
likewise to rebel from the Athenians, made their treaty with the officers and
counsaillours of the city of Lacedemonie without knowlaige of Agis, with
whom was come into the said city, Thissaphernes, Thissaphernes
that was prouoste of the inferior prouynce for the king Dareus, Dareus
son of Artaxarxes, who solycited the Peloponesians to make warrre against
the Atheniens and promised to fournishe the^ with monney, whereof he had the
comoditie, for that, that by the commandment of the king his master, he had a
little before exacted a tribute of his prouynce to the intent for to employ the
monney against the Athenyans. Whom he hated much, for that, yt those were
they, that had empesched him to make Greece trybutairie unto him, and it semedde
to the said Thissaphernes, that more easily he should recover the said trybute
insomuche as he was minded to employe ytt against the Athenyans, and also by
that mean that he should make alliance bitwene the Lacedaemonians and the
king Dareus, and besides this, that he should have in his power, Amorges,
Amorges.
bastard son, of Pyssuthnes. Who being provost of the country of Carry for
the king, Caria.
was rebelled against him, and he had commanded the said Thissaphernes that
he should take pain to have him living or dead. And thereupon Thissaphernes
agrede with them of Chio. In the self season Calligetus, Caligetus.
son of Leophon of Megare, and Tymagoras, Timagoras.
son of Athenagoras of Cizine, who were both chased out of their country,
came unto Lacedemonie unto Pharnabasus, Pharnabazus.
son of Pharnacus, who had withdrawin the^ thider, to demand of the
Lacedemonyans ships, for to carye the^ into Hellesponte, offering them to make
all his power to get the cities of his prouynce, which took part with the
Athenia^s, for the^, desiring by that mean to make the like alliance bitwene
the king Dareus his master and them. Thies practices of Pharnabazus and of
Thissaphernes being than brought to Lacedemonie, without that those, which
brought the one, had in any thing knowlaige of the other: the Lacedemonyans
were in great controversy, for some were of opinion that me^ should furst
send shyps into Ionium and Chio, and the other that they should send into
Hellesponte. But finally the greater party was of opinion that men ought
furste to accept the party of Chio and of Thissaphernes, specially at the
perswation of Alcibiades, who at that present lodgedde in the house of Endius,
that was the same year Ephore, that is to say, Trybune of the common people,
and his father also had lodgedde there, by reasone whereof, he was calledde,
Endius Alcibiade. Endius
But before that the Lacedemonyans sent their ships to Chio, they sent one,
who was neighbor of that same city named Phrynes, Phrynes.
for to epsy, if they had so great number of ships, as they had given to
understand, and in the rest if their city were so rich, and so puissante as
it was renomedde, who being come again and having made his reapoorte that
there was nothing less in effect than in renome, made incontinentlye
alliance with the said Chiens, and Erythriens, and ordained to send thider
foorty galleys for to ioigne theyme with the other three skoore, which the
Chiens said that they had, whereof they should send at beginning foorty and
ten other afterward by Melacride their Captain by sea. In whose place
they afterward did choose Chalcideus, forsomuche as in the making the
election of the said Melacride, yt had thoundredde. And of ten ships that
Chalcideus should have carried, he had but only five thereof. And in thies
enterfeaictes the winter ended. Which was the end of the.xx. year of the
war, that Thucydides has wryttone. In the beginning of the furste spring,
those of Chio sent incontinently unto the Lacedemonyans that they should
send them the ships, which they had promised unto them. For they
fearedde greatly least the Athenyans should be aduertisedde of their
treaty, whereof they had yet vnderstandedde nothing. For this cause the
Lacedemonyans sent three of their cytezeins unto the Corynthyans for to show
them, that they should cause all the ships to pass, aswelle those, which
Agis had caused to be armed for to send into Lesbos, as the othere in the sea,
where they were through the distreate in the sea of Athenes, and to conducte
theyme to Chio which ships were to the number of, xlix. But forsomuche as
Calligetus, and Tymagoras would not be partakers of that same voyage, the
ambassadors of Pharnabazus would not deliver the monney that he had sent
for to wage the army by sea, which amountedde to, xxv, talentes, but rather
determynedde to make an othere army with that same monney, and therewyth to
goo thider, where they had purposed. When Agis understood that the
Lacedaemonians had determined for to send furste unto Chio, he would not goo
against their deliberation. And likewise the allies having holden their
counseille in Corynthe, were of that self opinion, that Chalcideus should furst
goo into Chio. Who had armed five ships at Lacanique. And afterward
Alcamenes, whom Agis had also cho^ene for capytaine, should goo to Lesbos.
And finally that Clearchus son of Rhamphius should goo into Hellesponte. But
before all things they ordeynedde that the moytie of their ships should
pass with all diligence, the distreacte, before that the Athenyans should
parceyue yt, fearing least they should charge as well upon them, as also upon
the othere that should pass afterward. For from the other sea, the shyps of
the Peloponesians might depart openly without any fear of the Athenyans, for
that, that no man could yet see any army in the sea for them in anny poorte.

How certene of the Peloponesians ships were repoulsed by the Athenyans in
the port of Pyerus. And how the cities of Chio, of Erythree, of Mylet and
many other turned unto the co^federation of the Pelopone^ians. And how the
furst alliance was made bitwene the king Dareus, and the Lacedemonyans.
The.iii. Chapter.
ENsuyng that same deliberation, those, which had charge thereof, passedde
the distreate with.xxi. galleys. And though that they made great instance to
the Corinthyans, that they should pass with them yet they would not do it,
for that, that the feast, which is called Isthmie, did draw nygh, the which
they were wyllyng to celebrate before their departure. Which perceiuedde, Agis,
that they should not break the oath, by the which they had made trefues with
the Athenians until after that same feast, offered to take the^ in his name,
whereunto they also would not agree. And in the mean time that they debated
hereupon, the Athenyans, being advertised of the treaty that the Chiens did
make, sent unto them one of their officers, named Aristocrates, Aristocrates.
for to declare unto the^, that they did naughtely. And forsomuche as they
denied the case, he commanded them, that they should send their shyps to
Athens, like as they were bound by virtue of their alliance, which thing
they durst not refuse, and sent thider seven galleys, whereof certene, which
did not know the other treaty, were authors, and also they that knew yt,
who feared to putt theymself in danger and to declare the case unto the
comminaltie, until they might have some puissance, for to resist yt, if that
it would rise up, not hoping more that the Peloponesians would have come,
since that they tarried so long. During this time, the solemn plays were
made at the feast of Isthmie, whereat the Athenyans were, for that, that they
had had suertie or saulf conducte to come thider. And so they lernedde there
more clearly how the Chiens practysedde to rebel from them. For this cause,
after that they were returned unto Athenes, they prepared their ships for to
defend, that those of thennemyes should not depart out of Cenchree without
their knowlaige. Ce^chree.
And right sone after the feast, they sent thider.xxi. galleys for to encounter
the other xxi, whereof Alcamenes had the conduct. And after that they did see
them, they enforced themself to tull them into the main sea, faigning themself
to retire. Neuerthelas after that the Peloponesians had followed them a little
further, they returned back, which seen, the Athenyans did likewise
retire, forsomuche as they trusted not seven shyps which they had from Chio in
their compaignie of.xxi. But being afterward come unto the^ an other new
succors with.xxxvii other shyps, they followed the enemies until the deserte
and habandoned port, which is in the extremyties or furthest part of the
land of Epidaurians, which they called Pyreus, Pyreus
within the which port the Peloponesians ships were retired, reserved one,
which was lost in the main sea. At which place the Athenyans came to
assaille them by sea, and also landedde one part of their men, who fearedde
theyme greatly, and crusshed many of their ships and did slay manany men,
among whom was Alcamenes, also a certene number of their people dyed before
that they departed, but finally the Athenyans retyredde. And for to keep the
enemies assiegedde, they left such number, as they thought good in a little
Islande there adioignynge, wherein they lodgeddde theymeselfe, and sent wit h
dilygence by a brigantyne to the Athenyans, that they should send theyme new
succors: during this time and the day followynge the Corinthians did comme
to the aid of the Peloponesians, and sone after, those of the other allies:
who saying, that it should be very hard for them for to kep^ that same
desarte place, were in great perplexity, and at the furste brunte did speak
of burning their ships. But finally they determined to wythdraw them toward
the land, and to cause their men to land for to ward them until that they
should see oportunytie for to save them. Agis being aduertysed of the which
things, sent unto them a cytezeine of Sparte, named Thermon. Thermon.
Now the Lacedemonyans had been aduertysed of the departure of the ships
out of the destreate, for that, that the Trybuns of the people had commanded
Alcamenes that he should aduertyse them, immediately when he departed. For this
cause they sense with all dylygence five ships after, under the conducte of
Chalcideus and of Alcibiades. But afterward being aduertysed how their men
and ships were fled, they were all astonyed and da^shedde out of
countenance, that their furst enterprise of war in the sea Ionium, had
myshappened, in such sort that they were determined not to send any more an
army by sea out of their land, and to revoke or call back the same, which
they had already sent thider. Which perceived, Alcibiades persuaded eftsoon
to Endius, that he should not suftre the enterprise of Chio to be brokene of,
another to wax cold. For it might arryue there, before that the Chiens were
aduertysed of the inconuenyence of the other ships. And if he himself
saylled into Ionum, he was hable to cause right easily the cities, which took
part with the Athenyans to rebelle, sygnefyinge unto them the debilitie and
low estate of the Athenyans, and the puissance, togyders with the enterpryses
of the Lacedemonyans: for somuche as he had great creditt with them. And besides
this, Alcibiades, showed to Endius perticulerly, that it should be great
honor and great glory unto him, that by his mean the country of Ionum
should rebelle from the Athenyans to the confederatyon with the Lacedemonyens:
and that by that mean he should be compaignyon with Agys king, and so have
done yt without the said Agis, unto whom the same Endius was adversary: and
Alcibiades so persuaded Endius and the other Trybuns, that the charge of five
ships, with Chalcideus the Lacedemonyan, was delivered unto him for to go in
that same party, which they did in a right small time. Now chanced it in
that self time that Gylippus after the victory coming again out of Sycille
into Greece with xvi. Peloponesians ships, he encountered nighe to Leucade.xxvii.
ships of the Athenyans: whereof Hippocles, Hippocles.
son of Menippus, was chief, who was sent thider to this end, to wytt, for
to encounter and spoylle the ships, which came out of Sycille, and though
that he did them great displeasure and greatly feared them, yet neuerthelas
they eskaped all, resarued one, and sailled to land at Corinthe. In the mean
time Chalcideus and Alcibiades in making their voyage, did take all the
ships, which they encountered, of whatsoever sort that they were: to the
intent that their passage should not be knowin: the which neuerthelas they
did afterward suffer to depart, before they arrived at the place of
Coricque, Coricus
which is in main land, and having treated with certene of the Chiens that
ministered to the treaty, they were aduertysed not to speak thereof to any
whatsoever parsone: which thing they did in such sort, that they arrived at
the City of Chio, before that any parson knew any thing thereof. The
Cytezeins being much astonyed thereof, they were persuaded by some for to
assemble the counsaille of the town, for to hear, what they, which were
arrived, would say. And the same being assembled Chalcideus and Alcibiades
declaredde unto them, how many of the Peloponesians ships did come after unto
them, wtoute making mention of those, that were assieged in Pyreus. The Chiens
understanding whichch thing, made alliance with the Lacedaemonians, departing
them self from the same of the Athenians: and the like they caused
incontynently after to be made by the Erethriens, Erithrei
and consequently by the Clazomeniens, Clazomenes
who wout any further delay passed fourthwith into the main land, and builded
there a small town, to the end, that if any should come to ouerro^ne them in
the Island, they might have some place for to witdraw the^self into. And for
effect all those that rebelled, were attentive and diligente for to fortefie
their walls, and to provide the^self with all things for to resist the
Athenians, if they did come to assaill them. When ye Athenya^s were advertised
of ye rebellyo^ of the Chie^s, they were in great sorrow and doubt, that their
allies perceiving that same great city rebelled, would do the like. For this
cause, albeit that they had laid a part a thousand talentes and had made a
decree yt no man should speak or purpose under the great pains to touch or to
take thereof during all ye war: yet neuerthelas for the fear, yt they had of
that same case, they revoked their decre, and ordained that men should take a
great part thereof, wherewith that they might make and tacle a great number of
ships: and moreover caused eyghte of those that were in Pyreus to dislodge
under the conduict of Stro^bichides sone of Diotimus for to follow those,
Stro^bichides
which Chalcideus and Alcibiades did conducte: but they could not overtake
them, for they were already come again fromthence. And sone after they sent
for the same effect twelve other ships under the conducte of Thra^ides, which
likewise were departed from the Siege of those, that were in Pireus. For
understanding the rebellion of ye Chiens, they seized the.xvii. ships, which
they had of the^ at the said Pyreus: and restored to liberty the esklaues that
were wtin them: but they did take ye cytezeins prisoners. And instead of the
other, which had given up and forsaken that same siege, there were other fourth
with sent thider at great charges, and also they had determined to arm.xxx. and
upwards of them: which to do they used so great dyligence, yt it seemed that
they esteemed nothing to be sufficient enough for to recover Chio. During this
time Stronbichides with.viii. ships sailled to Samu^, and having there taken also
one ship, which he found there, he sailled to Tea, Tea.
and prayed the cytezeins that they would be firm and constant, and not to
make any nouelty. Unto which place Chalcideus did come from Chio with.xxiii
ships, in the which he had charged a great number of fotemen, as well of
Erythree, as also of Clazomenie. Stronbichides, being aduertysed thereof, he
departed incontynently from Tea, and when he had taken the main sea, seeing
afar of so great number of ships he retired into Samie, where he saved
himself, although that the other did give him the chase. Which perceived, the
Theriens although that at beginning they had refused to receive garnyson into
their city, received it after Stronbichides was fled fromthence. And there
were left the fotemen Erithryens and Clazomeniens: who having certain days
attended the return of Chalcideus, that followed Stronbichides, and seeing
that he came not, they did raze down the walls of the town, which the
Athenyans had made from of the coaste of the main land. And that did they,
with the aid and perswation of certain strangers that came thider in the
mean time under conducte of Stages, lieutena^t of Cissaphernes. In this mean
time Chalcideus and Alcibiades, having chased Stro^^bychides into the port of
Samie, they returned fromthence to Chio, and there left their maroners in
garniso^, who^ they armed as souldears. And having in their stead put into
their ships men of ye country and moreover armed.xx. other ships, they
sailled fromthence to Mylet, trusting to cause the town to rebelle. For
Alcibiades, who had great amytie with many of the pryncipall cytezeins thereof,
would gladly do that act, before that the shyps of the Peloponesians should be
sent thither for that same cause, and to have that same honnour, as well for him
as for Chalcydeus and also for those of Chio, whom they had in their
compaignie, and moreover for Endius, who was author of his voyage: that by
their mean, many Cities, which took part with the Athenyans, should rebelle.
Having than made great dyligence by sea the most secretly that they might,
they arrived at the said Milet a little before Stronbichides and Thrasicleas,
Thrasicleas.
who were sent thider by the Athenyans with.xii. ships, and caused the town
incontynently to turn to their confederatie. Sone after arrived other
nynetene ships of the Athenyans, which followed those here, the which not
being received by the Mylesians, they retired into an Islande there
adioygning, named Lada. Lada.
Sone after the rebellyon of Mylet, the furst alliance was made between the
king Dareus and the Lacedemonyans by Tyssaphernes and Chalcideus in this manner.

The tenor of the allyaunce between the king Dareus and the Lacedaemonians.
IN thies enterfaictes, the Lacedemonyens and their allies, made allyaunce with
the king Dareus and Tyssaphernes his prouoste, in this manner. That the
cities, lands, countries and seigniories, that the Athenyans held, those
same, which the king or his predecessors had holdene, should remain unto
him: and that all the revenue that those Athenyans did take thereof, should be
enjoyed by the king and the Lacedemonyans togiders, and that they should
defend that no part thereof should cometo the proffitt of the Athenyans. That
the king and the Lacedemonyans with their allies should make war commonly
against the Athenyans: and that the one should not conclude peace with them
without the othere. And that if any of the kings subjects rebelledde
against him, the Lacedemonyans and their allies should hold them for their
enemies: and of the subjects of the Lacedemonyans and allies, if they
rebelled, the king should take them for his. Such was the sum of the
allyaunce between them.

How those of Chio or Chiens after that they were rebelledde against the
Athenyans, caused Mytilene and all the Isle of Lesbos to rebel. And how the
Athenyans did alterwardes recover it with certain other cities, which were also
rebelled. And how, having vainquishedde the Chiens in three battailles they
pillaged and wasted all their land: and of some other things. The.iiii.
Chapter.
AT the self time the Chiens armed ten othere ships, with the which they
took their way for to saille to the city of Anea, Anea.
aswelle for to learn what the City of Milet had done, as for to sollycitte
the othere Cities, which took part with the Athenyans for to haba^done them.
But being aduertysed by Chalcideus how Amorges did come against their city
with a great host by land, Amorges.
they returned fromthence unto the temple of Jupiter, out of which place,
they might see coming.xvi. Athenyans ships, which Diomedon conducted,
Diomedon.
who was sent from Athens after Thrasicles. And knowing that they were ships
of Athenes, one part of the Chiens went unto Ephesus and the other to Tea: of
the which, foore were taken by the Athenyans. But that was, after that those,
that were within them were landed. The other saved themself in the port of
Tea, and the Athenya^s departed fromthence against Samu^. And yet neuerthelas,
the Chiens having assembled the other ships that were eskaped, and also a
certain number of fotemen, they persuaded the city of Lebedus to forsake the
party of the Athenyans, Lebedus.
and afterward that same of Eras. Eras.
And that done they retired with their ships and foteme^ into their houses.
Abouts the same time the.xvi. ships of the Peloponesians, the which did hold
a like number of the Athenyans ships assieged at Pireus, issued soubdainly and
unlooked for, upon those Athenyans: and defied and repoulsed them in such sort,
that they did take four of them: and that done, they sailled to the port of
Cenchree, where they repaired and tacled their ships, for to saille afterward
to Chio and into Jonu^ under the conducte of Astyochus, whom the Lacedemonyans
sent unto them, unto whom they had geuene charge of all the army by sea.
After that the fotemen that were at Tea, were departed fromthence, Tyssaphernes
arrived there. Who having caused the rest of the walls to be beatene down,
sailled fro^thence incontynently. And sone after Diomedon arrived there,
with.xx. Athenyans ships, who did so much with them of the town, that they were
content to receue him, but he tarried not there, and so sailled to Eras,
thinking to take it by force: which thing he could not do, and for that cause
departed. In that same time, the mean people of Samiu^ did rebelle against the
greater, having with them the aid of the Athenyans, which were come to arrive
there with three ships. And they did slay two houndred of the principal of the
same greater occupiers and they bannished other two houndred: and forfeyted
their goods, as well of the dead, as of the bannished: the which they departed
amongst them. And by consent of the Athenyans, after that they had promised
them to persevere in their amytie they set themself into liberty, and governed
themself of the^self, without giving to the bannished, whose goods they did
wythhold, any thing for their lyuinge, but rather made a great defense and
prohibition, that none should take any land or house of them, nor also deliver
the^ any. In thies enterfaicts the Chiens, that had determined to declare
themself against the Athenyans, in all sorts yt they could cessed not with
their proper force, without any aid of the Peloponesians, for to sollycit and
practice the other cities, holding the party of ye Athenia^s for to turn
from them, and they did this for many reasons, but principally for to wtdraw so
many more people into self danger, wherein they were. And so they armed.xiii.
ships, with the which they sailled toward Lesbos, ensuyng the derre of the
Lacedemonyans: by ye which it was appoincted yt the second nauigatio^ or voyage
by sea should be made to ye said Lesbos, and the third to Hellespo^te. For the
foten^e^ which were come thider, as well Peloponesia^s, as other borderers, were
gone to Clazomenie and to Cumes: Cumes.
of who^ Eualas ye Spartia^ was capitain, Eualas.
and Dimiadas of ye ships. D^miadas.
The Chiens came with this army furst to Methimne, Methimna.
and at the arriual caused the^ to rebelle: and having left there four ships,
came fro^thence to Mytilene with the rest of the ships, who^ they caused likewise
to rebel. On ye other side Astiochus ye admiral by sea of the Lacedemonia^s,
departed from Cenchre with three ships and did come to Chio. Being at which place,
three dates after his coming, he understood how Leo^tes and Diomedo^ were
arrived at Lesbos with.xxv. Athenians ships. which understanding, he departed ye
same day in the evening with one only ship of Chio, for to saille into ye
part, and to see if that he could give any new succors to the Mytileniens,
and did come that night to Pyrrha, and the morrow aftere, to Eresse. In which
place he was advertised, how the Athenya^s had at the furst assault, taken the
city of Mytilene by this manner. For before that any man perceived yt, they
were soubdaynly arrived in the port, where they destroyed the ships of the
Chiens, which they found there, and fourthwith were landed, and having
repoulsed those of the town, that came to the defense, they were entered into
it by force. Astyochus than understanding this nouueltie, he changed his
opinion to go to Mytilene. But rather with the ships of the Eressiens and three
of those of Chio, which the Athenyans had takene at Methymna wyith Eubolus
their capytain (but after the taking of Mytilene, were eskaped, and the fyfth
remained) he went to Eressus, and after that he had put good garnysone with in
it, he sent by land to Antissa and to Methymna the men of war, that he had
within his ships under the conducte of Eteonicus, Eteonicus.
and he with his ships and three of the Chiens, sailled by sea that self way,
hoping that the Mytilenians, seeing his army by sea, would take courage for to
persiste and continue in their rebellion against the Athenyans. But seeing that
all things came contrary unto him in the Isle of Lesbos, he recharged his men,
which he had set on land and returned fromthence to Chio, and there parted
or disseuered the men that he had, as well of sea, as of land, through the
towns and villaiges until that, whereby they should pass into Hellesponte.
Hellespontus.
And sone after came thider six ships of the allies of the Peloponesians, to
wit of those, that were in Chencte. On the other side the Athenyans, having
than ordained the affairs of Lesbos, they did come to the new town, which
the Clazomenyans had newly made in the main land, Clazomenei,
and did beat and raze it utterly down: and the cytezeins, which they found
within it, they carried again into the city within the Islande, those excepted,
which had been authors of the rebellyon, who were fled fromthence to Daphnus,
and by that mean brought Clazomenie again into the obeissance of the
Athenyans. The same summer, the twenty Athenyans ships that were rested at the
Isle of Lada, nyghe unto Mylett, having set their men on land, did comme to
assaille the town of Panorme, which is in the terrytorie of the Mylesiens. At
which assault Chalcideus duke of the Athenyans was slain. who was come with
a small number of men, for to succor the town: and that done they departed
fromthence, and the third day after they did set up their Trophee, which
the Milesiens did afterward beat down, saying that they ought not to have
raised up an Trophee in a place, which they had not taken by force. On the
other side Leon and Dyomedon with the ships that they had at Lesbos departed
fromthence, and came to the I^^endes next to Chio, and frothence made war
against the Chiens by sea, and also by land with the footmen well armed,
which they had caused the Lesbyans to furnish by thappoynct me^t, which they
had made with the^, in such sort that they brought again the towns of
Cardomyla, Cardomyla.
and that same of Bolissus and the other nighe bordering of the land of Chio,
into their obeissance, chieflye aftere that they had destroyed and vaynquished
the Chiens in three battaills, which they had against them. The furste before
the said town of Bolissus, Bolissus.
the second before Phanes and the third before Leuconicu^. Phane.

Leuconicum.


After the which, they durst no more issue fourth of their city, and by that
mean the Athenyans remained Lords of the feldy ground, and also pillaiged
and wasted all that same fair and rich country, which had not endured anny
dammaige of war, since that same of the Medes: and they were also, next
the Lacedemonyans, of all that I have knowin, both most blessed and also the
most modestuous and sober. And also they had this pollecie that how much the
more the city increased in riches, somuche they enforced themself to make yt
the more fayer and triumphant in all things. And they never enterprysed to
rebelle against the Athenyans, until they parceyued that there were many of
the other puissaunte and honnorable cities, which did put themself into the
self danger. And that the case of the Athenyans was in such declination after
the loss, that they had made in Sycille, that they themself held their estate
in manner for lost. And though that they had an evil opinion therein, like as
it happens in humayne affairs: yet neuerthelas it was common with many other
sage and puissante parsones: who held it for certain that the estate and the
Empire of the Athenyans, within short time should be lost. Saying than that
they were oppressed, as well by sea as by land, there were some in the town
that entreated to render it again to the Athenians. The principalleste of the
town being aduertysed thereof, would make none other show or appearance therein
of themself, but sent unto Astyochus, who was at Erythree, that he should come
with four ships that he had, for to give some remedy therein, taking hostaiges
or pledges of the suspected: or by such other mean, as he should think to be
expedyent: the most modestuously that he could. In such terms or condition
were the affairs of Chio.

How the Athenyans having assieged the city of Mylet, had a battaille
against the Peloponesians, in the which both the parties, in diverse
respects, had the victory. And how the Athenyans understanding that
succors did come unto the city, they raised their Siege and departed
fro^thence. And afterward how the Lacedemonyans and their allies did take
the city of Lase: and within the same Amorges, who rebelled from the king
Dareus, whom they rendered to his Lieutenante. The.v. Chapter.
ABoutes the end of that same summer, a thowsande, five houndred men well
armed, being Athenyans: and a thousand Argiues being the one half well armed
and the other moytie lightly armed, and so many of their other allies, togiders
with.xlviii. ships, the one part whereof were Barques for to carry men, and the
other galleys, having Phrynicus^ Onomocles and Scironidas, Phrinicus.

Onomocles.

Scironidas.


for capytayns: departed from Athenes, and passed through Samie, and
afterward did saille fromthence to plant their camp before Mylet. Against
whom did issue fourth eight houndred men of the town well armed, togiders
with those, which Chalcideus had brought and a certain number of mercenaries
or huyred souldyars, that Tyssaphernes had, who was in that same affayre, and
did come to the battaill. Wherein the Argiues, which were in the right
poyncte, being of themself disparsed and more set at large than reason would,
for to enuironne their ennemys: estemynge that the Ioniens should not have been
hable for to susteygne and wythstande their strength, were broken and putt to
flyghte: and there were slain of them few lesser than three hou^dred. As
touching the Athenyans that held yt other poincte. having at beginning
repoulsed the Peloponesians and the Barbarous with the other trowpe, they did
not fayght against the Mylesians: who after that they had defeated the
Argiues, were retired into the city, and as having the victory, had putt of
their armure nyghe to the walls, before that they did see, that the other
poinct of their army was repoulsed. And by that mean it chanced in the same
batrail yt the Ioniens on both sides had the victory against the Doriens^ to
wit, the Athenians against the Peloponesians, and the Milesians against the
Argiues. After the battaill, the Athenyans, having raised up their Trophee,
determined to enclose the city with walls on all sides by land. For the more
part was enuironned with the sea: presupposing that if they did ^ake that same
cytie^ the other would easly come again into their obeyssance. But the self
same day in the evening news came, how that there were coming against them
fyftie ships, as well of Sycille, as of Peloponese, that would be shortly there:
like as yt was for troth. For the Siracusains at the perswation of Democrates,
for to extinquish utterly the forces of the Athenians, had devised to send
succors to the Peloponesians, and so did send therein.xx. ships of theirs, and
two of the Selynu^tyns, which were ioigned with those of the Peloponesians, that
were.xxxiii. And the charge was given to Theramenes Lacedemonian for to conduct
them all to Astyochus admy^all and general capitain of all the army, Theramenes.
and so they came furste to aboard at Eleus, Eleus.
which is an Island and is sytuated directly against Mylet. Miletu^.
Understanding fromthence that the Athenyans were before the said city of
Mylet, they did come to the goulphe of Lasycus. Las^cus
For to learn more easly, what was done at the said Mylet: and afterward they
arrived at Tichiusa, Tichiusa.
which is the terrytorie of Mylet. Being in which place, they were advertised
of the battaill that had been before the said Mylet, by Alcibiades, who was
thereat on the party of the Mylesiens and of Tyssaphernes. That same man showed
them that if they were not willing to suffer Ionum, and afterward all the rest
to be lost: it was nedeful yt they should come to succor the city of Mylet
soubdainly before that it might be enclosed with walls, which should be no small
matter if they permitted the enemies to do it: upon thies words and
declarations it was determined and concluded on the morrow for to depart in the
morning for to succor the said city. But Phrinicus, Phrynicus.
being aduertysed of the coming of that same army into that quarter although
that his co^paignions and colleagues wylled that men should tarry for to fayght:
said that he would never consent unto it, nor for his power suffer the other
to do it, saying and declaringe unto them, that before they should faight, it
was requisitt furst to understand what number of ships the ennemys had: and
what number was necessary for to faight with them, and afterward to have time
and leisure to put them into order and in batt^^lle, as the case required it.
And that it was never holden for shame or cowardenes not to be willing to
haz^rt a thing, when there was no necessity: and therefore that it was no shame
to the Athenians for to retire with their army for a certain time: but rather yt
should be much greater shame for them, if it happened that they were
vainquished, in what soever sort, that it should happene. And besides the
shame, the city of Athenes and his estate should be brought into great
danger: the which, considered the great losses that she had within short
time before made, ought not to be putt in hazarte of battaylle, although that
yt happelye had her preparatyon assured and sufficyente in all things, and
that therein were no necessytie or lack. Wherefore the things being in
woorser terms and condytyon, there was no appearance to do yt wyllyngly, where
that yt was not nedefulle. Therefore his opinion was, that they should
fourthwith charge into their ships all their men togyders with their
munytions, bagguages and vessels, which they had brought only thider, and
to leave the othere which they had gottone from the enemies, for that they would
not ouercharge their ships, and with the same to retire with the greatest
diligence that they could unto Samye: and having there assembled their ships
again to saylle fromethence to search their enemies, where they should think
that they might do yt with their advantage: the which opinion the other did
follow. And as well for that, as in many other things, that were committed to
Phrynicus, he was always reputed to be a saige man and of a clear
understanding. In this manner the Athenyans without fynishinge their
enterprise departed from Mylet about the evening tide. And they being arrived
at Tam^e, the Argiues, that were with them, for the dispyte, which they had,
to have been vainquished, returned from thence into their howses. The
Peloponesians, ensuyng their deliberation, in the morninge departed fro^thence
for to come to mete with the Athenyans at Mylett. But being there arrived, and
understanding the departure of the ennemys, after that they had soiourned there
one day, they did take the ships of the Chi^^s, that Chalcideus had brought
thider, and determined to return fro^thence to Tichiusa for to recharge their
baggage, which they left there, when they departed. And they being there
arrived, Tissaphernes did come to mete them with his fotemen, and persuaded them
to saille unto Lasus, where Amorges bastard son of Pissunthes, who was enemy
and rebel to the king Dareus, kept himself. Where unto the Peloponesians did
agree and came to the said place with so great dyligence, that the said
Amorges parceyued it not: but rather when he did see the^ come straight into
the port, he thought that they had been ships of Athens. And by that mean,
they did take the port, though that those of ye town, when they did know
that they were ennemys, made great defense: but they could not resist the
puissance of the enemies, and chiefly af the Syracusains, who did best y^ same
day. In that same town Amorges was taken prisoner by the Peloponesians, who
sent him again to Tyssaphernes for to co^uey him to the king his master, if
he thought good. But the pyllaige of the town was granted to the souldyars,
who found it all full with goods, and specially with mo^ney, for so much as that
same town had long been in peace and in prosperytie. As touching the
souldears, which the same Amorges had, the Peloponesians received them in to
their soulde or wages, and divided them among their compaignies, for yt, that
there were many of the country of Peloponesa. But the rest of the people,
which were found in the town, the Lacedemonyans committed them togiders with
the town unto Tyssapharnes paying for every of the said prisoners one stater
of Darea: and with the same they returned to Mylet. And fromthence sent
Pedaretus, son of Leon, who^ the Lacedaemonians had sent to Chio, for to be
governor of the town, with the souldiars yt they had had of Amorges. And they
left Philippe for capytain and in thies enterfeates comes the end of summer.

How the City of Chio being assieged by the Athenyans, Astiochus, chief of
the army by sea of the Peloponesyans, refused to succor it. And how the
second treaty of alliance was made with Tyssaphernes, with some other small
feats that were done on both sides. The.vi. Chapter.
IN the beginning of winter, Tissaphernes, after yt he had well furnished La^us,
did come to Milet, and there made payment to ye souldiars, which were in the
ships, as he had promised to the Lacedaemonians, to wytt, one groate of Athens
for every man at that payement, but he declared that fromthens^ourth he would
give but three half pence for the man, until he understood the kings
pleasure. But Hermocrates Duke of the Syracusains would not be content with
this payement, although that Theramene^ made no great instance touching the
same, for that, that he was not chief of that same army, but had only the
charge to bring yt to Astyochus. And in effect for the instance that
Hermocrates made, yt was concluded with Tyssaphernes that the payement
fromthence forwards, should be more than three half pence^ resarued only for
those, that were in five ships. And so it was concluded, that of.iv. ships that
he had there, fyftie should have the whole paymente, and the five, three half
pence. In that same winter the Athenyans, that were at Samie, a new army
of.xxxv. ships being there come to them, whereof Charmynus^ Charminus.
Stronbichides and Euctemon had the charge, Stro^bichides.

Euctemon.


and having moreover retired and wythdrawin some other as well of Chio, as of
other places, they determined to part and deuyde their puissance among them,
and with one party, to wit, the shipmen, to go to assault Mylet, and to
send the fotemen by sea unto Chio, Ensuing which determination, Stronbychides,
Onomaches and Euctemon, who had the charge for to saille with thirty ships and
one party of the souldyars, that were come against Mylet, sailled fro^thence
unto Chio: which voyage chanced unto them by lotte. And their colleagues and
co^paignyons that remained at Samie departed from thence with.lxxiii. ships, and
sailled against Milet. Astyochus being advertised thereof, who was come to Chio
for to take hostages of the suspected, cessed to execute yt, which he purposed.
But understanding that Theramenes was come with a good number of ships, and that
the affairs of their leagge did take ill success, he did take ten of ye
Peloponesia^s ships, and asmany of those of Chio, with which, he departed, and
in passinge, he thought to take Pteleu^: but he failled thereof, and sailled
from thence to Clazomenie, and there commanded those, which took the party of
the Athenyans, that they should render the city and depart fromethence unto
Daphaus: and the like commandment was made unto them by Tamus Praetor or chie^
officer of Ionu^, notwithstanding they would do nothing. Which perceived,
Astiochus did give the^ one assault, thinking to have taken them easly, for
yt, that they had no walls, but he could not, and so launched fourth. And
after that he had sailled a little way, there soubdainly did come a great wind,
which parted and skatered abroad his ships, in such manner that he came to
aboard at Phocee, Phocea.
and fromthence to Cumes: Cumes.
and the other aboorded in the Islands next adioigninge to Cl^zomenie,
Clazomenie.
to wit, Mirathuse, Marathusa.
Pele, Pela.
Drymisse, Drimissa.
where they found much victuails and other goods, which the Clazomenians had
withdrawin thider: whereof, in ye space of eyghte days that they abodde there,
they consumed one part, and the other part they charged in their ships and
afterward sailled fro^thence to Phocee and to Cumes to find Astyochus. Unto
who^, there being, the Ambassadors of ye Lesbyans did come, for to treat with
him to bring again the said Island into his power, where unto he readely
agrede. But seeing yt the Corinthians, and the other allies would not gladly
co^sente unto it, by cause of the mysfortune ye before time had there happened
unto the^, he sailled straight unto Chio, where all ye ships did arrive
finally, although y^ an other time they were skatered obroad by fortune of ye
sea, and were driven by force of wind into diverse places. And Pederitus,
Pederitus.
who was left at Erithre came to mete them there, and brought by land from
Mylet the fotemen that he had, which were abouts five houndred: and had been
taken by the maronners of the Chalcidians and left there with harnnes and
weapons. After whose coming, some of the Lesbyens did come unto Astiochus,
offeringe ef^sones to render the city and the Island. Who declared and
communicated the thing to Pedaritus and to ye Chiens, showing that it could
not but sarue for the enterprise, for if ye thing did comme to effect, the
Peloponesians should have so many the more ^rendes, and though yt it might not
be brouht to the purpose, yet should it greatly noye the Athenyans. But saying
that they would not consent thereunto, and that Pedaritus chie^ly refused to
deliver the ships of the Chiens, he took with him five Corinthyans ships and
one of Megare besides his own, which he had brought out of Laconie and
returned to Mylet, where his principal charge was: and said in anger unto the
Chie^s, that they should not look to have any aid from him, whatsoever busynes
that they might have. So he sailled to land at Coryce, Coricus
where he soiourned certain days. During this time the army of the Athenyans,
departed from Samie and arrived at Chio, and they came to lodge themself at the
foot of a hill that was between the port and them, so that they, which were
within the said port, perceived them not: another also the Athenyans did know
what the other did. Bitwene both, Astiochus was advertised by letters from
Pedaritus, how some Erithriens, which had been prisoners at Samie, were
released by the Athenyans, and sent to Erythree to cause the city to rebelle.
So he incontynentlye launched fourth to return thider, and it failled very
little, but that he had fallen into ye Athenyans hands: neuerthelas he came
thider in saulftie, where he found Pedaritus, who was likewise come thider for
the self cause. And so both of the^ made great inquyrie of the same treaty,
and did take many of them, that were suspected. But being infourmed that no
naughty thing had been there perpetrated, but that the same was feigned for
the wealth of the city, they absolved them all and returned fromthence, the
one to Chio, the other to Mylet. Duringe this time the Athenyans ships, yt
passed out of Coryce unto Argiue, encountered three long ships of the Chiens,
which incontinently, as they had perceived them, they followed to ouerwhelme
the^, and did give them the chase unto their poarte, where they with great pain
could skarcely save themself by cause of ye tempest that came upon them And
three ships of the Athenyans that followed them into the port, perished and
were lost: and they, that were wtin, partly taken and partly slain. The other
ships, retired into a port, that was under Mymante, Mimas
named Phenicuate^ Phenicus.
and fromthence they sailled to Lesbos, Lesbos
where they raised up new rampares. In that same winter Hippocrates
Lacedemonian with ten ships of the Thuryens, Hippocr^tes.
over which, Doricus son of Diagoras one of the three chiefest of ye army,
Doricus.
and with two other, to wit, one of Laconie, Laconia.
and the other of Sarragosse, did rule or govern passed through Peloponese to
Cnide, which city was already rebelled against Tyssaphernes. Whereupon those of
Mylet, understanding the coming of that same army by sea: sent the moytie of
their ships for to ward and defend the said city of Cnide, Cnidus
and for to succor certain barques that were coming out of Egipte, Egiptus.
charged with men, which Tyssaphernes caused to come, and ordained to mete with
them, the ships, that were in the hauon of Triopie, which was a rock in the
promoutorie, situated on the heigh of the regyon of Cnyde, vpone the which,
stands a temple of Apollo. But the Athenyans advertised hereof, which were
at Samie, prevented the said ships, that were at Triopie, Triopiu^
to the number of six and did take them: neuerthelas the men that were within
them saved themself on land. And fromthence they came to Cnyde: the which
failled but little, that they had takene it at the arryuall, for that, that it
had no walls: notwithstanding they were repoulsed. And yet neuerthelas the
day following, they did give them an other assault, but they did less
proffitt therein, for that that ye men of the town, had in the night better
rampared their dyches. Also the shypmen, that were saved in the land at
Triopie, were comme thider in the self night: whereby the Athenyans, seeing that
they could do nothing there, they returned to Samie. In the selfsame time
Astyochus being come to Mylet, he found his army right well appoincted with
all things, for that, that the Peloponesyans fournished right well to the
payemente of souldyars, who besides that same, had great and much monney for
the butie, which they had gotton at Lasus. And on the other part, the
Mylesians were all desposed to do that, which was possible for them for their
party. But forsomuche, as the last alliance, which Chalcideus had made with
Tyssaphernes, seemed not to be ample enough, but defectuous and faulty in some
things, which made more for the party of Tyssaphernes, than for them they
reformed and renewed yt an other time by the mean of Theramenes, in the
manner, to follows.

The second treaty of alliance bitwene the Lacedemonyans and the king Dareus.
HEre follow the articles, conuenau^tes and treaties of amytie, bitwene the
Lacedaemonians and their allies of the one paatie, and the king Dareus, his
children and Tyssaphernes on the other party. Furst that all the cities,
contreys, lands and seigniories, which do at this present apperteigne to king
Dareus, and that have been his fathers or other his predecessors, shall
remain frank and free unto him in manner, that the Lacedemonyans nor their
allies may not go thider for to war or to do damage therein, and that they may
not exact nor take any trybute there. And likewise that the king, nor any of
those, which be under him, may do damage nor exact any trybute in the lands
of the Lacedaemonians another of their allies. And moreover that if any of the
said parties requires any thing of the other, and if that yt be granted unto
him, in like case that same party that shall have received the plaisir, shall be
bound to render it to the other, wha^ he shall be thereunto required. And that
the war, which they have begone against the Athenyans, shall be followed to
the end, generally by the said parties, and shall not be left of by the one
without the othere. That all the men of war, which shall be levied in the
kings countries by his ordenance shall be paid with his monney. And if any of
the confederated cities shall come to invade any of the kings provinces, the
other shall forbydde and keep them from it to his power. And to the contrary if
any of the kings countries or subjects come to invade any of the confederated
cities or their land, the same kyuge shall empesche and forbydde them with his
power. After this treaty made, Theramenes, having delivered his ships to
Astiochus, departed thence, and was never after seen. During this time the
Athenians, that were come from Lesbos against Chio, having assieged it by
land and by sea, did give the^self to enclose the port of Delphinie, which
was a strong place on ye land side, with wall: and also it had a port
sufficiently suer, and was not very far from Chio, whereby the cytezeins were
greatly troubled, as well for many great losses and damages, which they had
already susteigned, by occasyon of the war, as also for that, that the
inhabytantes were ill agreinge amongst themself, and much troubled
otherways. For Pedaritus had caused already Tideus the Ionian with all his men
to dye, for that, that he suspected them to have confederation with the
Athenyans. By reason of which act, the rest of the cytezens, which were
brought to a small number, did not trust the one the othere, and thereby it
seemed unto them thot another they, another another the strangers being souldyars,
which Pedaritus had brought, were sufficient for to go fourth against the
enemies. So they sent to Astyochus to Mylet to pray him that he would comme
to succor them. And for that, that he woolde not do it, Pedaritus did write to
the Lacedemonyans against him, that he did greatly endo^mage the comen welthe.
In this manner the Athenyans did hold the city of Chio assieged, and moreover
their ships, which they had at Samie came to presence battaille to those of
the enemies that were at Mylet: but seeing that they would not issue fourth of
their poarte, they returned fromthence.

How the Peloponesians had a vyctorie in the sea against the Athenyans, and
how certene of their chiefes, having had some words afterward with
Tissaphernes touching an article of their alliance, they sailled to Rhodes and
caused it to rebelle against the Athenyans. The.vii. Chapter.
Calligetus.
IN that same winter, the affayre of Pharnabasus being appoyncted and concluded
by Calligetus of Megara, and by Tymagoras Cyzicien: Tymagoras.
xxvii. ships did pass out of Peloponese into Ionum, about the midst of
September, under the conduct of Antisthenes Spartian with twelve other his
fellow cytezeins, Antisthenes
which the Lacedemonyans sent unto ^stiochus, for to assiste and give him
counsel in the affairs of war. Amongst whom, Lychas son of Archesilas
was the principal. Lychas
And they had given unto them in commission for to deuyse, after that they
should be arrived at Mylet, in all affairs, and thereupon to provide in such
sort, that all things there might he well. And for the rest, to send, if
they thought good the ships, that they shall have brought thider, aither in
greater number or in lesser, as the affayre should require yt, into
Hellesponte^ to Pharnabazus, under the conducte of Clearchus, Clearchus.
son of Ramphius, who was in their compaignie. And also if yt seemed to them
to be good, that they should take the charge of the army from Astyochus, and
deliver it to Antisthenes, for that, that they had the said Astiochus
suspected for the letters^ which Pedaritus had wryttone against him.
Thies.xxvii. shypps, than being departed fro Malee, Malea.
they found at Melee, Melum
ten Athenya^s ships, whereof they did take three, being void or empty, which
they burned: and fearing lest the other, that eskaped should do their coming
to be knowin to the Athenians that were at Samie, like as it chanced, they
sailled to Creta. Having long sailled for their saulfgarde, they aborded in
the port of Cumes, which is in the country of Carry: and reputinge themself
to be in a suer place and out of dangier, they sent fromthence unto those
that were at Milet, that they should come to mete them. Duringe this time the
Chiens and Pedaritus cessed not to instante Astiochus, that he should come to
succor them, seeing them so assieged, and that he would not so habandon the
principal city of Ionu^, which was enclosed on the coaste of the sea, and
pillaged on the land side, and so much the more fyercely^ that in the same
city there was greater number of esklaues, than in anny other of Greece, next
to Lacedemonie, the which for fear of their multitude, men did keep in great
feare^ and were more sharply chastysed and corrected than elleswhere. By
reason whereof, the hoaste of Athenyans, being lodged in suer places after yt
they had made their rampares: many of the said esklaues and bondemen fled
unto them: and for that, that they did know well the country they greatly
endo^maiged the cytezeins. For all the which reasons, ye Chiens declared to
Astiochus that he ought to come to succor them, whilst that it was in his
power to empesche that they should not fynishe the closure of Delphinum, which
was not yet fully made. For after that it were acheued, the shypps and the
army of the ennemys should have more spacious lodgyng there, than they had
had. The which requests and declarations perceived, Astyochus^ albeit that he
was minded not to do it, as he had said and affirmed unto them at his
departure: yet neuerthelas he determined for to succoure them. ^ut being
thereupon advertised of the coming of the said, xxvii, shyps and of the, x^i,
counsaillours to Caunus, it seemed to him more expedyente to leave all othere
thing, for to goo to seek the said shyps, with which he might be Lord of the
sea, and to bring the counsaillours, which were come for to discharge him, in
suertie. So he left the navigations which he purposed into Chio and sailled
straight to Caunus. and in passing by Meropide, he caused his men to land,
and pyllaged the to^ne, which hadbene destroyed through an earthequake that
chanced there, the greatest that ever had happened in man's remembrance. For it
had shakedde down not only the walls of the town, but also the greatest
part of the houses. Howbeit the inhabitants, perceyuyng the coming of the
enemies, wythdrewe themself partly into the mountaignes, and partly into the
feldes, in such manner that the said Peloponesians did take what they would in
that same land and carried al into their shyps resarued the free men which
they suffered to eskape. Astyochus came fromthence to Cnidus, being arrived at
which place, as he would have landed his men, he was advertised by those of
the town, that there were we^le nigh, xx, Athenyans ships, which Charminus,
one of the Dukes of the Athenyans, that were at Samie, did conducte^ who was
sent for to epsy the passage of the, xxvii, shyps that came out of Peloponese,
against whom, the same Astyochus sailled. And the other Dukes had given him
commission to follow them and to coaste in his passage, by Sima^ by Rhodes and
Lycia, Sim^.

Chalces ^h^dus

Lycia.


for those same Athenyans had been already advertised, that they were at
Caunus. Caunus
Astyochus being than hereof advertised, was minded to dissimule or faigne his
voyage and made toward Sima, for to see if that he could discover the said,
xx, ships. But there did come upon him a suer of rain, so troublesome and so
obscure, that he could another perceive them, nor yet govern that same night
his oun^ in good order, in such sort, that the morrow at the break of the
day^, those, which were in the right poyncte, did find themself in the sight
of the ^^^^myes in the main sea, and those which were in the left poyncte,
sailled yet s^ateryng about the Islande, when the Athenyans perceived them
thinking that yt ^ad been those that were aboorded at Caunus, which they
saylled for to espy, they set upon them although that they had but twenty
shypps, and all the arryual did synke three and crusshed many of the other,
thinking to have the victory, But sone after, seeing that there were many
more ships, than they thought which came to enuirone and compass them
aboutes on all sides, they put themself into flight, wherein they lost six of
their shypps, the other saved themself in the Islande of Teuglussa, and
fromethence they sailled toward Halicarnasses. That done, the Peloponesians
returned to Cnidus. And afterward that they were ioigned with the other,
xxvii, that were at Caunus, they sailled all togiders to Syma, where they
raised up a Trophee, and afterward returned from^he^ce to Cnidus. In this
mean time the Athenyans that were at Samie, understanding the combat that had
been at Sima came with all their puissance into that same part. But being
there aboorded, and seeing that the Peloponesyans, which were at Cnidus, durst
not come to mete them there^ and they also fearing to saille to assault them
in the forte, they did take all the vessels and other instruments of
Navigations, that they found at Syma, and returned from thence to Samie, but
in their way they pyllaiged the town of Loryme, Lorymus.
which is in the main land. The Peloponesians, having assembled at Cnidus
all their army, they caused all that was needful to be repaired. And during
this the, xii, counsaillours with Tyssaphernes, who was come to mete with them
there, devised of things passed, whider there had been any thing therein done,
that they judged not good, and also of the manner of contynuynge the war to
the greatest advantage that might be for the welthe and proffytt, aswelle of
the Peloponesians, as of the king. And among the other Lychas alleged that
the articles of the alliance, had not been very reasonably made, for he said,
that reason would not that all the lands, which the king or his
predecessors had gouerned^ should return into his puissance, forsomuche
as by that mean of necessity all the Islandes, the Locrians, and the countries
of Thessale, and of Beotie should come again into his subjection, and the
Lacedaemonians by that mean, instead of setting the other Greeks into
liberty, should bring them into the bondage of the Medes. Wherefore he said
and concluded that aither new articles should be made, orelles that same
alliance be left of and dissolved, and that for to obteigne the same, yt was
not nedefulle that Tyssaphernes should pay annye more soulde or wages. Who,
hearing this preposition was right angry and fulle of despyte, and so
departed in great anger and collar from the said Peloponesians. Which, after
his departure being calledde by certene of the pryncipalles of the Rhodiens,
they sailled into that same quarter, hoping with the same city to get a
great number of warryours and of ships, and that through the aid of them,
and of their allies, they might have monney sufficient for to enterteigne
their army. Being than, the same winter, departedde from Cnidus with foore
skoore and fortene shypps, they did come to aboorde at Camirus, Camirus.
which is in the Islande of Rhodes. Whereof those of the country, and of the
city, that knew nothing of the treaty, were much afraid, so that many of
them habandoned the city, for this chiefly, that it was not closed with
walls. But the Lacedemonyens sent unto them, and caused them all to assemble
togider, and likewise those of Lyndus, Lindus
and of Ielissus, Ielissus
and persuaded them that they should depart from the alliance and amytie of
the Athenyans, and by that mean the cities of Rhodes revolted and did take
part with the Peloponesians. Now the Athenyans, that were at Samie, had been
before advertised of this army that was in the way for to saille unto Rhodes,
and so they departed altogider hopyng to cosarue and succoure it, before that
it should have turned from them, but being come until within the sight of
the enemies, and knowing that they came to late, they retired into Chalces,
Chalces
and fromthence to Samie. And yet notwithstanding after that the Peloponeseans
were departed from the Rhodes, those same Athenyans came to make many
assaults against the Rhodiens, aswelle out of Samie, as of Chalces and Coo.
But the Peloponesians having withdrawin their shypps, there into the poorte,
soiourned there, lx, days, without doing any feate of war, during which
time they recovered, xxxii, talentes of the Rhodyans.

How Alcibiades being come into suspicion of the Lacedemonyans, did repair
to Tyssaphernes, and persuaded him to forsake the party of the Peloponesyans,
and to really or confederate himself with the Athenyans. And how ambassadors
were sent by the said Athenyans unto Thissaphernes for to conclude yt.
The.viii. Chapter.
During this time, and before the rebellion of Rhodes, after the death of
Chalcideus, and the battaille, that was made at Milet: the Lacedemonyans had
Alcibades in great suspicion, so that they did write to Astyochus, to cause
him to dye, for he was enemy of Agis their king, and in the rest he was
reputed a man of little faith. But he being advertised hereof, had withdrawin
himself, even at beginning as he had knowlaige of yt, toward Tissaphernes,
with whom, he had practiced, all that he could against the Peloponesians,
and had declared unto him all that he had learned of their affair, and also he
was the cause to make him to abate and dymynyshe the soulde or wages that he
paid unto the souldiars, and instead of a groate of Athenes, which he should
have paid them for the day: to deliver them three half pence only, whereof
he also did oftentimes faille the paymente, and by information of the said
Alcibiades, he excused himself, saying that the Athenians, which had better
understanding in the feate by sea than they, did pay unto their maronners,
but the said wages: and that he would not bring them thereunto, as well for to
space the monney: (not for annye lack that he had thereof) as also not to give
them occassion, to abuse ytt, and to become more lascyuious and delycate,
somuche the more, that the surplusage of that which should be necessary for
them to live within their vessels, should not by them be expended in
superfluous things, whereby they should be the more weakened. And where that
he deteigned from the^ for a certene time, one part of the payment, yt was to
the end that they should have no occasion to depart and habandone the shyps,
if nothing were due unto them, which thing they durst not do, when they
should perceive themself contregaiged with any part of their soulde. And for
to be hable to obteigne and persuade this same unto the Peloponesians, the same
Tissaphernes, by the counsaille of the said Alcibiades, had gotton all the
patrons of the ships and all the capytaines of the towns for monney,
resarued, that same Hermocrates of the Syracusayns, who only did resist
against yt with all his power, in the name of all their confederates. And
moreover the self Alcibiades, speaking for Tyssaphernes, did with reasone
confute the cities which demanded monney of the other confederates, for to
keep and defend them. And furst he said to the Chiens, that they ought to have
shame for to demand monney, considered that they were the richest of Greece,
and also that they were set into liberty and exempted from the subjection of
the Athenyans, through the aid of the Peloponesians, wherefore there was no
appearance to demand that the other cities should bring into danger their
parsones and also their goods and monney for to consarue the liberty of that
same city. And as touching the other cities, that were also likewise rebelled
against the said Athenyans, that they did great wrong not to be wyllyng to
pay for the defense of their liberty, that, which they had accustomed to pay
to the Athenyans by ta^e or by subsedie. And moreover he said that to the
surplusaige, Tyssaphernes had reasone to spare the monney in that manner for to
susteigne the charges of the war, at the least until he should have news
from the king, whider that he intended that the soulde should be entierly paid
or not, and than if he commanded him to pay the whole, there should be no lack
therein, and also should recompense the cities particulerly every one according
to his deserte. And moreover the said Alcibiades counsailled Tyssaphernes,
that he should not go about to make by any means an end of that same war,
and also that he should not cause the ships that he had caused to be tacled in
Phenice to come, another those which he had caused to be armed in Greece to
ioigne with the same of the Peloponesians, for in that doing he should make
them lords both of the sea, and of the land. But rather that he should
maignteigne them always in strife and in war, forsomuche as by that mean he
should be always in his puissance to provoke the one of the parties against
the other, which should have offended him. But if he suffered that the one of the
parties were destroyed, and that the other might have the dominion in sea and
in land: he should find none, that might aid him against those same, if he
would chastise them, and it should be forced yt he himself in that case should
only take the adventure with great danger and great expenses. Wherefore it
was better, with small expense to enterteigne them in controversy, and by that
mean to have his estate in full suertie. And also he showed further to the
said Tyssaphernes that the alliance of the Athenians should be much more
comely for the king, than the same of the Lacedemoniens, for that, that the
same Athenians went not about to rule on land. And their intent and facyon of
making war, was much more proffytable for the king, than the same of the
other, for this, yt the Greeks, which they should subdue in the sea, being
his allies, should redute and bring them partly into their servitude, and
those that were in the land, inhabyting in the prouynces of the king, should
remain his subjects, where the Lacedemoniens proceeded directly to a contrary
end, to wytt, to restore all the Greeks into liberty, wherefore it was to
believe that those, which went about, to bring the Greeks out of servitude of
the self Greeks, that they would not suffer that they should remain in the
like bondage of barbarous or estrangers, and so would go about to set in
liberty all those, that before time were not restored thereunto, which tha^
were in the subjection of the king. Wherefore he counsailled him yt he should
suffer the one party to weaken and destroy the other. For after that the
Athenians shall have lost the greatest part of their force, the Peloponesians
should be so weakened, that he should easily chase them out of Greece.
Tyssaphernes did easily agree to thies instructions, and knew suffyciently
that Alcibiades had told him the troth, forsomuche as he might co^prehende
and perceive it by the affairs that occured. And ensuing his counsaille, he
furst paid the soulde to the Peloponesians. But for all that he would not
suffer them to make war, but rather, he sometime showed them that they must
attend the ships of the Phenecia^s that should come, sometime that they were
to hoate and to ayger to fight. And by that mean he troubled all the
enterprise, and made the same army, that was so fayer and puissante, in manner
as unprofitable. And also in other things he declared most openly with
words, saying that he vnwyllyngly made war in compa^gnie of the said
allies, wholly by instruction of the said Alcibiades, who judging the same to
be a good thing, did persuade it as well to the king as to Tyssaphernes, when
that he was with them. And that did he pryncipally for the desire that he had
to return into his country, which thing he hoped at some time to obteigne,
if yt were not utterly destroyed. And somuche the more, when men should
understand that he had great amytie with Tyssaphernes, like as it happened.
For as the souldyars Athenyans, that were at Samie, understood the famyliaritie
that he had with the said Tissaphernes with this^ that he had alread^ practiced
the principalles to set ^orwarde his restorynge toward them that had most
auctorytie in the town, and to bring the governance thereof to a small number
of the most honnest men, doing the^ to understand that by that mean
Thissaphernes would the sonner lynke and ioigne in their amytie the more part
of the patrons and capytaines of the shyps and also of the other pryncipalles
that were in the army, who, of theymself hated the commons estate: they agrede
thereunto, and after that the matter was brought into the camp, the bruytt
thereof did run through out the city of Athenes and chiefly that it had been
ordained, by those that were in Samie, that some of them should go unto
Alcibiades for to treat and parliament with him of that same matter, like as it
was done. Who assured them furste to make Tyssaphernes their frende^ and
a^terwardes the king, provided that they should change their common government,
and should comyt it into the hands of honnest substanciall me^, as is before
said, for by that mean he said that the king would take and conceive the
greater suertie, and trust in them, whereunto those which were sent unto him,
did readely agree, as well for that, that it seemed to them that by that mean
the Athenians might have the victory of that same war: as also for this, that
they themself that were of the pryncipalles of the city, hoped that, by that
mean, the admynistracion should come into their hands, where before they had
been oftimes persecuted by the com^naltie. Being than come again to Samie,
after that they had treated and persuaded the thing unto them that were there,
they sailled to Athenes, and showed the commons that in calling again
Alcibiades, and co^mytting the government into the hands of the pryncipalles
of the city, they should win the king on their side, who should fournishe
them with monney for to soulde and pay their men, in that same war.
Wherunto^ although at the furst sight, that the people were unwilling to
co^descende and agree, yet the charge, which they susteigned for the war, in
paymente of the warryours, understanding that the king would pay them, caused
them to enclyne and co^sente unto yt. And thereunto those, which stomacked the
matter did greatly help, aswelle for the love of Alcibiades, as for their
particular proffytt. And so declared, all that which Alcibiades had said to
them, unto the people right amply, which seemed in many things right great,
and right assured. But Phrynicus, who was yet Duke of the Athenyans, found
nothing good, which came to that purpose. And it semedde to him, that
Alcibiades in the estate, wherein he was, desired not more the governance of the
pryncipalles, than of the common estate, but rather that his end and intent,
was to make some sedition in the city, hoping that by one of the parties, he
should be called again, and wholly restored, where against the said Phrynicus
minded well to withstand, aswelle for his particular interest, as for to
exchue the deuysion of the city. And moreover he could not understand, how
the king would depart from the amytie of the Peloponesians, for to allye
himself with the Athenyans, considered that the said Peloponesians had already
as much practice and puissance in the sea, as the Athenians, and also yt they
possessed many of the cities within the kings countrey^ wherefore for to ioigne
himself with the Athenians, in whom he might skarce^y have confydence, it
should be unto him but charge and tra^aille. And that it were a much more easy
thing for him and more conuenable for to enterteigne the amytie with the
Peloponesia^s, who had in nothing offended him. On the other part he said that
he knew that the other cities, wha^ they should understand, that the
gou^^^^nce of that same Athens was altered and translated from the commons, to
a small number of men, and that they must live of the self sort: the same that
were already turned from them, would not therefore come again to the amytie
and obeyssance of the Athenyans. And those, which had not done yt, would not
therefore let to do yt. For where they hoped to recover there liberty by the
mean of the Peloponesians, having the victory: they would not choose to
remain in subjection of the Athenyans, in whatsoever manner that their estate
should be governed, were it by the commons or by the pryncipalles. And on the
other side, that those, which were reputed for the most honnest and for the
pryncypalles, considered that they should suffer no less the gouerna^ce, being
in the power of a small number, than they did when the same was in the hands
of all the commons. For they should be as much troubled, by those, which used
guiftes and corruptions, and that were inuentours and conductours of all evil
things for to make their particular proffyt, as they were in the commons
es^ate. And also the citizeins should under the auctorytie of those, which
should have this government, be punisshed and putt to death without hearing
their offenses, where they than had recourse to the people which punysshed
such violences, and that the same was the opinion of the othere cities, which
were in their obeyssance or amytie, which had knowyn yt by experience.
Phrynicus said that he was well infourmed of all thies things, and thereby not
to find any thing of that good, which Alcibiades did than set forward. Yet
always those, which from the beginning had been of the contrary opinion,
all that same notwithstanding, perseuered still therein, and so ordained to
send messengers unto Athens, amongst whom was Pysander for to propone and
declare unto the commons, Pisa^der
the restitution and restoryng of Alcibiades, and the abolysshynge of the common
estate. Whereupon Phrynicus, seeing and knowing of what sort the messengers
should propone and declare the brynging again of Alcibiades, and doubtinge
least the commons would accept it, and if it were so, that evil should chance
to him, for the resiste^ce that he had made to the contrary, Alcibiades having
the pryncipall auctorytie, he devised one such a practique. Which is, that he
secretly sent one of his men to Astyochus, chief of the army by sea, of the
Peloponesians, which was yet at Milet, whom he advertised by his letters of
many things, and among other how Alcibiades destroyed all the affair of
the said Peloponesians, and treatedde to make alliance bitwene Tyssaphernes and
the Athenians, and by the said letters declared that he was to be pardoned in
that he aduertysed and did counsaille the thing, which was to the disadvantage
of his city and country, insomuche as he did yt for to noye his enemy.
Astyochus, having received his letters, did not greatly esteem them. For yt
was not in his puissance to punyshe Alcibiades, for that, that he did no more
come to him. But he went to Tissaphernes and the said Alcibiades, which were in
the city of Magnesia, Magnesia.
and seignifyed unto them what was wryttone to him out of Samie, making
himself wytnes of that, which had been addressed unto him, by that mean for
to gratefie Tyssaphernes: and as men did judge to make his particular proffytt
thereby, and also that, unto that end, he suffered that the paymente of the
souldyars was delayed by the said Tyssaphernes. Alcibiades, having recovered
the letters of Phrynicus, sent them incontinently to the officers and chiefest
that were in Samie, admonysshing and requirynge them, that they should putt
Phrynicus to death. Who, being hereof advertised, and perceyuyng himself in
great danger, he did write eftsoon to Asteochus, complaining of this, that he
had discoueredde and delivered his letters to his enemies, offryng unto him an
other party, to wytt, to bring into his power all the army, that he had at
Samie, for to cause them all to dye. delyueryng him sufficient easy means,
for that that the town had not walls, and he excused himself afreshe unto him
saying, that no man ought to repute him wicked, whider that he did the same or
whatsoever any other thing, for to exchue the danger of his life, wherein he
was, by procurement of his mortal enemies. Astyochus caused eftsoon this
treat^e to be knowin to Tissaphernes and Alcibiades. Phrynicus being advertised
hereof, and that the same Alcibiades had not yet had his later letters in his
hands, he took and furst practiced the other capytaines that were at Samie,
and said unto the^ that he was advertised how the enemies, considering yt the
same city was not enclosed with walls, and that the port was so little that
all the ships that they had there, could not be within it: were determined for
to assaille their camp, wherefore he was of opini^n yt incon^inently the walls
should be raised round aboutes the town, and in the rest to make great watch
and great ward, and yt he, for the auctorytie, which he had over the^ by mean
of his charge, should constrain the^ to do it. Which thing they did willingly
as well for to exchue the danger yt was present, as also for to be hable to
ward and consarue it in time to come. Sone after, the letters of Alcibiades
did come to the other capitains of the army, by the which he advertised the^ of
the treat^e of Phrynicus, and how yt he would betray and deliver the^ al into
the hands of thennemis, who would right sone sail to assault the^. But the
said capitaines and other that understood it would not credytt it, but rather
judged yt he did write it but for hatred and that he charged Phrynicus to have
intelligence and confederatio^ with thennemys of that thing, which the same
Alcibiades knew well yt they would do, and by that mean the letters of
Alcibiades did in nothing hurt the said Phrynicus, but rather they did Auerre
and credit that, which he had already discovered of thenterprise of ye said
enemies. After yt, Alcibiades cessed not to persuade Tissaphernes, yt he should
conclude amity with the Athenians, whereunto he redely inclined, for that, yt he
alredye was in fear of the Lacedimonia^s, seeing that they were more puissant
by sea, tha^ the Athenians. And neuerthels Alcibiades went about to get
authority toward Tissaphernes, in manner that he should give faith unto him.
And chiefly after that he had understand the difference, yt had been bitwene
Tissaphernes and the comissaries Lacedemonia^s at Cnidus, Cnidus
touching the articles of allya^ce made by Theramenes, which difference had
already been moved before yt the said Peloponesians came to the Rhodes. And
also before that same, Alcibiades had vttred ye purpose, whereof we have spoken,
to Tissaphernes, showing unto him that the Lacedaemonians went about to restore
and set all the grekishe cities in liberty, whereby, being afterward cha^ced
the proposition yt Lychas had at the assemble of Cnidus, who said that ye same
article was not to be holden, by the which it was spokene yt the king should
recover to his obeissa^ce al ye cities, which he or his predecessors had
governed: he fortefied his opinion more and more. And by such means,
Alcibiades, as a man that intended great things, went about to show himself
in all sorts, affectioned to ye said Tissaphernes. During this time, ye
messengers which were sent with Pysa^der by the Athenians yt were at Samie, to
ye city of Athe^s, being there arrived proponed and declared to ye commons yt
which they had in charge, touching so^ marely the principal poinctes, and
chiefly that in doing this, which was demanded of the^, they might have ye
king on their side, and by yt mean obteigne ye victory against the
Peloponesia^s, to wit, in calling again Alcibiades and in cha^ging the
governance of ye town, like as has been said. Against the which things many
of y^ people did speak with great insta^ce, as well for the affeccio^ which they
had to ye common estate, as also for thenmytye yt they had against Alcibiades.
And they said that it should be a thing tomuch to their reproach for to restore
to auctorite him, who had violated and broken their laws, and against whom,
those yt pronounced the hallowed things had borne wytnes of the corruptyng,
and violation of their ceremonies. By reasone whereof, perceiving himself
cou^pable, he wyllyngly bannysshedde himself, and therefore the same cytizeins
were bound to great curssynges and punyshmentes toward the gods, in case
that they should call him again. Whereupon Pysander, seeing the great
multitude of the Againesayers, he went thider, where the greatest preasse of
them was, and taking them by the hand the one after the other, he demanded
of them if they had any hope of victory against the Peloponesians by other
mean, seeing that they had so great an army by sea, as theirs, and great
number of cities of Greece in their alliance, and moreover the king and
Tyssaphernes, who fournysshed them with monney, whereof the Athenians had no
more, another could hope to have, but on the kings bihaulf. Whereunto al those,
whom he demanded, answered him that they perceived none othere mean. Than
he replied unto them that the same could not be done, if they reformed not
the governance of the city, and did not co^mytt it into the hand of a small
number, and that the king desired it for to be more suer of the city.
Wherefore he required them that they should not be wyllyng to have more
regard to the governance of the tytie, than to to wealth of the same. For
afterward, with the time, it should be in their faculty and power for to
change yt, if they thought good. Let us than call again, said he, at this
present Alcibiades, who alone has power to do yt. Through thies declarations
and perswations of Pysander, the people, which at the beginning did take this
change of the estate and governance to be strange, understanding by the
proposition of the same Pysander, that there was no other mean to save the
Empire and the city, partly in fear and partly in hope, they were content
that the governance should be committed into the hand of a small number of
men. And the decree was made, whereby the people did give charge and commission
to Pysander, with ten other cytizeins for to go to Tyssaphernes and
Alcibiades, for to create and accord with them, touching the same, in such
sort as should seem unto them most proffitable for the city. And by the self
decree, Phrynicus with his compaignion Sciron, Sciron
who had been accused by the said Pysander, was deposed from their charge,
and in their stead were placed Diomedon and Leon, Diomedon.

Leon.


who were sent unto the army in the sea. And the charge, which Pysander had
laid against Phrynicus, was that he suffered Amorges to be betrayed and lost
and it seemed to him that he was not sufficient for to conducte the things,
that should be treated with Alcibiades. Pysander having than set fourth all
the coniurations and form of doings, which were in the beginning, before
that the common estate had auctorytie, aswelle touching the judgments as
also the officers, and done somuche that the people being assembled, had
consented to the abolysshyng and abrogating of the commons estate, and moreover
provided for all things that seemed to him necessary for the state of the
things present: he launched fourth into the sea with his ten compaignions
and sailled fromthence to Tyssaphernes.

How those of Lhio having been repoulsed at a saulte which they made in the
camp of the Athenians, with great loss of their men: were straitely assieged
and brought into great necessity. And how the treaty, which Alcibiades
purposed, for to make alliance bitwene Tyssaphernes and the Athenyans, was
brokene, and the alliance renewed bitwene the said Tyssaphernes and the
Lacedemonyans. The.ix. Chapter.
ON the other side, Dyomedo^ and Leon, after that they were arrived at the army
by sea, they governed it against the Rhodes. And saying that the Peloponesyans
shyps were in the poorte, which wardedde it and by that mean that they could
not enter therein, they sailled fromethence to land in an other place, whereat
the Rhodians being above r^adye against them, they repoulsed them, and that
done, they embarked theymself again, and sailled into Chalcedon, Fromwhence
and also fro Coo^ they made sharper war against the Rhodyans, and also might
easily spy if anny Peloponesyans shypps passed thereby. During this time,
Xenophantydas Laconia^ did come out of Chio to the Rhodes from Pedaritus, who
signified to the Lacedemonyans that were there, that the wall, which the
Athenyans had raised up against the city of Chio was already fynysshed. And
that if all the army by sea, did not right shortly come to their succors, the
same city should be lost. Which thing understanding, It was determined by an
general accord of the^ all for to succor it. In this mean time Pedaritus
and the Chiens issued fourth against the rampars which the Athenyans had made
about their ships, with such force that they did beat down and break one
part thereof, and also did ^ake some of the said shyps. But the Athenyans,
being come to the succors of their men and rampares, the Chiens did furst
fly. And afterward Pedaritus, who was wylling to stand to it, being
habandoned of those, which were about him, was slain and a great number of
Chiens with him and a great quantity of harnoies takene. By occasion of
which overthrow the city was assieged yet more straightly than before, as well
by sea as by land, and therewith was in great necessi^ie of victualles. On
the other side, Pysander and his compaignions being arrived with Tyssaphernes,
they begone to treat with him the appoynctmente and to set fourth the parties.
But he fearing more the Lacedaemonians than the^, and as he that minded (ensuing
the counsaille of Alcibiades) to suffer the^ yet more ^o feoble and weaken the
one the other, did not wholly declare himself to the same Alcibiades. Who
perceiving that, did put fourth such parties bitwene the Athenyans and
Tyssaphernes, yt they could not agree, which thing, in my fantasy, the said
Tyssaphernes also purposed, but to diverse ends and for diverse causes. To wit,
Tissaphernes, for that yt he feared the Peloponesia^s, and therefore durst not
well depart from them. And Alcibiades for this, that seeing y^ Tissaphernes was
not willing to conclude the appoynctment, he would not give knolaige thereof to
the Athenians yt it was not in his puissance to cause him to co^desce^de unto
it, but rather was he wylling to cause them to bileue, that he had already
won him, and that they were the cause of the breaking of, for that that they
made to him tomuch sklender offers. And for to comme to his purposes, he
demanded of them in the name of the said Tyssaphernes, for whom he did
speak in his presence of things so great and so unreasonable, that he was
forcedde to keep himself from agreynge unto them, that the conclusion should
not be made. For furst he demanded of them all the country of Ionum with all
the Islandes adioignyng to the same. And that same being agrede unto by the
Athenyans at the third assembly, which they made, for to show that he had
some authority with the king, he demanded them that they should suffer him
to make ships at his will and with the same to saille into his lands with
such number and as often as it should ^^me good unto him. The Ahenyans would
not give place to that demand, but saying that intolerable things were
demanded of the^, and judging them ^elf as deceived by Alcibiades, they
departed in great anger and disdeigne, and returned to Samie. After that
same, Tyssaphernes the self winter sailled again to Caunus, to ioigne himself
a new with the Peloponesians and to make alliance upon such conditions as he
might, payinge unto them the soulde or wages, at their pleasure, to the end
that they should not become his enemies, fearing that if they were
constrained for to come to battaylle, by sea with the Athenyans, least that
they should be overcome for lack of men, considered that the more part of
them had not be paid, or else that the Athenyans should obteigne that, which
they required without him: or happily that he feared more, least that for to
recover their paymente, they would waste and destroy the country of the
king borderynge unto theyme, which was in the main land. For these reasons
than, and for to come to his intentes, which were to make the Greeks egall in
force, having caused the Peloponesyans to comme, he delyueredde them paymente
and soulde or wages, of the army by sea, and did come to the third treaty
with them in this same manner and substance.

The third treaty of alliance bitwene the Lacedemonyans and the king Dareus.
THe thirtenth year of the king Dareus, Alexippidas, Alexippidas.
being Trybune of the people at Lacedemonie, the treaty was made in the field
of Meander, Mea^der
bitwene the Lacedemonyans and their allies of the one party, and
Tyssaphernes, Theramenes, Theramenes.
and the children of Pharnacus on the other party, touching the affairs
bitwene the said parties. Furst that all the same which apperteigned to the
king in Asia, should remain to him, and that he might determyne and dispose of
his prouynce at his pleasure. That the Peloponesians nor their allies should
not enter into the kings country, for to endomage it, nor likewise the king
into the country of the Lacedemonyans nor of the allies. And if any of the
said allies did the contrary, the other should prohybitt and resist them: and
the king likewise, if any of his subjects did it in the lands of the said
confederates. That Tyssaphernes should pay the soulde or wages to the ships,
which be presently ready, attending that those of the king should come, and
than the Lacedaemonians and their said allies should wage and enterteigne
theirs, at their proper costs and expenses if they would, and if they rather
desired that Tyssaphernes should pay the charge, that he should be bound to
lend the^ monney, which should be rendered and repayde unto him the war
fynysshed by the said allies. That after that the kings ships should be come,
they should ioigne with those of the allies and al togiders make war against
the Athenians, so long as it should seem good to the said Tyssaphernes, and to
the said Lacedemonyans and confederates, and if it should seem good unto the^
to depart from the said enterprise, that it shall be done with a common accord
and not otherwise. Such were the articles of the said treaty. After the
which, Tyssaphernes used diligence to cause the ships to come from Phenice,
and to accomplish all the other things, which he had promised, and he showed
himself moreover much affectioned unto the enterprise. About the end of the
winter, the Beotians did take the town of Orope, Orop^.
with the garnison of Athenia^s, that were within yt, and that by the treaty
of those of the town, and also of some of ye Erethriens, hoping afterward to
cause the town of Eubee to rebel. For the same town of Orope, being in the
land of Erythree, which those Athenians did hold, it could not be, but yt
the loss thereof should turn to their great damage as well to the city of
Erythree as to all the Isle of Eubee. After ye same, the Erythreens sent to the
Peloponesians that were at Rhodes for to cause the^ to come into Eubee. But for
that, yt thaffaire of Chio seemed unto the^ more urgent, for the necessity,
wherein the town was, they refused the other enterprise, and departed
fro^thence for to sail to succor it. And passing nigh to Orope, they
descriued the Athenia^s ships that were departed from Chalce, Chalce,
which kept the main sea, neuerthelas for that, yt they sailled to diverse
voiages, the one came not against the other, but rather took every one his way,
to wit, the Athenians to Samie, and the Peloponesia^s to Milet, for so much as
they perceived well that Chio could not be succored without battaille, and in
the mean time the end of the winter did come, which was the twentieth year
of the war, which Thucidides has writto^. In the beginning of the furst
spring, Dercilidas Spartian was sent with a small number of men into Hellespont,
for to cause the town of Abide, to rebel against the Athenia^s, which is a
coloine of the Melesiens. On the other side the Chiens^ seeing that Astyochus
s^acked so much to come to their succor, they were constrained to come to fight
in the sea against the Athenians under the conduct of Leontes the Spartian, who
they had made their chief after the death of Pedaritus, in the time that
Astyochus was yet at Rhodes, and was come with Antisthenes, from Mylet. Now
they had, xii, strange ships, that were come to their succors, to wit, five
of the Thu^iens, foore of the Syracusains, one of Anea, one of Milet, and one
of Leontes, and, xxxvi, of theirs. And so all those that were hable to fight,
issued fourth, and came to assault the Athenians very boldly, having chosen
a place of advantage for theymself. And the combat was sharp and dangerous on
both sides, wherein the Chiens should not have had the worse, but the night
came upon them which departed them, and the Chiens returned into the town.
In the self time Dercilidas being arrived by land in Hellesponte, the town of
Abide, did fourthwith render it self into his hands and of Pharnabazus, and
two days after, the city of Lamsaque did the like, whereof, Strombichides,
who was before Chio, being advertised, he came soubdaynly with, xxiiii,
Athenians ships for to succor and defend that same quarter, amongst the
which ships, there was barques that carried me^ at arms, Being tha^ arrived at
Lamsaque, and having vainquisshed in battaille those of the town, that issued
fourth against them, he did take even at one coming, the said town, for
that, that it was not walled, togiders with all those which were within the
ships, afterward having restored the free men into the town, he sailled
fourthwith unto Abide. But saying that there was no hope to take it nor
appearance for to assiege it, he departed and did go to Seste, Sestus
which is a city in the country of Cheronese, situated directly foranempst
Abide, the which the Medes had holden for a certene time, and therein he did
putt a good garnison for the saulf guard and defense of all the country of
Hellesponte. But in thies enterfeates by cause of the departure of Dercilidas,
the Chiens, and also the Melesia^s were masters of the sea, whereupon
Astyochus, understanding the combat by sea, which the same Chiens had had
against the said Athenians and the departure of the said Strombichides, he was
more anymated and assured therein. And so he did come with two shyps and no
more to Chio, and there he took with him all those that he found there, and
sailled straight to Samie. And seeing that the enemies would not issue
fourth to fight, for that, that they trusted not well the one the other, they
returned to Mylet.

How a great division happened amongst the Athenyans, as well within the
city, as without, chiefly in the army that was in Samie, by mean of the
change of the estate and governance of the same, which did greatly endomage
them. The.x. Chapter.
THe differente and controversy of the said Athenyans was for that, that in
the same time, the estate and governance of the town, had been changed at
Athens, out of the power of the common people, unto a small number. For
Pysander and his compaignions, being returned to Samie, brought the army that
was there, to their will and obeyssance, and one great part of the Samiens,
chiefly they exhorted the prycipalle of the town to take the governance
thereof into their hands, although that there were many, which were
willing to maignteigne the common estate, whereby happened great division and
sedition bitwene them. Also the Athenia^s, that were there in the army,
having consulted upon the thing among themself, and seeing that Alcibiades
was not earnest in the matter, they concluded to forsake him, and not to call
him again, for that, that it seemed to theyme, that though he did come again
into the city, yet should he not be conueniente nor mete, for to order and
govern the affairs under the governance of a small number, but rather was
expediente that those that were there, of the estate, whereof was question:
should deuyse the manner, how that practique should be conductedde, and also
how the feate in war should be pursued. Whereunto every man of them did
readely offer to contrybute of his oune monney and all other things
necessary, knowing that they should no more labor for the commons nor for
any other, but for theymself. And so they sent again Pysander and the moytie
of the ambassadors which had been sent toward Tyssaphernes, unto Athenes,
for to give order there in the affairs, and charged them, that through all the
cities which they should pass, of the obeyssance of the Athenyans, yt they
should comytte the governance into the hand of a small number of the
pryncypalles, and the other part of the said ambassadors also departed and
every one did goo into sundry places for to do the like. And also they
ordained that Dyotrephes, Diotrephus.
who was tha^ at the siege of Chio, should go into the province of Thrace, which
was delivered into his governance, who, in his departure from the said siege,
passing through Thasse, abolisshed the common estate, and comytted the
governance into the hands of a small number of men. But being departed out of
the city, the great part of the Thessyans, having enclosed their town with
wall aboutes one month after his departure, perswadedde themself to have no
more need to be governed by those, which the Athenians had set there, nor by
y^ mean to remain under their obeyssance: but rather hopedde within short
time to recover entier liberty through the aid of the Lacedemonyans, for
that, that their cytizeins, which were bannisshed by the Athenians, were
withdrawin to Lacedemonie, and sollycited with their power, that ships should
be sent unto them and that the town might rebelle. So it chanced unto
theyme holy in that same, as they desired, which is, that the city without
anny danger was committed into their liberty, and the commons, which were
bente to speak against the estate of a small number, were without hurt
rebuke or offense depryued of the governance, and to those that took party
with the Athenyans, and unto whom Diotrephes had betaken the government, yt
chanced whole contrary to their thinkinges. And the like was done in many
other of the cities subjected to the Athenyans, which, considering (as it
seems to me) that they should have no more fear of the Athenyans, and that
the same form of living in their obeissance under the color of pollecie,
was for troth but a colored servitude or bondage, they attended al for a
true liberty. As touching Pisander and his compaignions, that were gone with
him, they comytted the governance of the cities, through which, they passed,
into the hand of a small nombere, at their pleasuer: and out of some of the
same, they did take souldyars, which they carried with them to Athenes, where
they found that their accomplices and friends, had already done many things,
redoundinge to their intent for to abolishe the commons estate. For one
Androcles, who had great authority with the common people, and that had been
one of the chiefest, that were cause of the bannishmente of Alcibiades, was
slain by a secrett conspiratie of some young compaignyons of the city for
two purposes. The one for that, that he had tomuche authority with the common
people, the other for to acquire and get the good will of Alcibiades: who as
they thought should have comme again into authorie, trustinge that he would
make Tyssaphernes their friend. And for the self purposes they had by like
means caused some other to be slain, which seemed unto them, to be contrary
unto that practique: and also they had showed unto the commons by studied and
apparante narrations and reasons: that there should be no more wages paid but
to those, that sarued in the warrre, and that in the admynistration of the
common affairs, no greater number should entermeddle, than of five houndred
men, and chieflye of those, that were hable to sarue the comone weal, both
with bodies and with goods: which thing seemed honnorable to the common
people, and those same, which were cause of the brynging down of the common
estate, thought yet by that change to have authorytie. For also the ancient
facyon of assemblynge the people and the counseille in all affairs, of
hearing the opynyons of all men, and of followynge the greater number, did
stylle remain. But nothing might be proponed or declared without deliberation
of the small number, which had the authorytie. Amongst whom, there were
that conferred a part of all that should be proponed and set fourth for
their intent: and when they had said their opinion, no man durst speak
against yt for fear: saying the great number and authorytie of the said
governors. For also, when any did speak against yt, means were found for to
cause him to dye: also they did no justice, nothere make inquyrie for
manquellers or murderers: whereof the people were so afraid and abashed: that
they durst not say a word: and they thought that they did get very much by
holdyng their peace or keeping silence, in that they received no other
incomodytie and violence. And somuche the more they were in greater fear, that
they doubted, least there had been a much greater number of people in that
same conspiracy, for it was not very easy to understand, who were the
coniuratours and accomplices or parttakers in that same sect, as well for
greatness of the city and multitude of people, as also that the one did not
know the intent of the other, and also did not complain the one to the other,
another to discover his secret unto him, nor to treat to take secret vengeance
thereof. For the suspicion and mystruste was so great through out the people,
that a man durst not trust, no not his acquaintance and friends, doubting
least they had been of the same co^spiratie, for that, that there was in yt
such things, as never were doubted. By reason whereof a man could no more
know, to which, of the commons he might trust, whereby the estate of the
coniurators or parttakers was greatly assured, pryncypally because of the said
diffidence or mistruste. Pysander and his compaignions than being come in the
time of that same trouble, they brought to pass right easly, and in a small
season, their enterprise. And furst having assembled ye people, they caused
the^ to consent to chose ten grephiers and secretayries, the which should
have full power and auctorytie to pronounce to the people, that which should
be devised to be putt in consultation for the welthe of the city at a day,
which was named. The which day being come and the assembly made in a great
field, wherein was situ^ted the temple of Neptunus aboutes ten stades out of
the city: there was no other thing recyted by the grephiers, but that it was
lawful for to declare and publishe the decree of the Athenyans in whatsoever
part a man would. And who soever should write that the pronouncer did against
the laws, or otherewyse did him oultrage or empeshemente, should be grievously
punished. Afterward, the said decree was published, which was of this
substance, that all the officers which were than in authority by the choosing
of the commons, should be abolisshed and set of, and that no wages should be
paid unto them: and that they should elect five presedentes, who should
afterward name an houndred men, and every of those, should choice three other,
which should be in the whole foore houndred: who, when they should come unto the
court, should have full power and ample auctorytie to execute that, which should
be determined to be for the wealth of the common weal: and moreover to assemble
five thousand cytezeins, at all and asmany times, as they should think good.
Pysander did pronounce that same decre, who in the same, and in other things
did willingly all that, which he learned to s^^ue for the extinguishinge and
abrogation of the commons estate. But the said decree had already of long time
before been made by Antiphon, Antipho^
who was in great reputation. For truly there was not at the same time in the
city any man that exceaded him in virtue, and also he was very well aduysed
and prudente for to find and counsel in good, expedient and common affairs:
and moreover he had a great grace to speak and declare them: and albeit that he
never would come to the assembly of the people, another to any other
co^tentious congregation, except that he were required: yet the common people
had him in suspicion for the effycacitie and elegancie of his speakinge. And
though that he would not entermedle in causes, yet every man that had any
matter, were it judicial or touching the commons, he reputed that he had great
favor, if he might have him for counsaillor. And aftere that the estate of
foore houndred was abragated and that men proceeded against those, which were
the pryncipall authors thereof, being accused as the other, he defended his case
and answered therein in my conceyte better than anny man, to my remembrance,
ever did. Phrynicus also showed himself greatly favorable to the same commons
estate, for fear of Alcibiades, whom he knew to have understood al yt,
which he had treated with Astiochus being at Samie: for it seemed to him that he
would never return so long, as the said governance of foore hou^dred endured.
And also he was esteemed a man virtuous and constant in great adversities for
yt, that me^ had seen by experyence, that he never showed himself that his
heart failled him. Theramines also sone of Agno^ was of ye chief and principal
for to extinguish ye common government, who was a man very sufficient, as well
in word as in deed. This work being than conducted by so great number of me^
of understanding and of auctority: it was no maruail that it was brought to
effect, though yt it seemed and was for troth a very difficile and hard thing
to deprive the common people of Athens from their liberty, which had been and
wherein they were about a hou^dred years after that the tyrants or evil
rulers were bannished. And they had not only been exempted out of the
subiectyon of all other: but also for, more than the half of the foresaid
time, they had governed over other people. The assemble of the people being
departed, after that they had approved and ratefyed the said decree, the
four houndred governors were afterward brought into the court, in this
manner. The Athenyans were contynually in armure by reason of the enemies,
which were in Decelea, to wit, the one for to ward the walls, the other
the gates and other places, whereunto they were appoyncted. And when the
assygned day did come for to do the said act: those that were not of that
coniuration or sect: were suffered to goo into their howses, as the custom
was. And to those, that were of yt, was commanded that they should tarry, not in
the place of their watch, and where their weapons were, but in some other
part thereby, and that if they perceived any that woolde resyste that, which
was done or empesche or let yt, that they should repoulse such with their
weapons if need were. And those, which were deputed and ordained thereunto,
were the Andrians, the Thenyans, three houndred of the Caristiens, and those of
the city of Egyne, which the Athenyans had caused to come for to inhabitt
there. The things being than so ordonned, the four houndred chosen to the
governance, every of them bearyng a dagger hid under his habillement or
clothing, and with them six skoore young men for to assyste and strengthen
them, when it should be needful: entered all togiders into the pallays, where
the court was holden, and enuyronned the senators, which did sit in
counsel. Who aftere the custom declared their opynyons by black and white
beans, and so said unto them that they should take their payment, for the
time, that they had served, and departed. Which payment the same four
houndred had brought the^, and as they issued fourth of the counsailles
chamber, they delivered to every of them their duties. And by that mean, they
departed out of the court without making any resistance, and without that the
rest of the commons ones styrred. And than the four houndred did enter and
choice among themself certain threasouriers and receyuours, and that done,
did sacrefyce solempnelye for the treatinge of the said new officers. And by
that mean the comone governance was holy changed, and a great part of that,
which was done before that time, was revoked, resarued, that they did not
call again the bannished men, for that Alcibiades should not be comprysed
therein. In the rest, the said governors did all things at their will,
and among othere caused some of the Cytezeyns to dye, doubtinge least that
they should have been placedde in their steed, for that they seemed to them
not to be for their purpose. Some other they did put into prysone, and some
they bannyshed. That done, they sent unto Agis king of the Lacedemonyans, who
was at Decelea, an Heraulte: signefying that they woolde reconcyle themself
with the Lacedemonyans, and showing him that he might conceive and take more
suertie and trust in them, than in the varyable and unconstant commons. But he,
which thought well, that the city could not be but in trouble: and that the
commons woolde not suffer their authorytie to be easily abolished, specially, if
they parceyued any great army coming before their town: and that the estate
of the said four houndred was not so establisshed, but that it might well be
troubled, he made them no answer touching the appoynctement. But within few
days after, he caused to assemble a great number of men of war, in the
country of Peloponese, and with them and those, that he had Decelea, he came
unto the walls of the city of Athenes, trusting that they would have rendered
themself to his will, as well for the trouble, that was among them, both
within and without the city, as also for fear, seeing so great puissance at
their gates. And though that they woolde not do yt, yet yt seemed unto him,
that he might easily take the great walls by force, for that, that they were
solitary and required ever great watch and ward. But it chanced wholly
otherwise, for the Athenyans did make no tumulte nor insurrection amongst
themself, but they caused their horsemen and also one part of their fotemen,
as well well armed, as light armed to issue fourth, the which repoulsed
incontynently, those, which were approached next unto the walls, and did slay a
great part of them, ye spoils of whom, they carried into the town. Whereupon
Agis seeing, that his enterprise did take no good effect, he returned to
Decelea, and certain days after his return, he sent back the strange
souldyars, which he had caused to come for that same enterprise, and reteygned
those, that he had furste there. And neuerthelas the foore houndred sent
eftsoon unto him for to treat the appoynctement, the which he did take in
good part, so that he persuaded them to send Ambassadors unto Lacedemonie
for to treat the peace, which they greatly desired. On the other side, they
sent ten cytezeins of their faction or sect, unto those, that were at
Samie, for to show them, among many othere charges, which they had, that the
same, which they had done in changing of the commons estate, was not to the
damage of the city, but for the wealth thereof, and that the auctorytie, was not
in the power of foore houndred only, but of five thousand, and thereby that it
was as much in the hands of the commons, as before time it had been: for so much
as at no affayre, that ever was treated upon in the city as domestical, nor
wtin the self country as foreyne, there was never found under the commons
governance so great a number, as five thousand men. And the foore houndred did
send this Ambassade unto Samie, immediately after the beginning, fearing
least those that were there of the army by sea, would not be agreeable to that
change, another obey their governance, and least the euylland the discord
should begin there, and afterward come into the city, as it happened. For
after ye time, that the said change was made at Athens, there was a mutyne and
sedytion made in the said city of Samie, for the self occasion in this
manner. For some Samyens, the which in favor of the commons estate, that was
than in the city and for defense there of, were raised up and in the armure
against the pryncipalles of the town that would have usurped the
admynistration, did sone after turn and changed their opinion at the
perswation of Pysander, when he was come thider, and of other his followers and
accomplices Athenians, who^ he found there. And willing to put down the said
common estate, they assembled to the number of foore houndred fully determined
to assault and drive away all those, that conducted the common governance:
pretendinge themself to be and represente all the commons. And at the arryuall
they did slay an ungracious man, and one of an evil lyuinge an Athenyan named
Hyperbolus, Hiperbolus.
who was bannisshed out of Athens, another for suspytion nor fear, that annye
man had of his puissance nor of his aucthorytie: but for sin and offense, and
for that, that he procured shame to the city, togiders with one of the Dukes
Athenyans named Charminus, Charminus.
and some other Athenyans that were in his compaignie, by whose counsel he
governed himself. And they determined to proceed further in favor of the small
number. But ye other cytezeins taking party with the common estate, which
understood this co^iuration or conspyratie, did discover it, chiefly to some of
ye capytains that were under ye charge of Diomedo^ and of Leon, dukes of ye
Athenia^s. The which dukes, for somuche as they had had that same charge and
other honnours of the como^s, were not content that ye auctorytie should come
into hands of a small number. And likewise they discovered it unto Thrasylus,
whereof the one was patron of a shipp, and the other capytayne of the men of
war, that were in the same: and also the said men of war, whom they knew
to have affection to the said commons estate: prayinge and requyringe that they
woolde not suffer them to be so foiled and ouercharged by the said
coniuratours, which had conspyred their death, another also in such affayre,
to habandonne, the city of Samie, which should cause it to lose and wythdrawe
the good will, that it had borne to y^ Athenya^s, if they would change the
form of living, which they had used until that same time. This thing, being
so declared to the Chiefes and capitains, they did speak particulerly to the
souldyars: persuading them not to suffer that same conspyratie to take effect.
And furste they practysed the compaignie of the Athenyans, that men call
Pareles, and afterward all the free men, that were in that same Athenyan
ship, which had been both than and at all times before, contrary to the estate
and governance of the small number, and also were in good estymation with
Diomedon and with Leon, in such sort, that when they made any voyage in the
sea, they delivered unto them willyngly the charge and ward of certain
ships. Those same than being ioygned with those of the town, that were for
the commons estate, they de^yed the three houndred coniurators that were chosen
and putt in authorytie. Whereof they did slay thirty and bannisshed three of the
pryncypal authors. They pardoned the othere, and restored the commons estate
into his former auctorytie. That done, the Samyens and the Athenyan souldyars,
that were there, did incontynently send that same ship with Parales togyders
with that Capytayn and Patron of the same ship, named Chereas, the son o^
Archestratus, that was aydinge to that same busynes, for to aduertyse the
Athenyans of that, which had been there done, knowinge also that the
governance of the city of Athens had been putt into the power of four
houndred. Who understanding the coming of that same ship, caused two or
three of the said Parales to be taken and put into prysone, and caused the
other to be charged into other ships, and sent them into diverse places of
Eubea for to be suerly warded, resarued Chereas, who perceiving, which way
the wind would blow, hid and saved himself: and afterward returned to
Samie, and reoported to those, that were there, all that, which had been done
at Athens, and made the things much greater, than they were: saying that all
they that took part with the commons, were beaten and oultraged, without that,
that there was any one parsone that durst hysse against the governors: and
that they oultraged and wronged not only the men but also their wy^es and
children. And moreover that they determined the like to all those that were in
the army of Samie, that should be ^waruinge and discrepant from their will^^
and to take their wives, childrene and next parents, and to cause them to dye
if they would not condescende unto their will. And the said Chereas reaported
many other things, which were all lies, whereby the souldyars were so
spytefull and inflamed, that they were of opinion to slay not only those,
that had brought in the estate of a small number at Samie: but also those
all, that had cleued and consented thereunto. Being declared unto them by
some, which entermedled for to quiett and appaysetheym, that in so doing they
should put the city in danger to fall into the hands of the enemies, which
were in great number in the sea, for to come to assault them, they did
forbear to do yt. And neuerthelas willing to set up again openly the common
estate in the same city: Thrasibulus and Thrasillus, who were the chiefes and
pryncypall conductours of that same practique, constrained all the Athenyans,
that were there in the army, and chiesly those, that took party with the
governance of the small number, for to help with their power to defend the
common estate: and to follow (touching the same) that, which those capytains
would do, and in that doing to defend the city of Samie against the
Peloponesyans, and to take the four houndred new governors of Athens, for
enemies: and not to make any treaty nor appoinctement with them. All the
Samyens, which were in age to bear weapons, made the like oath: unto who^ the
souldyars made also oath, for to live and to die with them in one self fortune.
Reputing that there was none other hope of wealth, another for them nor for those
of the town. But rather they al did take theymselfe for lost, ayther if the
estate of four houndred should take place at Athenes, orelles if the
Peloponesyans should take the town by force. In thies entrefaictes a long
time was employed ad lost, whylest the souldyars Athenyans that were in the
army of Samie, wylled to restore the city of Athens to the common estate: and
those, which had the governance at Athens, to constrain those of Samie, to do
as they did. But the souldyars being assembled for this matter, they fourthwt
deposed all the capytains and other, having charge in that same army, that were
suspected to favor the estate of foore houndred, and did putt other into their
places. Of which number were Thrasybulus and Thrasillus, Thrasybulus.

Thrasillus.


who the one after the other, exhorted all the souldyars to be constant in the
same purpose for many reasons, which they declared unto them: though that the
city of Athenes had condescended to the government of the said foore
houndred. And among other things they showed them, how they themself were in
greater number than those, which remained in the City, and also had greater
habundance and faculty of all things than they, for so much as having the
ships in their hands and all the army by sea, they might constraigne all the
subjected and confederated cities, for to contribute monney. And if they were
bannyshed out of Athens they had y^ same city of Samie, which, was nayther
small nor weak, but rather the same of Athens, being deprived of the force by
sea, wherein it pretended to excede al other: they should be sufficiently
puissant, for to chase away the enemies Peloponesya^s, if they should come to
assault the^ in Samie, like as they had done at other times: and also for to
resist those that were at Athenes, and for to be y^ masters, having the ships
in their hands, by mean whereof, they might have victua^lles in habundance,
where those of Athenes should have lack thereof. And that, which they had had
until that same hour, which came to descend in the poarte of Pyreus, was by
the mean and favor of the army by sea, which was there at Samie, which thing
they could no more have, if they refused to restore the governance of the city
into the hands of the commons: and thereby, that those, which were there,
might better empesche, and stop the usage of the sea, fro those, that were
in the city of Athenes: than the same that were in the city, from them. For
that, which the same city could fournishe of yt self, was the lea^t party,
that a man might hope to have for to resist the enemis, and losing the same
they should lose nothing: for that, that there was no more monney in y^ City
that they might send, but rather the souldyars were constrained to sarue at
their expenses: and also they had no more good counsel, which was the only
thing, that caused the city to have obeissance of the hoostes that were
without: but rather they had greatly lack thereof, forsomuche as they had
violated and corrupted their aunycent laws: where they, which were at Samye,
both woolde consarue them, and also constrayne other to keep them. Wherefore it
was not to bileue that those amongeste them, which had been authors of a
better counsaille and opinion in this matter, than those: that were in the
city: should be more mean And on the other part, if they woolde offer unto
Alcibiades his restorynge and his reappeale: he would right wyllinglye make the
alliance and amytie bitwene them and the king. And if all other parties should
faille them, having so great an army by sea: yet might they saille into
whatsoever such place, as they should think good, where they might find
both cities and lands for to inhabytte. With such sayings and perswations
they anymated the one, the othere: and neuerthelas used all diligence for to
prepare all things apperteigning to the war. Which things perceived by the
Ambassadors, which the foore houndred sent thy der, to be already dyuulged
and spredde abroad through the commons, they kept silence and did not expound
nor utter their charge.

How Tissaphernes did come into great suspytion of the Peloponesyans: as well
for that, that he abused them with the succors which he had promised: as also
for this, that Alcibiades was restored and called again by the Athenyans that
were in the army, and had all the auctorytie with them, which he used to the
wealth and proffytt of his party. The.xi. Chapte.
IN thies enterfayctes the Peloponesyans souldyars by sea, that were at Mylet:
murmured and did speak openly against Astyochus and against Tyssaphernes,
saying that they destroyed and wasted all, to wit, Astyochus, for that, that he
would not fight, when their army by sea was weak, yea although that they
than were in a great dyssentyon among theymself, and that their army by sea
was departed into many places, yet would he not assaylle them, but consumed the
time under couloure of attendynge and taryinge the ships, that should comme
out of Phenice, and he did give them succors with words, but not in
effect, willing so to consume and destroy them in expenses: and also he
paid not intierly and continuelly the army by sea, by occasyon whereof it was
lost and destroyed. Wherefore they said that he should delay them no moore,
but saylle to assault the said Athenyans, and the Syracusayns most
instantely required him thereunto. Astyochus and the other Chiefz that were
there for the confederated cities, being aduertysed thereof, determined to
faight, understanding specially, that there was great mutyne and sedytion at
Samie. So they assembled all the ships, that they had, which were six skore
and two at Micale, and fromthence aduertysed and commanded those, which were
at Mylet, that they should march by land. Now the ships of the Athenyans were
foore skoore and two in number, which were comme out of Samie, into Glauca,
in the country of Mycale. And it must be understand that the City of Samye
is a little in length of the land from the coas^e of Mycale. Fromewhence the
Athenyans, seeing the Peloponesyans ships to comme against them, they
retired to Samye: for yt seemed unto them, that they were not suffycyentlye
strong for to hazard the battaille, wherein rested the question of the whole
estate. And forsomuche as they had learned, that the ennemys did comme with
an erneste will to fayghte: they saylled lokynge for Strombichides, who was at
Hellesponte and should come thider with the ships that he had brought from Chio
to Abide, whythe thing they had commanded him to do, soon after that they
retired to Samie, and that the Peloponesians came to Micale. In the which
place, they had the same day made their camp, as well with men, which they
had in their ships, as with those, that were at Mylett, and also with the
people of the country. And they determined to go the morrow after to mete the
enemies at Samie. But being aduertysed of the coming of Stronbichides, they
did return unto Mylet, in the which place, the Athenyans determined to go to
present them battaill, after that they should have been reforced or new
strengthened with the ships, that Strombichides governed: for they were in
all an houndred and eight ships. But seeing that the Peloponesyans would not
issue fourth at large, they returned unto Samie. And after their departure,
the Peloponesyans, although that they had so fayer and so puissante an army:
yet neuerthelas reputinge not themself suffyciente for to fight against the
enemies, and not knowing in the rest how they might enterteigne that same
army, specially seeing that Tyssaphernes paid it not well: they sent unto
Pharnabazus, Pharnabazus.
Clearchus son of Ramphius, Clearchus.
Capytain of forty ships, ensuynge that which had been already commanded
unto them from Peloponese, for that, that the said Pharnabazus had promised to
pay the army: and on the other side, they did understand that if they saylled
to Bizance, the town would turn unto them. So Clearchus launched fourth
with his forty shyps keeping the main sea^ for not to be perceived of his
enemies. But there came upon him soubdainly; tempest, so that his ships were
disparsed and skatered abroad, and one part, which followed Clearchus, sailled
to Delos, y^ other returned to Mylet, and sone after did come again to the
said Clearchus. Who came by land into Hellesponte. Hellespo^^tus.
But ten ships, which were before arrived at the said Hellespont caused
the city to turn to their confederation. Whereof the Athenyans, which were
at Samie, being sone after aduertysed, sent a number of ships for to ward
and defend Hellesponte, the which had a light battaill before Byzance: to
wytt, eight ships of them, against the like number of the Peloponesians. In
this mean time, they, that were chiefz of that same army for the Athenyans,
and principally Thrasibulus (who had always been of advise, that Alcibiades
ought to be called home again, and also since that the estate of Athens was
changed, by his mean) they were always from much into more in that purpose.
And he declared it in such sort and so persuaded the souldyars, which were
there: that they all agrede to the restoringe of the said Alcibiades: and the
decree was concluded and put in wrytinge, by the which the said Alcibiades
was pardonned, and that he should be called home again into the city. The
which being so published, Thrasibulus went unto Tyssaphernes, and brought
the same Alcibiades with him to Samie. Hoping by his mean to wythdrawe the
said Tyssaphernes to the amytie of the Athenyans. Alcibiades, being arrived
at Samie, caused the people to assemble, and proponed and declared unto them,
many great losses and damaiges, which he had su^teigned in his bannishement:
and afterward did speak profoundely, highly and wyttely of the affairs of
the common wealth: in such sort, that he did put them in great hope, to set it
up again: magnefyinge greatly the authority, which he had with the said
Tissaphernes, to the end, that those, which had the auctorytie and
adm^^nistration at Athenes, should be in fear of him, and by that mean their
co^spiraties and confederations should be dissolved and weakened: and also that
those, that were at Samie should conceive and have the more trust in him, and
by consequente, that he might be in more reputation, and that the enemies
should the more mistruste the said Tyssaphernes and lose the hope, which they
had to be aided by him. For he said to the said Athenyans, that were at Samie,
that the same Tyssaphernes had promised him to pay the wages of their
souldyars (if he might find and take suer trust in them) until the end of
their affairs: though that he should therefore sell as much as he was worth:
and that he would cause to come to their succor and aid the Phenicians shyps,
which were already in Aspendus, instead of sendyng the^to the Peloponesyans.
And for all ye assurance, he demanded of them, but that they should receive
and take again ye said Alcibiades. Who having declared such and like words,
the capytains and souldyars did adioigne and add him to the number of the
other chiefz of the army, and did give him auctorytie for to order in all
things. And in effect they took so great confidence and hope in him, that they
made no manner of doubt in their wealth: another of the ruin and fall of the
foore houndred, also they were all ready even at the self time, upon
confydence of that, which he had said, for to saille into Pyreus, without
having regard to the enemies that were there so nighe: but though that there
were many that made great instance to obteygne the same, yet would he not
consent thereunto, saying, that it was not expedient, having the enemies so
nyghe, to saille into Pyreus. And that since that they had given the charge
of the war unto him, and had made him Chief, that he would provide for every
thing with Tyssaphernes. Toward whom he returned incontyne^tly after the
departure of that same assembly, for to show and declare unto them, that he
woolde communicate and consulte with him in all things: and to the said
Tissaphernes, that he was in great auctorytie with the Athenians, and was their
chief, to the end that he might be the moore esteemed of him, and that he should
understand that by the same mean, he might aid and hurt him. Also it
happened therein even as he understood yt: for through the favor of
Tissaghernes he held the Athenyans in fear: and through the fear of them,
the self Tissaphernes. When the Peloponesians, that were at Mylet, understood
the repeal and calling home again, that was made of Alcibiades, having
already so great suspytion against him: they begone to blame him openly. And for
troth in that, that they refused to saylle to encounter the army by sea,
which was come to present them battaill, even to Mylet, had caused the said
Tissaphernes to be more cold to pay the soulde or wages of the said army,
togiders with this, that Alcibiades had a right long time trauailled and
labored to cause him to come into difference and dissension with the said
Peloponesians. This bruyt being than come, up the warryours, that were at
Mylet, begone to assemble the^ self by trowpes, as they had done before time,
and to make a great mutyne or sedytion. So that some amongst them, men of
auctorytie, saying that they had never had their entier payment, and also that
the s^ne little, which had been paid to them, was not continued: they threatened
yt if ^^ey were not brought into some part aither for to fight or for to have
to live with, they would habandone and forsake the ships, and charged Astyochus
therewyth: who, for his particular proffit was minded to complain to
Tyssaphernes. By this murmuraryon and mutyne, a great tumulte ensued against
the said Astyochus. For the marroners of the Syracusains and those of the
Thuriens, for that, that they were less subjected, than the other: made
greatest instance, and that with sharp and more prycking words, to have their
payment, than the other. Unto whom, Astyochus made a rude answer, and
Hermocrates, willinge to speak for his men and to maingteigne their quarelle,
he lifted up a staff, which he held for to stryke him: which parceyued, the
maroners and souldyars Syracusains did all run impytuous^ye and furiously
upon ye said Astiochus. Who perceiving them coming, wtdrew himself into
Franchise or Sanctuary in a chapel thereby, and by that mean saved himself.
But afterward being come fourth fromthence, they did take him, and besides
that, the Mylesiens went to assault a castelle or bulleworke, which
Tissaphernes had there made, the which they took, and chased fromthence his
men, that he had set therein, which thing was agreeable to the other allies,
and also the other Syracusains. But Lychas was therwyth displeased, saying that
the Mylesians and other, which were under domyny on of the king, should obey
and please Tissaphernes in the things that were reasonable until that the
affairs of the war might have been better ordered: by occasion whereof, and
of many other like declarations, the Mylesyans conceived so great indignation
against him, that, being sone after dead afa disease or malady, they would not
suffer that his body should be engraued in the place, where the Lacedemonyans,
that were there, had appoincted. In thies entrefaites and thies dissentions
being among the souldyars: Tyssaphernes and Astyochus arrived at Mylet.
Myndarus, Myndarus.
being sent for chief of that same army from the Lacedemonyans in the stead
of Astiochus: who after yt he had re^dred the charge to the said Mindarus he
returned to Lacedemonie, and Tyssaphernes sent with him an Ambassador of
Gaulere named Cara, Gauletes.

Cara.


which could speak well both languages, to wit, Greek and Persyan, as well
for to complain of the oultrage that the Milesians had done unto him and his
men in this castle or bastillion: as also for to excuse himself of that,
wherwyth he knew well that they woolde charge him and that they had sent
men to Lacedemonie to do yt, and that Hermocrates was gone with them, who
affyrmed that he and Alcibiades were agrede for to destroy and mar the
affairs of the Peloponesians. For he had had of a long time a marvelous
hatred against the said Tissaphernes by cause of the pay^mente, and also for
this, that being come the other three Chiefes of the Syracusains ships unto
Mylet, to wit, Potamus, Potamus.
Miston and Demarchus, Miston

Demarchus.


the same Tyssaphernes had sharply charged him in their presence of many
things and among othere, that the hatred, which he had against him, was for
this cause, that he would not deliver unto him a certain some of monney, which
he had demanded of him. In this manner Astyochus, the messengers of the
Mylesians and Hermocrates sailled from Mylet the Lacedemonye. And on the other
side Alcibiades returned from Tyssaphernes to Samie. Being arrived at which
place, certain messengers did come from Delos, which, the four hou^dred
governors of Athenes had sent thither for to pacefie and quyett those, that
were in the said place of Samie. But at the beginning, the people being by
them assembled, the souldyars made instance that no man should give them
audyence, but rather cried with a loud voice, that men ought to hacke into
pieces such people, as woolde destroy the comone estate, neuerthelas after
many words, silence was made, and they were heard with great difficu^tie:
who declared how the change of the estate, which had been made, was not for
the destruction of the city, as they were done to understand, but rather for
the wealth of the same, and to the end that it should not come into the power
of the enemies, who were comme unto before the town. Whereupone yt was
devised to be necessary to depute the said foore houndred to give order to
the defense, and in the affairs of the same, with the othere five thowsande,
all the whych^ should be parttakers in every whatsoever thing for the co^ductyng
or admynistratyon of the affairs. And also that yt was not true, which
Chereas had spokene for envy, that men had bannyshed and evil entreated the
Childrene, parents and friends of those, which were without: but rather
suffered them all in their goods, howses and in liberty, as they had before
time been. But having made their excuses and declarations and wylling to pass
further: they were empesched or interrupted by those Chartagians that were
there, which took that, that was said in an evil part, and bigone to speak
many and diverse opynyons, but the more part did put it fourth, that men should
saille fromthence by unto Pyreus. In the which trouble, Alcibiades showed
himself as much or more friend to the party, wherwyth he did take, than any
of the other. For seeing that the Athenyans, which were there, were minded to
saille against those, that were at Athenes, and knowinge that if that deed were
done, it should be occasion, that the enemies should take all the country of
Ionum and of Hellesponte, he would not suffer it, but rather did speak against
it: which thing, none other but he, might do in the same furye. And by his
auctorytie he stayed that same navigations: and also caused those to hold
their peace, which cried against the messengiers and blamed them openly. And
afterward sent them again despeched by himself in this manner. To wit,
that as touching the five thousand men, which were named for to aid in the
governance of the City, he was not of opinion, that they should be taken from
the governance, but he willed gladly that the foore houndred should be
dysmyssed, and that the counsel should be readmytted in the number of five
houndred in like form, as it was before. And somuche as touched that, which
had been made by the said foore houndred, for to dymynishe the expenses of ye
city for to fournishe the payment of the men of war, he did right well
allow it, and exhorted them to provide well in the other affairs of the
city, and not to suffer the city to comme into the hands and power of the
enemies, geuinge them good hope for to appoincte and conclude all thies
dissentions, the city remayninge in his entier estate, without that they
should rise in strife and armure the one against the other, whereunto men ought
to have good regard. For if they at any time should come to fight, to wit,
those that were in the city, against them that were at Samie, which of the
parties should have the victory, there should none remain with whom the
appointement might be made. Now were come thider Ambassadors from the
Argiues, which presented to the Athenyans that were there, aid and succors
against the foore houndred, for defense of the common estate, unto whom
Alcibiades did render thanks for their good offres, and neuerthelas having
demanded of them, who had prayed them to come thider for that matter, and they
having answered that they were not come thither, as called by any parson: he
^ente them away graciously. And for troth they had not been required to come.
But certain Paraliens, being sent by the foore houndred in a ship of war
for to saille to see what was done in Eubee, and also for to carye three
Ambassadors, that those foore houndred sent to Lacedemonie, to wit,
Lespondias, Aristophon and Milesias: the said Paralians when they were arrived
at Argos rendered the said Ambassadors prisoners unto ye Argyues, as those,
which had been the pryncipal authors and accomplices for to beat down the
common estate of Athenes: and the said Paralians did not afterward return to
Athenes: but did take in the Ambassadors of the Argiues, and did carry them in
the ships to Samie. In the same somer, Tyssaphernes knowinge that the
Peloponesyans had a right naughty opinion of him, as well for other reasons, as
also for the restorynge of Alcibiades, for the which, they presumed that he
was reallied with the Athenyans, for to pourge himself of that same suspicion
toward them, he prepared hymsel^ for to goo ^o mete the Phenycyans ships,
that should comme, and for to haste them forwards, which were in the poarte
of Aspendus: and required that Lychas should come with him: and duringe that he
should be in his voyage, he left Tamus one of his prouostes, Tamus
to whom he did give charge, as he said, for to pay the soulde or wages to
the Peloponesyans maronners: howbeit yt appeared afterward that he was not gone
to the said place of Aspendus for the same purpose. For he caused not the said
ships to come, though that there were in the same place one houndred and.xv.
all ready to saylle. And albeit that it can not be knowin for ^routh the cause
wherefore he saylled thither, and wherefore he caused not the said ships to
come: yet were there sundry judgments pronounced. For some did presume that
he did it, for to enterteigne the affairs of the Peloponesyans under the
hope of that his journey: for also Tamus who he had left for his Lieutenant
paid no better than he had done: but rather worse, the other judged that he
was gone thither, for to recover the monney, which was ordened for the soulde of
the Phenycians by sendynge them home again: other presumed that he was gone
for to abolishe the evil opinion, which the Peloponesyans had of him, and for
to show them that he was willing effectuously to help the^: since that he
sailled for that same army by sea, which was knowin to be ready. But as for me
I hold yt for most certain, and the thing is clerelye euydente, that he
was not minded to bring his ships, but to dyssimule in that voyage to the
end, that in attendynge his coming, the affairs of the Greeks should comme
into confusion: and that by not geuynge aid to the one party nor to the
other, and frustratynge and deceyuinge them both, they should remain egall
and weak. For yt was very notoryous that if he had been wyllinge to ioygne
with good purpose and syncerely with the Lacedemonyans, they might than have
obteign^d the victory. For that, that in the self seasone they were of
themself as puyssante by sea, as the Athenyans. And the excuse, that he made
for that, that he had not brought the ships: declared evidently his malice
and deceyte. For he said, that it was not for that, that the Phenicians had not
fournyshed such number of ships, as he had appoincted them. And yet
neuerthelas it is to believe that the king would have been right ioyefulle
that he might have done the self effect with lesser number, and by
consequente with lesser expenses. But for whatsoever intent that he did yt,
the Peloponesyans by his order, did send two galleys with him to the said
place of Aspendus, of the which was Chiefa Lacedemonyan, named Philippe. On
the other side Alcibiades understanding the voyage of Tissaphernes, did take
xiii. ships of those, that were at Samie and sailled into that same quarter:
doing the Athenyans to understand, that were at the said Samie, that his
journey should proffit them greatelye. For he woolde compass it that the same
army by sea, which was at Aspendus, should comme to their succors, orells
should not go to the aid of the Lacedemonyans, and thereof assured them,
knowinge (as it is to be believed) the will of the said Tissaphernes, by the
comunication which he had had with him: which was, for no^e sendynge of the
said army to the Peloponesyans, and also he practysed yt to the intent for to
rendere the said Tyssaphernes from moore into more suspecte with the
Peloponesyans, to the end that afterward he should be constrained to turn
to the party of the Athenyans. So he sailled toward him, keeping always the
main sea from the coaste of Phaselide and Cumus.

How the Athenyans, being come into great division and dissensio^ among
themself, by cause of the common estate, which had been changed, assembled to
come to some accord and appoynctmente. The.xii. Chapter.
During this time, the ambassadors, which the foore houndred had sent to
Samie, being arrived and returned to Athenes: they made their report of the
charge, that Alcibiades had given them, to wytt, that they should give
theymeselfe to ward and keep well the city, and defend theymselfes against
the enemies, and that he had hope for to reconcyle those that were in the
army at Samie, and also for to vainquyshe the Peloponesians. Which words
did give great courage to many of the foore houndred, which were already
cloyed and anoyed with that same form of gouernemente and would wyllyngly
have wythdrawin them self if they had thought them to be hable to do it
without danger: so that all with one accord did take the administration of
the affairs, having specially the two pryncypall men, and the most puissante
of the city for their chiefes, to wit. Theramenes, Theramenes.
son of Agnon, and Aristocrates, Aristocrates.
son of Sicillius, and besides those same, many other of the most apparente
and excellent of the assembly of the foore hou^dred, who excusedde theymself,
of this that they had sent ambassadors to the Lacedemonyans, saying that
they did it for fear of Alcibiades, and of othere that were at Samie, to the
end that the city should not be offended. And it seemed to them that men
might exchue, that the gouernemente should not come into the hands of a small
number, if it were ordained that the five thowsande, that had been named by the
said foore houndred, might have the auctorytie in effect and not in word:
and that by the same mean the estate might be reformed in an other sort to
the welthe of the city. Whereof albeit that they made always mention in their
propositions, yet neuerthelas the more part of them did wrynge yt to their
particular proffytt, to ambition and auctorytie, hoping that in abatynge the
said gouernemente of foore houndred, they should be not only egall to the
other, but also superyours. And moreover in the common estate. every one endured
and suffered the rather or better willing a repoulse, for that-that the offices
were given by election of the people: than in the estate of the particulers,
for it seemed unto him, not to have been repoulsed by his egalls, when that it
was done by the people. And for troth the auctorytie, which Alcibiades had
with them at Samie, did give great courage to thies here, ioigned, that it
seemed not to them good, that the same estate of foore houndredde should
endure, wherefore every one of them enforced himself, the most that he
might, to acquire and get credytt with the people, for to be pryncipall in
auctorytie Neuerthelas, those, which were the pryncipalles of the said foore
houndred, travailed to the contrary somuche, as they might, and chiefly
Phrinicus, Phrynicus.
who, whilst that he was Duke and chief of those, that were at Samie, had been
contrary or adversary to Alcibiades. And also Astiochus, Aristarchus.
who had always been contrary to the common estate, and likewise Pysander,
Pysa^der
Antiphon and the other, Antipho^
that were the most puissante in the city, who, after the time that they had
embrased and takene the admynistration, and also after the change and sedition,
that had been at Samie: sent ambassadors of their oune bodies and conueyde
them to Lacedemonie, and went about to maignteigne the gouernemente of the
small number with all their power, and also caused the wall of Eetione to be
repaired and heighthened. And after the return of their ambassadors, whcihe
they had ^ent to Samie, seeing that many of their oune sect changed their
will, who had been taken for constante and fully determined in the affair,
they sent readelye Antiphon and Phrynicus, with ten other of their bend
eftesones to the Lacedemonyans, and did give them charge for to appoynct with
them, for and upon the lesser evil that they might, provided that the
appoynctmente should be tolerable. And this did they for fear that they had
as well of those, that were at Athens, as of those, which were at Samie. And as
touching the wall, that they repaired and heighthenened at Eetione, they did
it) as Theramenes said, and those that were with him) not somuche for to
empesche that they, which were at Samie might not enter into the port Pyreus:
as for to receive the army by sea and by land of the enemies, wha^ they
would, for so much as the same place of Eetione is at the entering into the
poorte of Pyreus, in manner of a cressente or half a circle, whereby the wall,
which they made for the coaste of the land, rendered the place so fortefyed,
that it should be in their power with a small number of people, that they might
putt within yt, to suffer the ships that should comme to enter or for to
empescher or keep them fourth, for that, that the same place ioigneth to the
other tower of the poorte, which has a very strait entering, and besides
that reparation which they made at Eetione, they repaired the old wall, that
was without Pyreus, of the coaste of the land, and builded a new wall within
yt of the coaste of the sea, and bitwene both, made great halles and
Stoarehouses, into the which they constraynedde every one of the town to
bring and bestow the corn, which he had in his house, and also the same,
that was from without by sea, they caused to be discharged there, and they that
were minded to have thereof, were constrained to go and buy it there.
Theramenes, had already (before that the later ambassadors went from the
foore hou^dred to Lacedemonie) diuulged and opened these things, to wit, that
the foore houndred did make the said reparations and provisions for to receive
the enemies. But after yt they were returned without doing any thing, he did
speak and publishe more openly yt the same wall, which was caused to be made,
should be cause of puttinge the estate of the city into danger, for at the
self time did come thider, xlii, ships of the ennemis, whereof the one part
were Italians and Siciliens, that came from Peloponese, to wit, of those that
were sent into Eubea: and certene other were of those, that were left in the
port of Ye, Ya.
in the country of Laconie, of whom Agisandridas, Agisandridas.
son of Egisander, the Spartian was chief, whereupon Theramenes said, yt they
were not arrived there, somuche to saylle their voyage of Eubea, as for to aid
those that made the said wall of Eetione, and that if they made not very
good watch, there was great danger least they should take Pyreus secreatly
or by stealthe. And that which Theramenes and those that were with him did
speak, was not wholly lies, nor said for envy. For truly those, which held
the estate of a small number at Athens, would gladly (if they might) have
governed the city in liberty and under their authority, and to have been
hable to command the subjects, in the name of the said city, as
representing the commonwealth. But if they could not defend and maigteigne
their authority, they were determined (having the port, the ships and the
forteresse of Pyreus in their hand) to live there in suertie, fearing least if
the people did return unto their former common estate, they should furst be
destroyedde. And if than they might not save and defend theymeself there:
rather than to fall into the hands of the people, they determined to let the
enemies into Pyreus, but so that they should not have another the shypps nor
the fortresses in their hands, and to capitulate and confer with them
^ouchynge the estate of the city, the best that they could, so that their
parsones might be saved. For thies respects they kept good watch and ward,
on the walls and in the ports, and in the rest they advanced theymself, the
most that they might to build the places, where the enemies might have
entryng and passage forth: fearyng to be soubdainly takene and prevented, the
which enterpryses and delyberations were furst devised and treated upon among
a few people. But since Phrynicus, after his return out of Lacedemonie,
was hurt in the myddest of the markett place, by one of those that warded,
wheeupon anon after his return from the Palais, he dyed: and the same man
that did hurt him, fled away. But an Argiue, that had aided him, was by
order of the foore houndred taken, who being racked and demanded, to tell who
had caused him to do it, could name no parsone. And he said that he knew none
othere thing, but that in the house of the capytayne of the watch, and of
many other cytizeins, a great number of people did oftentimes assemble.
Whereupon, and through occasion of that same news, Theramenes, Aristocrates,
and the other, which were of their confederatie, as well of the number of foore
houndredde, as other, were the more chaffed and heated in their enterprise. And
somouche the more, that the army by sea, the which was at Ye, having takene
the poorte and soiourne at Epidaure, made many coursynges and pillages, in the
land of Egyne. Wherefore Theramenes said, that it was not to be bileued that
if the said army had been willing to saille into Eubea, that it would have
come coursynge until the goulphe of Egyne, for afterward to return to
Epidaure, except that they had been called by those which held and fortefyed
Pyreus, like as he had always said. For this cause, after many declarations
made unto the people for to cause the commons to reise against them, it was
finally determined to take Ye, by force. Ensuyng the which delyberation, they
yt were busyed at the fortefyinge of Fetione, over whom Aristocrates was
chief, did take one of the number of foore hou^dred, which neuerthelas held
secretly the contrary part, named, Alexicles and warded him in his oune house,
Alexicles.
and after the same, they took many of them, and among other, one of the
capytaynes that had the wardyng of Munichie, Munichie.
named Hermon, and that was done by consent of the greateste party of the
souldyars. The which thing being signefyed to the foore houndred, which at
that time were in the pallais of the town (resarued those, that was not
pleased with the gouernemente) determined to take their armure and weapons, for
to give charge upon Theramenes and those which were with him. Who excusing
himself said that he was ready for to saille to Ye, to apprehe^de and take
those, that made such novelties. And so he did take one of the capytaynes,
which was of his will and mind, with him, and went to Pyreus. Unto whom
Aristarchus and the horsemen were aydynge, whereby a great and horrible
tumulte was incontinently stirred up. For they that were within the city, said
plainly, that Pyreus was taken, and all those that were found within yt, were
slain. And on the other side, those, which were within Pyreus, thought that
al those that were in the city, had come against them. So that the auntyente
of the city had enough to do for to keep the cytizeins from putting
theymeselfe all into armure, and therein Thucidides the Pharsalien trauaylled
greatly with them. Thucidides.

Pharsilianus.


Who, having had great amytie and acquaintance with many amongeste them,
labored to appaise theyme with sweet words, requyrynge and exhorting
theyme, that they should not will to putt the city into danger of
destruction, having the enemies so nyghe, which laid in wait for theyme,
by means of which declarations, the furye was appaysedde, and all wythdrewe
theymeselues into their houses. During this time, Theramenes, who was officier
with the othere being at Pyreus, made semblante, with words only, to be
angrye against the footmen well armedde. But Aristarchus and those of his
bend, which were of the contrary faction or sect, were for troth, thoroughly
displeased against them. The which for all that, ceased not to proceed in
their busynes and work, until that some of them demanded of Theramenes,
whider yt seemed unto him for the best to fynyshe the wall, or to raze it
down. For being by him answered, that if it pleased them to grynde it
down, he would not therewyth be angry: incontynently all those, which
wrought, and many of the othere that were in Pyreus, mountedde upon the said
wall and in a very short time, brought it to ground. And in that doing,
to thintente to encouraige the people unto their purpose and will, they said
with a loud voice unto the standers by, thies words. Whosoever has more
desire that the five thousand shall govern, rather than the foore houndred,
he ought to do this, which we do. And that did they say for to declare
that they were not wyllyng to set up again the common estate: but rather
showed theymself concented, that the five thousand should govern, fearing
least that it should eskape to any of those, which pretended to have anny
governance in the said common estate, for to name it by error or ouersyght, by
speaking the one to other, whereof the foore houndred were much astonyed, for
that, that they were not content that the said five thousand should have
auctorytie, nor also understand that they should be deposed. For in that doing
it should come again, to the common estate, also in geuynge them the
auctorytie, yt should in manner be all one, the auctorytie being in so great
number of men. And so this facion of not declarynge the thing held the men in
fear, as much of the one side as of the other. The morrow followynge, the
foore houndredde, although that they were yet in great trouble assembled
togiders in the pallais. On the other side those, which were in armure in
Pyreus, having rased down the wall, and releassed Alexicles, whom they had
before apprehended, they went into the Theater or guylde hall of Dyonisius,
that is to say of Bacchus, which is before Munichie within Pyreus. So they
held there their counseylle, and after having debated upon that, which they
had to do, they concluded for to goo into the city, and there to bestow
their armure in the place accustomed, which thing they did. And they being
unarmed, came many cytizeins, sent secretly from the foore houndred, which
addressed and repaired to those, which they knew to be most tractable,
prayinge them, that they should keep the peace without making annye trouble
or tumulte in the city, and also to defend, that the othere did yt not,
showing theyme, that they all togiders might name the five thowsande that
should have the governance, and putt into the same number the foore houndred to
such charge and authority, as they should think good, for to keep the
city from danger of comymnge into the power of the enemies. Through which
declarations and requests, which were made by diverse men in diverse places and
to diverse personaiges, the people was greatly quyetted, fearing least their
dissension, should come to the ruin and destruction of the city. And in
effect yt was generallye agreede, that at a certene day, an universal
assembly of the people should be made within the temple of Bacchus.

How the Peloponesians had a vicorye by sea against the Athenyans, nigh to
Erithree. And afterward how the governance of the foore houndredde was
abrogated, and the sedition in the city by that mean appaised. The.xiii.
Chapter.
THe people, being at the day assigned, assembled in the temple of Bacchus:
before that any thing had been proponed and declared, news came, that, xlii,
ships were departed from Megare, for to comme to Salamyne, under the
conducte of Agisandridas. Which thing seemed to the people, to be the effect of
that, which Theramenes and his followers had said before, that the army by
sea of the enemies, would come straight to the wall, which was in building,
and that for the same cause it was expediente for to raze it down. And yt
might be, that Agisandridas, kept himself aboutes Epidaure, and other nygh
places of a set purpose, knowing the dissension wherein the Athenyans were,
for to execute some good thing, if he might see occasion and opportunity. The
Athenyans understanding than these news, departed all ronnyng into Pyreus,
reputyng the same domestical and intestyne war, more great and more
dangerous, than the same of the enemies, and being before their poorte, more
than if it had been in anny other place further of. For this cause some did
cast theymself into the ships, which were ready and tacled within the
poorte: the other they did bring to shore, and trymmed those which were not
ready: and the other mounted upon the walls, that were at the entering of the
said poorte, for to defend it. But the Peloponesyans shyps, having passed
Sunie saylled or kept their way, bitwene Thorice and toward Prastie, and
came fromethence to aboorde at Orope. Which parceyued, the Athenyans did
soubdainly apprehende and take the maroners, which they found ready (like as
the custom is to do in a city, which is in Ciuille war, and in great
danger of enemies) for to wythstande yt. For also all the comfort and
succors, which they than had, was out of Eubea, the coaste of the land
being occupied by the enemies. And so they sent Tymocrates, with the shyps
that they could than make ready into Erithree, which after, that he was
arrived having in all, xxxvi, shypps, those same comprysed, which were before
already in Eubea: he was constrained to fight, forsomuche as Agisandridas
having already dyned, was departed from Orope, and did come against
Erethrie, which is not distante from the said Orope but three skoare stades by
sea. The Athenyans, than seeing the army of the enemies coming in battaylle
against them: they mounted soubdaynly into their shypps, thinking that the
souldyars should have fourthwith followed the^, but they were skatered through
all the quarters of the town, for to make prouysion of victuailles, for that,
that the burgeoses of the same had maliciously found mean that there were no
victuailles to be sold in the markett, to the end that the said souldyars,
being occupied to search victuailles through the town, they might not in time
mount into the ships, and by that mean that the enemies might betrapp or
soubdaynely take them. And also they in the rest conuenanted with the enemies
to make them a sign, when they should perceue that yt were time, for to
assail the said Athenyans shypps. Which thing they did. And notwythstandynge
all this, the Athenyans, that were in the shyps within the poorte, susteigned a
good while the force of the enemies, but at the end they were constrained to
putt theymself in flight. So they were followed by the enemies euene unto the
shore of the sea, whereupon those, which retyredde into the town as into the
land of friends, were by the burgeosses, villaynously slain. But those,
which retired into the fortes, that the Athenyans held, were saved. And
likewise the shyps, that could saylle unto Chalcide were saved. But the other
that were to the number of, xxii, were takene, with all those, that were in
them, maronners and othere, whereof some were slain, and the other deteigned
prisoners, and by reasone of the same victory, they raised up there a Trophee
and within a small time after, they brought all the Islande of Eubea, into
their obeyssance, except Oree, Oreum
which the same Athenyans did hold, and also compounded with all the places
borderynge thereaboutes. When the news of the same overthrow, did comme to
Athenes, all the people were afraid as much or more, than of annye thing,
that had ever happened unto them. For although that the overthrow, which
they had received in Sycille had been of great ymportance, and many other
losses which they had had at diverse times: yet the host which was at Samie,
being turned and rebelled against them, and not having another more shyps
nor men to putt in them, and they theymselues moreover in such dissension in
the city, that they did but attend and watch the hour for to invade the one
the othere: to have presently lost, after so many calamyties and myschances,
euene at one instante all the Islande of Eubea, out from the which they had
more succors than out of their oune land of Athenes: it should have been a
right strange thing, if they had not been thereof astonyed. And somuche the
more that the said Islande being so nyghe unto the city, they feared greatly
lest the enemies in the furye and heat of the same victory, would have come
fourthwyth, all with one power, into Pyreus, the which being wholye unprovided
of shypps, if they had had couraige, they might well have done, and chiefly
they might have assaulted the city, the which by that mean should have come
yet into greater deuysione, or at the least assieged it. By which doing those
that were in the army by sea of the Athenyans in Ionum, though that they were
adversaries, and against the gouernemente of the foore houndredde, should yet
have been constrained for their particular interest and for the wealth of their
city to habandone and forsake the said country of Ionum, for to come, to the
succors of their city. And by that mean all the country of Ionum, of
Hellesponte, and the Islandes that be in that same sea aboutes Eubea, and in
effect all the Empire and the seigniorye of the Athenyans should have come
into the power of the Athenyans. But the Lacedemonyans, both in the same and
in many othere things were much proffytable to the Athenyans, and
pryncipallye through the multitude and dyuersitie of people that there in
their compaignie, who were much differente, contrary and disagreynge, both in
will and in manner of living. For some of them were hasty and dyligente: the
other slack and loyterynge, some hardye and the other fearful, and specially
touching the feate by sea, they were in great discord, which redounded to the
great proffytte of the Athenyans. And that might be well knowyn by the
Syracusayns. Who, for that, that they were all of one accord and of one will:
did great things, and had fair victoryes. And for to return to the
hystorye, the Athenyans having learned these news, in whatsoever manner and
necessity that they were, they neuerthelas armedde twentye ships, and
fourthwyth at the self hour, they assembled togider in the self place of
Pyreus, and at an other time, in a place which they name Picne, Picne.
wherein they had at othere times accustomed to assemble theymself, and it was
concludedde in the same assemblies that the foore houndred should be deposed,
and that the auctorye should be in the hands of five thousand, of the which
number, all those might be, that could bear armure and that would sarue in
the office without wages, and whosoever would do otherwise, should be abhorred
and execrable. Afterward there were many othere assemblies, wherein diverse
laws and ordonances were made touching the admynistration of the common
welthe. And in the beginning thereof, it seemed to me that they made many good
things for the conductynge of the common affairs to the welthe of the city,
reducynge and bryngyng the dissension that ^as amongeste theyme, by cause of
the particular and common government, unto a good mean, which was occasion
for to cause many euilles things that were done in the city to cease, and
by that mean maigteigned yt. Moreover they ordained that Alcibiades and the
other which were with him should be reapealled and called home again, and
likewise that yt should be commanded to theyme that were at Samie, that they
should comme for to aid to give order in the affairs of the city. In thies
enterfeates, Pysander and Alexicles and some othere of the number of foore
houndred wythdrewe themself to Decelea. But Aristarchus, which was their chief
without other compaignie of theyme, did take a certene number of Archers,
which were there of the most barbarous or estrangers, and departed
fromethence to Oenoe, Oenoe.
which is a castelle that the Athenyans held in the frontiers of the
Beotiens, whom the Beotiens did keep assieged by cause of certene murders,
that those, of the said castelle had committed and done to their people, and
there were with him certene Beotians that were comme of their oune mind.
Aristarchus being there arrived, he treated with the said Corynthians and
Beotians to cause the place to be rendered unto them. And so he did parlamente
and speak with those that were within yt. Doing theyme to understand that
the appoynctmente was made of all the othere differences and questions bitwene
the Lacedemonyans and the Athenyans. Wherefore it was requisitt that they
should render the said castle to the Beotians. Unto which words and
declarations, those that were within it (who knew nothing of that, which was
done, as people that be assieged) did give credytt and faith, for that
specially, that the said Aristarchus was the chief of the foore houndred, and
so rendered the place by composition. In such manner the gouernemente of the
small number ceased at Athens, and by that mean the sedition and division of
the cytizeins.

How the armies by sea as well of the Athenians as of the Peloponesians,
sailledde into Hellesponte, and there prepared themself for to fight.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
IN the self season, the Peloponesians, that were at Mylet, did know
manifestly that they were abused by Tyssaphernes, aswelle for that, that none
of those (to whom he had commanded, when he departed to saylle at Alpendus,
that they should have paid the said Peloponesyans their soulde or wages)
another had delivered them any thing, nor also there was any news of the
coming again of the same Tyssaphernes, nor of the shypps that he should bring
out of Phenice. But Phillippe that was gone thider with him, had wrytton to
Myndarus, Myndarus.
chief of the army by sea that he neded not to attend or tarry for the said
shyps, and a Spartian named Hippocrates, Hippocrates.
who was at Pharsalide had wrytton the self thing. Pharsalide.
For that cause the said souldiars, being solycited and instanced by
Pharnabazus, Pharnabasus.
who desired with the aid of the said army by sea of the Pelopone^ians to
cause all the towns, which the Athenians held in his prouynce for to rebelle,
like as Tyssaphernes had done: Myndarus chief of that same army allied and
confederated himself with him, hoping to have some more advantage of him, than
of Tyssaphernes. And for to do the thing more secrettly: before that the
Athenyans, that were in Samie parceyued yt, with the greateste diligence that
he could, he departed from the said Mylet with, lxxiii, ships, and did take
his journey toward Hellespont, Hellespontus.
whider in the self somer were also gone, xii, othere, the which had made many
coursynges and pyllaiges in one quarter of Cheronese. But he being in the goulf
of the said Cheronese, was taken with a storm or pyrrye, and was constrained
to wythdrawe to Icare, Icarus.
and there to soiourne five or six days, attendynge that the sea might be
appaised and quietted, and afterward to saille to Chio. In the mean time,
Thrasylus, who was at Samie, was advertised, how that same Myndarus was
departed from Milett. So he departed with, lv, ships in the greateste haste
that he could, for to be the furste in Hellespont. But being advertised that
the army of the enemies was at Chio, and thynking that it would have
soiourned there certene days, he set espyes into the Isle of Lesbos, and also
in the main land, that is in the quarter oueranempste the Isle, to the end
that the said enemies should not pass, but that he should be advertised
thereof. And he, with the rest of the army saylledde to Methymna, Methimna.
where he caused flower and othere victuailles to be takene in, for to saille
from Lesbos to Chio, if that the enemies would long have soiourned there.
And also they were minded to saille to ye city of Erese, for to recover it, if
they could, for that, that yt was rebelled from the Lesby^ns, by mean of
certene bannysshed men out of Methymna, which were of the pryncipalles of the
city. Who, having called out of the city of Cumes aboutes fyftie good men,
their friends and allies, and soulded or waged aboutes three houndred souldyars
of the main land, under conducte of a citizeine of Thebes which they had
chosene, for the amytie and alliance, that they had with the Thebayns: were
saylled by sea straight to Methymna, thynking to enter therein by force, but
their enterprise did take no effect. For they being entered into it, the
Athenians, that were at Mytilene in garnison: did come soubdainly to the
succors of the burgeoses, and having sought against the said bannysshed men,
constrained them to issue fourth again in the night out of the town, and did
go straight to Erese, the which they constrained to receive them and to rebel
from the Mythileniens. Thrasilus with all his army than being there arrived,
prepared himself, for to assault the town. And on the othere side,
Thrasibulus, who had been advertised at Samie, of the coming of the said
bannysshed men to Erese, was already come thider before with five shyps, and
moreover two other ships did arryue there after the coming of Thrasillus,
which came out of Hellesponte, and sailled fromethence home to their houses,
in such sort that aswelle with the shypps that were at Methymna, as with the
other, that were come thider, there were to the number of, lxvii, which carried,
men, artillery and Engynes, for to take Erese. In the mean time Myndarus with
the Peloponesyans ships, having made provision of victuailles, for the space
of two days at Chio, and received the payemente of the souldyars by those of
the town, to wit, xliii pence for every one: the third day they launched
fourth, and fearing to encountre and mete the shypps, that were at Erese, they
took the main sea, and leaving the Isle of Lesbos on the leafte hand, they
came alongest the main land for to aboorde in the town of Carterie in the
land of Phocaide, where he dyned with his bend. And incontinentlye as they
had dyned, they passed alongeste of the land of Cumes and did comme for to
supper in the town, Cumes.
of Arginusse, Arginusse.
which is in the main land directly against Mytilene. And after that they
had supped, they saylled most part of the night so long that aboutes none
they arrived at Hamatus, which is a town in the main land foranempst
Methymna, where they soubdainlye dyned. Since after dynner passing
foranemste Lecte, Lectus.
Larisse, Larissa.
Amaxitie, Amexitus.
and othere places of that same country, one part of the shyps came to
aboorde at Rhetee, Rhetiu^.
where Hellesponte begins, aboutes mydnight, and the other part aboorded at
Sigea, Sigeu^.
and in othere poartes and hauons adioignynge. The Athenyans, that were at
Seste, to the number of, xviii, ships, seeing the signs and tokens of their
watches, which were made by fyers, and also likewise a great number of othere
fyers that were made alongeste the sea coaste: knew that the Peloponesians
were entered into the goulphe of Hellesponte. And so embarked theymselfe
incontinently, and the self night did comme byneth Cheronese, for to aboorde
in Eleunte, thinking by that mean to avoid and exchue the army of enemies
by the main sea, and for effect they did pass so diligently, that the,
xvi, ships, which were in Abide, parceyued them not, although that they
were advertised by the Peloponesians, that they should take good head or
watch well, that the Athenyans shyps should not pass without their
knowlaige. But after that the break of the day appeared, they did sone see the
shyps of Myndarus. So they incontinently fled, but they did not all take the
mayn sea, for one party retyredde into the main land, and some other to
Lenmus, Le^mus
there were foore of them that remained the last, which were takene nyghe to
Eleunte, with the people, that were within them, for they came to cross a
thwarte theyme foranempste the chapelle of Protesilaus, two were takene emptye
or void, whereof the people was saved, and one was burned, which had been
likewise takene emptye. And that done, having assembled the same day as well of
Abide as of other places, the number of foore skoore and six shyps, they did
comme straight to Eleunte, thinking to take it by force, but seeing that there
was no hope therein, they sailled to Abide. In this mean time the Athenians,
thynkyng that the army by sea, of the enemies, could not pass, but that
they should know yt, they were still before Erese, and made there
preparations for to assault the wall. But when they were advertised that the
othere had passed they leafte fourthwyth their s^ege and saylled with all
diligence toward Hellesponte for to succoure their people. So they
encountredde or met two of the Peloponesians shypps, which had over aigerly
followed the other Athenyans, and did take them, and the morrow after they
arrived at Eleunte, being locked in the which place, they received the othere
ships that were eskaped from the encountryng at Imbre, and by the space of
five days, they made their preparations for the battaylle, after the which
they did comme to the combat, which was in the manner that follows.

How the Athenians had a victory against the Peloponesians in the sea of
Hellesponte. The.xv. Chapter.
THe army of the Athenyans was locked at both poynctes and extended from of
the coaste of Ses^e toward the main land. On the other side that same of
the Peloponesians, perceiving the other to come forwards, departed from
Abide, for to encounter it. And wha^ both parties did see, that it was needful
to fight, they extended themself into the sea, to wytt, the Lacedemonyans, who
had, xlviii, shypps, enlarged themself from Abide to Dardane, in the right
poyncte whereof were the Syracusayns, and Myndarus held the left, wherein the
lightest shyps were. The Athenyans extended themself toward Cheronese: from
Idaque to Archiane, which were in all foore skoore and sixtene shyps, in the
left poyncte whereof was Thrasyllus, and Thrasybulus in the right, and the
other capytaynes, every one in the place, that was appoyncted for him. So the
Peloponesians auaunced theymself to fight and furst to give the assault, to
the end to have enclosed with their left poyncte, the right poynct of the
Athenians, if they might, in such sort, that they should not have been hable
to enlarge theymselfe in the sea, and that the other ships, which were in
the myddeste should be constrained to retire to the land, which was not
very far of. Whereupon the Athenyans, perceiving from the coaste that the
enemies would comme to enclose them, they assaulted theyme lively, and
having takene their charge of the sea, they saylled and gouernedde their
ships more galiardly: than the othere. On the otheresyde, their leafte
poyncte had been passed already the rockye place, which is called, the
sepulcher of the dog, The sepulcre of the dog.
by mean whereof the ships, that were in the myddeste of their battaylle,
remained nakedde and disseparated from those of the two poynctes, somuche in
the greater danger, that the enemies had the more nombere of shypps, and
far better fournysshed with men. And moreover that same rockye place of the
sepulcher of the dog, extends alongest into the sea of such sort, that
those that were within the goulphe and retreatte thereof, could see nothing of
that which was done without. For this cause the Peloponesians, seeing those
same, separated and feobled in such sort, came to give charge upon theyme and
repoulsed theyme unto the land, and those same Peloponesians, seeing
theymeselfe to have the vyctorye, a great number of theyme landed for to
follow the Athenyans, which could not be succouredde by their people, to
wit, by those, that were in the right poyncte with Thrasibulus, for that they
were oppressed with greater number of ships, than they had. Nothere with
those, which were in the left poynct with Thrasillus, for that, that they
could not see what those same did there, by cause of the rockye place or
promontorye that was bitwene both, and moreover they had much to do for to
resist the shyps of the Syracusains and a great number of other, which
oppressed them greatly, until that the Peloponesians, perceiving themself to
have the victory, bigonne to putt themself into disorder for to follow the
enemies ships, so as they skattered themself abroad. For Thrasybulus, which
perceived it, without more contending to saille with those, that were before
him: russhed with all his ships and with all his strength upon them, so that he
put them to flight. And finding those, which had brokene the myddeste of his
battaylle into disorder, he brought them in such fear, that many of them
without tarying did put themself into flight. Which parceyued, the
Siracusains, and the othere that were with them, which had been already
greatly oppressed by Thrasillus, did likewise putt themself in flighte: in
such sort, that all the army of the Peloponesians fled straight toward
the river of Pydia, and fromethence toward Abide. And albeit that the
Athenyans did not take a great number of the enemies ships: yet that same
vyctorie did come very well to their purpose: for that, that they were before
time in great fear of the Peloponesians by sea, by cause of many losses,
which they had made in many places with them: but above all, for the same of
Sicille. Whereby, after the victory, the fear cessed, which they had of the
said Peloponesyans by sea, and also the murmuration that was amongst their
people, by cause of the same. And neuerthelas they did take of the enemies ships
those, which did follow eyghte of Chio, five of the Corynthians, two of the
Ambraciotes and two of the Beotians: and of the Leucadians, Lacedemonyans,
Siracusains and Pellyens of every of them, one: and they lost fyften of
theirs. So they received after the battaille the shipwrackes and the cariongns.
Where of they did by appoynctement render to the enemies, theirs: and
afterward, having addressed and raised their Trophee upon the rocky place of
the sepulcre of the dog, they dyspesched a brygantyne, by the which they
aduertysed the Athenyans of that same vyctorie. Through the which news, the
Cytezeins that were in much great fear and dyspayre by cause of the great
inconveniences, that were happened unto them, as well in Eubea, as in the city
it self, through their seditions: recovered their spirittes, and did
greatelye take again their courage, hoping to be yett hable to have the
vyctorie against their ennemys, if there case were well and diligently
conducted. Foore days after the same vyctorie, having in this mean time,
with great diligence repaired their ships, which were bruised and crusshed at
Seste, they departed fromthence for to saille to recover the city of Cizice,
Sicum.
which were rebelled from them. And in passing their voyage, they did see
eight Peloponesyans shyps in the hauon of Harpagie and of Priape, Herpagius.

Priapus.


which were departed from Bizance: the which they assaulted, vaynquished and
took. And fromthence they sailled to Cizice, and also did take it easily for
that, that it had no walls, and they recovered of the burgeoses a good sum
of monney. Duringe this time the Peloponesyans departed out from Abide, and
sailled to Eleunte. Where they did take of the ships, which had been gaigned
and won of the enemies those thereof, that they found whole and entier: for
they of the town had burned a great number of them. And also sent
Hippocrates and Epicles into Eubea for to bring away other of them.
Hippocrates.
In the self seasone Alcibiades departed out of Cannus and of Phaselide
with.xiiii. ships, to Samie: and did the Athenyans that were there to
understand, how he had empesched that the Phenycians ships did not come to
the aid of the Peloponesians, and also had drawin and treyned Tyssaphernes to
the benyuolence of the Athenyans, much more than bi^oretyme he had been.
Since having with his eight ships tacled other nine that he found there,
he sailled into Halicarnassus: where he levied a great some of monney, and so
enclosed the town with wall. Afterward he did return to Samie about the
beginning of Autumpne. On the other side, Tissaphernes, having understood,
how the army by sea of the Peloponesyans was departed from Mylet for to pass
into Hellesponce, departed from Aspende for to saille into Ionum. And in the
mean time that the Peloponesyans were occupied in the affairs of Hellesponte,
the Citezeins of Antandrie (which is a town of the Eoliens) having takene a
certain number of people in Abide, caused them by night to pass through the
mount of Ida. Antandrii
So they put them into the town and did chase fromthence the men of Arsacus
the Persyen, Arsacus
who was capytayne there for Tissaphernes, for that, that he entreated them
noughtelye. And besides the evil intreatinge, they had great fear of him and
of his cruelty for the experyence, which they had seen him use against the
Delyens. Who, when they were chased out of the Isle of Delos by the Athenyans,
under couloure of relygione, they being wythdrawin into a town nyghe unto
Antandria, named Atramyrtum: Atramyrtu^.
that same Arsacus, which did bear them certain hatred, dissimuled or cloked
his evil will, and feigned with the pryncipalles of them that he would use their
saruyce in war, and give the^ wages, and by that mean caused them all to
issue fourth into the feldes. And one day, as they were at dynner caused them
to be bisett round aboutes by his men and with strokes of darts to be slain
right cruellye. For this reasons than and for not being of power to supporte
the charges that were exacted of them, the Antandryans chased away his men.
Whereby Tyssaphernes found him self greatly offended, beside that, which had
already been done by the Peloposyans at Mylet and at Cnydus: from whence they
had likewise chased his men. And fearyng least it should happen worse, and
also having in great despyte, that Pharnabazus, having wythdrawin them to
wages should with their aid, do with lesser charges and in lesser time, more
in effect than he could do with the Athenyans, he determined to saille unto
the^ into Hellesponte for to complain to them of the said oultrages that had
been done to him, and also for to excuse and discharge himself of that,
wherewyth men charged him, specially touching the Phenycians ships. So he
took his journey, and being arrived at Ephesus, Ephesus.
he made his sacrefice in the temple of Diana. And when the winter that shall
comme after this summer shall be fynishedde, yt shall be the end of the twentye
and one year of this same war.

HEre ends the History of Thucidides the Athenyan, of the war that was
bitwene the Peloponesyans and the Athenyans. Prince of Hystorians that have
wryttonne in the Greek tongue, out of the which, this book was sometime
translated into Latyne by Laurence Ualle, and afterward brought into the the
French tongue by the Lord Claudius of Seissell, furst Bushopp of Marseille and
afterward Archebushopp o^ Turyn, and being translated into the English is
finally, by the most gracious priuielege of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, Edward the Sixte by the grace of God King of England, France and
Icelande, defendor of the faith and of the Church of England and also of
Irlande in earth the Supreme headde: published and brought into light to the
proffitt and edification of the subjects of his Majesty's Realms and
Domynions. And newely imprinted in the City of London, in ye fourth year of
his Majesty's most prosperous Reign.
Leaf Page Line Faults Corrections. i^. second. xxi. and it was. and how it
was. xi. furste. furste. a truse for iiii. for.iiii. the same. the same. xxxix.
Anaxagoras. Athenagoras. xii. both. xi. xlii. viil. xiii xxxi. king of Air.
king Darius. xv. furste. furste. chosenne. chased. xx. second. x^ii. his
house. their houses. xxiiii. second. xxxix. had had. had. xxix. furste. xiii.
be not said. be said. xxxiii. furste. xiiii. that. than. xxxviii. furste.
furste. the said city of Samye. leave it ones fourth. ^. furste. xi. gate.
port. lii^. second. furste. Corsayrians. thieves or sea rouers. lxiii.
second. iii. declared. defended. lxv. second. vii. a great number. a great
nombre of them, lx^. furste. ^^^x. over all inhabyted. over all not inhabyted.
lxxii. second. xxvii. of poarte. of the poarte lxxxii. second. xxv. as much
as the. as much on the^ lxxxiii. second. xlvii. that we have not bego^ne that
ye have begone the wart^ against us. lxxix. furste. xviii. against you. And
against you, and study not hue how they may do you some ill turn. And
lxxxiiii. furste. xvi. the Athenians, ye^ the Athen^ans at your commandment,
yet. the same. second. xvii^ whereof, and for. wherof^ for. lxxxx. second.
xliii. ymbecillitie of the other. ymbersllitie of their wits and the
habylitie of the other. the same. the same. v. than not to be oultraged than to
be oultraged or circumuented. xCiiii. furste. xiiii. against him. against
them. xCviii. second. furste. their army in. their army by sea in. xCix.
second. second. set battaille. set in battaille. C. second. xlix. truse
^hulde not be. truse should be. C. second. xxxix. this same been accorded this
same shall have been Cii. furste. iiii. Lacedaemonians. Athenians. Cvi. furste.
second. when. than. the same. second. iiii. out of Corinthe out of Coreie^.
Cxii. furste. xxxviii. Athenians. Peloponesians. Cxiiii. second. x. Athenians
Acanthians. Cxvii. second. xxx. all those, those. all those, that. Cxviii.
furste. xxviii. them unto them. theirs unto them. Cxxii. second. xxxiii. that
his tresues. that this trefues Cxxiiii. second. xxii. easy for us. ea^ye for
them. Cxxxii. furste. xlii. the other city of Sparte. the city of Sparte.
Cxxxv. furste. xliii. on the one party. on the other party. Cxxxvii. furste.
xxxi. with the Athenes. with the Atheniens. Cxxxix. second. last. those
Patras. those of Patras. Cxl. second. xxiiii. men Captain. Captain. the
same. the same. the same. of the war. of the men of warre^ C^li. furste. xxv.
and other were. and other that were. Cxlvii. furste. xxviii. so that he
persuades. that as he persuades. the same. the same. xxx. and to accept it.
for to accept it. the same. the same. xxxviii. thereof resists. thereof
rests. Cl. furste. xxxii. and the like did. and the like they did. ^lv.
second. xxii. little hazarte that I may. little hazarte as I may. ^lxi. furste.
xxiiii. which they had sent. which the Athenians had sent^ Clxvi. second. x.
for his cause. for this cause. Clx^^ii. furste. iii. if it becomes friend. if
he becomes friend. Clxxiiii. furste. xviii. Egesta. Egestains. Clxxvii.
furste. xxii. with the suffer. with the stuff. Clxx^x. furste. xiiii. October.
December. the same. the same. xxxix. that is plemyrum. that is nigh plemyrum.
Clxxx. furste. vi. did give give. did give. the same. second. xxx. of the
Athenyans. of the Lacedaemonians. the same. the same. xli. to come with. to come
to saille with. Clxxxii. furste xlix. fynisshed. furnysshed. the same. second.
last. xxiii. xxxiii. Clxxxviii. furste. xxxix of the servitude ^bo^dage leave
it ones fourth, Cl^xxx. furste. vi. of soartes. of all soartes. the same. the
same. xiii. victua^lles were. victuailles they were, the same. the same. xli.
than we should, than we woolde. the same. second. xxxiii. another more here.
not here. the same. the same. xxxiiii. nor other. another (...) other. ^lxxxxv.
second. xx. to m^t^ the. to m^t^ (...). CCv. furste. x. to follows. that
(...). the same. the same. xlvi. nether another. n^the^ other. the same.
second. xvi. September. December. CCvi. furste. xx^vi. and all the ^^yuall.
(...) at the (...). CCxii^. furs^e. xxii. treaty^^. (...) the same. the same.
xli^.^ he had decelea. he had in (...). CCxiii. furste. furste. unto Chrasil^s.
unto (...) the same. second. last. more mean. And more (...) in other (...)
CCxvi. second. xxix. in this castelle. in his ca^^elle. CCxx. second. xxxvi.
people that th^^e in. people that were in. CCxxiii. second. xxxii. the the
french. the french.


