Soliloquium Animae. The sole-talke of the Soul. Or, A spiritual and
heavenly Dialogue betwixt the Soul of Man and GOD. Which, for the great
affinity it has with other books of the Auctor published heretofore in our
native tongue, is now entitled The fourth book of the Imitation of Christ.
Translated and corrected by THOMAS ROGERS.

Never before published.

At London Printed. And are to be sold in the Royal Exchange at the Shop of
Andrew Maunsell. 1592.

To the Christian Reader.
BEing much and earnestly requested hereunto, I have published in our vulgar
tongue another of Malleolus, alias Thom. de Kempis, or, Kempisius works: not
that I confess, which of some well weening, though not so well deeming persons
was commended unto me, I mean, that in the old English translation, and in
some Latin copies too, called, The fourth Book of the Imitation of Christ,
which in deed is altogether De sacramento altaris, and so entitled: but the
next to that in Kempisius works, namely, the Soliloquium animae. This I have
termed, for the great affinity it has with the books of Kempisius by me
heretofore diuulged, The fourth book of the Imitation of Christ.

In the doing whereof, I have as little as might be varied from the auctors
words and phrazes, and no where from the sense, but where himself has varied
from the truth of God, and, I doubt not, would have redressed, had he lived in
these days of light, as he did in the time of most palpable blindness.

And this have I done with the greater alacrity, because I find (and thou
may read it also in the Auctors own Preface) that he not only doubted
that he might utter some things both fond and offensive, but also wished to
have some godly corrector of his faults, and prayed unto almighty God
graciously to reveal, such things offensive, either unto himself, or unto
some other.

Whose godly prayer, God has heard, and discovered those things for thy
benefit, and testification besides how Kempisius, the Auctor, howsoever living
in a Popish time, was yet in heart no Papist, but would like well of that which
is done, as I trust thou will, whose aedifieng, and spiritual comforting, I
have only aimed at.

And reaping this comfort to thy soul, by the reading or hearing of this
treatise, be thankful unto thy God that gives thee some taste of the
caelestiall ioies in this miserable and all-trooblesome world, to whose
gracious protection, I do most humbly commend thee and my self.

The Aucthors Preface.
I Have gathered together into a little book for my comfort sake, certain
devout sentences, the better so to commit them to memory; I have also
disposed them as into a pleasant orchard, set out with all sorts of trees, and
bewtified with all varieties of goodly flowers, where-into I might now and then
enter both for to choose and behold at my need such matter as my heart desires
for the refreshing of the mind, grieved at any time, and overwhelmed with
pensiuenes.

Now the more cleerlie, and readily to find under which arbor I might repose
my self, or which flower were best to be culled out, I have made the heads of
every Chapter to glitter (as it were) with red titles. I have likewise with
variety of words, as now talking, now reasoning, praieng now, now
conferring, now in mine own, now in another man's person, bewreathed about the
text with a sweet, and delightsome style.

Wherefore I entreat them whosoever shall read it, first that they be not
moved with indignation at that which the writer has done, for it was his mind
wholly to talk (with his God.) Next, that theie will pardon the imperfection,
and plainnes of the style, considering that God is more delighted with words
that be simple and pure, than with those that be artificial. And if happily
the sense in any place appear either not sound, or not clear enough, my
desire is to have a godly corrector of the same, telling him withal, that
what fond matter soever he shall epsy, it has escaped from me not of
purpose, but rather for that I was not heedie enough in marking what I writ.

Moreover, forasmuch as man in that judgment of his which is most probable,
may be deceived, unto thee, o God almighty, and father of lights, do I
thine humble disciple make recourse, and this Sole-talke (of mine) do present
before thy divine Majesty, to the end that thou may both approve the things
well said, and disprove what is done amiss, and insinuate also either into my
self, or some other faithful servant of thine, more rightly to observe
whatsoever things are offensive.

My request is also, holy Father, that I thy poor servant may obtain at thy
hands both time and space to abide in the all plentiful pastures of the
Scriptures, which be and shall be my chiefest comfort, until that day of
aeternitie appear, and the shadow of mortality do decline away. And
therefore withdraw thou fro me all unprofitable cares, worldly desires,
hurtful affections, and what else may hinder me fro my desired leisure. For
he must have a free mind and a quiet, that would meditate of hidden and
heavenly matters. Wherefore that I may be worthy to attain my suit,
vouchsafe thou (my God) to endue and fill me with the grace of thine heavenly
joy, that I may speak to thy glory, and to some comfort of my own soul.

The fourth Book of the Imitation of Christ.
CHAPTER. 1.
1. A longing of the soul after God. 2. The incomprehensible majesty of the
Lord. 3. An exhortation to the love of God.
SOVLE. AS for me, it is good to draw near unto God Psalm 73, verse 28.
.

O short, and o sweet saying, embracing God, and abandoning the universal
world!

What more can be said? And what more-ouer is to be desired? Would it not
suffice if that were performed which now is spoken? And were other, yea many
other things uttered, should not all in the end be reduced unto this one thing?

Therefore, my soul, say thou with the Prophet, As for me, it is good to
draw near unto God Psalm. 73, 28
.

O my God, thou art mine only felicity; thou alone art good Luke 18, 19
, and sweet unto me.

To speak of thee it delights the lover; to think of thee, it likes the
religious, whose heart is not fixed upon the world Math. 6, 21 Coloss. 3, 1. 2
, but hidden with thee in the heavens, to the end that both thou alone may
be his true peace Phil. 4, 7
, and inmost joy; and he not vexed daily in this world, where false
concupiscence does provoke unto sin 1. John 2, 16
.

O my God, how is he affected, which is inflamed with thy love Rom, 8, 35 36,
etc.
! How does he rejoice, that has no pleasure in any vain creature! 1. Cor
13, 4 5, etc.


Are not these the words of such a man in that Psalm, whereout the beginning
of my speech was taken, even these his words?

Whom have I^in heaven but thee Psa. 73, 25
? and I have desired none in the earth with thee?


MAN. O holy soul, MAN.
o zealous soul, so longing after God! What is that I hear? what is that thou
say? Are the things both in heaven and in earth but small things in thine
eyes?


SOVLE. Surely I take all things but for trifles. SOVLE.



MAN. What then seek thou? MAN.
Whom would you have without these? And where will you find him if not in
these things?

Has he either name, or place, or habitation to be sought by?

Where is the place where his honor dwells? of which in a certain psalm
thou sangest, saying Psalm. 26, 8.
:

O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house; and the place where thine
honor dwells.

Make answer, I pray thee. For, if thou can, show me him, I will go with
thee, and we will seek him together, yea and he shall be thy God, and my God:
and we shall be full happy when we have found him, and hold him.


SOVLE. What ask you this at mine hands? SOVLE.
Or why so curiously do you enquire of this matter of me? Think you I can,
or am able to utter such things? What though gladly I would, conceive not yet,
that what through the rarenes of the thing, and the deepnes of the mystery, I
am restrained back?

What ask you me? Ask them who have both heard and seen, they are such as
better can describe him whom you seek.

But rather ask him that knows all things Psalm. 94, 8 9 10
. For he it is, of whom we speak, that both best can tell you who himself
is, yea and best declare the place of his own aboade. Psalm 119, 12
Even he it is (and none other) which teaches man knowledge Psalm. 94, 12
, and gives his grace also to the humble Iam. 4, 6
.

Make recourse unto him which reuealeth himself when he will, and to whom he
will Mat. 11. 25
, neither is there any beside him that can open. He alone can reveal to thee
what the joy is of such as love him 1. Cor. 2, 9
, and that far more excellently than I can tell you.


MAN. But why speak you on this wise, o holy and humble Soul? Think not
that I would know that of you, which neither ought to be known, nor can be
uttered. Keep your secret to your self; let your door still abide shut upon
you: let the seal of faith remain uncancelled, neither let the vale, for me,
be removed from the sanctuary.

Eat you holy bread (by your self) in the chapel, go in into the
tabernacle of your house, ascend into the upper parlor, enter into the cellar
of the eternal king, or, which is more noble, and sounds more sweetly, even
into the bride-chamber of your celestial spouse.

I know it is written Mat. 15, 26
, It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to whelps. I know
this, I say, and have read it: but mark again what follows, and take
pity upon me, according to the words of her that said Mat. 15, 27
, The whelps do eat of the ^romms, which fall from their masters table.

And therefore hide not that fro me which I demand, but of the greatness of
your inward pleasures, poure-out even a sparcle of the fiery love. Give me one
small drop of precious wine, send forth some little savor of the best
ointment, whose chiefest part and lovely comfort is well and usually known
to thee, that I also may taste thereof.

Why linger you? Satisfy my desire, and open the door to a friend now at
this third knock.

O beloved, speak of the well-beloved; let not me be neglected.

If you cannot describe him rightly as he is, yet speak of him so well as you
can. For indeed as he is, who is able to describe him? Yea, who is able to
conceive the describer?

Therefore, if not, as in himself he is: yet tell me what thou think of
him. If not what to himself: yet utter out how good he has bin to thee.

For who ever shall search forth what he is in himself?

Thou will never do it, because thou have plainly confessed, and not denied,
how speaking of him Psalm. 139, 6
.

Thy knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is so high, that I cannot attain
unto it. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit? 7


If then thou art not able to know thine own spirit, which the creator and
quickner Act. 17, 25
of all spirits has made Genesis 2, 7
, how at any time will thou know him which is uncreated! Did not this make
thee all amazed to say Psalm. 35, 10
, O Lord, who is like unto thee?

Notwithstanding, of all friendship, by some similitude describe him, whose
essence thou have not yet attained unto. Neither is it for you to deny to
show him in part, whom you think can not wholly be revealed.


S. I must needs say you are too curious, and importune upon me. Thou
searchest all my priuities, and let in thine hand into the secrets of my
chamber.

I sent thee unto him, and come thou again unto me? Seek you me or him?

But I pray you, of what spirit art thou? Be still, I beseech thee, and
trouble me not. For whom thou seek, he is above me.


M. But can he that seeks after God, so easelie give over? Protract not to
speak, for you may comfort me forthwith. How long will you keep me in
suspense? What do you say and vnsaie?

As I live I will not give over, except you bless me* For I count it a
blessing, if thou show me my God.

Now therefore if thou have seen him, tell me plainly, and I will take him
upon my shoulders.


S. I know thou have a great desire, and a love unto the creator.

But a great thing is it which you require at mine hands, and such a thing as I
am in doubt whether it may be done or no.

He whom thou seek, knows it right well: for it is not in me to let
thee know so much.

Your demand seems unto me to be like that of the Spouse which in the Songs
did say Sal. S. 1, 6
;

Show me, o thou, whom my soul loves, where thou feedest.

Will thou then learn of me who this is, or what good he has done with me?
Doubtless it is not in me to show you.

But you are not content, neither his greatness, who exceeds the heavens 1.
Kin. 8. 27
, can deter you; nor my weakness, which in his eyes am nothing, make you to
desist.

Why have thou laid this burden upon me? I am not able to tell thee, until I
go into the sanctuary of God Psa. 73, 17
, and understand the same.

Why are you so desirous to know that, which may not be uttered?


M. And will you not? Oh, how feign would I be instructed! For those things
we are most earnest to know, which the most hardly may be revealed.

Notwithstanding, once again I pray you be not so hard, as altogether to be
silent.

Think not that forthwith I will utter what you shall say unto our enemies. I
will keep your saying as a friend, yea, as a very friend ought to do.

You may boldly tell me your mind secretly. Lo, we two be here alone;
neither I with lightness, nor you with arrogancy are delighted, but in him
which has given us understanding, even of him will we speak.

And if happily he come while we are talking, let us give place, and let him
be between us. If he vouchsafe to speak, let us hear him gladly, and be
silent till he have done. At which time you shall not be bound to satisfy my
demaundes. For when he speaks, all flesh must be still.


S. This covenant I like well. Only let him be with us, and be we carried
unto our secret places. Let him be the guide of our speech, and conduct us
whether our delight is to go.

This beloved of whom you so diligently enquire, is for his greatness
unspeakable Psalm. 139, 6
, for his hight and glory incomprehensible Job. 9, 10 11
; for his strength and magnificence infinite Psalm. 8, 1 2
* Whatsoever is either spoken or written of him, comes far behind his
majesty, because in glory he excels all things.

The heavens have said, He has ouerpassed, and ascended, and prevailed over us
2. Chro. 6, verse 18.
.

The earth has answered, If the heavens, and the heavens of heavens do not
comprehend him, ask not me of him Psalm. 139, 7 8, etc.
.

The stars have soong; We are darkness and not light, unless he inlighten us
Gene. 1, 1. 2, etc.
.

The sea trembled, and said, He is not in me, Psalm. 139, 12*
and the deep knows him not.

Hear you what they say?


M. I heard, and was sore troubled; at their voice my very lips trembled.


S. What then will become of thee if we should ask him? Let us speak unto
him.

O Lord, art thou he of whom the Prophets have prophesied, and whose
commandment all things in their seasons do obeie?

Verelie I am that I am Exo. 3. 14
; and GOD.
besides me there is none other God Deuteronomy. 4, 35 Psalm. 18, 31 Isai. 45, 21.
; I am the beginning and the ending Revel. 1, 8
; I am the creator Isai. 42, 5 Act. 17, 24.
, and the governor Hebr. 1, 3 John. 5, 17.
of all things. I live says the Lord, and I will reign for ever and ever.

Now little worm what say thou, SOVLE.
being environed with such light?

Lo, thy beloved, whom thou thoughtest was with me, speaks unto thee.

He was with me when I said Psa. 73, 28
, For me it is good to draw near unto God. He will be with thee, if thou
also wilt say, Psalm. 77, 2
My soul refuses comfort: the day of misery I desire not Ier. 17, 16
, for thou art my King and my God Psalm. 5, 2
.

Be not like to raging lovers, but love God alone, seek him alone, which
admits no companion of the world into his fellowship.

Talk thou only with him, and though he depart, leaving the room void, bear
all things patiently. For his wont is, to go and to come, to prove his
friend, and make him perfect in loving.

If thou desire his presence, bear his absence patiently. Wait, and wait
again, he will depart for a while, and after a while he will again return.

Love makes thee thus affected, which now heaueth thee on high, and
straight-waie flingeth to the ground again.

His love is than all flowers sweeter; than lilies fairer; and brighter than
the precious stones.

For no creature is to be preferred before the love of God Mat. 10, 37
, and therefore for that every thing is to be despised Mat. 16, 26 Luke. 9, 25
.

So soon as I was touched inwardly with his love, I forthwith began so to be
inflamed in my mind, that bidding adue to all things in the world, I only
wished for his most pure embracements, and, as it were bearing hot coals out
of a burning oven, I uttered these words, which but few do use Psalm. 73, 25
.

Whom have I in heaven but thee; and I have desired none in the earth with
thee. 26
God is the strength of mine head, and my portion for ever.

By these gather now of thy beloved what manner a one and what he is, which
incomprehensiblie exceeds all the things which are, and have being.

And although he can neither by words be uttered, nor conceived in mind,
because he is infinite Job. 23, 8 9
: yet is he very lovely, tractable, felowlie, and to be entreated, insomuch
as though he cannot be comprehended, yet after a strange manner he may be
loved.

For by love he is taken, yea by love fast bounden: but by desire, he is
sought; by prayer, knocked at; and by hope attained.

If as yet I have not satisfied you, let him, whom you have sought, satisfy
you, and teach you, above all teachers, to find himself.


CHAP. 2.
1. Of God his distinct judgment at the end of this world. 2. The cursed state
of the ungodly.
KNit mine heart unto thee, O Lord, that I may fear thy name Psalm. 86, 11
.

O my God, thou art much to be loved, yea, and to be feared much thou art Psalm.
96, 4
.

He that loves, let him be glad; but he that loves not thee, let him quake
and fear. But he which neither does fear thee, nor love thee, is utterly
foolish and frantike. For, it is a fearful thing to fall into thine hands
Heb. 10, 31
.

And, who knows the power of thy wrath Psalm. 90, 11
? Or, who may abide the day of thy coming unto judgment Mala. 3, 2
?

For, thy roaring shall be like a Lion Isai 5, 29
; and thy glittering swoorde like a consuming fire.

At the sound of thy voice all the dwellers in the world shall be moved; and
when thou come, all the foundations of the earth shall shake 2. Pet. 3, 7
Revel. 6, 14
.

Who then but will fear? Or by what means can any escape thine hands Psalm.
139, 7 8, etc.
?

If a man will hide himself upon the strong rock Isai. 2, 19 20, etc.
, thou will thunder there-vpon, and it shall rent asunder. And if ^e lurk in
caves, or mountains, he shall be plucked out Hose. 10, 8 Luke. 23, 30
, and be made to sustain thy displeasure Reave. 6, 16 17
, because he cared not for thy favor. Revel. 9. 6


Surely there is no place which can hide man from thy presence Job. 23, 10
Psalm, 139, 7 8, etc.
.

For all things are naked and open in thine eyes Hebr 4, 13
; thou see the heart and the reins Psalm. 7, 9
, and beholdest the most secret affections of the thought, so that no secret is
hid from thine eyes Ecclus 23 verse 19 20
.

O how terrible will thou be to sinners, and to the hearts that ^e hardened
Prou 1, 2^ 25, etc
, which now do glory in ill doing, and triumph in wickedness, saying. The
Lord sees not Psalm. 10, 11
, he will not regard Psalm. 94, 7
.

They are so puffed up with vain words, as though thou would never come:
yea, they turn away their eyes, that they may not see the end.

But in the hour that they think not, thou will come Mat. 24, 44
, and they shall be taken in the snares Luke 21, 35
of their own wickedness. And as thieves and robbers being suddenly taken are
confounded: so shall they be put to confusion at their due time.

Then will thou have them in derision Prou. 1, 26 27 28, etc.
, which now deride thy servants; and evil shall be rendered unto such as have
abhorred thy righteousness.

Now they stop their ears unto thy voice; but the time shall come, when they
shall cry, and not be heard.

Now they turn thy word into a fable: but themselves shall be turned then into
a flame of fire Mat. 25, 41
. For thy word shall go out with an horrible blaste; and it shall strike the
wicked and unbelievers without all mercy.

What will the proud person say then, so puffed up with knowledge, and
swelling in power? What answer will he make, when the last trumpe shall
sound in his ears 1. Cor. 15* verse 52
? When thou Lord, our God, shall appear in Majesty, together with thine
angels Mat. 24, 31
and archangels 1 Thessalonians. 4, verse 16
?

Then all the ungodly deriders of thy word shall be hush; and they which have
molested thy servants, struken with an horrible fear Wisd. 5. 2 3, etc.
.

Then shall they utterly be confounded, which, laying a good conscience and
honesty aside, gave themselves to vanity and wantonness.

They shall suffer punishment then, which have loosed the bridle unto the flesh.

Then shall they roar toward heaven, which now are cunning in vain music
and daunces:

Then shall that be turned into moorning, which has bin contracted by
inordinate pleasure:

They shall be bound up in bundles together to be burned then Mat. 13, 41 42 43
, which have bin companions together at dronkennes and bellie-cheere. And whom
love has bound in wickedness, the revenging fire shall roll together in
torments.

O ye foolish, and wretched, o ye frantike, and blind lovers of the world,
what do ye, what is your meaning? how will ye escape the vengeance of the
Lord?

Why for a little pleasure which you do love, do ye hasten unto everlasting
torments? Why fear ye not hell, which do so fear a little penance? And,
you which fly the death of the flesh, why aforehand do ye not take heed of
the eternal death of the soul?

Unless therefore ye do convert, and repent, ye shall never escape these
horrible and fiery torments of Gods displeasure.

When I consider the day and hour of the general judgment, my bones do
shake for fear, because entreatie then shall not turn away the wrath of God,
but he will be a righteous judge to all Act. 10, 42 2. Tim. 4, 8 Hebr. 12, 23
.

O God most holy, mighty, and merciful Savior, save me from that bitter
death, and give me grace to repent, that I may unfeignedly bewail my sins
before I depart our of this present world. ()

CHAP. 3.
1. An humble confession of sins; 2. with a Prayer for grace to repent.
MY sorrow is ever before me Psa. 38, 17
.

O my God, foulie have I spotted my life with manifold sins: but, Lord,
behold my tears which I shead before thee, because I have so much offended
thine holiness.

For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing Romans 7, 18
; and that so long as I carry about a mortal body, I am not free from
wickedness Wisd. 9, 15
.

I therefore do sin, and offend day by day; and, which is more lamentable,
I suffer many sins to pass away without sorrow and due repentance.

For being busy most commonly, and encombred with affairs of the world and
vane curiousnes, I am not able so speedily to return unto wholesome tears.
Whereof it is that the darkness of sin does increase so mightelie against
me, the which both stop up the fountains of grace, and hinder the streams of
heavenly comfort from coming unto me.

LORD. And is that a small offense?


SOVLE. No, my God, it is a great sin, and so much the greater, as it passes
the sooner from the heart, and does not prick me with sorrow.

But, Lord, will thou not regard this my wicked dealing? How long shall I
delude thee, and thus deceive my self!

Will thou alwaie be silent? where is thy rod? where is thy spur? where is thy
wand?

O Lord, why do thou withdraw thy judgment, and the pains of hell fro
mine eyes?

Were these things always in my remembrance, could I be so retchlesse?

Thy silence and patience is for mine amendment Wis 11, 20 2. Pet. 3, 9
; but if I still be negligent, will thou not then punish me severely Wis.
12, ^0
? Surely thou will punish me, if not in this world, yet in the world to come.

For nothing shall pass away unrevenged, neither small, neither great offense.

But much better here in this world, where both weeping is profitable, the
pain is short, the satisfaction more accepted, and reconcilement sooner had.

And therefore spare not the rod; but with a sharp water anoint mine eyes,
and reserve not my sins until the time to come, least then I be delivered
unto the tormenters until I have paid the utmost farthing Matt. 5, 26
.

Better is it now a little for my profit to be pricked, than hereafter to
feel the bitter pains of hell fire. Purgatorij.


Wherefore I am to mourn, and to conceive a great sorrow for my sins.

For many things I have to bewail, but no cause at all to laugh.

The darkness of mine heart, the slipperines of my conscience; my proanesse
unto wickedness; my want of grace, do wish me, yea rather of necessity do
enforce me to weep and to lament.

Furthermore, the remembrance of manifold temptations, and of assaults to
sin, should make me have little lust to be merry.

Spare me, o Lord, spare me.

For though I weep, being touched inwardly with sorrow, it is no marvel,
because the time is now to weep.

O happy is the hour, when I conceive sorrow for my sins! Blessed are the
tears which do flow from the grief of heart, at the consideration of the
foulenes of a guilty conscience!

And who is able to sound the bottom of this depth, and to reprove the hidden
filthiness without feeling?

O my God, the true light John. 1, 9
, thou can lighten all the obscure places of mine heart; yea, and burn up
all the spots thereof, in the spirit of heat, and judgment.

It is in thee to give a new heart, to create a new spirit Psalm. 51, 10
, and there to prepare a secret habitation, that it may be a place for thee to
rest in, and a tabernacle of thy name, which art the lover of cleanes, and the
ghest of the good conscience.

But for so much as willingly thou do not visit a disordered house, but
commonly leauest the same to be illuded with beastly affections, I am the
more careful least that betide me.

But help me, o merciful and gracious God, to repare the ruins of this mine
house.

Woe to him from whom thou departest away offended! But peace to him unto
whom thou descendest, and with whom thou abidest.

I miserable wretch now placed in the mids of snares, and laden with the
shacles of wickedness, what counsel is best for me, or what remedy to be
used, but only to lift up mine heavy eyes unto thee, that my cry may be
heard in the heavens?

For a polluted conscience shall never find or have a better medicine, than
bitterly to slaie it self in prayer. And how can extreme tentation more
profitablie be cured that it prevail not, than by pouring continual
petitions unto thee, and by humbling our selves?

But who can give me these blessings? I mean to pray and to weep as I ought
to do. Where may I attain that humility, and abundance of tears? Doubtless
of thee Lord, with whom is mercy Psa. 130, 7
, and great redemption.

O Lord, my God, the giver of all grace Iam. 1, 17
, grant that I may, as I am bound, bewail mine offenses, seem they never so
small, and to amend all without vain excuses, as well those offenses which are
secret, as those that are well known.

Let this mine hearty repentance get me thy favor again, and prepare unto
well doing, and to that which tends unto salvation.


CHAP. 4.
1. A lamentation of the soul for her weakness, and vnstaiednes in the race
of virtue.
THine eyes did see me, when I was without form Psa. 135, 16
.

O Lord my GOD, what in the end will become of me, seeing daily I do offend?

When shall I amend my life as I ought to do? When will it be better with me?
When shall I wax strong? And when shall I overcome?

I am cast headlong into the deep pit of filthiness. Who can think there is
yet hope left to arise again, to amend, to go forward, and to come unto the
end? Surely touching my self I am out of all hope; ah that mine hope were
stronger in thee!

I greatly d^o despeire, because my weakness increases through long troubles;
and I see no end of my sorrow, and sin.

And though I say, lo now I will begin to amend; lo it is now time, I will
do my best to reform my self, straight-waie, alas, sin stands before
me, the enemy lifts up himself against me, and wicked custom keeps me
back with might and maine, contrary to my mind.

O Lord, behold how I am cast down, and trodden under foot: behold the
troubles which I do endure.

Lift up thy right hand, and deliver me fro my persecutors, for they are too
strong for me Psalm. 142, 6
.

My wisdom is perished, and my strength has failed me.

Mine arm is broken, neither can my sword save me Psalm. 44, 6
.

I see not unto whom I may fly; and that will receive and heal me, I know
none.

Thou alone continuest my refuge, but I dare not approach for shame, because I
have offended thee.

I have sinned, o God, forgive me. I am sorry, yea hartelie sorry that ever I
did transgress thy laws.

Give me that which seems right in thine eyes, and be merciful.

Thou did justly in forsaking me, and justly thou did commit me into
the hands of mine adversary.

But Lord, remember that which thou have made, amend that which is decayed,
for of it self it can never stand.

Mark my groaning, and my troubles: let the pain and grief of mine heart at
no time be out of thy remembrance.

O merciful Father, cast an eye upon my thraldom and imprisonment, upon the
misery and cruelty which I do endure; and bring me out that am bound, from
the prisonhouse, and wretched bondage.

Though a man should live many years, what will he be the better thereby?
And who knows whether he shall amend his wicked life, or be worse and worse?

Man woteth not how he shall proceed, and end; and his continuance is very
doubtful, because of the manifold chances of evils, and dangerous tentations.

Many at their first conversion from sin are good and humble, which
afterward become froward and rebellious. At the first they were modest and
devout, zealous and silent, and in the end proved careless, and dissolute,
bablers, and barbarous. And they which at the beginning did bridle their wicked
affections, at the length had scarce any care at all either what they said or
did. And so by little and little wickedness takes root and increases while
it is not prevented at the beginning.

Who therefore but should fear, and be circumspect, seeing such unlucky
chances do come unto the good and modest?

Again, who thoroughlie does know whether he be elected; or has strength
to bear all things?

We are all to be tried Act. 14, 22
, and who is sure that he shall not be burned, seeing tentation is a fire 1.
Pet. 1, 7
?

So that all must fear, and hope alike of the better: but none is rashly to
presume, nor yet prowdlie to be secure.

In deed the gold which is tried Prou. 17, 3
, shall be preserved: but I advise thee, o man, to consider well of what metal
thou art.

The celestial purger will purge, he will fine the sons of Leui Mal. 3, 3
, even all that are his servants 2. Tim. 3, verse 12
.

It is not always gold, which has the color of gold; neither is it alwaie
stuble, or naughty silver, which endures beating, and bears the flaile. For
God beholds the very cogitations and the hearts Psalm. 7, 9
, by them most commonly working woonders, which in the opinion of many are
but castawaies.

O Lord God, what joy can I have in this world, when I think upon the
uncertainty 2. Petr. 3, 7 Psalm. 102, 25 26
, and frailty of all things under heaven?

Notwithstanding, this am I sure of, that thou art good, and that thy mercy is
from generation to generation on them that fear thee Iuk. 1, 50
.

For thine infinite goodness and mercy, is greater than all my sins. And this
shall be my comfort, while thou give me space to amend my life.

CHAP. 5.
1. Of the shortness and misery of this present life. 2. A prayer for grace to
renounce the world, and the vanities of the same.
LEt me understand the shortness of my days. So long as I am in this world, I
am wicked Job. 14, 4
: and while I continue upon the earth, I am poor, a stranger, and a pilgrim
Heb. 11, 13
.

I brought nothing into the world 1. Tim. 6, 7
, and certain it is I can carry nothing thereout: for naked came I out of my
mothers womb Job. 1, 21
, and naked shall I return thither again.

As a shadow which passes away; and as a fether, which is tossed up and down
with the wind; and as a ghest of one night, so suddenly shall I pass away.

All the time we have here to live, is but as the shortest night. Few and
evil are my days Genesis 47, 9
, and after a little while they shall end, and be as though they had never been.

And when man is dead, what is in man but filthiness? Who will have any care of
a stinking carkas? Or who will enquire of the absent being dead, whereas being
alive he was accounted of?

A small while is man remembered either of his friends, or of strangers: but
undoubtedly the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance Psalm. 112, 6
, because he shall be everlastingly linked to God, who is always the same,
and shall never die Ps. 102, 27
.

Therefore happy is he which puts no trust in man; nor yet reioiceth in
any worldly thing, but has his heart fixed in heaven Psalm. 2, 12
, for what soever is in this world, is transitory 2. Petr. 3, 7 Psalm. 102, 25
26
and vane.

Call into thy mind those which have lived since the world began until now,
and tell, I pray thee, 1. Cor. 7, 31
where they be? 1. John 2, 17
And those whom you see and hear to live now, how long think thou will
they endure?

Say therefore of all, Every man that lives, is but vanity Psalm. 39, 5
.

O miserable and wretched life! o frail, and lamentable life, which good men
do suffer rather than desire: and wicked men, albe they desire it, yet can
they not long enioie the same!

Oah, vanity of this world, when will thou have an end? when will thou cesse?

Yet the time will come, when all the elect shall be set free from the bondage
of corruption Romans 8, 22 23
, though now they do lament, because they are estranged from the kingdom of
Christ Psalm. 1, 23
.

Would to God, the whole world would even wither up in mine heart; and my Lord
God, even mine immortal spouse, seem sweet unto my soul!

Undoubtedly, the fleeting joy of this present life, is but a false and a
most bitter potion. Let them drink thereof that list, for afterward they shall
feel a most bitter flixe. And the more one has drunk thereof, the sharper
shall his torments be, because the whole pleasure of this world shall more
speedily pass away than the wind Wisd. 5, 8 9, etc.
, and leave to their lovers pains and burnings Luke 16, 25
.

Therefore out of my sight thou deceiptfull glory of the world, and all
foolish pleasure of the flesh.

Many you do draw, and deceive: but in the end you leave and destroy them
1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17
.

Woe to them which believe thee; woe to them which be there drowned.

But come, and come nigh me, most holy humility; and the full renouncing of
all worldly pompes; and never do thou leave me, o thou sweet remembrance of
my present pilgrimage.

What am I but ashes, and earth Ecclus. 10 verse 9
? and whether tend I, but toward earth Genesis 3, 19
?

Oah, how wretched am I become! how justly may I lament, when I think upon
my pilgrimage Heb. 11, 13
, and how little I am privy how I shall end the same!

If I live well, and continue so, there is no cause why I should fear an
evil death. But who can glory of a good life, and of a pure conscience? He
which knows himself to be such a one, let him rejoice in the Lord 1. Cor. 1,
31
, and take compassion upon me a sinner.

To live I have no desire Phil. 1, 23
, because misery enuironeth me on every side: to die an evil conscience is
affraide, for to answer God, it has not one for a thousand Job. 9, 3
.

The Prophet was not so in a fear, which said Psalm. 10^, 1*
, Mine heart is prepared, o God, mine heart is prepared.

O Lord, the God of my salvation, let my life come unto a good end; and
prolong not the days of my lamentation. With sorrow I came into this prison;
and without grief I shall not get out.

S. Long do I think this life; and the rather, because of the continual
misery and troubles which I find therein: but in truth it is not long, for it
passes away more swiftly than a Post Job. 9, 25
.

To a man that lives in pain and misery, all time is long Ecclus. 41, 2
, and he compteth a day for a year. This makes my life tedious unto me,
and so much the more it does trouble me, as the more truly I consider all
the miseries of the same.

But, if happily any consolations and joy come between* it stands me
upon to look about whether they be of God, or no* If they be^ of God, I
accept them gladly, but yet I know not how long they will continue: yet how
short soever they be, they like and please me well.

But, would to God he would power them largely upon me; and cause them to
continue with me a long while!

But the ioies and pleasures which are not of God, are vile and vading, albe to
the show they appear sweet and pleasant.

Thus, even thus passes away this life, replenished continually both with
good and evil things.

Therefore so long as I live in this world, I am a poor pilgrim Heb. 11, 13
.

I cannot truly say I have enough, because presently there is sa^ietie of no
good thing Eccles. 1, 8
: but the good thing which I look for thou art Ps. 119, 57
, in whom I believe.

So that, when thy glory has appeared, and replenished me, then, even then I
will acknowledge, that I have enough. But in the mean while, because this word
is hidden fro me, much grief and sorrow does enuiron my soul.

And therefore being mindful of thine holy saying, I repeat this
oftentimes Matthew. 26, verse 38*
, My soul is very heavy, even unto the death.

Well were it with me, if this hour were come, and that neither grief nor
sorrow did possess me!

But, Lord, I beseech thee, let thy goodness conserve me.


CHAP. 6.
1. An ardent desire of the soul to be loosed from sin, and from the
troubles of this world.
BRing my soul out of prison Psalm. 142, 7
.

The greatness of my sorrow will not suffer me to be still.

For why do I yet live in this world? I know not what I can do here.

Slowly, God he knows, I go forward in virtue; naie would to God I went not
backward!

O Lord, what a pleasure should thou do me, if speedily thou would
take me out of this life, that a woorser thing come not unto me John. 5, 14
!

My life, alas, sigheth in pain, and in weldoing amendeth not.

If thou look for my conversion, I repent not by the same, but do abuse thy
long suf^ering; if thou punish me, I do ^ardlie show patience, because thou
pursuest dry stuble Job. 13, 25
.

Why then do thou not quite take away thy servant? Why do I live upon
the earth? that is, why do I dwell among good people, and yet reform not my
life and manners? Why, so vnwoorthelie and dangerously keep I the place of
some better person, and yet walk so carelessly and so coldlie, in this life?

Thus power I out this woeful thing which I consider of, in the ears of my God.

Yet, gracious Lord, cry not out in thine anger against me, Cut down the tree
Luke 13, 7
, and cast it into the fire.

I accuse mine infirmity before thee, that I may find grace in thy sight
through my confession.

It is my part to accuse; but it belongs unto thee to show mercy Dan. 9, 9
. It is my part to weep and to sigh bitterly; but it belongs unto thee
Lord, mercifully to comfort.

Wherefore, my Lord and God, either give me more grace in this life, or take
me speedily out of this world, that the rent be not woorser.

For to live long, and not to cesse from ill living, is but to augment the
punishment of hell.

Neither can I away with such a life as knows neither how to proceed in
virtue, nor to bewail wickedness.

For that party which leads an holy and righteous life, is grieved at the
heart whenever he offends; and that he may in grace and virtue increase
more and more, it is always his desire.

What shall he do which knows himself daily to offend; and that his flesh
greeuouslie does rise against the spirit? who also being overcome with
tediousnes sometime, and cooled with negligence and idleness, does give over
to resist, or else laieng aside the spiritual weapons Ephesians. 6, 11
, does follow the swing of the flesh, whether his own will does draw him?

Alas, Lord and God, such a one alas draws nigh unto the gates of death, and
living in the flesh, runs into the death of the soul.

Oah, how is every one to take heed, that he be not seduced and supplanted
of the enemy 1. Pet. 5, ^
!

No man is su^ from temptation Matt. 6, 13
, no man is pure from sin Job 14, 4 Psalm. 51, 5 7
; but all the sort of us are frail Iam. 3, 2
.

But, Lord, thou which art almighty Job. 13, 3
, and know all things Ecclus. 23 verse 19 Est. 13, 12
, raise up the broken in heart; and cleanse the unclean from all filthiness,
renew a new spirit within his bowels, that all faintnes and lazenes may leave
him, that spiritual zeal may return, and that thy love may continue
immovable within him unto the end.

For he only wants thine assistance, who is pe^sed down with his own
weight Wisd. 9, 15
: neither is he able to cast off the load of sin, until thou send
strength from heaven of power to loase the hard fetters of carnal affections.

And this my request is to obtain; for without thy special grace, we shall
neither lead a good life in this world, nor live eternalie in the life to come
Romans 6, 23
.

And whereas I now live in the body, it is no joy to me; for better it were
for me to die, than to live Phil. 1, 23
: because through this life I am debarred the farther from eternal life, which
cannot come, unless that death do destroy the life present, yea and death
also it self be destroyed.

Hence it is that my desire is to heauen-ward, and mine heart seeking eternal
rest, fetches deep sighs, and cries:

It is now enough Lord, take away my soul, which thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood 1. Pet. 1, 18 19
.

Open to me the gate of thy kingdom, and let in a poor pilgrim Heb. 11, 13
returning unto thee from exile.

Listen to me, Lord, and loase me from the band of the body Phil. 1, 23
.

What should I longer do here? I am good neither to my self, nor to others.

Why then do I live? To my self I am burdensome, to others troblesome.

What shall become of me? I wot not, Lord, whether thou have foreseen any
better thing of me, wherefore my longing should be lingered.

I do allow thine ordinance, because it is good: but in me only I find the
evil, why it greeueth and troobleth me to live in the world.

For daily I do sin; I heap sin upon sin, and yet, as I ought, I
repent not.

If therefore I were loased from this body of sin Romans 6, 6
, and coopled to thee in heaven, neither should I offend any more, nor thou
be offended, but be praised continually.

Notwithstanding as yet thou bear with me 2. Pet. 3, 9
, and showest all patience.

I know my fault; because through my sins I may not enter into thy kingdom.
For none unclean thing shall enter thereinto Ephesians. 5, 5 Revel. 22, 15
.

But, when shall I be without sin! When shall I thoroughly be cleansed, that
I may not fear to be prohibited, but rejoice rather to be let in?

If I go not forward more zealouslie, nor be more careful than hitherto I
have bin, I am affraide, mine hope will be little enough.

But Lord, thou which wilt that no man should perish 1. Tim. 2, 4 1. Petr. 3, 9
, but that all should be saved, grant me more grace to the amendment of my
life; and to hope for celestial blessings, give me the spirit of inward
fatnes.

Let not mine heart here rejoice after the flesh; but in fearing let it expect
for death.

Let no care, or creature hold me back; but let thy desired presence draw and
comfort me.

Blessed is the man which trusts in thee, o Lord Psa. 37, 34 Psalm. 27, 14
: but more blessed is he that is passed out of this wicked world, for he shall
no more either feel, or fear any trooble Reave. 7, 17 Reave. 21, 4
. ()

CHAP. 7.
1. A godly desire for a good death.
O Lord, thou art mine hope even fro my youth Psalm. 71, 5
.

In this hope I fly unto thee, until the last hour and time of my resolution
shall come.

Oah that I were so well prepared, that I might even now die under the hope of
grace!

Oah that I had ended this life with an happy departure; and laid off the
load of this body Wisd. 9, 15
; how many dangers and fears had I then escaped!

Happy is the man whom thou have chosen, and taken up, who is now gone out of
this world unto the father Mat. 5, 48
; from banishment, unto a kingdom Mat. 25, 34
; from the prison unto the palace Phil. 1, 23.
; from darkness unto light Reave. 22, 5
; from death unto life Reave. 21, 4
; unto security from dangers Reave. 7, 16 17
; from labor unto rest Reu. 14, 23
; and from all manner miseries unto everlasting felicity Reu. 22, 5
!

Happy is the soul that now enioieth her reward, triumphing in thee her Lord!

But, alas that my contrie is so long kept fro me Psalm. 120, 5
!

How graciously and mercifully should thou deal with me, if quickly I
were called away, and bidden to come unto thee, that where thou art, I might
be also!

Oah that I had bin taken out of this world, before ever I had known the
filthiness of the same, and before I was affraide to offend even in small
things; how happy then had I bin! But now the longer here I live, the more I
wander from thee, and do sin in too too many things.

Woe is me, what have I done? Alas, I have followed the desires of the flesh,
and have drawn vanity to my self with roapes, but godliness I have abandoned,
abhorred innocence, and added sin unto sin, so that now to my grief I
find that true which I have sometime read Isai. 3, 11
, Woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him.

Too too late almost I have returned unto my God, yea very late it was ear I
began to amend, and then too but slowly went I on; I was not zealous enough in
my proceeding, I did not increase in zeal, but, which is woorser, I waxed
cooler and cooler.

Hence it was that many times I was very loath to die, because my guilty
conscience still told me I had not lived as I should have done.

Notwithstanding, in consideration of the dangerous temptations (whereunto I am
subject) and that my sins might not increase, many a time have I wished for
death; and into these words have I burst, saying:

Oah that now God in mercy would take me out of this world, that I might
sin no more upon earth! Oh that God speedily would vouchsafe to take me
away, and make an end of my labors; in what an happy state should I then be!

But, Lord, all things must be even as thou will. If thou mind to do that
which I require, it shall forthwith be accomplished: but if otherwise, thy
will be done.

I may utter out my desire, and the misery which I endure, not as to him
which is ignorant thereof, but that thereby I may find some comfort to my
soul.

I know I am not yet ready as I ought to be, for my conscience is greatly
out of quiet.

And what marvel though I, a sinner, do stand in fear, seeing many even of
the holy fathers were affraide, because thou iudgest not as man does 1. Sam.
16, 7 John. 8, 15 16
.

But how shall I prepare my self? It were good for me to prepare my self
against that time, which may come this day before to morrow for any thing I
know.

Therefore I will more firmly alter my purpose; I will bewail all my
negligences passed; I will sacrifice my self to thee; and wholly and
henceforth commend my self unto thy mercy, o Lord.

O Lord, my God, all my works do stand at thy mercy Ephesians. 1, 6 7
; and without thy mercy I have no merits. And this is mine hope, this is all
my trust.

But how fares it with a good and pure conscience? What says the chaste, and
devout soul? Come, says she, Lord Jesus Reu. 22, 20
, o come, and tarry not; untie my sins, loase my fetters, bring me out of
prison, out of the lake of misery, and mirie claie Psalm. 40, 2 1
.

I have waited patiently for thee, o Lord, incline to me, and hear my cry.
Leave me not any longer in this wicked world.

Let it content thee that hitherto I have striuen, that so long I have bin in
exile; that I have not deserved to enioie thee, nor to see thee face to face 1.
Cor. 13, verse 12 Revel. 21, 4
.

Grant me to enioie the long desired joy, which no time shall end, nor
troubles ouershadowe.

Show me thy countenance, which the angels continually do behold Mat. 18, 10
.

Let thy voice be heard in mine ears, which they without cessing do hear.

Come Lord Jesus, and take me out of this foreign contrie; call me wretch
home unto my contrie Heb. 11, 10 13
, and restore me a sinner unto my former purity.

Come gracious Redeemer Matt. 1, 21
, make me partaker of thine eternal glory.

It is hie time that I return unto thee; it is now time that I commend my
body to the earth, whereout it was taken Gene. 2, 7.
.

The matter is not great where the body be laid, or how it be handled, if so
be the soul be safe, and come unto thee.

Let my spirit do well, which I commend into thine hands; and let my flesh
rest in hope to be raised up again in the last day 1. Cor. 15, verse 51 52 53
. For wheresoever it be buried, it can never be far, or hid from thee.

Remove me from the company of men, and join me to the society of thy
saints. For this temporal life is irksome to me: but to think of the day
of eternal glory, reioiceth mine heart.

Oah, let not the old serpent Reave. 12, 9
withstand me at my departure out of Egypt; let not the enemy bark against
me in the gate: let neither Satan with his ouglie sight terrefie, nor the
horror of death trooble me: but let thine holy angels faithfully assist,
stoutly aid, valiantly protect, lovingly receive, and ioiefullie bring me
unto the everlasting felicity of thy celestial paradise.

And merciful, lovely, and blessed Jesus, do thou graciously, I beseech
thee, behold me; and cast me not out of the number of thy servants: but
remember, o Son of God, how thou have redeemed me with thy precious blood
Ephesians. 1, 3 7
.

Receive me into glory, and that in thy mercy and goodness: ^. Pet. 1, 18 19
because greatly have I wished to solemnize a passover with thee.

Oah happy day of my desired reward! Come blessed hour of blessed passage,
which long I have desired, and kept before mine eyes.

What now have the troobles and afflictions in the world hurt me? Romans 8, 18
What am I the woorsse for the contempt, labor, and humiliation for thy name
sake?

Thou have bin my life, and now death will be to me an advantage Phil. 1, 24
, and to be with thee in thy kingdom will be absolute felicity.

Now praise and glory be to thee, who art the life, of such as live Ioh. 11, 25
, the hope, of those which die Act. 2, 26
, the salvation and rest of all which trust in thee Psalm. 17, 7 Psalm. 34, 8
Prou. 16, 20
.

CHAP. 8.
A meditation of one dead unto the world, yet alive in Christ.
TVrne away mine eyes from regarding vanity Psa. 119, 37
.

Oah Jesus, which art the true life Ioh. 11, ^5
, which never shall have an end, give me grace that through love of thee I
may be consumed, through love wounded, through love killed, that the flesh
prevail not over me.

I am not as yet thoroughlie dead to the world, but the old man yet lives in
me Romans 7, 23
, raising up within me much contention, and desires of manifold evils, and
making the nights bitter, and the days tedious unto me.

Oah, when will it fall out, that boldly I may say, I thought my self as a
dead man? For he which dead is, does way neither the praises of men, nor the
reproaches of the malignant, because he is dead.

He which touching the flesh is dead, neither speaks, nor smells, nor
tastes, nor exercises any work, yea he neither hears also the vanity of
this world: again he regards not curious and bewtifull things enticing unto
the love of some vile thing upon earth.

And he which is dead to the world, is not in the world, but in God to whom
he lives; even as Paul to the beloved disciples does say Col. 3, 3.
, ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

This man does so speak, so think, so behold things without, as though they
were not. For the things which are seen, are temporal, and vane 1. Ioh. 2, 17
: but the things which are not seen, are eternal 2. Cor. 4, 18
.

Hither does he cast his eye; hither does he hasten; hither is his desire;
for these things does he labor, to attain these things is all his study Col.
3, 1 2
.

These things he wishes, these things he loves, these things he seeks,
these things he sauoreth, even which are within, and secret, to wit, great
good things, sovereign, and eternal things, of which he cannot think too
often, because theie are exceeding precious, and sweet, and delectable, and
more than vtterable 1. Cor. 2, 9
.

This man is far estranged from present things Gal. 6, 1^
, and breaths altogether after things eternal Colos. 3, 2
, having the dominion over the sensual appetite.

For the flesh seeks outward, desires pleasant, loves present, loatheth
absent, flies all sharp and bitter things, which notwithstanding are good for
the soul Romans 8, 4 5. etc.
. Whence it comes that it will not suffer the spirit to be at rest, but
lays before it sundry fantasies, which are scarce to be spoken, and in
truth not to be accounted of.

But he which is endued with the grace of spiritual fortitude, may with more
ease subdue the insolent motions of the flesh, singing in the word of the
divine power Psalm. 118, 6
, The Lord is with me, therefore I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.

Therefore albeit this sensuality does move battle, and the voice of the
flesh does secretly murmur Romans 8, 23
: yet does not the spiritual man easelie consent; for greater is the force of
the divine love which inwardly does comfort.

This man now and then so sweetly, so strongly, and so earnestly is drawn,
ravished, and in love with God, that scarcely he does see, and perceive the
things about him, and be heard in the world: because he is not there, but
elsewhere Matthew. 6, 21
; not below, but aloft even with God, and in God, which moves the spirit
within him, and erecteth, and as it were carries it away in a fiery chariot,
that at the length it may enioie him in an happy, and holy, and long wished
desire of his heart.

This man is sildome found (idle) abroad, because his freende has borne him
away. There quietly and alone he hears his speech, even the speech of his
beloved, and greatly does rejoice to hear the voice of his unsuspected spouse.

Neither straight-waie does he cas^ his phiall upon the ground to draw^ up
vanity: but hides the founde^ treasure, and shuts it under loc^ and keie,
that the foot of pride com^ not in, and so all virtue do perish^ For thus he
says to him Sal. S. 8, 6
, Set me a^ a seal on thine heart, and so forth as i^ follows in that place.

It is good to seal the heart, and to keep it, least the beloved go back,
and fly away: because he seeks and visits above all a pure and an humble
heart Math. 5, 8 Math. 11, 29
.

These things he thinks with himself, and is astonished at that good thing
which passes all sense, and gifts. Yea still he wandereth, and enquireth
dilige^tlie, what thing is this? and exceedingly reioiceth, for that Manna is
come down from heaven.

And he which ministers true bread from heaven John. 6, 31 32
, does give also a good understanding to the taster, that he may know, how
every good giving, and every gift is from above, and comes down from the
father of lights Iam. 1, 17
.

This word now, says he, is from God John. 1, 3
. Without him there is nothing, I have all things from him.

Furthermore (this spiritual man) he woondereth, and lamenteth that he so
lightly esteems so excellent a good thing, by the which he is not a little
blessed; and why also he does not oftener bend his heart to hear and to see
that, than the which nothing is more sweet, and blessed to be desired.

And would to God henceforth I might thus do! For this exceedingly does
delight me, and more will delight me, the more I give my self unto these
meditations.

Oah that my beloved would come into mine heart, that I might taste the
sweetness of his apples!

Oah that he would decline unto me, and show himself to me, and me to
himself! He is my felicity, and mine only delight.

Now begin I to covet, and desire, and greatly to love this good thing, in
whom all good things are Act. 17, 28
; this joy, in whom is all joy; this one thing, in whom are all things,
small and great, base and hie; yet nothing created, but without all conceit of
man, the beginning and the end of all the good things which he has formed
Revel. 1, 8 17
.

Hence it is that now and then I would thoroughlie be replenished with this
good thing, and filled with that so heavenly joy, and I covet after a sort
even to be swallowed up and consumed utterly of him, that mine insatiable
desire might once be satisfied, in such sort, that nothing in me might be
mine, but his only, whose the fire and heat of love is, whose this
wonderful work is also, that so I might the more greedily be carried to
him^ward, and be made one spirit together with him.

Notwithstanding all this does not puff up the godly man, or make him to
think himself somewhat, or to despise others, or to judge inferiors: for he
knows that whatsoever he has comes not of himself, but it is the free
gift of God 1. Cor. 4, 7
, that thereby he is not to wax proud, when he perceaueth himself to be so
comforted of the Lord.

For he seeks not the praise of man, he cares not for foraine favor, but
he seeks the beloved, his praise and his favor he only desires, in whom
he has all things, and shall find more than all these things: because he
prefers his love, his sweetenes, and the ioiefull enioieng of him before all
transitory things; and his honor he seeks and sigheth for above all things
else. And therefore he cannot be proud, nor boast of any thing.

(God) he is his glory, his praise, and his comfort 2. Cor. 1, 31
. (God even) he is his true and perfect joy, his sovereign and sole
happiness, all his desire and perfection. And which more is, he would have
others also thus to rejoice with him, and to enioie such felicity without end
both in this world, and in heaven too.

For this is his desire and prayer, that God would reveal himself to all men,
and that he would vouchsafe to convert and draw all unto him, that he alone
might be praised and glorified; for he is both love it self 1. Ioh. 4, 8
, and such a fountain of love, as never can be drawn dry. For he does more
love all men, than all men (set together) can love him.

Notwithstanding it likes him well if any man have a desire to love him from
the botome, although he cannot sound unto the depth. For he in loving
deuoureth, vanquisheth, and surpasses all.

CHAP. 9.
A desire of the Soul, that no earthly creature may carry her away unto
vanity.
BEhold, I would take my flight far off, and lodge in the mountains Psalm. 55, 7
.

Oah how profitable, how sweet, and how ioiefull a thing is it to sit
solitarilie in silence, to talk with God, and to enioie the only good thing,
in which are all good things Iam. 1, 17
!

Would to God I were so conioined to that all simple and only good thing, that
I might be moved with none affections and distractions of transitory things;
nor curiously fasten mine eyes upon any creature, and visible thing!

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver from the body of this death Romans
7, 24
?

Alas, how often dies my soul for the creatures which she loves! oah many
times she forgets her creator, and is carried away for their sakes!

Mine unstable mind now wills this thing, now that thing, now it is here,
now there, seeking but not finding rest in creatures: because there is no
creature which can yield full satietie to be enioied Ecclus. 1, 8
, though it has some delectation for use.

The heart of man is unsearchable, and who can know it Hier. 17, 9
? O Lord, thou know the thoughts of men, that they are vane Psalm. 94, 11
.

O eternal God 1. Tim. 1, verse 17
, most hie and infinite Psa. 139, 7 8, etc.
, the creator Act. 17, 24.
and governor of all things Psalm. 97, 1
, I am thy creature Psalm. 100, 3 Psalm. 119, 73
which thou have made by thy power.

Thou have made me that I should love thee, and gladly would I love thee, but
I cannot as I would.

For I am fettered with vane love, and with clammie affections of transitory
things, from which, while I would rid my self, hardly or not at all can I so
do without great pain.

Oah how soon would theie fly and perish, if thou, Christ, were sweet, and
did ^auor in my nostrels!

Notwithstanding sometime through the sight of the mind I do behold thine
invisible things by the creation of the world Romans 1, 20
, and thee also the sovereign felicity, the true and eternal God.

And gladly would I continue in these meditations, but forthwith I know not
with what wind I am blown away from them, and held down Wisd. 9, 15
like a miser by the love and weight of visible things.

Behold, I firmly do purpose in mine heart, as it were making a covenant
between me and thee, that for thy noble and precious love, I will neither
love nor look upon any creature, but will contemn all things, yea my self
and all mine Romans 8, 35
: but straight-waie worldly, fleshly, and familiar cogitations do ascend
into mine heart as though in them were a certain felicity, and as though, if
I contemned them, I were to forgo some great good thing; and these bear a good
countenance, but they hide the woeful end; showing what is present, but hiding
the inconvenience that will ensue, as though euerie-where and in all creatures
thou art to be sought, and that nothing were to be neglected or despised, which
has bin made of my God: and thus they withdraw me oftentimes fro my purpose,
and at the length utterly seduce me.

Oah how vane, and deceiptfull, and almost nothing, are things which now stand
and flourish, proved to be 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17
, which flieng away after their sudden ioies, do leave me among the thorns
and briars of a guilty conscience.

But woe is me, Lord, yea woe again to me, because so soon I have believed
and assented to vanity, and so quickly forsaken thee, which art the truth
John. 14, 6
.

Oah, how greatly have I sinned even in this, that I have not sticken to thee
alone, neglecting all things else Luke 18, 29 30
!

For I was made to love and to enioie thee, but by following after creatures
inordinatelie I have lost thee, and found no rest for mine heart in them neither
Eccles. 1, 8
.

But turn me unto thee, o Lord, and leave me not in earthly things, thou
which have vouchsafed to promise celestial things to such as follow thee Mat.
19, 28 Luke. 9, 23
.

CHAP. 10.
1. A comparison between earthly, and heavenly ioies; 2. with a prayer for
grace to contemn this transitory world.
MY soul has refused comfort Psalm. 77, ^
.

Wander thou not after deceiptfull vanities and madness, o my soul, but turn
unto the Lord thy God, for he is the fountain of all comfort 2. Cor. 1, 3
.

Whatsoever thou seek either among men, or among creatures, thou shall leese
it, and shall well perceive it to perish. For though I grant, theie may yield
some show of comfort, yet sure I am nothing does continue 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17
1. Cor. 7, ^1
.

Why so vanelie will thou be deceived? It is egregious folly to beg of a
beggar, when he that is rich will give abundantly. Every creature is but
poor to minister comfort unto us; but God which is rich in mercy Ephesians. 2, 4
gives to all men liberally Iam. 1, 5
, and reprocheth no man, if thou for thy part diligently do seek Matthew. 7, 7
, and patiently expect his leisure.

Return, o my Soul, return down unto Noah in the arc Genesis 8, 9
, even unto Christ in thine heart, because it is not good to abide long abroad.

See thou refuse outward comfort, if inwardly thou will be refreshed 1. Ioh.
2, 15
. Do not thou with the crow abide without the arc Genesis 8, 7
, but with speed avoid the carcass. Return thou an hungered, and Christ so
will feed thee with the bread of life John. 6, 31 32 35
.

If urgent necessity, or weakness hold thee abroad, take heed thou make no
stay, but with speed get thee home, least thou be either overwhelmed with the
flud of words, or comprehended in the snares of devilish tentation.

Many traps are laid for the wandering soul; and great safety has the quick
returning dooue: which not finding where to set her foot, made haste to come
back unto Noah in the ship Genesis 8, 9
.

Go thou therefore unto thy secret place and abide there, yea let it be a
grief for thee to be elsewhere.

Oah blessed is the soul, which has a clear conscience before God Math. 5, 8
, and is not delighted with any vane thing Luke 18, 29 30
, which is neither polluted with loving any thing 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16
, nor wearied with extremely hating any man Matt. 5, 22 23, etc.
!

Blessed is the soul that seeks no comfort of creatures, but fixes all her
hope in the Lord Psalm. 40, 4
!

Blessed is the soul which refuses all outward and temporal quietness, and
whatsoever belongs unto the welfare of the body; and which for the love of
Christ does willingly embrace both pain and poverty Mat. 19, 29
!

Blessed is the soul which commends her self to God, that he may do with
her even as he thinks good!

Blessed is the soul which at no time seeks her own glory Iere. 9, 24 1.
Cor. 1, 31
, which desires at no time to have her own will done, but continually
minds, loves, and prefers the glory and will of God above all things!

Blessed is the soul which does es^ange her self from whatsoever is
temporal 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16
, and keeps her self pure and undefiled before God in all her dealings Psalm.
15, 1 2
!

O rejoice and be thou much glad, thou which art such a soul, for thou may
abide in secret and celestial (cogitations,) and so magnify the Lord day and
night!

Blessed and blessed again is the soul whose desires are to heauen-ward
Colos. 3, 1 2
; whose hands and arms are outstretched even as the two wings of the
Cherubims Eze. 11, 22
; whose eyes are pure to behold God Math. 5, 8
; whose inward power and strength does go altogether, and ascend, and
returns not, until it have him whom only she loves before all things! And
when she has found him, she follows him whether soever he will have her!

And when he speaks, he reioiceth to hear her make answer, saying; I am
thine only beloved, of thee elected. I am thine exceeding great reward Genesis
15, 1
Be thou neither proud in prosperity, nor impatient in adversity. Consider
how theie which love me, are comforted of me. How sweetly, think thou, I
will entreat them, when theie shall be received unto the eternal rest, after
that the troobles of the body and soul are laid aside!

Oah that I enioied such pleasure, as does the holy soul, when the senses
being asleep, she is carried aloft, and elevated above her self beloved,
and coopled to God by the bond of most hearty friendship! O my God, which art
the treasure of mine heart Mat. 6, 21
, thou know right well how this would be the only comfort of mine inward
grief. But thou art the geuer, and the pourer in of this ointment.

Thou teach 2. Tim. 3, 16
, thou exhortest, thou cherishest, thou comfortest, thou carriest, thou
vpholdest, thou guidest out and bring back, thou do with the soul whom
thou have chosen, even as thou will, and whatsoever thou do and wilt, it is
all good.

But I who am as a sour vessel, altogether unworthy to receive th'infusion
of thy good spirit, do humbly crave that plentifully it may so spout forth
upon me, that I may both taste the sweetenes of thine inward love, and also
perceive those sacred pleasures, the which, I doubt not, the religious soul
does feel by thy grace.

I did smell the celestial perfumes a far off, when I did meditate certain
inward cogitations of the mind concerning the soul: but, Lord, thou know
how sildome, how little I do think of eternal things, how often words do
wither, how rude the understanding, how unquiet the conscience, how my heart is
troobled, darkened and irreligious, and only through mine own default.

Notwithstanding sometime seeking a way unto spiritual matters, having taken
my cogitations with me in secret, I begin seriously to call into my
remembrance the good things of the blessed soul, how great are the celestial
ioies, and spiritual delights which are in her heart; what peace, what
tranquillity, what hope and reioicing in God her Savior, whose words be
sweet, and face bewtifull. And these cogitations though short theie endure:
yet when theie come blessed is the hour.

And I thus thinking, and thou enlightening my darkness, I do find just
complaints upon my self, and by privy holes of grace I perceive how such and
such is the soul inwardly united unto thee, and tha^ so and so thou have
spoken to her.

She is still from all things sensible, and thou in the spirit speak to her
of invisible matters.

She seems as it were to be forsaken of all creatures, and after an
unspeakable manner thou do comfort her.

So that I said again in mine heart woe to the sinful soul Deu 27, 26 Gala. 3,
10
, to the grieved conscience Prou. 3, 33 P^ou. 24, 19
, to the man which is neither hot nor cold Reave. 3, 15 16
, destitute of the light of grace, and of spiritual comfort, seeking tears,
and yet finding none.

But peace be to him which unfeignedly does love Christ, and never turns
aside the eyes of his heart from his Savior Coloss. 3, 1
: but continually seeks the things which are pleasing in his eyes.

For he shall walk in peace and equity, and no stranger shall participate of
his pleasure. He shall well perceive that his rest is good, and taste how
sweet his Lord God is, in whom he trusts Psalm. 34, 8
. He shall set him far from outward tumults, and with hearty desire expect his
prosperous coming. Lo, thus works the Lord in his elected vessels!

He which comes unto him shall not return empty away: for cheerefullie
he bestows upon the thirsty drink, and bread upon the hungry Mat. 25, 35
.

O my God, when thou enterest into the house of the soul which loves thee,
will thou not feed her with thy milk? yea and bring her sometime beside her
self, through thine abundant sweetness, to the taking of thee without any
corporal similitude!

O truth, truth, of what force and power is love!

Then will thou speak thy word to her all secretly, and show the things that
shall be, and have bin in most happy charity, and fruition, where the words
of man shall no more be heard.

From thenceforth thou will cause her no whit to doubt any more of eternal
rest, and of the fellowship of sancts: but now by differring the token of
special grace, thou make her the more able to hope for the things she sees
not Romans 8, 24
, and to despise present things which by sense she comprehends.

O merciful God, be mindful of me a poor beggar even of thy great mercy
1. Cor. 1, 3
; and send the true bread from heaven John. 6, 31 32, etc.
, thy good word so full of comfort and grace.

CHAP. 11.
1. That all comfort, and pleasures are in God. 2. A prayer that all people may
glorify the Lord. 3. The blessed state of good men. 4. That we are to be
ready against the coming of our Savior Christ.
ALl my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee Psalm. 35, 10
!

There is one Deuteronomy. 6, 4
, and like to him there is none 1. Kin. 8, 23
, even my GOD it is Ioh. 20, 17
, to whom, whatsoever is compared, is nothing Prou. 3, 15 Isai. 46, 9
.

My God is entirely to be loved, and a most faithful friend, which never
forsakes the soul that loves ^im John. 13, 1
, but continually abides with ^er for company. And if sometime ^e hide
himself, and suffer her to be ^roobled, it is not done of him to de^troie, but
to try her Iam. 1, 12
, to purge her Wisd. 3, 5 6
, and to instruct her Psa. 119, 71
. So that even ^hen he forsakes not, but the more ^iselie instructs, that
every one may see what he is of himself, and how far he is come forward
(in religion.)

O my beloved, thou art all fair and lovely, but not to the flesh, but to the
mind; not to the eye or sense, but to the faithful soul, to him which has a
pure heart Mat. 5, 8
, to him which is altogether addicted unto things invisible and spiritual 2.
Cor. 4, 18
.

So that who so desires to be united to thee by a religious affection, he must
of necessity mortify in himself all fleshly motions, and above all retain
a pure conscience. For thou art much displeased then, when a man does go unto
frail crreatures to seek consolation.

And therefore thou call me inwardly to love thee Luke 10, 27
, and thou command that I wait for thee: for then I shall find thee, when I
do humble my self, and wish that which thou will.

And this shall be all my felicity, even freely to serve thee, neither
dreading any loss, nor seeking any gain: because thou allowest that soul
which pure lie does love Mat. 10, 37
.

Oah blessed is he, which both in life and death sticks only to thee*

But as for me I am far-awaie cast oftentimes from thy favor by loving, and
that both inordinatelie, and vndiscreetelie, transitory things. But that I
may not perish with them, I with all speed will return, and behold in them
thy glory Romans 1, 21
, and direct all my cogitations to thee w^rd.

O my Lord, and God, which of nothing have made all things Gene. 1, 1 2, etc.
, give me grace for all things to praise thy name. John. 1, 1 2 Act. 17, 24


For all power Revel. 4, 8.
, wisdom Iam. 1, 17
, goodness and mercy is thine Mat. 19, 17
; thine also is everlasting glory and majesty Reave. 7, 12
.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom Psa. 145, 13
; and thy dominion endures throughout all ages.

Thou orderest all things Wisd. 8, 1
, both things above, and things in earth.

Thou know all things Ecclus. 23 verse 19
, and possessest all things Psalm. 95, 4 Eccles. 9, 1
; nothing does resist Dan. 4, 32
, or trouble thee: but quietly thou rulest the world, and make the
rebellious to stoup, and to serve Wisd. 12, 3 4, etc. Daniel. 9, 3 12
.

Thou art privy of all things which are done in the world Ecclus. 23, 19*
; and before theie were done thou knew their ends Isai. 46, 10
.

Thou art the God both of heaven and earth Ezra. 5, 11
, the creator of things visible and invisible Psalm. 89, 11 Psalm. 115, 15
, the governor of the whole world Psalm. 47, 1 2 6, etc.
, and the disposer of the seasons Ecclus. 4^, verse 5 6, etc.
.

O bless thy servants, I beseech thee, dispersed far and wide over the world,
yet serving thee most religiously. Make them (constantly) to sound forth thy
praise, and in all places with one voice to glorify thy name.

Stir up their hearts firmly to love thee; and grante that all their
enterprises may take a good end.

Oah, how gracious, and how good art thou to such as love thee 1. Cor 2, 9
! how sweet art thou to them which taste thee Psalm. 34, 8
!

Theie which have felt thy sweetness, know thereby the better how both to
think and speak. For thy sweetness surpasses all sweetness; and thy pleasures
do sweeten all bitterness.

O Lord my God, holy men have spoken, and Prophets have talked of thee.

All the godly from the worlds beginning have believed in thee, have served
thee, have glorified thee both with sacrifices and oblations, theie have
praised and blessed thine holy name: because theie have both acknowledged thee
to be the creator and maker of the universal world, and also trusted in thee
above all things Hebr. 11, 2 3, etc.
.

Theie have known thee in their visions, for thou have revealed thy name to
them; and beside thee they knew no God. Theie observed the law of thy
commandments, which thou gave them.

Theie followed not the foolish imaginations of false Gods: but they worshipped
thee which live for ever 1. Tim. 1, verse 17
, the creator of all things Act. 17, 24 Hebr. 1, 3
.

Theie lifted up their voice to thee with thankesgeuing: because from on high
thou soundest in their ears, saying Exodus 3, 14
, I am that I am. Before me there was no God formed Isa 43, 10
, neither shall there be after me. I have ordained the things which shall be,
and I forget not whatsoever is past.

This when theie heard and understood, theie cast the eyes of their faith a far
off, believing that God will save us; and that he which shall come, will come,
and will not tarry Heb. 10, 37
.

Knowing these things before hand theie were not a little comforted, and
marvelously astonished, at the presence of the glory to come, theie fainted.
But afterward coming by little and little to themselves, and with joy beholding
the power of God approaching, theie said, He is, even he is the Lord our God,
and we have none other. He has taken us, and he will save us. He cannot
deny himself 2. Tim. 2, 13
, because he is faithful. As we have heard, so we have seen 1. Ioh. 1, 1 3
: as we have believed, so we have spoken, and borne witness to the truth
John. 3, 11
.

Once the Lord did speak, and it was done Psalm. 33, 9
. He said, My counsel shall stand Isai. 46, 10
: but yours shall come to naught, o ye sons of men Psalm. 33, 10
.

Woe unto them which imagine evil Mich. 2, 1
, and afterward make a scoff at the word of God!

Woe unto you which do faigne a religion out of your own brain, and are
exalted in your own power!

Hear the word of the Lord, ye which serve the Lord: know ye that he has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the earth Hos. 4, 1
.

To turn away your selves, it is not good; stand ye therefore and consider
his ways.

Return you and come unto him, so will he ioiefullie receive you into favor;
for the Lord is gracious and merciful Exo. 34, 6 Jonas. 4, 2
.

He keeps not his anger as man does Hos. 11, 9
, but pardons all sins, yea and moreover he restores the former grace with
the later.

Only return you with all your hearts: and dedicate your selves wholly and
unfeignedly to his service. Thus do the sancts speak in mine ears.

That which music is at a banquet, and sweet smelling frankincense in a
censar: even that is the word of God in a pure heart.

And thy sancts, Lord, filled with thy spirit, have thus sounded forth the
memory of thine abundant sweetenes; and have lest their words unto us to be
sounded abroad.

But my speech often-time is stopped, so that it has no passage to ascend. But
if that fire come from above, then shall my tongue be hot: and if it once be
enflamed, I shall forthwith be consumed.

I shall not be able to stand in the presence thereof; for as the wind drives
away chafe, so shall sorrow be expelled from the heart. And as the rust by the
fire: so shall my sins be consumed.

The fire of God which consumes all things, shall sweep the floor of man's
heart. Descend, and get up; tuch me a little, and I shall flee.

Things passed shall be as though theie had never been, and that to come shall
not be accounted of: for all sins shall utterly be forgotten.

Old things shall pass away, new shall come abundantly; holy desires shall
increase, and rise up on all sides, wheresoever the good spirit shall blow.

Fear shall depart, love shall possess the hearts of all; all affliction shall
cesse: for this alteration is by the hand of God.

Therefore that which I say is not to mine own, but to his praise.

The pensive has comfort; the hungry, bread; the thirsty, drink;

The sick is healed; the wavering, assisted; the weak, strengthened; the
weary, quieted; the hopeless, comforted; the complainer, pitied;

To the blind, sight; to the wandering, a ready way; to the knocker, the
gate is opened.

He which doubted, is now resolved; he which staggered, is now strengthened;
he that diligently enquired, is now entertained ioiefullie by mother
charity. The friend comes more ioiefullie to meet, than is the soul
desirous to speak with him.

L. Lo now am I present, says he, say on, what new thing has fallen out?
What, have you forgotten what you are to suffer and to do for my sake?


B. Yet this stayed me not being desirous to go forward with him. So
straight-waie I mounted aloft, and forgot all mine affliction.

He would not by and by discomfort the party so longing to abide with him:
but with gentle words he said, that in due time it should be performed.


L. Thy desire is good, and request unto me does like me well:
notwithstanding, it may not presently be granted.

Go thy way, and get home to thine own house, and declare to thine
acqu^int^nce what the Lord has done for thee.

Say unto them, Prepare your hearts every one of you; and lay down the
heavy burden of sin; and be ye wary, and strong to resist the snares of
Satan Iam. 4, 7
.

Watch and pray, least ye fall into tentation Mat. 26, 41 Mark. 14, 38
.

I will come shortly, look that I find you ready.

Lo, I have warned you aforehand.


CHAP. 12.
1. The desire of the soul after God. 2. The properties of God by the sondrie
titles ascribed unto him. 3. None comes unto God, unless God draws him.
Say unto my soul I am thy salvation Psalm. 35, 3
.

O, of what excellency art thou, my soul, what wonderful virtue is hidden in
thee, that thou can never be at rest, until thou have attained perfect
happiness, and found the last end which thou so desire! which once being
known and found out, the care is gone.

Oah happiness above all happiness; o end without end, when shall I both without
measure, and everlastingly enioie thee!

I find many good things in this world. But theie continue not 1 Cor. 7, 31
1. John. 1, 15 16
, neither do theie satisfy my desire Ecclus. 1, 8
.

But one thing is necessary Luke 10, 42
* This one thing is that I seek; this o^e thing I desire.

For one thing are all things Isai. 43, 7
; and of one thing are all things Genesis 1, 1 2, etc. John. 1, 1 3
. If I ^et this thing, I shall be co^^ent: but if I enioie it not, I shall
continually be tossed, because many things cannot satisfy me.

What is this one thing? I am not able to say what it is; sure I am I desire
that, than which, nothing either is, or ma^e be imagined either better or
greater Isai. 46, 5 6, etc. Job. 41, 1 2, etc.
.

For this is not one thing among many things; but one thing above all things
Ezra. 5, 11
. And it is my God, to whom if I stick, I shall do well Psalm. 73, 2^
.

To him I say, to him I (...), when I say, Say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation Psalm. 35, 3
.

O my soul, my longing soul, what more desire thou? Is it not better for
th^e to clea^e unto one thing, than unto many things? Of one thing are many
things Act. 17, 24
, but one thing is not of many things.

Cesse to seek many things, join thee to one, stick unto one: for in one
thing all things consist.

Let others enquire after manifold and diverse outward things: but do thou
seek one inward good thing, and it is sufficient.

Lo, this man seeks a farm Mat. 22, 5 Luke. 14, 18
; that man traueleth about his merchandise; another heapeth up much gold and
silver; another hunteth after pleasures and preferment; another visits his
friends and kindred; another is merry with his acquaintance; another rides unto
cities and castles; another does long to see diverse contries of the world;
another desires wisdom, another preferment, another principality, another a
kingdom: and thus one wishes one thing, another man another thing even as well
among the spiritual sort, as among the secular. But few do seek one thing,
and (other things) purelie and simply for one thing. And therefore theie
neither do find any sure peace; nor yet savor the inward grace of the spirit.

For so many as are (the servants) of Christ, do covet not temporal, not
earthly things Colos. 3, 1
, as though they were then iolie and glorious felows, if theie abunded
therewith.

What then? will thou say that the things which theie seek for, do touch
thee, o devout soul? in truth thou can not.

For my part, I detest all these things: for my good thing is but one thing; I
love but one thing, I require but one thing; and this one thing is better to
me than all other things either in heaven or earth.

If thou have found such a good thing, my counsel is, that you hold and keep
it, for who^e sake you have contemned all things. For having that, it shall not
grieve you to want other things; naie, you will judge it reason for the getting
thereof, that you do both give Phil. 3, 8
, and suffer all things Romans 8, 35 38
.

Now therefore, o my soul, seek thou after so singular, and superexcellent a
good thing.

So long as you live in the flesh, you are of necessity to seek: because that
cannot too carefully be sought for, which can at no time sufficiently be
comprehended 1. Cor. 2, 9
.

But then shall you cesse seeking, when the hour of enioieng is once come. For
then shall he be all in all 1. Cor. 15, verse 28
, even he which alone is all sufficient for all, and every man.

And although there too he must be sought, where he is continually sound: yet
is he not there sought with labor, as in this world, but with surpassing
pleasure, and love ^. Cor. 13, 13
.

What he is in this life to the godly, it may be declared by his manifold
titles: and such as have experience (of his goodness) know very well how it
may be showen.

Notwithstanding, consider what the names of God are, as I have learned them in
the school of experience: I will recite a few, but the grace (of his spirit)
may put you in mind of many mo beside.

Lo, he is a spouse Mat. 9, 15
, to such as love; but to such as still serve him in fear, a dreadful Lord
Deuteronomy. 6, 13 Math 4, 10
.

He is a father, to good children Math. 6, 9
; but to the obstinately wicked, a seueare judge 2. Tim 4, 8 Hebr 12, 23
.

To the sick, he is a physician Matt. 9, 12
, and to the whole, wholesome food John. 6, 55 56
.

To the ignorant, a teacher John. 7, 16
, and to the obedient, an everlasting Savior Math. 1, 21
.

He is the way Ioh. 14, 6
for beginners, the truth, for proceeders, the life John. 11, 25
, for the absolute performers of his holy will.

He is the hope Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1
of repenters, and a surpassing comforter Ioh. 14, 26
of the righteous.

He is a crown Luke 2, 32
for the humble, and a punishment Romans 9, 33
for the proud.

In darkness, he is a light John. 1, 8 9 John. 3, 19
; and in the night, a lantern John. 8, 12 1. John. 1, 5
.

He gives medicine to the diseased souls, and much wine of comfort, to the
sorrowful.

With such as stand to the battle, he stands; with such as proceed in
their iornie, he walks; with such as fervently make haste, he runs; with
such as mount in divine contemplation, he flies.

Do you pray? he is present with you. Do you read? he is talking with
you. Do you meditate? he is still with you.

One and the same God works in all these things, showing himself to every
one, even as he thinks good: in his words there is no fault, and his works
are past finding out.

For great and unsearchable are his judgments Romans 11, 33
, and no man is t^ say unto him, why do thou so^ or why do thou choose
this man rather than that man Isai. 45, 9 10 11
.

It is folly for a man to reason a^gainst the almighty: and all the will of
Adams children is vane, Romans 9, 20 21, etc.
an^ to no purpose.

How like you these things, and how does God savor unto you?

S. He seems sweet unto me; neither am I offended at his works.

He is righteous Psalm. 119, verse 137
, and who can rebuke him of ill dealing Ioh. 8, 46
?

He that so does, does set himself against God, and shall be reproved of
his irreprehensible light.


M. But what thou have heard, what is it in his presence? scarce undoubtedly
so much as a sparcle, without that which is hidden within.

Ask you what that is? I must say, I know it not, it is altogether above my
capacity, even as a certain cloud far off, whose beginning and end are
unknown.

And therefore meditate rather, and think more often upon the base humanity
of Jesus, and do not mount up too high, least of his glorious majesty you be
confounded.

But, for so much as burning love does now and then forget all reverence and
fear, you are (in that respect) the more to be borne withal, if sometime,
being extreemelie set on fire with the love of Jesus, you do consider not
only how he cried in the manger Luke. 2, ^
, and how he hanged upon the cross Mat. 27, 31 32* etc.
: but also how he reigns now in heaven all gloriously Philip. 2, 9 10
, and rules all things under heaven most wonderfully Revel. 1, 5
.


S. O most lovely Jesus, gladly do I follow thee in earth: but more gladly
would I follow thee unto heaven.

Where my treasure is, there would mine heart be also Math. 6, 21
.

Oah thou art my treasure, thou which art at the right hand of the father Romans
8, 34 Hebr. 1, 3
, art deerer to me than any creature. For my sake thou wast incarnate, for my
sake thou wast eleuate.

Thou did leave thy self an example upon earth Ioh. 13, 15 1. Pet. 2, 2^
; thou keep thy self for a reward in the heavens.

Upon thee therefore mine eyes are fixed, and after thee do my feet trace. To
thee mine heart says, my face seeks thee o Lord, I will continualie seek thy
face Psalm. 27, ^
.

O Lord, how long will thou hide the sight of thy glory? Why hi^ est thou thy
face Job. 13, 24
, and take me for thine enemy?

Thou know right well, my mind will be distracted hither and th^ther, and be
diversely beat, until it be fast joined to thee her freende in the heavens.

For the force of love knows not how to be quiet Sal. S. 8, 6 7
: but vnce^santlie makes inquiry of her lover, sends forth messengers, and
dobleth prayers: neither does it so give over, because love will altogether
possess that which it desires.

Therefore draw me Sal. S. 1, 3
, that I may begin zelouslie to run after thee. I had need to be drawn, and
with great force to be drawn. For unless thou draw, none will come John. 6, 44
, none will follow: because every one is naturally inclined to himselfe-ward.

But if thou once draw, lo then I do hasten, then I run, then I wax hot. But
if thou do not draw, I do neither run, nor seek, yea scarce have I any
desire at all to follow. If thou reach out thine hand, I do run so much the
more swiftly, as thou forcibly do draw.

This is the voice of my lover drawing Ioh. 12, 32
, And when I am ^ift up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me.

O sweet Jesus, draw me after thee, and then not I only, but all shall run
after thee by the savor of thine ointments Sal. S. 1, 2 3
.

First therefore draw me after thee, then let others follow, seeing an example
of good life.

But, that we may not wax proud, it is good that we mark this withal, how
that we began to run, not through our own strength, but by the savor of thine
ointments.

This is the heavenly drawing, without which no man can go forward, no not so
much as begin, as likewise thou did say Ioh. 6, 44
: No man can come unto me, except my father draw him.

So that whom the father draws, he follows thee, and forsakes himself.

He seemed to be well drawn that said Mat. 8, 19 Luke. 9, 57
: Master, I will follow thee, whether soever thou go. But every one has not
the gift to be so affected: neither is it a weak stomach that can so readelie
follow thee unto all things.


M. What let have hou, o my soul, that thou do not forsake all for Jesus
sake? Why so unwillingly do you depart from vane and transitory things?
What good can these worldly things do you?

Behold, while you pass by mortal things, and visible creatures, willing to
delight your self in them, you forget better things. While you so do, you
sever your self from the sovereign good thing, and turn your mind from the
true, blessed, and eternal life.

And therefore you shall continue miserable and wretched, full of grief and
vexation Eccles. 2, 17
.

For turn your self on which side you will, and you shall find matter of
continual sorrow, and much tediousnes, until you turn again unto thy
creator: because he is thy peace Ioh. 16, 33
, and secure quietness.

But, if thou neither make stay in earthly things, nor fasten thy foot in
the mire, but rather behold and worship in the glass of worldly creatures,
not the figure which passes away 1. Cor. 7, verse 3^
, but him whose image and superscription it is, blessed art thou, and shall
never die Reave. 21, 4
.

For when thou seek after these visible things not to enioie them, but
beholdest them to the end to glorify the name of thy creator, by making to
thy self of his best and basest works a kind of ladder wherewithal thou
may ascend, thou shall be delivered so from the filthy bowels of this world,
and thoroughlie be coopled to thy desired end, which is above all things the
blessed God for ever and ever.


CHAP. 13.
1. How, and when the soul and God are united together. 2. The misery where
God is not present.
MY Soul cleaves unto thee Psalm. 63, 8


O my God, the true comforter, thou know how thou likest me well, and how I
take pleasure daily to be talking with thee secretly alone.

But where may I seek thee, if happily I do miss thee for an hour? who
shall bring me unto thee?

Thou art God above all things Isai. 46, 9
; and I beneath all things a miserable man. Thou art in heaven Matthew. 6. 9
, and I in the world. Thou art most high, but I am poor, and a beggar.

Who ever has measured the distance between heaven and earth? Far asunder be
theie: but farther art thou fro me, o God.

Who therefore shall unite me to thee? either thou must do it, or none can.

But if thou will, it may speedily be done. And thou know, how of my self
I may easelie fall: but that I do stand, and go forward, it is of thy goodness.

So that my soul depends upon the grace of thy spirit, and of the infusion
of thy special favor.

I^ thou command, it shall be lifted up from earth: but if thou turn away thy
face, it shall be greatly troobled.

But of thy woonted favor and mercy receive me; and let thy right hand guide
me wonderfully unto thee.

Hear this, all ye people Psalm. 49, 1
, give ear all ye that dwell in the world; for it is an easy thing with God
to bring it to pass, as it is written, that the rich and poor may be all one.

I am poor, and lack many things; but this my God is rich, and wants
nothing Psalm. 50, 11 12
.

And although no great experience, yet I have an undoubted testimony to prove
that the soul through grace may be united to God.

My beloved is mine, says he Sal S. 2, 16
, and I am his, he feeds among the lilies.

This is the testimony of the friend, and his dearling; of the bridegroom,
and the spouse: and it is a very fit, and a strong testimony of the holy
law.

The next is like to this Ioh. 17, 21
: I will that theie all may be one, as thou, o father, art in me, and I in
thee.

Behold the notable testimonies of two books, whereby it plainly appears,
that the soul, through special grace from above, may be linked familiarlie
unto God.

And although it rarely come so to pass: yet is it dearly to be accounted
of, and not altogether unknown to the lover. And again, though very hardly:
yet may it fall out.

The soul therefore so conioined to God, let no man dare to separat, or to
trooble.

If thou do wonder at this marvelous union, wonder thou and marvel at the
excellency of his goodness, and at the strange and singular uniting of the
humane body (to his Godhead.)

He may do what he will, which only does great woonders Psalm. 136, 4
.

If thou look for merits, you shall find it is his good pleasure to have it
so.

O sweet society with Christ, and under the wings of Christ!

O gracious conjunction, full of love, and sweetenes of the holy Ghost, the
which is perceived better than uttered!

These things belong unto the soul that is estranged from all worldly
matters, and is not delighted with this present life: but is carried aloft in
godly meditation.

The more the lover knows this, the more am I ignorant. Notwithstanding,
gladly would I be in presence when the devout soul is in such an happy case.

And then is she so, when the spouse and she is together at the noone day. But
then it fares ill with her, and that very ill too, if it happen that Jesus
be away; if the perfumes of grace run not from above; if no pleasure she take
in the holy Bible; if it be irksome for her to continue in prayer and godly
meditation; if the clouds of the heart be so thick, and hurtful cogitations
do so prevail, that theie cannot be restrained, but do labor to ouerwhelme in
a manner all the former good things.

O Lord God, why do thou so? What play is this? O blessed Jesus, what
mean you hereby?

If it were not offensive to thine honor, I could wish to have farther
communication between thee, and thy beloved.

For So Much as she is so greatly desirous of thy gracious presence, whereby she
may be nourished with chaste delights, I do much muse why sometime you
suffer her to fit so desolate. Thou passest by, and go thy way, as though
she had no desire unto thee. But she is alone all pensive. For thus she says
in effect Isai. 26, 9
, With my soul have I desired thee in the night.

It is night with her, when thou, the true light, art not present. So that she
prays for thy presence, that the darkness of sin comprehend her not. For
she feels manifold discommodities when thy gracious visitation is taken from
her. For, had she not suffered somewhat, she had never so earnestly cried unto
thee.

Another also, which was before said, cried thus Psalm. 63, 8
, My soul cleaves unto thee.

But I think no trouble is or seems so troublesome to her, as the want of
thy presence.

And no marvel, if through this want the waieward soul do languish away in
sorrow. For thou art very hardly found at any time, and being found, she
reioiceth at thy return, hoping to spend the day merely with thee: but
thinking little of thy departure, she suspecteth no adversity to come. But,
handling another matter secretly, thou often take thy flight.

For thou departest suddenly out of her hands, when she cannot lay hold upon
thee.

I do praise thee, but in this how shall I praise thee? If thou have any
praise and sweetenes, why do you seem to forgo it in this deed?

If thou were not, she might be offended. But she can take none offense at
thee, who so mightelie do love her.

If therefore any good reason be signified under that lesson, o God show it
me.

For gladly would I understand the same: neither do I think it unnecessary
to learn though it be but little.

Because no man of himself can behold thy secret judgments: but it is thy
light which does both inlighten dark, and drive away hurtful things.

What therefore may the cause be that sometime so secretly you withdraw your
self from the soul, she not witting thereof?

Do you love her, or no? If you do love her, then why do you leave her, my
beloved? If you love her not, why then have you visited her before time?
Again, if you love her not, why do you make return, why knock you at the
door, why enter you in again? What, is it of lightness that you do so both
go and return? God forbid.

But so often change does not a little grieve her; yea much it does disquiet
her. Yet the grief would be the lesser, if thou would say plainly Ioh.
14, 28
, I do go, and will come unto you; your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no
man shall take from you Ioh. 16, 22
.

But now you cast out never a byword; only she thinks upon that speech,
which she well perceaueth to be performed in her self, how Jesus hid himself,
and went out of the Temple Ioh. 8, 59
.

A few things I have against you, but my complaint does spring out of a good
root. I humbly request to be instructed, I love not to contend.

And therefore, when occasion serves, make answer I beseech you.

Also let the godly soul say for her self somewhat for her learning.

Likewise make you answer boldly when your part requires.

O my soul, answer thou thy beloved boldly. For thy friend will patiently
hear, and meet thee with mild words, that you may suffer none hinderance.

For if he be not thy comforter, who will comfort thee? And who more
favorably will bear thine infirmity, than he which bears all things, and
yet is not burdened? And to whom more safely can you reveal your misery,
than to him which perfectly knows all things? Ecclus. 23 verse 19
Or in whom may you put more confidence, than in the truth which deceaueth
not John. 6, 14
?

Now, if any stranger, or one that is not a friend to the spouse, shall hear
these things, let him be driven from the doors. But if he love the spouse, if
he be faithful, if devout and spiritual, let him have free ingresse.

If he be a keeper of a good conscience, a lover of virtue and discipline; if
he be pure in heart Matthew. 5, 3
, and clear in judgment; if humble in himself, and good toward others; if
he can neither wickedlie carpe at, vanelie extol, rashly reprove,
impudentlie maintane, nor proudly commend things; but contrariwise if he have
learned both, the things which he conceaueth not, to reverence, and also
rightly to interpret obscure and mystical matters, let him have entrance, and
hear the communication. For the affection of the heart through the sound of
words ought to be noted rather than the quality of voices.

And therefore tell me, o soul, how do thou feel thy self wanting now the
grace of thy beloved? I for my part do see that hardly I can take it well, if
he keep himself long away: and I conceive the like of you.

If you think good let us sit here together, and confer we hereof to our
comfort.

CHAP. 14.
1. A lamentation of the soul for the want of grace.
MIne heart breaks for desire Psa. 119, 20
.

What is it thou say? Why say thou, Zion, the Lord has forsaken me?

Fear not daughter, Zion, thou loving and religious soul, lo thy king, and
well-beloved friend comes to thee.

Arise, stand up, and behold the joy which comes toward thee from thy God.

S. I have sought, says the soul, and have not found Sal. S. 3, 2
, I have called, and he has not answered, and therefore I do break for
thought.


M. Then said I, this is the voice of the Turtle having lost her mate.

It is not now with you as it was yesterdaie, and earewhile, when you sang the
songs of mirth.


S. The morning is past, night comes, and the spouse rests himself at
noone tide: yet may I not come nigh him.


M. Your words are sorrowful, and your eyes shed tears. O soul, thou art
grieved, and have need of comfort. But speak, whence comes your grief?


S. I am not troubled either for gold or silver, or any worldly matter,
neither for lucre, nor for hurt, neither for injury, nor for poverty, for I
am now dead, and crucified to the world.


M. If I be not deceived, long since you renounced the world. But whether in
all things perfectly you have denied the same, and art come even into a very
hatred of your self, I would feign know.


S. Very few have that gift, and it is especially looked for at your hands.


M. Why therefore are you so pensive? What have you forgon? If it be for your
friend his sake, I must needs confess you do well to be sad: neither should
you take delight in any thing, until he return, and visit you again.

But in the mean while, how do you sustain your self upon the beloved, o
sweet soul?

And sure I am he is not alwaie present at a wish. Therefore while he is
absent, what comfort have you, wherein do you take delight?

Tell me your secrets, be theie never so grievous.

That you bear the absence of Christ heavily, no man doubts, but he only
that loves not.

Now you are sad, I take it, not for this world, but for the spouse Christ. And
I know full well that when he shall return, you will be merry again:
because he will not always forget you. For he has said Ioh. 14, 18
, I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come to you.

Therefore your words are not vane, being uttered with such grief, but theie
declare a loving heart, and strike the cold affection, which is not inflamed
with the love of Christ.

For your voice, is the voice of a Turtle, not the crieng of a murmurer. And
therefore I trust you shall find him, whose loss you so lament.

Notwithstanding I demand, What say you of him, whose absence you do so
bewail? Is he good, or no?


S. Doubtless he is good, and singularly good too Mat. 19, 16
, righteous, and faithful, in him there is no wickedness Job. 34, 10
, neither can be.


M. Why therefore lament you for the good in whom is no deceit 1. Pet. 2, 22
?


S. I weep not for the good, in respect that he is good: but I lament mine
own miserable condition, because I have lost a good and a faithful friend.

I, even I have deserved this: but alas, alas that I kept not his favor.

By the lack, I have now learned what I have lost. And the absence of a friend
shows, what his presence did good.

I was merry and iocund with him: but I did no whit consider of his speedy
departure.

He came skipping upon the mountains, he was ioiefull and iocund in the
porches of mine house. And straight-waie I locked the doors of the flesh, and
let in the beloved unto me. I did sit, and rested within under his shadow
from the hail and rain. And it did me much good to have his company.

Why should I not rejoice? He is my joy, and the comfort of mine heart.

Ah, what had I? And what then did I possess?

I am not able to utter, how well I prospered then; neither is it convenient
that I should. I could not desire more then I had, he being present whom
alone I loved.

Oah, how did I love, when I despised both my self, and all things beside!

I had either little or no care at all of any thing that might delight me; for
I was ravished with love of him, and whatsoever was not my beloved, I loathed
as altogether unsavory. But he being taken away, I am in a manner clean out
of heart.

For my soul depended upon his grace, because I had none other comfort besides
him, whose absence I do thus lament. He did content me, and was sufficient to
the making of true mirth in deed.

As I would, so was he; and whatsoever he enioined me, I took it in good
part, and I consecrated my self wholly and frankly to his will. So that there
was a good agreement, and great quietness between us.

No man durst be so bold as to interrupt our silence, when he had commanded so
through my mouth.


L. I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem Sal. S. 2, 7
, by the roes, and by the hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor waken
my love, until she please.


S. Now therefore note, if you be able to conceive my words, what great cause
I have to lament the absence of my friend, by whose presence I began to be so
rich with all good things.


M. Heereunto I answered. I know well what you say: by often experience I
have proved so much as you speak.

But let us comfort our selves in this, that the dispensation of his will, is
the increase of our zeal, and devotion.

And now I have received with thankefulnes that which you have uttered:
notwithstanding, I would more thoroughlie have them beaten into mine head. For
theie which be hard of conceiving, are often to be told of a matter.


CHAP. 15.
1. Touching the fruit of freendship. 2. The benefits of Christ upon man. 3.
The true felicity and joy of the soul. 4. The affinity between Christ, and
the soul of man.
PRaised be GOD which has not put back my prayer fro me Psalm. 66, 20
.

Therefore I am now again zelouslie to enquire, if your friend at any time
left you without inward comfort.

What mean you? What muse you here about? How also may he be reconciled
and reclamed?

Of all freendship, I beseech you, o dear and beloved soul to Christ,
conceal none of these things which I am to demand of you.

You may so do me a pleasure, in opening to me your godly cogitations.

By your talk. I shall be able to measure the weight of my grief, whether
justly or without cause I was pensive.

For I have seen you sometime merry, and sometime sad, and by and by glad
again, and by you I did somewhat consider of my self.

But I suppose the chiefest cause of this your alteration is that returning and
departure of the beloved. The which has made me, perceauing how you have run
over many matters, for mine instruction to resort unto you.

S. According to your desire, I will bend my self somewhat to unfold the
things which I feel within me, both when I am with my friend, and also when I
am alone, looking for him whom I so do love.

This first understand, I reap not so much joy and pleasure by his presence,
but I find as much sorrow and bitterness through his absence.

But why it pleases him so to come and go, rather I had he should declare
than I.

But you shall hear it when I have finished the words of my song, because in
the end we will bring him in unto us, and sitting among us, he shall teach us
his order, the which he uses to show unto such as desire his presence.

In the mean while give attentive ear unto me, and be not offended at mine
homely speech.

For we are now come together to stir up our hearts, and either to weep
together, or through love to rejoice together.

For woe unto him that is alone Eccles. 4, verse 10
, because when he falls into some sorrow or tentation, there is not a second
to lift him up. And if to be together theie will comfort one the other, while
one being sad, the other ministers joy; or if he refuse to be comforted, he
shall be pitied forthwith, and grief will be taken for his grief; and so it
will fall out that either theie will both be glad, or both sad together. And
although some sorrow do yet still continue for some adversity, or matter of
sorrow: yet the more patiently theie bear it, because their hearts be so
linked, that nothing can change or alter their minds.

Now, who seeing this faithful concord of minds, but must needs break into
these words, and say, Psalm. 133,
Behold, how good, and how comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell even
together.

And therefore I can the more boldly tell you what I think, because I dread no
deceit, or subtlety in you.

Lo, this all sweet spouse, and best beloved friend, our Lord Jesus Christ, the
lover of holy souls Wisd. 11, 23
, even of pure love, not able otherwise to do, allured me unto him; and when
I was not, he gave me life Act. 17, 22
, wisdom, and power to behold this common light.

He gave me grace to be borne anewe by Baptism, and adorned me with the
roabe of his precious merits.

Over and besides, when afterward I had foulie bespotted my self with sin,
and was far unfit to love him, he cast not his eye upon my filthiness, but upon
the side of his mercies.

For when as yet I wandered out of the way, he reclamed me of his goodness
Romans 8, 30
, not suffering me to perish in this wicked world.

Moreover, he has provided me a place to rest in so long as I live in this
mortal body.

Notwithstanding, this dwelling under the shadow of the beloved is not the true
rest, nor the rest which shall for ever continue: but that is the true rest,
which we shall feel after the labors of this present life Reave. 21, 4
.

Yet for the soul to perceive her self to be unburdened of worldly cares,
and there to rest where she may the more fully serve her beloved, and attend
upon him in the secret chamber of silence, it is a kind of comfort.

Furthermore, my friend has not left, but assisted me in my diverse troubles,
and sorest tentations.

Also, he has both instructed me oftentimes with profitable sermons, and
confirmed me in his word.

And as young plants are wont to be watered with showers: so he has watered me
with inward comfort, that the virtue newly implanted within me may not wither.


L. And he said to me, If thou have a lust unto me, and wilt harken unto me,
thou shall enioie good things; if thou will do, whatsoever I command you, thou
art a friend of mine Ioh. 15, 4
.

If thou will choose me, and love me above all things, all things that you
ask, my father will give you: but if you forgo me, then shall thou come to
destruction, for my wrath shall be incensed against thee; if thou seek after
another, he shall not please thee long, but thou will loath and abhor him.
Because I am the salvation, and the life of the soul John. 14, 6 John. 11, 25
.


S. So I turned me unto him which had done me good, and expelling my self
from out the dust of earthly affections, I decreed in mine heart from
thenceforth to serve him only: because I found nothing better than him, nor
could imagine no covenant more profitable.

Let others iet, and seek what freendship theie will elsewhere, I am
thoroughlie persuaded this is the true man of the soul, for whose sake me
thinks I could gladly forsake this world, to enioie his love everlastingly.

And therefore I stuck unto him, for he liked me still; neither could I find a
better friend.

For my soul alwaie has exceedingly desired such a one, as is the greatest,
for power, the best for goodness, the woorthiest for dignity, and the most
happy for all good things.

And because he is very courteous, he gave me comfortable words, warelie
foreseeing that theie should neither terrefie, nor break me through
overmuch roughnes, but rather enioine and teach me that which should be both
light, and sweet to be borne, that so my young affection might the better be
drawn on, and the more forcibly addicted to the friend beloved, and shrink
not back.


M. She shall the better, said he, be instructed, and profit, if not by force,
but through gentleness she be provoked forward. She will the more easily receive
my yoke, rather by love with rewards, than by fear with punishment. And if
she need impulsion, let it wisely be used, that violence do not overthrow
her.

For he knew right well what was best for a young plant, and what profit this
his kindness would bring unto me, especially at the time of trial, when I
should easelie call into my remembrance the good things which at the first he
did unto my soul, and thereby take courage to proceed in the battle.

He would not straight-waie open unto me, what and how much trooble I was to
endure in his service; but sometime he tempered adversity with prosperity,
well considering my weakness at the first, until through experience I had
gotten strength to endure affliction.

After all this he carried me about, enstructed, and boar me upon his
shoulders.

He conducted me over the holy Scripture, and with the heat of his holy
Spirit he armed me against the wicked tentations of Satan.

Moreover, he placed before mine eyes examples of all the virtues, namely, the
holy Patriarchs, and Prophets, besides the glorious lights of the new
Testament.

Even as a Mother teaches her little child, so he instructed me, breaking
spiritual shales, and putting the carnels into my jaws, because theie were
sweet to be eaten.

Search if you can what theie signify, and where such may be found.

Open the apostolical book, read advisedly, and see if you are able to
comprehend so great mysteries.

Peruse the Prophet Isaiah; look into the Gospel, the light of all lights,
and mark if theie do not yield most pleasant notes of themselves.

In them whatsoever you find which is obscure, and hard to be understood, that
is a nut in a shel.

But if you hear it expounded, and understand that which before you did not,
then broken is the shel, and the sweetness of the ^ut does savor in the heart.
And so are we to judge of other dark sentences. Whereby you may behold so
many nuts, as you see hidden sentences.

And how, think you, did he bear me on his shoulders? That he did so often as
he beheld mine infirmity, and yet neither cast me off, nor despised me, but
patiently and mercifully did bear with me 2. Pet. 3, 9
.

Again, he did bear me on his shoulders, when he made other men to bear with
mine infirmities, and whatsoever was blameworthie within me.

Besides, yet more lovingly he did bear me on his shoulders when he bare his
cross unto the place, called the place of dead men's sculs Ioh. 19, 17 18, etc.
, where he was crucified. For then was I a more heavy burden unto him, than
the cross was. And my sins were more grievous to his bones 1. Pet. 2, 24
, than this wood of the cross to his back. Because for my sake that cross was
carried Isai. 53, 5 6
, not for his own sake.

Oah, how is he above all things to be loved, and to be worshipped, by whose
grace and merits I am thus both found out Luke. 15, 4 5, etc.
, and redeemed Gal. 3, 13
. And therefore he shall be as dear to me, as the child is to his mother.

But well I know, that I am far unmeet to love him. Notwithstanding my
boldness comes from his goodness. Neither could I do otherwise but run unto
his most friendly embracements, when he showed himself so kind unto me.

I do well remember what the Prophet David in a certain place does say 1.
Sam. 18, verse 18
:

What am I? and what is my life, or the family of my father in Israel, that I
should be son in law to the King?

But our affinity together is much more excellent, than this of David and
Saul. Because ours is a pure and sincere kindred, not with flesh and blood, but
between God himself, between faith unviolated, and a good conscience.

Of this, did that Disciple whom Jesus loved, speak on this wise 1. John. 4, 4
:

Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

For God is love 1. Ioh. 4, 16
, and love brings forth this kindred.

Therefore since David thought himself far unmeet to be son in law unto an
earthly King: much more abashed ought I to be, to enter into alliance with the
King of all Kings, that vouchsafes to allure me, vile wretch, into his
freendship.

So that he has dealt with me, not according to my deserts, but even as it
seemed good in his merciful eyes.

Oah blessed, and happy art thou, soul, now thou art fast bound with the
chain of the heavenly love!

Oah how noble, and free art thou, seeing thou art privy even to the sighings
of so holy copulation!

But seeing I have spent many words about the beloved, and yet have not
answered fully unto your demand, let us now begin afresh, and God grant that
our speech may be both to our comfort, and profit.


CHAP. 16.
1. The more we love Christ, the more we may. 2. Tentation and when. 3.
Happiness of the life to come. 4. How to bear affliction.
BEhold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters; and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistres Psalm. 12 3, 2
: so mine eyes are fixed continually upon my friend.

Since first I began to love him, I have had a great desire to continue with
him. And this mine intent liked him well, and he allowed the same, saying John.
15, 5
:

He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit.

But that the truth, the strength, and the purity of my love might appear, it
was behoouefull that I should be tempted. And so I could not be, unless he
both suffered the same, and hid himself.

And, because tentation serves both for the purging of the inner man Psa. 119,
73
, and for the fruitful bringing forth of virtue; and also for the better
perceauing the spiritual graces of God, I was tried, and exercised
therewithal.

How strongly, and how often he flang me this way and that way, my God and
Lord, which knows all secrets Ecclus. 23, verse 19
, and is a witness to every privy cogitation of the heart Act. 15, 8
, and still sees me, and perceaueth how I am nothing else but a frail
creature Psa. 102, 11
, even he knows right well.

If therefore he had not assisted me, when I was extreemelie afflicted,
doubtless I had perished Psa. 119, 92
, be^ing ready to fall into the pit of desperation. But he, whose manner is
to comfort the troobled in spirit Psalm. 34, 18
, took mercy upon me.

For, if God helped and assisted not, who were able to bear so manifold
tentations!

And therefore it was of his great mercy that I stood before the face of such
trooblesome tempests: and also it is of the same his goodness, that still I do
stand and fall not.

But hereof I may not vanelie ^oast so long as I live in this mortal ^odie.

For though I see the element is now clear, yet do I not think that long it
will continue quiet. For the wind sodeinlie will arise, and that happily when
we think least thereof.

So that by so much I perceive I do need my friend his assistance, by how
much I perceive I do lie open on all sides to troobles.

We shall be quiet no where but in heaven Revel. 21, 4
, where my friend does feed his elect with joy and exultation.

But when there? What can I speak thereof? Scarce can I think any thing
thereof, and that not evidently enough; and enter thereinto I may not.

Oah that he would come, and set me in that all glorious, quiet, and fructfull
pasture of his sancts, where neither Satan is, nor danger to be feared!

As yet I toil in the sea, and whether I shall attain unto the port of
salvation by reason of my troobles arising through so many contrary winds, I
am utterly ignorant.

So that I am altogether out of quiet. Notwithstanding, it is a shield and
comfort unto me, that I still do behold the light of faith; that with all
submission I seek the favor of my beloved; that I bear toward him a constant
hope; that I will not be separated from his love Romans 8, 35
; and that I do rest upon his providence, and unsearchable goodness, more than
upon my self.

And therefore, though too too often I do stagger, yea and fall too sometime
into sin: yet am I not to despeire, but rather continually to fly unto him,
and to cry:

O Lord my God, have mercy upon me, and suffer me not to perish through my
manifold tentations, but assist me faithfully, that valiantly I may resist,
and overcome.

Reach out thy right hand unto the work of thine own hands Job. 14, 15 Psalm.
95, 7
, oah thou which triest me by Satan, and set me oftentimes on thy left
hand.

And if any such tentation shall come, as will stay me from crieng unto the
Lord, then will I sigh from the bottom of mine heart. For he knows even the
very secrets of the heart Psalm. 7, 9
, and is privy to the gronings of the spirit Romans 8, 26 27
. It is not his will that any one even of the least should perish Mat. 18, 14
.

Oah, how great was his goodness to mee-ward, in that it pleased him to be
present with me in my trooble, when I did not know, nor could mark so much!
For often he preserved me from being utterly given over unto my wicked
affections.

Through his secret judgment it came to pass now and then, that I fell, and
was foiled even in trifles, that I might not wax proud Psa. 119, 73
, and be high minded for great things, but learn through humiliation, how I
was nothing even then when I seemed to stand upright, and to flourish 1. Cor. 4,
7
.

And therefore I wish you not ouer-rashlie, or quickly to commend me, though
I seem to prosper in your sight, but reserve all praise until the good day
of my death, yea rather praise the Lord, and not me.

Give the glory unto God on high Luke. 2, 14
, which assisted me in all my tentations.

For he delivered me of his mercy many a time, when I was taken of mine
enemies.

Also, when theie came as a whirlewinde to destroy me, he sent out his
arrows, and scattered them Psalm. 18, 14
, and he increased lightnings and appaled them, so that theie left me for a
time. Because he would not have me to be without that, which from time to time
he has acquainted his sancts withal Act. 14, 22 Psalm. 34, 19
.

So that I had afterward a little quietness, and peace by the means of my
friend.

Whereupon, I did betake me not unto bodelie, or worldly, but unto spiritual
ease, beholding the earth a far off, and casting my thoughts upon the secrets
of heaven Colos. 3, 1 2
.

I gave diligence to see what manner of person I am, and how I might best
please him, which had revealed unto me so many tokens of love, far beyond all
deserts of mine.

And so much as in me lay, I wished continually for this ioiefull peace, the
better to cleave unto him, and to serve him the more freely.

But many times the soul has not her desire. But sometime it is granted,
sometime upon good consideration it is differred.

For who would not wish still to rest under the shade of the beloved, if it
might be granted him, and if time and place were convenient? But now my friend
works with me again.

I feel not affliction alwaie, neither yet do I enioie continual rest, but
by an evening and morning a day is made.

For this mortal life is spent in coming and going both through prosperity
and adversity Act. 14, 22
.

This was in the mind of that sanct which said Job. 7, 18
:

Thou do visit him in the morning, and triest him every moment.

Notwithstanding, it seems a kind of rest, if the enemy do neither too
often, nor too importunatelie assail.

And therefore when it shall be granted me even a little to rest my self
sweetly in my beloved, I will take it in good part, and rejoice. I will
rejoice I say, yea and alwaie rejoice for that grace of God.

Moreover, it makes me bold to pray unto him in all my necessities, because
he has freely prevented me so oftentimes with his merciful visitation.

For when he does but approach, minding to keep holy day with me, even then
suddenly there shines a light over mine heart, which forthwith drives out
the clouds of all wicked cogitations, whereby I do enioie the long desired
cleerenes of God his light.

Because no unclean, nor filthy thing can stand where he enters in Revel.
21, verse 27
, for he loves purity Matthew. 5, 8
, and is the ingraffer of the same; so that of necessity all satanicall
illusion, together with the pomps of this world, must be packing.

Therefore my passions and tentations which I did endure being supprised, I
began both the more evidently to know, and the more earnestly to love, and
the more hartelie to praise him, for vouchsafing at the length to beat back
the damned crewe of the wicked from assailing me.

For theie do disturb my peace, and sin does so shut up my mouth, that I am
ashamed to speak unto my well-beloved.

But in vain do theie bend themselves against his power and wisdom, because
even in a moment he can slide down into mine heart, and pour in secretly good
motions, that I may both contemn, and utterly neglect all their privy
whisperings.

O my faithful, and all happy friend, take me so unto thee, whenever thou
shall perceive mine affections to be either pressed down at any time with the
weight of sin, or to be held with unnecessary business, that I may not wander
far astraie from thee after the swarm of wicked cogitations, and so
ouerhastelie be deprived of thy grace, without which I shall not be able to
enioie thy freendship.

For thou art my Lord, and my God Matt. 4, 10
, which by thy word do both heal, and sanctify; which hold my soul in
life Psalm. 66, 9
, and suffer not my feet to slip, but deliuerest me from the evil day,
and from the snares of death.

Oah, how many have bin cast off, and utterly perished, that have bin much
more innocent than I am!

And therefore my soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name Psalm. 103, 1 2
.

My soul, I say, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits.

It is all too little, and far insufficient whatsoever thou shall either
think, or speak, or promise to his praise. For he exceeds all praise, and
is much sweeter than any music.

Wherefore my soul cleaves to thee alone, and loves thee above all other
gifts, notwithstanding it be exceedingly beutifull and sweet which of mere
good will thou have sent unto me.

For thou alone art the spouse Matt. 9, 15
, as for all things else theie are gifts, and arguments of love.

In steed of thee I will not love them; neither will I believe that any thing,
or all things in the world can suffice me, if I have not thee: for in so
doing, I may perchance forgo thee with them too.

Thou give me leave to use many things for thy sake; but I may not enioie
so much as one thing in thy steed Exodus 20, 3
.

And therefore, o Christ my sweet spouse, I have preferred thee before all
other things, and my care has bin above all things to love thee.

Wherefore, grant that blessedlie I may enioie thee, and in that union
everlastingly to triumph in happiness together with thee.

But how far am I come? I have lengthened my speech more than perhaps you
would. But pardon me, good friend. For I have bin carried aloft through the
love of mine especial, and only friend; and would to God it would please him
still to lift up both me and you too in contemplation!

Let him provide an heavenly ascension, but let us not keep a base going
down.

M. Ask you me, whether I am forsaken at any time of my beloved?


S. Yea, I say so.


M. But how do you behave your self in trooble?


S. I take all things as patiently as I can, expecting his coming.

Naturalie I am grieved, but as touching my spirit, I have inward patience;
that my grief prove not incurable. For I forget not, how he that loves,
lives in pain.

I live by faith Romans 1, 17
; I believe the holy Scriptures; I give credit to the words of comfort. And
although I endure affliction: yet I doubt not, neither in deed ought I to
doubt, but that God (when it pleases him) can send me ease.

For true, and to be credited are those words which are declared. Because the
very sancts themselves have bin exercised in many, and proved in like things
Hebr. 11, 4 5 6, etc.
.

Nature continually does wish for quietness, and seeks to be comforted in
some thing: but the spirit notwithstanding is ready to sustain whatsoever the
will of God is I should endure Mar. 14, 38
.

If therefore I shall be less zealous, and less willing to do good, my
punishment shall be the more grievous. Though he slaie me, says the wiseman
Job. 13, 15
, yet will I trust in him.

If I love virtues, patience is a great virtue: therefore let patience evermore
be retained. For the more praise we purchase, the more pains we take in
bringing things to pass.

And that our virtue may be proved, and made the more glorious, we are
commonly exercised by contrary events.

Therefore whenever any such trial shall happen, be not out of heart, neither
fall down; but retain thou patience, and extol the righteousness of God. The
Lord is not so hard and pitiless, that he can suffer you to abide long
vncomforted.

Only have a care, that you neither lament immoderatlie, nor yet murmur
against the righteous and just God, because you are forsaken 1. Cor. 10, verse
10
, least the wicked spirit do send unto you more grievous tentations of your
faith, whereby being ouerfearefull, you shall extreemelie be afflicted.

Wherefore bear a little, and suppress your sorrow, although the grief both
of your heart and body be never so great.

Abide constant in that good purpose, which at the first you intended to keep.
For it is good, especially at such an extremity, to cast all confidence upon
the beloved.

Look thou patiently for God his heavenly comfort, so shall you speedily
perceive a special favor, and sight of God.

Lo, you have a faithful witness, saying Psalm. 40, 1
, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my
cry.

And that in your need you may find the like favor, I do wish you both
earnestly to pray your self, and desire others to pray for you also, and so
commit your self wholly (...) and is privy unto the things to come? Even I,
the Lord, which have done all things in measure, number, and weight Wis. 11, 17
.

I am the creator both of heaven and earth Isai. 42, 5
; the ruler of this world 1. Tim. 1, verse 17
; the knower of hidden things Revel. 3, 15 Ecclus. 42, verse 20
; the reuealer of secrets Mat. 10, 26
; the possessor of the whole world Psalm. 50, 12
, and the beholder of the causes of all particulars.

I am God, and change not Mal. 3, 6
, who have continually with me the causes of all changes in the world.

I am God the almighty Genesis 35, 11 Revel. 4, 8 Reave. 11, 17
, whose power is invincible Romans 9, 19
; I am God the most high Isai. 14, 14
, whose highness can not be attained Psalm. 139, 7 8, etc.
; I am God, the most righteous Mat. 19, 17
, whose being can not be conceived Job. 11, 7 8, etc.
.

I am for my presence euerie-where Psalm. 139, 7 8 9
, and yet no where to be seen Job. 23, 8 9
.

I am the most spiritual, and farthest from the senses of man John. 1, 18
.

I bear all things, yet never burdened Hebr. 1, 3
, and I fill and rule each place, and yet vnstretched.

I behold both things past, and things to come alike, as though theie were
present Wisd. 8, 8 Ecclus, 42, 15
.

I surpass all creatures both spiritual, and corporal Psalm. 35, 10
.

I am diversely to be named: yet no thought is able to conceive me as I am.

I show my self suddenly, and forthwith when one would little think, I am
gone again.

I am in deed the invisible God 1. Tim. 6, verse 16
, which after a thousand ways declare my presence to my friends.

And thus I spoke unto the loving soul:

I will hide my face for a little season, I will forsake her for a while, to
see if her love be pure, and unfeigned.

It is a great matter to love unfeignedly. For that is to love me neither for
her own sake, nor for any temporal commodity, or spiritual comfort; but to
love me, and me only Mat. 4, 10
, and that for mine own sake, and that to the end, and that in hope of nothing
at mine hands.

It is not in every one thus to love me; but this prerogative of pure loving,
is properly to the perfect soul.

But she that is yet imperfect, has great need often to be proved, and
exercised, that she may know both how much she loves me, and how greatly
she despises her self.

For you said in your heart: Truly I do love (Christ,) yea, and often you
repeat the same thing, I love him in deed.

But I credit not words, or thoughts only. For I will make due trial of that
love.

When I am present, and speak fair; when I either put, or increase good
motions in the mind; when I grante prosperity most commonly or pleasure,
then can you say with all deuoutnes, O my beloved, I do love you. And you
say well. For I am greatly to be loved, and you are at no time either to
think, or speak otherwise than friendly, and honorably of me.

But for prosperity, and good turns only to love, and to commend me, what
great thing is it? Because even sinners do the same. For when theie have
received what naughtelie theie craved, theie oftentimes bless me for the
same. But praise is not seemly in the mouth of the sinner Ecclus. 15, verse ^
.

He therefore which either for some profit, or comfort received, does love me,
does no more than a covetous man does. But exceed him, I say, exceed him,
and proceed unto greater righteousness.

Be ashamed still to be weak and tender; learn to eat man's meat, be not
still fed with the milk of children.

Attain thou to the company of the stout David's, that can hold both spear,
and sword, and shield.

Take up the cross, and follow me Luke 9, 23
.

Make haste to be in the number of them, which have learned to bear diverse
afflictions, and much banishment for my name sake. You are too much given unto
ease.

I purpose to try you, and to turn unto the other side, that you may know
what you can suffer, least you seem over innocent and holy in your own
conceit.

Tribulation, and anger, and mine heavy displeasure, together with sore
tentations of wicked spirits, shall come upon you. Some unjustly shall spoil
you of your goods; others shall take no compassion upon you; others shall
defame; others shall resist; others shall ouercharge; others shall carry you
perforce whether you would not go; some outwardly, others inwardly, shall
trooble you. Some shall be advanced unto hie degree, and honor, but you shall
be left unto reproaches, and endure servile pains. In all these, yea and in
greater things you shall be proved, whether you are a valiant soldior of mine,
or no.

I will depart, and not give over, until I have made sufficient trial,
whether you bless me to my face.

Now if I find, that from the heart unfeignedly you do love me, and
continually do praise my name, then is it meet that from thenceforth I call
you Spouse, and that you shall have a secret chamber with me.

But if I perceive that you cannot Bear my correction, but will judge my
punishment to be ouer-sharp, and still bewail mine absence, wishing for me
with hearty and earnest desire, I will send you my staff, that you may arise
thereby, and afterward my self will come, and restore you again unto my
woonted favor. For it is not my will that you should utterly faint; because
him that loves me, I will love to the end John. 13, 1
.

And although your love be not so perfect as could be wished; yet I will not
despise you, but provide that you may grow on in loving. For my care is that
you do well; and therefore mistrust me not.

I know what you can endure, which makes me to temper my course, that you be
not tempted above your strength, and so faint.

And if I stay, in your opinion, somewhat too long, look for me until the
day of my visitation. For coming I will come, and perform my promise.

Be you still in prayer, still meditating upon the holy scripture, and alwaie
be patient, and suffer.

I am not ignorant but your grief will be much: but so quickly to be
overthrown, and to be out of all hope of my return, I cannot like that.

Where is your faith? A great faith you had need of especially on this
behalf: for although you see not me, yet are you seen of me Ecclus. 23
verse 19
, into whose hands you are to commend both your self, and all that you have.

For although you are not privy to my judgments: yet having a strong faith,
you must of necessity say Psalm. 119, verse 137
, Righteous art thou, o Lord, and just are thy judgments.

So then be of good comfort, for this affliction is not to your destruction,
but for the glory of God.

I denied your petition, because I would have due proof of your faith and love.

For all this I did that you should well understand both your own weakness,
and my goodness Psa. 119, 67 71
.

I know what you are Psalm. 7, 9
better than your self does. Yea, I have known you thoroughlie, not of late,
but from everlasting Wisd. 8, 8
.

Wherefore acknowledge the benefit which you have by me; behold how miserable
you should be, if once I forsake you.

As yet you have not profited sufficiently in the knowledge of your self. And
because it is very expedient that you have that knowledge, my will was that by
experience you should attain thereunto.

It is very good for you to be forsaken, to be troobled, to be humbled
sometime, that so the better you may even sensibly perceive your own
weakness Psalm. 119, verse 71
.

I know right well this will make you a good disciple of mine. And what, I
pray you, have you lost, if hereby you prove more wise and watchful?

Oftentimes you are too arrogant, and forgetful of your self, thinking that
goodness to be within you which is not; self-love does deceive you, and while
you think not of the giver, you do abuse the gift. I made you drunk; but you
forgot how the grape did grow upon mine own vine.

Try your self a little, acknowledge your strength. If that which you had
came of your self, why did you not hold it? But if you could not hold it,
confess that you received it from above 1. Cor. 4, 7 Iam. 1, 17
. And therefore ascribe all the honor to the mercy of God, and openly
confess, how without me you can do nothing Ioh. 15, 5
.

Consider both in what steed I stand you, and how able also I am to confirm
you in all goodness.

Where were you before I called you, but weltering in sin and wickedness? And
now how would you wander, if I directed you not? Yea, and when also went it
well with you, if you had not my favor?


S. And I said, At no time, sweet Lord. Thou alone, art my singular good
friend, in all things, and above all most faithful.


L. Why then did you purpose so wickedlie with your self, to go after strange
lover?

What misliked you in me; was it either my majesty, or my beauty?


S. Ah Lord, there is none comparable to thee either for beauty, or for glory,
or for riches, or for authority; neither in heaven nor in earth is any like
unto thee 1. King. 8, verse 23
. For thou only art most hie over all creatures.

The heavens are thine Psalm. 89, 11
, the earth also is thine; thou have laid the foundation of the world, and all
that therein is.

Much it is that thou have imparted upon thy creatures, by which, thy beauty,
wisdom, and goodness does appear Romans 1, 20
: but yet in comparison of thy blessed, and glorious presence, it is nothing.
So that by experience I have learned now, that I cannot lack thy company one
hour together, but with much grief to my soul.


L. Return therefore unto me; thou have hitherto wandered enough about.

Let not henceforth to be more stayed, and mild, and faithful, yea and to
trust in me, not only in the day of my gracious visitation, but much more in
the night of tentation.

I have let you slip, that being wearied, you might return unto me the more
speedily, and being frustrate of outward comfort, at length understand how
much you are bound unto me, that so often have called unto you.

And therefore liften now at the last, for it is not without cause that
sometime you are forsaken; that you are cold sometime in zeal; that it irketh
you; that you are ouer-wearied with tentations; that on all sides you are
afflicted; that you can neither find any counsel, nor feel comfort, but
are enforced to endure anguish and misery at all times, and in all places.

I am absent, to the end you may know how needful it is that I be present
with you, not only in one matter, or in a special cause, but in every
action, in all places and times, so well early as late, wheresoever you shall
become, go, or stand.

For this will teach you to walk warelie with your friend; to abstain from
vanities; and to take heed of offenses Mich. 6, 8
.

I do leave you, that you may well understand how much you are bound to love
me, that is, that you may see a manner how to love me in deed.

It is very true you thought your self more stout, and happy, than in truth
you were; but when I did once withdraw mine aid from you a little, it then
appeered to the world how you were very poor, and miserable Revel. 3, 17
.

How shall your love be known, unless you bear my yoke with patience?

Sometime I see you to wax sluggish, and therefore I do hide my self for an
hour, like a friend standing behind the wall Sal. S. 2, 9
, that you may be stirred up the more zelouslie to seek me.

I know for my part, and I see all things Ecclus. 42, verse 19 20
but troublous trials (which are good for many causes) do make you the more
heedie and wise in all your actions Isai. 28, 19
.

Moreover, if you love me, you will not wax the more sluggish in seeking me
for all this; if you like me, you will seek me.

What? Wot you not, how riches painfully come by, are kept most carefully?
Who so wishes rest, as the wearied man? Who loves so kindly, as he which
has sighed most heauelie? And is not that jewel which was lost, and is found
again, much more esteemed than before it was Luke 15, 19
? So, even so is the joy duble, and the mirth dubled, at the long wished
presence of the beloved.

And therefore it is much for your profit that I withdraw my self: because I
do it, not for any ill will to you-wards, but upon very good cause; so do I
dally with my friends.

Let it suffice you at this time, that you have bin in my favor to hear so
much at my mouth.

Besides, when you have need, return unto me, and fear not. For I never
shut mine ears against that person which humbly and earnestly cries for
mine assistance Math. 7, 7 8
.


CHAP. 18.
1. The confidence of a true Christian. 2. God justifies the ungodly. 3.
gives whatsoever good is to man. 4. will have no man to despeire, 5. but that
all sinners should fly unto his mercy.
MY Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded Isai. 50, 7
.

S. Let it grieve no body, though I love much to speak with my Lord God,
whose goodness has allured, and inflamed me both to pray, and to meditate in
such sort, that me thinks I should be too hard and unkind, if I made none
answer unto his words.

But happily some one will say against me, Therefore neither do you fear
God, seeing you are a foul sinner, unworthy even to live in this world.

Whence is it, that you dare so presume in your heart? And, being the least, and
vilest of all others, with what face can you thrust forth your self so to
talk with your Lord God Ecclus. 15, verse 9 John. 9, 13
? Whom do you make your self?

Oah, my loving Lord, do thou answer on my behalf. For the mouth of the
wicked is opened upon me Psalm. 109, 2
.

If I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me Job. 9, 20
. And though I were clean, yet did not my soul know so much.

Oah, Lord, thou know my folly, and my shamefastnes. Speak thou on my
behalf, and I full gladly will keep silence.


L. Give thou none heed to the words of the wicked: but rather do thou
remember how I have said, I came not to call the righteous, but the sinners
unto repentance Mark. 2, 17
.

Am not I to do what I will Mat. 28, 17 Mark. 17, 2 Hebr. 2, 8
Who may resist my pleasure?

If I think it good to show favor to thee-ward, though little thou deserve
the same at mine hands, who shall reprove me therefore Romans 8, 33 34
?

He that is without sin, let him throw the first stone at thee John, 8, 7
. But if theie, all the pack of them are sinners, with what face can theie
find fault with my favor to thee-ward?

You have not chosen me Ioh. 15, 16
, but my mercy did prevent you.

Dares any yet murmr against you for coming unto me? Comfort thy self,
his murmr is not against thee, but flatly against my person, because it is I
that receive 1. Tim. 1, 15
, and ^eate with sinners Matt. 9, 11 12 13
.

And why ought you not to cha^enge mine acquaintance, the which (...) rejoice
to offer rather than to withdraw from any one?


S. Oah gracious Lord, lay not this ^in to their charge, but to me, and to my
sins.

I cannot deny, but deservedly ^heie conceive ill of me; yea I do ^penlie
acknowledge this withal, that I am much more wicked than ^nie man does know.


L. You do well thus to humble your self. For in so doing, you shall ever
gain, and more easelie obtain my ^auor.

Notwithstanding, I will not therefor cast you away, because you are (...)
sinner, and faulty, albeit that should ^ake you both to think base^^e of ^our
self, and alwaie to have in mind what great sins you are polluted withal.

But that you perish not through desperation, consider how many righteous men
I have made of sinners Mark. 2, 17 Luke. 15, 1 2, etc.
, friends of enemies, choosing the humble, and refusing the proud Luke 1, 51
52, etc. Luke. 18, 14 James. 4, 6
.

I have no need of any gift of thine Psalm. 50, 11 12
: only this I require at your hands, namely, that you love me with a pure
heart Mar. 12, 33
, and I am satisfied.


S. I am clean dashed, for, alas, there is naught within me to stir up your
love thus to mee-ward.


L. I do neither respect, nor require the things that this world does offer
to get favor withal; if you do love, and that your love be fervent, and
constant, it is all that I ask.

But, I pray thee, whose are the things that do, or may adorn a man? Are
not all things mine, whatsoever do glitter either in the body, or mind Iam.
1, 17 1. Cor. 4, 7*
?

As for that of the world, and which set out the body, theie ought little to
trooble your mind. But the things which belong to the beutifieng of virtue, it
stands you upon to seek, that you may please the Lord in the light of the
living.

Howbeit, you have well done in humbling, and accusing your self so well
outwardly as inwardly before the face of my majesty, by confessing
unfeignedly your great weakness, and wickedness, and by fetching deep sighs,
for that you are very unworthy to challenge the favor of my familiarity even
but one hour, being, as I am a glass pure without spot Wisd. 7, 26
and you are a great sinner, and unclean even from your infancy Gene. 8, 21
.

And therefore be ever mindful both of your frail condition, and of my
glorious majesty, and so with humble reverence approach boldly into my
presence.

For I am he that puts away thine iniquities, and will not remember thy
sins Isai. 43, 25
; it is I that justify the ungodly Romans 4, 5
, and this I do for mine holy name sake; yea and I am still ready to
minister greater gifts of mercy unto thee.

Because I do ever choose to show favor rather than displeasure, as one who
had rather spare than punish.

Yea, all this seems but little in mine eyes, neither am I so content with
the first grace that I will not add a second, or a third rather, yea, in very
deed, as I can set none end to my mercies Psa. 145, 9
: so neither can the number of my gifts and benefits be recited Psa. 68, 19
.

Last of all, after that I for my part have pardoned sins, and men for their
parts by their goodness have testified to the world their unfeigned repentance,
then do I restore for the most part the comfort of mine healthful
countenance, by pouring in most plentiful manner the grace of mine holy
Spirit.

And although a sinner do abide still in the flesh: yet do I receive him into
my familiarity, so that he is not to fear the utter confusion for sins
committed: but rather to thank and praise God, that old things be passed
away, and that all things are become new 2. Cor. 5, 17
.

So gracious, and merciful am I, that always I am more ready to forgive,
than thou art to beg forgiveness at mine hands; more ready to give, than thou
art to ask.

Therefore why fear you? What dismaieth you to approach unto the side of such
favor? And why do you estrange your self from so great kindenes offered
unto you so frankly of mine own accord?

Doubtless, though you did certainly understand that I were purposed to give
you the denial: yet ought you not to desist from prayer, nor yet to be out of
all hope of being heard; but so much the more earnestly to be instant in
crieng, until you were heard.

For my mercies are infinite, and what I deny at one time, may be granted
favorably at another.

How know you whether I will turn my face unto you, and grant you the desire
of your heart?

And what says the Prophet concerning me? Approach unto him, and be
illightened, so shall not your faces be confounded.

Wherefore accuse your slow coming unto me rather than your often
approaching; and rather your fearful shamefastnes than your prompt presuming
of forgiveness.

To hope well of my goodness, is a very token of true humility, and of a great
faith.

This do I speak, that you may not offend; and that when you do offend, you
despeire not, but rise again with speed. For yet you have hope, and an
advocate with the Father 1. John. 2, 1
.

What? Look you to be all worthy before you make access unto me? And of
your self when will you be so?

If only such as are good and worthy, and great, and perfect, should approach
unto me, to whom should sinners and publicans approach?

So then, what says the Gospel? There resorted unto him publicans, and
sinners to hear him Luke. 15, 1
.

Therefore let the unworthy approach, that theie may become worthy; let the
wicked approach, that theie may be made good; let the weak and imperfect
approach, that theie may prove strong and perfect; yet let all and every one
approach, that theie may receive from the abundant streams of the well of life
Ioh. 4, 14
. I am the well of life, that can not be drawn dry.

He which is a thirst, let him come unto me, and drink John. 7, 37
. And he which has nothing, let him come and buie without silver, and without
money Isai. 55; 1
.

He that is sick, let him come to be healed Math. 9, 12
. He that is neither hot nor cold, let him come to be inflamed Mar. 9, 24
.

He that is fearful, let him come to be encouraged; he that is sorrowful,
let him come to be comforted.

He that is withered, let him come to be fatted; he that is wearied with
cares, let him come to be refreshed with joy.

Lo, my delight is to be with the children of men Romans 8, 31
.

He that desires wisdom, let him come unto my lessons Psalm. 119, 9 24
.

He that seeks riches, let him come to receive those which are eternal, and
incorruptible Math. 6, 19 20
.

He that hunteth for honor, let him come to get an everlasting name in the
inheritance of heaven; he that wishes for felicity, let him come, and he
shall taste the sovereign, eternal, and infinite happiness 1. Cor. 2, 9
.

I, even I it is which give all temporal good things Iam. 1, 17
, yea and besides that, I give eternal riches in the heavens Romans 6, 23
. And what I promise I will perform, at such time as my commandments are
duly observed. And he then shall be crowned gloriously in heaven, that has
foughten courageously in this world 2. Tim. 2, verse 11 12
.


CHAP. 19.
1. The desire of a Christian Soul is never satisfied, till God be enioied.
2. No comfort any whit comparable to the spiritual joy.
LEt the meditation of mine heart be acceptable in thy sight Psalm. 19, 14
.

What can be more comfortable: What more ioiefull to the faithful Soul, than
still devoutly to meditate upon her Lord God; that whom she cannot as yet
behold in a clear, and blessed sight, at the least she may, as it were, make
him present by earnest calling him into mind?

Therefore let her behold him as in a glass darkly 1. Cor. 13, 12
, whom she is not to see face unto face.

And albe she may not have a full sight of him in his majesty: yet let her
search for him by types in the Scriptures.

Oah that the care to seek the face of the Lord did never wax cold within me,
but daily more and more increased!

Howbeit, the soul that loves God, has a wonderful desire to enioie the
sight of God. For to see him is happiness in deed, and the absolute felicity
Reave. 22, 4
.

Wherefore she desires this blessedness, that, her whole appetite having
attained her end, she may be satisfied, and at quiet, for nothing in the
world is able to content her Eccles. 1, 8
.

For long experience has taught her, that the more she estraieth from
celestial happiness, the more unhappy and unquiet she is, in as much as in this
world nothing is permanent, or durable 1. Cor. 7, 3^ 1 John. 2, 15 16 17
, that may assuage the heat of her affection.

So then let her make return unto him that made her Genesis 1, 26 27 Wisd. 2, 23
, and let her desire to be blessed of him, who at the first created her.

For doubtless, he that made the soul, must satisfice the soul with good
things Psalm. 103, 5
. Because, such a desire has he instilled into her, that he being gone,
nothing will content her; nor any joy comfort her greatly.

And therefore, soul of mine, stand not here still, for this is no place of
rest for thee: but mount aloft, ascend unto him that made thee. For he has
now sent his messengers, and bids thee to ascend.

So many desires of eternal life as he inspireth, so many messengers he
does send. Which being entertained, prepare thy self to the iornie.

Then go thou on, when thou desire to see him; when thou laborest to
please him; when thou renouncest this world; when thou do, whatsoever thou
do, even of pure love to him-ward.

For had he not first sought thee, and powered holy cogitations into thy breast,
thou could never seek him John. 6, 44
.

For that soul does languish not for love, but through wearines, which is not
enlightened with the beams of the eternal Son John. 1, 5
.

But, if through the sweet blastes of the Southren wind her frosen coldness,
and sorrow be once resolved, then by reason of the light inspired, and
incomprehensible divinity, she begins to sweat through the hotnes of love.

Oah infinite heat of the true Son, what boilings do thou cause then
within the heart of the lover? Thou dissoluest the darkness of a sorrowful
mind, and bring the laborsome toil unto nothing. The long time and days
of poverty thou do comfort and that abundantly, with one simple beam of
thy glorious light.

O salve of the sorrowful Matt. 9, 12
! o shining light of such as wander and seek!

Shine thou continually upon me; prepare thou a mansion place within me, even
till thine everlasting light do appear.

Oah how sweet, and how comfortable will thy presence be, seeing even of a
little remembrance, so unspeakable joy does arise!

How gladly can I turn unto thee; how frankelie do I renounce even this
world, that I may be comforted with thine heavenly favor!

For it will be none hard matter for the soul which longs for the sight of
thy countenance, to bereave her self of all outward pleasure, when she shall
either feel now a greater in the mind, or very shortly expect with a
perfect faith for the same.

Furthermore, none is to be so foolish as to think, that thou will leave the
devout soul any long while vncomforted; or that the gifts of thy favor which
she is to receive for all her conquests over nature, shall be small; for no
earthly comfort, whatsoever it be, or whence soever it arise, is any whit
comparable either in the quality, or quantity of sweetness to the heavenly
joy.

And therefore labor thou, o faithful soul, to show thy self such toward
thine heavenly spouse Christ, that he may continually be gracious and
favorable unto thee; for through him and in him you shall in most abundant
manner find that, which exceedingly shall minister comfort unto you in all
extremities.

The oftener you have access unto him, and the nigher you do approach unto his
side, the sweeter he will appear, and the more amiable in your eyes.

But if you withdraw your self, then the loss will be your own; and he
abiding in his beauty, shall feel neither grief nor trooble.

You stand in need of his, but he of no man's goodness.

So that you may become blessed through him, but so cannot he by your
proceeding.

He alone suffices himself; he alone can neither be augmented, nor
diminished.

Through his goodness all things are, whatsoever be, whether theie have life,
sense, or understanding Act. 17, 28
.

And therefore just it is that all creatures everlastingly should bless him
Psa. 150, 6
.

Oah, how gladly would I discourse and speak of him unto thee, if I were able
sufficiently so to do!

But what? He neither is, nor may be uttered. Again, as he cannot be uttered
by means, so can he not be conceived in mind.

Which being so, think notwithstanding of thy Creator so well as man may,
taking the remembrance of his abundant sweetness for a comfort, until such time
as he reuealeth the sight of his own countenance unto thee in the heavens
Reave. 22, 4
.

CHAP. 20.
1. A complaint of the Soul for the want of her blessed state. 2. What weeping
pleases God. 3. Who truly blessed. 4. A description of God.
I Said in mine heart I am cast out of thie sight Psalm. 31, 22
.

Mine heart is wounded within me, through the long differring of thy glory.

I will speak therefore, and reason with my grieved Soul. The great zeal of
love compels me to speak, and suffers nothing to be concealed from thee.

What then shall I say? Lo my God, in peace is my most bitter bitterness.

He that is ignorant, wotteth not the meaning hereof. But it is not so with
me. I know, and I understand it, and therefore I am not ashamed to sing with
the Prophet.

I speak to thee my Lord Psalm. 38, 15
, who know all things Reave. 3, 15 Ecclus. 42, verse 20
; and give both knowledge and understanding according to thy good pleasure,
that neither I may glory more than is meet I should, nor the fool advance
me, when in truth I am simple.

I may confess then what I have received from thee. And yet what need have I
to tell you thereof, when as you are neither ignorant, nor can take any
pleasure of the same.

Again, what comfort can come unto you, which art the comfort of the
comfortless?

So that the profit is mine, which do lack the consolation of words, thereby
to stir up mine affection to thee-ward, and to find some ease for my desolate
soul.

For, seeing I may not behold thy presence, I will bewail thine absence;
because even this is a token of love, and a great pleasure to the loving soul.

Now then the sense of this sentence appears. Because it is rightly said of
the loving soul, how, the more fervently she loves, and the more earnestly
she longs after eternal things, the more truly she feels the power
thereof working within her.

Theie are not cold words, but to the unkind soul; neither deaf organs, but
to the hardened heart.

The loving and zealous soul knows this well; and is so often inflamed in
heart, as she is pricked with the desire of eternal peace.

And therefore she speaks to thee her Lord God, not to men, of whom she
would not be known.

And although sometime she talks with men: yet that which theie hear is to
the outward sense. But whatsoever she says to thee, it is to the very soul,
and rather by sighing of the heart, than by sounding words.

Lo (says she) in peace is my most bitter bitterness. As if she said; After
that of thy goodness I returned unto the peace of mind, the transitory state
of the world began to be still more grievous unto me. For I see in this peace,
how far I am separated from the sovereign peace.

And in deed being first busied with earthly desires, and moved with diverse
passions, I was greatly hindered from spiritual cogitations, and so from
heavenly contemplation, after which I should have much longed: but that could
I least of all do, because through slothfulnes I did forgo all sense of inward
sorrow.

But now seeing the troobles of idle thoughts are taken away, I do somewhat
rest in the peace of conscience, and am drawn unto heavenly matters with mine
whole heart, and I do more lament, that I do not enioie the good things of God,
than erst I did moorne being vexed with the troobles of this world.

So that it is bitterness to my soul even to live in this world; and to go
under the heavy burden of sin. But it is bitterest of all, when so much as I
may, all mine affections being gathered together, I do enioie now the good
things of the heart, and bend my self, even with hearty zeal toward the arms
of eternal peace, and yet may not attain thereunto, because of the bonds of
my mortal state.

And this makes me even with grief of heart to cry unto thee, and to say:

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death
Romans 7, 24
?

There is none so grievous a burden unto me, as still to wander from thee by
living in the world; for laboring in love, I wish for no comfort beside thee.

For by good experience I have long sithence learned, that my soul can neither
be satisfied with the good things of this world Ecclus. 1, 8
, nor yet be blessed until she be joined unto thee in the celestial
habitation.

For as exceedingly she does love, burn, and use contemplation while she is
in the body: so will her desire be insatiable until the body be laid off.

And therefore her end must be made perfect by attaining the sovereign
felicity, and the light of thy countenance Revel. 22, 4
.

O King of heaven 1. Tim. 6, 16 Revel. 1, 5 Revel. 17, 14
, so amiable in all respects; o my all lovely beloved, even wholly to be
desired, when will thou fill me with the light of thy countenance Psalm. 16, 11
; when will thou satisfy my longing with the well of life?

My soul has much thirsted after thee Psalm. 42, 2
; and greatly will be troobled until she attain thee.

Living in the world, and not seeing thee, I can take no comfort of whatsoever
I behold; so greatly does zeal wax hot, that not once, but often I break
into these words:

When shall I come, and appear before the face of my God Psalm. 42, 2
?

And this love of mine cesseth not, but increases more and more, in such sort,
that I am driven even to weep night and day, while continually I do think
with my self, Where is now my God?

For it is a comfort to the loving soul to weep for thy sake, while she must
want her desire; and still expect thy coming.

And these tears do more feed and refresh the loving soul, than if she
enioied all the things of this world. For did she love them Math. 6, 24
, she would not weep for thee.

Oah how blessed, and pleasing to thee is the sheading of such tears!

For theie do both kill the desires of secular and temporal ioies; and also
theie obtain the celestial consolation.

And therefore none do shed such holy tears, but theie which are both
singularly in love, and very notably religious.

Far of another kind be the tears of such as miserably be troobled in this
world.

For one man weepeth because he is sick; another for that he is oppressed;
another because he is injured; another because his mind is contraried: but it
is thou, religious soul only which powrest forth tears even of pure love to
thy Sauior-ward; as for temporal damage, and worldly causes, theie trooble
thee not, for thou submittest thy self to the righteous judgment of God Psalm.
119, verse 137
, and art thankful.

And for so doing, let no worldly creature judge thee either foolish, or
impatient: because thy tears do not grieve, but comfort; theie do not blur
the face, but wash it; theie hurt not the eyes, but theie purify the sight of
the mind.

Howbeit, let others conceive hereof as theie will, I cannot but think
otherwise than well of you; for I do wish to drink deep of such tears.

S. If you wish to weep with me, then may you be comforted with me.

Oah that your soul were as I am, you could never forget what I do feel!

I know whom I credit; and sure I am it is a more easy thing to deny that
there is any heaven and earth, than that there is a God.

And I know also he is my full happiness; and that I shall never be blessed
until I have an absolute sight of his majesty Reave. 22, 4
.

Whose sight, because it is not yet granted me, nor always assured me, does
make me to lament, inasmuch as I am deprived of happiness, wrapped in the
darkness of this life, and downpeised with the weight of mine own infirmity
Wisd. 9, 15
, that I am not of power to suffer that wonderful light, and that whatsoever I
do think concerning the glory of heaven, is so little, and ouershadowed as it
were with a cloud.

Hence it is that I dooble my complaint in steed of a song; and while theie
still say unto me, Where is thy God Psalm. 42, 10
? my spirit is the more troobled.

For thus I think then, Where is my felicity? where is the full joy of mine
heart? where is my true peace and rest?

Where be all the good things that are unspeakable, but only in my God? And
when shall I enioie them, unless I be joined unto him, having nothing between?

Yea, when shall I there be? I know not, but I believe well; I do hope well,
but yet I have not.

Why then, where is my God, whom I love so, and yet I see him not? Through
whose love I am so often wounded; through whose absence I am so grieved;
through whose gracious visitation so refreshed sometime?

Where is my God, whom even once to see, is to know all things?

Where is my God, in whom both mine heart, and my flesh do so earnestly
desire to rejoice?

Where is my God, for whose love I suffer such pain and sorrow? His very
remembrance is sweet, but his presence is more lovely, and expels all
sadness fro mine heart.

Where is mine hope, and my crown? Is it not in thee my God, and in thy
blessed countenance 1. Cor. 13, verse 12
.

Oah, show me once thy glory, and thy face, so will I cesse to complain!

If I contend a little with thee, o blame me not; extreme zeal of good will
has many wonderful devises.

I am driven to expect, and moved still to long; and so this ioiefull combat
does continue.


CHAP. 21.
1. The delaieng of the happy is patiently to be borne. 2. The felicity of
the life to come. 3. with a Prayer for the same.
O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine
honor dwells Psalm. 26, 8
.

How gladly I would be with thee, thou know full well o my God; and how
entirely I desire the same, I am not able sufficiently to express.

I wish it, not only when I am evil at ease, but also what prosperity soever
I enioie, my desire is to be with thee.

But how shall my longing be satisfied?

Here it greeueth me to continue Phil. 1, 23
, and yet of necessity I must, but my desire is to be with thee, and I may
not yet.

And therefore I see no remedy, but that I am with patience to endure this
delaie, and to refer my wishing to thine holy will.

For what? Is it meet I should murmur, when it must be so? God forbid.

Again, I have the examples of many of Gods children, which have used long
patience in this life Hebr 11, 13 14, etc.
, and yet their hearts were in heaven Colos. 3, 1 2
.

Therefore if thy will be to prolong my pilgrimage, I am willing to abide, and
obeie your pleasure.

Howbeit, that with less grief I may bear my longing to be with thee, I will
till that time still meditate with my self of that celestial habitation.

Yet I presume not to pierce into the least of those ioies which thou have
prepared for such as love thee 1. Cor. 2, 9
: but of this and that I will meditate, to the end that mine affection being
pressed down and infected oftentimes, it may be stirred up, and lifted into
the hope of eternal bliss.

O that that day had once shined, whether then had the ioies of heaven
ravished me!

How merry at the heart should I be then, and how happy should I think my
self!

How happy should I then be, enioieng a continual peace Reave. 21, 4
!

From thencefoorth should I make none inquiry for any thing, seeing no secret
could be hid.

But my life is spent in darkness, and therefore no marvel, though my sight
do dazel between the clouds of glory.

Notwithstanding I will lift up mine eyes, and though a far off, behold and
salute that holy city Jerusalem builded in the heaven even of lively stones
Reave. 21, 10 11, etc.
, namely of holy angels and men, replenished continually with praise, and
mirth, and magnifieng the Lord their God for ever and ever.

Now therefore my soul, take unto thee the wings of desire, and fly upward,
fly I say from all bodelie senses, ascend from the visible form of this
world, unto the holy house of God, even unto the new Jerusalem, builded
substantiallie in aie lasting peace, crowned with glory and honor, and blessed
with the abundance of all good things.

Lo, wonderful and unspeakable are the things (of heaven) which no man either
can, or may utter 1. Cor. 2, ^
.

No sense is able to conceive, neither can the understanding of man attain to
know, how God is in his sanctes glorious, and wonderful in his majesty.

Mount thou in cogitation even unto the hiest things, stretch thy desire into
the everlasting eternity, and say with the Prophet Psalm. 87, 3
; Glorious things are spoken of thee, o city of God.

There whatsoever can be wished of man, is had Revel. 21, 4
; and what is once got, is kept without care Reave. 7, 17
.

God there is beheld face to face cleerelie 1. Cor. 13, 12
, truly, continually, and eternally.

There the blessed and all glorious Trinity, in one inseperable unity, which
of all the blessed citizens of heaven is woorshipped, praised, and magnified
Reave 7, 12
, is perfectly known.

There is mine only and right singularly beloved friend Sal. S. 1, 1 2, etc.
, which is more precious (to me) than all riches Mat. 10, 37 38
, and the treasure above all to be desired, Math. 6, 19 20 21
even my Lord Jesus Christ Romans 1, 3 7, etc.
, the immortal spouse of the Church Ephesians. 5, 25 26, etc Revel. 21, ^
, in whom are hid Math. 11, 25
(but yet revealed to the sanctes) from the beginning of the world, the whole
treasure of wisdom and knowledge Colos. 2, 3
.

O how iocund are the sanctes now before the face of the most holy, who is the
cause and spring of their blessedness!

For there he speaks unto them not in parables, but plainly of the Father
Ioh. 16, 25
.

He is their book, even the word which in the beginning was with God John.
1, ^
, teaching all things, and performing all things, so that theie want nothing in
glory.

O blessed, and everlasting glory, not of small remembrance, but all happy in
God his presence!

There is also the most glorious Mother of our Savior, and constant virgin
Ma^^e, bewti^^eng the whole celestial court with her comlines and beauty,
compassed and accompanied with troops of virgins, as with sweet roases, and
lilies of the valies.

There be the angels and archangels placed in order, who most cheerefullie
sound forth the praises of God.

^ There be the Patriarchs, and Prophets, even theie which being filled long
ago with the holy Ghost, did foretell of Christ his coming Genesis 49, verse 10
Number. 24, 17 Dan. 9, 24 25 Isai. 7, 14 Iere. 31, 22 Psalm. 132, 11 Hag. 2, 8 10
Mala. 3, 1
, whom now theie both know, and evermore confess to be their Lord and
Savior, the King of kings Reu. 17, 14 Revel. 19, 16
, and perfect God.

There theie behold eye to eye their Redeemer, whom long theie looked for, and
for whose coming theie longed.

There be the Lords Apostles, and Disciples, those most reverend and renowned
Fathers, which were filled with holiness and grace, and laid a strong
foundation of the Catholic faith.

There especially shines that reverend man John, which baptized our Savior
Christ Math. 3, 13 14. etc. Mark 1, 9 10 Luke. 3, 21
, and was a special friend John. 20, 2 John. 21, 7 20
of my Spouse.

There is Peter, and Paul, and Andrewe, and Philip, and Thomas, and James, and
John, and all the other Apostles and Evangelists, pillars of the Church.

To keep the faith, and to follow the example of these men, is the ready way
unto everlasting life.

Moreover, there be the valiant Martyrs enriched with their proper blood, and
everlastingly blessed with Christ, whose bodies though theie were most
cruelly flean: yet could not their souls by any torments be severed from
Christ.

Also, there be the noble Confessors, which contemned this present life, that
theie might be in heaven.

There be the great and glorious Doctors that were so carried aloft in
contemplation, of which many have left a lively image of holiness in their
wrightings.

There be young men and maidens, old men and children praising the name of the
Lord continually, and ascribing the goodness which theie had at any time unto
his mercy.

There theie are I say, alwaie grateful, alwaie zealous, alwaie iocund, alwaie
religious, never loathing, but ever loving the Lord.

Oah, how glorious is this kingdom, where all the Sanctes do reign with
Christ, araied with the first roabe Reave. 6, 11 Revel. 7, 13
, and be without care of the other!

There theie follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes Reu. 14, ^
, for theie cannot part; but reioicing everlastingly, shall joy in the Lord.

O my Soul, muse thou upon these things, and cast thy thoughts upon heavenly
matters.

That place in deed is an holy place, and God is in the same.

There is surpassing joy and peace Reuel^ 21, 4
; good things abound, and evils there be none.

Oah, if thou could even a little comprehend the unspeakable ioies of God
his sanctes, then should you find some comfort!

For in me you shall be sure to find nothing but labor and sorrow, and
tentations, with troobles of this world.

Oah that the giver of supernall light Iam. 1, 17
would vouchsafe to enspire some portion of these ioies into you, and not send
you back unto my new withering food, but according to the riches of his
superabundant mercy, purify and rid you of all material forms, and bring
you yea by force into the deep of his eternal brightness!

Would to God, you could carry back from that heavenly sanctuary, a form
and example of true holiness, which you might imitate.

For better, and more true are the examples of celestial, and strong things,
than theie which are confirmed by earthly demonstrations.

Therefore grante Lord, that I may savor and know what the perfect felicity
of sanctes is, not so much by written books thereof, as by the holy Ghost,
which teaches of celestial secrets in such sort, as no sense of man is able
to reach thereunto.

Grante also that from henceforth I may lift up my mind more fervently unto
heavenly things; and amiddes my grievous troobles, valiantly bear the
garland of patience, till the debt of flesh being paid, I may attain through
thy mercy unto this felicity that I so desire.

CHAP. 22.
1. A godly meditation, concerning the access unto the holy of holies, even
Jesus Christ, the king of angels. 2. godly petitions for the forgiveness of
sins.
THou art my King, o God Psalm. 44, 4
.

Arise now my soul, come, and enter into the wonderful tabernacle even into
the house of God.

For it is meet that omitting other things, thou with all reverence do
proceed to salute our Lord Jesus Christ Romans 1, 3 7, etc.
, thy Savior Mat. 1, 21
, and redeemer Gal. 3, 13
, which is the head of all principality and power Reu. 17, 14
; the joy and crown of all sanctes; the assured trust and certain hope of
all the faithful Col. 1, 27
.

He it is which has made Psalm. 100, 3 Psalm. 119, 73
, and redeemed thee 1. Pet. 1, 18 19
; he it is which has for thy sake both labored Isai. 53, 3 4, etc.
, striued 1. Cor. 15, verse 55 56, etc.
, and overcome Matt. 4, 10 11 John. 16, 33
.

He is thine advocate 1. Ioh. 2, 1 2
, and the propitiation for thy sins.

He is thy comforter, thy prouider, and thy Lord Reu. 19, 16
.

He is thine only and singular friend that feeds among the lilies Sal. S. 2,
16
, and loves to rest him upon thy breasts Sal. S. 1, 12
.

Who ever has done the like for thee? who ever loved you so entirely?

Come thou unto him; offer your self to him; open your whole heart, and unfold
even your hidden secrets unto him.

For no man will better either declare, or else reveal how you should behave
your self in this world, in the which, things fall out so strangely.

Let your wishes and prayers be directed unto him; and in him let all your
counsels abide.

Vain is the hope of man Psalm. 62, 9
; but he is the vpholder of peace.

Through him we have open access unto the Father Ephesians. 2, 18
; and from him we receive all goodness, and virtue 1. Cor. 1, 30 31
.

Whether you mourn, or whether you rejoice, make continual recourse unto him.

He is the glass of life; the rule of righteousness; the light of the soul;
the love of shamefastnes; and the joy of a good conscience.

If thou love him, it will be none hard matter for thee to despise the vane
pleasures of this world; if thou love him, all sour things will seem
sweet; all heavy things will seem light; and that which otherwise you should
mislike, you will like right well for his sake Romans 8, 35
.

To be brief, of him, and through him, and for him, are all things Romans 11, 36
.

The principal end both of all our thoughts, and of all our actions, and of
our speech, and of our reading, praieng, meditating, and speculation, should be
Jesus Christ.

Through him you attain salvation Gal. 3, 13
, and everlasting life.

For his love you will neither fear to die Romans 8, 35 36
, nor refuse to live Phil. 1, 23
; because you are to commit your self wholly to his trust, and to prefer
nothing before his love, and honor.

Wherefore come near, and give thanks to thy Redeemer.

S. O most sweet Jesus, above all things to be loved, I salute thee most
religiously, I commend thee most highly, and I bless thee now and
everlastingly with all thy creatures.

O most renowned Jesus, how can I praise thee as I ought? When shall I thank
thee, as I am bound, in that thy mercies are so infinite to mee-ward?

Again, whatsoever I give, it is thy gift, and I received it from thee 1. Cor.
4, 7
.

But little, or nothing it is that I have: and can I then sacrifice of nothing?

Howbeit, accept I beseech thee, mine humble, base, and vile sacrifice; and let
my gifts be ascribed to thy goodness.

Let the quires of heavenly angels attending about thee, sound forth thine
infinite praises on my behalf: also let the souls of the righteous repeat
the same.

In the mean while what shall I do in memory, and praise of thy most sacred
name?

Much I ought to do, and for many things I am greatly bound; yet am I not
able to perform the least.

And therefore I will read of thee, o my sweet Savior, I will write of thee;
I will sing of thee; I will think of thee, I will speak of thee, I will work
for thee, and for thee will I suffer.

In thee will I rejoice, thee will I praise, thee will I magnify, thee will I
glorify.

As it is meet I will worship thee, because thou art my God Math. 4, 10
, in whom I believe, whom I do love, seek, and have alwaie desired.

Give me some good sign, that mine eyes may behold thy goodly countenance
in the heavens.

Humbly I do throw down my self at thy feet in heart, earnestly with
tears desiring thy favor, that thou will vouchsafe to be good unto me.

Write my name in the book of life; and let that never be out-blotted, which
thine holy hand has written.

I, wretch that I am, and far inferior to any of thy sanctes, yet trusting
boldly upon the more than excellent prerogative of thy mercies, beseech thee,
that at the leastwise I may be compted among the basest and woorst of thine
elect.

I confess, my life and conversation is not such, that I dare presume any
thing of my self; and therefore all mine hope and comfort is, and rests in
the price of thy precious blood, wherein I do wholly repose my self, and
deem it requisite that I should do so, together with all which I have done,
offended, deserved, and omitted.

And therefore behold, most gracious Jesus, my baseness and humility, consider
the affection of mine heart which I bear toward thee, not for my merits, but
for thy mercy sake, which vouchsafest to be loved even of the unworthy.

In respect of mine unworthiness I am greatly ashamed to come in thy presence;
but I am drawen-on and emboldened through your wonderful goodness and humility
Mat. 11, 28 29
, which have in perfect good will Romans 5, 7
yielded not only to become man John. 1, 14
, but also to suffer Isai. 53, 3 4, etc.
, die, and to be buried for my sake: and therefore unto thee do I make
recourse, for I find no goodness in my self.

Supply that for my sake, which of my self I cannot perform.

Thou have given me a desire Phil. 1, 13
to pray unto thee, to praise, and to bless thee: because thou art mine hope,
and my portion in the land of the living Psalm. 143, 5
. Al my desire is to be with thee in the kingdom of heaven; but inasmuch as my
time is not yet come, I will wait until the night approach.

In the mean while, this may be my comfort in the place of my pilgrimage,
that I am mindful of thy name, and of thine exceeding great love; and that I
behold thee in this life by the eyes of my faith.

To live in this world, and yet to repose no trust in thee, o Lord, were a
thing intolerable to my soul.

I do not consent to rejoice with the world Luke. 6, 25
; and, that I may not abide without joy and comfort, I have determined to
place my joy in thee 1. Cor. 1, verse 31
.

Much and often should I go astraie, greatly should I be tossed in
cogitations, did I not retain thee fast in my mind, and thoughts.

And for so much as I am unable to sound the depth of thy divinity, I think it
best for me to turn unto the deeds and saiengs of thine humanity; because,
being in these cogitations, I swerve not altogether from thy divinity.

Thanks be to thee, good Jesus, sweet and lovely Jesus, for vouchsafing to
become my brother, to take my flesh and bones upon thee Ioh. 1, 14 Math. 1, 23
.

Thanks I say to thee for entering into the womb of good Marie thy Mother,
of whose maidenlie flesh thou tookest the holy members of thy body, which
thou did unite to thy divine nature.


CHAP. 23.
A godly Prayer; and commendation of our Savior Christ.
NOtwithstanding I am wicked, and guilty of manifold sins: yet have I great
hope of salvation, because of thy suffering, and merits: whereof, as I have a
good mind to consider, so grant, o my Lord Christ, that I may with good
leave so do.

For who am I to approach nigh unto thee, unless I have license?

I know mine vnwoorthines to appear in his presence, whom the very angels
do worship with great reverence, saying:

Who is this that comes out of the wilderness of this world, so abunding in
pleasure?

Therefore, o most blessed Savior, I am far unmeet to think of thy glory
and honor, of thy beauty and magnificence; because I am earth and ashes Ecclus.
10, verse 9
, yea more base am I then earth and ashes, because I am sinful, and proane
unto all wickedness.

But thou being made hier than heaven, have the whole world under thy feet
Mat. 28, 18 Hebr. 2, 8
, and art worthy to be praised and honored for evermore.

Howbeit of thine unspeakable goodness, which passes all understanding, I am
drawn in affection unto thee; because thou art the comfort of the
comfortless, and use most willingly to help most miserable sinners.

I acknowledge how I am not only destitute of all comforrt, especially of thy
favor; but also very unable to do good unto my self.

But, merciful Jesus, would thou vouchsafe to consider my baseness, then
should I both be aided, and comforted most plentifully in this my trooble.

Therefore I see well, whenever I am compassed about with affliction and
tentation, I am straight-waie and without fear to fly unto thee: for where
mercy is most ready, there grace is in greatest plenty.

And when I have a good mind to consider of thy most glorious estate, and to
commend thee in most honorable manner, I must come forth with a much purer
affection, and may not go forward without the conduction of Gods heavenly
light.

Assuredly, he shall have no glory, but shame, that presumes without all
reverence to approach unto thy gate.

And he which comes thereinto, must proceed with all reverence and
humility, joined with good hope, that he may find grace to be admitted.

Wherefore both humbly, and reuerendlie and devoutly, and boldly I go to
thee-ward.

Let the godly lover of thy name listen then what I say.

The heaven reioiceth, the earth woondereth, when by faith mine heart says,
Christ is my Savior.

Satan flies, hell trembles, when my conscience cries, Christ is my Savior.

The world waxes vile, and the flesh humble, when as a Christian does say,
Christ is my Savior.

Sorrow departs, new comfort approaches, when my mind pronounces, Christ
is my Savior.

Slothfulnes vanishes, mine heart through love faints, when zelouslie I can
say, Christ is my Savior.

Zeal increases, compunction arises, hope grows, comfort waxes strong,
when my soul sounds, Christ is my Savior.

Mine heart is iocund, mine affection becomes sound, when in truth I do
say, Christ is my Savior.

For such is the force of these words uttered of a faithful soul, that no man
is able to express the same in words, but still it rests more hie and
excellent, than may be reached unto by the wit of man.

Which makes me once again most humbly to bow my knees unto thee, o
blessed Savior, and still I say, o Christ my Savior.

O most gracious Jesus receive my prayer, and me with it, that I may find
somewhat that may like thee well, and embolden me, and kindle my zeal, and
keep me evermore in continual praising of thine holy Name.

Oah that for the satisfieng my desire to praise, and to pray unto thee from
the very bottom of mine heart, both all my members were forthwith converted
into tongues, and those tongues into fiery voices, that I might find a way to
glorify thee, my Savior, world without end!

Oah that for all my sins wherewith I have deserved thine indignacion, offended
greeuouslie thy Father, and dishonored thee with all the host of heaven, I
might once so thoroughlie bewail, and repent, that I might hereafter take a
new trade of life to thy glory, and the comfort of my soul!

Oah that thou would assist me in well doing, seeing my life frail and I
all subject to offending!

Oah pardon and forgive all my sins either wilfully, or negligentlie
committed, all my vain thoughts, my ungodly speech, my abominable deeds!

O most gracious Jesus, I say, do thou both defend me from doing any
wickedness hereafter, and forgive, I pray thee, all my sins forepast: so shall
I be both the more devout, the more zealous, and the more careful in saying,
thou Christ art my Savior both in mine heart, and with my mouth, in company,
and in my chamber, and in the garden, and in the field, and in all places
wheresoever I shall be.

And now, what more shall I ask of thee, o Christ my Savior?

What is better, or more profitable, or more necessary especially for me a
great sinner, than to find favor in thy sight, o Christ my Savior?

And therefore it is that I have desired, and still do crave, even that by
thine intercession and means I may have the grace of God thy Father, who, as
both thy self have said, and the Apostle does witness, have all power given
thee both in heaven and earth Mat. 28, 8
.

There is no prayer more welcome to thee, than this is, nor any thing more
necessary for me, than the grace and favor of God.

If I have the grace of God, whatsoever else I do want, I am rich enough.

For what is all mine endeavoring if I l^ck that? Again, what can I not do, if
I be assisted and helped thereby?

I see that many and diverse are my wicked affections: but yet against all
passions the grace of God is a most effectual medicine; and if once it come,
it will mitigate them all.

I do also stand in need of spiritual wisdom and knowledge: but the grace
of God is a most excellent teacher, and instructor of heavenly knowledge, and
is able even suddenly to instruct me in whatsoever things are necessary unto
salvation.

For to require more than is necessary, or to desire to understand more than
is lawful to be known, is against the will of God, whose pleasure is that we
should be humbled under his hand, and contented with his grace.

Wherefore obtain this grace for me, o Christ, which is so noble and
precious, that in deed I ought neither to desire or crave any other thing than
grace for grace.

CHAP. 24.
A Prayer for comfort unto Jesus Christ.
GRace is poured into thy lips Psalm. 45, 2
.

Oah my Lord, I beseech thee, at the length now vouchsafe to speak unto me,
o Christ.

Open thy mouth in thine own name, who art full of all spiritual graces John.
1, 16
.

L. I am the fountain of mercy; full of love and sweetness.

I am the ladder for sinners; the hope and pardon of the guilty.

I am the comfort of the sorrowful, and the special joy of all sanctes.

Come unto me so many as love me, and fill your selves at the breasts of my
comfort; because I am good and merciful to all which cry unto me.

Come unto me both righteous and sinners, I will sue unto the Father for you;
I will entreat him to be good unto you, and to fill you with the holy Ghost.

I call every one, I look for all, I desire to have all to come unto me; I
despise no sinner, but with the angels in heaven I rejoice exceedingly over
that sinner which repents Luke 15, 10
, and so comes into the favor of God: for no one drop of my blood which I
shed for the world, is in vane.

Therefore come unto me, ye sons of men, consider and behold my zeal for
you unto God my Father.

Lo, I have taken his wrath upon my self, I have borne his displesure Isai.
53, 1 2, etc.
, yea, and continually do I make supplication for you unto him 1. John. 2, 1 2
whom you know right well you have greeuouslie offended.

Turn then, and approach, repent, and of my word you shall have pardon.

For lo, I stand between heaven and earth, between God and sinners; and that
this world perish not, I obtain through my prayers.

Wherefore, abuse not my goodness, and mercy; but beware of offending, least
when you little think thereof Mat. 24, 44
, indignation be powered upon you, and intolerable vengeance Romans 2, 8 9
.

I do forewarne you as children, I beseech you as friends, be you perfect as
your heavenly Father is perfect Mat. 5, 48
.

Forget not me, who have bin, and am, and will be mindful of you.

For I do both pity such as are in misery, and I do entreat for those which
cry unto me 1. Ioh. 2, 1 2
.


S. O gracious speech, and full of all comfort!

O heavenly voice sweetly dropping from heaven to the comforting of sinners,
and reioicing of the righteous!

O celestial music, how sweetly do thou resounde in a desperate
conscience!

Whence is it that the Savior of mankind will thus talk with me?

Blessed art thou, o Christ, and blessed are the words of thy mouth. For
honey is under thy tongue, and the savor of thy speech excels all sweetenes.

My soul was mollefied, so soon as thou spakest, o Christ.

Behold, no sooner did thy voice sound in mine ears, but my soul within did
spring for joy.

For my spirit revived within me; and all mine entralls were filled with new
comfort; because good and ioiefull things are told me this day by you.

I was doleful, but now I am iocund because of your words. For your voice is
sweet in mine ears.

I was grieved and desolate; but now I am revived, and made merry. For thou
have sent thine hand from on hie, and touched me, whereby of weak, I am
become strong.

Scarce could I speak, but now I have a good mind to sing, and to praise thee
highly.

I was loath to live, and now I am willing to die, because I have thee, Christ,
for mine advocate, with the Father, to whose mercy I commend my self, even
from this time for ever and ever.

For since first you began to speak unto the heart of thy desolate orphane, I
have bin changed into a better state, and greatly comforted in my mind.

I was almost at the door of desperation, but thy comfort came, and lifted me
up with these words:


L. What is the matter Son? and who are they which would hurt thee? Fear
not, I will see unto thee, my son.

I do live with God my Father Revel. 1, 4
, and I sit at his right hand, being a faithful hie Priest, and an
intercessor for thy sins 1. John. 2, 1 2
.

In me thou should repose thy trust, because I do both give life Ioh. 11,
25
, and destroy death 1. Cor. 15, verse 55
.

I was incarnate of a virgin in time Math. 1, 18 19, etc.
, but of my Father begotten before all times Psalm. 2, 7 Hebr. 1, 5
, and when the fulness of time came, I suffered for man's salvation Gal. 4, 4 5
.

Lo, I am the hope and comfort of the godly, and by me is faith and victory
attained 1. Cor. 15, verse 57
.

And therefore let neither me, nor these things be out of thy mind, and thou will not fear any darts of Satan.


S. Oah happy hour! o blessed state, that my Lord and Savior will vouchsafe
to comfort on this wise my trubled heart!

Oah that I might still hear thy so comfortable words, for greatly do theie
inflame, and move me, and touch me even at the very heart!

O blessed Christ, thou never cessest to send forth the sweet milk of
heavenly consolation!

For by reason of the abundance of thy grace, thou can not deny favor to
such as crave the same at thine hands; yet often thou showest much mercy even
to the very sinner Math. 5, 45
.

O Christ, thou excellest in pittifulnes, in mercy, and in loving!

O Savior, to whom none is to be compared, thou art above all to be loved, and
to be worshipped.

O Son of God, by whom we are also the sons of God Gal. 4, 6 7
, and of whom we are called Christians Act. 11, 26
, thou art of all good men to be served most religiously, and above all Mat.
4, 10
.

O friend of all friends 1. Ioh. 3, 16
, King of heaven and earth Revel. 1, 5 6
, Lord of angels Hebr. 1, 6 7, etc. Mark. 1, 13
, conqueror of devils Math. 4, 10 11 Mark. 5, 7 8 9, etc.
, draw me after thee, least I fall, and so rest under the heavy burden of
sin.

Pour out thy grace, send me thy comfortable dew from above, that truly I
may perceive, how thou art the procurer, and the open fountance of all mercy
1. Pet. 3, 24 25
.


L. I am in deed the spring of holy love, and of chaste and religious fear,
of godly conference, and of sweet consolation.

Therefore when you do hear my name, rejoice with your whole heart, and
magnify the goodness of your God.

In honoring me, you honor the Father which is God as I am John. 1^ 1 2, etc.
. For I am Jesus the Son of God Math. 1, 18 20
, and this name shall I have while the world endures 1. Cor. 15, verse 28
.

But what is Jesus? even the Son of the living God Math. 16, verse 16
; the Savior of the world Math. 1. 21 1. Pet. 1, 18 19
; the King of heaven and earth Reu 17, 14 Revel. 19, 16
; the Lord of Angels Dan. 7, 10 Hebr. 1, 6 7, etc.
; the redeemer of the faithful Gal. 3, 13
; and the judge of quick and dead Act. 10, 42
.

And what is Jesus? the hope of the godly; the comfort of the desola^e; the
peace of the meek; the riches of the poor; the glory of the humble; the
strength of the weak; the way of such as wander, the light of such as see
not, the staff of such as walk not; the oil of such as feel not, the stay
of the oppressed, the help of the troobled, and the singular refuge of all
good men Mat. 11, 28
.

Bless the Son with the Father, and so God will bless you.

Give honor also and glory to the Father, whenever you praise me.

His glory, is my joy; and my praise, is his worship.

Place me and the Father as a seal upon thine heart, and as a token upon thine
arm.

Therefore sit you, or stand you, or pray, or read, or wright, or work you,
let my name Jesus and God be often reuerendlie in your mouth, but continually
in your heart.


S. O grante it may be so good Jesus; and let all people, tribes, and tongues
serve thee; and let all creatures bow at thy presence.

Let heaven say, Reign thou Jesus; let the earth make answer, yea for ever
and ever let him reign.

Yea, let all Sanctes confess thy glorious Name, and all good people rejoice
before the Father, and thee his lamb John. 1, 29
, and our Lord Jesus Christ Romans 1, 3 7
, Amen.


CHAP. 25.
That for God his benefits we are to thank him.
BLessed be the glorious Name of the Lord for evermore Psalm. 72, 19
.

O Lord my God Ioh. 20, 17
, let all my doings, all my reading, all my wrighting, my thoughts, words,
and understanding, tend unto the advancement of thine honor 1. Cor. 10, verse 31
.

Yea, let me both begin my business in thy Name, and go forward in thy fear,
and finish it with thy blessing.

That which thou have given, that receive again; and from whence the streams
do flow, thither let them return.

It never goes better with me, neither does it realish better to my soul,
than when unfeignedly I do ascribe all to thee, whatsoever I have either done,
or thought as I should.

My desire is to render thanks, which I then do as I ought, when for that I
have received, and thou have given, I ascribe all praise to thee, and nothing
to my self.

For what can I, a wicked and unprofitable servant, render unto thee my God?
Alas, all that I can do, yea, if I should do all which thou command to be
done, it is to none effect Luke 17, 10
.

So that I am brought unto nothing, and rightly humbled. And in deed it is
very well that I am so brought down Psalm. 119, verse 71
, that thou alone may be justified Psalm. 51, 4
, and have the praise of all, and that vile dust Ecclus. 10, verse 9
may at no time glory in it self.

Howbeit, I mind not to surcesse, but will extol thee both with heart and
mouth. For albe I discharge not my duty therein as I ought: yet ought I to
speak of thy goodness, and not be silent.

O my God, thou art my glory; my praise shall always be of thee Psalm. 71, 6
.

He that would but a little consider of thy glory, and know what it is to
glory in the Lord Iere. 9, 24
; how would he despise all outward glory!

He that would, even but a little taste of thy sweetness; how quickly would he
loath, as most bitter, the pleasure of this world!

He which would receive even but a small sparcle of love into his breaste, how
would he burn in affection! For full gladly would he contemn all things
to have thy freendship: and would count it all sweet, and easy to be borne,
whatsoever he should do, or suffer for thy love sake Romans 8, 35
.

He that would consider in his mind thy goodness to man-ward; how would he
rejoice, and run after thee! He would seek nothing so charelie, he would
keep nothing so warelie, he would pursue nothing so egerlie, as to serve thee.
For in loving, he would feel no burden Sal. S. 8, 6 7
, because love would bear all burdens.

So then theie which complain of the burden, do plainly declare how theie
have little true love in them.

To serve of love, is of all others the greatest pleasure, and comfort in labor.

True love does neither respect commodity, nor fear damage, but in all
things seeks that which may please thee.

Oah Christ, how sweet is thy love, how well does it sound, how sweetly
does it enter, how strongly does it bind!

Oah that it would fast bind me to thy continual service! oah that it would
wholly take me, and wholly subdue me, and wholly and altogether make me to be
thine!

For then, and not before am I free, when I am taken of thy love, and utterly
deprived from all that mine is.

O my Lord, I am thy servant Psa. 143, 12
, yea thy servant am I, because thou have redeemed me 1. Cor. 6, 20 1. Cor. 7,
23 1. Pet. 1, 19
.

I am thy servant with a very good will, and am not ashamed to be properly
thine.

I wish not to be mine own man again, and therefore, Lord, help me, that I
may be freed from that which naturally is mine.

Oah blow, and kindle, and inflame the fire of my zeal, so shall mine heart
boil, and become pure, clear, and pleasant: for thy love expels vice, and
consumes sin.

Lay thou fast hold upon the band of love, and I shall stand and continue in
thy service.

Full well I wot, no good can my service do you, Lord; but all the benefit
redoundeth to my self, if I do that which I know is acceptable in thy sight.

Would I did, and hid not, that I revealed, and concealed not thy works, Lord!

When shall I be able worthelie to consider the manifold benefits conferred
upon me of God!

Mercifully have thou dealt with thy servant, o Lord; but alack, I never
thanked thee for the same, as thou deseruedst.

And therefore am I punished, and pinched at the very heart, even because I am
unable to answer thy benefits so great, and so manifold.

Oah that I could even but once worthelie, and thoroughlie thank thee for all
these things!

But what may proceed from him, in whom nothing is? An empty vessel, can
minister no drink.

What then shall I do? Something I must give. For it is not lawful to come
before God with an empty hand. Because the Lord abhors the ungrateful man
Luke. 17, verse 17
.

Oah that I could find something in this world to give you that might be
acceptable in your sight!

Oah my Lord, whom in heart I love, what would you that I should give you?

As for any good thing of mine you need it not Psalm. 50, 12
. And why then exact you a gift at mine hands? For riches none is comparable
to you, and yet require you somewhat of me?

L. That which I demand is even your self wholly. For so it is expedient if
you would purchase my favor.

I will give grace to you, and you shall show grace to me; and so love shall
be continued between us.

Give me your self, and you have given even all.


S. O good Jesus, the fountane of all goodness, the fountane of life, the
fountane of grace, the fountane of sweetenes, the very fountane of aie lasting
wisdom, power upon me, even at this instant, I beseech thee, the gift of thy
celestial grace, and teach me to be grateful, and to give my self before
all things wholly unto you; for this is the dearest thing that I can render.

This I do know, and acknowledge. Therefore receive me, lo, I am wholly
thine, and all that mine is, is thine.

Only one thing there is which I cannot give; and that is my sin, which is
mine indeed properly, and therefore not to be imputed unto thee.

Sin mine is; and all defaultes within me are to be ascribed to me only; but
glory, and for all thy benefits thanks be unto thee.

But now in calling thy benefits into mind, of many I gather only a few,
and those which do most of all move me, and appear in my mind. For neither
will the time suffer to recite, neither can my thoughts comprehend them all 1.
Cor. 2, 9
.

Because for number theie are infinite, for greatness incomprehensible, and
inestimable for goodness. For bought theie cannot be, because theie are freely
given Mat. 10, 8 Iam. 1, 17
. And therefore only thanks be required for them, otherwise all shall be
taken away, as from that ungrateful one Mat. 25, 28
.

First therefore and before all things, I thank thee, o Lord my God Mat. 4, 10
, creator of all things John. 1, 1 2 3
, for making me a man, after thine image and similitude Genesis 1, 27 Psalm. 119,
73
, and for placing me over the works of thine hands Psalm. 8, 6 7, etc.
.

This is the great, and first benefit bestowed upon me, and that of thy mere
goodness.

For I made not my self, but thine hands did fashion me Psalm. 100, 3
, theie brought me into this world through my parents Psa. 139, 13 15, etc.
, whom thy will was, should serve thee herein.

And lo, I am better than other creatures, exalted above the beasts of the
field, and birds of the aer Genesis 1, 28 Wisd 9, 2
; in that I am facioned after thine image 1. Cor. 11, 7
, endued with eternal wisdom, and naturally participate of the light
uncreate, and of the unchangeable truth.

Wherefore for my being, living, and understanding, I give thee everlasting
praise, wishing and desiring herewithall that all creatures both in heaven and
earth, may everlastingly commend thy glorious and most excellent name.

I bless thee, o Father, Lord of heaven and earth Psalm. 97, 1 Psalm. 99, 1
, who of nothing through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ in the holy
Ghost, have created all things John. 1, 1 2 3 Hebr. 1, 2
.

Yea al things thou have made, not of necessirie compelled, but of pure and
special love moved thereunto, thereby to show thy power unto the sons of men
Psalm. 145, 4
; and by thine invisible and coeternall wisdom with thee, thou have most
perfectly disposed this visible world Wisd. 9, 1
.

Let all thy creatures subject in all things to thee Mat. 28, 18
, and ordained for the use of man Genesis 1, 28
, bless thee.

For at thy commandment both rain falls from heaven, and fructe springs
from the earth:

The sun shines brightlie in the day time, the stars give light by course
in the night:

The fountanes spring, the rivers flow, and fishes of diverse kinds do swim:

The birds not only fly, but sing also; and the goats, the coltes, and
hearts, do spring upon the mountains:

The sheep and other cattle dop joy in good pasture, and diverse other living
creatures do run about the groaues:

The ground waxes green, the fields prosper, and trees of the wood do yield
both bows and fructe.

O Lord, which only do woonderous things Psalm. 72, 18
, even all these are thy works.

Another benefit which thou have bestowed upon me, is the mystery of
incarnation 1. Tim. 3, 16
, the work of my redemption, the price of our salvation, even the fructe of
thy passion and death.

O great work of mercy! Oah work of most excellent love Romans 5, 8
, most abject humility Phil. 2, 5 6, etc.
, of most rare patience 1. Pet. 2, 21 22, etc.
!

No man could merit, nor Angel procure this thing.

The Prophets have wondered at it; the Apostles have seen and taught it; the
faithful have embraced it; and the elect especially do love, and call it
into mind.

The due consideration of this benefit stirs up good desires; inflameth the
heart; nurisheth devotion; inlighteneth the mind; purges the affection;
draws on to heauenward; with-draweth from the world; drives unto God; and
unites the soul with Christ.

This benefit far excels the above mentioned: yet there is one which gave
each, and has bestowed both of them upon us, even our Lord Jesus Christ.

For what the better had I bin for my life, if I had not bin redeemed with the
precious blood of my Savior Christ Gal. 3, 13
?

Therefore the grace, and mercy of God grew upon me, and plenteous redemption
was made Psa. 130, 7
: for the corrupted nature of man without the aid of God his maker, could
never have bin repared.

O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort 2. Cor. 1, 3
, thou, to redeem thy damned servant Ephesians. 2, 3
, have given thine only Son to the death Romans 8, 32
.

O wonderful I kindness of thine to us ward, unto which, neither the wit of
man, nor the understanding of Angels can attain 1. Tim. 3, 16
! But alone, sweet Christ, who art the beginning and the end of our
salvation, and alone could help the miserable, and damned, thou alone art
privy to the same.

For thou did vouchsafe to appear unto the world in the likeness of a most
vile servant Phil. 2, 5 6
; and for mortal worms Ecclus. 10, verse 9
even of mere pity receauedst with a willing mind the judgment of a cruel
death Gal. 3, 13
.

O good Jesus, thou which art the fountain of mercy, the light of aie lasting
glory, the pure glass without spot of God his majesty Wisd. 7, 26
, kindle mine heart with the meditation of this unspeakable benefit, bestowed
upon me, and upon all mankind Romans 5, 15 16, etc.
.

But this, as was the former, is general, sufficient to save all, but not
effectual in all, by reason of the incredulity, and malice of many: howbeit
it saves, and is profitable to all the elect, for whose sake all things were
created, and be, as I may say, created again, through thee my Savior.

O good Jesus, how manifold are the benefits brought unto us by thine humanity!

Thou becamest our brother, and flesh of our flesh John. 1, 14
, that we might be compted the children of God Gal. 4, 6 7
, and have access unto the Father thorough thee 1. John. 2, 1 2
, the fire of whose displesure none could quench, but thou alone of whom
himself did say Mat. 3, 17 Math. 17, 5
: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Happy is the soul, which earnestly records, and hartelie loves, and
worthelie extolleth the sacraments of our redemption; and for them thanketh
thee; and finally depends upon thy counsel, more than upon her own sense.

For none is meet to search out, no wisdom can reach into this mystery,
only it is the strength of belief, and the pureness of the heart lightened from
above Matthew. 5, 8
, that beholds the same.

Oah, blessed is he that is worthy to receive that by grace, which the wise
of the world could not understand by nature Mat. 11, 25
!

O sweet Jesus, the wisdom of the Father, make me in the light of faith to
know this great and wonderful mystery of thine incarnation 1. Tim. 3, 16
, for therein the sweetenes of our whole salvation lies, and thereby the
rarest freendship that ever was seen appears 1. Ioh. 3, 16 Romans 5, 8 Romans 8,
32
, and through it the unsearchable fulness of thy wisdom glittereth most
gloriously.

Oah let thy servant grow on still in godliness, in the study of well doing,
and more and more in this memorable secreat of thine incarnation, make me
acquainted with the mystery of thine holy passion, and draw me wholly into
the meditation of thy works!

The declaration of this love, and humility, is a wonderful deep, and a
certain celestial sea, which may not be swoom over, wherein do swim too and
fro the spiritual fishes both small and great, which thou have taken within
the net of faith.

Wherefore let this thy so great love and sweetenes, thine so great humility
and kindenes abide still in my remembrance; let it alwaie remain in every
sacrifice of prayer that I am to make; and in all mine holy exercises let
there be somewhat, as pleasant frankincense, and delightful spices, for a
sweet smelling savor to be offered unto God the Father, concerning the
mystery of thine incarnation and passion.

Let now then such as thou haste redeemed, I say whom thou haste redeemed out
of the hand of the enemy Luke 1, 74
, sing out with me the song of thine heavenly praise, and of inward joy
together with thankesgeuing.

Yea, let all the Angels standing about thy throne, fall upon their faces, and
worship the lamb of God, who has taken away the sins of the world John. 1, 29
, saying Reave. 7, 12
:

Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might, be unto our Lord Jesus Christ for evermore, Amen.

A third benefit, not inferior to the former, is the grace of justification,
whereby of thy goodness thou haste drawn me unto repentance, and amendment of
life, forgiving my sins, and giving me both hope of pardon, and willingness to
do well, and to serve thee evermore.

This after Paul duly had considered, he adhorteth his disciples to be both
thankful for so great a benefit, and also mindful of the heavenly grace,
and to study to show themselves worthy so spiritual a calling:

Brethren, says he 1. Cor. 1, ^6 27
, you see your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise.

These things I consider in my self, who notwithstanding I am contemptible,
and unmeet for this world: yet by thine holy calling am I saved from the
shipwreck of the same unto thine holy service. And this I ascribe wholly not
unto any goodness of mine, but unto thy providence.

For the which, I extol thy goodness, and bless thee, even I say, for calling
me graciously, for giving me a desire to please thee, for pardoning all my
sins; for putting me under thy sweet yoke, softening mine heart with the oil
of thy spirit, whom the world neither knows, neither sees, nor sauoreth.

O merciful Jesus, keep me in this mind, I beseech thee, increase thy gifts
of grace within me more and more, so long as I remain in this visible light.

I perceive right well this calling of mine is a great benefit, not given to
all men, but only to such as God the Father has ordained thereunto: because
it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy Romans 9, 16
, that every mouth may be stopped Romans 3, 19
, and all the world culpable before God; and that no flesh should rejoice in
thy presence 1. Cor. 1, 29
, nor ascribe any of their own virtues, or good works, to themselves.

For if thou should deal with me in justice, alas, I were then damned with
the curssed spirits in hell.

But of thy goodness, o Lord, thou have spared me, and forgiven my sins,
whereby I am not as the child of perdition.

And therefore am I bound to render great thanks unto thee for so excellent a
benefit; and would to God, both in my speech, and in my life, all the days of
my life, I might answer my calling!

But Lord, in steed of all thanks, receive I beseech thee, my poor service,
whereby I desire, and in deed am bound to serve thee.

Grante also that the debt of my service may proceed from the heart, and
finally agree to thy will and honor; and that mine heart be never turned from
thy love, but that both my soul and body may alike watch and perseueare day
and night in thine holy service, even so long as life is within my body, and
I have my wits to remember thee; let thy praise be never out of my mouth, nor
the remembrance of thy manifold benefits slip out of mine heart.

And if thy servant shall yet live many years, either an hundred, or how
many soever, grante that I may not prove lukewarm, or abashed at thy
service, but be even so zealous and so willing to serve thee, as I was at the
first hour and day when mine heart was admonished and confirmed of thee, even
with a pure and whole mind only to follow thee my Lord.

Neither let any infirmity or adversity hinder my purpose; but even as now I
mean, and purpose in the hearing of thee my God: so I beseech thee give grace,
that what now I have promised, I may perform.

And although through my infirmity and faults this my course shall be broken,
as there is no man so righteous upon earth but he sins 2 Chro. 6, verse 36
; yet suffer me not to despeire, and to faint utterly, but put into my mind
forthwith to bow the knees of mine heart, and with much sorrow and tears to
offer unto thee my woeful and wounded conscience to be healed with the salve of
thy mercy, and that my purpose may be bound more surely than ever it was.

Let me never repent me of this covenant, but still give thanks that I have
found such favor in thine eyes, as to be accepted into thine holy warfare.

Thou can, o almighty Eze. 10, 5 2. Cor. 6, 18
and all merciful God Wisd. 12, verse 20 2. Cor. 1, 3
, who have of nothing created me Genesis 1, 26 Psalm. 100, 3
, and foreseest the fall, and infirmity of man; thou art able, I say, and
that thou will I beseech thee, forgive the sins which I have committed; supply
what I have omitted; restore what I have lost; heal what is sick; cleanse what
is unclean; lighten what is dark; assuage that which swells; inflame what
is quenched; repair that is broken; recover that is neglected; amend what is
awrie; make plain what is rouged; restrain what is curious; call home that
which wandereth; place what is out of order; yea, and alter the whole state of
my mind, that nothing be wanting to my former purpose, and let all occasion of
evil work for the best unto me, I most humbly desire thee.

This change, is made by the right hand of God; this is God his visitation;
this is the manifold conference of the divine goodness.

In steed of all thanks, accept the devout service of thine holy Church
where-so-euer, with the sweet praises of the whole court of heaven.

And let all the sanctes from the beginning of the world, which thorough thy
grace have bin enlightened and called; yea and all the faithful and Christian
people which either be in the world, or have bin before us, or shall live
hereafter, let them I say together celebrate and praise thy all sweet and
glorious name, which is above all names to be blessed Phil. 2, 9 10
.

Let them repeat again, and again with great joy, repeat all praises
duly and deservedly to be said of thy name, and that so many times, as
there be either in the heaven, stars; or in the sea, fishes; or in the earth,
corns; or in the Bible, letters.

And all this being done, yet must I say, theie have not praised thy name
sufficiently, the which I desire to commend even to the uttermost of my
strength, and by all means to extol, until I attain unto those praises,
which now cannot be expressed by the voice of mortal men.

So that thou see now my Soul, the greatenes and the excellency of God thy
creator and redeemer his benefits, the which no creature, nor all creatures may
recompense, whom he has made unto the praise and glory of his eternal and
blessed name Isai. 43, 7
, who needs no glory, but is alone all sufficient for himself; he that is
what he is Exodus 3, 14
, is his own glory.

The number of his benefits was so great, that I could not place them all
before thine eyes; and therefore of a great many I choase three precious
gifts, even as the Wisemen did, which were about to offer to the Lord Math. 2,
11
, wherein I thought good to comprehend the rest.

For every benefit of God, if you mark well, is either of nature, or of
grace, or of superexcellencie: and whatsoever else is, may fully be referred
unto one of these three kinds.

In the Creation, you have the benefit of nature; in the Redemption, the
benefit of superexcellencie; in our Justification, note the benefit of grace.

For all which, and for every of them, glory be to thee, o sacred Trinity,
one equal deity, both before all worlds, now, and for evermore Reu. 17, 12
. Amen.


The end of the fourth Book.
A Table of the contents of every Chapter contained in this Book.
ALonging of the Soul after God. The incomprehensible majesty of the Lord. An
exhortation to the love of God. Chapter 1. Page 1 Of God his distinct judgment
at the end of this world. The cursed state of the ungodly. Chapter. 2. Page.
14 An humble confession of sins; with a Prayer for grace to repent. Chap. 3.
Page 19 A lamentation of the Soul for her weakness, and vnstaiednes in the
race of virtue. Chap. 4. Page 25 Of the shortness and misery of this present
life. A prayer for grace to renounce the world, and the vanities of the same.
Chap. 5. Page 30 An ardent desire of the Soul to be loosed from (...), and
from the trou^^^ (...) this world. Chapter. 6. (...). 37 A godly desire for a
good death. Chap. 7. Page 44 A meditation of one dead unto the world, yet alive
in Christ. Chapter. 8. Page 51 A desire of the Soul, that no earthly creature
may carry her away unto vanity. Chap 9. Page 59. A comparison between
earthly, and heavenly ioies; with a prayer for grace to contemn this
transitory world. Chap. 10. Page 63 That all comfort, and pleasures are in God
A prayer that all people may glorify the Lord. The blessed state of good men.
That we are to be ready against the coming of our Savior Christ. Chap. 11.
Page 71 The desire of the Soul after God. The properties of God by the sundry
titles ascribed unto him. None comes unto God, unless God draws him. Chap.
12. Page 80 How, and when the Soul and God are united together. The misery
where God is not present. Chap. 13. Page 92 A lamentation of the Soul for the
want of grace. Chapter. 14. Page 101 Touching the fruit of freendship. The
benefits of Christ upon man. The true felicity and joy of the Soul. The
affinity between Christ, and the Soul of man. Chapter. 15. Page 107 The more
we love Christ, the more we may. Tentation and when. Happiness of the life to
come. How to bear affliction. Chapter. 16. Page 118 The majesty, and
omnipotency of God. How, and why the Lord afflicts his children. Chapter.
17. Page 133 The confidence of a true Christian. God justifies the ungodly.
Gives whatsoever good is to man. Will have no man to despeire, but that all
sinners should fly unto his mercy. Chap. 18. Page 147 The desire of a
Christian Soul, is never satisfied, till God be enioied. No comfort any whit
comparable to the spiritual joy. Chapter. 19. Page 156 A complaint of the
Soul for the want of her blessed state. What weeping pleases God. Who truly
blessed. A description of God. Chap. 20. Page 162 The delaieng of the happy is
patiently to be borne. The felicity of the life to come: with a prayer for
the same. Chap. 21. Page 171 A godly meditation, concerning the access unto
the holy of holies, even Jesus Christ, the king of angels. godly petitions
for the forgiveness of sins. Chap. 22. Page 180 A godly prayer; and
commendation of our Savior Christ. Chapter. 23. Page 187 A Prayer for comfort
unto Jesus Christ. Chap. 24. Page 194 That for God his benefits we are to
thank him. Chap. 25. Page 202
FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Yardley, and Peter Short, dwelling at the
nether end of Bredstreete, at the Sign of the Star. 1592


