Encomium Salopiae, OR THE DESCRIPTION OF THE PLEASANT SITVATION, COMmendable
Government, and Rarities, of the ancient and famous Town of SHROWESBVRY.

By EDWARD THORNS of Mclverley Gent.

Qui sibi natus, frustranatus. Et mihi, and patriae.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Meighen. 1615.

TO THE Worshipful JOHN GARDNER, and Thomas Fawkener, GentleMEN BAYLIVES OF
THE TOWN OF SHREWESBVRIE.
IT has been an ancient custom, not only with us, but also with foreign
Nations, that in the beginning of the new year, (...) gifts should pass and
be bestowed by equals unto their equals, Inferiors to their Superiors, and
sometimes by Superiors unto their Inferiors, as signs and tokens of well
wishing minds, for increase of Love and Amity; which were commonly called new
Years gifts, and were of diverse kinds agreeable to the ability and
disposition of the Giver: some, ornaments for the Body, as Ringes, Gloves,
Jewls, and such like; some, of another kind to recreate and refresh the mind,
as Epigrams, or Pamphlets. Which commendable custom continuing still in use,
least I should be taxed to be ungrateful to those unto whom I owe obedience,
or a bad obseruer of time in my self, I have presumed to present unto your
Worships (on the behalf of our renowned Lady Dame Salopia) this small
Pamphlet as a token of my great good will: being most agreeable unto my estate
and disposition. Which if you will deign to accept in good part as my poor
mite, It will encourage me to give you better satisfaction hereafter. Poor
Bancis could not serve Jupiter in silver plate, but in a wooden dish ^ since I
cannot do as I would, I hope you will accept of what I can. I know you have
gifts of greater value, but none bestowed with greater good will: and in gifts
it is not the matter, but the mind that should be respected. And yet least
you should think that it wants weight, I will add this more unto it: Which
is my hearty prayer unto the Almighty (that the government now imposed upon
you may be so discharged, as may tend principally to the glory of God, next to
the good of the Commonwealth of this worthy Town, and lastly to your own
credits and commendations in times present and ensuing. Many eyes look upon
you, and you shall be subject to many censures: but not what is spoken of you,
but what shall be done by you, will be believed. As you have well begun, God
of his mercy assist you with his Holy Spirit, that you may so persevere to the
end. And so I end with my pen, but not with my love to you; Bentstone this
first of January, 1615.

Your loving friend to, be commanded, Edward Thorns.

In amorem Authoris and opusculi.
A Friend to flatter with a clawing rhyme,
Or foe to slander with a venomd tongue,
Argues the foul contagion of our time,
For they from hence may find the greatest wrong:
These two extremes, I pluck up in the root;
For at this work, no such like bolts i will shoot.
First, for this Author, as a friend I deem him,
His conversation not to me untried:
The more for this I never will estee me him,
But that his work the censure will abide
Of good and bad: for in his verse I find,
Besides invention, honesty of mind.
For if a stranger bred in foreign soil,
With judgments eye should this discourse suruay,
He would award him guerdon for his toil,
That could in such fit terms your fame display,
Not led with passion, nor with fond desire,
But with bare truth he does your state admire.
The Magistrate for civil government,
The grave divine for virtuous life approved,
The toyling tradesman to his profit bent,
Through his industrious quill he makes beloved,
Then bruise not virtue in her fairest flower,
For it will live when time does all devour.
JOHANNES SMITH
Norfolciensis.
In amorem Authoris and opusculi.
WHo so shall read thy verse and not co^mendit,
He understands it not: If he disprayse it,
He is an Ass, his shallowness bewrayes it.
And as for fools; I Will swear you never pend it.
For there appears in all and every part,
Learning, invention, judgment, wit and art.
Let self-conceited envious Critics kick
Against the Thorn, perhaps they may be taught,
Phlebotomizing often times is naught,
If so the season be not fit for it:
But howsoever such base Mushromes deem them,
Sound and true judgments ever shall esteem them.
Thomas Smith
Norfolciensis.
Rogerus Thorns generosus Salopiensis, in amorem Authoris.
Here Is one example that no foreign dare,
Like man, like gift with Salopine compare,
He is unkind ungratefully that scorns,
Such winter blossoms yielded here by Thorns.
My love unto the work and town is such,
Compels me write so little, think so much.
Johannes Stafford Ar. Leceistrensis, in laudem Authoris.
I (Though a stranger of Lecestrum breed)
Thy censure and thy judgment do approve:
For Polus is a worthy dame indeed.
Thy commendation comes from truth and love:
I know not whether I may more commend
That noble Dame, or this that thou have pend.
Richardus Mountgomery generosus Salopiensis, in laudem Authoris.
THe Nightingale delights her self,
Upon the Thorns to rest,
Where she tunes forth melodious notes,
To cheer the hearers breast.
The Thornie branch, the fragrant Rose
Puts forth in pleasant spring,
And did unite two houses great,
From whence discends our King.
And Thorns unto our worthy town,
Does yield deserved fame:
Then love Ned Thorns, Salopians all:
For he deserves the same.
His work and him I must commend,
And would, if I were able,
In golden letters paint his praise,
And set them in a Table.
The Author to his Pamphlet.
Pass, Pamphlet, like a Pilgrim poor,
To the Salopians kind:
The time has been, that for my sake,
Thou might some welcome find:
But time breeds change; and I am old,
And almost clean forgot:
My old acquaintance now are gone,
The younger know me not;
Time past, when I did walk, I should
Find friends in every street,
And now I may walk all the day
And scarsly one man meet.
If any after thee enquire,
Or do converse with thee,
Thou may confess from whence thou came,
And greet them well from me.
Behave thy self in Civil sort,
And cap to rich and poor;
When others press into the hall,
Do thou stand at the door.
Repair to market place and mill,
And Backhouse without stop,
And to the waterload likewise,
And to the Barbors shop.
Sometime into the Tavern go,
And trudge it up and down:
For in these places thou shall learn,
The news of all the Town.
Take pains, for by observing well
Thou shall both hear and see,
What news abroad, and also what
They speak of thee and me.
Be diligent in these affairs,
Observing word and deed:
Make haste, for I shall stand on Thorns,
To hear how thou shall speed.
ENCOMIVM SALOPIAE.
A new years gift containing a persuasion for a congratulation and
thanksgiving unto God for the good estate, health, wealth, and prosperity of
the famous and renowned lady dame SALOPIA, with a commemoration of her learned
Pastors, diligent Schoolemasters, provident Balifes, and discreet Counselors,
presented by one of her ever wel-wishing subjects, now living within the
Precinct of her laudable Government.

TO thee fair dame (O (...) I flatter not)
To thee that sitst on seemly Sabrine shore,
To thee these rude, and homely lines I wrote
That have been famous in the times of yore,
To thee I send the labors of my quill,
As Rivers run from fountains of good will.
Twice thirty years I lived have and three
Whereby my wits are almost withered now,
And yet thy Swain will sing a song to thee
If thy good nature will the same allow.
I never sucked of Helicon the sap,
Nor was my head Iuld on Mineruas lap.
And yet like Pan, I Will tune mine Oaten Pipe
And seek to set my warbling notes in frame,
I Will make a show, as though my wits were ripe
And ready still to canonize thy name,
No laurel Bay my barren brow adornes,
On thistle figs grow not, nor grapes on thorns.
In Broghwels time a famous Britain Prince,
Thou wast his seat a thousand years ago,
Then Pengwern Powis, and Salopia since,
For tract of time has changed the title so,
Though time breed change, and he be fallen asleep,
The place is known, where he his court did keep.
No marvel, though he took delight in thee,
Thou art so pleasant, fertile, fresh and fair,
There are but few that may compared be,
So sweet thy site, so healthful is thy air,
Being enterlac'd with fountains and with springs,
Besides the pleasures sweet Sabrina brings.
Whose rising from Plimhimmous lofty hill,
Where Wye and Rhydol their beginning take,
With silver streams her course continues still,
And Eastward does her way directly make,
First to Llan Idlos, then Kaer Sows runs by,
Thence to Newtowne, and so to Poole does hye.
And thence in have, as one that longed to see,
A dame so fair, and of so great renown,
She did direct her speedy course to thee,
Leaving behind the last recited town.
And when she viewed thy face she stood at gaze,
The sight whereof her senses did amaze.
And then with slower course she took her way,
From Cotton hill a neighboring mount of sand,
And shot the bridge although with much delay,
Where Leoline once Prince of Wales does stand,
Where she did make a whirlepoole, large and deep:
Intending there that night to lodge and sleep.
But sturdie streams that still on her attend,
Enforst her forwards much against her mind,
Yet as she passed, she did much commend,
Thy walls and turrets which she left behind,
And so with lingering pace against her hill,
She past Stonebridge, and came to Castle hill.
Whence looking back, with tears and heavy groans
Desirous still thy lovely face to see,
The water Nymphs did then record the moanes,
That she did make in parting so from thee:
She would have staid, but force her forwards drive
It is in vain against the stream to strive.
Being discontent with grief, and sorrow great,
As fast as Swallow she does forward slide,
Bridgenorth, and Beawdley, could her not entreat,
Nor Worster fair, nor Teuxbury to abide,
Nor Gloucester great, commended so of some,
Until that she to Bristows bay does come.
From whence she sends such tokens unto thee,
As with her love and true affection suites,
Corn, Wine and Oil, and Fish that needful be,
With great abundance of all kind of fruits,
What up or down into her storehouse come,
Out of her love she daily sends thee some.
There is a land that vale of Ambrose height,
A fertile soil, for butter, milk, and cheese,
For wood and cole that serve the turn aright,
And other things of value great as these.
And all things else that are of ought account,
From Brythin brave unto great Gilbarts mount.
The neighboring towns, and countries round about
Do bring thee daily of their chiefest store,
Which makes thee rich, and glorious in and out,
Increasing still thy plenty more and more,
Llanuylling, Poole, W(...)mme, Elsmer, Oswestree,
All these do serve as handmaids unto thee.
Thou have thy Preachers, learned, grave and wise, Thomas Higgons Doctor in
divinity.

One borne and bred, within thy Royal seat,
Who does bestow his daily exercise,
To do thee good, with care and labor great.
He does more good then many others do,
He feeds the soul, and heales the body too.
Since learning and good gifts do him adorn,
O let him for the same be duly deemed,
Though in a Country where a man is borne,
They say a Prophet is not well esteemd.
When he is gone (for all at last must die)
He will be wail'd, with many a weeping eye.
There is another lamp that gives light, Master Bright a grave and learned
Preacher.

Dispersing foggie clouds of ignorance,
He still is shining and is ever Bright,
And ready pressed the Gospel to advance,
His words, and works, to godliness incline,
His preaching pure, his exercise divine.
There is a third, borne of the British blood, Master Thomas Price (...)
zealous and religious Paestor.

Now aged almost threescore years and twelve,
He has continued long, and done much good,
And in the Vineyard still does dig and delue,
Whereat though some young wits do fume and fret,
He Is not dismayed, nor will give over yet.
From his old stem such lively branches spring, Daniel Price doctor in
divinity. Sampson Price master of Arts, a worthy professor.

As flourish like the Palm on water side,
Which to thy people daily comfort bring,
Bestowing of their talents far and wide,
The tree and branches still remain in Price,
Long may they live, to beat down sin and vice.
All these as they do teach, so do they hue,
Which to their Doctrine brings no credit small:
For why? the life, that good example gives,
Yeeldes great content unto the hearers all,
The praise of them, with every man is rife,
That do confirm their doctrine with their life.
Thou have free Schools, and Masters of the same, Master (...) Meighen.

As Nurseries of youthful tender plants,
Where learned Meighen, chief for place and fame,
Bestows his days wherein no labor wants,
They all do spend their time and wast their health,
To make fit members for a Common wealth.
Now give me leave a little to relate,
A matter that should yield thee much content,
How happy thou art in the Magistrate,
That rules thy state in civil government.
This is the thing, that does thy glory raise,
For want whereof, a Common wealth decays.
Lysurgus-like erst Lacedemons stay,
Who made good laws his subjects to combine,
Which being good, they willingly obey,
With one consent, and none thereat repine,
By those good laws which he so well ordaind,
Virtue was raised, and ougly vice restraind.
So do thy Rulers labor with effect,
To cherish virtue, and to punish vice,
No day, no time, no season they neglect,
To do the same by counsel and advise,
The fruits whereof are found with good success,
When due obedience makes up the mess.
The ground was laid by such as went before,
Continued well by such as did fucced,
Now put in practice daily more and more,
By those whose travel have thy bliss decreed,
Last year a Hunter, and a Gardner gainful,
This year a Gardner, and a Falckner painful.
The Hunter did his time so well employ,
In working for thy safety and thy health,
The Bore, the Fox, the Woolfe he did destroy,
As enemies unto thy Commonwealth,
He stroke the Bear and Catterpillar down,
And did his best to chase them out of town.
That Gardener did manure thy garden plot,
And thereupon his labor did bestow,
His care, his toil, his rhyme he spared not,
To pluck the weeds whereby the herbs might grow
He did his best, and labored hand and foot
To pull up tare and cockle by the root.
This Gardener not unlike the fathers son,
Whose memory remains for his deeds,
Does well continue, what was well begone,
And with like diligence therein proceeds,
There is good hope, heel set and plant in prime,
And cut down Hemlock, and make much of time.
The Fawkner seeks those birds for to destroy,
That do in any sort thy state incumber,
The greedy gripes that do the same annoy,
The iangling lay, the Bitter he keeps under,
The Cormorants in ravening that delight,
The lazy Puttock, and the greedy Kite.
The sins reprou'd by Preachers of the word,
They both do join, to understand and know,
And then they cut them off with justice sword,
That by their wills again they never grow:
They do their best to punish luxury,
And drunkenness, but cannot usury.
These two (if I prognosticate aright)
Will add to that which has bin done before,
And unto those that follow give such light,
As may increase thy profit more and more,
By their good means before the year be ended;
What is amiss, I hope shall be amended.
There is one vice that is noted far and wide,
(Aye me for grief) that I must now express it,
This vice is called a Salopian pride,
And I do fear they never can suppress it:
This vice does soar so high, it is past cure,
They cannot make it stoop unto the lure.
It has four daughters worthy such a mother,
Hatred, and malice, Envy and Disdain,
The one of these could never love the other,
Whereby their nature is discovered plain,
There whole delight consists in doing evil,
Much like unto their Grandfather the Devil.
O that they might be chased hence away,
So might thy subjects bin at rest and peace.
O that I might but live to see that day,
So Charity and Concord would increase,
These furies five do in thy Palace dwell,
I know the place, but yet I dare not tell.
Whiles here they stay, they will endeavor still,
To foster strife, and factions to maintain,
If they prevail herein, and have their will,
Thy Preachers and thy Rulers work in vain.
For this disease to find a salve in season,
(In my opinion) passes humane reason.
Then from the hope of humane help decline,
And pray to God to keep these furies under,
And also by his might and power divine
In his good time to break their bonds in sunder,
He can and may for thy utility,
Depressing Pride exalt Humility.
And then shall Love put Hatred unto flight,
And Charity shall Envy chase away,
And grudge and malice then shall loose their might,
And Amity in stead of them shall stay,
And in the place of discord and disdain,
Goodwill and Concord shall the fort maintain:
Then friend with friend shall lovingly converse,
And flatterers and falsehood set aside,
And neighbor unto neighbor shall rehearse,
The happy state wherein they then abide:
And bless the time wherein such change was made,
When rich and poor live well upon their trade.
The idle sluggard then will painful prove,
The hasty person will commend forbearance,
The drunkard his affections will remove,
The greedy Glutton turn to Temperance,
He that before was covetous and greedy,
will now make have to help the poor and needy.
He that did love contention and debate,
Will then desire to live in quietness,
And is contented with his own estate
And will relieve his neighbor in distress
Thus as they vice detest, and virtue nourish,
Thou may be sure thy Co^mo^wealth will flourish.
Behold how good and pleasant eke it is, Sampson Price upon Innocents day.

For brethrtn still to live in unity,
It comprehends the joys of heavenly bliss
And pleasing much unto the Trinity,
This lesson sweet was lately taught to thee:
Out of the Psalm, one hundred thirty three.
Add zeal and true Religion unto this,
Abolish superstitious and precise,
Compel the Newters to amend their miss,
So shall thy state to happiness arise.
When these predictions thou at last shall see,
Give God the thanks that sent them unto thee.
For of our selves we nothing can demerite,
So are we taught, and so we ought to learn,
What good we have it comes from the spirit:
The good from bad we cannot well discern.
So do we read, so Scriptures do discuss,
We have no good till God does give it us.
What have we whereupon to make our brags,
Unprofitable servants every one,
Much like a sort of rotten rags,
Most vile and loathsome for to look upon.
The great compassion he on us did take,
Came from his love not for our merits sake.
When God the father after Adams fall, Master Bright upon Saint Stephens day.

These sweet and comfortable words did speak,
I Will not from man my mercy clean recall,
The woman's seed the Serpents head shall break
In praise and giving thanks upon him call,
Who as he made, so is he heir of all.
He came both poor and bare into the world, Sampson Price upon the day of the
Nativity of Christ.

Was borne in Bethelem in a stable base,
The Inn to him no lodging would afford,
His mother in a manger did him place,
The clothes but mean that Mary wrapped him in,
As he took life, so died he for our sin.
Then give him thanks and everlasting praise,
From Satan's bondage that has set thee free,
By death, from death to life he did thee raise:
A ransom great, if thou the same could see.
For all these blessings spoken of before,
Give him thy heart, he does desire no more.
The hungry Hog that eats all and some,
And underneath the Oak on Acornes feeds,
Does not look up to see from whence they come,
Nor once consider whence this food proceeds,
Be not ungrateful to that God of thine,
Lift up thy looks, show not thy self a Swine.
He all bestows, which little we regard,
He gives us health, and wealth, and liberty,
And sense, and moving, seeking no reward,
But faithful love without hypocrisy,
Of Lepers ten which he did cleanse alone,
None did return to give him thanks, but one.
If I have bin too saucy or too bold,
In giving counsel where I ought to learn,
I am contented for to be controld,
By such a Pilot as can rule the stern,
Since what I write do my affections prove,
Pardon presumption that proceeds from love.
If (...) carpe and seem to keep a stir,
He has no cause if truth be understood,
If Momus bark, I care not for the Curre,
He comes by due descent from Enuies brood:
What I have writ, is for love of thee,
More will I write if this accepted be.
Finis.

