ANTICHRIST ARRAIGNED: In a Sermon at Paul's Cross, the third Sunday after
Epiphanie.

WITH THE TRIAL OF GVIDES, On the fourth Sunday after TRINITY.

By THOMAS THOMPSON, Bachelour in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods WORD.

PHILIP. 3.2. Beware of Dogs; beware of evil workers.

HILAR. lib. contra Arianos and Aurentium. Lusit quidem ille verbis, quibus
possit fellere Electos: sed patet impietatis tantae professio.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, for RICHARD MEIGHEN, and are to be sold at
his Shop at Saint Clements Church, ouer-against Essex House, and at Westminster
Hall. 1618.

To the High, Noble and most virtuous, CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and Heir Apparent to the Crown and Monarchy of
Great BRITAIN, his Gracious LORD,
All happy increase of Grace and Glory heavenly, and earthly, from GOD the
FATHER, and from our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
MOst Gracious, and most hopefully Puissant Prince, Place may yield much
prejudice against the personal performance of any good actions, to those men's
conceits, who make custom a virtue, with the blind Pharisees, thus taunting at
NICODEMVS; John 7.52.
Art thou also of Galilee? search and look: for out of Galiee arises no
Prophet.

But such sinister thoughts God in his providence so graciously preuenteth,
that as the Sun shines in every Climate; and fruits are there found
proportionable to the measure of celestial influence shed down by the
Spheres-orbicular motions and light to the same place: so Christ is preached
every where, and pious plants are there discovered, answerable to that measure
of saving Grace, which God in his mercy, by the uniformly working motions of
his free Spirit, and light of his Truth, vouchsafes to send them, as Peter
said in his Sermon to CORNELIUS, Act. 10.34.35
Of a truth, I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons; but in every
Nation he that fears GOD, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.

My hearts true comfort is then well settled by a full assurance of right good
acceptance, in offering to your Gracious Highness, this small reward of a
poor Prophet, since the place whence it comes is privileged from prejudice,
it being your Highness own Principality of Wales.

For albeit some John Penrie against the unlearned Ministers in Wales to the
Right Honorable Lord, Henry, Earl of Pembroke, Lord President of the Marches
of Wales.
Schismatically-rash Censurers, in times past, laid an heavy aspersion of a
Galilaean barrenness upon this Country, for want of Prophets and Prophets
Children therein: yet God be thanked, their complaint was causeless, since
not to rifle up any old Rowles and Registers of the Ancient Britains, great
endeavors, and good proceedings in all holy Learning, and deep Literature, God
no sooner sent the beams of his Gospel to shine upon this Hemisphere of the
Reformed Church of Great Britain: but presently Wales was, as well as other
places of this Kingdom, comforted with the warmth of this heavenly Light,
conveyed thereinto, even through the hard storms of those Antichristian
Persecutions in former times, by the faithful Ministry of blessed Bishop
Farrar, Rawlins, White, and other at Gloucester, Worcester, etc. burnt.
Martyrs and glorious Confessors, and now continued, yea, and mightily
increased by the faithful pains of zealous Pastors, our Right Reverend
Fathers, and pious Presbyters, who John 5.35.
like shining and burning Candles, have so cleared these Coasts of the Clouds
of Popish Ignorance, that Wales is like Galilee in the days of Christ Jesus,
The Mat. 4.16.17
people which sat in darkness, seeing great light. A full proof whereof your
Graces Highness daily finds by the growth of godliness in Persons of all
sorts, by the loyal obedience of all true-hearted Subjects, and by the
constant observance of all good Orders set down most entirely, by those most
Honorable, Godly, and Prudent Sages of his Majesty's Council, within these
Marches, of whose sincere Government and Guidance of this your Highness
Principality, I must needs say as I find, the Lord the Searcher of all
hearts, knowing that I lie not, in the words of EVRIPIDES, Euripid. in Antiope
apud Tholosanum lib. (...). de Rep. cap. 1
(...): By the sentence of these men, the Cities are well inhabited, and so is
the House; also they are helpful to Warlike affairs.

For these five years together, I being called through Gods mere Providence,
by the sole care and favor of a most Worthy Sir Edward Herbert, Knight of the
Bath.
Personage for all deep Learning, and truly tried valor, to his immortal
honor, into this parcel of GODS true Vineyard, can testify with all
boldness the happy success of those true pains, which God has in his mercy
blessed to the comfort of us his poor Servants, that we labor not in vain;
John 4.36.
reaping and receiving wages, and gathering fruit unto life eternal.

The lively strength of which great encouragements has and does animate me
Gods poor Creature, to spend all spare time from the ordinary execution of my
necessary Function in preaching GODS Word upon the Lords Day, and at other fit
seasons, in writing out and publishing such of my Sermons, as are judged by my
Hearers to be most profitable, that what was lost in hearing, may by reading
be recovered, and what was well heard, might better be holden; by the Example
of the old Vid. Danaeum cap. 20. Prolegom, in M^nor. Prophetas.
Prophets and the Apostles of Christ, who preaching much, yet penned no more
then what Gods Spirit thought fit and profitable for the present, and to future
Ages. And so upon this settled resolution, which I trust in God, good men will
judge truly honest, I fastened my Studies for some time upon this Sermon,
preached long since, yet freshly desired to be published for their benefit, by
diverse godly Learned, especially, for that our Antichristian Adversaries seemed
much discontented, that their Pope should be arraigned and adjudged to be that
Great Antichrist; and themselves to be proved so plainly Antichristian, even
open Rebels to Christ and Christian Princes, whereas (as they think) in the
Theorique part, Andreas Eudaemon has answered our objections, and for the
practique, their loyalty is approved in the sight of GOD and Man.

Indeed this Argument is the very root of all the differences between them
and us, upon which, after so many Great Learned Men, I do not presume to
deliver more then has been said, but only to refresh the Memories of the
Learned, with a new Method of old matters; both replying upon Eudaemon, where
he seems to press, and explayning the misery of our enslaued Countrymen
under the Pope.

Al which I most humbly present to your Highness, as to whom the execution of
most things here mentioned may chiefly belong, for the rooting out of
Antichrist, and utter extirpation of the Romish Babylon; since what God has
begun by the Gracious hand of our most Learned, Wise, Godly, and Puissant
Sovereign for the detection of that Man of Sin, Your Graces Highness in
Hereditarie imitation may finish in due time, to the Glory of God, in
maintenance of Truth, and your own eternal Honor, by settling Gods people in
this happy, healthful, and orderly peace. The God of Power and Grace so bless
your Excellencies Highness with all the rich Endowments of his holy Spirit, that
with the full increase of all true Honor, your Grace may pass many many good
days here on Earth, in all Peace and Godliness, with the sealed assurance of
endless Happiness, in the heavenly Jerusalem, with the general Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Your Highness most humbly

TO ALL THAT HATE ANTICHRIST, Light in saving knowledge, and perseverance in
holiness through JESUS CHRIST.
GOod Christian Reader, I must be bold to advertise thee concerning some
passages in this tripled Treatise, wherein thou shall find three maine points of
Theology, handled as plainly and as fully as I could. The first part is,
define Saeculi: of the end of the World: an Argument apt for the Atheists to
muse of, both in the Doctrine, informing their mischieuously misse-led
understandings, and in the uses reforming their manners. The second part of
Antichrist, whom I prove to be the Pope, both by artificial demonstration,
and by testimony of Ancient Fathers, and of later Writers, digested into a
pannelled Jury to cast the Pope: What either Sanders, Bellarmine, Pererius,
Viegas, or Eudaemon have objected in any point of the Controversy, I have to
my power satisfied, using the help of our own good Writers, as Bishop Jewel,
Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Abbats, Doctor Willet, Doctor Sharp, Tilenus, Peter
du Moulin, Gabriel Powel, and Master Brightman with other more ancient strong
men of our Israel, that I might, as near as possibly I could, abridge their
large Volumes into a Manuell, Only I wish thee well to mark the uses of this
point; the former of which will notify the misery of our English Papists,
together with the Villainies of the Traiterous Jesuits, and Seminary Priests:
the latter will inform thee of what course God in his most Gracious Providence
took, to bring in this happy Reformation of Religion, professed in this
Church of Great Britain, together with an answer to all those exceptions,
which Papists have used to scandalize our Profession of truth. The last is of
Heretics, going before and following after Antichrist, briefly discovered in
the form of a short motion to Princes, Prelates, and other Peers for an order
against them. The second part is the largest, and so gives title to the whole
Discourse, which I seriously commend to the blessing of God, for the help of
his Elect in knowledge and holiness, and withal prefixe for their readier
finding out of the particulars, this Catalogue or Table of the several
Contents expressed in every Section, thus: The first part.
. I.
1. WHy JAMES and JOHN were called Boanerges: Sons of Thunder. 2. The
distinction of Saint JOHN his Writings. 3. Why the first Epistle was called
Catholica.
. II.
1. The scope and sum of what the Text yields obseruable.
. III.
1. The Division of the whole Text into several parts.
. IIII.
1. Why Time is called (...), an hour? 2. What is meant by the last hour. 3.
The six periods of the worlds age. 4. PAVL and JOHN reconciled about the last
day.
. V.
1. There shall be an end of time. 2. How the world is said to be established
for ever. 3. The world not of long continuance. 4. The change of the world,
according to two opinions. 5. The manner of this change is an hidden secret.
. VI.
1. The end is even at hand. 2. The signs of the last end set down in
Scripture. 3. The complement of those signs in these latter days.
. VII.
1. The first use of this Doctrine is for sobriety in opinion and life. 2. Why
the time of the last day is not revealed? 3. Man's presumption therein. 4. ELIAS
and NAPIER justly corrected.
. VIII.
1. Sobriety of life. 2. We must not make haste to be rich. 3. Rich men's
misery. 4. We must be sober in expenses. 5. The absurd change in living by
Gentlemen, and Citizens.
. IX.
1. The Second use is to watch and pray. 2. What watching is. 3. Good Rulers
are to watch over their Charge.
The second part.
. X.
1. THe Prophecies of Antichrist set down in Scripture. 2. The causes of these
Prophecies. 3. The order and method of this discourse.
. XI.
1. The litteral name of Antichrist, (...). 2. BELLARMINE and EVDAEMON confuted.
. XII.
1. The mystical name of Antichrist in these letters (...), 666. 2. The sundry
applications of these letters to diverse names. 3. The absurd dealing of Papists
in this name. 4. The word (...) what. 5. The nominall description of Antichrist.
. XIII.
1. The efficient cause of Antichrist, principal and less principal.
. XIIII.
1. The material cause of Antichrist. 2. Whether Antichrist be one only
person, or a succession of Apostates? 3. Our reasons proving a succession in
Antichrist. 4. The Rhemists make for us. 5. EVDAEMONS exception fully answered.
6. IRENAEVS and AUGUSTINE are on our side. 7. MALDONATVS also for us in the
meaning of IOH. 5.43. 8. Antichrist no Jew, nor of the Tribe of DAN.
. XV.
1. The former cause of Antichrist. 2. Antichrist, an Heretic, denies all the
Creed. 3. Antichrist most wickedly breaks all the commandments. 4.
Antichrist his character couetously imprinted. 5. Antichrist his false
miracles. 6. Antichrist his cruel wars against the Saints. 7. Antichrist in
the midst of the Church visibly militant. 8. Antichrist his residencie in the
City of Rome. 9. Antichrist his beginning and growth till six hundred years
after Christ. 10. Antichrist must continue in some sort till Christ's coming.
. XVI.
1. The final cause of Antichrist.
. XVII.
1. The Real and causall definition of Antichrist.
. XVIII.
1. MAHOMET is not Antichrist, by BELLARMINE, proved against IODOCVS
CLICHTHOVEVS.
. XIX.
1. The Pope of Rome is that Great Antichrist before defined. 2. The litterall
name (...) agreeing to the Pope. 3. The mystical name [(...).] fitly applied
to VITALIANVS, etc. 4. The course of edifying the Church was changed by
VITALIANVS his bringing in of the Latin service.
. XX.
1. The Pope is all one with that Antichrist in the cause efficient. 2.
CONSTANTINE his Donation forged.
. XXI.
1. The Pope agrees with Antichrist in the material cause. 2. The hollow
Chair, and Pope JOAN proved. 3. How the succession of Popes is to be taken.
. XXII.
1. The Pope is that Antichrist in the formal cause. 2. The Pope is an
Heretic denying the Creed. 3. Instances of his Heresies delivered for
doctrines e Cathedra, against every Article of the Creed, truly proved from
the testimony of their own Writers, and rightly reproved by the holy
Scriptures, and ancient Fathers in a large discourse, worthy the perusing by
all lovers of true Faith. 4. The Pope as Pope, is a most wicked transgressour
of every Commandment in the Decalogue. 5. Special records of the Popes vile
acts and deeds against the whole Law of God, gathered out of the Popes own
Historians, Schoolmen, Canonists, Casuists, and Ceremonials. 6. The Pope
imprinteth the Character of Antichrist upon Princes and Priests, and all other
sorts of people. 7. The Pope does coozen the world by lying wonders. 8.
SANDERS, BELLARMINE, and other Papists answered, touching the Miracles of
Antichrist. 9. The Popes cruelty against Gods Saints. 10. Rome Antichristian,
the Popes place of Residence. 11. The Pope, and that Great Antichrist, have all
one beginning, growth, continuance, and ending. 12. When Rome shall fall in all
likelihood.
. XXIII.
1. The end why God so long does suffer the Pope.
. XXIIII.
1. The form of the Demonstration gathered from all beforesaid, and proouing
the Pope to be that Great Antichrist.
. XXV.
1. The first exception against the Demonstration fully answered. 2. How is the
Gospel preached throughout the world? 3. How the Roman Empire is said to
stand at this day?
. XXVI.
1. The second exception from the judgment of some Protestants, denying the
Pope to be that Antichrist, fully and truly satisfied. 2. How we are to take
the words of the ancient Fathers in this question of the Great Antichrist.
. XXVII.
1. The testimonies of the Fathers, proving the Pope to be that Great
Antichrist two ways: 2. First, by way of Prophecy, declaring two maine
points: First, that Antichrist shall sit at Rome upon the ruins of the Roman
Empire: so Tertullian, Cyrill, Hierosolym. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and
Rodolphus Fluuiacensis, alleged by Coccius.

Secondly, that Rome is Babylon, the proper seat of Antichrist, and to be
destroyed before the end of the World: so Tertullian, Hierome, and Lactantius.

3. Secondly, by way of open verdict and proclamation; where the Pope is put
upon a Jury of twelve good men and true, whereof four are, 1. Kings and
Emperors, 2. Archbishops and Bishops, 3. Abbots and Monks;
together with a supply of a December Tales, if any of the former should be
challenged. 4. The sufficiency of these testimonies warranted, First, by three
specialties, the Pride, the Schisms, and the filthy lives of Popes. Secondly,
by the judgment of the Popes own Dearlings, (viz.) BELLARMINE and BARONIVS.

. XXVIII.
1. The first use of this doctrine, is to bewail the misery of our English
Papists. 2. The manner of their bondage to the Sea of Rome. 3. The dealing of
Jesuits and Seminary Priests. 4. The outrageous Conspiracies against our most
Gracious Sovereigns, the Kings and Queens of England. 5. No Papist, as a
Papist, is a true Christian. 6. No Papist, as a Papist, is a good Subject. 7.
The suspicious courses of Papists in taking the Oath of Alleagiance most
plainly detected.
. XXIX.
1. The second use of the doctrine, is to rejoice heartily for our gracious
deliverance from Antichrist. 2. The double means by which God delivered this
Monarchy of Great Britain from the tyranny of Antichrist. 3. The liberty
we enjoy now under our most Gracious Sovereign Lord, King JAMES. 4. The
Popish objections made to scandalize our Profession of the Reformed Religion,
fully satisfied by declaring three things: First, how Temporal commodities are
dear or cheap. Secondly, Upon what grounds our departure from them stands.
Thirdly, in what case our forefathers were, living in and under Popery.
5. An Exhortation to our Judges, for the strict execution of our Laws and
Statutes made against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Popish Recusants.
The third part.
. XXX.
1. THe diverse acceptions of the word [Antichrist.] 2. There must always be
Heretics in the Church militant, till the coming of Christ to Judgment.
. XXXI.
1. The use of the former doctrine is justly to reprove the Separatist, the
Brownists, whose grounds and reasons are fully examined, and their wickedness
discovered.
. XXXII.
1. All Heresies have a necessary dependence upon that Great Antichrist. 2.
What Heresy is. 3. The Heretical forerunners of Antichrist. 4. The relics
of Antichristian Heresies maintained by some private spirits in the bosom of
the Reformed Churches.
. XXXIII.
1. The use of this doctrine is threefold: to direct First, the Ministry, to
fight by the Word against Antichrist and Heresies. Secondly, the Magistracy,
to cut off Heretics by the Temporal Sword. Thirdly, the People of God, not to
murmr at the Execution of Justice, but rather, First, to praise God for His
Majesty's great zeal in defending Gods Truth against all Heretics: Secondly,
to pray God for the strengthening of His Majesty's heart and arm against them:
Thirdly, to avoid them, and flee from them that be Enemies to our Christian
peace.
2. The conclusion of all in a brief recapitulation, with a short Prayer for
the Coming of Christ.


And now, my dear Brethren, take in good part, my poor endeavors wholly bent
and employed for the good of his Elect in the Service of his Church, wherein I
labor as a weak and unworthy Minister of Gods Word. It may be, some will
require an Index Alphabeticall of the Contents. But that Table should be framed
by the Leaves, and Page: and I am far from the Press. Only therefore mark
the method, and your memories will be an Index sufficient for finding out any
matter in this Book contained. Read all before you for your better
understanding. Trust me not, before you try me in the pith of my proofs, not
taken up at the second hand, but sought, and brought out of the Storehouse it
self of holy Wisdom, to wit, the Canonical Scriptures, the Ancient Fathers,
and other good Authors of humane Learning. God open their eyes, and touch
their hearts that are otherwise minded. God increase and strengthen our faith,
who are right minded, that in the peace of Jerusalem our hearts may be
comforted with a full assurance of everlasting happiness in Jesus Christ. AMEN.

From my Study in Mountgomerie in Wales, this sixth day of January, being the
Feast of EPIPHANY: Anno Dom. 1618.

Your Brother in the Lord, Thomas Thompson.

ANTICHRIST ARRAIGNED.
THE TEXT IS, 1. John 2. 18. Babes, it is the last time; and as ye have heard,
that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we
know, that it is the last time.

19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of
us, they would have continued with us. But this comes to pass, that it might
appear, that they are not all of us.

20. But ye have an ointment from him, that is holy, and ye have known all
things.


JAMES, and John the sons of Zebedee (most Honorable, right Worshipful, and
dearly beloved men, fathers, and brethren in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ) are called by our Savior Mark 3.17.
Boanarges, sons of thunder, because of the powerful voice of their
preaching, says Nazianz. 19.
Gregory Nazianzene. For James was loud in Herod's ears, who slew him Act.
12.2.
for the Jews sake: and John was powerful, as an high sounding thunder,
according to the Aristot. lib. 2. Meteor. ca. 9. and in illu^ Vicomercatum, and
Senec. lib. 2. Natural. Quaest. cap. 27.
Naturalists their distinction of thunder, in nube, and ex nube: in the cloud,
and from the cloud: In the black cloud of his flesh, wherein whiles he lived,
he kept the Church pure by his effectual Preaching from heretical contagion,
if we may well believe the report of Hegesippus as Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 4.
histor. Ecclesiast. cap. 8.
has recorded it: From the bright cloud of his doctrine, when after his death
he now thundreth in his writings, first concerning things past, in that his
Gospel, which where other Evangelists speak most of Christ's body, Calvin. in
pro^m. commentar. in Joh.
most especially delivers the history of his soul, and not of his soul
only to show Christ truly man, but of his Godhead also to prove him very
God: Secondly, of things to come, in his Book of Revelation, Danaeus in
proleg. in Minor. prophetas, ca. 10
which is the last prophecy of the new Testament, to which Reave. 22.10.
whosoever adds, God will add unto him the plagues written therein: Thirdly, of
things present, to wit; Faith, and Love: Faith of sound doctrine, and Love of
good works, in these his three Epistles; in the first of which called by all
Divines, Catholica, because it is not dedicated or directed to any one man,
Church, or Country in particular (for Vid. Posside. in Indic. Oper. D.
Augustini.
it is not probable, that he sent it to the Parthians, of whom he makes no
mention at all) these points of Doctrine are handled so promiscuously, as that
yet they are attempered, and fitly framed to the strength and capacity of
every true faithful one, be he old, young, or babish: old by experience, who
Heb. 5.14.
through long custom, has his wits exercised to discern both good and evil:
Young in his best strength, that Ephesians. 4.26.
he might no way give place to the devil; but resist Iam. 4.7.
him rather, that he may flee from him: Babish as 1. Pet. 2.2.
newborn, desiring the sincere milk of the word, to grow thereby. For as in
the Plutarch. in Lacon. Institut.
Spartan festiuals, all the people rejoiced, but every man in a several
company with a several tune, as old men said they have been strong, young men
sung that they are strong; and children, that they may be strong: so although
the faithful performance of these duties belong unto all true Christians
alike; yet John in his heavenly wisdom directs diverse duties to diverse
ages, as loving experience to ancient Fathers: lively strength to flourishing
young men: and saving knowledge to tender babes; by which as old and young men
take heed of the world, which is contrary to the Father: so these babes
especially are careful to beware of all wicked heretics, destroyers of faith.

. II. For this is the end, The end and sum of all.
and purpose of these words, only to forewarne, that as old men with young men
flee these worldly evils, pride, covetousness, and luxury: so must these
babes look with a circumspect eye unto all false seducers in these dangerous
times. Because (that you may now see at once the sum of all to be said out of
these words) now it is the last age of the world, wherein according to the
ancient prophecies of the coming of Antichrist, there are now risen many
forerunners of that great one, who since they are reprobates, are become
Apostates, that may be discerned, what they are by us, who are endued with the
grace of Gods holy Spirit from Jesus Christ, to know all things necessary for
our salvation in this behalf.

The Division of the whole Text.
. III. Hence therefore you see two things to be observed out of this Scripture,
a temptation, and an issue; a danger, and a deliverance. The danger is twofold,
first, in respect of time [ Babes, it is the last time:] Secondly, in respect
of wicked teachers living in that time, who are here described certainly to
come for an evident manifestation of this last time. First, by the greatness
of the head [ and as ye heard that Antichrist shall come:] Secondly, by the
multitude of the members [ even now are there many Antichrists, by which we
know it is the last time,] yet the deliverance is greater then the danger, 1.
Cor. 10.13.
our faithful God not suffering us to be tempted above that which we are able
to bear, but giving the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to
bear it. For our deliverance is described procureable two manner of ways:
First, in respect of the seducers themselves, who are noted to be known:
Secondly, in respect of the faithful endued with grace for to know them. The
mark of these Antichrists is their Apostasy, disciphered out two ways, first
by the cause, and secondly by the end. The cause is formal, or as Zaharell. de
medijs demonstr. cap. 5. and Keckerm. lib. 1. system. Logic. cap. 15.
Logicians call it, efficiens per emanationem, to wit, Reprobation, necessarily
concluding these men to be Apostates, in this demonstration a causa propter
quam; whose proposition is [ if they had been of us, they would have continued
with us.] Assumption, [ But they were not all of us.] Conclusion is, and
therefore [ they went out from us.] For secondly the end is [ that it might
appear, that they were not all of us.] And therefore that by this mark we
might know these Antichrists, our God does indue us with the grace of his
Spirit, here lively discribed, first by this fountain [ ye have from that holy
one:] secondly by the flood [an unction, or an ointment,] and thirdly from the
Sea, or rather from the end, for which this flood flows from this fountain [
and know all things.] Every word has his weight, and every weight has worth,
in the danger, for a corrosiue; in the deliverance, for a comfort; in both, for
sound doctrine, and true instruction, which although I cannot but rudely
deliver, being not accustomed to so honorable a Celebritie: yet heartily in the
Lord and most humbly I beseech you to hear me patiently, since I will endeavor
by the grace of GOD preventing, and assisting me in this present business, to
speak to the purpose, and prove what I speak, concluding thus with Solomon;
Prou. 8.33.34
hear instruction, and be ye wise; and refuse it not. Blessed is the man,
that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, and giving attendance at the
posts of my doors. For he that finds me, finds life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord. And so now to the first danger in respect of the time.

The first part of the end of the WORLD.
. IIII. BAbes, it is the last time.] Time here in the original is called
(...). Vid. Illyri^ in voc. Hoca.
an hour both for opportunity, since considering Romans 13.12.
the season, it is now time we should arise from sleep; For 2 Cor. 6.2.
behold now the accepted time; behold now the day of salvation: and for
brevity, for which cause it is here called the last hour, as by Saint Paul in
another 1. Cor. 10.11 Vid. Za^ch. Miscellan. lib. 2. lect. de fine saeculi.
place it is termed the end of the World in a double respect, first of
quality, because all things necessary for man's redemption are consummate in
Christ, fulfilling the Law, and abolishing the ceremonies with the types, and
shadows, that at length he might bring in the truth of the Gospel as he said;
Luke 16.16.
The Law and the Prophets endured until JOHN, and since that time the kingdom
of God is preached, and every man presses unto it: Videntur enim minora
compleri, cum maiora succedant, says Ambros. lib. 8 Commen. in Luc.
Ambrose upon that place, lesser things seem to be fulfilled, when greater
things succeed them: secondly of quantity, because, as says Saint Peter, 1.
Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things is at hand, and as Saint Paul said Philip. 4.5.
also, the Lord is at hand; first in his Godhead, Iere. 22.23.24.
filling heaven and earth, a God near hand, and a God far off: secondly in
his Spirit, which 1. Ioh 3.18.
he has given us, that he might abide in us, and thirdly in his coming, For
behold, says he, Reave. 22.14.
I come shortly: Shortly to us, who are daily to expect him, since Heb. 10.
yet a little while, and he that comes, will come, and will not tarry:
Shortly in himself, who Mat. 24.22.
will hasten these evil days, for his elects sake: and shortly to the world
it self, which is now in the old age. For, as we may read this often in Saint
Augustine, Vid. Praecipu^ lib. 83. quaest. cap. 50..
the world is as a man, whose ages are six; Infancy, Childhood, Youth,
Strength, Gravity, and Old age: the first age of the world is from Adam to
Noah; the second, which is Childhood, from Noah to Abraham: the third, which is
Youth, from Abraham to David; the fourth is strength, from David unto the
Captivity of Babylon: the fifth, which is Gravity, from that Captivity to
the coming of Christ: the sixth, from the first coming of Christ in the
flesh, unto the end of the world, is called Old age, ob incertitudinem, because
of uncertainty in the final approach. For as Old age in a man beginning at
his sixtieth year, may be longer or shorter, but always uncertain in the
last period when it shall come: So the last age of the world may be either
further protracted, or presently contracted into fewer days, according to the
only good pleasure of God, but always to us both unknown, and not found,
quibus generationibus computetur (says the same Father) by how many
generations it may be accounted. So that here may be made a true reconciliation
of some opposition in appearance only, between the two blessed Apostles,
Saint Paul, and Saint John; For S. 2. These. 2.3.
Paul denies the day of the Lord to be at hand in his days, Bucanus Instit.
loc. 38.
quoad vltimum temporis, according to the last instant of time, before which
approaching many things were to be done; Whereas Saint John says here, that
the last time is come, quoad vltimum tempus, according to the last time, so
here said to be last, both in respect of Ages past, and because there shall
be no time after this, unto which succeeds that heavenly Heb. 3.9.
Sabbath, which remains for Gods children. Wherefore since no time follows
after this time, which John calls the last time, hence arises a double
doctrine, and from them a double use of good instruction: The first doctrine is
this, The doctrine of the first part
that there shall be

Proofs of the former doctrine.
. V. Concerning the former, it is an Assumpsit amongst all sorts of men, both
Christians, and Heathens: Christians, who believe this both by Scripture and
Fathers: Scripture both of the old Testament prophesying; that they (that is,
the heavens, and the earth) Psalm. 102.26.
shall perish, where God endures for ever; and of the New Testament preaching,
2. Cor. 4.17.18.
that the things, which are seen, are temporal, where the things, which are
not seen, are eternal. Fathers, both Greeks, as Clem. lib. 5. Stromat.
Clemens Alexandrinus, with Eusebius. lib. 11. de ^rap. Euang. cap 17.
Eusebius Caesariensis, and Latins, as Lactant. lib. 7 Iustit. per totum.
Lactantius, and Saint August. li. 20. de Ciuit. ^. cap. 4 5.
Augustine. For all these together most certainly demonstrate, that the world
shall end, not only from Scripture, to inform true Christians; but also from
Philosophers, to reform Heathens, who are compelled to confess the worlds end
by a double strength of arguing, first from Authority, and secondly from
Reason. For the Authority, which binds them, is a double cord of true
consent, plainly to be found in their Poets and Philosophers: Their Poets,
such as their Sybille in Lactant. lib 7. Institut. cap. 23.
Lactantius, who reports this from them: (...); That is, There shall be a
confusion of the earth, and mortal men: Their Philosophers, as Pythagoras,
Stoickes, Epicures, Academickes; yea and Peripatetickes, if we will believe
the faithful report either of the fore alleged Fathers, or of Plutarch
himself, who says, Plutarch. li. 2. de plac. Phylosop. cap. 4.
that all Philosophers teach the end of the World: yea, and the Peripateticks
confess the end of the sublunary World: that is, of those bodies that are
under the Moon. For reason euinceth it, first, from their own grounds, and
secondly, from experience. Their own grounds, who deny Arist lib. 3. Physic.
cap. 5.
Infinitum actu, that is, any thing to be actually infinite; and therefore
must necessarily renounce that their Arist. lib. 1. de Caes. cap. 9.
opinion of the Eternity of the world, since if there be given an eternal
addition of years to the infinite years past, then must Valesius ca. 1. de
sacr. Philosq.
it needs follow, both that there is Infinitum actu, an infinite thing in act,
in respect of time past; and that by continual addition of years there is
something more then that, which is infinite against their own best Arist. lib.
3. Phys. cap. 6. and Beda in axiomat. tit. s.
axioms and rules: Infinito nihil est maius; Nothing is more then an Infinite
thing: Extra infinitum semper est aliquid; There is always something in the
world without that, which is infinite. The modern experience, whereupon both
Varro A. Gellius lib. 3. Noct. Atticar. cap. 10.
in Gellius, and Before lib. 7. natu. h^st. cap. 16
Pliny do gather a sensible corruption of the Inferior world, is the waxing
old, and continual decreement of all things in this world, which will at
length come to nothing hereby, since other things and men grow less and less,
because men above all other things grow worse and worse. Horat. lib. 3. Od. 6.
Aetas parentum peior auis tulit
Nos nequiores mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem:
That is, Our Fathers age is worse, then were our Gransiers days:
Who brought us forth, that others bring forth worse and worse always.
I know, The objection of Atheists against the former truth.
that this seems to be a very Paradoxe unto all Atheists, who except against
us, First, out of Scripture, Psalm. 93.1.
that the World shall be established, that it cannot be moved, and that
Whatsoever Eccles. 3.14.
God shall do, shall be for ever: Secondly, from the long continuance of the
World in the same estate still one from the beginning, and therefore which
cannot so quickly be changed as we pretend: Thirdly, from the uncertain
manner of change, which cannot but be known, Our Answer.
if ever it shall be. But in truth, our answer is as easily made to every one
of these points, by Reason, and Grace, as they seem ready only from the
corruption of nature to urge them. For first, the Scriptures are mainly wrested
from their proper purpose, since the Holy Ghost there speaks of Gods Decree
only, which in despite of man shall stand vnmoouable, be it of whatsoever
subject it may be, whether of the World, or the things of the World, according
to that of the Lord by the Prophet: Esaias. 46.10.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do, whatsoever I will. Secondly, that
long continuance of the World in the same estate is only supposed, not
proved, but evidently disprooued by the Apostle Saint Peter, pronouncing
plainly against this objection, 2. Pet. 3.6.7.
that the World that then was perished, ouer-flowed with water, but the
Heavens, and the Earth, which are now, are kept by the same Word in store, and
are reserved unto fire, against the Day of Condemnation, and of the destruction
of ungodly men. For Noah's Flood infringeth the opinion concerning the former
continuance of this worldly Fabrique: and the divine supportation of the World
by the Word, shows the World to be but a Nowne Adjective, which cannot stand
by it self, but must needs have the whole dependence thereof from God only,
who as he will does change it, seeing Esaias 40.22.
that he sits on the Circle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are
but as Grasshoppers. And therefore now to speak to the third concerning the
manner how the World shall be changed, What need we use such curiosity? They
who are evil, shall be cast into a far lower place; For the Psalm. 9.17.
wicked shall be thrown into Hell, and all the people that forget God: They
that are good, must ascend up higher, since even now Christ Jesus is gone Ioh.
14.3.4.
to prepare a place for us, Whence he will come again, and receive us to
himself, that where he is, there may we be also, as the Apostle also said,
1. These. 4.17.
that we must be caught up into the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and
so to be ever with the Lord. And yet to give them some further satisfaction
unto this demand, I find amongst the learned Fathers of the Church two famous
Opinions, and both very probable concerning the manner of the Worlds change:
The former is expressed in these two conclusions, the first, that this change
is not a mere corruption of substance into nothing, but a renewing of
qualities into a better estate, as PHILO IVDAEVS said, Philo. lib. de
incorruptibilitate mundi.
the corruption at the end is a change unto a better estate: and as Eusebius. in
Esaiam.
Eusebius calls it only a (...)
renewing; both these well agreeing with the Apostles words; Romans 8.21.
The creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God: the second, that this purging
renouation of this visible World shall be made by fire. For besides the
Scriptures affirming, that Psalm. 50.3.
a consuming fire shall go before our God; and that 2. Pet. 3.10.
the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with
heat, and the Earth with the works, that are therein shall be burnt up, it is
the judgment of many good Christian Fathers and Doctors, as Chrysostom. hom. 14
in Epist. ad Romans
Chrysostom, Ambros. lib. 1. Hexam. cap. 6.
Ambrose, Aquia. in lib. 4. Lomb. li^. 48.
Aquinas and Durand. in* li. 4. did. ^7.9.3.
Durand^s, yea and of some Heathens, as appears by these words of the Poet
Lucan, Lucan. lib. 3. Phar^al.
Communic mundo superest rogus, ossibus astra
Mixturus.
that is to say, For World remains a common pile;
The stars with men's bones to desile.
But now the latter opinion, which is of our most judicious latter Divines Dan.
Tilenus. p. 2. Syntagm. loco. 67. These. 32.
admitting the second conclusion of the former opinion (to wit, that the World
shall be changed by fire)* does altogether deny the first; whiles that; it
absolutely affirms, that the Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and all the visible
Fabrique of the running heavens shall so utterly be consumed by fire into
nothing, that it shall not roman in the World to come. For so the Scripture
seems to affirm where Job says, Job. 14.12.
that man sleeps, and rises not; neither shall wake again, nor be raised
from his sleep, till the Heavens be no more: and where Esaias. 51.6.
Isaiah says, that the Heavens shall vanish away, like a smoke, and the Earth
shall wax old, like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall perish in like
manner, etc. Yea, and the proportion of faith seems plainly to demonstrate
this unto us, since first this visible World is only appointed for a lodging
unto man, quatenus est Vtator, as he now is travailing toward his Country:
and therefore what need shall he have of this World, when after the Day of
Judgment he dwells in his own Land? Secondly, Natura non amat vacuum, nec
gratia superuicaneum: Nature loves no emptiness, nor grace idleness: Mat.
22.13.
Wicked men must be cast into utter darkness Mat. 25.41.
With the Devil, and his Angels: and cannot use this World: Godly men shall
be placed in Heaven, like the Mat. 22.30.
Angels, and shall not need this World; since there in Heaven Revel. 22.5.
shall be no night, and they need no Candle, neither light of the Sun: for
the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for evermore. Therefore
if this visible World shall then be, it shall be empty, or if it be full,
then it shall be idle; and that is against nature; this against Grace.
Whereupon seeing the manner of this change is secret, and the change it self
most certain; hold we most certainly this truth for our stay, that the World
shall end; and leave we the manner thereof to be revealed by him, who will
very quickly perform it, as now it follows in the second Doctrine, which I
noted before.

. VI. That the end is even now near at hand. Proofs of the second doctrine.
For besides the plain testimony of Scripture recorded in my former exposition
of this part of my Text, the signs of the end exhibited by Christ himself,
and his holy Apostles, will evidently declare it, if we well perceive, first,
what those signs are, secondly, how in these days they are fulfilled. That we
may know them the better, what they all are, let us with our selves at our best
leisure privately recount and peruse these places written in the 24. Mat. 25.
Mat. 13. Mark. Luke 17. and 21. Cap. Romans 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Tim. 4.2. 2.
Tim. 3. and the whole Book of Saint John's Revelation. For out of all these
places, the signs of Christ's Coming are gathered to be twofold; first, the
further removed, secondly, the nearer conjoined signs. The further removed
signs beginning long before the Coming of Christ, are especially three;
First, Wars amongst Nations, as our Savior said, Mat. 24 7.
Nation shall rise against Nation; Realm against Realm; there shall be
Famine, and Pestilence, and Earthquakes in diverse places. For although there
shall be such peace amongst the Godly in the time of the Gospel, that Esaias.
7.4.
they shall break their Swords into Mattockes, and their Spears into Sythes;
Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation; neither shall they learn to
fight any more; yet the Esa. 57.20.21
wicked are like the troubled Sea, which cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire, and dirt: For there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked, since
amongst themselves they rush heads together, like mad Rams, and wild Bulls;
and toward the Faithful fulfill Christ his Prophecy, that Mat. 10.36.
a man's foes shall be they of his own Household. The second, Carnal
security, such as befell in the days of Noah, unto them of the old World,
and in the days of Lot, amongst the Inhabitants of Sodom, and Gomorrha, when
Luke 17.26.27.28.29. etc.
they did eat, they drank; they married wives, and were given in Marriage,
till the Flood came upon the one sort, and the fire from Heaven fell down upon
the other. For Prou. 16.18.
pride goes before destruction, and an hautie spirit before the fall. The
third, the Revelation of Antichrist, as my Text, and other Scriptures to be
opened hereafter will plainly prove. Now the signs, which are nearer at hand
unto the latter Day, are likewise three in number. The first, the Conversion of
the Jews, Romans 11.25.
after that the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in. The second, the terror
Reave. 6.15.16.17.
of all Tribes, and Kindreds, when the Kings of the Earth, and the great men,
and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondsman, and free man, hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the
Mountains, and say unto the Mountains, and Rocks; Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of Him, that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. For the great Day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?
The third and last, and the very next unto the final dissolution of all, is
the shaking of the visible Heavens, when as our Mat. 29.29.
Savior shows out of the Prophet Joel. 21.31.
JOEL, The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and
the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of the Heavens shall be
shaken. For God does exhibit these signs unto us in his holy Word both to show
that he shall come, and also to prepare us his Children for his coming, since
by these signs we see, how he hasteneth it according as he spoke this Parable
of the Fig Tree unto his Disciples, Luke 21.29.30.31.
Behold the Fig Tree, and all the Trees, when they now shoot forth, ye see,
and know of your own selves, that Summer is now nigh at hand: so likewise ye,
when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the Kingdom of God is
nigh at hand. The fruit, says Gregory, Gregor. Hom. 1. in Euangelia.
is the fall of the World: for this end it grows, that it might fall: for
this end it falls, that it may bud again; for this end it buddeth forth,
that whatsoever it buddeth sorth, it may consume by overthrows. For lo, the
first sign complete in bloody wars not only amongst Pagans both of old, as
Romans against the Goths, and Parthians, and of late, as Turks and Persians;
but also amongst the Christians, as Greeks, and Latins; and amongst the
Latins, as Germans, and Franks, Spaniards, and Englishmen; Protestants, and
Papists, who all fulfill that Prophecy of Dan. 9.27.
Daniel concerning the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place,
applied by our Mat. 24.15.
Savior unto this purpose. For as the Learned Vid. ^uni. lib. 1. parcello
sacr. cap. 45.
well expound it, it is nothing else, but a most depopulating and raging Army
of Infidel people in the midst of the Church, Esa. 9.21, 22
Every man eating the flesh of his own arm; EPHRAIM MANASSEH, and MANASSEH
EPHRAIM; and both these together being set against IVDAH. Secondly, concerning
carnal security, whereby men Amos 6.4.
put far from them the evil day, and approach unto the seat of iniquity;
what need we use many words? For the Gluttony amongst the Rich, and the
Drunkenness amongst the poor, and the abominable coupling of all men in
Polygamie, with those Vid. Act. and Monuments Jo. F^x page 225. Edit. vltimae.
three Daughters of King Richard, the first of that Name King of England,
Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury (which Fulco the Bishop wished the King to
marry away from his Person and Court; and which upon good experience that Great
Prince then bequested presently after this order, the first to the proud
Soldiers of Jerusalem, called Templars; the second to the Monks of the
Cistercian Order; the third to the Prelates of the Popish Church) this
matching, I say, of their souls and bodies unto these three most abominable
vices, and crying sins, shows plainly that the last Day is near at hand,
although every Deuteronomy. 19.19.
man bless himself in his heart, saying,) I shall have peace, though I walk
in the imagination of mine heart, to add Drunkenness to thirst; as if Esaias.
28.15.
they had made a covenant with death; and with hell were at an agreement. But
certainly, when 1. These. 5.3.
they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them,
as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. For Prou. 16.5.
every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the Lord, though hand
join in hand, he shall not be unpunished. Thirdly, concerning the Revelation
of Antichrist, we shall hereafter in this Discourse find him painted out in his
colors by the Spirit of God. In the mean time we may observe the neerenesse
of the last end by the complement of the fourth sign, to wit, the Conversion
and restoring of the Jewish Nation unto the faith of Christ. For, although in
the judgment of many Zegedin. loc. comm. pa. 36. and Bucan. Instit. loc. 38.
q. 15.
godly, and learned men, it is not yet known, when and how this Conversion of
the Jews shall be accomplished, because it is not revealed in the Word of God,
whether it shall be a Conversion visible or invisible; total or partial, made
all at once, or by succession: yet is this certain, that many thousand Jews,
by James his Act. 21.20.
report in the time of the Apostles believed; and Vid. Act. and Monument. page
886.
that in every age of the Church some of them have bin baptized into Christ,
and Vid. Marlar. in Romans 11.25.
that unto the end of the World, some of them shall daily be converted, that so
our Savior might fulfill in due time that his Prophecy; Ioh. 10.16.
Other sheep I have, which are not of this sold: them also must I bring: and
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd.
Neuerat eos in turba furentium, and praeuidebat eos in pace credentium, says
August. Tract. 47. in Ioh.
Saint AUGUSTINE: he knew them in the company of the madly roging, and foresaw
them in the peace of the godly believing. For howsoever their modern
Synagogues be most Satanicall, and deadly Adversaries to the truth of
Christianity, as appears by their doctrine and customs discovered by the
learned man Buxtorf. in Synagog. Iudaic.
Buxtorfius: yet some may be true Israelites, and in their time also be truly
converted unto the faith of Christ; since (as Petrus Galat. lib. 1. de arcanis
sid. Cathol. cap. 4.
Galatinus has well distinguished the condition of the Jews after Christ's
Resurrection) some of them follow Christ and fide and opere, both in says, and
in work, as old Act. 5.39.
Gamaliel in the Talmud famous, and the great Rabbi Haccanas Nehumiae filius:
other some cleave to him fide, no^ opere, by faith, not by work, because they
are zealous of the Law withal, as the Jews in the Act. 21.20.
Acts, and the Historian Josephus, but others will not follow Christ, nec side
nec opere, neither by faith, nor by work, although they cannot deny the Truth,
which they seeing to be fulfilled, will yet in the obstinacy of their hearts
conceal. And may not some of these last sort return? Lodouicus Carettus,
Johannes Isaacus, Immanuel Tremellius, and diverse other most famous Conuerts of
the Jewish Nation are evident proofs of a present reconciliation of Israel
unto Christ even in these last days, wherein the Gentile fullness is past,
since Mahomets Musulmans do now possess the midst, true Christians being
extruded into the outmost parts of this our Hemisphere, as is plain by the
Apud Petr. Plaut. and Io. Magin. in Tabul. Ptolom. de Asia and Africa.
Maps both of the Turkish and Persian Kingdoms. But howsoever this Conversion
of the Jews shall be; the end is near, since the first signs are past, and
the second sort begin to approach in the first of them, that now we may daily
look for the complement of the two last, to wit, the amazement of the
Reprobates, and wrapping up of the visible Heavens, for our happy deliverance
out of this misery, that we may be partakers of the only blessed Kingdom in
greatest glory, as Titus Bostre. in Luc. 21. and Aquin. in Caten. ibid.
one said well; Ipse aduentus Domini climinans omnium principatum, and
potestatem praeparat Regno Dei: The coming of Christ destroying the rule or
chiefedome of all others, prepares a power for the Kingdom of God.

. VII. Wherefore hence I conclude with the Apostle Saint Peter, that now 1.
Pet. 4.7.
since the end of all things is at hand, we therefore must be sober, and watch
unto Prayer. For this is the double use of the Doctrines proposed, first, for
Sobriety, and secondly, The first use of the two former doctrines: and the
first part of it.
for Watchfulness. For Sobriety both in opinion, and life. In opinion and
judgment, as the Apostle does warn, that Romans 1^.3.
No man think of himself more highly, then he ought to think, but that he
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.
For as Salt seasoneth every thing, and therefore by the Leuit 2.13.
Law they were to season with Salt every Oblation of the meat Offering: even
so a sober discretion in judgment is the most wholesome condiment to all our
Meditations, since it makes the mind peaceable, and the tongue seasonable: as
therefore our Savior speaks for the former, Have Mark. 9.50.
Salt in your selves, and have peace one with another, and Saint Paul for the
latter, Coloss. 4.7.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt, that ye may know,
how ye ought to answer every man. For as Bernard. Ser. 3. de Circumcis. Dom.
Bernard says well, The light of discretion is the Mother of Virtues, and the
consummation of perfection, when according to the Horat. de Art poetic.
Poets rule, Singula quaeque locum teneant sortita decenter, Every thing
keeps his own proper place in a comely sort, as Prou. 16.23.
The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. For
that we may apply these things unto this very particular, a question is made,
when our Savior shall come at the end of the World; but omnino importune,
altogether unseasonably, says Saint August. lib. 18 de Cim. Dei. c. 53
Augustine; because if it had been expedient for us to have known it, of whom
should it have been spoken better then of God himself, the Master to his
Disciples demanding the question, since he plainly professed unto his
Disciples, that Ioh 15.15.
because they were his friends, all things that he had heard of his Father, he
had made known unto them? and yet when they asked of him, saying, Act. 1.6.7.
Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel, he said
unto them, It is not for you to know the times, or the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power. For Mark. 13.32.
of that day, and that hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in
Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Non filius ipse, says Gregor. lib.
8. Registr. Ep. 42.
GREGORY, ex natura humanitatis, licet in natura humanitatis; Not the Son
himself by the nature of his humanity, although in the nature of his
humanity. For although he may know it, as he is God, and Man; yet does he
not know it, as he is man only. And therefore he would not reveal unto men;
because as Saint August. lib. 83* quaest. cap. 60.
Augustine does gloss it, and Vid. Zanch. li. 1. Misc loc. de fine saeculi.
cap. 4. and Bucan. Instit. loc. 38. q. 18. and Polan. lib. 6. Syntagmat. cap.
65.
many other good Divines approve it, Nescit filius, id est, facit homines
nescire; quia non prodit hominibus, quae inutiliter scirent: The Son knows
it not, that is, he makes not men to know it; because he bewrays not those
things unto men, which they would know unprofitably. For Vid Durand. in 4. s.
did. 47. q. 1. art. 10.
the Creation of the World from nothing to something is known to God only, who
alone did accomplish it, and therefore must the dissolution of the World be
known, and done by God alone, seeing it is a changed ab ente ad non ens: from
something to nothing, between which two terms the space is infinite, solum
percurribile, and perceptibile, to be run through, and perceived only by the
infinite God. And therefore those who thrust themselves into this secret, are
deservedly convicted for lying spirits, as those men of Bethshemesh 1. Sam.
6.19.
were justly smitten with the plague of God for looking into the Arc. For what
else may we esteem those men to be, who presumed to show in former times,
that Vid. Lactant. lib. 7. c. 25. and August. li. 18. de Ciuit. Dei* ca. 53.
and Zanch. lib. 1. Miscell. vbi supr.
the Day of the Lord should come first in the time of the Apostles? secondly,
in the year of our Lord, three hundred sixty five; thirdly, some two hundred
years after CONSTANTINE the Great: fourthly, in the four hundred, or in the
sixth hundred, or in the thousand year after Christ; yea by the computation of
Arnaldu^ de noua villa, and Johannes Regiomontanus it must be in the year of
our Lord It was from these conjectures said: Octu^g^ssimus octauus mi^abilis
annus.
one thousand, five hundred, eighty and eighth, the Men 2. Tim. 3.13.
deceiving, and being deceived. Theognis.
(...)
(...).
that is, A lie at first does find small grace:
In the end, soul loss with heavy case.
But yet there are two conjectures of the last Day, very much esteemed by some
men of note amongst the learned; the former concerning the Millenary, the
latter concerning the Centurie, wherein the last Day must befall (as they
think) certain, although the day and hour (as our Savior said) cannot be
known. But good Saint Augustine August. Epist. 78. quae ad Hesychium.
does answer here plainly, that no time at all, neither (...), nor (...),
that is, neither time of continuance, nor of opportunity, wherein our Savior
shall come to judgment, can be known by any man. For in what Millenarie, or
thousand year will they have CHRIST to come? They say in the sixth thousand
year after the Creation of the World, according to that sentence of Orpheus in
Plutarch. lib. de E^ apud Delphos.
Plutarch; (...):
Aetate in sexta studium finite canendi;
that is, In the sixth Age the World of harmony shall cease, both because the
World was finished upon the sixth day (for as S. Peter says, 2. Pet. 3.8.
One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day,) and also according to the tradition of Elias, Talmod. lib. Sanhe^rm, cap.
helec. and apud P. Galatinum, lib. 4. de arcan. fid. Cath. cap. 20.
there were two thousand years before the Law, two thousand years in the Law,
and two thousand years after the Law. Indeed I find this opinion concerning
the thousand years, to be very much set by amongst some Fathers of the
Primitive Church, as Lib. q. ad gentes q. 17.
Iustine Martyr, Lib. 5. cap. vltimo.
Irenaeus, Lib. 7. cap. 7.
Lactantius, Jn exposit. Psalm. 89.
Hierome, and Apud Sixtum Senens^m lib. 5. annot. 190.
Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople, which yet some other of sounder
judgment, as Lib. 7. in locu^.
Ambrose, and In exposit. Psalm. 90.
Augustine, altogether disprooue, as wanting good ground to be settled upon.
For first, that anagogicall interpretation of the sixth days Creation is
besides Gods intent, and Saint Peter's meaning, who by comparing of one day with
a thousand years, and of a thousand years with one day, did but show, as
says Saint Augustine, contemnendam futuri temporis breuitatem, the
contemptible shortness of future time. Secondly, that Rabbinicall and beggarly
tradition falsely fathered upon Elias, does not agree to the truth of time in
the two former terms, since according to the computation of the Hen. Buntingus
in sua Chronologia, and Clariss. Joseph. Scaliger l* 5. de emendat. temporum,
and Christoph. Helwicus in suis tabuli^ Chronologicis.
best Chronographers, the Law was given in the two thousand, four hundred,
fifty and third year of the World, or at the most, in the thousand, four
hundred, fifty and fourth: between which time and the coming of Christ there
have run only one thousand, four hundred, ninety, and four years, or at
the most, one thousand, five hundred, and fifteen years. Can it therefore be
probable, that he shall hit the mark in the third term of time, which is now
after the first coming of Christ? Since his credit is cracked in the former two
thousands, we may very well mistrust his truth in the last term not yet
fulfilled. Another Napier, proposit. 14. and 15.
Time-searcher, of the like curiosity concerning the Centurie, absolutely
defines the Day of Doom within these two years of our Lord, one thousand,
six hundred, eighty and eight, and one thousand, seven hundred. But since, as
Vid. Aristo. de Jnterpret. cap. 7.
Logicians say, de futuris contingentibus non est scientia, there is no kind of
knowledge concerning things to come, I marvel at his boldness, who upon so
uncertain a ground durst rear so high a building. For where he would conclude
a certain number of years from those one thousand, two hundred and ninety in
Dan. 12.11.
Daniel, and from some other numbers in the Revelation, I answer first with
the most learned both August. Ep. 78 ad Hesych.
Fathers, and Rolloc. and Iunius in Daniel.
new Writers, that Daniels Prophecy reaches only to Christ's time, before
which the Law ruled; and secondly, as our most Gracious Sovereign In Meditat.
super 20. cap. Apocalyp.
King James could tell him, that in the Revelation of Saint JOHN a certain
number most commonly is put down for an uncertain number: So that rather then
we should run into so hard Imputations, as such men deserve for so many
monstrous falsities, and lies; I think it were far better for us to follow
the good counsel of that most holy Father Saint August. vbi supra.
Augustine, who thus concludes for sobriety of judgment concerning the last
Judgment. First, concerning the coming of our Savior, who is expected in the
end, I dare not reckon or count the times; neither do I think, that any of
the Prophets have certainly defined the number of years concerning this
matter; but that this should rather prevail with us, which the Lord himself
Act. 1.7.
said; It is not for you to know the times, and seasons, which the Lord has
kept in his own power: Secondly, August. in Psalm. 6.
and therefore let us be willingly ignorant of that which God would not have us
know.

. VIII. Now for sobriety in life, The latter part of the former use for
sobriety in life.
which is to be practiced of us all, because of the neerenesse of our end, it
consists in these two duties especially, first, in the sober getting;
secondly, in the sober spending of goods so gotten. For in getting goods we
are sober men, while we neither make too much haste to be rich, neither trust
too much in goods gotten hastily. For concerning hasty wealth, howsoever it
be gotten, Salomons sentence is most sure, first, of the sin, that Prou.
28.20.
he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent; and concerning the
punishment, Prou. 20.21
that an inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end
thereof shall not be blessed. For 1. Tim. 6.9.
they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish, and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction, and perdition.
(...), (says the Apud Stobaeum Sermon. 10.
Poet MENANDER) no man hasteneth to be rich, in the way of Justice. For --
Iuue. Sat. 14.
quae reuerentia legum?
Quis metus aut pudor est nimium properantis auari?
a covetous Wretch cares neither for Law, nor fear, nor shame, so he may be
enriched by any means. Riches (says Bern^ser. 3. in Psalm. Q^ habitat.
BERNARD) are the Devils snares, from which sew men are free, and with which
many do very much lament, that they are not entangled. But if they well
marked, first, the great things they lose (for Mat. 19.22.
rich men hardly enter into the Kingdom of God;) Secondly, the small gains
they get (for Luke 12.15.
a man's life consists not in the abundance of things which he possesses;)
Thirdly, into what certain danger they thrust themselves by hastening to this
store, whiles that they drudge to get, dread to keep, and droope to lose (for
Eccles 5.9.
he that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase; this is also vanity, as it is plainly proved by the
Rich man in the Luke 12.20.
Gospel, whose soul was taken from him in the night of his brag;) if I say
they would well weigh in all their accounts, how they purchase in the seeking
for wealth, only labor for their travail; surely, surely, they would rather
with Diog. La^rt. lib. 6.
Crates the Theban resolve to cast their wealth and pelf into the Sea, saying,
Ego mergam te, priusquam to perdas me; I will drown thee, before thou shall
destroy me: or follow the counsel of Solomon thus aduising him, Pro. 23.4, 5.
Labor not to be rich; cease from thine own wisdom.

For first, will thou set thine eye upon that, which is not? Secondly, riches
certainly make themselves wings; they fly away, as an Eagle toward Heaven.
The best wealth in the judgment of CLEMENT Clemens Alex. l. 2. Paedagog c. 3.
ALEXANDRINVS is the poverty of desires, and the true magnificence is not to
grow proud upon growing wealthy, but rather to despise wealth. For (now to take
down their trust in goods thus lewdly gotten) what if they be rich in wealth
or land? Are they therefore the better men? Or shall they live the longer? They
are not the better, because of riches, because that riches are not bona
simpliciter; simply good things. For Chrysostom. hom. 17. in 1. Tim.
what we account to be very precious things; as Gold, Silver, Spices, and
Jewels, are basely esteemed of amongst the barbarous Indians and Saluages,
amongst whom yet virtue is of greatest price. A Jade will be a lade for all his
stately trappings: wealth of it self will rather hinder then help goodness,
since it is a sworn slave unto wantonness and riot, as we see in Luke 16.19.
the rich man, who was clothed in purple, and fine linen, and fared well, and
delicately every day. Whereupon one Stel^h. in Luc. 8.
said very well, that as the Moon, the fuller she is, the further she
stands removed from the Sun, and nearer to be eclipsed in the dark
shadow of the earth: so oftentimes it happens (for I cannot make it
general, since we know that many good men, as Abraham, Job, David, Solomon,
etc have been very rich) that the richer men are, the further from God they
live in this world, and nearer to be entrapped in the snares of the Devil,
who Luke 4.6.
challenges wealth unto himself as his own true peculiar, to bestow where he
will: our Savior threatening Luke 6.24.
a woe unto such, because here they have received their consolation. But shall
they therefore for their wealth live the longer? Certainly no. Neither they
themselves, nor theirs. Not they themselves. For then (as the Devil Job. 2.4.
said) Skin for skin; yea, all that a man has will he give for his life. But
Horat. lib. 5. od. 4.
Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede Regum turres, pauperumque tabernas; Death
knocks as well at the Kings Palace, as at the poor man's Cottage. For we
Psalm. 49.10, 11, 12.
see that wise men dye, likewise the fool, and the brutish person perish, and
leave their wealth to others: Their inward thought is, that their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call
their lands after their own names: nevertheless, man being in honor, abides
not; he is like the beasts that perish. Therefore they shall not continue in
their posterity. Summis Lucan. lib. 1. Phar.
negatur stare diu; High things cannot stand long. Claudian. lib. 1. in Ruffin.
Tolluntur in altum vt lapsis grauiore ruant; They are raised up on high, to
be rushed down lower. It may well suffice them, that their souls are
immortal, although their bodies are dissolved, their goods scattered, and
their lands demised over to other men. For there is (says Eccle. 5.13.14
Solomon) a sore evil, which I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept
for the owners thereof to their hurt: But those riches perish by evil
travail, and he begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand. For: Apud
Cl. Minoem in Comm. sup. Alciat. Emb. 128.
De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres: That is; Of goods which are ill
got,
Third heir scarce has a lot.
Since, as Cicero Cic. 2. Philip.
told Antonie out of an old Poet; Male parta male dilabuntur; Ill gotten goods
are far worse spent: as we see it daily happen, that great men's houses are
like to Dan. 2.32, 33
Nebuchadnezzar his great Image, whose head was of fine gold, breasts and arms
of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, feet part of iron,
part of clay. For the lower we descend, the worse we shall find them; as
Plato 1. Alcibiad.
Plato was wont to say, Aurei Patres, filij Plumbei; Golden Fathers, but leaden
sons, that now it is no marvel, if in all places of the world great men's
houses come to nothing, seeing great men's children grow to nothing, fulfilling
the old Erasm. Adag. sub titul. Degenerantiu^ in peius.
Proverb, Heroum fi^ij noxae; Lords prove but Louts, and Gentlemen Gulles,
whiles Sons are heirs of Parents patrimony, which they spend wastfully, and
not successors in Parents virtues, without which it is impossible that their
houses should stand, since Psalm. 127.1. and ibi Hierony.
except the Lord build the house (and that is only when we are settled upon
the foundation Ephesians. 2.20.
of the Apostles and Prophets) they labor in vain that build it. That
therefore these mischiefs may happily be prevented, Fathers must be sober in
getting of goods, leaving to their children a patrimony of virtue by honest
education, which (as said Apud Stobaeu^. Ser. 3.
Aristippus, cast out upon the Rhodes naked and bare, but relieved by
Philosophical Arts) they cannot lose in shipwreck. (For, I pray you, why
should the Fathers go to hell for leaving to their children a clod of earth
only?) And children must care to keep sobriety in the right use of
Inheritances, left to them by their Parents. For what needs this waste, which
we daily behold in Cities and Country by gorgeous Apparel, stately
Buildings, sumptuous Banquets, idle Sports, and other vanities, which Col. 2.22.
perish with the using, yea, are used to our perishing, whiles by this our
demeanor we are like that bad servant, which said in his heart, Mat 24.48, 49.
My Lord delayeth his coming; and thereupon begins to smite his fellow
servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken. Indeed as Prou. 27.8.
a Bird that wandreth from her nest: so is a man that wandreth from his place.
For in my small experience, I have well observed what every man may see, that
as an Archer, who shoots aloft above his true compass, lights his arrow
far wide of his mark: So whiles men are carried with a hawtie and proud
humor above their own ordinary condition and estate, they certainly miss
of the mark and scope of their great desires, either for honor, the aim of
proud Citizens, or for the store of wealth, the Butte of our brave, but
greedy Gentlemen. Because when Citizens, that they become Gentles, will go
into the Country there to keep residence: and when Gentlemen, for sparing,
will lie in Cities, lurking with a small retinue of Servants about: them; Arts
and Trades decay by those, Husbandry and Hospitality does fail by these, and
God blows upon both, that Hagg. 1.9.
when they look for much, it comes to little. Ier. 22.29.30
O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord: (Earth, first in affection;
(for what is this else but a dunghill desire?) Earth, secondly in action; (for
all this is but drudging.) Earth, lastly through dissolution of all into dust.)
Thus says the Lord, Write ye this man childlesse, a man that shall not
prosper in his days; for no man of his seed shall prosper; sitting upon the
throne of DAVID, and ruling any more in Judah. For IECONIAH his case is ours,
while we become like him: according to that of the Prophet Esaias, touching the
general reward of all men, as they shall deserve: Esa. 3.10.11
say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat
the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for
the reward of his hands shall be given him. But if we be men endued with
reason, we will learn wisdom of the Pissemire or Ant, Prou. 6.7.8.
which having no guide, ouer-seer, or Ruler, provides her meat in the Summer,
and gathers her food in the harvest: and if we be Christians enriched with
grace, we shall quickly perceive, that 1. Pet. 4.3.
the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine,
reuellings, banquettings, and abominable idolatries. For 1. These. 5.7, 8
they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken
in the night: But let us, who are of the day, be sober: Yea, the night is far
spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness,
and let us put on the armor of light: let us walk honestly, as in the day,
not in ryoting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. For as the Sun,
shining above our Hemisphere, both dispelleth darkness, and brings on light,
by which we walk safely until the evening: So the Sun of Righteousness,
the Son of God, Christ Jesus, now sending down his bright beams of
truely-sauing knowledge into these our ouer-deeply-darkned hearts, both drives
away the mists of ignorance, and indueth us with so great a light of grace, as
by which we see clearly what to fly, and what to follow, in this our day,
before the night come, even by his own ensample, who said, Ioh. 9.4.
I must work the works of Him that sent me, while it is day: the night
comes, when no man can work. As therefore good laborers apply themselves
earnestly about their business in the afternoon, that they may well finish
their whole work intended, before the night come: so we men now hired Mat.
20.6.
into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, are seriously to endeavor our selves
Phil. 2.12.
to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, before our Master
comes, that when we are called, we may receive every man a penny, as the
Prophet plainly warned us, Iere. 13.16.
to give glory to the Lord our God, before he cause darkness, and before our
feet stumble upon the dark^ mountains, and while we look for light, he
turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. For Aristot.
lib. 4. Phys. cap. 8.
natural motion is swifter in the end, then in the beginning; because the
nearer it comes to his proper place, wherein it must rest, the more it
desires to attain unto that place, in which it may rest. If therefore heaven
be our home, toward which we make our journey; thither then must we most
swiftly return, the nearer we come unto the place; casting far from us these
worldly lets, these fleshly fardels, these deuillish deceits, which slow our
speed in our course for the Crown; as we may read it plainly practiced,
first by David, who said, Psalm. 119.32.
I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge mine heart:
Secondly, by Zachaeus, Luke 19.6.
who made haste, and came down, and received Christ joyfully: Thirdly, by
Saint Paul, who Philip. 3.13.14.
forgetting those things, which are behind, and reaching forth to those
things which are before, pressed toward the mark for the price of the high
Calling of God in Christ Jesus; fourthly, and lastly by all Gods Saints, Who
Rom 8.23.
waiting for the Adoption, even the Redemption of their bodies, follow the good
counsel of the Apostle thus aduising them, Heb. 12.1.2.
Seeing we also are compassed about with such a cloud of Witnesses, let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin, which does so easily beset us; and let us
run with patience unto the Race, that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author, and finisher of our faith. For as Cyprian said well, Cypr. in
orat. dominicam.
He that has renounced the World, is greater then the Honors, and the
Kingdom thereof: and therefore he, who dedicateth himself to God, and his
Christ, desires not earthly, but heavenly Kingdoms. For so must we be sober,
and thus now must we watch.

. IX. Watch; not in the night only: The second use for Watching in Prayer.
For Physicians ^o. Fern. li. 1. Pattilog. cap. 17.
do teach, that Night-watching weakens the bodies of young men; and Students
do find the heavy hurts of nocturne lucubrations by their sore eyes, and dry
brains: but Watch, as well on the day, as on the night, as well in prosperity,
as in adversity, as well in peace, as in warfare. For the watching hence to
be urged as a second use is a spiritual care, to be diligently taken over
soul and body, that we as men alive from the dead, should always Romans 6.13.
yield our selves unto God, not any way giving our members to be weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin, but always to be instruments of righteousness
unto God; first, watching over our hearts against evil thoughts, since from
our hearts proceed Prou. 4.23.
the actions of life; Secondly, over our eyes, that we Job. 31.1.
think not of a Maid: Thirdly, over our mouths, that Psalm. 39.1.
we offend not in our tongue: Fourthly, over our feet, especially, when
Eccles. 4.17.
we enter into the House of God: Fifthly, over our hands, that 1. Tim. 5.21.
we lay them not suddenly upon any man, lest we be partakers of other men's
sins; Sixthly, and lastly over all our ways, that We Gene. 17.1.
walk before God, and be upright, and that we Romans 12.17.
provide things honest in the sight of all men. For Reave. 16.15.
blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments; lest he walk naked,
and they see his filthiness.

Some (says Saint August. Ep. 80. quae ad Hesych.
AUGUSTINE) watch and pray, because the Lord will come quickly: others, because
life is short, and uncertain: a third sort, for that they know not, when the
Lord himself will come: and these are always to be thought the best
watchers, because they seem especially to respect that Commandment of Christ,
saying, Mark. 13.35.
Watch ye (for ye know not, when the Master of the house comes, etc.) and
for that they well consider the manifold dangers of this last time, wherein
first the World, as an old rotten house, is ready to fall ( for 1. Cor. 7.31.
the fashion of this World passes away:) secondly, the Inhabitants thereof are
as those in the old World; Gene. 6.4.
mighty men (to wit, in mischief) and men of renown (to wit, in Deuillish
and Machiauillian policy) for want of the true love of God, as our Savior
said, because Mat. 24.12.
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold: thirdly, the Devil
having Reave. 12.7.
but a short time, rages more and more, both by inward temptations, by which
he Ephesians. 2.2.
works mightily in the children of disobedience, and by outward assaults,
made very many ways, First, by himself, who as 1. Pet. 5.8.
a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour, and then by his
ministers, even a cursed crew of wicked Antichrists, who must reign in these
last times. So that as in the Veget. lib. 3. de re Milit. ca. 8. and in illum
Gods. Stewich.
Military discipline of ancient Romans, their Watches were so set, and
disposed in their (Castris) Tents or standing Garrisons, as that in the first
Watch All, in the second, their (Tyrones) Fresh-water-souldiers, in the third
(Viriliores) their men of full strength, in the fourth and last and the most
dangerous (Veterani) their tried men stood at the glass, all in their place
with such circumspection, that if any had slept, he was beaten in the morning
by all the whole Band with Clubs and Stones, even to the death, if he could
not by his speediness make a quick escape: so now GOD has ordained, that
howsoever in the former times of the Church of God, the faithful did watch,
but as yonglings, or in their fresh strength, wherein they grew, and flourished
for almost six hundred years together immediately after Christ; now in this
last Age and most perilous times, wherein our foes are every hour ready to
surprise, if not to surcharge us, We should stand on the Watch-towres, as
Old-beaten-souldiers of tried experience, like Caleb, who Josh. 14.11.
in Canaan was as fit for War, or Government, as he had been forty years
before, when Moses first sent him to spy out the Land.

For as the Proverb was amongst the Romans; Liui. lib. 8.
res ad triarios redit, all is by GODS providence brought now unto the last
push; since first the War is desperate to be taken in hand, not with Cic. li.
1. Offic.
Carthaginians, but Cimbrians, not whether should rule Honorably, but whether
should live safely (so deadly an enemy is the Devil unto us:) and secondly,
the Government is grown wholly Anarchicall, through the inward Garboyles
between the Flesh and the Spirit, worse then any Civil Wars raised either
by Grecian, by Roman, or by any other disorderly State, because (as the Poet
Lucan. lib. 1. Pharsal.
said) In se mignaruunt, Great men gall one another; great things grow all to
ruin by their mutual violence, that we may now well Lamen. 2.19.
cry out in the night, and in the beginning of the watches, power out hearts
like water before the face of the Lord.

For what may we expect but a sudden surprising, if our eyes prevent not the
night watches, as Psalm. 119.148
David's did? Nay, let our enemies be as sluggish as we are; yet shall we not
be free from the punishment of flothfulnesse, since the Saints, who are our
fellow soldiers, cannot but complain against us for our carelessness, and by
Gods appointment drive us out of the Camp of the Militant Church visible,
wherein we live, by the heavy Clubs, and hard stones of censures
Ecclesiastical, and Excommunications. For Ye Brethren, says the 2. These.
3.13.14.
Apostle, be not weary in well-doing: and if any obey not our word, by this
Epistle note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
Spiritali gladio superbi, and contumaces necantur, dum de Ecclesia eijciuntur,
says Cypr. Ep. 62.
CYPRIAN; the proud, and stubborn are slain by the spiritual Sword, when
they are cast out of the Church. All Christians then in these perilous times,
even for fear either of Foreign destruction, or Domesticke displeasure, are
diligently to watch in the War, as Soldiers, 2. Tim. 4.7.
fighting the good fight, in the Government, as Captains, going in and out
faithfully before GODS people, as Solomon 2. Cor. 1.10.
desired. We, my Brethren, who are inferiors must every one watch, as a
Soldier, over his own soul, Ephesians. 6.11.
Putting on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil. And you, most Honorable Captains of Israel, are to watch
over us, like Cornel. Nepos in Jphicrate.
Iphicrates the Athenian, over his sleeping Soldiers, like Castriote, Rich.
Knols in his Turk. Histor.
called Scanderbeg, who himself kept the Centinell, nay, like the Keeper of
Israel, who Psalm. 121.4.
neither slumbreth, nor sleeps. For Homer. Illiad. lib. 2.
(...): It becomes not a man of counsel to sleep all the night time. Est
honos and onus: it is your Honor to be Governors, but your burden to govern
in these dangerous times, and amongst so many enemies. The time may make you
careful: The enemies stir up valor; and both of them cause a watchfulness,
lest we your poor, and silly sheep be suddenly surprised by these most
subtle Serpents, of which now after this first aduertizement of the perilous
times, we are to speak in the second danger, expressed in these words: [And as
ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists,
whereby we know, that it is the last time.]

The second part of the Great Antichrist.
The two most dangerous parties living in these last times Antichrist, and
Heretics.
TImes are full of dangers, because of dangerous men living in these times, as
they are most lively described here unto us, first, by the greatness of their
Head; secondly, by the multitude of the members.

The Exposition of the Text concerning Antichrist.
. X. Their great Head, is that Antichrist, of whom, as Saint John says, the
faithful had oftentimes heard by the plainest means of notification in type
and truth: In type (as some Hieronym. and Perer. in 7. Dan. and omnes, quos
adhuc vidi Pont.
think) of Antiochus Epiphanes, delivered by Daniel in sundry Dan. 7.24.25 and
Dan. 11.36.37.
places. In truth of the Gospel, under which are diverse Prophecies of
Antichrist, published first by our blessed Mat. 24.24.
Savior unto his Disciples; secondly, by Saint Paul both 1. Tim. 4.1.2 and 2.
tim. 3.1.2.3
under terms general; and most particularly in that famous place, the a ver.
3 ad 11
second Chapter of the second Epistle written to the Thessalonians: thirdly, by
Saint John in his Book of the Revelation, Vid. Praes. Saereniss. Reg. Jacob.
page 90. and Apol. Bellar. and Respo. Reverend Patris Lancel. Eliensis Episcop.
cap. 12.
under four several figures, shaddowing out one, and the selfsame MAN, in
four several Visions tending to one, and the selfsame end; the first of
which is in the sixth Chapter at the eight Ver. where Antichrist is figured by
the pale Horse at the opening of the fourth Seal: the second, is in the ninth
Chapter at the first Verse, where Antichrist is noted by the Star falling
from Heaven, at the sounding of the fifth Trumpet; the third is in the
thirteenth Chapter at the eleventh Verse, where Antichrist is expressed by the
second Beast ascending out of the earth: the fourth and the last, and indeed
the plainest is contained in the 17.18.19. and 20. Chapters, where Antichrist
and his Kingdom is most lively set forth, both by the Great Whore of Babylon,
sitting upon the scarlet colored Beast, and by the false prophet that rules
in the Whore.

For God would have these Prophesies of Antichrist to be delivered in the time
of his Gospel, first, to show that such an one must come, before that Christ
himself shall come unto Judgment: secondly, to reprove, and convince the
Reprobates of manifest Apostasy, by which this MAN of sin must come: and
thirdly, to fore warn the faithful Flock of Christ, against whom he was to
come. For Praemonitio, praemunitio; Forewarning is twice arming, as our Savior
said therefore upon his Prophecy, to make all his Apostles, and Disciples to
take heed, Mat. 24.25.
Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore, I hope, that no man can justly
blame me, for taking upon me so weighty, and so difficult a business, which
yet by Gods grace preventing, and assisting me, I shall easily perform, both
to manifest to our Papists their miserable captivity, wherevnder they (poor
souls) so long time have layne, and to establish the weak, and male-contented
Protestants in the true use of that liberty, for which with Zachary we may
joyfully sing; Luke 1.68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited, and redeemed his
people.

For although many of the Worthies of Israel, whose Arms, as a Page, if I were
able, yet am I no way worthy to bear, have written many large, and learned
Volumes concerning this subject, that it may seem to the discreet, nothing
could, or should be spoken more then what they have said; yet Plato in Phil.
and Go^g. and lib. 6. de leg.
(...): a good Tale may be twice told: multitude of witnesses give greater
assurance to a matter in question: and although that verity be in unity, yet
the abundance of Gods Spirit affoordeth much variety, in handling the one and
the selfsame thing, both to take away tediousness accrewing of identitie, or
plodding still on one point; and to satisfy the diverse humors of men,
desirous of novelty, which although we cannot exhibit, in respect of the
matter that is to be handled: (For nihil Terent. Eunuch. in prolog.
dictum erit, quod non sit dictum prius:) Yet the learned shall find it in the
manner of handling, whiles first they shall see another order: secondly they
may mark, if not more proper, yet some stricter proofs of our conclusions.
Our order of proceeding in this discourse of Antichrist. And our several kinds
of proof.
For the order must be to seek out first what is this great Antichrist:
Secondly, who he is. The proofs of the former must be only the Scriptures,
out of the forenamed places, and some other Texts of this Epistle of Saint
John: but the evidences of the latter must be such scripts and monuments as are
to be found plainly in the acts and monuments of Papists themselves, delivering
them unto us, either in their own proper Histories, or in their Popes own
Decrees, bound up for better carriage in Ex Editione Grego. 13.
the body of their Canon law, and Books of Libritres Cerem. Romans Eccl. and
Missale, and Breuiar. The first Question: What is the Great Antichrist? First,
in his Name, and that first, his literal Name Antichristus.
Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome.

. XI. Now to answer the former question: That we may find out this Monster,
What is this great Antichrist, let us seek out first his Name, and then
secondly his Nature. His name is twofold, Literal, and Mystical. The
literal name is Antichristus, Antichrist, so called, first, because he is
contrary, and an enemy to Christ, as all Writers with one consent do affirm
out of these words of S. John, 1. Ioh. 2.22.
He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. Secondly, for that
Wolsan. Mosc. loco de Minist. Eccles.
yet to cover his enmity, he behaueth himself pro Christi Vicario; for the
Vicar of Christ. For this latter Etymology may be, and is made good against
the foolish cauilling of Bellar. lib. 3. de Pontif. Romans cap. 1.
Cardinal Bellarmine, and the witless wrangling of his wilful Ape Andr.
Eudaem. lib 2. in Rob. Abbat. de Antich.. 4.
Andreas Eudaemon, by the true use of this Preposition [(...),] which both in
apposition, and in composition signifies [ Pro, For,] first in the Scriptures;
and secondly in many of the most Classical Authors, that are extant in the
Greek tongue. In the Scriptures, as where Archelaus is said to reign Mat.
2.22.
(...) in the room of his father HEROD, and where Sergius Paulus is called
Act. 13.7.
(...), Proconsull, or Propraetor, as we say well in English, The Deputy of
the Country. For as in the free state of the people of Rome, these Officers
were sent into the Provinces in stead of the Consuls or Praetors, (quorum L.
Fenestella lib. 2. cap. 11.
vice functuri essent) whose place or course they were to supply: So after it
became a Monarchy, Augustus Caesar, as Dio Dio lib. 53.
reports, called his Lieutenants, Propraetores, men under him in the Province
to execute that same office, even as (...) (to derive it according to the true
composition thereof) does signify One, next supplying the place of the
chiefest, as not only Plutarch. de praecep. Politicis.
Plutarch, but also S. Act. 18.12.
Luke shows by the use of the Verb (...), which notes the execution of the
office of a Vicegerent. In Classical Writers, as in Homer, -- Jlliad. 9. and
Spond. ibi videas
(...)
(...):
that is, That man is in stead of many people, whom God shall love in his
heart: and (...) in Hesych. in lexic. and Steph. in Thesaur. (...).
Hesychius, which growing in stead of an Acorne, is called by Plin. lib. 16.
cap. 7.
Pliny himself Galla, (Galls) as some think, and (...) in Apud H. Stepha. in
(...)
Strabo, an vnder-minister, as we Vid. Innoc. 3. lib. 1. de Miss. c. 4
say in the Church discipline, a Subdeacon, and Budaeus in Comment. and in
Annotat. in Pandect. Prior.
Budaeus his (...), against which they so much except. For although in
Thucydides, and in Plutarch it signifies a Captain of the contrary part: Yet
in Demosthenes and other Orators, it is taken for one, who supplieth the place
of the chief Captain, as a Lieutenant, note equal, as says Bellarmine, (for
then he does not supply another man's place, but only his own, as a chief
man) but a substitute to him, whose place he bears, as the word H Stephan.
in (...).
(...), is not interrex (let Eudaemon still belie his lexicon, wherein no such
signification is mentioned) but prorex, a Viceroy. So that we may conclude,
concerning the true deriuation of this name, out of these general words of S.
August. lib. 2. contra. aduers. legis and Proph. cap. 12.
Augustine, that he shows himself to be an Antichrist, who (sub nomine
Christi, quod est nomen Dei;) under the name of Christ, which is the name of
God, (hoc est, Christianum se videri volens;) that is, desiring himself to be
thought a Christian, (superextollitur contra Christum;) is lifted up against
Christ. For 2. Cor. 11.14
such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, as do now the great Fox, and his little Cubs, Antichrist,
and Heretics (for I take the words to be generally spoken of all whatsoever
wicked Seducers, such as is Eudaemon, so called (...), being a right (...), a
pretty young Devil,) even as all of them seek, Mat. 24.22.
if it were possible, to deceive the very Elect, by signs and wonders, done
(it may be) in the very name of Christ, and yet proouing in the end to be
nothing at all, but as the Apostle speaks, (...), 2. These. 2.10.
seductionem aut deceptionem. For all is one to us, who know, that this (...),
or drawing out of the way, being joined with (...), unrighteousness, is taken
always in the worst part, and signifies (as it is most pithily translated
into English In the new Translation.
of late) deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness. They say it, and we know, that
both Scriptures and Fathers, such as Damas. lib. 4. de fide Orthod. cap. 48.
Damascen, and Hieron. q. 11. ad Algasiam.
Hierome, take the word Antichrist, to signify some famous false Christ: but
yet this does not disprove our deriuation, since he shall be as a false Christ,
masking himself deceitfully under the outward habit of an honest true
Christian: yea, says Hierome, showing himself, as if he were Christ himself,
and the Son of God, in the beginning of his Kingdom: or rather tyranny,
fayning some goodness, says Damascene in the same place. For as the Poet
Iuuencus l. 4. Euang. hist. cap. 6
well turned our Saviors words into these heroical Verses: Nomine fallentes
Christi, falsique prophetae
Exurgent terris, and monstra potentia fingent:
that is, Deceiving in the name of Christ,
Fa^se Prophets shall arise
In earth, and to seduce good men
Shall powerful Signs devise.


The mystical name under these letters, ch, x,.
. XII. Now the Mystical name is concluded under these three Greek Letters ch,
x,, as Saint John says plainly of the name, though altogether mystically of
the signification; Reave. 13.18.
here is wisdom; let him that has understanding, count the number of the
Beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is, six hundred,
threescore and six. A name of truth so very obscure, that I had rather with the
ancient Father IRENAEVS Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. 30.
sustinere ad impletionem Prophetiae, quam suspicari, and diuinari nomina
quaelibet; quando multa nomina inueniri possunt habentia praedictum numerum:
endure or abide until the fulfilling of the Prophecy, then to suspect, and
conjecture upon this or that name, seeing many names may be found, which have
the foresaid number. For God gave this name under this number mystically, only
because it might not be known, before it should be done, and lest it might
prove a very open occasion unto the Romish Tyrants for their unjust
Persecutions, when they should have seen plainly their destruction by
Antichrist directly foretold them in this Revelation. And therefore in my poor
judgment that diligence of some very learned Men is somewhat needless, when
they labor earnestly to apply very many names unto this number of six hundred,
sixty, and six; to wit, as some Feuard in notis in ^renae. lib. 5. cap. 30.
and Henriq. lib. v^timo Moralis Theolog. cap. 23.. 2. in margin, and Sixtus
Senensis, lib. 2. Bibliot p. 9. edit. vltim. per Hay.
Papists of note have gathered them out of diverse Authors, twelve in number, 1.
(...); 2. (...); 3. (...) (out of Irenaeus, and Arethas:) 4. (...), nego (out
of Hippolitus and Primasius:) 5. (...); 6. (...); 7. (...); 8. (...); 9. (...);
10. (...) (and all these out of Arethas;) 11. (...) (out of Primaesius and
Tyconius;) 12. (...) (out of Rupertus Tuitiensis;) that I need not add more
(as Dic lux) out of Haymo. For this their liberty has emboldned some Geneb.
lib. 3. Chrono. page 491. Edit. vltim.
Sycophants to wrest this number unto certain other names, clean contrary to
the purpose and drift of the Holy Ghost in this Prophecy, as when some
construe it of Maomitis, and apply it to Mahomet against both the right writing
of the word, and the true time of Mahomet: others G. Lindan. lib. 3. Dubitant.
and Genebrard. qu. lib. 4. Chron. page 713. construit in (...)
of Martin Lauter, and apply it unto that true Witness of Christ, Martyn
Luther, whose name and time (he living, and beginning to preach, in the year
of our Lord, one thousand, five hundred, and seventeen) does of it self
reprove their impudency: others Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 10.
of (...) which they would have to be the name of that very learned
Chronologer, David Chytraeus, not marking the right writing of his proper name
in the Hebrew tongue, (...) yea, and of (...), which they would give unto
Luther, with as good reason as others seem to give LATINVS to the Pope;
although I cannot but tell them, that since Luther was but one man, and there
have been many Popes, and since the name of Saxon, is applyable but to one
soil, wherein Antichrist by JOHN'S Prophecies was never to have his personal
residence, they are wholly mistaken, and carried away by a wilful wrangling
spirit of error into this delusion. For if it might suffice to handle this
matter by uncertain conjectures; in mine opinion we need go no further,
then to those three names, which Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Irenaeus (once Eusebius. lib. 5. Histor. cap. 18.
Scholar to Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, who himself heard John the Penman
of this prophecy, and therefore is best to be followed as most ancient, and
who also might have it by a direct tradition from John) delivered unto us
(...), and (...). For the Vid. Reuer. Patr. Epis. modo Sarisbur. D. Rob. Abbat.
de Antichrist. ca. 2.. 10.11.12. etc.
first notes out a fairly flourishing Kingdom, or Governor ruling therein:
the second expresses one shining like the Sun, who is called of the Ovid.
lib. 1. Metamorp. and Virgil. saepiss.
Poets, Titan, although all his glory is gotten only by that irefull and
direful vengeance, which upon Gods permission, he still seeks to work upon
Gods people and holy Saints, just like those Titanes, whom the Hesiod. in
Theog. and Vid. Natal. Commit. lib. 6. Mythol. ca. 20.
Poets have feigned to make War with Jupiter, for a plain type of Antichrist,
who sighteth against God: but the third name, (...), strikes it dead down to
the ground, whether (as a most reverend and learned Episc. Eliensis in Resp. ad
Apol. Bellar. cap. 12. page 293.
Bishop does instruct us) we take it for the number of a name, or the name of a
man. For if it be the number of a name, then (...), written according to the
true and most ancient Orthographie, not with the letter [ i] but with the
Dipthong [^] as our best Grammarians both Quintil. lib. 1 Instit. cap. 7. and
Isidor. lib. 1. Etymolog. cap. 15.
old and Iul. Scalig. lib. 1. de causis ling. Lat. cap. 27. and Angel. Canin.
in Orthog. apud Clenard. exedit. Schot. page 103.
new have taught without controlment, then does it most fitly express the
number of six hundred, sixty, and six: or if it be the name of a man (proper
or common, it makes no matter whether, since as it is proper to the whole
body, so is it common to every one supplying the head of that body) then it
fitly notes the time, wherein from the Nativity of Christ, after all other
Heretics in the Primitive Church, Antichrist should come, even that then from
the year, six hundred, sixty, and six of our Lord, and so always
afterward, till the second coming of Christ, the same Antichrist should reign
in the Latin Church, as some very good approved Balaeus in Vital. and lo. Fox.
in 13. Apoc. and D. Whitak. in Sander. demonst. 39. and D. Willet. in Synops.
page 197.
Authors do deliver it from other words intimating the same number both by
Hebrew and Greek letters: By the Hebrew, in the word [(...)] which signifies
Rome; and by the Greek, in the words, (...), which notes out plainly the
Church of Italy. So that now from these two names, litterall and mystical,
we may define Antichrist to be an enemy, and contrary to Christ, who yet so
dissemblingly behaueth himself, that he would be taken for the Vicar of
Christ, ruling and reigning in the Latin and Italian Church at Rome with all
worldly pomp, and raging cruelty, against Gods Saints, from the year of our
Lord, six hundred, sixty, and six, till the coming of Christ Jesus to judge
the world.

. XIII. The causes of Antichrist, whence we shall gather a full definition,
and first.
But what is this Monster Antichrist really? The real definition is to be
gathered from his Nature, which we shall easily find by the true and due
consideration of these four causes: First, the efficient: Secondly, the
material: Thirdly, the formal: And fourthly, the final cause of this great
Antichrist. The efficient cause is twofold; The cause efficient.
the first is principal, and this is Satan, 2. These. 2.9.
after whose effectual working, the coming of Antichrist is in the world: The
second is less principal, and this is either occasioning, or inducing:
Occasioning this mischief two manner of ways; first, by the reign of the
Roman Emperors, which 2. These. 2.7.
was to let, or stop the coming of this Beast for a time, till at length he
should be taken out of the way: And secondly, by the liberalities, and
donations of mighty Princes, who committed Reave. 18.9.
fornications, and lived deliciously with the Whore: But inducing and drawing
on this mystery to a ripeness by those many worldly pleasures, wherein this
great Revel. 18.7. Esaias. 47.8.
Harlot glorified her self, and lived deliciously, saying in her heart, I sit
a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow.

2. The material cause.
. XIIII. Now the matter or subject of Antichrist is a Man, not a Devil,
although the Occumen in 2. Tress. 2. The state of the Question in the Material
cause.

The first opinion of Papists.


Devil must be Antichrists Doctor. Only here is the question between us and
our Adversaries the Papists; Whether this great Antichrist shall be one only
man in person; or many men succeeding one after another in a Kingdom
apostaticall from the true Church of Christ? They all, so Saund. den. 2 and 8.
Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 2 ac 12. Henriq. vbi sup. Blasius Viegas qu. de Antich. 2.
and 3. and ^udaem. lib. 2. in Rob. Abbat. etc. The latter opinion of
Protestants, being the truth.
many as I have read of them, hold the former; affirming, that this great
Antichrist, being but one man in person, shall be a Jew by Nation, borne of the
Tribe of DAN. But we maintain the latter, denying the former, while Vid. D.
Whit. contra. 4. q. 5. cap. 1.2. D. Abbat. de Antich. cap. ^.. 6. M. Lauren.
Deios in his first Sermon. D. Willet. D. Down. Gabr. Powel. and D. Sharp. in
speculo Papae. cap. 1. etc.
we plainly and truly avouch thus much against them, That Antichrist at one
time is but one person; but in continuance of time he is many men, succeeding
one after another in a government gotten by mere usurpation: as in a well
settled Monarchy there reigns only but one King at once, although in
succession of time there may be many, one after another, according unto our
own English Proverb, The King never dies. Our proo^e^.
For this we shall make good by many strong reasons from the Scriptures, from
the proportion of faith, and from the plain testimonies of Orthodox Fathers:
From Scriptures, out of these plain words; first of Paul; First, from
Scriptures.
and secondly of John. Of Paul two ways; first, when he says 2. These. 2.7.
that the mystery of iniquity does already work. For this is not spoken
only in respect of the forerunners of Antichrist, who were open Heretics,
(as our Bellar. cap. 2. resp. 1.
Adversaries interpret it;) but also in regard of that secret transfusion of
inuenoming poison from one Heretic to another, through the close conueiance of
deuillish delusions, unto the great Antichrist, who being the common corpse of
all their corruption, Theod. in 2. These. 2.
shall after that he is revealed, openly and plainly preach what he always
had privately confirmed, as therefore before he was openly made known, it is
said of his working in the time of the Apostles, Many Ioh. 2. Ep. v. 7
deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh: [(...)] that is that deceiuer, and that Antichrist, then
working in a mystery, even at Rome by Simon Magus, and other Heretics, whose
poison is now derived tanquam per traducem, into Peter's Chair. For upon the
Whores forehead Reave. 17.5.
was a name written, Mystery Babylon, The great, the Mother of Harlots, and
abominations of the earth. Secondly, this appears from the same Apostle,
calling Antichrist 2. The. 2.3.11
an Apostasy, and showing that it must continue till the end of the world,
when the Lord shall consume him with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
him with the brightness of his coming. For this Apostasy (which is not, as
Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
some think, a reuolting in obedience from the Roman Empire; but (as Cyril
Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 11.
says, and to him our Adversaries, convicted in conscience, do assent) a
defection from the right faith) cannot be complete in the number of few years,
nor yet have full residence in one only man, since it must endure from the
first full disclosing thereof, which fell out in the year of our Lord, six
hundred, sixty and six, until the end of the world, as we shall have occasion
(God willing) to show hereafter.

Ob.
For in the mean time where they Bellar. ubi in. in resp. ad. 3.4.
would have this Apostasy not to appertain to one body, and Kingdom of
Antichrist, nor yet to require necessarily, that it should have one only head
thereof, but to be only a disposition or preparation unto the future Kingdom
of Antichrist, and to be done in diverse places, under diverse Kings, upon diverse
occasions, as Afrike is fallen away to Mahomet, Asia to Nestorius and Eutyches,
and other Provinces to other Sects; where, I say, they would thus unseasonably
separate Antichrist and this Apostasy;

Sol.
I wish them to look better into the holy Apostle, who makes these two
Reciprocals, Antichrist and Apostasy, since there can be no Apostasy from
the right faith, which is not against Christ, neither is their any one to be
accounted Antichristian, which is not an Apostate either more or less, as
Augustine August. lib. 20 de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 19.
thought, and therefore construed these words of Saint Paul only of the Great
Antichrist, yea, as Bellarmine Bell. vbi supr.
himself confesses in his first answer unto this our Argument, that
Antichrist is called Apostasy, either by a Metonymie, because he is unto many
men the cause of their backe-sliding from God, or (...), by reason of some
excellency, in that he is the most famous Apostate; although this figurative
identitie supposed by these men does not hinder the succession of the Great
Antichrist in many men, who are heads of this Monster successively, since they
all are both notorious Apostates in themselves, and villainous Seducers of an
infinite number of people from Christ, as we shall find presently from the
formal cause. In the mean while, as this truth is proved from Saint Paul's
words: so let us now demonstrate the same from Saint John, who calls this
Great Antichrist in one place Reave. 13.11.
a Beast that comes forth of the earth, and after that in the same Chapter,
the Verse 14.
image of the Beast, and in another place, the Reave. 17.10.
seventh King. For every one of these names signify a succession of men
sitting on Antichrists Throne, since, as the Reave. 13.1.
first Beast rising out of the Sea, signifies not one Emperor only, but all
the whole company of Emperors, succeeding one another in that Monarchy: so
the second Beast imports a body of beastly Tyrants, arising by succession
into a Government, which is called the Image of the Beast, Gloss. interlin. in
cap. 13. Apocalyp. and R^^har. de Sanc. Victore lib. 4 in Apocalypse. cap. 5.
because it most fitly resembles the State and Pomp of the Empire; that as in
the Empire the Head was one, not by unity of Person, but by succession of one
person after another in that same authority: so in this Kingdom of Reprobate
Antichrist, the Head must be one, not singular in one only person, and no more,
but single by the succession of one after another. For else how can he be the
seventh King, which was to come in the place of the sixth then flourishing,
when John did write this Prophecy? I will go no further then to their own
Rabbis, the Rhemists Annot. in 13. Reave.. 1.
Rhemists, who first expound the seven heads to be seven Kings (but how truly
they speak this, I send them unto Qui prorsus negat hanc gloss. lib. 2. in
Rob. Abbat. page 127.
Eudaemon for judgment) Five before Christ, one present, and one to come, and
secondly Rhemens Annot. in 17. Reave.. 8.
interpret the eight to be the Great Antichrist, one of the sene^ in regard of
order, but for that the malice of all the rest is complete in it called the
eight, and the odd Persecutors. For who are the five Kings before Christ? The
Iidem, ibid.. 7
Rhemists tell us that they were the Empires, Kingdoms, or States of Egypt,
Canaan, Babylon, the Persian, and Greeks, which be five, as sixthly the
Roman Empire, which persecuted most of all. Well then, I demand, whether the
seventh head or Kingdom shall resemble the rest in State and Government, or
differ clean from them? They cannot say, that he shall differ from the other
in form of policy, since he is one of the seven, and Reave. 13.12.
shall do all that the first Beast could do. Therefore hence I conclude, that
since the heads of Egypt, Canaan, Babylon, Persians, and Greeks, yea, and of
the Roman Empire were not one singular person, and no more but single men
succeeding one after another, as the Herod. lib. 2.
Pharaohs in Egypt, Iere. 52.31.
Nabuchadnezzar, Euilmerodach, etc. in Babylon; Herodot. lib. 1.3. etc.
Cambyses, and Darius Histaspis in Persia, Dindor. Sicul. bibliothes. lib. 17
18.19. etc.
Alexander alone, and after him his Captains in four several Kingdoms of
Grecians, and the Sueton. Dio, and Corpus Roman historiae.
Caesar's in Rome; since I say these Kingdoms, to which Antichrists Kingdom is
like for outward Government, had a succession of many, one after another,
Antichrist shall be such an head, as when the Devil has cut off one, he shall
presently in succession set another in place. But although this glosing
Exposition of the Rhemists be sufficient to convict the Romish Sect; yet the
faithful must be satisfied by reason only grounded upon the truth, which is
this concerning these seven Kings, that as the six former kinds of Government
were vpholden by succession of one after another until their last period: so
must this Kingdom of Antichrist continue in a company of wicked Caterpillars
succeeding one another, like Vipers, the latter eating out his way to reign by
the ruin of the former. For they are all alike both Heads and Kings for power
and authority over the same City; and they had a succession in every kind
severally, as they were in force, first Kings, then Consuls, thirdly, Tribuni
militum, fourthly, Decemuiri, fifthly, Dictators, and sixthly, Emperors, as
the Histories and Annals of the Romans do demonstrate, and we shall show
hereafter.

But Eudaemon, page 122. etc. ad 128. etc.
Eudaemon in his madness denies all at once here, Antecedent and Consequent,
that, Ob.
because there were not in Rome before Christ five several kinds of
Government, which kept this succession; since Kings, and Emperors were all one
kind of Government, as Consuls and Dictators, since Dictators were not
ordinary, but chief men chosen upon extraordinary occasions, since there was
an often interruption of Consuls by Dictators, and Tribuni militum: this, for
that if we grant those five to have a succession; yet it follows not that the
seventh must continue by the like succession, since some of those reigned but
two years, as the Decemuiri, others, but fifteen, as the Tribuni militum,
nay, all of them but seven hundred years at the most before the time of
Augustus; yea, and that in the time of the Persian and Grecian Monarchy, of
which John should have had as great a regard, as of this poor place then, when
those Empires were in their prosperity, inhabited by poor Shepherds. For
this seventh then shall be of longer continuance then all the rest, seeing
they ended in Christ's time, and the sixth was to cease about the time of
Boniface the third.

This is the sum (so well and shortly as I could take it) of all that his
most impertinent Discourse made for an answer unto our above said Argument,
which yet stands firm against all this babbling, both in the Antecedent and
in the Consequent: In the Antecedent, because first there were five several
kinds of Government in Rome before Christ's time, since Kings and Emperors,
though like in the solenesse, or alonelinesse, yet differed much both in the
name, and the nature of their Government, the Liuius lib. 2.
name of King being wholly rejected, in token of their liberty under the
Government of Consuls, when the Dio lib. 43.
name of Emperor was given most gladly unto Julius Caesar, and to his
Posterity after him, as a sign of greatest Soueraignetie: the nature of the
Office of the King being in their Cic. pro C. Rabirio perduello reo.
opinion wholly opposite to their liberty, where their Sueton. in Augusto.
Emperor was accounted the maintainer thereof, all the Offices, (as Dictator,
Pontifex Maximus, Censor, and Tribuni Plebis) being conferd upon him for term
of his own life, and to his Successors for ever after him; since also their
Dictator and Consul, which this ouer-worne Greek Antiquarie would have
confounded, were as far different in the Roman Commonwealths, as the
General and Provincial are now amongst their King-killing Iebusites, the
Polyb. lib. 6.
Consuls having in obedience and subjection all the Offices of the
Commonwealth, save the Tribuni Plebis, where Dionys. Halycarness. lib. 5.
the Dictator had authority above the Consuls, the Tribunes and all.

Secondly, although the Dictators were set upon the most weighty extraordinary
occasions; yet they may well be said to retain this succession, since, when
one was to give it over ordinarily at the half years end, they either made
choice of another or Liu. lib. 5. and Plutarch. in Camillo.
of the same man a new, as occasion served.

Thirdly, the interruption of the Consular Government by Dictators, and Tribuni
militum, did not hinder the succession of Consuls, (when they were) no more
then a vacancie for a Month or two, nay, a Year, and more sometimes takes
away the personal successions of Popes, since still some were in place of
Government amongst them to exercise due authority till another succeeded, as
the Festi Romanorum set out by many Sigonius, Onuphri, and Chronologi,
Funccius, Bunting. Chytiaeus, etc.
learned men do plainly declare.

2 Our argument is sound now in the antecedent, and shall it not stand then, I
pray you, in the consequent? Yes surely, notwithstanding these frivolous
exceptions violently thrust out of a self-condemning conscience by this
coozening-hungry Greek.

1 For first, what if the Decemuiri reigned but two years, and the Tribuni
militum but fifteen and all the five, till Augustus, but seven hundred years?
They yet had a succession like unto this of Antichrists, although not so long:
for the flux of succession is as true in minutes, as it is in years, although
not so great.

2 Secondly, what if the Persians and Graecians then flourished most, when
these five first offices were of principal use in Rome? This hindered not
their succession in Rome, which (as the Proverb is) was not built in one day;
but by little and little was to grow unto that prodigious greatness, which
afterward weighed down it self into the dust. For the Persians and Graecians
were to grow up in their order, and the Romans to follow after them, as Dan.
2. and 7. and 8. cap.
Daniel has delivered in sundry of his visions: And therefore John was not to
speak any thing of Persians or Graecians, since they were all before Christ,
Daniel being the Prophet appointed for those affairs: and since John was only
to speak of things to fall out either for, or against the Church from Christ's
ascension, till his second coming: and therefore he being to set forth the
seat and kingdom of Antichrist, meddled only with that kingdom which
Antichrist himself was to surprise, describing it by such tokens of things
already past, as by which we may now easily define of things present, and
plainly conjecture of things to come.

3 Thirdly therefore we grant, that Rome heathenish was first but small and
weak; but it was to grow unto her ripeness under these seven heads one after
another: under the last of all which if it stand in most continuance, there
follows no absurdity, since the old age in a strong man is commonly the
longest lasting period of life, but it rather shows the point we prove, that
Antichrist is not one man only, but many succeeding one after another, in a
kingdom continuing from the year of Christ six hundred sixty and sixth,
until his last coming. Secondly, from the proportion of Faith.
For so reason will enforce us to think from the proportion of faith, in that
as God works good in his children through his most rich grace by certain
degrees, according to the Mark 4.26.
parable of corn coming up out of the earth, first the blade, then the ears,
after, full corn in the ears: so heresy will ask some time for hatching,
because it must be wrought into men's consciences, not by force and rigor, but
by plausible persuasions, and colorable conceits, since it is hard to remove a
settled opinion in any thing, be it true or false. For Luke 5.39.
no man having drunk old wine, straightway desires new; for he says, The
old is better. And therefore since Antichrist must deal by delusions, and like
a crafty and subtle harlot, Revel. 17.2.
use blandiments, and allurements, by which he may seduce, and draw from the
true Church the greatest men on earth, it is needful to have more time then
one man's age (though he should live an hundred years and more) wherein these
his poisoned potions may work throughout the world. For although men by nature
will be quickly won to wickedness, yet the world is very wide, and full of
many sorts of men, to whom Antichrists doctrine cannot come in so short time,
as our Adversaries imagine: yea, and Antichrists doctrine is not so
compendious, being burdened with so many thousands of subtle sophistications,
and observations of beggarly rudiments, as to be learned in three or four
years at the most, (the time allotted unto him by them, as we shall see
hereafter;) nay Antichrist himself, let the Devil do to him what he can to
make him mighty in word and deed, yet is but a man, who can do no more then a
man can do, as the proverb is, Vnus homo, nullus homo. Erasm sub tit. Cedend.
multitudini.
One man, no man: and therefore although all the Heretics in the world did
make way for him, yet must he have more time to establish their blasphemies,
then the age of one man, because Tertul. lib. de praescrip. cap. 2.
there must be prescription, and precedents, upon which he must build, if he
will prevail any thing with settled Christians; and how, I pray you, can one
man prescribe? Say Gregor. Canonist. in notis ad Gratian. p. 2. causa 16. q.
15. praescript^al^ae etc.
they not, that in public causes prescription must be of forty years
together at the least? yea an Great. 16 q. 3. quas actiones. and can. Nemo. and
Gl^ss. in c. ad audie^. eod. tit.
hundred in some cases against the Church? How then can Antichrist in so short
time, as the age Breuis est hom. vita. reg. breuior Pontif. breuissima. Petarch.
of a Pope, go through the world, and draw so many to him? Surely our
Adversaries are either wholly besotted, not weighing the sundry courses of
conueyances in such designs as these are of Antichrists; or else if they find
them, (as it is not possible but they should, being men so expert in worldly
policies, as most of them are) then they plainly bewray themselves to be the
men, who follow the beast, and the merchants who grow rich by this trade, which
they conceal for their own best advantage, making Antichrist a Chimaera, and
not such, as besides the Scriptures, and these reasons, even the Orthodoxe
Fathers describe him to be. For besides those Fathers, Thirdly, from the
Ancient Fathers.
who from Saint Paul's words calls Antichrist the apostasy, as Qui omnes in
2 Thessalonians. 2.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, and Oecumenius by Bellar. li. 3. de
Pontif. cap. 2.
Bellarmines own confession, I will produce two of the chiefest, directly
declaring the succession of monsters in this throne of Antichrist, to wit,
Irenaeus, and Augustine: For Irenaeus, howsoever he sets down many things
concerning Antichrist, which at the first blush to an unaccustomed Reader may
seem to be spoken of one only person, yet so plainly delivers the
succession in this kingdom, that I marvel with what face either Sand. lib.
8. de Visib. Monarch. cap. 1.
Sanders, or Feuard. in Annot. in Jrenae. lib. 5. cap. 25.
Feuardentius can say, that he makes for them, when although he sets down
the tribe, the names, and years of continuance, as if it were spoken of one
only man, (speaking Vid. Whitak. in resp. ad 1. Demonst. Sanderi.
either after the manner of the Prophets in scripture, or according to the
common opinion of men in his interpretation,) yet he says thus plainly,
Irenae. lib. 5. fol. 249. edit. Paris. A. Dom. 1567
Lateinos nomen sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerum, valde verisimile est:
quoniam verissimum, (Feuardentius Feuard. in su^ edit. Coloniae. 1596.
most filthily and falsely has turned this word into nouissimum) regnum hoc
habet vocabulum: Latini enim sunt, qui nunc regnant, sed non in hoc nos
gloriabimur: The name Lateinos is most likely to have this number six hundred,
sixty and six, because the truest kingdom has this name; for the Latins
are they, who now do reign, but we will not boast in this. Now is not here a
lively proof to show the succession, since Antichrist is called Lateinos, and
Lateinos is called a kingdom? If they say, that it is but the kingdom of one
man only, let them turnebackward, and a little before In edit. Parisiensi.
fol. 244. and Colon. li. 5. ca 25.
this they shall find this history of Antichrist, that he shall be the
unrighteous judge, to whom Luke 18.2.
the poor widow, that is, the earthly Jerusalem shall come for justice, to be
revenged of her enemy, which he shall do in the time of his kingdom; for he
shall translate his kingdom thither, and sit in Gods Temple, seducing those who
worship him, as if he were Christ himself. For out of this history we may
plainly gather, that Irenaeus thought of Antichrist, as of a company
incorporated into a Kingdom first abroad in the world, then settled at
Jerusalem; lastly, using tyranny some three years and an half, according as
Daniel prophesied, concerning the half week. And yet if Irenaeus had not said
thus much, we want not other testimony, if we may believe S. Augustines
report, who August. lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 19.
speaking of Antichrists sitting in the Temple of God, delivers first this
common Exposition: Nonnulli non ipsum principem, sed vniuersum quodam modo
corpus eius, id est, ad eum pertinentem hominum multitudinem simul cum ipso suo
principe hoc loco intelligi Antichristum volunt: Some will have in this place
to be understood by Antichrist, not the Prince himself, but his whole body in
a certain manner, that is, the multitude of men belonging unto him, together
with the Prince himself. Secondly, his own judgment of this exposition;
Rectiusque putant etiam Latin dici, sicut in Graeco est, non in templo Dei sed
in templum Dei sedeat, tanquam sit ipse templum Dei, quod est Ecclesia, sicut
dicimus, sedet in amicum, id est, velut amicus, vel si quid aliud isto
locutionis genere dici solet: And also they think better, that it may be spoken
in the Latin, as it is in the Greek, he sits not in the Temple of God, but
for the Temple of God, as if he were the Temple of God, which is the Church; as
we say, he sits for our friend, that is, as our friend, or if any other
thing else be accustomed to be spoken in that kind of speech. For out of
these words of Augustine, so direct and plain, we may observe, that the
common sort of learned men in Augustines time, or before, did hold, concerning
Antichrist, these two conclusions, which Augustine himself allows of: the
first, that Antichrist is a multitude, consisting of head and members, Prince
and subjects. The second, that Antichrist should take upon him the authority of
the Church, as if he only were the Church. So that now, since Antichrist is a
multitude, and not one man, and to be esteemed by men for the Church, which
pleads still for succession, The Popish opinion confuted, and their reasons
answered.
I marvel upon what ground our Adversaries deliver for authentic doctrine
these three conclusions: The first, that Antichrist shall be one person only:
The second, that Antichrist shall be a Jew by Nation: The third, that
Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of DAN. For they have no ground at all out of
the Scriptures to make them good. For concerning the first,

Ob.
Where they would have Antichrist to be but one man, partly because our Savior
says, I Ioh. 5.43.
am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not; if another shall come in
his own name, him ye will receive; and partly, for that in the description of
the great Antichrist, the Greek Text prefixeth the Article [(...)] to make an
indiuiduum.

Sol.
There is a double fallacy: the first, (...) from the ignorance of Argument,
since our Savior there speaks, not of one only opposite, but indefinitely
of all who are against him, be they false Prophets or Antichrists, or whosoever
other wicked Seducers, who agree neither with him, nor amongst themselves, to
their own conviction and confusion, according to that old rule, Veritas vna,
error multiplex; Truth is but one, and error is manifold. For the use of the
word in the original [(...)] is to note an indefinite, [ any] or [ many] as
(to give instance in two places for a great many) where it is said, John 4.37.
one sows, and another [(...)] reapeth: and, 1. Cor. 12.8.
to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another [(...)] the
word of knowledge by the same Spirit: Even as Nonnus in paraphrasi Ioh. Euang.
ex correct^ Fr. Nansij.
Nonnus does well express the indefinite term, in paraphrasing this foresaid
place of S. John after this manner most faithfully: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...):
which in English are thus much, word for word: if any other Bastard false
named man, come opposite against God [seeking the praise not of the Great God,
but of himself,] then ye men amazed will again make much of this deadly
Deceiuer, that any man may say: they deny the lawfully born, and receive the
Bastard appearing to the^. For though ((...)) be the singular number, yet it
notes indefinitely mo then one, if we may believe the report of old Ammonius
de simil. and different. dictionibus
Grammarians, (...): the word (...) (which signifies another also) is
appointed to signify the second of two, but (...), to intimate any of many. So
that what our Savior here speaks in the singular indefinitely, he is
Reverend. Patre Episc. Sarisb. D. Abba. 1 by sup.
well observed to deliver the same expressly in the plural number, when he
says: Mat. 24.5.
Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. For
as many were before; so many should come after him, being most vile Impostors,
who, whether they come in their own name, that is, not by Gods will and
pleasure, but only upon their own motion, and madness; or whether they come
in the Name of Christ, that is, counterfeiting themselves to be Christ: yet
are still opposed unto Christ, who is John 14.6.
the only way, the truth, and the life, that John. 5.43.
came in his Fathers Name, as it is Mat. 21.9. and Psalm. 118.24.
said therefore of him, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

Eudaemon Eudaem. p. 139
yields unto the exposition of Io. Maldonat. in Ioh. 5.43.
Maldonatus, which makes only for us, since first his Paraphrase is of [ Si
quis alius] by the indefinite [ Quisquis alius:] secondly, he takes it to be
spoken not of Antichrist only, but of all false prophets; who Iere. 23.21.
ran, when they were not sent; thirdly, he judges these Deceivers to be
those, whom Act. 5.35.36
Gamaliel did mention, Theudas, Judas of Galilee, and that Rebel Barchochebas,
of whom Eusebius. lib. 4. hist. Eccl. cap. 6.
Eusebius makes mention: and fourthly, he reconcileth the places
aforementioned seeming to be repugnant in the terms of coming in Christ's
Name, and in their own name, by the very same distinction, which we use of
name, which signifies either Christ's agnomination, in which these false
prophets are foretold to come, or else Christ's authority, which yet they want.

Therefore, Cardinal Bellarmine must now find out some better proof to show,
that Antichrist must be one man, since this his first reason bewrays his
impudency (I cannot say) ignorance in a man of such great learning.

Sol.
For, what I pray you, may we think of him for his second Argument drawn from
the Article [] before [(...),] but, as of a Iuggler given only to tricks of
colloguing and delusion, since it is another fallacy, which may be more
plainly discerned to be drawn a figura dictionis, from the figure, or fashion
of the Word it self.

For the Article prefixed, as he says, does note out some certain one
particular person, by the judgment of Epiph. ^aer. 9.
Epiphanius.

But Epiphanius does not help him, if he look well to the words of that
learned Father, who says, that [(...) a King, and (...) a God, and (...) a
Man, do indefinitely signify any King, any God, any Man, whereas if the
Article be prefixed [(...)] it determinately does signify one certain King,
one true God, and one particular Man. For all this we grant, and confess of
Antichrist, that he is one particular person, but not one only particular
person, as ((...)) does point at one particular King, God or Man, by the
judgment of Epiphanius; but not at one only singular in any of these kinds,
as Bellarmine must prove, if he will say any thing unto the purpose. But alas,
what can they do in causa deplorata, in a desperate Plea, where both
Scripture, and their own mouths make most against them? Scripture, where the
Article does not intimate determinatum indiuiduum, one only single singular
person, but indiuiduum vagum, any singular person indefinitely, as in these
places; Mark 2.27.
the Sabbath was made for man, but [(...)] not man for the Sabbath, and, Luke
4.4.
man [(...)] lives not by bread only, and, Heb. 9.7.
into the second [tabernacle] went the High Priest [(...)] once every year,
and, Ioh. Ep 2. verse 7.
this is a Deceiuer, and an Antichrist [(...):] their own mouths:

For Eudaemon Eudaemon page 151.
admits the Article to give a double limitation, one to design the nature
only; the other to limit the universal nature to this or that particular so,
as it may agree to any other of the same kind: and what is this else, but to
grant that the Article may as well express indiuiduum vagum, as determinatum?
Nay, he Jdem. p. 159.
further admits, that the name of Antichrist may be given to any notorious
Heretic, even with the limiting Article metaphorically, as Champions may be
called Lions; Actors, Roscij, and Tyrants, Nerones. So that we need not much
trouble our selves to answer their oppositions, if we would, but mark
diligently their own contradictions in other points, as much as in this
concerning Antichrist, whom they can never prove to be one only person.

he shall be a Jew by Nation? The Pellar. lib. 3. de Pontif. ca. 12.
Cardinal brings no place of Scripture, but what has been answered before
out of Saint John; so basely begging the question. Only his reason is all,
which any of them can say, to wit, that he must needs be a Jew, because that
the Jews will never receive any one for their Messiah, who is not a Jew, or
uncircumcised, since they look for a Messiah out of the Lineage of DAVID, and
Tribe of IVDAH.

Sol.
And yet it comes short a great deal of their mark, since it is not proved
that the Jews will receive Antichrist; or if they shall receive Antichrist,
whether they will take him for their Messiah only; or how they can expect one
of the Tribe of David, and yet receive a Counterfeit coming from the Tribe of
Dan, and borne in the City Babylon, not Rome, but that place properly in
Mesopotamia, as Henriq lib. vlt. ca. 23.. 7.
Henriquez, and Viguer. Instit. cap 21.. 3. v. 3.
Viguerius do falsely suppose? But if he be from the Tribe of Dan, he must
needs be a Jew. Surely, it follows not, since Dan for their Idolatry was
accounted by the Holy Ghost, rather Gentiles then Jews.

And yet it is to be proved, that he must be For Bellarmine Vid. Bellarm.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
himself does truly and ingenuously confess, that this opinion (concerning
Antichrists original from the Tribe of DAN) is very probable, becuase of the
authority of so great Fathers (such as were IRENAEVS, HYPPOLITVS, etc) who do
affirm it. But yet it is not altogether certain, both because Gene. 49.16
IAACOB seems literally to speak of SAMSON, when he says [DAN shall be a
Serpent by the way, an Adder in the path, that biteth the Horse heels, so that
his Rider shall fall backward.] For SAMSON was of the Tribe of DAN, and was
truly unto the Philistims, as a Serpent by the way: for every where he
withstood them, and vexed them; and so HIEROME expounds it in his Hebrew
Questions: and it seems truly, that IAACOB did wish well unto his Son,
when he spoke these words: and therefore that he did not foreshew ill, but
good: Yea, if it be allegorically applied unto Antichrist, there can but a
probable Argument be thence derived such as is drawn from mystical meanings.

Secondly, where some allege these words of Iere. 8.16.
Prophet [the snorting of his Horses was heard from DAN,] the same Cardinal
answers, that JEREMY without doubt does not speak of Antichrist neither of
the Tribe of DAN, but of NABVCHODONOSOR, who was to come to destroy Jerusalem,
through that Country, which is called DAN, as HIEROME there does rightly
expound it.

Lastly, where some Riber. and Viegas in 7. Apocalypse. 14.
make it a great matter of moment to draw Antichrist from DAN, that DAN is not
reckoned amongst the elect Tribes, this great Cardinal does thus lightly pass
over this proof: Why DAN is omitted, it is not yet known* especially, since
EPHRAIM, which is one of the greatest Tribes, is not set down. An answer
sufficient to stop the mouths of our arrogant Adversaries, although for the
satisfying of all good Christians, our most learned Divines Apud Marlaorat, in
7. Apoc.
deliver this reason for the omission of DAN, because DAN so quickly revolted
unto Gentilisme, that he was not thought worthy to be accounted amongst the
twelve Tribes of Israel. So that now to conclude this Discourse concerning the
material cause of Antichrist, let us pass over all these unwritten fopperies
of blearing Phantastickes, touching the certain Nation, and Tribe, whence
Antichrist shall rise, and hold this truth for certain, that Antichrist must
be a man, of what Nation soever (as he may be of any,) succeeding a
Predecessor in all his abominations, which he himself shall leave unto a
Successor, in one only place, as now the form of Antichrist, to be sought
out shall plainly demonstrate.

The formal cause consisting in these three, 1. Qualities. 2. Place. 3 Time.

. XV. The form shall appear first by the qualities of his person, secondly,
by the place of his residence; thirdly, by the time of his beginning and
continuance. The qualities of his person are first inward habits, and secondly,
outward actions: The Qualities of Antichrist are two, 1. Habits, 2. Acts.


The Habits of Antichrist are two, 1. Heresy. 2. Iniquity.


Antichrist an Heretic.


The habits are many, but all comprehensible under these two heads only,
first, of heresy in doctrine; secondly of iniquity in life. For because of
heresy in doctrine, he is called 2. These. 2.4.
[(...)] or an Adversary, because like Beza in Annot. mayor.
his own Father Satan, he opposes himself Aquinas in 2. These. 2.
against all good Spirits teaching true Doctrine, by that his earnest embracing
of all manner of heresies, which violate the common faith expressed in our
Creed, as plainly appears by this one mark of Antichrist, which S. John 1.
John 4.3.
sets down, Every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is not of God; and this is that spirit of Antichrist, of which ye
have heard, etc. For under Vid. Fern. and Piscat. in hunc locum.
this denial of Christ's Incarnation, all the Articles of our faith in the
Creed are renounced, whether they be concerning the person, or the office of
Christ: Concerning his person, as he is both God, and man: God, Phil. 2.7.
coequall to his Father, and to the Holy Ghost; Man, like Heb. 4.15.
unto us in all things, sin only excepted, conceived by the Holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary: Concerning his office, first of Prophecy, wherein he
teaches us, being our only Mat. 23.8.
Doctor: secondly of his Priesthood, wherein he suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried, and descended into Hell: thirdly of his
Regalitie or Kingly office, wherein he is not only personally exalted by the
Resurrection of his body the third day from the dead, his ascension into
Heaven, his sitting at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, and his
coming again to judgment of the quick and dead; but also rules over his
Church in the communion of Saints, both for the forgiveness of sins in this
life only (for as Cyprian Cyprian. lib. contra Demetrianum.
says, after death, there is no place for repentance) and for the Resurrection
of the body unto life eternal. Antichrist Revel. 16.13
the false prophet must deny all these points of Christian belief, not openly
(for then he should be convicted publicly in the Councels by the Orthodox
Fathers,) but by secret conueyances, and colorable pretenses, for which he is
Revel. 13.11.
said to have two horns like a Lamb, but to speak as a Dragon, because as
Gregory Gregor. lib. 33 Mor. cap. 36.
the great, and after him many learned, even Rich. de sancto Victore, lib. 4 in
Apocal c. 5. Viegas and Ribera in 13. Apocal.
Papists expound it, Under the show of a Lamb he infuseth into his reprobate
hearers the poison of a serpent, having the two Testaments by knowledge of
learning, not by holiness of life, he agrees with the Devil by wicked
persuasion.

Antichrist by the holy Apostle is called, Antichrist in Iniquity most heinous.
in respect both of his own wicked person, and of other vile miscreants whom
he seduceth, 2. These. 2.3.
the man of sin, the son of perdition, yea, Revel. 9.11.
Abaddon, Apollyon, both actiuely to others, and passiuely in himself, since
there is not one commandment in the whole Decalogue, which wittingly and
willingly he does not infringe; as (to give in every one of them a special
instance) he breaks the first by Atheism and Magic, by which as Antiochus
Epiphanes, otherwise called Epimanes, a right tipe of Antichrist, Dan. 11.36.
magnified and exalted himself against every God, speaking marvelous things
against the God of gods; so Antichrist shall 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
exalt himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: the
second by Idolatry and superstition, by which as Antiochus Dan. 11.38.
shall honor his God Mauzzin, a God whom his fathers knew not: so must
Antichrist Revel 17.4.
be full of all abominations, and filthiness of fornications: the third by
blasphemies, whereof Revel. 17.3.
he must be full: the fourth by profanation of the Sabbath, and other
festival days through Revel. 9.1.
smoke of the pit, which darkened sun and air, that is, through Ribera in
hunc locum.
the darkness of errors, and lusts of ignorance, which blinded the minds of
simple Christians: the fifth by pride over the Kings of the earth, Revel. 13.12
causing them to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed: the
sixth by Revel. 17.6.
murdering the Saints of God: the seventh by Revel. 17.2.
fornications, and foul adulteries, yet Dan. 11.37.
seeming not to care for women, by 1. Tim. 4.2.
forbidding Marriages: the eight by thefts, Dan. 11.39.
in dividing the land for gain: the ninth by 2 Thessalonians. 2.11
lies, and false wonders, as one possessed with a spirit of delusion: the tenth
by the indulgence of raging concupiscence, 2. Tim. 3.4.
loving pleasures more then God, and 2. Pet. 2.14.
exercising himself in covetous practices, as a cursed child. So is this vile
Monster habituated on each side. Can we look for better acts? Mat. 12.34.
O generation of vipers, how can ye, The acts of Antichrist are 3.
Covetousness. Coozenage. Cruelty.
His Covetousness known by his Character imprinted.
For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. The tree (says
Clem. Alex. li. 5. Strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus) is known by his fruits, not by flowers, and blossoms.
For lo now the Acts proceeding from these habits! The first is of Covetousness
in his Character: The second of Coozenage in his miracles: The third and the
last of cruelty in his wars. For the Character, which is nothing else but (as
Dionysius Dionys. Carthus^n 13. Apoc.
Carthusianus says) a conformity to the life and doctrine of Antichrist, or
(as Aquin. par. 3. q. 63. art. 3.
Aquinas defines it) a profession of an unlawful worship joined with an
obstinate malice (whether expressible by some outward sign and mark, or
invisible, or both, as it is either an inward conformity, or an outward
profession, all is one to Vid. Petrum Molins 3. part Apolog. cap 4.
us, who take it for a mark of a reprobate,) does demonstrate his incroaching
and coueteous humor, since first he Reu. 13.16.17
causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond to receive
the mark: secondly, it is to be imprinted in their right hand, and in their
foreheads: thirdly, no man may buy or sell, save he that has the mark, or the
name of the beast, or the number of his name. For first, when he causes all of
all sorts of men, both Laity and Clergy (as Bellar. lib. 1. de membr.
Ecclesiae, cap. 1.
they wickedly distinguish Gods people, to debar them from this lot,
inheritance in Jesus Christ) that is, Aquin. part. 3. q. 63. art. 3. ad. 3.
either men in an order unto a common life of ignorant superstition, or in an
order of a special calling for propagating and defense of the same
superstition; when, I say, he seeks to put all into his own mark, does he
not well resemble that wretched worldling, who Psalm. 10.10.
croucheth, and boweth, that heaps of the poor may fall into his strong
parts? Secondly, he must have the mark set on their foreheads Gloss. ordinar.
and Lyra in 13. Apoc. 17.
for show of profession, and upon their right hand also for strength of
operation, that both like a false Apostle, Gal. 6.12.
he might glory in their flesh, and with the most tyrannous Ammonite Nahash, 1.
Sam. 11.2.
put out the right eyes of their understanding, to lay it, if he can possibly,
for a reproach upon all the Israel of God. For thirdly he bewraieth his greedy
desire of this general subjection to be for his own advantage, only by
restrayning the power of buying, and selling, unto those alone which have his
mark. For what else is this buying, and selling, but a making of merchandise
of the souls of men, through covetousness, with fained words, as 2. Pet. 2.3.
Peter calls it? And what is this restrayning of this market to some only,
but a special motive to them, who think to grow rich by such a gainefull
trade of seeking to procure this mark, as a letter of Mart to themselves
alone, by which they may securely enjoy the benefit of such a Monopoly?
Babylon, as Nah. 3.4.
Nineveh, is a Mistress of Witchcrafts, that sells Nations through her
Whoredoms; and Families through her Witchcrafts, in which, as in the corrupted
Mic. 3.11.
Jerusalem, the Heads judge for reward, the Priests teach for hyre, the
Prophets for money, as Merchants Revel. 18.3.
waxing rich through the abundance of her delicacies. So proueable is the
Beasts mark; whereof yet, lest some wary people should make a doubt,
Antichrist, the better His Cooznage known by his false Miracles
as our Mat. 24.24.
Savior, and his 2. These. 2.11. Reave. 13.13.14
Apostles foretold. For since 1. Cor. 12.22
Miracles are signs to them that believe not, as is the gift of tongues:
therefore as Christ himself came, and sent his Disciples to preach the Gospel,
Heb. 2.4.
God bearing witness thereunto with signs and wonders: So Antichrist, to
gather the people unto him, like an Ape, must imitate the Master, and Ministers
of the true Church of God, in counterfeit signs, which by Bellar. lib. 3. de
Pontif. ca. 15.
Bellarmines own confession, are every way lying Miracles, in respect of all
the causes: as first, of the end, because they are only done Mat 24.24.
to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect, whiles thereby they would, if
they could, show, that Antichrist is God and Messiah: Secondly, of the
efficient, which is only the Devil, John 8 44.
the Father of lies, after 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
whose working is the coming of Antichrist: Thirdly, of the matter, ficta non
facta, coozening tricks, Bell. vbi supra.
done in the sight of men, but deluding the same, says Bellarmine, out of
Arethas: Fourthly of the form, because they exceed not the strength of
nature, being only performed by the secret, either sympathy, or antipathie,
of natural things mirande, non miraculose; maruailously, for that they are
secret to the simple; but yet not miraculously, since that they are known to
the Angels, and may be perceived by skillful men in Philosophy Antichrist
cannot do by his Fox-like fraud, His cruelty forcible and fraudulent.
that same he attempteth with Lyon-like force; Psalm. 10.9.
like a Lion in his den, using both force and fraud, says Aug. in Ps. 10
S. AUGUSTINE, Force in his Government, and fraud in his Miracles, that so he
may fulfill the measure of the Devils hatred in persecuting the Church; first
by the force of cruel Emperors: and secondly by the fraud of cunning
Heretics. For to say nothing of those fantastical Wars of Antichrist,
which the Bellar. cap. 16 Henriq.. 5. Viegas in 13. Apoc. de Antichrist.. 10.
Jesuits would, out of the mis-interpreting of Daniel, Ezechiel, and John's
Revelation, put upon him to wage, first against the three Kings, of Egypt,
Libia, and Aethiopia: secondly, with the seven Kings remaining, and so to
become the Monarch of the whole World. We need go no further for testimony
of his cruelty, then to the description of the Revel. 17.7.
Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus. For to suck up this precious blood of Gods redeemed, Antichrist warreth
not only Revel. 11.7.
with the two Witnesses sent to preach in the great City, (which are not, as
the Bell. ca. 6. Ribera and Viegas in 11. Apoc.
Papists all say, Enoch and Elias, since all the Apud Pereriu^ in 5. Genesis 24.
Fathers say, that Enoch is not to be seen of men in this world: and our
Savior says, Mat. 11.14.
that John Baptist was the Elias which was to come: but rather, as His Jacob.
Rex in Praefat. in Apolog. pa. 78.79.
sacred Majesty has most certainly demonstrated, either the two Testaments,
or the Witnesses preaching the Truth of those two Testaments) but also with all
those, who will not worship the Image of the Beast. For Gal. 4.29.
as he, that was the son of the bondwoman, persecuted him which was the
son of the freewoman: Even so is it now, seeing the faithful must, Act.
14.22.
through many temptations and afflictions, enter into the Kingdom of God. For
the wicked, thus raging, are but Esaias 10.5.
Gods Rod, and the staff in their hands is his indignation. So that this may
be our only comfort in the midst, or heat, of all these troubles, that as
when a Father has beaten his child, he burns the Rod, to still his
child: so our most gracious God, and loving Father, having suffered, for some
short space, the great Antichrist, both in and against his Church, for his
Churches comfort and pleasure, will destroy that Monster Antichrist, as the
Revel. 16.17
loud voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, at the pouring out of
the seventh Violl, shall say, It is done. The place of Antichrist is twofold,
Common and Proper.
we must in the second place seek where he sits: and this by the guide of
Scriptures may we find out easily, since Scripture shows the place of
residence for wicked Antichrist to be common and proper: His Common place.
and both of them (God knows) too good for him. For his common place, wherein
Gods Children may dwell as well as he, is 2. These. 2.4.
the Temple of God, which all the Popish Bella^. Vigne. Henriq. Viegas, Eudam.
etc.
Writers, that I have seen, understand to be the Temple at Jerusalem; but
first, without any Scripture at all, since that great City, upon which they
frame this conceit, is not Jerusalem, either heavenly, or earthly; not
heavenly, (for that is called Revel. 11.8.
The holy City:) not earthly, (for that was not the place of Execution, when
A. Nerone ad Licini. Vide Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 6. and lib. 4. cap. 6. and
Orosi. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Tyrants were to persecute the Saints, it being made desolate all the time of
those trials:) but is taken by all Vid. August. hom. 8. in Apoco. and Marlaor.
etc.
the best Writers, weighing all circumstances, for the midst of the Church,
where Christ was crucified, both in his Members by persecution, and in Himself
by the blasphemies of Antichrist. Secondly, against both Scriptures
prophesying, and the proved event; those plainly foretelling that God will
make Jerusalem desolate, until Dan. 9.27.
the consummation; and that determined, shall be powered upon the desolate.
This is manifest by the Jewish hope of building the Temple so oftentimes
frustrate, especially Russin. lib. 1. hist. cap. 38. and Theodor. lib. 3.
histor. cap. 20.
when Julian the Apostata, the more to despite the Christians, did authorize
them to build the Temple in the place where it was set before, but then could
not be founded, by reason of Fire, and Thunder, and Earthquake, happening in
the same place, where they would have laid the first stones. Wherefore the
Temple, in which this Antichrist shall have his abode, must be the Church, if
we stand either to the interpretation of Hieron. q. 11. ad Algasi. and
Chrysostom. ac Oecumen in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Fathers, or to the use of the word [ Temple] in the new Testament, as where it
is said, 1. Cor. 3.17.
that the Temple of God is holy, which ye are, whiles as 1. Pet. 2.5.
lively stones, ye be made a spiritual house, by Ephe. 2.22.
growing unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Yet thereby we conclude not, (as
Bellarmine Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 13.
would enforce) that the state of Antichrist shall be the true Church of
Christ. For as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 1.21.22.23.
The faithful City is become an Harlot; it was full of judgment;
righteousness lodged in it; but now Murderers: Thy silver is become dross:
thy wine is mixed with water: Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
Thieves. Indeed, the place where Antichrist now sits, was once the true
Church of Christ, both in inward truth, and outward profession: yea, and many
bright lamps did A. Lino, seu Clement. ad Bonifac. 3. Vid. Fascic. Tempor. and
Plati.
shine therein, some dying in blessed Martyrdom, some as constant Confessors:
but now Osee 6.8.
Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity: and Mat. 21.^3. His proper
Place.
the House of Prayer is made a den of thieves. For now the proper place of
Antichrist is in Scripture noted by the name of Great Reave. 14.8.
Babylon, not litteral in Caldae^, which is Vid. Sam. Purch. l. 1 ca. 11
so far desolate, that Trauailers cannot find it, neither yet in Egypt near
to Grand Cayro, since Pet. Bellonius lib. 2. cap 38. and Io. Maginus in
descript. Aegypti.
some report that our Savior was hid in Egypt there from Herod, it being now
a beggarly Village: But mystical, even Rome, whose description is delivered by
S. Reave. 17.9.10.11.12.
John, in these words, [ The seven Heads are the seven Mountains on which the
woman sits: and there are seven Kings; five are fallen, and one is, and the
other is not yet come: and when he comes, he must continue a short space:
and the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth; and is of the
seven: and the ten horns, which thou saw, are the ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast.] For do not all these Observations concerning Rome, most naturally
arise according to their most certain events out of this Scripture? First,
that Rome was built upon Onu^hr. lib. 1 Antiq. Romans page 140.
these seven Hills, which in John his time were termed, first, Palatinus;
secondly, Capitolinu^; thirdly, Quirinalis; fourthly, Caelius; fifthly,
Esquilinus; sixthly, Viminalis; seventhly, Auentinus, according to that Verse
of PROPERTIVS Propert. lib. 3 Eleg. 10.
.

Septem Vrbs alta i^gis, toti quae praesidet orbi;
The City built on seven Hills,
That with her power the World fills.
Secondly, that Rome was governed by Rhemenses in 17. Apoc. 9.
seven Kings, that is, by seven kinds of Magistrates, having kingly authority,
the first whereof were called Kings: the second, Consu^s; the third, Decemuiri;
the fourth, Tribuni militum; the fifth, Dictatores, the sixth, Imperatores, the
seventh, Pontifices, or Bishops; five being past as out of date in Saint John's
time; the sixth, who was called Emperor then bearing sway, till the seventh,
which is now the Pope, should rise, in the growth of whose Supremacy, an eighth
kind of Government springing from Charles the Great, and continuing amongst the
Germans, successively Carrion. Chron. lib 5 and A^nti. lib. 4 Annal. ^oior and
Abbas Vrspurg^ns. and Na^cler. tom. 2. and Henr. Mutius de reb. Germanicis.
in the Families of the Frankes, Saxons, and Sueuians under the name of
Emperor, which was one of the seven former kinds of Government, for a while
swayed the scepter, which the Pontifex now holds over the City of Rome.
Thirdly, that this Rome was supported by ten horns, that is, by ten Provinces
subject to the Roman Empire, but upon the very first rising of Antichrist,
reuolting from that Government, and reuerencing the Beast with all Titles of
Honor, all Homage, and help, till afterward upon plain information of the
truth, they all by one consent shall make war against the Beast: and these are
their names (if we stand to the most probable conjecture of the Apud Marlor.
in locum.
best learned) viz. 1. Naples; 2. Portugal; 3. Spain; 4. France; 5.
Britain; 6. Denmark; 7. Sweden; 8. Poland; 9. Hungary. 10. Bohemia.


For these in Saint John Onuphr. lib. 3. Romans Antiquit.
his time were the Provinces supporting the State of the Roman Empire in the
West, and these all became Kingdoms, distinct in Government and State, from
the Empire, much Vid. Carrion. lib. 5. and Chron. Maria. Scoti and Vrspurgens.
ab anno 500. ad anno 800. post Christ. natum.
about the time, when the Empire was divided, near the days of Charles the
Great, some eight hundred years, or more from Christ. The strength of these
Collections is such, that the Riber. and Viegas in 17. Ap^c. 9. and Bellar. li.
3. cap. 13.
Jesuits themselves, as convicted in conscience, grant Rome to be the seat
of Antichrist, yet absurdly distinguishing Rome to be either Heathenish, or
Christian: and Rome Heathenish to be the proper seat of Antichrist* as it was
subject unto the Heathen Emperors; but not Rome Christian now under the Pope.
For this Gloss is flatly repugnant, first, to the Scripture, which assigns
Reave. 13.11.
the same place of being, though not of beginning, to both the Beasts:
secondly, to reason, since we know that Rome Heathenish could not be Sic
Glossa in Gratian. did. 50 can. Placuit, vt poenit. definit Apostat. ^sse
retro abeuntes a side, Religione, vel Clericat. ex cause. 26. q. 2. can. Non
obseruetis.
an Apostate from Christian Religion, which it never professed: thirdly, to the
certain event of things happening; seeing Heathenish Rome did never Revel.
17.2.
make the Nations drunk with her Idolatries, as does the
Ps^udo-Christian-Popish-Rome at this day; but rather was made drunken by the
abominable Superstitions of all other people, which they Rosinus lib. 2. Antiq.
Romans ca. 5
willingly admitted into their Pantheon, the common Temple of all their gods.
Wherefore, concerning the place, I conclude without further treating of a
matter so plain, that Antichrist must sit in the midst of the Church at Rome.

The time of Antichrists, 1. Beginning. 2. Continuing

first, when Antichrist should begin; secondly, how long he shall continue;
In the former point it is hard to prescribe a definite time of beginning
Antichrists beginning.
since both of them grow from senseless beginnings, to very fearful issues.
So that if we search the first instant of his beginning, we shall hardly find
it, seeing in the 2. These. 2.7.
Apostles time it begun to work under a mystery: but if we crave the time,
when he should be revealed, we find it in Scripture to be at the ruin of the
Roman Empire, which being the only obstacle to Antichrist, The three sure
means of Antichrists rising.
was first of all to be taken out of the way, that Antichrist might afterward
be displayed in his colors by these three degrees: First, of a voluntary
succession, and remoouall Antichrist should place his Chair: The second of a
Antichrist by glosing and flattery must win by little and little unto the
embracing of his abominations, for the more speedy and surer planting of his
ten several Horns. The third, of a fraudulent usurpation of a double Sword,
Antichrist himself then peeping abroad. For the first was to fall out at 2.
These. 2 7.
he which let in the Apostles time, was to be taken out of the way, first,
by voluntary changing of his seat, dividing his Empire, as Chrysostom Chrysostom
hom. 4. in 2 These. 2.
expounds it; then by an v^ter euersion, and rooting of the same out of the
World, as all Ambr. Sedul. Primas ^heod. Theophylact. Oecumen. ^yr^ cum g^ssis
(...). cert. and Ordinar. Aquin. etc.
other Fathers take it: the second, that particular denunciation of the third
Reu. 8.12.13
part of the Sun, and the third part of the Mo^ne, and the third part of the
S^arres to be smitten and darkened, that the d^y sh^ne not for a third part of
it, nor likewise the night. For Hayn o, Marlaora. and Brightman in loc.
the smiting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the third part, signifies Gods
judgment inflicted upon a great part of Christendom, by the bloody hands of
Heathen people, whose fury should so stop the course of Christian Doctrine,
that their day, and their night seem shortened in the third part. And yet
Antichrist in all this Garboyle is not troubled, but Psalm. 10.10.
croucheth in his Den, till he may ravish the poor, fawning on and
flattering these rude Mates, and Tyrants, till out of their Offspring such
Kingdoms may be settled, as by which (they Revel. 17.2.
now poisoned through his venomous Potions,) he may daily be more strengthened,
and hoysed up to that huge height of unjust usurpation, which he openly should
begin to manifest in the World, about that year after CHRIST, which Reave.
13.18.
the number, of his name does intimate unto us. (...) Erasin. in Chiliad. sub
tit. Auaritie, and Rapa^itatis.
A Serpent, unless he eat another Serpent, cannot become a Dragon, say the
Greeks in their Proverb, which we may very fitly apply to our purpose, since
Antichrist could never have attained to such a fullness of filthiness, and an
abundance of abominations, unless he had swallowed up all the former plagues
of God, cast out upon the Church, before by Heathenish Tyrants, and homebred
Heretics; to spue them out again, in a greater measure, by cruelty and
subtlety, amongst Gods Chosen, as the Revel. 8.13.
Angel flying in the midst of Heaven did import by crying out of woe, woe,
woe, before the sounding of the fifth Trumpet, when there should fall Revel.
9.1.2.
a Star from Heaven to Earth, (even Antichrist himself,) to whom was given
the Key of the bottomless pit, which he should open to let out smoke
(signifying dark ignorance,) and send out such Locusts, as were to sting men
to death, like Scorpions. Unto such an ugly shape does this Serpent, or this
Bear grow by his degrees; so small was his beginning, and so dreadful is his
full growth, that he is fitly resembled by a B. Jewel in 2. These. 2. page 115.
fol.
blessed Bishop unto an Earthquake, which caused by a little wind, for a time
hidden in the hollowes of the earth, Stobaeus lib. 1 Eglo. 9. cap. 32.
at last breaks out to the shaking of the Mountains, the cleaving of the
Rocks, the throwing down of houses, and the killing of men. The Thorn (...).
Eras. Chil. sub tit. Initij laudati.
when it is little, seems good. Antichrist in his Infancy gave great hope of
integrity: but the elder he grew, the worse he proved, Homer. apud
Strabonem. lib. 3.
a Tartesso ad Tartarum, falling (as we say) from the deep Sea to the Devil.
Now knowing his beginning, if you ask me, how long he shall His continuing and
ending.
For his end is not yet come, and Aristot. de Interpretat. ca. 11.
De futuris contingentibus, nulla est scientia: there is no certain knowledge
to be had of things future. Yet, surely as Certius est quam mors, quam mors
ince^tius est nil* Marcell. Palingenius in Scorpio
nothing is more certain then death, although then the hour of death nothing
more uncertain: so nothing is more certain, then the ruin of Antichrist;
although the instant of his ruin be not yet known; because his utter
abolishing must be 2. These. 2.11.
at Christ's coming, the time of which is known to God only. Ob.


And therefore where our Sanders them. 40. and Bella. li. 3. de Pontif. cap. 8.
Papists will have Antichrist to continue, but only three years, and an
half; partly, by these words of Dan. 7.25.
Daniel [they (that is, the Saints) shall be given into his hands, until a
time, and times, an^ the ^ding of time] and partly by these of Reave. 12.14
John concerning the woman, [ Where (that is, in her place in the Wilderness)
she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time from the face of the
Serpent,] Lo, a double either sottishness, Antichrist in their opinion, when
the former does properly belong unto Antiochus Epiphanes only; the latter unto
Satan, and Satan's servants, the Heathen Roman Emperors, by whom the Devil
August. homil. 10 H. ^mo, and R^b^ra in 12. Apoc.
cast out the floods of ten several persecutions after the Woman retired into
the Wilderness, that is, the Primitive Church of Christ flying from their
fury into secret places for their best safety, for a time, times, and half a
time, that is, Vid. Ioh. Fox. lib. 1. Marty^olo. page 90.91.92. and Reueren.
Patrum D. R. Abbade Antichristo, cap. 8.. 6.
for the space of two hundred, ninety, and four years after Christ, when the
last great Persecution raised by Licinius was quieted, and so ceased by the
only help, and authority of Constantine the Great, then the first Christian
Emperor, which openly fought under the Banner of CHRIST.

For (to give you a short and yet a full survey of these latter times, laid out
by St. John under several numbers thus truly reckoned by ^idem vbi sup.
most religious and learned Divines,) this first number of time, times, and
half a time, is in plain signification, three years and an half, which
number of years consist of one thousand, two hundred and threescore days, all
which days together make up in just account two and forty months: now if
every month be taken for a Sabbath of years, then all these numbers make up
the just sum of two hundred, ninety and four years, which years beginning
to be reckoned at the thirtieth year of Christ's age (when Luke 3.23. Matthew.
4.23.
he after his Baptism began by his Preaching to gather a Church, that John
16.32.
was to be troubled in this wicked world) will end in that very year, An. Dom.
324 vid Eusebius. Chronic. and Theatr. histor. Christoph. Helwici.
when Constantine the Great began to reign alone, Licinius being vanquished,
and persequutions ceased for the space of a thousand years together, in which
time Satan is Revel. 20.2. and 7.8. etc.
said to be bound in the bottomless pit; because for all that time he is not
permitted to molest the Church by open persequution, howsoever he must trouble
it by homebred heresies, and secret schisms. For the Vid. Meditat. doctiss.
Sereniss. Regis Iacobi in 20. Apoc.
Church universal was to be quiet and free from foreign persequutions for the
cause of religion for that space of a thousand years, that in that long calm
of outward prosperity Antichrist might ripen unto a fullness of Abomination,
which for a time was covered under the cloak of outward Orthodoxie, and
ceremonial indifferency; but at last appeared in the true state of ugliness
toward the Anno Dom. 1314. sub Ioh. 22 Lodouico Bauaro Imper. Edwardo 3.
Angliae, sub quo Ioh. Wicliff. Vid. Chronic. Anglic. Holinsh. Stow, and Io.
Fox. page 365. Edit. vltimae.
latter end of the thousand years, when Satan was to be loosed, that he might
most furiously rage against Gods chosen, both outwardly by the foreign power
of Gog and Magog, and inwardly in the Church it self by the great Antichrist,
whose kingdom then began a little to be diminished by 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
the preaching of the Gospel, until at last it shall utterly be demolished by
the glorious coming of Jesus Christ, as at the trumpet sounded by the Revel.
10.7.
seventh Angel it shall be finished. I speak thus indefinitely of the last
period of Antichrists kingdom, because since it must last in some outward,
although weak form of government ( Rome being destroyed) till the coming of
Christ, we have Part. 1.. 7.
before defined, that the time of Christ's coming is the Fathers secret only.
Ob.
And yet I am not ignorant of a very probable conjecture, made by a Master
Peter du Moulin in 3. part. Apolog. in Coessetan. cap. 4. page 250.
most famous Preacher, and reverend Divine, concerning the last period of
Antichrist his kingdom, that it must fall out (as he thinks) in the two
thousand, and fiftenth year after Christ; because after it is settled, as it
was in the seven hundred, fiftieth and fifth year of our Lord, it was to
continue one thousand, two hundred, and threescore days, that is, by terms
of Scripture, Sol.
so many whole years. But howsoever I cannot but justly admire his sharp and
sound judgment in collecting out of the prophetical numbers of Scripture, the
truth of things past: yet I cannot fully assent unto this his construction of
future events, by that number of days; since as yet it appears not unto me
upon what ground, either he sets the beginning of the thousand, two hundred
and threescore days at the end of the seven hundredth, fiftieth, and fifth
year after Christ (for Antichrist his kingdom was begun and settled An. Dom.
666.
a good while before,) or stretches the number of those many days so far,
seeing Mat. 24.24.
for the Elects sake those days shall be shortened, and Christ may come sooner,
for any thing we know (as Now Revel. 22.21.
come Lord Jesus!) Let us leave then these conjectures unto them, who in the
liberty of prophecy might first set them abroad, to make them good; and as by
faith we are to be assured that the kingdom of Antichrist shall come to an
end, so let us in sobriety cease from the curious search thereof, daily in hope
expecting the complement from Him, who will do it in his own time. And so by
this discourse of the qualities, place, The conclusion of the formal cause.
and time of Antichrist, we see in what form he must come abroad, to wit, in
the habit of heresy and iniquity, doing all things by covetousness,
coozening, and cruelty; in the midst of the Church, at Rome, secretly, and
(as it were) by a mystery in the Primitive time, but openly and plainly from
the six hundredth year after Christ, till he should grow, and ripen unto his
full greatness, which by little and little was to be lessened through the
preaching of Gods word, and utterly destroyed at the coming of Christ.

16 Now fourthly, and lastly, the final cause, The final cause of Antichrist.
or end, why this Great Antichrist should thus reign and ruffle in this wicked
world, and against the Faithful, is (to speak in Logical terms) vltimus
and vltimatus, the last and furthest, to wit, Gods glory, which in justice
shall be manifested, when God Esaias 1.24.
eases him of his enemies, and auengeth him of his adversaries, as the Prou.
16.5.
wicked are ordained for the day of evil: the near and subordinate, which is
first, that the Reprobate 2. These. 2.11
might be deluded unto their destruction, by the vile deceits of Antichrist:
secondly, that the Godly elect might be tried in this great fire, both for
their present purging, as Prou. 17.3.
Silver in the fining pot, or Gold in the furnace, and for their future glory
promised to the perseuerant, under this good precept, Reave. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.

The Real and full definition of Antichrist.
. XVII. The efficient, the matter, the form, and the end, now all put
together, will openly discover, what is this Great Antichrist, to wit, a man by
ordinary substitution succeeding another in a kingdom raised up by Satan,
upon the ruin of the Roman Empire, and the liberality of Christian Princes,
through the pleasures of the world, who being in opinion an Heretic, and a
most wicked man in life, couetously seeks to imprint his Character upon all
men whomsoever, coozeningly endeavors to do signs and wonders, and cruelly
persequuteth in bloody massacres the Saints of God, in the midst of the
Church, sitting at Rome, growing mysteriously in the Primitive time, but from
the sixth hundredth, sixtieth and sixth year after Christ openly manifest, till
his utter destruction, at the end of the world, both for the blinding of the
reprobate, and the trial of the elect, to the glory of God. Eculmo spicam: By
the half you may know what the whole tale means. For by this definition thus
proved in all points, we may easily perceive, what now in the second place we
are to make search for; Who is this Great Antichrist.

. XVIII. Some, The second Question, Who is this Great Antichrist? The first
opinion.
(as Iodocus Clicthoueus Clicthou. Commentar. in Damascen. l. 4. ca. 27
reports) thought, that this Great Antichrist was that Seducer Mahomet, and
his succeeding bloud-suckers, Saracens and Turks. But Cardinal Bellar. lib. 3.
de Pontif. cap. 3. Sanders Henriq. Viguer. etc.
Bellarmine, together with all our other Papists, which I could as yet ever
read concerning this matter, utterly reject this opinion, as most false, being
indeed convicted by the strength of Truth. For first, Mahomet and the Turks
had never any place of residence in the midst of the Church, at Rome:
secondly, he never was a Prince Ecclesiastical: thirdly, he could not by any
reason be accounted for an Heretic, or an Apostate from that faith, which he
never professed: fourthly, although he began to reign in Arabia, An. Dom.
623. vt Genebrard. lib. 3. Chronolog.
much about the time when Antichrist did manifest his rising at Rome; yet he
never made himself an universal Bishop, and the Vicar of Christ, as
Antichrist did. And therefore some other must be found out to be Antichrist.
The second opinion and the Truth: The Pope is that Great Antichrist.

Proofs are two, 1. From the Names. 2. From the Nature or causes of Antichrist.


From the name are two, 1. Literal. 2. Mystical.


The Literal Name.




. XIX. Who, I pray you, then can this Antichrist be, but Pontifex Romanus, the
Bishop, or (as they commonly now call him) the Pope of Rome? For both his name
and his nature agree so fitly unto that, which we have noted of the Great
Antichrist, that we may well conclude them to be both one, so truly, and fully,
as that now the Pope of Rome is the only Great Antichrist, and the Great
Antichrist is only the Pope. The name of both is litterall and mystical: The
litterall name is Antichrist, by which, although the Pope be not called
totidem sillabis, in those same sillables; yet in the same sense he bears
that name, if we mark the true Etymology of the word [ Antichrist:] since
first he is so opposite unto Christ Jesus, both in doctrine and life, as we
shall find hereafter in the application of the formal cause: And secondly,
since he is commonly called by his chiefest Bell. in praefat. Tom. 2. ad Sixtii
5. and Azor. in dedicat. Tom. 1. ad Clem. 8.
Flatterers, Christi in terris Vicarius; Christ his Vicar on earth over the
Church, of which being but Extrauag. Comun. lib. 1. tit. 8. cap. 1. vbi sic:
Ecclesiae vnius and vnicae, vnum corpus, vnum caput, non duo capita, quasi
monstrum, Chris^us viz. and Christi Vicarius, Petrus Petrique successor, etc.
one only, there is but one body, one Head, not two heads, as if he were a
Monster, to wit, Christ, and Christ's Vicar PETER, and PETER'S successor, etc.
But howsoever they may cavil against this application of the litterall name,
the mystical [(...)] included in the number [666] more plainly agrees unto
the Pope. Latio, but only Ex fict^ Constantini donatione, vide Laur. Vallam.
the Pope? who makes the Scriptures translated into the Latin tongue, The
mystical name.
to be only the Authentic Word of God, but Con. Trident. sess. 4. decret. 2.
the Romish Pope only? who forbids the use of the Liturgy in any other
language, save the Latin tongue only, but only the Con. Trident. sess. 22.
can. 9.
Pope? Yea, mark how this mystery of this name is made plain! For at that
very time, when the years after Christ came up to the number of six hundred,
sixty, and six, Vitalianus, a Musical Pope, notwithstanding, through Jn
bello Longobardico inter Imperator. and barbaros: vid. Ottonem Frisingens. lib.
5. cap. 11
the misery of the time when he lived, there was more need of praying, then
singing: yet Fascicul. Tempor. compilata historia, Platina, Balaeus, Valero in
Vitalian. Magdeburgens. C^nt. 7. c. 6. and Osiander. C^nt. 7. lib. 3. cap 10.
brought into the Church singing of the Service, and the use of Organes,
commanding that the Canonical hours, the Hymns, and other Ceremonies, should
only be celebrated in the Latin tongue. A matter of main consequence, since
thereupon ignorance arose amongst all people, now lulled (as it were asleep)
by the confused noise of many voices in an unknown tongue; and upon that
ignorance an easy admittance of many gross opinions, if it carried the color
of advancing devotion; although it was no better, as their case then stood,
then Act. 17.23.
the Altar erected to an unknown God.

And therefore where some Bell. in Apolog. pro Resp. ad Reg. cap. 12.
of our Adversaries mock at this our applying of this number to Vitalian, Ob.
since he was in their opinion a zealous good man, in whose time there was no
such innovation, or change in the Church, as we pretend.

We answer for Vitalian, Sol.
that his goodness shall be judged of at the great Day of the Lord: In the
mean time we know, that 2. Cor. 11.13, 14.
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, and his ministers as
the Ministers of righteousness. For secondly, concerning Vitalian; Vitalian
himself was the only cause thereof, by those his Ordinances, for playing and
singing Latin Hymns in the Church, since thereby Luke 11.52.
the Key of Knowledge was hid, when common people Vide Polydor. Virgil. lib.
6. de Inuentor. ^er. c. 2.
could not understand what was said or sung in an unknown tongue; and the heat
of zeal quenched in men of understanding, whose ears were tickled, but hearts
not touched, whiles, as S. Augustine Aug lib. 10. Confess. cap. 23.
complained of himself; so most were more moved by the sweetness of the
song, then by the sense of the matter, which was sung unto them. And yet here
was the mischief, that men knew not their hurt, which most did pinch them: For
it wrought, as the Aelian. de histor. animal. lib. 9 cap. 11.
deadly touch of the Aspis, in a tickling dilight, till it had undone them; not
so manifest at the first, because the manner of working was in a Mystery, like
Episc. Eliensis in resp. ad Apolog. Bellar. ca. 12 page 249.
growing Impostumes, and sowring leven, not felt in fieri, but well known in
facto.

Pope to be Antichrist, From the Nature, or causes of Antichrist.
as does the nature of the thing, if we will but mark the true applying of all
the In the Efficient cause. 1. Principal.
the principal efficient of Antichrist is the Devil; and so of the Pope, since
if we respect the grand corruptions, either of the Chair, or of the Persons
successively placed in the Chair, we shall find the Devil to have a chief
hand therein. For the corruption in the Chair is Matt. 13.28.
a Tare in the Field, sown only by the Devil, of whose maine seducements the Sea of Rome, the Chair of Peter (as they surname it) is called Revel. 11.8.
Sodom, and Egypt, this, for her Heresies, and that, for bad life, used by
the persons placed in that eminency, both for their own and others
destruction, being instruments of the Devil; Revel. 9.11
Angels of the bottomless pit, called Abaddon, Apollyon. For after their
discovery, which of them ascended into that Throne, but by the Devil? Some by
Ambition, as those who rose to the place by Schisms, whereof there were A.
Damas ad Eugeni. 4. Vid. Onuphr. de schismatib.
some thirty at the least; some Ioh. 189. apud Platinam.
by bribing of the Cardinals in the Conclaue; some by Ioh. 11. per Theodora.
and Io. 13. per Marozia apud Lu^prandum, lib. 2. ca. 13
the favor of Bawdes and Whores, yea, and some came to the Papacy by a direct
compact made with the Devil, to whom they couenanted the possession of their
souls, and bodies, after their death, if they might attain to their wished
for honor of the Papacy, as we read in Chronicles, of Fascicul. Tempor. and
Platina.
Siluester the second, and Hieronym. Marius in Eusebio.
Alexander the sixth. So that we may very well conclude with these old ruins
made upon these occasions: Apud Catalog. testium Veritatis tom. 2. page 832.
Ima tenet IVPITER, coelum habet PLVTO;
Et accidit dignitas animali bruto;
Tanquam gemma stercori, and picturaluto.
that is, JOVE holds the lowest parts,
PLVTO has Heaven got:
Dignity to Beasts, as Gemmes
To dunghill sals in lot.


Now for the less principal efficient cause, 2. Less principal.

Occasion, as the liberality of Christian Princes.


which we noted in Antichrist to be, either outwardly occasioning, or inwardly
inducing, we find them the very same altogether in the Pope. For the occasion
of Papal rising was twofold, first, the ruin and decay of the Roman Empire;
and secondly, the liberality of Christian Princes to the Sea of Rome, when the
Sozomen. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Emperor having translated his Imperial Throne from Rome to Constantinople,
and leaving Carrion. lib. 3. Chron. page 404.
only his Exarch, or Lieutenant in Italy, who was overthrown, and thrust out
by the Lombards; the Pope Platina in Zacharia 1. and Stephano. 2.
called the Frankes into Italy, for the utter overthrow of the Kingdom of
Lombardie, which with other great Seigniories in Italy, he obtained by the
first Donation of Pipin the Father, and the second Confirmation of Charles the
Son, and the final Acknowledgement of Lewis the Grandchild, registered in
Gratian. did. 63. can. 30.
Gratian, and being, as Albertus Albert. Crant. zius lib. 2 Sax. cap. 1.
Crantzius supposes, that which they call the Donation of Constantine. For let
August. Steuchus Eugubinus lib. 3. de donat. Constant. contra Laur. Vallam.
Eugubinus and others Baronius and Bisciola ad ann. 324. etc.
of the Popes Flatterers sweat out their hearts, whiles they seek to make good
this false Donation of the Great Constantine; the truth is, that the Pope had
not any Temporalities, by any grant of the Emperor, till the Albert. Crantzius
vbi supra. Inducements, as the Abundance of worldly pleasures.
Goths first gave somewhat, the Lombards added more* and lastly, the Frank-
Emperors made up these Dominions unto his desire. But yet these occasions of
his advancement were not so lamentable; as the inducements for the lifting up
of the Papal State are abominable, and most truly Antichristian; For it was
the abundance of worldly pleasures, which moved them so much unto the
amplifying of their authority by the trampling down of the Roman Emperors,
and the Princes of Italy, that when others wept, they might laugh; when others
stood penitent without, in the cold, three days together, barefoot, and
bareheaded; as Vid. Platinam in Gregor. 7.
did Henry the fo^rth; they with proud Hildebrand might glut themselves with
all pleasures in their Palaces, according as Mantuan Baptist. Mantuan. lib. 3.
Calamitat.
has in these words bewailed: -- Petrique domus polluta fluente
Marcescit luxu: -- mores extirpat honestos:
Sanctus ager scurris; venerabilis ara cinaedis
S^ruit, honorandae diuum GANYMEDIBVS aedes.
that is, NOW PETER'S house polluted pines with flowing lust,
Casts out good manners: holy field to Scoffers must
Now serve: for Bawdes is Altar set,
To GANYMEDES are Saints housen let.


. XXI. Secondly, for the material cause, or In the material cause. 1. A Man.
and not the Devil; although such men be little better then Incarnate Devils.
For the hollow Chair used in the Popes Consecration ever since John the eight,
otherwise called Joan English, demo^strateth him plainly to be a man, since
then when he sits down in that Chair, his Priuities are groped by the
lowest Deacon (as Platina Platina in Ioh. 8.
says plainly) although Onuphrius in Annotat. ibidem.
Onuphrius does impudently deny that which Bellarmine ingeniously Bellar. lib.
3. de Pontif. cap. 24
grants to be done, not for trial of humanity, but for demonstration of
humility and remembrance of death. Therefore the Pope must needs be a man;
and as we demonstrated before at large of Antichrist, One succeeding another.
one by ordinary substitution succeeding Bellar. lib. 4. de Eccles. Militante
cap. 8.
themselves most gladly confess, when they urge so often against us the
personal succession of their Popes in the same Chair from Peter, unto this
now living Paul the fifth. And yet I cannot but by the way touch that, which if
I had leisure, I could easily demonstrate, as I have done In Clauiger^
Ecclesiae.. 7.
in another Work; first, that their personal succession has been oftentimes
interrupted either by an Vid. Onuphrij Chroni. ad finem Platinae.
interregnum, and vacancie many months together, or by their several Schisms
in their proud Antipopes: secondly, by that, this personal succession, if it
could be proved soundly, yet is of no moment, unless they can show succession
in Doctrine, as well as in person, since by the plain confession of their own
dear Doctor Staplet lib. 4. demonst. princip. doctrinal. cap. 20.
Stapleton, grounded upon Tom. 2. Council. a^ud mani. page 149. ^n Epist. Epist.
A^gypti ad Anatolium into ^pistolas illustrium virorl^.
very good Antiquities, No Bishops name was set down in their Dypticks (that
is, as he expounds it, they were not mentioned in their Commemorations)
until they had received [Synodycam] the Epistle testimonial of their
Orthodoxe faith; because he was not to be accounted a Successor, who held not
the true faith of his Predecessor. But yield we unto them this personal
succession, since it serves well our purpose to prove the Pope to be that
Antichrist, if now to this material cause we fit the form of Antichrist
before delivered. A Work wor^hy our labor, and yet very easily to be
accomplished.

Antichrist. In the formal cause, by three 1. Qualities. 2. Seat. 3. Time.


His Qualities, are two, 1. Habites. 2. Acts.


Habites are two, 1. Heresy. 2. Iniquity.



The qualities, be they either Habits or Acts. The Habits both of Heresy and
of Iniquity. For the Pope is an Heretic, seeing there is not one Article in
the Creed, which the Pope does not deny (not Vid. Canum lib. 6. l^cor.
commun. cap. 8. and Bellar. lib. 4. de Pontif. cap. 2.
privately as some private person, but publicly in his Chair as Bishop,) when
either by his proper assertion, or by his giving privilege, and approofe to
the Blasphemies of his Minions and Disciples, he crosses the truth, in olden
in these Articles, as (now to run through them all in particular, like as many
other most Reverend Divines Heming. in Antichristima^. Beza cap. 7. Confess. M.
Perkins in his Advertisement, and M. D. Abbots, now the Right Reverend Bishop
of Sarum, in his third part against D. Bishop.
of the Reformed Churches have done before me) he denies this first Article
[ I believe in God, The first Article of the Creed, infringed by the Pope.
the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth] by two special Doctrines,
the former impugning our belief in God only; when he gave his allowance to
that Decree Council. Trid. sess. 25. cap. 2.
of the Council of Trent, wherein it is commanded, that men should teach it,
to be good, and profitable, suppliantly to invoke Saints. For if we call
upon them, we must believe in them, as the Apostle Romans 10.14.
says, How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And if we
believe in them, we make them as God, seeing thereby (as Eusebius. Emissen. homil.
2. in orat. dominicam
Emissenus says) we give the honor of the Lord, to the servant; both
wickedly, because he Esaias 42.8.
will not give his glory to another, and idly, in that the Saints departed
have not the knowledge of our wants in particular, by the judgment of Saint
August. lib. de Cura pro mortuis, cap. 15.
Augustine, alleged in the Gratian. cause. 13. q. 2. can. 29.
Canon Law under these words: We must needs confess, that the dead do not
know what is done here, while it is in doing here. And therefore we may say in
Psalm. 11.1.2.
David's true Zeal against these wicked Teachers; In the Lord put I my trust;
how say ye unto my soul; Fly as a Bird to the Mountain, answering our selves
by a true faith as he did in another place, saying, Psalm. 121.1.2
I lift mine eyes to the Hills, from whence comes my help? My help comes
from the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth. Let not them presume then upon the
Mountains, says August. in Psalm. 120.
Saint AUGUSTINE, because the Mountains themselves do not shine of
themselves* but from him, of whom it is said; John 1.9.
This was the true Light, that lighteneth every man which comes into the
World. The latter intending an impeachment of Gods Almightinesse in Creation,
whiles he maintains his Gab. Biel lect. 4. in Canon^m Missae.
Favorites plainly to auerre that the Priests do make [conficium] ^he body
of Christ. A two-forked Blasphemy, like the Serpents sting; For first, if they
make Christ's body, Christ's body, was not before, since to Pererius in 1. c.
Genes. in verbo [Creauit.]
make a thing, is to give it a being which it had not before. But Christ's body
was before, even Aquia. p. 3. q. 6. art. 5.
a perfect body in the very first instance of his Incarnation, unless they will
have that body to be a fantastical body, as said the Vid E^i^han. August.
^lastr. de his haeresib. and Steph. Zeged. tab. De Chr^sti humanitate assertion.
Phantasmaticks, Marcionites, Cerdonians, and Manichees. Therefore the Priests
cannot be said to make Christ's body. For secondly, then the Priest must have a
power infinite, to give a passage infinite unto this his new creature, seeing
(as the Bonauent. in 2. sent. did. 1. and Scotell. ^n 2. sent. distinct. 1. q.
5.
Schools teach) between non ens, and ens, the space is infinite, passible
only to the Infinite God, to whom the power and work of Creation is so truly
proper, that (as Aquin. p. 1. q. 45. art. 5.
Aquinas out of the very depth of true Divinity said well) it is impossible,
that (to create) can agree to any creature, neither by it own proper virtue,
nor by way of instrument or Ministry, as his Master P Lombard. l. 4. did. 5.
3.
Peter Lombard seems to affirm, what he upon better reason does justly deny.
The second Article is denied in respect
The second Article [ and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord] is denied
by the Pope two ways, first, in respect of the person of Christ, secondly, 1.
Of Christ's Person.

1. As Christ is God.


of his office: of his person, as he is both God and Man. For his Godhead was
denied by those Arian Popes, Foelix the second, and Liberius, he being upon
Liberius his banishment made Bishop of Rome by Constantius the Emperor at the
instance of Acacius, and so continuing till his dying day, if we believe either
Hieronym. in Catalog. sub nomine Acac.
Hierome before Platina in Foelice.
Platina or Onuphrius Onuphr. in Annot. in Platin.
his old Monument recording him a Schismatike, and an Opposite to Liberius then
as yet truly Orthodoxe; before Bellarmines Bellar. lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans
cap. 9.
false Epitaph found, or rather counterfeited by some cunning Knave, at that
very time, when they made him a Saint: this, to wit, Liberius being drawn upon
Foelix his death for the re-obtayning of his place, to subscribe to Arianisme,
to communicate with Arians in the Council of Sirmium, and after his
re-instalment, all his life afterward, to be a professed Arian, if we may
rely upon the constant report of Athanas. in Epist. ad solitar. vit. agentes.
Athanasius, Hieronym. Catal. in Fortunatiano.
Hierome, Sozomen. lib. 4 cap. 15.
Sozomene, and all the Regino lib. 1. Hermannus Gigas, etc. tom. 1. illustr.
scriptoru^ apud Ioh. Pistor. 2. As Christ is Man.
latter Histories. And for his Manhood, how it was undermined by Vigilius the
Manophysite, and Honorius the Monothelite, I need not insist, since Bellarmine
and Baronius are here beaten down with their own best weapons, by the D.
Rainolds in Apolog thesium, page 39.40. etc. and D. Whitaker, contr. 4. q. 6.
c. 3. 2. Of Christ's Office.

1. As Christ is a Prophet.


two great Worthies of our Israel, not yet answered. For the Popes coozening
close-play, against Christ his Office, is at this day more detestable, in that
he impugneth, first, the Prophetical Office of Christ, by his wicked allowance
of unwritten Verities, and humane Traditions, which he Catechism. Trident.
Coloniae 8.1581. page 11.
makes one part of the Word of God, like the blasphemous Jews, Apud Petrum
Galatin. lib. 1. de Ar^an. Cathol. fidei, cap. 1.
now dividing the Law into two parts, the one in writing, the other in
speaking; whereas we are not bound to acknowledge any other word of God, but
what is written in the Canonical Books of Scriptures, by Damascen Io.
Damascen. lib. 1. Orthodox. sid. cap. 1.
his judgment, unless we will incur Paul's Gla^. 1.8.9.
Anathema for receiving another Gospel: 2. As Christ is a Priest.
secondly, Christ his Priesthood, not only by appointing Council. Trident.
sess. 22. c. 3.
the Mass to be a Sacrifice propitiatory for quick, and dead, against the
Apostles Doctrine, by which we are taught, that Heb. 10.14.
by one offering Christ has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; but
also by ordayning a Shaueling Priest to be Mediator between God the Father,
and Christ his Son, as when upon the Popes prescription Jn Missali edit.
iussu Pij Quinti.
the Priest must offer the body of Christ for a Sacrifice to God, using this In
Canone Missae.
Prayer after the words of Consecration [ Placeat tibi, Sancta Trinitas,
obsequium seruitutis meae, and pr^s^a, vt sacrificium, quod oculis Maiestatis
tuae indignus obtulit, etc.
Let the obedience of my service please thee, O holy Trinity, and grant that
the Sacrifice, which one unworthy has offered in the eyes of thy Majesty, may
be acceptable unto thee, and thou showing mercy, helpful to me and to those
for whom I did offer it by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.] which all his chief
Liturgists cannot free from the blot of Blasphemy, since the Sacrifice being
(as their Of Transubstantiation, Council. Trident. sess. 13. cap 4*
Doctrine enforces it) Christ himself, whom the Priest does offer; the Priest
must needs be a Mediator, upon whose worth the Sacrifice is acceptable; so that
they cannot excuse it from a plain intrusion into the Office of Mediatorship,
and a lifting up of the Priest above Christ his Savior; and therefore
Titleman. Durand. Durantus in exposit. Missae
some of their Ceremonists pass it over in silence, as a Mystery; and others
Iodoc. Clicthoueus lib. 3. Elucidator. Ecclesiastici. ad finem.
gloss it, as if the Priest did desire it to be accepted, as well for the
giver, as for the worth of the gift; whereas we are not to acknowledge any
other Mediator then 1. Tim. 2.5.
one which Christ, in Ephesians. 1.6. 3. As Christ is a King.
whom alone we are accepted: thirdly, Christ's Kingly Office, by that wicked
usurpation of a Supremacy over the Church, whose Head, and whose Husband the
Pope Extrauagant. Commun. lib. 1. tit. 8.
plainly calls himself, when if he be an Head not mystical, which is
Ephesians 5.29.
Christ, nor Civil as the 1. Sam. 15.18
lawful Magistrate is, but (as Rhemist. in 1. Ephesians. 2^. and Bellar. lib. 2 de
Ponti. Romans c. 17
they call him) an Head Ministerial, then both the Church shall be like
Cerberus, a Triple-headed Monster, and the Pope but like a Wen, or an Head for
no use, but for an odious, and tedious burden; since Christ for matter
spiritual, and the Magistrate under Christ for Civil Causes does wholly, and
only govern the Church, which cannot have the Pope to be her Head Ministerial
without some contradiction, since Ioh. Patriarch. Antiochen. in appendi.
Concilij Basiliensis.
if he be an Head to the Church, he is her Master, or if he be but a
Minister (as they call themselves In suis bullis a Gregor. 1.
seruos seruorum) then she is his Mistress; and therefore not his Spouse,
unless Vid. D. Abbat. in Antilogia ad Apologiam Eudaen. cap. 3.
he be an Adulterer, and she an Adulteress; since Christ her 2. Cor. 11.2.
only Husband Heb. 13.8.
is yet alive, and ever Matthew. 28.20. The third Article is impugned in respect
1. Of the Virgin Marie her self.
with her to the end of the World. The third Article [ Which was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin MARIE] is by him impugned two several
ways; first, by that proper assertion of the Franciscans allowed by Extrauag.
Comm. lib. 3. tit. 12. cap. 2.
Sixtus quartus, and the Council. Trident. sess. 5. can. 5
Council of Trent, that the Virgin MARIE was conceived without original
sin. For, thereby they conclude, that Christ is not a lonely so holy, as Luke
1.35.
the Angel pronounced him, and that he was not a 1. Tim. 4.10.
Savior for all men, as the Apostle avouches, since Marie had no need of him,
if She were without sin, whereas of the contrary She her-selfe Luke 1.48.
confessed Him for her Savior; the Fathers uniformly holding this for an
Axiom against the Pelagians, what August. lib. 2. contra Pelagium and
Caelestium. cap. 29.
Saint Augustine avouches, and the Glossa in did. 23. can. 1.
Canonists repeat, that as the Flood Gene. 7.23.
overwhelmed all men, save Noe, and his family: so original corruption seized
upon Romans 5.12.
every one, none excepted, but the very Heb. 4.15. 2. Of Christ his birth.
person of Christ. Secondly, by that gross opinion concerning Christ's Birth,
that Aquin. 3. p. q. 28. art. 2. and q. 35. art. 6. and Coccius tom. 1.
Catholicismi, lib. 2. cap. 5. and D. Bishop in his answer to M. Perkins
Advertisement. Vbi vide D. Abbots Reply.
Christ was borne of the Virgin, clauso vtero, the womb being shut: Directly
contrary to the cause of his presentation to the Lord in the Temple, recorded
by Luke 2.23.
the Evangelist out of Exodus 13.2.
the Law; Every male, that opens the womb, shall be called Holy to the
Lord: by which yet there happened no breach of virginity, since she Luke 1.31.
knew no man, being, as Tertullian Tertull. lib. de Carne Christi, cap. 23. The
fourth Article undermined by deuillish doctrines.
says, A Virgin, and not a Virgin; a Virgin as touching man, and not a Virgin,
as touching childe-bearing. The fourth Article, [ Suffered under PONTIVS
PILATE, was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended into hell] although he
dare not deny in the thing done, for fear of being found; yet he subtly
undermines the efficacy of these actions wrought for our salvation, by sundry
deuillish doctrines delivered by his Schoolmen for the easier Vid. Council.
Trid. sess. 14. cap. 8 and sess. 25. ca. 1 1. Of Christ's sufferings.
bringing in of humane satisfactions, and the setting open wider the gates of
picke-purse Purgatory. For first, they say, that Christ did not properly
suffer any punishment or death, but Bellar. lib. 2. de Christo, cap. 8 and
Feuardent. li. 5. Th^omac. Caluinisticae, cap. 11
of the body only: whereas if hearty grief be a proper passion of the soul,
by which it is troubled, and suffers pain, not by sympathy with the body
only, but properly in it self, as all true Aquin. 1.2. q. 35. art. 1. and 7.
etc. in eundem ibidem B. Medina.
Divinity and Lodon. Viues lib. 3. de Anima.
Philosophy does teach us, we may rather believe, that Christ did properly
suffer in soul the Damascen. lib. 3. Orthod. fid. cap. 26. and Aquina^ 3.
part. q. 46. art. 5 6.7. and Calvin. Institut. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 10, etc.
pains of hell, although not in regard of loss [ damn^,] but of feeling [
sensus;] and that, not for ever, as Esaias 66.24.
Reprobates find, whose worm never dies; but only for some time; and this,
not long, as M. Luther. John Glouer, etc. apud. Io. Fox
some faithful men have endured a trial, but for a very moment, and as it
were, at an instant, even then, when he Luke 12.49.
grieved, Heb. 5.7.
when he feared, and when Mat. 26.38.
he found his soul heavy unto the death, as upon these symptoms it was
concluded by Council. Hispal. 2. can. 13.
the Fathers of the second Council of Seuill, amongst whom were these great
men, Isidore and Fulgentius, out of a place Ambros. in 23. Luc.
of Ambrose, that the soul was subject [passionibus] to sufferings, but the
Godhead was free. For as Hierome Hieronym. in Esaias 53. 2. Of Christ offered.
said, it is very plain, that as his body being beaten and torn, did bear
the signs of injury in the prints of strokes, and in the blewnesse: so his
soul [vere doluisse] truly grieved, lest partly the truth, partly a lie,
should be believed in Christ. Secondly, they auerre, Aquin. Opuscul. de sacra.
altaris cap. 1.
that as the body of the Lord was once offered upon the Cross for original
sin; so it is offered continually upon the altar for our daily
transgressions: whereas we are only bound to believe, that by one Heb. 10.14.
Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, then upon the
Cross so John 19.29.
finishing the work of our Redemption, as his blood then shed, cleanses 1.
John 1.7.
us from all sin, Original and Actual, without exception, as Eus^b. lib. 1.
Demonstr Euangel. cap. 10.
Eusebius therefore calls him, the atonement for the whole world, the
sacrifice for all souls, the pure host for every blot, and sin; who (as
Athanas. orat. 3. contr. Arianos
Athanasius says) offered a faithful sacrifice continually enduring, and not
falling down: For (as Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 17. in Ioh.
gathered upon the word in the present tense used by John 1.29.
S. John Baptist, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world,) when he suffered, he did not then only take away our sins; but from
thence hithereto he takes them away: he is not always crucified: for he has
offered one sacrifice for our sins, but always by that he now purges us;
from all sin (says Aquinas in 1. Ioh. 1.7. 3. Of Christ not meriting alone.
Aquinas himself) original, actual, mortal, venial. Thirdly they Biel in
lib. 3. sentent. did. 19. q. 1. conclus. 3. and Nicholas de Orbellis in eundem
ibidem.
hold, that although the passion of Christ did merit salvation for all the
sons of ADAM; yet the working of those that are to be saved, must help
together with it as a merit of congruity, or of condignity, because, although
it be the principal, yet it never was the whole cause, nor the sole cause
meritorious of opening the Kingdom of Heaven; whereas we are not in any sort to
acknowledge either any other way to heaven, but only Christ, who is John 14.6.
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, or any meritorious work of man to be
joined with Christ's merit, seeing first Vid. Calvin. lib. 3. Inst cap. 15. 2.
and D. Fulke in 13. Heb. 15 and in Answer to Greg. Martin touching haeret.
translat. cap. 9.
no Scripture at all, no not in any translation, ever made mention of the word
[ Merit:] secondly, no man can plead for any such perfection, as thereby to
merit, being Gal. 5.17.
troubled with his rebellious flesh: Thirdly, Christ's merit is not so weak, as
to be supplied by the help of our merit; his merit being able to redeem a
thousand worlds, and so effectual for us* that thereby now Romans 8.35.
not any thing can be laid to our charge: so that against this blasphemy,
besides these grounds of faith in Scripture, we may oppose the judgment both
of ancient Fathers, and of some moderat and learned Papists, those both jointly
agreeing in the second Counsel of Orange against the Pelagians to these Canons,
Council. Arausicanum 2. can. 12. and 18 apud Binnium Tom. 2. Council.
that God loves us such, as we shall be by his gift, not such as we are by
our own merit: and reward is due for good works, if they be done; but grace,
which is not due, does go before, that they may be done: and severally
auouching the sole mercy of God in Jesus Christ against our merit: as S.
Augustine thus; August. tract. 3. in Ioh.
Christ Jesus is plainly, and the whole Physician of our wounds. And S.
Ambrose thus; Ambros. lib. 1. de Jaa^ob, and vit. beat. cap. 6.
I will not boast, because I was profitable, nor for that any other was
profitable unto me; but because Christ Jesus is with the Father, an Advocate
for me; but because the blood of Christ was shed for me. And S. Bernard thus;
Bernard. Sermon. 61. in Cantic.
Meritum meum miseratio domini: My merit is Gods mercy. These, even by
conviction of conscience, either foolishly, in forgetting, or craftily,
suppressing their own tenent, but thus clearly affirming, that Colonienses in
Enchirid. cap. de Poenitent. fol. 93.
if merit be applied unto us, as in whom there must be some cause of our own
salvation, the word [merit,] as say the Divines of Colen, is taken abusiuely,
being in proper signification peculiar unto Christ, because, as says Aquin.
1.2. q. 114. art. 1. in corpore.
AQVINAS, in whom there is a simple righteousness, in those the merit is
proper, and in whom righteousness is but in proportion, there is merit only but
in some respect: Whereupon (as Adrian Adrian. in lib. 4. sentent. apud Cassand.
in Consultat. loco ^e bonis operibus.
de Toledo, afterward Pope Adrian the sixth, and Iodocus Clichthou. lib. 3*
Elucidat. Eccl.
Clichthou^us said well,) Our merit is as a staff of reed, and a menstruous
cloth, deceiving those who trust therein, and being continually polluted by
some new sins: so that (as Sella Stella, Commen. in 2. Lu. 11.
concludes) Christ is our absolute Savior, and deliverer from all danger and
evil; meriting for us, (as Scotellus Petrus de Aquila, alias, Scotellus in lib
3. sentent* did. 19.
well observed) these five several things, 1. Remission of sin: 2. Infusion
of grace: 3. Freedom from pains eternal and temporal: 4. The trampling under
soote of Deuillish power: 5. The opening of the heavenly gate. Surely these men
last alleged, and such other of their rank, may upon better reason say, then
Nestor did in Homer:

Hom. Illiad. 10
(...): that is, Shall I lie? or shall I speak the truth? my conscience
compels me to speak what I think. For as the beams of the Sun pearce
through the thickest and darkest clouds, so truth here breaks through the
deepest mists of error, by the power of the spirit of truth; which compels
these men like Ioh. 11.51.
Caiaphas, to tell that truth, which themselves deny. And yet they further
seek to overthrow the truth of this article by a fourth way, 4. Of Christ his
descending into Hell.
to wit, by a singular and strange interpretation of Christ's descension into
hell, both wringing themselves, and wronging us: Prou. 30.33.
wringing their own noses, for a division of Catechismus Trident. p. 69.
Hell into three rooms, Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, and the lowest Pit or place
of the damned; to strain out this blood of an hellish conclusion, Aquin.
opuscul. in symbol. and p. 3. q. 52. art. 2. and 5. Petrus a Soto in Method.
confess. L. Vaux his Catechism Canisius in Catechismo. Rhemist. in 2. Act. 12.
Feuardent. lib. 6. Caluinist. Theomach. cap. 1. and Bellar. lib. 4. de Christ.
cap. 11.12.13, etc.
that Christ descended only in Limbum Patrum, even Abraham's bosom, to bring
forth the souls of the Patriarchs, and other godly res^ant there before his
ascension into heaven, then opened to them, and not before; whereas first by
their Vid. Bell. l. 1. de Purgat. c. 15.
own confession the Scriptures have no such division of Hell, since not so
much, as the words [ Limbus Patrum] and (Purgatory) are to be found in all the
Bible: and therefore their conclusion must needs be both idle, and false; idle,
by crossing, and contradicting it self in taking hell from Abraham's bosom;
when they might well know, both from St. Augustine, Aug. Ep. 99. ad Euodium,
and lib. 12. de G^. ad liter.
that the name of hell in Scripture is never used in the better part; and from
their own friend Andradius, Andrad. lib. 2. defens. fidei Tridentinae.
that in the places of note where (...) or In^ernus is mentioned, it is taken
only for Death and the Grave, which Christ did loose by his resurrection:
false; by denying, first the evidence of the holy Ghost, who shows, that
Heaven was open to some of the Patriarchs and Prophets, as Genesis 5.24.
Enoch, Heb. 11.26.27.
Moses, and 2. Reg. 2.11
Elias before Christ's ascension; secondly, the true efficacy of Christ's
sacrifice, who was Revel. 13.8.
the Lambeslaine from the beginning of the world, even Jesus Heb. 13.8.
Christ, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever; thirdly, the true happiness
of those Ancient, and holy Fathers, whose Souls were then as they are now,
Revel. 14.13
in rest from their labors, since they died in the Lord; and were gathered to
their Fathers into Abraham's bosom, a place of light, and not of darkness;
above, and not below; near to Christ in glory, and not to hellish torments, if
we may stand to the authority and warrant of Orig. l. 1. Commentar. in Job.
Origin, (or of him, who wrote those Commentaries upon the book of Job) thus
copiously paraphrasing Jobs patient speech [ naked shall I return thither
againe] thither shall I go, where is the disposing of tribulations, where is
the rewarding of labors, where is Abraham's bosom, Isaac his property, Israel
his familiarity, where are the Souls of Saints, the chores of Angels, the
voices of Archangels, where is the illumination of the holy Ghost, the kingdom
of Christ, the purest glory, and the blessed sight of the eternal God. Now
their wronging of our Churches is perspicuous to the world by their accustomed
coining of a double lie; one, Feuard. lib. 6. Theomach. cap. 1 and D. Bishop in
his answer to M. Perkins Advertisement.
that we expunge, or wipe this article out of the Creed; the other, that we
corrupt it by an infinite variety of false expositions; whereas against the
former falsehood, we need no better witness then Harmonia Confess. sect. 6. per
omnes Eccle. Reformat.
our harmony of Confessions, in all which this article is uniformly avouched,
although if we should have omitted it, we could not have wanted a lawful
warrant therefore, out of good antiquities by Bellar. lib. 4. de Christo, cap.
6.
Bellarmines own grant; but (to make answer unto their second forgerie,) we
admit it into the sum of our faith, all agreeing in the matter (that Christ
descended into hell,) howsoever there is amongst our learned men in private,
such diversity of judgment only in delivering the manner of Christ's
descension into hell, as may by distinction of time, wherein all those actions
were fully complete, in my poor opinion be easily couched into one sound corpse
of necessary truth. For some, as Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. ca. 16.. 10
Master Calvin, and the Catechism. Ecclesiae Geneuensis inter opuscula Caluini.
Church of Geneua, say, that then did our Savior descend into hell, when he
suffered in his Soul those hellish torments, that were due for our sins,
expressing his humiliation under so great a burden by his grief, by his
heaviness, and by his crying on the Cross [ my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?] Others, as Oleuian. in Symbol. and De substant. foederis, art. de
descens.
Oleuian, and the Palatin. and Belgiae in Catechismis Vrsmi, and Bastingij.
Churches of Germany, holding against the real bodily presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament, say, that then did Christ descend into hell, when upon the
dissolution of his soul from his body by death, he entered into the state or
condition of the dead, which is nothing else, but that the body lies in the
grave, and the Soul is with God, separated from the body, as Christ was till
the third day under the lowest degree of his humiliation. Lastly, the ancient
Fathers followed by the best and most learned Vid. nostros, vt D. Hill. B.
Bilson, M. Spark, and D. Abbots in his Answer to D. Bishop against M. Perkins
Aduertisment.
Divines of the Church of England, with whom the L. Hutter. in explic. lib. de
Concord. art. 9. and Eckardus in Enchirid. Controu. cap. 3. q. 30 31.
Lutheranes also accord, hold, that then did Christ descend into hell, when his
soul being separate from his body then buried, went really, and locally down
into hell, as a King into the prison, to declare his power in it, and therein
to triumph over Satan, and all the gates of hell, which from thenceforth should
not any way Mat. 16.18.
prevail against his Church. Opinions all true, though it may be, all of them
cannot so fitly be applied to this article, as the only proper meaning
thereof. Wherefore with that most blessed and renowned servant of Christ
Bucanus loco 25. Institut. q. 6. and Vrsinus Catechism p. 2 q. 45 page 315.
Bucanus, we thus reconcile them all into one, by the true and necessary
distinction of times, wherein our Savior first suffered in his soul those
griefs, and pains, which were due to our souls, both in all his life time;
but especially a little before, and at his death; in the state and condition of
which death secondly he continued from the time that he gave up the ghost,
until his resurrection, in which space of time thirdly his body was buried,
and his soul now being separated from the body, returned unto God that gave
it, so as that it first went into Paradise, where it was with the theefes
soul, and after by the power of his Godhead really and locally descended into
the place of the damned, (it may be about the time of the earthquake, which
happened a little before his resurrection,) there to make a defiance against
Satan in his own kingdom. For all these assertions are severally true by the
assent of diverse Aquin. Opusculan Symbolii; Colonienses in Instit. super hu^c
artic. and Ferus in Mat. 27.
learned Papists themselves: what reason then is there, why they may not be as
orthodox, being joined together by way of reconcilement, to make peace amongst
brethren, in whose divisions, as in Judges 5.15.
those of Reuben, there are great thoughts of heart? For holding fast the
matter, we have more freedom of says concerning the manner; in the opening of
which if there be any difference, it only shows 1. Cor. 12.7.
the abundance of Gods Spirit in the Servants of God, who swim toward heaven,
their last and everlasting Haven, through the waters of the Scriptures, Ezech.
47.1, 2, 3.
that issue out of the Temple, by diverse channels, and several depths. So that
against these wrongs of our Adversaries thus clearly wiped away from our faces
by the evidence of truth it self, and their own assent also, we conclude with
those words of S. Augustine, Aug. Ep. 174. ad Pascentium.
If men sometimes were not one according to diversities of their wills and
pleasures, and according to the unlikeness of their opinions and manners, yet
shall they be one when they come to that end, that God may be all in all.

The fifth Article undermined. 1. By their practice.
Now to proceed from this fourth Article, whereon we have insisted the longer,
that we might the more fully discover the very bottom of the filthy sink of
Popery: the fifth, concerning Christ's Resurrection on the third day, is
secretly undermined, first, by that Popish practice of going in Pilgrimage to
visit the Sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem, both authorized by their Synod.
Moguntina sub Sebastiano, c. 44 and Mediolanensi 4. An. Dom. 1573. c de
Peregrinat. apud ^inium. tom. 4. Council.
Councels, and confirmed by those Letters testimonial, which the Vti vidi
da^as cuidam Eduardo Long Generoso, Anno Dom. 1609.
Prior of the Covent, now being at Jerusalem, gives to the superstitious
Pilgrims, and our English Pha^tasticks, who upon money let out to receive some
five for one, undertake that idle Journey: for if we believe it, what need we
see it? 2. Cor. 5.7.
We walk by faith, and not by sight. Gregory Nyssen Gregor. Nyssen. in
Epist. ad Cappadoc. Graecolat. apud Catalog. testium verit. tom. 1. li. 4. p.
163
says of this abuse, that since local motion does not bring God nearer to us,
to whom he will come, wheresoever we be; we must labor to travail from the
body to the Lord, and not from Cappadocia (or from any other Country else)
unto Palestina, which is not to be called above others, Innocent. 3. apud
Platinam.
an Holy Land, being Mat. 27.25. 2. By their Doctrine.
subject yet to the curse for the death of Christ, as they wished His blood
upon themselves, and their children. Secondly, by that most strange assertion,
that Iodic. Coccius tom. 1. Catholic. lib. 2. art. 5.
Christ should rise, clauso Monumento; The Sepulcher being shut; whereas the
Mat. 28.3.
Angel came down to roll away the stone, not, (as some Maldonatus in Matthew.
28.
of them say) after his Resurrection, only that the woman might see it; but
before his rising, as LEO, Leo 1. Ep. 83. cap. 6. and Hilar. in Matt. can. 33.
their own man, avouches plainly, since (let Bellar. lib. 3. de Eucharist.
cap. 3.4 5. etc.
them presume never so much upon Gods omnipotency, here working miraculously)
Vid. Sadeelem tract. de sacramentali mandu^. cap. 3.
there was not, neither could be penetratio dimensionu^, a piercing of
dimension, if it was a true Body, (as our Luke 24.39.
Savior proved it by showing his Flesh, and Bone,) that arose again; because,
as August. Epist. 57. ad Dardan.
S. Augustine says, Take away from bodies space of place, and then they shall
be no where; and because they are no where, they shall not be at all. The sixth
Article overthrown.
So that for the sixth Article, concerning Christ his Ascension into Heaven,
and his sitting at the right hand of God, we cannot but find it overthrown
utterly by that vbiquitie of the Manhood of Christ, which most necessarily
follows upon the Popish tenent of the bodily real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist. For if his Flesh be here or there, (as it must be of necessity in
many places at once, when the Sacrament is in diverse places ministered at one
and the selfsame time) then Act. 3.21.
how can he be contained in the heaven, till the restoring of all things, as
Peter said? As he is God, he is every where; but, as he is man, he is only in
heaven: so August. Ep. 57. ad Dardan. and Gloss. ordina. in Math. 28.
the Fathers distinguish: and upon it we argue, as the Angel did, Mark 16.6.
he is risen, he is not here: he is ascended: therefore he is not here upon
earth according to his Manhood; as said Fulgent. lib. 2. ad Thrasymund.
FVLGENTIVS, One and the selfsame Christ, according to his humane nature, was
absent from heaven, when he was upon the earth; and leaving the earth, The
seventh Article impeached.
when he went up into heaven. Now for the seventh, concerning the Coming of
CHRIST unto Judgment, howsoever he pretends a belief in the thing, 1. By
making Saints Judges
yet he warranteth his Minions to set out many cross points, and close
blows, against the true manner of the same: As first, that the Rhemists in 1.
Cor. 6.2.
Saints shall judge, and give sentence with God at the latter Day: whereas the
truth is, that although the Saints shall judge the World Ambros. and Theodorit
in 1. Cor. 6.2.
by way of witnesse-bearing against the world; as Mat. 12.41.
the Ninevites against the Jews: Yet the giving of sentence, Mat. 25.34.
noted by Christ himself, belongs John 5.22. 1. By thinking the East to be
the place of Judgment.
to Christ only, as to the only chief Justice of this great Court of
general Assise, since the Father has committed all Judgment to the Son.
Secondly, that the place of this Judgment is Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccle. triump.
cap. 3. rat. 4.
the East part of the world, whereas the Kingdom of God Luke 17.10.24*
comes not by observation of either place or time; but as Christ shall come
suddenly, like Lightening shining from the East to the West, or as 1. These. 5.2.
a Thief in the night; so shall he come from Heaven to no certain set place
here upon Earth; because he is God, who must appear euery-where, as Judge of
the World in the sight and view of all men; as witness besides these
Scriptures, both Origin. tract. 35. in Matt^.
Origin, and August. in Psalm 74. 3. By a wrong sign of his coming.
Augustine: thirdly, that Christ shall come with Bellar. lib. 2. de Eccles.
triumph. cap. ^8. in quem Vid. Iunij Animaduers. ibidem.
the sign of the Cross carried before him by Angels, whereas neither
Scripture at all, nor Father before Constantines time, did ever so interpret
the sign Mat. 24.30.
of the Son of Man, but only took it, by comparing Saint Matthew with the
Mark. 13.26. Luke 21.27.
other Evangelists, for the most conspicuous Origin. tract. 30 in Math. and
Author oper imperfecti in Mat. hom. 49. 4. By setting down the time of his
coming.
appearing of CHRIST, made known to the World by many great signs there, by
our Savior himself related: fourthly, that the time of Christ's Coming to
Judgment shall be but Bellar. lib 3. de Pontis. ca ^7. and Henriq. lib. 4.
Moral. theolog. cap. 2^.. 10.
forty five days after the death and destruction of Antichrist, whereas we
have sufficiently declared before, that no man knows that time. A Fable then
it is, which cannot be grounded upon Daniels numbers given of Antiochus only,
and no way proper to Antichrist, whose Kingdom by 2. These 2.7.
Saint Paul's words, must last till the very Coming of Christ, as before we
have proved. And therefore I cannot but account these Papists no better then
the wicked, who Amos 6.4.
put off far from them the evil day, which shall yet come sooner then they
imagine, seeing Antichrist is revealed, and his Kingdom in part by the Word of
God diminished, yea and all the signs of Christ's Coming almost so fully
complete, as that we have all of us more need to dress Math. 25.5.
our Lamps against his arrival, then any way imagine with the idle servant,
Math. 24.45
that our Master does defer his Coming. Let us have our hearts prepared by
holy living, and we shall not fear; but love that Day to come, which
increases pain on Infidels, but ends them unto faithful men, says the
blessed Saint August. in 37. Psalm. Conc. 1.
Augustine. But let us pass from the second unto the third person in Trinity,
The eight Article resisted.
of whom the eight Article of our Faith is delivered [ I believe in the Holy
Ghost:] albeit Aquin. Opusc. contra Error. Graecorum, cap. 32. and Bellar. lib.
2. de Chron. cap. 20.21. etc*
they will hold with us against the Greeks the proceeding of the Holy Ghost
from the Son as well as from the Father: yet they lewdly resist the Holy
Ghost in these two points, as first in appropriating Ruard. Tapper. tom. 2. Or.
theolog. orat. 3.
him only to the Sea of Rome, when the John 3.8.
wind blows where it lists: secondly in denying the assurance of the Spirit
by Staplet. l. 9. de Iustific. c. 1. Bell. l. 3. de Just. c. 4.5 etc. and
Feuard. l. 7. theomach. Caluinistic. c. 19.
their doctrine of doubting, and uncertainty of perseverance; when the
Witness 1. Ioh. 5.6.
of this Spirit is Truth, bearing witness To. 8.16.17.
unto our spirits, that we are the Sons of God; and the seal thereof most
certain, Ephesians. 1.13.
until the Redemption of the purchased Possession. It is a plain token, that
they feel no comfort by the Spirit, when they fight so much against the true
working thereof, by denying those Truths, which the Spirit does testify in
the Word, and deluding those Works, which the Holy Ghost effects in the
conscience, for comfort, by strengthening the assurance of life eternal. But
why do I urge Grace to those who either refuse it, or receive it in vain,
their hearts, and consciences being hardened and feared? They do not only
grieve the Spirit, The ninth Article infringed 1. By false members of the
Church.
but abuse the Bride, that is, the holy Catholic Church, and the Communion of
Saints (the subject of the ninth Article,) first, by accounting both Bell. lib.
3. de Eccles. Militante, cap. 4.
Heretics and Reprobates to be members thereof, when my Text says plainly,
1. John 2.19.
They were not of us, and our Savior himself says: John 15.6.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and withered, and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned: For as Saints
are the members of Christ: so are the wicked the members of the Devil, says
Am. in Psalm. 37
Ambrose: secondly, 2. By holding the Church to be only visible.
by Bell. lib. 3. de Eccle. Milit. c. 11
making the Catholic Church to be visible only, when David says, that Psalm.
45.16.
the Kings Daughter is all glorious within, and our Luke 17.24.
Savior, that the Kingdom of God is within you: For because one part of this
Catholic Congregation is Triumphant now in the Heaven of the Blessed, secluded
from our eyes, and the other part scattered into a warfare here upon Earth,
some secretly, amongst Jews, Turks and Heathen, others openly, in a visible
particular Church, wherein yet the best part are the fewest, and known to God
only; therefore the good men Interrelig. Caesariana, c. 9. apud L. Osiand. in
Epitome hist. Eccles. Centur. 16. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 68.
of that Deuillishly-deuised Interim, or hotch-potch religion penned, and
published by the sole Commandment of Charles the fifth, ingeniously confess,
that the Church, as it consists of those members, which live according to
Charity, is only belonging unto the Saints, 3. In affirming that the Church
cannot err.
and in that respect spiritual and invisible: thirdly, in holding that a
particular visible Church (such as Bell. vbi supra.
they call the Church of Rome) can neither err in faith, nor fail in state;
when yet experience shows, what the Prophet Esaias 1.20.21
said of Jerusalem and the Church of the Jews [the holy City is become an
Harlot: it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
Murderers: thy silver is become dross; thy wine mixed with water,] to be
fulfilled, not only in most of the Greek Churches, Vid. Brierw. Enquiries,
and Knoll^ his Turkish History.
both corrupted with the Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, and now subverted
utterly almost by the fury of the Turks; but also in the Church of Rome, it
self by the judgment Apud Gowla^tium in Catalog. t^st. Veritat.
of Petrarch, who alluding to the Proverb [ in Samnio nihil Samnij] said, Et
Roma Romae nil reperi media: I found nothing of Rome in Rome: For the Mat.
13.38.
Devil is always ready to sow his Tares of Heresy, and Iniquity; and the
Church, through the allurements of the flesh and the World, very apt to retain
them: whereupon GOD in judgment many times remooues the Revel. 2 4.
Candlestick out of his place; that as the Moon which receives her Light
from the Sun, sometimes shines clearly, when the Sunnebeames are not
hindered, and sometimes is eclipsed and darkened in the shadow of the Earth
interposed between the two bright bodies of the Sun and Moon (it is a
similitude used by good Sadeel lib. de legitima Ministorum vocatione, and D.
Whitaker. de Eccles. q 3. cap. 3. arg. vltimo.
learned men borrowing it of Ambros. lib. 4 Hexan. cap. 7. and August. Ep. 80.
ad Hesych.
some Ancient Fathers:) so the Church, which receives all her light of Truth
from the Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, sometimes flourishes in the
bright Profession of the Truth, not hindered, or crossed by the Clouds of
Error; and sometimes lies desolate under the dark shadow of Heretical
Opinions, interposed by the Devil, between Christ and his Chosen Congregation
visible; which when it once came unto Christian Princes, became greater in
Power and Riches (says Hieronym. in vita Malchi. 4. By wrong marking the
Church with improper Notes.
Hierome) but less in Virtue: fourthly, by assigning such notes, and marks to
the Church, as mar her, but mark her not; some being false marks, as the
Bellar. lib. 4. de Eccles. mil. cap. 14.
power of Miracles (for Tharasius in Council. Nic. 2. Action 4. ex 1. Cor.
14.22.
Signs are done for Unbelievers, Math. 7.21. and Author oper. Impers. hom. 19.
and many times by such) some true, but not fitly agreeing to the particular,
but to the general only, as Antiquity, and Universality (for this is the
right Catholicisme Ex regula (...) apud Aristot. lib. 1. Poster. cap. 4.
of the whole Church from the beginning of the World;) lastly, others being
both true, and fit to a particular visible Congregation, but not well
understood, as Succession, which Bellar. lib. 4. de Eccles. mil. cap. 8.
they take to be personal, whereas it is the succession of Doctrine, that
Tertullian. lib. de praescript. aduers. haer. cap. 21.
proves a Church to be Apostolical. But what need I so strictly examine
their marks? They Vid. D. Whitaker. q 5. de Eccles. cap. 1. and B. Keck rm.
system. theolog. lib. 3. cap. 6.
make indeed so many, that a reasonable man may well think, that they have not
one true mark amongst them; some reckoning four, as Costerus; some six, as
Sanders; some twelve, as Cunerus; some fifteen, as Bellarmine; and some full
twenty, as Socolouius, whereas if this be a true rule, which all the
Hieronym. in Psa. 133. and August. lib. 11. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 1. and Albert.
Magnus Comment. in Luc. 13.
best Divines allow for a maxim in Theology, [that nothing marketh out a
Church, but that which makes up a Church,] the Church shall have but one only
proper, and essential mark, to wit, the Word of God, effectually preached;
unto which if we add the true administration of the two Sacraments, Baptism,
and the Eucharist, as Seals to an Indenture, we have the full mark of a
particular visible Congregation of Christ, if besides diverse Ancients, we
stand to the judgment of Apud T.M. celeber. Doctor. p 1. Apol^g. lib. 2. cap.
28.39. etc.
learned Papists, who convicted in conscience, subscribe to this truth
delivered in the Interrelig. Caesarian. cap. 11
Interim, that the signs of a true Church are sound doctrine, and the right
use of the Sacraments. I am weary of wading through these puddles of pollution,
wherewith Pope and Papists do pester the Church of Christ; The tenth Article
denied.
and therefore I will not speak of their denying the absolute and free
remission of sins mentioned in the tenth article by their Bellar. lib. 1. de
Amiss. great. and lib. Arbitr. cap. 1. and 2.
distinction of sin into venial and mortal, and their tenent grounded
thereupon, Idem. lib. 1. de Purgator. cap. 11. rat 2.
that the punishment eternal of both is fully remitted in Christ, but the
temporal punishment for the venial sin is to be satisfied for by our
selves, either here, or in Purgatory; whereas Scripture tells us that Romans
6.23.
the wages of sin is death, and Ephesians. 1.7. Hebr. 9.22. 1. John 1.7.
that there is no remission of sin, but by Christ, in his blood, and that
Psalm. 49.7. Ephesians. ^.8.
no man of us can redeem his own soul, and that Eccles. 9.4. Revel. 14 13.
after this life, there is no place either for repentance, or remission, and
that Luke 17.10. The eleventh Article denied
when we have done all that we can do, we are but unprofitable servants:
neither will I trouble you with recounting the Atheism of John the 23.
condemned and deposed by the Council of Constance, Council. Constant. sess. 11.
art. penultimo, and sess. 12. tom. 3. Council. apud Binnium.
for denying the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the dead,
specified in the eleventh article, because peradventure Canus lib. 6. loc.
Comm. cap. 8. ad 11. arg.
they will say, that it was not e cathedra, although Bellar. lib. 4. de
Pontifice Romans cap. 5.
he then was Pope certain, not uncertain: for else he needed not to have been
so solemnly deprived, and another ordained to be his true successor.

Lastly, The twelfth Article misunderstood.
I will not now touch at large that most presumptuous and saucy doctrine
delivered in their Aquinat appendix. q. 96. art. 1. and 4.
Schools, without all text of Scripture, or witness of ancient Fathers, de
aureolis, that is, of a further crown and reward then perfect and essential
happiness, such as they assign to Virgins, Martyrs, and the more learned. For
although Danaeus Isagog. Christ. p. 4. lib. 6. cap. 8. and Bucanus loc. 36.
quaest. 14.
we deny not the degrees of glory there proportioned by God according to the
several measures of grace, as Gregor. in Psalm. 7 poenitent. ss. 142.
Gregory well observed God to give rewards in heaven, not per, but secundum,
according to our works done here upon earth: Yet can not we here know, either
to whom in particular the greatest degree of glory shall be given there, or
whether this little crown, which they will have to be added to the great one,
differ from essential happiness, since 1. Cor. 2.9.
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Where 2. Cor. 12.3.
S. Paul professes ignorance, I will not search to know, since secrets Deuteronomy.
29.29.
are Gods, who concealeth the measure of future glory, to further our endeavors
unto the highest degree thereof by faith, hope, and love. Many are their
errors, and mighty their bad opinions conceived against the right
understanding of the Sacraments, and the Lords Prayer, and all the grounds of
the Catechism, which because other Fr. Gomarus inresp. ad F. Coster. p. 1 and.
M. Perkins Advertisement, and M. D. Abbots in Bishop, and G. Powel
godly and learned men have fully discovered, I will not relate, having (I
hope) laid open so plainly to the view of the world the Popes denial of the
Christian faith, that no man can otherwise judge of him, then of an Tit. 3.10.
Heretic, justly to be cast off, after so many admonitions; seeing that as the
Great. cause. 24 q. 3. can 28.
Canon law out of S. August lib. de vti i^ate credendi, cap. 1.
Augustine defines an Heretic, so the Pope and Papists have proved themselves
to be: An Heretic is he, who for temporal profit, and especially for glory
and principality, either forgeth first, or follows after false and new
opinions: and he who believes such men, is a man illuded by a certain
imagination of truth and godliness. Yet is he not so heretical, Of the Popes
Iniquity against the ten Commandments.
as most villanously wicked, and wickedly repugnant to all Gods Commandments,
delivered in the Decalogue, as shall be demonstrated by many notorious, and
crying sins of several Popes, whereof some one way, and some another way,
have (to make up the monstrous body of sinful Antichrist,) broken Gods
Commandments in word, or in deed, by doctrine, or by life. For now to make
instance in every particular, against the first Commandment, Against the
first Commandment.
as Antichrist was an Atheist, and a coniurer; so find we in good histories,
that such were diverse Popes, Atheists, as he, even Stella, Balaeus, Valera in
vita Leonis 10.
Leo decimus, who said to Cardinal Petrus Bembus, the great Scholar of his
time, citing a place out of the Gospel; What profit this fable of Christ has
brought to us, and our company, all the world knows: Coniurers, as Benno
Cardinalis de vit. and gestis Hildebran. apud G^w^art. in Catal^go. test.
Veritat. tom. ^* lib. 13. page 383.
Gregory the seventh commonly called Hildebrand, following the steps of
eighteen together of his sweet predecessors, even to Syluester the second,
who Platina in Syluestro z.
gave himself to the Devil, that he might attain to the greatest honors,
like as Hieronym. Marius in Eusebio, and C. Valera in Alexand. 6.
Alexander the sixth did, that he might be Pope. I marvel how these Beasts,
over whom the Mat. 16.18.
gates of Hell have so far prevailed, could be Peter's successors, either in
person, or in doctrine, since not only Gods Deuteronomy. 18.12.
Law casts out such hel-hounds from amongst Gods people, but also their own
corrupted Gratian. c. 26 q. 5. ca. 11.12.13
Canon law, together with the rascal rabble of all their Nauarrus, Enchir.
cap. 11. number. 28. Tolet. lib. 4. Instruct. cap. 14. and Jacob. a Graphijs. p.
1. lib. 2 cap. 6. Azor. tom. 1. lib. 9. Instit. cap. 13.14. etc. Against the
second Commandment. 1. By Idolatry
coozening Casuists denounce against such Monsters of the true black guard, the
great Excommunication, as a sure seal of the second death, reserved for such
vile Non-repentants. But see how he sins against the second Commandment by
Idolatry, and Superstition, to show himself truly Antichrist. For if Idolatry
be, as Aquin. 2.2. q. 94. art. 1. and Tolet. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 14.
themselves define it, the giving of divine worship to a false god; then the
Pope commits a double Idolatry, by authorizing Council. Trident. sess. 25.
cap. ^.
Images to be set up in Churches, and to be worshipped, seeing, either they
are Images of things which are not, nor ever were, as Vide D. Rainold. lib. 1.
de Romans Eccles. Idololatr. cap. 5.. 25.26. etc.
of Christopher, Katherine, George, and other feigned Saints; and so by their
own general confession, the worshipping of these is palpable Idolatry, or
else they are Images and resemblances of the true God, and so not the true God:
(for, nul^um simile est idem) and so indeed a false god; (for, inter verum and
falsum no^ est medium,) and thereby, according to their own definition, they
commit gross Idolatry, by giving the worship of the true God, to that which
indeed is no god, but a mere creature, as Tertullian. de Idololatr. cap. 4.
Tertullian defines, that the consecration of an Image is Idolatry. And
Augustine August. lib. 5. locution. ss. in Deuter.
from the nature of the word does show, that since (...) does note the service
due to God, Idolatry is the giving of that service to an Idol, which is not
God. Yet this is not all their wickedness against this Law, 2. By superstition.
which they wilfully transgress by vile superstitions, in burdening the Church
with an infinite number of idle Ceremonies, false Relics, idolatrous Temples,
polluted Altars, garish Vestures, s^range Gestures, idle Pilgrimages,
May-game-like Processions subtle Suffrages, deuillish Dirges, and an huge
mass of such like beggarly and impotent Rudiments of the World, mentioned in
their Ex correctione Pij Quinti.
Missall, Breuiarie, and Editum sub Leone 10.
Romish Ceremonial, but maintained by Bellar. lib. 2. and 3. de Eccles.
triumph.
Bellarmine, Suarez tom. 1 de Relig. lib. 3. etc.
Suarez, Vasquez. li. 4. de Adorat.
Vasques, Feuard. lib. 6 th^omach. Call.
Feuardentius, and the Tomi tres Antiquit. Liturgi^ carum editi in 8 Duaci,
1605.
Dowists, Merchants made Revel. 18.3.
rich by the filthynesse of the Whore, that if August. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar.
Augustine in his time had cause to complain against the abundance of
Ceremonies, crept into the Church, to the hinderance of more necessary
exercises of true Religion; such as are the hearing of Gods Word truly
preached, and the duly and daily receiving of the blessed Sacraments, rightly
administered, we have now fair more just occasion to cry out with the good old
Father Hierome, against this trifling in the use of Religion, that, Hieronym.
in Math. 23.
contrary to Gods Commandment, we devour, and neglect matters of great
moment, and show our opinion of Religion, and diligence in small things that
bring gain; yea, and to wish with the Cardinal of Cameracum, that Petrus de
Alliaco lib. de Reformat. Eccles. cap. de ref. Praelatorum.
in Gods service not so much burdensome prolixitie, as devout and sound
brevity might be observed. Well, yet the Iere. 13.23. Against the third
Commandment.
Black-a-Moore cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots: This
Triple-mitered Cerberus will not be reformed; but as Antichrist against the
third Commandment was found to be full of blasphemies: so, to our great
astonishment, has the Christian World heard the Pope of Rome open his mouth
against God by tattling and titling: by tattling in Table-talke things
horrible, and hideous; as did Balaeus, and Valera in Iul. 3.
Julius the third, that greasy, gowtie, and porke-noddle Pope, who loving
Porke exceedingly, although his Physician forbad it unto him, because of his
disease; when one day he missed it from his Table, and upon his demand
thereof, his faithful Servants told him the Physicians mind, in a great rage
said, I will have my Porke in despite of God. Yea, another time the same
Monster, being in a fury for a cold Peacocke, not served up, when a Cardinal
desired his Holiness not to be angry for so small a matter, said, If God for
an Apple cast our first Parents out of Paradise, why should not I, his Vicar,
be angry for my Peacocke, a thing of far more worth then an Apple? By
titling, first, in his Laws, when he takes himself, as did Act. 12.20.
Herod Antipas, the name of God, as we read in their Canon law, Gratian. 96.
did. can. 7.
that the Pope can neither be bound, nor loosed by the secular power, seeing
that he was called God, by the godly Prince CONSTANTINE; and it is manifest
that God cannot be judged of by men. Secondly, in his Libels, as in these
Verses, set out in a Pageant of Triumph for Julius tertius: In monumento quodam
^ononiae.
Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et meri^o in terris crederis esse Deus.
Thirdly, in his Glosses Gloss. in can. 2. q. 6. causae. 15.
upon the Canon Law, where the Pope is said to have power of Dispensation,
contra ius natural, and contra Apostolum, against the Law of Nature, and
against the Apostle: Fourthly, in the use of his own proper person; as
Innocent. 3. lib. 1. de mysterijs Missae, cap. 5.
where the Cardinal Deacons are said to carry the Pope on their shoulders, as
the Leuits used to carry in the Wilderness the Arc of the Covenant; and Lib.
1. Ceremoniar. Romans Eccles. sect. 7. cap. De Ense dando in Vigil. Natiui.
where the Pope in blessing the Sword upon Christmasse Eve, does show, that the
Sword does signify the chiefest Temporal Authority to be given by Christ to
the Pope his Vicar on Earth, according to that, Mat. 28.18.
All power is given to me in Heaven, and in Earth; and in another place, Psalm.
72.8.
he shall rule from Sea to Sea, and from the Flood unto the Worlds end.

How this abuse of Scripture can be excused, I crave to know of their curious
Casuists, especially of Molanus Ioh. Molanus tr. 2. theolog. practicae, cap. 5.
conclus. 3.
the Popes maine Friend, thus determining of Sacrilege; dishonor is off^red
unto God, whenever an holy thing is handled vn^eueren^ly, as for Example,
when holy Scripture is abused to Jests: and of old Azorius, Azor. tom. 1.
Instit. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 28. q. 3. Against the fourth Commandment. 1. By
doctrine
who defines this to be one kind of Blasphemy, when in speaking thou give
to a thing created, what is proper to God. For I cannot see how they can shift
off the Pope from being a sacrilegious person, and a Blasphemer in the foresaid
bad practices accustomably used. Yet he proceeds further in the breach of
duty toward God, by profaning the holy Sabbath, the Day of our great Duty
against the fourth Commandment, both by doctrine, and life; by doctrine when
he warranteth his Aquin. 2.2 q. 122. art. 3. ad 4. and Dominic. a So^o lib. 2.
de Instit. and iure, q. 4. art. ^. and Suarez tom 1. de Relig. lib. 2. cap. 4.
and Rhemists in 15. Mat.. 3.
Schoolmen to teach, that the Lords Day is not the lawful Sabbath by the Law
of God, but only by Tradition, whereas even by the confession of some of
Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccles. triumph. cap. 11. and Azorius tom. 2. Instit. lib.
1. ca. 2.
his best Learned, the Lords Day is in Scripture both commended to be the Psalm.
118.24.
Day which God has made, that is, separated from other days by many of his
actions, especially, Mat. 28.1.
of his Resurrection, and Act. 2.1.
sending of the Holy Ghost, and therefore commanded to be the Day of Gods
Service, wherein we may be glad and rejoice: 2. By life and practice.
by life; when they usually on that Day, either allow openly, or wink at idle
sports of Plays, May-games, and youthful Revels, as appears by the Relikes
of this Rudeness yet standing in some Parishes of England, where, since the
Reformation there has not been resident a Preaching Minister, and as it is
Raphael Volateran, lib. 22. Anthropolog. ca. de Alex. 6.
recorded of Alexander the sixth, that upon all Festival Days without
difference, he used to have acted before him Plautus his Comedies, and other
Interludes, and many times he was wont to retire himself to the top of
Mount Hadrian, thence to behold the Courtezans minsing and ietting by him, as
they went into the Fields. Is this your Devotion, holy Popes, on the LORDS Day,
which should be kept so Esaias. 58.12.
gloriously holy, that you should not do your own pleasures? Surely, no
marvel, if your people now Iere. 8.6.
rush into all profaneness, since you their Shepherds Iere. 50.6.
cause them to err from Mountain to Hill, and so to forget their resting
place.

But I hope that howsoever you neglect your duty toward God; yet for shame
you will have some respect of your Neighbors, who esteem so well of your high
style of holiness. Surely, no such matter: he that fears not God, does not
regard man: and therefore against the fifth Commandment, Against the fifth
Commandment.
as Antichrist was to lift up himself above Kings and Princes: so the Pope
exalts himself above all Christendom, 1. By proud practices.
First, by practice of Pride against the Emperor, as Vid. Plat. in horum
omnium vitis.
Gregory the Third excommunicated LEO ICONOMACHVS; ZACHARY the First deposed
the lawful King, to set up Pipin to be the king of France. LEO the Third
created for Emperor CHARLES the Great: GREGORY the seventh first attempted to
depose the lawful Emperor HENRY the fourth: ALEXANDER Volaterran. l. 22.
Anthropolog. in Alex. 3.
the third trod upon the neck of the Emperor FREDERICK BARBAROSSA, as ADRIAN
the Idem ibidem.
fourth had made him hold his stirrup, yea and Roger. Houedenus page 2. Annal.
sub. Rich. 1.
CAELESTINE the third was not ashamed to put the Crown upon the heads of HENRY
the sixth, and of the Empress, with his feet, pushing it off again with his
foot, and saying, 2. By seditious doctrines.
I have power to make and unmake Emperors at my pleasure: secondly, by
positions of doctrine, wherein the Pope teaches, that Decret. Greg. li. 1. tit.
33. ca. 6.
there is as great difference between Popes, and Kings, as is between the
Sun and Moon; and that Extrauag. Commun. lib. 1. tit. 8. cap. 1.
the material sword is subject to the spiritual, this being put into the
hands of Priests, that of Kings and Princes, and both of them in the power of
the Church; Whereupon besides the spiritual power of binding and loosing there
is ascribed unto the Pope a temporal power of setting up, or deposing Kings
either directly as the Hostieusis in Can. Quod super his, etc. Syluester
Angelus, and Silmistae alij in verb. Papa.
Canonists, and the Popes parasite Tho. Bozius l. 4. de Regno Italiae, cap 5.
and 6.
Tho. Bozius say; or indirectly by force of the spiritual sword, as the
subtle and wicked Bell. lib. 5. de Pont. Ro^ c. 5. etc.
Jesuits have craftily imagined; both these in truth like Judge. 15.4.
Samsons foxes, tied together by the tails, to carry the firebrands of
furious rebellion against Kings, and Princes, into the midst of Christendom,
Vid. G. Barcklaium lib. de Potestate Papae.
auouching these positions against all Scripture, which requires Romans 13.1.
every soul to be subject to the higher power, even the soul (says Chrysostom.
in Epist. ad Romans hom. 23.
Chrysostom) of Apostle, Prophet, Prelate, and all, as therefore many Popes
(look Tom. 1. and 2. Council. apud Binnium.
into the Epistles of Leo, Gregory, Agatho, and others) have willingly
acknowledged the Emperor for their Liege Lord. But those were men of a moderate
spirit, and Antichrist was then but in the hatching. For afterward that which
was crushed, Esaias 59.4. Against the sixth Commandment.
brake out into a Viper, or Serpent, which did not only sting great Kings, but
poisoned all poor people. For as against the sixth Commandment, Antichrist
was to be a Murderer; so is the Pope proved to be, by his practices, both
accomplished in sundry Princes: as, in Historia de vita Henrici 4. apud
Christoph. Vistitium. tom. 1 Illustr. German. Scriptorum.
HENRY the fourth Emperor, Abbas Vrspurgens in Frederico 1.
FREDERICK BARBAROSSA, Math. Paris. and Roger Houeden in Ioh.
King JOHN of England, the Vid. French Inuentarie, and Process. in Fr.
Raualliac.
two HENRY'S of France, all slain by the Popes and Papists procurement, or
happily prevented by God, either disclosing them intended, as against Vid.
English Justice.
blessed Queen ELIZABETH, by PARRY and other Villains, justly executed for
Traitors: or turning them back into his own bowels, as to ALEXANDER
Guicciardin. lib. 5. histor.
the sixth, who thinking to have poisoned his Friend, a Cardinal, was, by the
mistaking of his Servant, mistaking the bottle full of Poison, dispatched
himself.

Erasm. Chili. sub tit. Malum retortum.
Turdus malum sibi cacat: The Pope here provided a rod for his own tail: as
Prou. 26.26.
whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein; and he that rolleth a stone, it
shall return upon him. For whosoever Gene. 9.6
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. It is a point of Gods
Justice, which a private man must not undertake without a public calling, set
down in the Law, Deuteronomy. 19.21.
life for life, eye for eye, Against the seventh Commandment.
etc. Now to go forward, as Antichrist, against the seventh Commandment,
pretended an hatred against Women, with whom he yet most filthily polluted
himself: so does the Pope exclaim against lawful Wedlock, Syricius Ep. 1.
decretal tom. 1. Council apud Binniu^m.
first, applying that of the Apostle thereunto; They, that are in the flesh,
cannot please God: and secondly, Council. Trident. sess. 24. can. 9.
forbidding Marriages to Priests, Romans 8.7.
to whom yet, as also unto any other man, Gratian. did. 34^ Can. 4. and 5.
he gently permits the use of Concubine in stead of a Wife; when the
Apostle, on the contrary, said, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge; as he did some Popes taken in the very act with
other men's Wives: to wit, Platina in Ioh. 13.
JOHN the Thirteenth slain in the act of Adultery: And PAVL, Stella and
Balaeus in Paulo 3.
the Third, wounded by Nicholas Quercoeus, in the very act committing with his
Wife. But why do I mention only these two? There was but one Pope IOANE. For
all, or most of the Popes, since that time have proved themselves to be men,
by their Bastards begotten in Fornication, Adultery, yea, and sometimes in
abominable incest, as Apud Balaeum and Gowlartium in Catalog. testi. Veritatit.
Pontanus declares in the Epitaph made upon Lucretia, that kindly sweet
Daughter of Alexander the sixth: Hoc iacet in tumulo LVCRETIA nomine, sedre
THAIS, Pontificis, silia, sponsa, nurus.


So that Pius the g Second, before called Aeneas Syluius, in conscience
execrating these monstrous Villainies, and Sodomitries committed and permitted
by Popes, said that Marriages were taken away from Priests upon great reason,
but upon better reason he thought they might be restored.

I will not trouble you further with an odious Catalogue of privy Thefts,
violent Robberies, Against the eight Commandment.
and wicked Sacriledges, committed by the Pope against the eighth Commandment,
especially, in spoiling the Church of her dues, by the Vide quae dixi in
Clauigero Ecclesiae.. 19. and 20.
Impropriation of Tithes from the Clergy, or lawful Ministry, to Council.
Lateranense sub Alex. 3.
beastly and idle Monks and Nuns; Albert. Crantzius. li. 6. Saxon. cap. 52.
giving thereby occasion unto the Emperor, and other Christian Princes to
sequester the Churches goods unto their own proper uses, under the colorable
pretense of maintaining Soldiers for the Churches defense, and Schools for
her furnishing with a lasting succession of able men; but surely in my opinion,
no way allowable in the sight of God, who Prou. 20.25.
pronounces the devouring of things sanctified to be a destruction, as the
Maledicta domus, cui lapis sacer infertur. apud Romans in Proverb. Salom. ibid.
Against the ninth Commandment.
old saying is, Cursed is that house, that is built of holy stones.

I will not register, either his many vain lies coined of fained Saints, and
set down in the holy Legend, to the wonder of wisemen and amazement of fools,
(he that made that Book being no better then he who authorizeth it, A man (as
says VIVES Lod Viues lib. 2. de Causis Corruptarum art. ad finem.
) of an Iron mouth, and a leaden heart; or his malicious slanders given out
against the true Saints of Christ, such as were the Wilderses, Luther, Calum,
Cranmer, and others, whom they repute for Heretics, Coozeners, and the most
vile men that ever lived, when yet neither Th. Walden in Wickle^. lib. 5. de
Sacrament.
Walden, Cochlaeus de vita Lutheri.
Cochlaeus, Fed^r. Staphylus in Epitom. Theolog. Luther.
Staphylus, Hi^ron. Bolsec in vita Calu.
Bolsec, nor any of all these Popish Parrats shall ever be able to fasten one
such a fault, as they report, upon the lively memory of these happy men, Reave.
14.13.
who rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Mat. 11.18. Against
the tenth Commandment.
Wisdom will be justified of her Children; Truth may be pressed, but never be
ouer-pressed.

Lastly, I will not diue into the gulf of his inward Concupiscence, since it
so boyleth inwardly by the diversity of his most corrupt, and violent
passions, as that like Aristot. lib. 2. Meteor.
Bosphorus Thracius, it cannot be sounded by the heauiest plummet of humane
wit. It is sufficient for us, who must leave him to his Judge, to descry it by
the steame, and fume thereof, ascending out of the fiery Oven of his filthy
heart, by the Baptist. Mantuan. lib. 3. Calamitatum.
inticement of Women, loving of Boys, incroching upon Temporalities, watching
for Advantages, plotting of bad Practices for his own Advancement. For this is
all the Popes study, Qui Virgil. 3, Egl.
si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset: who if he were not every way most
sinful, he could not be properly (as we have now proved him by his habit of
Iniquity) that Man of sin.

The Popes acta
Let us yet, I pray you, enter into scrutinie of his several Acts proceeding
from those habits of Heresy and Iniquity; and see, if all tend not, first,
unto Covetousness, 1. Of Covetousness in his Character.
secondly, to Coozenage, and thirdly* unto Cruelty. To Covetousness, in that
he will have the Character of his name imprinted, I say, even the very
Character of Antichrist himself, 1. Inwardly.
imprinted both inwardly upon all men's hearts by that Implicit or infolden
faith, which they Bellar. lib. 1. de Iustific. cap. 7. and Coster. Enchirid.
cap. 4. 3
hold to be sufficient unto Salvation; so that he that has this faith, only
believes, as the Church believes; although he knows not, what the Church
believes; when yet our Savior tells us, that John 17.3.
This is life eternal to know thee to be the very God, and him, whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ: for Romans 10.14.
how shall they believe in him, on whom they have not heard? Faith, said
Bernard Bernard. Epist. 190.
out of AUGUSTINE, is not got or had by gessing and opinionating in the heart,
in which it is, by him whose it is; but by certain knowledge, the conscience
consenting: as also their own Catechism says, Catechism. Romans p. 1. cap. 1.
resp. ad q. 1. 2. Outwardly.
the knowledge of true happiness is nothing else but Faith: and outwardly,
both upon the forehead for profession of Romish Doctrine [for so the Extrauag.
Commun. lib. 1. til. 8. cap. 1. ad sin.
Pope declares, says, defines, and pronounces, that for every humane
creature to be subject to the Romish Pope, is altogether of the necessity of
salvation; thereby indeed preiudicing the Greek and Ethiopian Churches Vid.
Catho. Traditio. and Ed. Bri^rw. Enquir.
which never were, nor as yet are subject to this ambitious Antichrist:] and on
their hands for working, since neither Prince nor Priest must now adays
practice the several duties of Magistracy, or Ministry, without an Oath of
Fealty, first, made unto the Pope; not Prince, since he Clement. lib. 2. ti^.
9. cap. 1. in princip.
is so commanded to secure his Kingdom from the Pope unto him by the bond of
an Oath, the former whereof is diversely set down, but all to this purpose, That
the Emperor must be subject to the Bishop of Rome, as it was taken Gratian
^ist. 63. can. 30.
by Lewis the Son of Charles the Great unto Paschalis the First, by Great.
did. 63 can. 33.
Otho the First to John the twelfth, by Platina in Gregor. 7.
Henry the Fourth to Gregory the Seventh, by Lib. 1. Ceremon. Romans Eccle.
sect. 5. cap. 2.
Frederick the Third to Nicholas the Fifth, by Charles the Fifth to Clement
the Seventh, yea, and by King John Math. Parisiens. in Ioh. page 217.
of England to Innocent the Fourth, [all this truly verifying the words of
SOLOMON, Co^n^l. Agrippa in historia de Coronat. Caroli 5. ^ononiae, tom. ^.
Over.
Eccles. 10.6.
I have seen servants upon Horses, and Princes walking, as servants upon the
earth. For this servant of servants is by this Oath promoted above his elder
Brethren in Christendom, Kings and Princes:] not Priest, since his tonsure, or
shauing, his Chrisme, or anointing given by the Pope, and Popelings only,
Henriquez lib. 10. Moral. theolog. cap. 34.. 2. in textu.
are ratified by an Oath of subjection unto the Pope, to be taken in the
Chapter House before he enter the Possession of the Temporalities, belonging to
his Bishopric, or other like Benefice, as Idem ibidem in margin.
Gregory the Thirteenth of late set out the form, and whereof we find a Copy
registered in the I. Fox. Martyrolog. lib. 4 pa. 208. and lib. 7. page 961.
Acts and Monuments. (...): Praise just dealing, but yet be thou set wholly
upon gaining, Sophocles in Aiac.
said one in the Poet; whom the Pope fitly follows in requiring these Oaths
of Magistrates and Ministers under the colorable pretense of maintaining true
Unity, and Uniformity in Church, and Common Weal; but in truth, as the event
shows, for a ready occasion, and sound cause, upon which he may gather
money; both of Princes, who before they were admitted unto their places, by
this Oath, as by a posterne gate, or a window, did solemnly promise some one
special Temporalitie of Earldome, etc. for a thankful Benevolence to holy
Church, as Caelestine Roger Houeden in Ioh.
the Third peremptorily urged it to Henry the sixth Emperor; and of Priests;
who, if they were Archbishops, were to Vid. lib. 1. Ceremon. Romans Eccles. sect.
10. cap. vlt.
pay a great mass of money for their Pall; if Bishops, according to the rate
of their Living; Abbots, Priors, Deanes, or any way Beneficed men, Fox. Martyr.
lib. 4. page 322.
were to send their first Fruits of all their Livings unto the Pope; who was
not ashamed by his Legate Otho, Math. Paris. in Henr. 3. p. 316
to require out of England, besides this bridle of bondage in the mouths of
the Clergy, from every Cathedral Church two Prebends, one from the Bishop,
and another from the Chapter; from every Abbey, and Covent two Portions, yea,
Idem, page 677
and many times reserving Benefices for Strangers, amongst many other
grieuances, and heavy burdens by the Pope in times before laid upon this
flourishing Kingdom of England, which the Pope in respect of the Peter Pence,
Annals, Pensions, Provisions, and other gainefull Injunctions brought from
hence to Rome, might well term truly Idem. page 683
his Garden of Delights, his Bottomless Poole; out of which, since many things
abound there, many things from many may well be extorted, even thereby
verifying of his Court at Rome, both what the Fox in the Poet said of the Lions
Den, -- Horat. Ep. 1. lib. 1.
quia me vestigia terrent
Omniate aduersum spectantia nulla retrorsum:
I fear to go thither, being affrighted by the footings of all other Beasts
looking toward, but not returning back from this Den of Men, worse then
Lions; yea, even of Devils, whose Court is Scaliger de ^t^litate, exercitat. 52.
like the Sea at Paria, and the Isles of Maidegascar ever flowing in, but never
ebbing out: and that of old, when Rome was in her Ruff, as one well rimed with
reason, from a strange, yet true Deriuation of the word [ Roma] thus; Ioh.
Monachi apud Gowlart. in Catalog. test. Veritat. ^om. ^. lib. 14 page 494. 2.
Of coozen^ge in his miracles.
Roma manus rodit; quod rodere non valet, odit;
Dantes exaudit; non dantibus ostia claudit.


Now to cover this Covetousness, he flies to the Coozening course of
Quacksaluers in the fraudulent use of lying Miracles, the glory Bellar. lib. 4.
de Eccles. Militant. cap. 14.
whereof is made a mark of their Church, in which even now adays Vid. Binderi
Sc^olasticam theolog. cap. 10.
they must have a Miracle done, to make a good doctrine, warrantable no other
ways, as may appear in that Bellar. in locis de Purgatorio, and Sanct. and
Eucharist.
Iesuicall custom of proouing their Conclusions by the uncertain report of
lying Wonders. For what truth can be authentike by Miracles, without Scripture?
Miracles may be done Mat. 7.20 and 24.24. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
by the Devil and his Ministers, being true in the act, through Gods
permission, though false in the end, which is to deceive. And yet we doubt of
the truth of their Miracles, seeing Lyra reports Lyra in cap. 14. Dan.
great deceiving of the people to be wrought in the Church by lying Miracles
done by Priests and their Adherent^, for temporal gain; and Canus lib. 11.
loc. Com. cap. 6.
Canus their own Champion censureth Beda his English History, Gregory's
Dialogues, Vincentius his Speculum, Antoninus his Historical, and the Leaden,
not the Golden Legend for uncertain Records of many idle reports, concerning
Miracles, done by some Saints, which not only wise men, but even common people
dare not believe.

-- Horat. de Art poetic.
Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas:
Painters, and Poets, and Popish pardoners have all the like privilege, to lie
for an advantage.

But lo, what a block is here laid in our way: Ob.
Antichrist (says the Bellar. lib. de Pontif. ca. 15. and Sanders demons. 25.
and Eudaemon lib. 3. contra. D. Abbat. page 244.
Cardinal) must do these three miracles, first, cause fire come down from
heaven; secondly, make the Image of the beast to speak; thirdly, feign
himself to dye, and to rise again: But the Pope does none of these three
wonders: therefore the Pope cannot be Antichrist. And yet he may be Antichrist,
Sol.
although he do none of these; since he may do other tricks of a maine
deceiuer.

But to answer their argument, first, we deny 1. Proposition false.
not allowing any of these three to be Antichrists miracles. For (to begin at
the last, 3. Miracle.
till we come to the first,) Where do they find that Antichrist shall feign
himself to dye, and to rise again? For Revel. 13.3.
the head wounded to death, and the deadly wound healed, can no way prove,
either, this Vid. Riberam in locum.
to be a dying, and rising again, since he was but wounded unto death, and yet
did not dye, being healed of this wound to the wonder of the world, which
magnified the Dragon, for giving such power unto this beast, whom afterward
they worshipped; or, to be an act of Antichrist, who is not signified by the
former beast, but by the latter, as we have before proved, the former Vid.
Marlaorat. in locum.
being the Roman Emperor, one of whose heads is said to be deadly wounded,
when the Monarchy beginning in Julius Caesar, Appi^n. lib. 3 de bell.
Ciuilibus and Dio Cass. l. 52.
was almost clean defaced again by his death, till Augustus did afterward
revive it to its former estate, and leave it in a flourishing firmness to his
successors; in whom Iunium in Apoc. 13.3.
being bad men, as in those monsters, Caligula, Nero, Domitian, Commo^us, and
Heliogabalus, the majesty of the Empire seemed to be dead, where again in
those, who made a show of moral virtue, as Tiberius, Claudius, Vespasian,
Titus, Traian, Aurelius, Alexander Seuerus, Probus, and others, it flourished
to the wonder of all the world; which both magnified the Devil in those
heathen gods, to whom they, with Symanchus, Symmach. Epist. ad Valentin. apud
Prudentium, and Ambros. tom. 3. lib. 5 Ep. 31.
ascribed the continual prosperity of the Empire, and worshipped the Emperors
for Gods, as Ioh. Rosinus lib. 3. Antiq. Romans cap. 18.
appears by their solemn consecrations after their death. Again, where the
second beast which is Antichrist, is said to make the Image of the beast to
speak, we cannot understand it literally to be spoken of a miracle done by
Antichrist, who, as Henriq. li. 14. cap. 23. 3. and Blas. Vi^gas in 13. Apoc.
commentar. 2. q. 6.
Papists do describe him, must, in setting up of the Jewish superstitions, pull
down all images, (and therefore will not erect his own, as Eudaemon lib. 3.
in Rob. Abbat. page 253.
Eudaemon speaks without book) but mystically, according to the tenor of
the whole Chapter, wherein (as Hieronym. Epist. ad Paulin.
Hierome says) there are as many mysteries as words, we must take it for an
allegorical description of one of the proudest actions of Antichrist, who then
made the Image of the beast to speak, when either he took upon himself the
like majesty, and authority, as the heathen Emperor had before, or else
seemed to assign it over to the Germane Empire. For what had the first beast
Onuphr. lib. 3 Antiquit. Romans
in substance of government truly? to wit, an head, who was the Emperor, a
body politic consisting of the Senate at home, with his deputies in the
Provinces abroad, and a soul, or life of sovereign authority, set down in
his laws, either heathenish in the Digests, or Christian in the Code, and
Authentiques; the second beast, to wit, Antichrist, even the Pope has apishly
counterfeited, as he proudly mainteineth, in Vid. lib. 1. Ceremon. Romans Eccles.
sect. 1. and 2.
a like resemblance of Soueraignetie, and State, both in his own Court at
Rome, and in his creature, the Germane Empire, posted over from one noble
Family to another, at the pleasure of the Pope. For first in his own Court at
Rome, there is an head with three crowns, even the Pope himself, not ashamed
to term himself Bonifacius 8. apud Vrspurg. anno 1200.
Caesar and Pontifex; a monstrous body of a scarlet colored Senate Vid. lib.
1. Cerem. Romans Eccles. sect. 8. cap. 4.
in the Red-hatted Cardinals, together with his Deputies his Legates abroad,
and a filthy soul of usurped authority, by which this Image speaks aloud
to all the world, Corpus Iuris Canonici in Decretis Grati. Decretalibus
Raymundi, Sexto Bonifac. 8. Clementinis, and extrauagantibus, correctis a
Gregor. 12.
even the Canon law set down in the text of Gratians Decrees, Raymunds
Decretalls, the Sext of Bonifacius, Clementine, Extrauagants and their latter
Constitutions, all adorned with glosses, plainly painting out the primacie of
the Pope, both over the Spiritual, and Temporal state. So speaks this Image
by these Parasites one way. But secondly, Bull^ng. Ser. 6 in Apocalypse.
if we take this Image for the Germane Empire, which in truth is but a shadow
of the former Roman Empire, as we shall show hereafter; then the language,
which the Pope puts into his mouth, is but as an idle Echo, resounding
abroad, what is the Popes pleasure, as appears by that mutual accord Apud
Auent. lib. 4 Annal. Boiorum. page 259. etc.
between the Pope and Franks, Pipin, Charles the great, and others, who as they
were placed in their Empire by the Pope; so set the Pope for Sovereign in the
best, and the greatest Segniories of Italy, verifying the old proverb,
Racemus iuxta racemum maturescit. Erasm. Chiliad. tit. ^en^at. benefic.
(...), since one state by the help of the other came to ripeness. Lastly,
that fire, which they will have their Antichrist to fetch down from heaven,
Bulling. Marlaorat, Iun. etc. in 13. Apoc.
is no material, or elementarie fire, but that brutum fulmen, that furious
fire of Excommunications, thundered out usually against Plat. in Greg. 2
Gregory the second against Leo Iconomachus, by Gregory the Jd^ in Greg 7
seventh against Henry the fourth, by Innocent the Mat. Paris in Johan.
fourth against King John, and by Pius the Vide Jewels view of a seditious Bull.
fifth against Queen Elizabeth, to the Confessio Stanihu^s. ad M. Johan.
Pellingum, Bruxellis, and Guiliel. Barckley de Potest Pap^, cap. 31.
setting of the Christian world on ^ire, and the trouble of Religion within
those Kingdoms whither such Bulls were sent, even by the sound judgment of
moderate Papists.

But honest Eudaemon li. 3 in D. Abbat. page 252.
Eudaemon will have this fire of Antichrist to be, as true, and proper fire, as
was that of 2. Reg. 1.9, 10
Elias his calling fire, which consumed the Captains with their fifties. Ob.
Wicked wretch as he is, in equalizing, and matching the true miracles of Gods
Prophet, with the false delusions of wicked Antichrist. Sol.
For Elijah called to God, who sent a true fire to consume those his enemies,
for the certain confirmation of his doctrine, Vid. Pe. Ma^t. in l. 2 Reg. c.
1.9.
and office; whereas Antichrist soliciting his Master the Devil for the like
favor of sending down fire, cannot obtain it; because the Devil can no
better help Antichrist in this strait, then he did the 1. Reg. 18.28
Priests of Baal striving with Elijah. Therefore in this disputable question
amongst learned Divines, whether the devil have any such power to bring fire
from heaven, I had rather hold the negative upon the foresaid example of the
Baalites, and so deny this power unto Antichrist; then rashly to affirm, what
I cannot make good, especially, since it is the true judgment of the ancient
Fathers, thus deciding the controversy in Council. Bracarens. 1. Can. 8. apud
Binnium, tom. 2. Concilior.
an Orthodox Council, that if any man believe, that the Devil has made any
creatures in the world, or that the Devil himself, of his own authority,
now can make both Thunder, and Lightning, and Tempest, and Drythes, let him be
an anathema. For although the Devil be that Prince Ephesians. 2.2.
which rules in the Air, in which he may presumptuously undertake such
actions, as seem miraculous, being only done by the course of nature: yet, as
Gregory Greg. lib. 2. Moral. cap. 10.
said well, formidari non debet, quia nihil nisi permissus valet; He ought not
to be feared, because he can do nothing but by Gods permission: and now
whether God will permit Antichrist to fetch fire from heaven by the power of
the Devil, is not determined. But admit their Proposition, that Antichrist
shall perform these three several miracles, how prove they their Assumption,
2. The Assumption not true.
that the Pope does none of these things? Shall records of good Histories be
Judges in this case? Then is he cast out for that very Antichrist, seeing,
first, for fire Pope HILDEBRAND, who Benno Cardinalis in vita Gregor. septimi.
could when he would, cast fire out of his sleeue; the other, committed upon
the Father of their beautiful Saint Barbara, whom they Epitome Martyrologij
per Haraeum in 4. December.
report to be consumed from heaven by fire and thunder. Secondly, for making of
the Image of the Beast to speak, we Popes, or by their authority, have been
made to speak, but how we know not; yet surely not by God; since by God they
are so esteemed, as Psalm. 115.5.
to have mouths, and not to speak; and therefore when they speak, it is
either by the Devil himself, or by some coozening conueyance of their Idol
Priests, that they utter some language, as did the Image of the Crucifix in
Naples, to Vid. Breuiar. Romans ex editione Pauli 5. and Epitom Martyrolog. in
festo S. Tom. Aquinat. 7. Martij.
Thomas Aquinas praying unto it, Been de me scripsisti, THOMA; quam ergo
mercedem accipies? Thou have written well of me, THOMAS; what reward shall thou
have therefore? And so another in England, to Jornalensis apud I. Fox. lib. 2
Martyrolog.
Dunstane and the Bishops, in an assembly gathered for deciding of a
controversy between Monks and Priests, expelled out of their places at
Dunstanes pleasure, Absit vt hoc fiat, absit hoc vt fiat; iudicastis been,
mutaretis non been: God forbid that this should be, God forbid that this should
be; ye have judged Thirdly, and lastly, for Antichrists sayning of himself to
dye, and to rise again, although we do not find, that the Pope did ever such
a thing in his own person; because, I think, he durst not, lest, whiles he
should seem dead, another might step up into his Chair (so ambitious have
they all been in seeking and keeping their place in that hollow seat,) yet a
Vid. Regulam Brigittae cap. 17. and Pontificale Castell^ni apud Hospinianum
lib. 6. de Orig. Monachor. c. 73.
show thereof is usually made by his hellish Locusts, at their admittance into
Monasteries, and Nunneries; when the foolish Nouices, who are to be received
into that society, first prostrate themselves before the Altar in their old
Clothes, as dead, and then rise again to put on the new Weed of their
superstitious Order, as folks revived. Look into the Legend of Epitom.
Martyrolog. Romans ad 29. April.
Catherina Senensis, and tell me, ye Pope-lings, upon your consciences, if you
can think it true, what is there reported, to wit, That her heart was taken
out of her body, and another put in place thereof, she living yet for all that;
or that her soul went out of her body, returning after a few days into it
again. Surely, I cannot think it to be any other miracle, but such us the
Devil did counterfeit amongst the ancient Heathen, for the disgracing of true
Miracles, in that kind done by Christ and his Apostles, as in Plin. lib 7.
Nature. histor. cap. 52.
Hermotinus Clazomenius, Aristoeus, and others, of whom, as of this their
hellish Saint, we can conceive no better opinion, then as of a Vid. Wi^rum
lib. 3. de praestig. daemonum, cap. 11.12. etc.
Witch deluded by the Devil, in thinking her soul to be forth of her body,
when it was the Devil only possessing the soul: Your own great Clerk,
Augustinus Steuchus August. Steuchus lib. 8. de perenni Philosoph. cap. 27.
proving out of Antiquities, that animae per era volitantes, sunt daemones:
souls slying through the air, as these folks souls be reported of, are
Devils: Hesiod. lib. 1. (...).
(...): being clothed with air, they go about every where throughout the
earth, as Satan Job. 1.6.
said of himself, that he compassed the earth about to and fro, indeed like
1. Pet. 5.8.
a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. But leave we this point of
discovering the false miracles of Pope and Papists, to those who are daily
eyewitnesses of such delusions, in their time to be disclosed, as plainly as
were these lewd pranks of their Vid. Hospin. lib. 6. de Orig. Monach. cap. 13.
Mendicants, committed in Berna, and Orleans. For, non diu fallet falsum: a lie
will not last long; the Pope knows well enough. And therefore, as Julius Vid.
Balae. Valor. etc. in Iul. 2.
the second said, If PETER'S Keys cannot do it, PAVLS Sword shall; meaning
thereby, not the Ephe. 6.18. 3. Of cruelty by persecutions.
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: but the Sword of Persecution,
which to maintain his former acts of Covetousness and Coozenage, he draws
out in Cruelty against the Saints of God, thereby both devouring and
massacring whole Towns, as Fox. Martyr^log tom. 2. page 859. and August.
Thuames lib. 52.
Cabriers, and Merindoll in Piemont, many thousands of people in all parts of
Europe, yea, and diverse Christian Princes, as Collyu^ts History of the Civil
Wars in France.
IONE, Queen of Navarre, poisoned Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth, Kings
of France, most treacherously murdered, and animating vile Traitors unto wicked
designs against the lives and states of good Princes (as how many ways he
made against Queen Elizabeth, and in them all was wonderously defeated) all
the world has been astonished, assenting in heart to those censures, which
diverse well learned men have given forth against the Pope for his raging
cruelty, both in general, of them all, and in special, of some most
remarkable Panthers, Aelian. lib. 5. de histor. animal. cap. 40.
drawing unto them, by the sweet smell of their outward fair skin, and show
of fleshly fashions in outward Ceremonies, a multitude of silly souls, and
simple-hearted people, whom they without mercy consume, and bring to nothing.
For of the Pope in general, his own chief Secretary Theodoric. a Neim. lib.
1. de Schismate, and apud Gowlart. in Catalogo test. verit. lib. 19. and p. 850.
Theodoricus a Neime, said, I truly assent (as the Canonists dispute) that
Popes are neither gods, nor men, but Devils incarnate: and of some in
particular, we have these witnesses; first Machiauell, Machiauell. cap. 18. de
Princ.
against his Patron Alexander the sixth, whom he terms an Impostor, or
Deceiuer of all mortal men, exercising his mind in nothing, but unto fraud and
malice: secondly, Bellarmine against his Master Sixtus Quintus, whom although
in flattery he Bellar. Epist. praefixa tom. 2. Oper.
acknowledges to be both a learned, a godly and a bountiful Prince; yet in
private he thus judged of him after his death, if we may believe Watson.
Quodlib. q. 3. art. 2. page 57.
one Locust now stinging another, Qui sine poenitentia viuit, and sine
poenitentia moritur, proculdubio ad infernum discendit; and Conceptis verbis,
quantum capio, quantum sapio, quantum intelligo, discendit ad infernum. Quidam
Poeta in Alex. 6. apud Gowlart. in Catalog. test. verit. lib. 20. c. 93^
De vitio in vitium, de flamma transit in ignem;
Roma sub Hispano deperit Imperio.
Sextus TARQVINIVS, Sextus NERO, Sextus and isle,
Semper sub Sextis perdita Roma fuit.
that is,

From sin to sin; from flame to fire,
Rome still falls under Spaines Empire:
Sixth TARQVINE, Sixth NERO, this Sixth they call:
For under Sixtus rule, Rome still does fall.
And thus now by comparing the Qualities of Antichrist expressed in Scripture,
with these lewd tricks of Popes, made known by time, through woeful
experience, we see what the Pope is, 2. His seat or place of residence.
even that Great Antichrist, as now his seat, or place of Residencie shall
evidently demonstrate. For it is agreed amongst the best both of Lod. Viues in
lib. 18. August. de Ciuitate Dei, cap. 22. Rhemenses in 17. Apoc.. 5.
Learned Papists and of Zealous Iun. Danaeus, Whitaker. Abbot. vbi supra.
Protestants, that the place of Antichrists Kingdom is that Rome, where the
Pope now sits (as he thinks) in Peter's Chair, but in truth, upon the
stool of Wickedness in the midst of Babylon, if we may believe Petrarch
thus justly exclayming against the bloody Francis. Petrarcha, Ep. 16.
City, Olim Roma, nunc Babylon, falsa and nequam, Once Rome, now Babylon,
false and wicked. 3. His time.
And therefore we may quickly pass from the Of beginning.
which has been spoken before, seeing both the beginning and continuance of
Antichrist and the Papacy is altogether one. For first the Pope began to
work, like Antichrist, in the Primitive times, by infinite superstitions, such
as are Epist. Telesphori.
the forbidding of Meals, and Ep. 2. Clement.
Marriages; Ep. 1. Euaristi.
the exemption of the Clergy; Ep. 3. Anacleti
the Supremacy of the Roman Bishop; Ep. 1. Alexan.
the necessary use of holy Bread, and holy Water; and many such like recorded
in those Epistles, which they usually call Decretall, and which well may
convince the Popes of Antichristianisme, seeing they are allowed by them,
howsoever we have just cause utterly to reject them for a Bastard-brood, both
by their rude style not any way correspondent Qibus vixerunt Liuius, Tacitus,
Seneca, Lucan, Silius Italic. Plinij, Quintilian. Martialis and alij classici
linguae Latinae autores.
to those pure times of Latin speech, and by the bad matter, not any way well
agreeable to the proportion of faith, albeit Turrian. lib. 1 in Magdeburg.
Turrian, Baron. tem. 1. Annal. and Bisciola in Epitome.
Baronius, Binnius tom. 1. Conciliorum.
Binnius and Genebrard. lib. 3. Chronolog.
others labor never so much to prove them Authentike. Sophocl. apud Erasm. in
Chili. ad. sub titulo Inanis Opera.
Labor by Labor brings Labor.
(...). Secondly, the Pope was hindered from usurping this Temporal power by
the Emperor for a time, as we may see plainly by the Epistles of Leo Ep. 53.
ad Leon. August.
Leo, Agath. act. 4.
Agatho, and Synodi in superscript. Gregor. lib 4. Regifiri, Ep. 32.33. etc.
Gregory the Great unto the Emperors, whom according to their due Allegiance
they entitled Sovereign Lords. Thirdly, then the Pope was manifested to be the
Great Antichrist, when the Roman Empire fell into ruin, and utter decay, first,
Naucler. generat. 11. tom. 2.
by the fatal translation of the Imperial Seat from Rome unto
Constantinople: secondly, by the Eutrop. Procopius Paulus Diacon. etc.
miserable deuastation of Italy, and the Western Empire by the Goths,
Vandalls, Hunnes, Longobardes, and other like barbarous people issuing out of
the North, as swelling floods: thirdly, by the Platina in Zachar. 1. and Steph.
2.
calling of Frankes into Italy, to whom crafty Popes adhered for advantage,
like the Iuy to the Oak, till they had sucked out from them all the sap of their
power, both Spiritual and Temporal. For first they got the Spiritual
Jurisdiction, partly, by that purchase, which Platina in Bonifacio 3.
Boniface the Third made with Phocas the Parricide, for the title of Universal
Bishop, then in controversy between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople,
about the year of our Lord, six hundred and sixth, and partly by that plot of
policy, which Bisciola ad Annum 684.
Benedict the First contrived secretly against the Emperor, when he subtly
obtained of Constantinus Pogonatus, in the year of our Lord, six hundred,
eighty, and fourth, the free Consecration of the Bishop of Rome, without the
expectation of the Emperors, either confirmation, or consent. Secondly* they
wrested the Temporal Sword or Power out of the sacred hands of the Emperor,
when Auentinus lib. 5. Annal. Boiorum, page 458.
Hildebrand, called by them Gregory the Seventh, took upon him to depose Henry
the Fourth, substituting Rodolph by a Crown sent unto him, with this Verse
written about it; Petra dedit PETRO, PETRVS diadema RODOLPHO.
The Rock a Crown to PETER gave,
Which RODOLPH must from PETER have.


Of continuance.
since he must stay in some sort till the Coming of Christ. Only concerning
Rome, the proper seat of Antichrist, me thinks, the Scripture gives us to
understand two things for certain: the first, that Rome shall be destroyed
before Christ's Coming, since there shall be a time before the Harvest come,
wherein the Angel shall cry of Babylon, Revel. 14.8.
It is fallen, it is fallen: the second, that it cannot be but that very
shortly it shall come to pass. For although we may not be so bold, as Napier
in locum illum.
some are, who precisely define the year of the utter destruction of Rome, to
be the one thousand, six hundredth, thirtieth, and ninth: Yet may we well
assent to the sober judgment of that most Religious Preacher of Repentance in
England, Master Arthur Dent, in those his most excellent Commentaries upon the
Revelation worthy all your diligent perusings, who Arthur Dent in 14 Reave. 8.9
thinks that this Fall may fall out within the compass of the age of a man,
that is, according Psalm. 90.12.
to Moses his account of Man's longaeuitie, within the space of threescore
years, and ten. For mark, how things grow, and ripen to their period, even
Revel. 10.7.
before the seventh Trumpet blow. We are now Revel. 8.3.
under the seventh Seal, wherein the Saints Prayers are presented upon the
Altar: and we live now in the time of the Revel. 9.15.
sixth Trumpet, wherein the four Angels, that is, Turks, and Saracens, old,
and new, are loosed, being prepared at an hour, at a day, at a month, at a
year to slay the third part of men: and the Gospel, which is Revel. 10.2.
the little Boooke in the mighty Angels hand is opened: yea, now the sixth
Vial is Reave. 16.12.
powered out, whereby first, Euphrates begins to be dry, that is, the glory
of Popery waxes small; secondly, 13.
the Frogs are sent out to heal it, that is, the Priests and Jesuits are
thrust out abroad into all the World, to help the halting Papacy: thirdly, 16.
the Kings of the Earth must be gathered together in Arma-geddon, that is, as
the word signifies, into a place of subtle desolation. For is not all this
done? First, the Saracens Saracen. hist. by Th. Newton.
out of Arabia, and the Turks Rob. Knolls his Turkish histo.
out of Tartaria have ouerspred the three greater parts of the Christian World,
as all Afrike almost, and all the lesser Asia with the Eastern Countries of
Syria, Armenia, Assyria, Media, Babylonia, etc. and a third part of Europe;
being now ready upon the least opportunity, or occasion that can be, to enter
the Lists of Christendom at their pleasure: Secondly, the Vid. Preface to M.
Edward Brierwood his book o^ Enquiries.
Gospel has now a free passage in most of the Christian Kingdoms, none being
ignorant of the preaching thereof, although some receive it, and some will not
admit the public profession thereof, as Italy, France, and Spain. Thirdly,
the glory of Popery, to wit, the Vid. Harm. Confess sect. 20.
Popes Supremacy is quite overthrown in England, Scotland, most parts of
Germany, and Polonia, Hungary, in Sueden, and Denmark, and much impaired in
France. Fourthly, the Jesuits Allen in Apologia Seminar. Romae, and Rhemis.
are daily sent abroad, either openly to oppose themselves against the Truth,
where they may have admittance, as in Spain, France, and Poland, or secretly
to work mischief against the State of Kings, and Kingdoms, which have cast
off, and will no more admit the yoke of Popish bondage, putting in practice
that pestilent position of proud Mariana, Io. Marianae lib 1. de Reg. and
Regno. ca. 6. and 7.
holding it lawful for any man to kill a King, whom Pope and Popelings
conceive to be a Tyrant, that is, a Vid. Petr. Molin^. li. de potest. Papae
temporal. cap. 7.
Resister, or Opposite to the Popes proceedings; contrary both to the Council
Council. Constant. less. 15.
of Constance that condemned this Position of D. PETIT; and the modern sound
judgment of the University Inter op^ra Fr. Iunij tom. 2.
of Paris, admitting the Orations of Antoninus Arnaldus, and others lately made
against the Jesuits, and condemning the Books both of Mariana, and Cardinal
Bellarmine now set out against Barkley. Only now the fifth part of this
Pageant remains, not yet acted by the Kings, to be gathered in Arma-geddon.
But, God be praised for his providence in all things* the Jesuits now make
haste to bring them on the Stage (we trust in Christ Jesus) to their own
confusion, while they daily incense those Princes, who will admit them into
audience against Christ's Flock, which yet shall prevail above all their
Enemies, in spite of all the power of Hell. God therefore enlighten the hearts
of the Princes of Italy, France, and Spain, that they seeing the abominations
of this wicked Antichrist, may with one consent join themselves in league with
all other Christian Potentates, for the seasonable demolishing of all this
whorish offspring, together with that false prophet, as it is Revel. 17.17
foretold, and shall be accomplished in the fullness of time.

. XXIII. For God for a time does suffer the The final cause
and reign in the Church as Antichrist, for these three ends, all one with
those before delivered. First, for his glories sake, that he might triumph over
this beast by his Saints upon this victory, sweetly Revel. 19.3.
singing, Alleluia: Secondly, for the further damnation of the wicked, who are
not sealed Revel. 7.14.
with Gods mark in their foreheads: Thirdly, for the bettering of the Godly by
these persequutions, under which they are purged from evil, and persevere in
goodness, unto their most certain glory in blessedness, as Revel. 19.9
Blessed are they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb: and he
says unto me; These words are the true saying of the Lamb.

. XXIIII. Now therefore having as fully, The Demonstration gathered from the
two former Questions. 1. What is Antichrist. 2. Who is he?
and as plainly, as I could, given resolution of the two proposed Questions
concerning Antichrist, What is Antichrist, and, Who is Antichrist, I may boldly
frame this most proper Demonstration under this plain, and direct form, after
this manner:

Whosoever is* to be a man by ordinary substitution The Proposition.
upon the ruins of the Roman Empire, through the liberality of Christian
Princes, and the pleasures of the world, in which kingdom he, both as an
Heretic denying all the articles of the Christian faith, and as a most wicked
Impe, violating all the Commandments of the Decalogue or Moral law, first
couetously imprinteth his character, both inward of implicit faith, and outward
of an oath, and priestly unction, upon all men whomsoever he can delude; then
fraudulently endeuoreth to do many miracles, and lastly, most cruelly
persequuteth the Saints of God; sitting in the midst of the Church at Rome,
mysteriously in the Primitive times, but plainly revealed about and after the
six hundredth, sixtieth and sixth year of our Lord, and so to continue for a
time in his ruffle, until he be destroyed by little and little through the
Preaching of the Gospel, but fully, and wholly by the coming of Christ, he
till then tyrannizing thus for the blinding of the Reprobates, and for the
trial of Gods children to the glory of God, is that Great Antichrist described
in Scripture:

The Assumption.
But the Pope is a man by ordinary substitution succeeding another in a
kingdom reared by Satan, upon the ruins of the Roman Empire, through the
liberality of Christian Princes, and the pleasures of the world, in which
kingdom be, both as an Heretic, denying all the Articles of the Christian
faith, and as a most wicked Impe, violating all the Commandments of the
Decalogue or Moral law, first couetously imprinteth his character both inward
of implicit faith, and outward of an oath, and Priestly unction, upon all men
whomsoever he can delude; then fraudulently endeavors to do many miracles,
and lastly, most cruelly persequuteth the Saints of God; sitting in the midst
of the Church of God at Rome, mysteriously in the Primitive times, but plainly
revealed about, and after the six hundredth, sixtieth, and sixth year of our
Lord, and so to continue for a time in his ruffle, until he be destroyed by
little and little through the Preaching of the Word, but fully, and wholly by
the coming of Christ, he till then tyrannizing thus, for the blinding of the
Reprobates, and for the trial of Gods children, to the glory of God:

Therefore the Pope is that Great Antichrist described in Scripture.

A Demonstration Aristotel. lib. 2 Post. cap. 10. and Keckerman lib. 3. system.
Logici, cap. 14.
(...), in which according to the direct rules of Logic, medium est definitio
matoris extremi, and Minoris proponuntur, tum (...), tum (...); that now if we
would know, what is that Great Antichrist, we may answer, It is the Pope; and
if we inquire further, What the Pope should be; We may affirm plainly, that
the Pope is that Great Antichrist, described so plainly, and so fully in the
Scriptures. For the Mayor proposition is taken out of the plain text of
Scripture; and the Assumption from the acts, and deeds of Popes themselves, as
they are Popes in cathedra: What then I pray you can hinder the Inference of
our conclusion? Surely in reading our Adversaries before cited, I have not
found any thing as yet, unto which we have not given a direct, and just
answer, if we now make satisfaction unto two special doubts. The former
Popish exception against our demonstration.


. XXV. The former of which, is Bellar. lib. 3. de Pontific. Romano cap. 4. and 5
Bellarmines first, and second Demonstration, stolen, or borrowed out of the
fourth, and fifth of those rabblements, which Sanders Sanders lib. 8 de
visibil^. Monarch^^.
had raked out of the stinking sink of hellish invention, under this form of
a negative sillogisme: The Gospel must be preached throughout the world, ^.
Their Proposition in two parts.
and the Roman Empire must be taken away, before Antichrist come: But the
Gospel is not yet preached 2. Their Assumption correspondent.
and (to add more to their instance) the South continent, and Northern
Samoedds, with other Our answer.
Therefore Antichrist is not yet come. But all this is easily taken away, if we
will weigh the weakness To the Proposition. 1. Collusion discovered.
the former by wresting of our Savior his words quite away from their true
meaning. For our Savior does not say, that the Gospel must be preached
throughout the world before the coming of Antichrist, but that it Mat. 24.14.
must be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then
shall the end come; the end, to wit, either of the world, as Aquinas in Catena
and Marl^orat. in locum.
most take it, or of Jerusalem, as Chrysostom. hem. 76. in Math. 2. Collusion
discovered.
Chrysostom expounds it: the later, by mis-interpreting the words of the
Apostle, saying, that 2. These. 2.7.
he who now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way: For the Vide
in hunc locum Ambros. Theophyloct. Theodorit. and Aquinatem.
Roman Empire, or Roman Emperor, or the seat of Majesty in that Empire,
then in the Apostles time settled at Rome, and hindering then the pompous
appearance of the great Antichrist, was to be taken out of the way; not simply,
and wholly, but only in respect of Italy; out of which the seat Imperial was
to be translated into Greece, or into Germany, or into any other Country
else, that the City of Rome, and the Territories thereunto belonging, might
the more easily be usurped by Antichrist, as it is now possessed only by the
Pope, who thrust out the Emperor into some corner of the Roman world, as
Hadrian the Fourth wrote in an Apud Auentinum lib. 6. Annal. Boiorum, page 506.
edit. Basilens.
Epistle to the Bishops, Princes Electors of Germany, Romae nostra seeds est;
Imperatoris est Aquis, in Arduenna, quae est silua Galliae: Our Seat is at
Rome; but the Emperors is at Aquae, in Arduenna, which is a Wood in France.

And therefore, secondly, we make this our answer To the Assumption.
that the Gospel must be preached throughout the World by the Apostles,
Maldonatus in 24. Math.
word ( world) either by Synechdoche, for all the known World by its
habitation; since even through all the habitable World, then known to
Geographers, the sound of the Gospel has passed by Romans 10.18.
the Apostles, after their dispersion abroad from Jerusalem, if we may rely
upon the report of Eusebius. lib. 3. Eccles. hist. cap. 1 and Nicephor. lib. 2.
per totum.
ancient and Genebrard. lib. 3 Chronolog. and Bisciola ad Ana^^ Christ. 44.
late Historians: or truly, and plainly for the whole World indeed, which
although it now does not profess the faith of Christ, scarce in M. Edw.
Brierwood in his Enquiries touching Languages, and Religions, cap. 14.
the sixth part, (for it is near the ending, when faith will be grown very
scant upon the earth:) yet might have had, and holden this word of faith long
before this time, Luke ^8.8.
since it is not ouer-clouded in Hieronym in Math. 24.
any part thereof with invincible ignorance, God being so kind and merciful
to all men, as to send them some light of Truth, either by the works of Nature,
ordinary, and extraordinary, or by the word of grace preached Vid. Witaker. in
resp. ad 5. demonsh at Sanderi. and qu. 5. de Pontif. Romans ca. 2
even in China, and in the Indians, by those three, who were called Thomas, so
much praised and celebrated for their general preaching of the Word throughout
the World, by that great learned man, Mr. Doctor Stapleton, in his Book De
tribus THOMAS. Secondly, Roman Empire is yet remaining, but the Kingdom is
abolished, and quite defaced; since first there is not scarce one Acre of
ground, which properly, and absolutely belongs to the Emperor, as he is
called Emperor of the Romans; because what he now has in possession in
Hungary, Bohemia, Carinthia, Silesia, etc. Vid. Sleidan. lib. 5. and 6.
Commentar.
is by right of inheritance from his most illustrious Progenitors of Austria,
and Hungaria, ye and the free Cities in Germany are not subject to the
Emperors absolutely, but according to certain conditions, and covenants,
expressed and contained in their several Charters, Vid. Onuphr. lib. 3. Romans
Antiquitat. qui est de Jmper. Romano.
most of them being situated without the Ancient Pale of the Roman Empire,
under which they continued but a small time, being the last conquered, and the
first recovered. Secondly, there is not now a Roman Emperor, by our
Adversaries own report: for till the Pope Aurea bulla Caroli Quarti, cap. 2.
crown him, who is by the seven Princes Electors chosen, and called, King of
the Romans, (they might more truly say, of the Germans) they Clementin. li.
2. tit. 9. de Iuram. and lib. 1. C^rem. Romans Eccles.. 5. cap. 1. and ^ellar.
lib. 3. de translat. I^^er^, ca. ^.3. etc.
account him no Emperor. Now since CHARLES the Fifth, the Pope has not set
the Crown Imperial upon any man's head, neither is it likely, that either he
will or shall, since there is a bar between Germany and Rome, which is not
passable by the Emperors Forces, even the power of the Venetians, and the King
of Spain in Italy, who with the great Duke of Tuscia, and other petty
Potentates, have usurped upon the Rights of the Empire so long a time, that
they Iuxta leges Imperiales ss. de diverse. t^m^or. possess. l. 3. longae and
Cod. lib. 7. tit. 31. l. 1.
may now prescribe against the right owner. Wherefore the wise Bononians Apud
Cornel. Agripp. in histor^a^ de duptici Caesaris Coronat. cap. 5.
might very well ominate by the breach of that Bridge, upon which Charles the
Fifth entered into the great Church there, unto his coronation, that not any man
ever after should be crowned for Emperor: yea, and Lypsius J. Lipsius in
praefat. lib. de magnitudine Romans Imperij.
might very truly hold, that all what remains of the Roman Empire, stands
only under the Pope, whose Imperial, both Seat, and Senate is at Rome. So
that their former doubt, opposed against our Demonstration, is so thoroughly
cleared, that we may, notwithstanding their wrangling allegations of the
Gospel, not published throughout the World, and the present state of the
Germane Empire, well conclude the Pope to be that great Antichrist.

. XXVI. The latter exception against our demonstration.
But now the later scruple is of greater difficulty, and indeed very much
prejudicial to our assertion, since it is (as some think) contrary to the
judgment of some of our best, and deepest Protestant Divines, such as Zanchius
lib. 2. Miscellan.
Zanchius and others, who deny the Pope to be that great Antichrist, described
in Scripture: Our answer.
yet I must needs say again, that since these great and good men be worthy of
all true and most reverent respect, for their profound learning and sincere
life; they are not to be brought forth, as opposites to that truth, which
Luther. l^b. de Captiuit Babylon. Calvin. lib 4. Iustit. cap. 7.15. and
H^sh^sius lib. de s^xcentis Papistorum error. ca. 23
others, of as great learning and sound judgment, have delivered out of the
most sacred Scriptures, especially, for that they deliver nothing against us
demonstratiuely, but upon mere probabilities, as Zanch. vbi supra and in
Confessione.
themselves confess, while they profess plainly, that this is their opinion
concerning Antichrist, to wit, 1. That the Pope is Antichrist, and his Kingdom
Antichristian. 2. That this hinders not, but A grave and good sentence,
agreeable to the Truth* if we respect the matter, howsoever in the manner of
the revealing of this Antichrist, they seem to run into Popish Tents, only
upon a peaceable mind, and zealous affection toward some of the Ancient
Fathers, especially for the Greeks, Damascen. li. 4. Orthodox. sid. cap. 27.
DAMASCENE, and for the Latins, August. lib. 20 de Ciuitate Dei per totum.
AUGUSTINE, who living before the six hundredth year after Christ, defined
this matter only upon conjectures, according to that tradition, which is
recorded in Hyppolyt. Orat. de consummat. saec. and Antichristo, tom. 2.
Biblioth. sanct. Patrum.
Hyppolitus his Oration concerning Antichrist; an Author most justly Sixtus
Senens. lib. 4. Bibli.
suspected to be counterfeited: and yet if he were true, he is no sound
warrant for us to build our faith upon concerning Antichrist: For although the
authority of ancient Fathers be of great force in the litterall exposition of
the Scriptures, out of which we have most fully declared the former question,
What is that great Antichrist: yet have they no place at all in determining of
the second point, Who is this great Antichrist, because they lived before the
time, wherein that great Antichrist, who lurked in those Fathers days under a
mystery, was to be detected, disclosed, and found to sit at Rome, and by his
deeds to fulfill all those Prophecies, which the holy Ghost had delivered
concerning him in the Scriptures. So that our holy Brethren, who yet expect a
more full expressement of Antichrist in some one particular vile Monster, that
should, if it were possible, surpass the Pope in villainy, are not so much
against us, as they seem to be in show, seeing it is not any good liking they
have of the Pope, whom they confess to be Antichrist; but only the just
detestation of so wicked a Monster, as is Antichrist, that draws them to
imagine the further deferring of his most dangerous and accursed approach. They
are in hope: We are in faith: and both in love. They expect a far off: We
behold even at hand the end of all these miseries by the fore-past revealing,
the present rage and reigning, the future happy ruin of Antichrist and his
Kingdom now settled in Rome: We agree both in the maine, not much differing
in the Bye: As we yield to them in the just execration of the odious nature of
this abominable Antichrist, so far as they prove what they speak from the
Scriptures: even so in like manner are they (be they never so learned and
wise) with patience, and love, to hear, and to judge us their dear Brethren,
speaking with some knowledge, in true zeal, concerning the manner of the
revealing of Antichrist, which they hold yet to be in futuro. We find to be
fully finished, and in praeterito, and in praesenti, both in times before and
now. If any 1. Cor. 14.30 31.
thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace.
For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted. Homer. 2. Odyss.
(...); weak men combined may work much good, since Ovid.
quae non prosunt singula, multa iuuant: what one cannot, many may.

Proofs of our Assertion from the ancient Fathers.
. XXVII. And yet I speak not this in diffidence of our cause. For we want not
the authority of ancient Fathers, either prophesying beforehand, or zealously
publishing upon his appearance, that the Great Antichrist is already come, and
the Pope of Rome is he. I will produce no Babes, but only such, as without
exception are, either produced by Canis. Catechis. cap. de nouiss. quaest. 3.
Canisius, and Coccius tom. 2. Catholicism. lib. 10. art. 30. 1. Prophesying
before.
Coccius, as if they were on their side, or else registered for eyewitnesses by
good Historians. For those who beforehand prophesied of Antichrist, and of his
seat or kingdom, agree upon these two points: The first, that Antichrist shall
sit at For to this Article speaks, First, Tertullian, when Tertullian. in
Ap^loget cap. 32.
he says, that Christians pray for the safety of the Roman Empire, because
by the course thereof the great Persecutions which must come by Antichrist, are
put off and hindered. Secondly, Cyrill of Jerusalem, when Cyrill.
Hierosolymitan. Catechesi 15.
he says, that Antichrist shall violently take unto himself the power of the
Roman Empire. Thirdly, Ambrose, when Ambros. in 2. These. 2.
he says that Christ shall not come till the Roman Empire fail, and
Antichrist appear, who must kill the Saints, giving liberty to the Romans,
yet under his own name. Fourthly, Chrysostom. hom. 4. in 2* These. 2.
Chrysostom followed by Theophylact. in 2. These 2.
Theophylact, Oecumenius in 2. These. 2.
Oecumenius, and Radulphus Fluuiac. lib. 18. in Leuit cap. 1.
Rudolphus Fluuiacensis, when both he and they after him jointly affirm that
Antichrist by treachery must destroy the Roman Empire. The second, that Rome
is Babylon, the proper seat of Antichrist, which shall be destroyed before the
end of the World. For to this Article Tertullian, who in full assurance of what
he speaks, oftentimes Tertullian. lib. in Iudaeos, cap. 9. and lib. 3. in
Marcion. cap. 13.
uses these words, Babylon, in our Apostle Saint JOHN, bears the figure of
the City of Rome; therefore great, and proud by her Kingdom, and a destroyer
of the Saints. Secondly, Hierome, who living at that time, when Rome was wholly
Christian under Constantius, Julian, and Valentinianus the First, yet in
foresight of future Apostasy therein there beginning under a Mystery, but
afterward openly to be complemented, very Hierony. tom. 1. Ep. 17. ad
Marcellum, and Ep. 151. ad Algosiam, qu. 11. and in Praefat. ad translat.
Dydimi. de spirit. Sanct. Omnia secund. Editionem Parisiens. 1609.
often terms that City Babylon, and the purple Whore spoken of in the
Revelation, wherein sometimes he was an inhabitant. (Now this cannot be
spoken of Babylon in Mesopotamia, which then was desolate, and where Hierome
never lived.) Thirdly, Lactantius, who Lactant. li. 7. Instit. cap. 25.
alluding to the Sybilline Oracle, says, that when that head of the World
shall fall, and begin to be (...), that is, but a street (or Impetus, for it
is derived either of (...) sluo, or (...) traho,) who can doubt, but that an
end is at hand upon all humane affairs, and upon all the World? The words of
the Sybill, to which he alludeth, are these (as learned Xistus Betuleius in
Annot. in Lactantium.
Betuleius does cite them) (...)* etc. Rome shall be a street, and Delus
unknown, etc.) But let us leave these Prophesies, and come to performances:
For Antichrist did no sooner Publishing his present approach by open Verdit.
to publish abroad unto the World, that the Mystery was revealed, and
Antichrist was then come, and seated in Rome. It is odious to say it, and idle,
if we prove it not. Therefore that Papists, especially in England, may at
length see, and mark, how their Pope was reputed off in former times, even
before John Wickliffe spoke against him in Oxford, the Pope shall have fair
play: his Cause shall be tried by a Grand Inquest of twelve good men and true,
(according to the Sir Thom. Smith de rep. Anglor. l. 2. c. 18.
only most laudable custom of the Commonwealth of England,) whereof, four
shall be Kings, and Princes: four shall be Archbishops, A Jury Impanneled.
and Bishops; and four shall be Abbots or Monks. Behold, now the Prisoner
standing at the Bar, who because he is become a Peer in the World, shall
have an open Verdict, severally delivered by every Iuror; where, according to
our Idem ibidem, cap. 28.
custom also; we will demand sentence, first of those, who are of least
account with the Pope, beginning first with Princes; then proceeding to the
Bishops; but lastly striking all down flat with the Monks of the Western
Orders, who Revel. 9.11.
are the Popes own creatures, and greatest Dearelings, being sworn Slaves to
their King, The first Man.
the Angel of the bottomless pit. And now to the business: The first Man of
the Princes is Frederick the Second, Emperor of Rome, who in just execration
of Popish Tyranny plainly avouched, that In Epist. ad Ordin. Germaniae, apud
Auentin. lib. 7. Annal. Bo^or. page 542. edit. Basil.
there were many Antichrists amongst those Roman Bishops, neither were there
any other hurt to Christian Religion, but only they, as their Works do show:
For says he In Epist. ad Wenceslaum Regem Bohemiae, apud Auen. ibid. The
second man.
in another place, they who sit over the Temple of God at Babylon, that is, at
Rome, affectate Divinity. The second is Otto, at that time Duke of Bauaria,
who confesses In Orat. ad Epis^. Germaniae, apud Auentin^, page 550. The third
man
his assent unto the Bishops, who affirmed, that the Pope was Antichrist, and
ratifieth his settled judgment by his just reproof of their inconstancy. The
third is Menardus, that thrice Noble Earl of Tyrolis, who in his Apud
Auentinum ibid. p 577
Apology against the unjust dealing of Pope NICHOLAS the Fourth, says
plainly, that the Popes are nothing else but Antichrist. The fourth man.
The fourth and the last Prince is Lodouicus Quartus Bauarus, Emperor of the
Romans, who in the Decree Apud Auentinum. page 616.
made, and divulged by a Council gathered of all the States in the Empire at
Rome, plainly auoweth of the Pope, then being John the two and twentieth, that
as he was a counterfeite Shepherd: so he was the Mystical Antichrist. So
have the Princes given their Verdict. Now call in the Bishops: The fifth man.
and the first that speaks here, is a certain Archbishop of Florence, who
used Platina in Pas^hali 2.
to affirm in his Sermons, and other his speeches, that Antichrist was borne.
I need not, for I cannot tell his name. Pope Paschal the Second proceeded
against him by unjust prosecution, even unto Deposall. The sixth man
The second Bishop deals more plainly and boldly, being President of a
Synod, called by the King of France, then Hugo Capet, and holden at Rhemes by
all the Bishops of that Kingdom, in the year of our Lord, nine hundred,
ninety and second (howsoever Baronius Baron. tom. 10 Annal. ad annu^ 992. and
Bisciola ib^d.
and Binnius tom. 3. part. 2. sub. Ioh. 15.
Binnius would have the truth thereof suppressed by a short relation of
partial Eginaldus, against the true report, and large narration of all things
there passing, made by Magdiburgensis Centur. 10 cap 9. and Gowlart. tom. 2.
Catalog. ^est. veritat. lib. 15. cap. de Synodi^.
Gerbertus, after that called Pope Syluester the Second, Platina in Syluestro 2.
thought to be a Magician, but defended by Onuphrius in Ann^tat. in Platinam,
vbi supra
Onuphrius for an honest man:) and this Bishops name is Arnulphus of Orleance,
who thus speaks of the Pope, then John the Fifteenth: Jn oratione apud
praedict. and D. Mornaeum in Mysterio Iniquit. ad ann. 992. The seventh Man.
O Reverend Fathers, what think ye him to be, who sits in the high Seat,
shining in a Purple, and Golden Garment? Surely, because he is void of
Charity, and puffed up, and extolled only by knowledge, he is Antichrist
sitting in the Temple of God, and showing himself as if he were God. etc. The
third of the Bishops is Eberardus Bishop of Salzburge, who in Apud Auentinum l.
7. Annaliu^ Boior. page 547.
an Oration delivered to the Bishops of Germany, then assembled in a Council
at Ratissone, mightily inueigheth against the Pope, applying unto him all the
foresaid Prophecies of Daniel, Saint Paul, and Saint John in the Revelation;
plainly auouching, that Hildebrand first laid the foundation of Antichrist his
Kingdom, under a color of Religion; and that the Pope is usually called
Antichrist, of whom the SYBILS, old HYDASPES and others did prophecy. The
eight man
The fourth, and the last Bishop, but not of the least learning, is Robert
Grosthead, the good Bishop of Lincoln, who a little before his death, in the
year of our LORD, one thousand, two hundred and fiftieth, even when this
Realm of England was most of all oppressed with Popish Tyranny, did
demonstrate Apud Math. Parificusem in Henrico 3. page 847.848.
the Pope to be the Great Antichrist, by that heavy destruction, which the
Pope brought upon many Christian souls, concluding all with these words,
against that Monster: Eius auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis:
Eius luxuriae Meretrix non sufficit omnis:
that is, Not all the World can well suffice
His greedy hearts desire:
Nor all the Worlds Harlots quench
His lustful burning fire.
Well: the Bishops have dealt plainly, and truly to the discharge of a good
Conscience. Let the Monks be produced: The first is, Ioachim Abbas, The ninth
man
that most famous Clerk, who Roger. Houeden in Richardo primo.
in conference with Richard the First, then King of England, going in his
journey toward Jerusalem, said plainly, that Antichrist was then borne in
the City of Rome, and should be set up in the Apostolic See. The second is
Nodbertus, The tenth man
or Norebertus the Hospinian lib. 6. de Orig. Monach. cap. 11.
superstitious Founder of the Praemonstratenses, who about the year of our
Lord, one thousand, one hundredth, and nineteenth, affirmed even to Trithem. in
Chron. Hirsa^giensi, anno 1125.
the face of Pope Honorius the Second, and unto Bernardus Epi. 56. ad Gaufridum
Carnotentem. The eleventh man.
Saint Bernard, that Antichrist was near, and in that very Generation to be
revealed, and that he should live to see the general persecution of the
Church; which indeed he being advanced to the Dignity of the Arch-Bishopricke
of Magdeburge afterward, saw inflicted by the Pope upon the good Waldenses and
Albigenses. The third is one Hay-abalus a Monk, who taught Henricus de
Erphordia ad annum 1345. and Gowlart. in Catalog test. Verit. lib. 18.
publicly at Auimon, that he was bound to preach this Doctrine to the World,
that Rome was Babylon, and the Pope with his Cardinals were the Great
Antichrist; for which his Doctrine, howsoever most true, he was put into Prison
by the commandment of Pope Clement the Sixth, and there most cruelly murdered.
The twelfth man.
The fourth, and the last, and yet of greatest authority, and renown amongst
all Popelings, is Saint Bernard, the worthy Abbot of Clarae-vallis, who feared
not to write Ber. Epi. 125.
thus unto one GERARDVS DE LORITORIO: The Beast in the Revelation, to which is
given a mouth speaking Blasphemies, and making War with the Saints,
possesses PETER'S Chair, as a Lion ready to the prey.

And thus has the Jury given their verdict: against which, The supply against
exception by a December tales.
if the Prisoner at the bar make exception, by disliking of any of them, as
too too partial, and so worthily to be challenged, we have a December tales,
others void of exception, ready upon the call to appear, The first.
as amongst the Princes, Frederick Barbarossa Emperor, who writing to the
Cardinals, said, Albert. Cra^tzius in Metropoli, lib. 7. cap. 53.
that the authority of the Roman See had loosed the reins of boldness; and
replying unto Hadrian the fourth, protests, Hen. Mutius l. 18. rerum
Germanic. ex Chron^co Hirsaugie^s. The second.
that he would provide for the peace of the Church, since he sees, that the
detestable beast of pride has crept up into Peter's chair: and Jews the
Twelfth king of France, who in the heroical spirit of his most illustrious
Progenitor, Philip the fair; Naucler. tom. 2. Generat. 44. and Platina in
Bonisac. 8.
(the famous suppressour of that Raging Tyrant Boniface the eight,) caused E
Chron. Gal. apud Pet. Molin. de Monarchia temporali Pontific. Romans ca. 15.
his coin of Gold to be stamped on the inside with these words, Perdam nomen
Babylonis, I will destroy the name of Babylon, meaning Rome, the seat of Pope
Julius the second, his deadly enemy; and lastly, our most Puissant Princes,
and Kings of England, Vide in horvitis Chron. Anglicana, praecipue Mat. Paris.
and Roger. Houeden. and Holinshed, and Stow, and l. Fox, in Martyrologio.
King John, King Edward the third, King Henry the eight, King Edward the
sixth, blessed Queen Elizabeth, all of them to their power renouncing the
Pope, as the very Antichrist; but especially our most Gracious Sovereign, King
James, concerning whose most Apolog. cum praef. and Medita. in Apocalypse. 20
Divine Discourses of this argument, well known to all the world, yea, and
carped at by Bell. Parsons, Suarez Coquaeus Schioppius, etc.
Popelings, but not corrected, admired at, but not answered; we may most truly
take up that proverb, Prou. 31.29 The fourth, etc
Many have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all. Secondly, amongst
the Bishops, Nilus Thessalonic. li. 2. de primatu Papae.
Nilus of Thessalonica pulling down the Popish Primacie, and Apud Auent. lib.
7 p. 573.
Probus Tullenses, showing the Popes Legates to be Antichrists servants: and
Honorius Hono. Angustod. dial. de praedest. et l. arbitrio.
Augustodunensis, auouching the seat of the beast to be in the Pope, and
Cardinals, yea and all Council. Turonensi sub Lodouico 12.
the Bishops of France in the days of Jews the twelfth, and of England in
the Reign of Henry Vid. Fox. Mart. sub Hen. 8 and Edwar. 6. The eight, etc.
the eight, and Edward the sixth renouncing the Pope. Lastly, amongst the
Monks, Henry Petrus Cluniace^s. l. 1. Ep. 1. and 2
the Scholar of Petrus de Bruis, calling Rome, Sodom and Babylon; and Rob.
Gallus l. de vaticinijs apud Posseuinum to. 2. Apparatus.
Robertus Gallus, a Dominican describing the Pope for Antichrist, under the
figure of a Serpent, and Guido. Carmel^t. and Bern. de Luzenburg. in Catalog.
haeres. and Bell. in Chro^, ad annum 1191.
Petrus Iohannis Bitterensis a Franciscan, in his Postills upon the Revelation,
proving the Pope to be that Antichrist: to conclude, if all this thick cloud
of witnesses will not cast him; we can produce whole Churches, as Catalog.
test. verit. lib. 3.
at Leodium, whole Synods, as those Ap. Aue^ l. 7. etc
of Rome under Otho, Frederick, and Jews Bauarus, and a great many such
Councels holde^ in Sub Philippo Pulchro and Lodouico 12.
France; yea whole peoples in Countries, who ever rejected the bondage of this
Antichrist, as in England those faithful ones, whom Fox. Martyrolog. ^ub
Rich. 2. and Henry. 5.
they wickedly nickenamed for Lollords; in France, Reinerius de Waldensi^us.
the Waldenses, in Italy, the Naueler. tom. 2. Genesis 44.
Fratricellians, in Bohemia, Jacob Misnensis de aduent. Antichr apud Catalogum
test. Ver. lib. 1^.
the Melitzians, (all before John Wickleffs time,) yea, and in the Mountains
of Rhetia above Sauoy, the Ioh. Nicho's his Recantation, and Mornaeus de
Mysterio Iniquitatis, pa. 730. An exception against these truly answered.
faithful Inhabitants of Vallis and Telina, who had, from their first
conversion to Christ, always their own true Pastors, never subject to the
bondage of Babylon, and Antichrist, Rome, and the Pope. But me thinks I hear
some Papists except against all these voices, as given by their enemies, and by
Heretics condemned by the Catholic Church. But to these men I cannot make a
better reply, then such as that of Reg. 18.13.
Elijah unto wicked Ahab, proudly demanding, Art thou he that troubles
Israel? when he said, I have not troubled Israel, but thou, and thy Fathers
house, in that ye have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and thou have
followed Baalim. For none of these were otherways their enemies, but as true
men are to thieves; neither did the Catholic Church their Mother at any time
condemn them for Heretics, who maintained no doctrine contrary to Scripture;
neither followed other discipline, then at that time was used. Indeed the Pope
and his adherents, in hatred of that truth which God revealed by them to the
world, did enterprise to condemn them, and persecute them with Fire, and
Faggot, sword and desolation; only to fulfill the Prophecies given out
concerning the cruelty of the wicked Antichrist. But yet their cause is never
the worse, since the great side does many times ouersway the better; neither is
the credit of their verdict thereby any whit impaired in the judgment of the
wisest, and most godly, since time has brought that truth to light, which in
that Dark world yet these faithful saw clearly; Three specialties enforcing
good Men unto this sharp censure of the Pope to be that Antichrist
and the Pope has proved their words to be true by three sundry specialties of
most lively proof, which enforced not only the forenamed witnesses, but even
the Popes own dear dearlings, and best friends to confess, that Antichrist
was even then come, and amongst them. The first.
The first specialtie was his pride, in usurping upon the secular power, by the
deposing of Princes, first Vid. Bellar. cap. 1. in Barklae. and Reverend. D.
Roffensem Episc. in Bellar. lib. 1. cap. 2.
attempted by Pope Hildebrand, Gregory the seventh, with such trouble to all
Christendom, that even at that time Apud Auentinum, lib. 5. page 470. The
second.
all honest and good men for the most part said, that HILDEBRAND was
Antichrist, and that the kingdom of Antichrist did then begin. The second
specialtie is, their schisms, which, as they were many (for Onuphrius in
Chronologia Pontificum ad Platinam.
Onuphrius in his Chronology of Popes reckons thirty:) so were they pursued
by Antipopes with such hatred, that good men even thereupon adjudged the Pope
to be the Antichrist, as Apud Auentinum, lib. 6. page 508.
Gerochus Bishop of Richemberge thought of those two firebrands of hell,
Octauianus called Victor, and his potent competitor Alexander the third. The
third and last specialtie is, their most vile, filthy, The third.
and abominable lives, abounding in all Pride, Covetousness, Sacrilege,
Symonie, Lechery, Treachery, and all manner of Blasphemy, so odious in the
open sight of all the world, that their own dearest Dearling, and most
faithful Friends, and Servants could not but inueigh against Rome, which they
name Babylon, and the Pope, whom they call Antichrist, as it is plainly to be
seen in the Apud Catalog. test. verit. lib. 4.
Satyrs of Bernardus Cluniacensis, Dantes pa. 9. and 31.
Dantes his Sonnets, Petrarches Petrarch. Epistolis 9.12.13. etc.
Epistles, and in the learned Works Sarisburi^n^. 6. Polycratici* cap. 22.
of Ioannes Sarisburiensis, to whom, as to his very great Familiar, Pope ADRIAN
the Fourth In Catalog. test. verit. lib. 14.
used often to say, that many of the Roman Bishops did rather succeed ROMULUS
in killing, then PETER in feeding. For indeed we need no further evidence for
this point, then the words of Bellarmine and Baronius themselves; he Bell. in
Chronolo. ad an. 1026
confessing, that about the year of Christ, one thousand, six and twenty,
the Popes did degenerate from the piety of their Predecessors: this exclaiming
Baronius Annal. tom. 10. ad an. 912. artic. 3.
against the Sea of Rome, possessed by Landus, John the Tenth, and such others;
Quae tum facies Ecclesiae Romanae, etc. What was then the face of the Church of
Rome? how filthy, when most potent, and most filthy Whores ruled all in Rome?
At whose appointment Sees were changed; Bishops translated; and that which is
horrible, and not to be spoken, (yet lo! he will borrow a point in Law to
speak it!) their Lovers, false Popes were thrust up into PETER'S Chair, who
were not to be written in the Catalogue of the Roman Bishops, but only for
signing out of times. Well. It is a bad Bird that defiles his own nest; but
in truth they could neither hold it in any longer, nor carry it out any
further, The conclusion of the general Doctrine.
their consciences constrayning them against their wills to tell the truth. So
that now, I hope, all doubts being cleared, which any way were made against our
Demonstration, we may conclude fully, that the Pope of Rome is that great
Antichrist, whose Kingdom is by little and little to be diminished by the
preaching of Gods Word, and at length to be wholly and fully demolished by the
coming of Christ.

. XXVIII. The use of the Doctrine unto our selves.
Whereupon now for use of all before delivered, concerning the great
Antichrist, we (my dear Brethren) may justly take up both lamentation, A
sorrow for our Brethren in the flesh, who are Papists in profession.
weeping for many of our dear Brethren, according to the flesh; but rejoicing
for our own selves. For concerning many Brethren now living in England, we may
with S. Paul Romans 9.2.
conceive great heaviness and continual sorrow in our hearts, because that
they see not in what a great captivity under this great Antichrist, they
(poor souls!) lie enthralled. For as the Plutarch. in Cryllo.
foolish companions of Ulysses, besotted with the enchanted and poisonous cups
of the lewd Ha^lot Circe, thought themselves to be the best men, when they
were worse then beasts, as Eurylochus in the Hom. Odyss. lib. 10.
Poet foretold them plainly, that (...).
she would make them all either Swine, or Wolves, or Lions: even so, many
silly fowls, like blind Moles, or Dormise, lurking in the by-waies, and
secret corners of Cities and Country, throughout almost all the Counties of
England, being made fully drunken with the Deuillish potions of the whorish
Babylon, think themselves only to be the best Catholics, and Orthodox
Christians, when (God knows) they are wholly become, through their full
draught of the inuenomed Challice, worse then Dogs or Swine in profane
filthiness; worse then Woules or Lions in ravenous devouring. And this great
conceit of themselves is fully settled in their darkened thoughts, and their
hardened hearts, only, because they hold of the Pope, the damned Author of this
their bondage; being in truth at this time as far blinded touching
Antichrist, as the Jews were in the time of Christ concerning the Messiah,
whom they then daily looked for, as appears by their Vid. Joseph. li. 17.
(...) cap. 11. and lib. 18 c. 10. and Rabbinos in sine Seder Olam apud
Genebrardum.
manyfold repinings and rebellions against their present government then under
Herod, and the Romans; although when Christ came into the world at Gal. 4.4.
the fullness of time, they neither John 1.9.
would know him, nor yet acknowledge him, only because he came in a manner
clean contrary to their carnal and worldly expectations, as Esaias. 53.2.
the Prophet foretold, that he should grow up before him as a tender Plant,
and as a root out of a dry ground, who should have no form, nor comeliness;
and when they should see him, there should be no beauty, that they should
desire him. For so it is with these doting Pontificians, that although they
Viguerius. Instit. cap. 21.. 3. Viegas in 13. Apocalypse. Perer. in Dan. 11. and
alij fere omnes.
daily make speech of Antichrist with much detestation of his mostlewd and
abominable ways; and albeit that Henriquez. lib. 14. ca. 23.. 3
they give out, that his time is at hand, when he must pervert all holy
worship: yet do they not see him now domineering over them, neither yet will
believe, that this Pope of Rome either is he, or may be him; only because he
now manifests himself in a contrary form to their conceit of Antichrist,
howbeit, if they would with a single and an impartial eye behold, and compare
the daily designs, and accustomarie actions of the Roman Papacy, with the
foretold villainies of the great Antichrist; I am persuaded, they could not but
acknowledge, how far they have been deceived before, and how they are now
(silly souls!) all deluded with the sheep Mat. 7.16.
clothing, covering a ravening Wolf; with a Lions skin put upon an Ass,
only as a Bug-beare to affright poor people. But, as he Phaedrus l. b. 1.
cap. 11.
said well, Virtutis expers verbis iactans gloriam,
Ignotos fallis, notis est derisui:
That is, He who does want true prowess,
And in words boasts of fame,
Deceives strangers much:
Of men known gets shame.
For see (ye peevish Papists) the dangerous estate of your captivity, many
ways most detestable; The miserable estate of our English Papists, in four
respects.
as in these four respects; First, of your Prison, dark and deep. Secondly,
of your Chains, hard and Romish Synagogue, dark through ignorance, 1. Of
their Prison.
For ignorance, it is John 4.22.
to worship what you know not, even in 1 Cor. 14.11
an unknown tongue, (as M Brierwoods Enquir. c. 3. and 6
Latin is to most men) an unknown god, Can. Miss. and Biel. in Can. lect. ^9.
made of bread by your Priests. And for obstinacy, you declare it by your
stiff maintayning of so many idle Ceremonies, and your open recusancie, of
communicating with us, who gladly would say unto you all, as unto our Osee 2.1.
Brethren, Ammi; and to our Sisters, Ruhamah. But (alas) I find you holden
down within this Dungeon, by Of their Chains.
under a pretense of great perfection; when, in truth, they are no better then
the snarled cords of redoubled iniquity, entangling your consciences with a
mere will worship, tending only to your destruction. For is not this a
bondage, to swear a fealty of obedience unto him, who, like Judges 1.7.
Adonibesek, cutteth off your right thumbs, and your right toes of allegiance,
due only to your Natural Sovereign, casting from above to you, now under
board, a few crummes or scraps of feyned favors, folden up, and that very
rudely, in Vide breuia Pauli Quinti, 1 and 2.
a Breue or two? And is not this a yoke which Vide Theses nostras de Votis
Monasticis.
neither you nor your Fathers were able to bear, to be tied unto that most
vile, idle, and abominable Monkish life, under a color of perfection; when
their chastity proves worse then Sodomitrie; their poverty proceeds only
to pomp; and their regular obedience is but a Cloak for Libertines to live as
they list? Laurent. Agricola apud Hospin. lib. 6. de Origin. Monach. cap. 17.
Qui volet immundum in mundo cognoscere Mundu^,
Exploret rasos, vestales, atque cucullos:
That is, Who would in this world behold filthy trunks;
Search out Popes-shauelings, vestals, and Monks.
And yet I see you wholly addicted unto them: I Of their diet.
because you look for some good Viands from them: and what do they give you?
Surely, your meat here in this jail of ieopardy, is but some gross stuff,
like Card. l. 6. de variet. reru^ c. 10
the fruits of Peru, that make men pur-blinde; and yet affoorded unto you (God
wot,) in so small a pittance, that in taking thereof, your bellies may think
your throtes to be cut; since God in his Justice for your perverse Recusancy,
now sends you a Famine, not Amos 8.11.
of Bread and Water (for indeed you fare too well, and your fathers are careful
to haunt where best cheer is, if wilful Wats. Quod. lib. 3. art. 1.
William Watson may be believed) but of the Word of God, as the Prophet hardly
threatened to obstinate Israel. For (now a little while to enter Commons with
you) what meat do they give you else, but either the Antike show of a private
Mass, at which you stand gaping like Tantalus, for his Apples in Hell, the
Priest offering up an uncharitable Sacrifice, whiles that (as Sleidan.
Commentar. lib. 5.
the Turk beholding a Mass gave his censure) he churlishly eats up all
himself, and gives no part thereof to his fellows; who stand by, looking for
some? or if it happen to be a Sermon: it is but some slubbered up idle
Discourse concerning someone will worship or other, for Processions,
Pilgrimages, retayning of Relics, worshipping of Images, shrining false
Saints, as Saint Campian, Saint Garnet, Saint Oldcorne, etc. or some powerful
Exorcismes, such as Father Harsnet. of Popish Impostures.
Edmunds used at Denham, and the great Friar of France, History of the
dispossessed written by the Friar Sebastian Michaelis.
Sebastian Michaelis exercised in Prouance, upon two Devils, who possessing two
poor Wenches conspired against the Huguenots, to maintain by Discourse the
Doctrines of Popery, now drawn to a low ebb, for the lack of such Patrones
as may defend it, since they are now compelled to fee such Hellish Advocates
for opening their cause: or if they propose better matters unto you, as Faith,
Hope, Love, Patience, and other Christian Virtues: yet cannot Rogers his
Preface of sanctification.
they minister true comfort to the Conscience, by their manner of handling such
necessary Coster. Enchirid. Controu. cap. 5. page 208. edit. Colon.
they) by the help of God, not yet dwelling in him, but moving and helping,
to prepare it self unto Justification, not only by suffering, but also by
doing, when the Holy Ghost tells us, that Ephesians. 2.5.
when we were dead in our sins, God quickened us together Secondly, their
building is upon the Law too hardly Petrus a Soto in Methodo Confessionis,
simul cum Nauarro in Manua^i Toleto lib. 4. cap. 1. etc. and omnibus Casuistis
alijs.
urged for the rule of performance to a man unregenerate, since to such not yet
refined by Grace, the Law is rather Colos. 2.15.
a Decree of Condemnation, because they Romans 7.10.
cannot do it, then a rule of Salvation, which must first be wrought in us by
the Grace of God through Christ, before we can be able to settle our obedience
according to the strict rule of the Moral Law; for Romans 13.8.
love fulfilleth the Law; and we 1. John 4.9.
cannot love him till he love us first, and his 2. Cor. 5.19.
love to us is purchased only by faith in Jesus Christ, in whom Math 3.17.
he is well pleased, and in whom Ephesians. 1.6.
we are freely thirdly, their end, and chiefest purpose in such Discourses, is
the whole subversion of a simple Soul, wrought first by terrifying with Hell,
as appears by Watsons Quodlibets, page 86.87.88. etc.
their exercise enjoined to their Nouices; then by puffing them up with a vain
conceit of meritorious actions, as if they could climb up to Heaven alone of
themselves; when the Apostle does teach us, that it Ephesians. 2.8.9.
is the gift of God, not of Works, lest any man should boast himself.
Miserable Fathers, which give unto your hunger-starued Children for Bread, Mat.
7.9.10.
Stones; for Fish, Scorpions! But who are Man of sin, Of their Iaylors.
either from Rome, or Rhemes, Salamanca, Vallidolid, Conimbricum, or some such
other strong Tower of Iebus, where stand 2. Sam. 5.6.
the Blind and Lame, in as high respect, as was the Pompon. Laetus in
Constantino Magno.
Palladium, in the Castle of Troy: Men, I say, of monstrous shape, furnished by
their Teachers, (such as Quodlib. Watson, page 108.109. and 236. etc
good Robin Cowbucke, alias, Parsons,) with all Craft, and Cruelty: Craft, to
deceive, both us and you: us, by word and deed, only to escape us, like the
Saepia and the Polypus: For Ovid. in Halientico, and Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29.
as the Saepia, lest he should be caught, casts out a black Ink, to darken
the water: so these men, to escape the hands of Justice, under words of a
double meaning, collude with their Examiners, as Epistola Campiani ad
Mercurialem, Generalem Iesuitarum.
Campian did with the Mayor of Dover, and Garnet in the Vid Acts of H. Garnets
Arraignment.
whole course of his Examination, when Gods Word wishes us Ephesians. 4.24.
not to lie, lest they Wisd. 1.11.
destroy their Souls: for John 8.44.
lying is the Devils Art.

But what care they for that? For who else is their Master, but the dissembling
Devil, that teaches them to counterfeit every shape of me^ in the world,
contrary to the Apostle his rule, who Romans 12.2.
will not have us to be conformed to this world? For as the Ovid. and Plin. vbi
supra.
Polypus, to avoid the hands of fishers, will turn himself into the color of
every thing he lies next: so these dissembling wretches, to shun the danger of
apprehension, take upon them any whatsoever habit of men in the world; as now
they will go Boast, Bishop, Gerard, Dudley, and other such Renegado disguised
do prove this true
like swaggering Gentlemen, now like Pedanticall Schoolmasters, now like
officious Seruing-men, now like a rich Farmer, now like a poor beggar,
Rat-catcher, Glasse-man, Pedlar, or in other such disguisement, both contrary
to their zeal of their falsely so called Catholic faith, which at Allens
Apology of the English Seminaries at Rome, and Rhemes.
their admission into their Seminaries, and dismission back again into
England, they swear to preach without fear, publicly in all places
wheresoever they come, and repugnant to their vow Bell. lib. 2. de Monach. ca.
4.
of Regular obedience, wherein they are bound by solemn oath to keep, and not
to change the habit of their order. I know Tortus, p. 366. Ob.
their Great Cardinal would here excuse the^, by the example of Eusebius
Samosatenus, who Tripart. hist. lib. 7. cap. 16.
in the Arian-persecution went about through Phaenicia, Syria, Sol.
and other places in a soldiers habit, to teach Gods people the Catholic
truth. But one example is no general warrant, especially to them who are bound
by vow, where he was free; who Tortura Torti ibid.
teach falsehood, where he spoke truth, who under a color of Catholic
doctrine, infuse the poison of treasonable Designs, into the heads and hearts
of their hearers; where he was in all things careful to obey superior Powers
so far as they commanded things not repugnant to the Word of God. Yet all
this their secret packing is only (say Tortus vbi supra.
they) to deceive such, as with whom they are not to keep any faith or
promise. Indeed so was it taught in the Council Council, Constant. sess. 15.
of Constance, against all truth, both of Religion and of civil honesty. But
alas, whom do they hood-winke? Not us, who know them too well, but you, (poor
souls!) whom they entangle by auricular Confession, and sensual Absolution
(their pretty ginne for Gentlewomen,) that they may be enriched by your
possessions, either kept, or sold, as you well find by the cunning dealing of
one Man only, John Gerrard by name, whose knauerie discovered by the Author of
those venomous Wats. Quod. lib. p. 89.90. etc.
Quodlibets, does sufficiently assure us of the like way taken, not only by
the Jesuits, but also even by the Secular Priests, who are as jealous Gal.
4.18.
over you, as the false apostles were over the Galatians, that you might only
love them, excluding all others. Their Craft can no longer be concealed, for
their Cruelty practiced upon you, and intended against us. For do not you
find by their haunt unto your Houses, a bondage in your souls to unnecessary
observations of Fasting, and other Abstinences; a butchering of your bodies by
Flagellations, and other Exercises; an emptiness in your Purses by ordinary
Pensions, and extraordinary Contributions, for the pretended furtherance of the
Catholic Cause? How many Nobles, how many Gentlemen, and others of Note, have
been brought (as we say) to a Staff, and a Wallet, even to beg of others
what they had of their own, I need not recount; the Country is full of such
Dilapidatio^s, occasioned only by their own too simple gentleness, and these
Cormorants too insatiable greediness, whereby they make as great a prey of
their poor, seduced, simple and besotted Followers, as Kites do of Carcasses
torn piece-meale amongst them. And yet they will not be accounted cruel,
although to save themselves, they thrust you out into desperate designs of
deepest danger, as to murder your Sovereign, to ransacke your Country, to
neglect your kindred, not Catesbies conceit for the Catholic cause.
to care for your friends, so your enemies perish with them. Surely I cannot
but fear and quake to think of the mischief, intended against this
flourishing Kingdom of England, by Pope and Papists, set on fire by Hellish
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests; How eager were they against blessed Quodlibet.
p. 260.261. etc.
Queen Elizabeth? first, to procure an Excommunication of Pius Quintus,
renewed by Sixtus Quintus; then to conspire against her Sacred Person, by open
Rebellions in the North, and privy Treasons of Parrie, and others; thirdly, to
poison her best Nobles and Friends by Lopez; fourthly, to procure an Invasion
by Spaniards in the year 1588. fifthly, to entitle the Infanta to this Crown;
sixthly, to procure Breeues from Rome to hinder His Majesty when time should
serve; seventhly, to enter into Conspiracy by Secular Priests, as Watson, etc.
at the very first Inte of his Majesty's happy Reign; eighthly, to plot the
Powder Treason; a Design beyond all example for heinousness, since which how
they have labored to excuse some, to defend others, to patronize those who
fled away, yea to register for Saints the chiefest Authors of this deuillish
intendment, I need go no further then to Eudaemons Apology, soundly and most
religiously confuted by the most Learned and Reverend Author of the Antilogie.
So that all the premises put together, have enforced me to this settled
judgment concerning a Papist, which without any fear, or scruple of
conscience, Two certain Correllaries grounded upon the Premises. The former.
The latter. The former demonstrated.
I boldly thus propose in these two conclusions: the first: A Papist as a
Papist is no true Christian: the second: A Papist as a Papist is no good
subject. What I speak, I will prove, or else take all for nothing: In the
former point thus: No sworn Slave of Antichrist, is a true Christian: For no
Mat. 6.24.
man can serve two Masters; for either he shall hate the one, and love the
other; or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other: no, Ye
cannot, says the 1. Cor. 10.22
Apostle, drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils: ye cannot be
partaker of the Lords Table, and of the table of Devils: He, says Ambr. s^r.
17.
AMBROSE, that will be partaker of heavenly things, must not be a fellow or
companion of Idols. But every Papist, as a Papist, is a sworn Slave of
Antichrist, because, as a Papist, he holds only of the Pope, whom we have
sufficiently proved before to be that Great Antichrist. Therefore no Papist as
a Papist is a true Christian. He may have the outward Name, but he wants the
true Nature, and form of a Christian, as indeed Romans 9.6.
All are not Israel, which are of Israel. He may be baptized in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, according to the outward
form, (not to be iterated upon his Conversion by a new Baptism;) but not
according to the invisible Grace, which through his Apostasy, he either
received not at all, or if he made some small show of it only, he wilfully
thrust it from him, by the Witchcraft of his wicked Stepdame, the Romish
Synagogue, which as Jerusalem in the Ezech. 16.20
Prophet bare children unto God, but offered them unto Molech. The latter
demonstrated.
In the latter thus: None who give any Primacie to the Pope in another man's
Dominion, wherein he lives as a member of that Commonwealth, can be a true
subject to that his own Liege King, and natural Sovereign. Because he
depriueth the King of his due; contrarying therein the precept of the Apostle,
who wills us to render to Romans 13.7.
all their dues, tribute, to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom;
fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor.

For it is the 26. Hen. 8. and apud Rastal in ^a. Romans
Kings due, that he should be acknowledged by every person borne, bred, and
living as a Subject within the Kingdoms and Dominions of the same King, for
Supreme head and governor next under Christ in all causes, and over all
persons, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal; as it was proved in the days
of King Henry the eight, largely and learnedly by two great Clerks of that
time, Stephen Guard. l. de vera obedientia.
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and Cuthbert Tonst. in his Sermon before K.
Henry 8. in Act. and Monument, p 986.
Tonstall Bishop of Duresme. For the very title of (Supreme head next under
Christ, etc.) is assigned unto Kings and Princes, first, by the Holy Ghost in
Scripture, as where Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King, (...), that is, (says Bishop Vbi supra.
Tonstall,) as to the chief head; as indeed unto him, who has a chiefedome or
superiority over us, like as Psalm. 18.43.
David was called the head of the Nations, and Saul termed the 1. Sam. 15.17
head of the Tribes: secondly, by the ancient Fathers both assembled in
Council, as in the Apud ^innium tom. 2. Council. and in praefatione Toleta.
Concilij, 8.
eight Toletan, where they all accord to the words of K. Reccesiunthus,
saying, the cause of governing the members, is the salvation of the head: and
the happiness of the people, the Princes cl^mencie: and severally whenever
they had just occasion to manifest, or demonstrate their most respectfull and
bounden obedience to Regal Soueraignety, as witness for the Latin Fathers,
Tertullian, when he says; Tertull. l. con. Scapulum, cap. 2.
we reverence the Emperor, as is lawful for us, and expedient for him, even
as a man second to God, and obtaining from God, whatsoever he is, and inferior
to God only: for so is he superior unto all others, as he is inferior to the
true God only: and for the Greek Church, Chrysostom. tom. 4. bom. 2. ad populum
Antioch.
Chrysostom, when bewayling the misery of the Antiochians likely to ensue for
their despitefull outrage done upon the statue of Theodosius the Great, he
said: he (to wit, the Emperor) is abused, who has not an equal upon the
earth; being the top, and head of all men upon the earth: But every Papist as a
Papist, gives a supremacy unto the Pope in these kingdoms and dominions of
our most gracious Sovereign. For first, the Gratian. did. 22. can. 1. and ibi
Gloss. Extrauag. ^om. l. 1. tit. 8. can. vnam sanctam.
Canonists, with Tho. Bosius, l. 3. de regno Ital. c. 4 and lib. 4. cap. 5.
Bosius, Carer. li. 2. de Romans Pontif. potestate, cap. 9.
Carerius, and other Apud Azor. part. 2. Instit. l. 4. cap. 19. and M.
Blackwels large Examination, page 22.^3. etc.
palpable flatterers of Popes, hold him to be the Supreme head absolutely,
fully, and directly, both in Spiritual, and Temporal things: secondly, the
Bellar. l. 5. de Pontif. Romans cap. 4.5. etc.
Jesuits fraudulently maintaining as much as the other, hold him to have a
Primacie directly in spiritualibus, and in Temporal things indirectly; only in
ordine ad spiritualia: thirdly, the Conc. Parisi^. an. Dom. 829. li. 1. c. 3.
and Conue^t. Paris. 1561. and 1595. apud Bochellum, decret. Gall* li. 5 tit. 4.
Parisians and secular Priests, our English Dormise* such John Ha^t in Ep. ante
Coll^t. cum D. Rainoldo.
as Heart, Watson Quodlibet. q. 8. art. 4. and Warmington.
Watson, together with Doctor Galiel. Barc. de pote. Papae, c. 2.
Barkeley, howsoever they collogue with Christian Princes in granting unto them
a chiefedome, or Primacie within their Dominions in temporal affairs, yet
will they not in any case derogate any one jot from the Popes supremacy in
spiritualibus, making the Pope to be head of the Church, and the King to be
chief, or as El^utherius called Epist. Eloutherij ad Lucium, apud Job Fox. in
Martyr. page 96.
king Lucius, the vicar of Christ, only So does Parsons interpret in his first
part of the three Conuersions of England, lib. 1. cap. 5. Ob. Sol.
in the Commonwealth, and over things temporal. Therefore no Papist, as a
Papist, is a good subject. For say, that he has taken the oath of allegiance:
yet is he but a subject in secundo ad^acente, more by the Kings Majesty's most
gracious acceptance, then upon his own good will, since he has not, neither
will take the Vid. Stat. 1. Eliz. c. 1. and Pulton de Iure Regni, tit.
Treason.. 15.
oath of Supremacy, when it shall by virtue either of ordinary vocation, or
of an extraordinary Commission, be unto him offered. Indeed the taking of the
oath of allegiance by Popish Recusants, may yield some satisfaction of their
outward obedience to charitable men. But surely for my part (and I think I may
speak for all my Christian Brethren that hear me this day) I can hardly trust
their inward loyalty because both their positive doctrine touching obedience,
and their usual practice of the same amongst us, do demonstrate their
dissembling, and Gyptian-tricks of fast and loose. For their Doctrine is this,
as War. of the Oath of allegiance, p 72.
Warmington says, first broached by Aquinas and as Watson Wats. Quodlibet. 9.
q. 4.
does prove, maintained by Jesuits, that So soon as Aquin. 2.2. q. 12. artic.
2.
any Prince is denounced excommunicated for Apostasy from the faith, his
subjects are then absolved from his government, and from the oath of their
allegiance; that they Parsons or Creswel in Philopater.
are to obey him but till they be able to resist, and make head against him,
nay, that any Ioh. Marianae de Regno. lib. 1. cap. 6. and 7.
may kill him by poison, or by some other way. Now can any Prince be secured of
the loyalty of such men, as hold this Paul. Quintus in Breui suo ad Angl.
priori.
for an Article of their Christian belief? If they shame to maintain such
absurd positions as these are, most abhorring both from Nature and Grace: Yet
their several daily practices against Christian Princes, and especially
against the Sovereign Majesty of the Kings and Queens of England, may give
us good occasion justly to suspect them for treacherous traitors unto our
State. For first, do they esteem any better of his Majesty, then they did of
Queen Elizabeth? That blessed Princess An. Do. 1569. Vide B. Jewels view of a
seditious Bull.
was expressly excommunicated by Pius Quintus: and is not his most sacred
Majesty included under the first clause of that Babylonish bead-rowle,
commonly called Apud Mart. Nauarrum in Enchirid. c. 28. number. 52. etc.
Bulla caenae, wherein the Pope himself every year, since Martin the fifth,
or as Grego. Sayrus in Thesauro lib. 3. cap. 4.
some say, Clement the fifth, upon the Thursday in Holy week, does denounce
excommunicate all Heretics, as they Ioh. Molanus Theolog. practic. tract. 1.
cap. 20. Conclus. 3.
call us, Hussites, Wicklenists, Lutherans, Zwinglians, Caluinists, etc? I know
not, how more basely they could demean themselves toward so Renowned, and
Potent a King, then to compare his true Godliness with Iulians Apostasy, as
In Terto.
Bellarmine did. Secondly, can we conceive better hope of these men, swearing
Allegiance unto His Majesty, then our Fathers had of Stephen Gardener, Boner,
Tonstall, and others, who swear to the Supremacy, in the days of Henry the
Eight, which afterward in Queen Mary's they utterly abiured? Certainly, the
small number of Papists swearing fealty; their backewardnesse in coming to
take the Oath; their cold maintayning of the temporal Supremacy of His
Majesty against Bellarmine Reg. Widdrington in Praesat. ad lectorem praefix^
Respons. Apologeticae, and in Epist. ad Paulum Quintum.
with probable arguments only, as if it were a School point only, raised for
disputation without resolution; enforce me to doubt of them, especially, since
they Vid. Casuistas, vt Tolet. lib. 4. Instr. c. 21. Naua^rus Enchir. c. 12.
number. 8. and Azorius p. 3. Iustit. moral. l. 13. c. 3. and Garnet of
Equivocation, and Par^ons in his Mitigation.
are not ashamed to maintain the use of Equivocation amongst us, whom they
account Heretics, practicing the knavery of the old Eusebius. lib. 6. hist. c. 31.
Helcesaitae, who made this the ground of their wicked dissimulation; lingua
^uripid. in Hyppol and Cic. lib. 3. Offic.
iurani, mentem iniuratam gero; I swear with my tongue, my mind was free: and
since Aquin. 22. q. ^9. artic. 9. ad 3. and Dom. ^ Soto lib. 8. de Iure and
Instit. quaest. 1. art 9. and Azori^ p 1 ^. 11 c. 9
they allow of the Popes Dispensation, by which at his pleasure, or upon their
own motion, they hold themselves absolved from the bond of their Oath. For as
that shows their lewdness, so this maintains their looseness, easily
yielding to treasonable acts, and treacherous designs, upon the least occasion
ministered unto them by their Masters of all this misrule, the Devil and the
Pope; Non diu fallit falsum; A lie will not last long, their knavery must be
known, that it may less hurt us: Pro. 26.24.
hatred is covered by deceit; but his wickedness shall he showed before the
whole Congregation. And therefore all these things duly weighed and considered;
my second problem, touching the false-hood of Popish fealty, is plain enough
to demonstrate the miserable captivity, wherein they, the bond-slaues of
Antichrist, lie enthralled, being blinded in mind, the right eye of their
judgment put out, as if they now carried the intended 1. Sam. 11.2.
plague of Iabish Gilead by N^ash the Ammonite; being in will, and affections,
wholly perverted, as if they were the Judges 1.7.
crum-fed captives of Adonibesek, having their right thumbs and toes cut off;
yea, so vilely prostrate at the feet of this Mezentian Antichrist, who (as the
Virgil. lib. 11 A^neid.
Poet says) Corpora corporibus coniungit mortua vi^is; iumbleth up all
together, both quick and dead, by his idle Indulgences, which are prized at an
high rate, and his wild Bulls, and thunderbolts of Excommunication against godly
people, and Christian Princes; that we cannot but much pity them, if they
would be pitied, and beseech God in his mercy once to open their eyes, that
they may behold the clear light of true knowledge, and to touch their hearts
with the sensible pricking of saving Grace, that they may believe, and repent,
and be saved.

. XXIX. But it may be, that we in charity Of rejoicing for our selves so
delivered from them and their bondage.
and therefore it is best now at length to let them alone, and leave them in
the hand of Gods great Council. For now to change our note or tune of
lamentation into exultation; of weeping for them, into reioyceing for our
selves, we may all say with DAVID, Ps. 124.6, 7.
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us ever for a prey unto their teeth:
our soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowlers; the snare is
broken, and we are escaped. Surely many Prophets and righteous men living in
times before, under Popish darkness, and Antichristian slavery, have much
desired to see Mat. 13.17.
those things which we see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which we hear, and have not heard them. We hear with our ears the Word
plentifully preached, which is the only best and free use of the Spiritual
Sword; and we see with our eyes, to the comfort of our hearts, an absolute
liberty from all forrayne power, repurchased by our Sovereign Princes,
enforced for their more secure and safe reigning, to draw out of the Scabbard
of the Common Right set down in our Laws, the Temporal Sword, that, as a
most learned obseruer of true witnesses has gathered out of the proceedings of
our Princes, Gowl. p. 2. Catalog. test. verit. page 775.
England is the fatal foe to the Papal See, and Popish tyranny. For as
Britain Platina in Eleutherio.
was the first Kingdom, which amongst the Gentiles publicly professed the
faith of Christ, in the days of good King Lucius, about some hundred and
fourscore years after Christ, under the very same form of Discipline, which
by Gods especial Grace, it has constantly retained ever since the first
planting, and now in despite of the deluding Devil, and doting
Disciplinarians, it happily exercises by the orderly hands of Archbishops in
Provinces, Bishops in Diocesses, and Priests, ( Presbyter^) not lay Elders,
(such as some, Vid. Bilson, c. 1. perpetual Government, and Sara^iam in Bezam.
according to their own only fantasies, have of late times, to the great
trouble of the Churches Order* newly devised) but preaching Ministers of the
blessed Word, sent by the Bishops out of Cathedral Churches into Parishes
abroad: even so is Britain the first of the Revel. 17.16.
ten horns, which hated the Whore, and made her desolate; I say, Ribera in
14. Apoc^um. 52.
the first of the ten Kingdoms, which once holding with the Pope, now breaks
his yoke, resists his tyranny, and delivers it self from his burdensome
bondage, by exalting in it self the most free use of a double Sword, both
Spiritual and Temporal, restored to her Governors by the three Great Estates
assembled in Parliaments; wherein they jointly* with the Royal assent of their
Gracious Governors, enacted such Statutes, as were not introductory of any new
law, but declaratorie, and restoratiue of the ancient jurisdiction, both in
Spiritual and in Temporal things to the Crown of England, as against all the
filthy barking of foule-mouthed Dogs, I mean, Parsons, and his prating
Companions, it is both learnedly and largely delivered out of the depth of our
English Antiquities, by the lively now living Oracle of the Common Laws, Sir
Ed. Cook then L. Chief Justice of England, part. 5. of Reports.
in Cawdries Case de iure Regis ecclesiastico. For so far as I can find by
diligent search of the Acts and Monuments, touching the issues of Church
affairs, I see that God took the very same course for our deliverance out of
Popish tyranny, which he used Exodus 4.16.
for the bringing of Israel out of Egypt by Moses and Aaron; MOSES for the
Sword, and Aaron for the Word; Aaron to be Moses his mouth, and Moses to be
Aarons God. Because it was Gods pleasure, for the pulling down of the Popes
Suprem^cie, and the rooting out of Popish tyranny, from out of this most
ancient Christian Kingdom, to put in ure a double knowledge; the first, of
Gods Word, publicly and powerfully preached by his Ministers for the Romans 1.16.
salvation of them that believe: the second, of the ancient Laws of this Land,
explayned both privately by our learned Judges, in particular Cases, reported
by four of the most ancient Benches, appointed before-times to select, and
write down the judgments of the Sages, as in the course of years they might
fall out: and publicly, in Statutes enacted upon grieuances for reformation,
which being a work of rare atchieuement, (especially in Religion so vilely
corrupted, that those, who were infected, could in no sort endure the sight,
much less the touch of the Lance) was first to be prepared* and afterward
to be perfected; God using for his instruments in this important business,
two of the most puissant and peerless Princes that ever did sway the Scepter
of these Kingdoms, to wit, Edward the Third, and Henry the Eight, both of most
famous memory. For in his days began the preparation of this great work:
first by Fox. Martyrolog page 390.
the preaching of John Wickliffe, and his Scholars, all Ministers of Christ:
secondly, by that Rastals Abridgm. tit. Prouis. et Praemunir.
Statute, enacted in the twenty fifth year of his most Victorious Reign
against Popish provisions, and admission of Strangers into Benefices, and other
Spiritual Promotions within this Kingdom. And Fox Martyrolog. p. 963. etc.
in the four and twentieth of this most Potent and famous King Henry, was it
brought to some perfection, first, by the preaching of these blessed Martyrs of
Jesus Christ, Bilney, Tyndall, Barnes, Latimer, and such like: secondly, by the
Statute made touching the Kings Supremacy, next under Christ within these
Kingdoms, both spiritual and temporal, restored to the Crown by all the
Estates, Lords Spiritual then swearing it, the Lords Temporal then
maintaining it, and Commons so approouing it, that from that time to this, the
Popes power in England has been in a consumption, still less and less, till
it was 1. Elizab. c. 1.
abolished wholly by the blessed Queen, Elizabeth, since whose first
inthronizing, till this very day, for the space of fifty three years and
more, we most happily have enjoyed that perfect liberty from the Popish yoke,
which Israel had from the bondage of the Philistines 1. Reg. 4.25.
in the days of David's and Solomon's reign, when every man from Dan to
Beersheba, sat without fear under his Vine, and under his Olive Tree. For lo,
a double freedom! the first inward of the conscience, by the preaching of Gods
Word, the Luke 11.52.
true Key of all knowledge, then lost, now found, then hid, now ready for
every man's hand to Revel. 3.20.
open unto him, that knocks at his ear for the comfort of his heart, the
Revel. 3.14.
Amen, Christ Jesus: the second, outward, of the Purse then open to the Pope,
now shut from his Provisions, Pensions, Annates, Tenths, Peter Pence, and other
means of subtle emunctions, by which he cleanely scoured the deepest bottom
of the greatest bag, that any ever of Zach. 11.17.
his Idol and idle Shepherds could fill by the Ezech. 34 10
fleecing and flaying of the Flock of Christ. For by the happy restraint and
absolute Vid. Rastal, sub tit. Romans
prohibiting of seeking the Pall, craving Inuestiture making of Appeals to the
Court at Rome, and of such other like Popish usurpations, we the people of
Great Britain now serve God only, and truly obey our Natural Liege Lord,
and Sovereign King, as most loyal Subjects, (now Gods great Name be praised
therefore!) Wat. Quodlibet. q 8. art. 6.
incensed by Jesuitical Renegadoes, and attempted by the doting deluded
Spaniards, has by Gods only help been happily prevented, to the wonder of
the world; they all in the mean time perishing Psalm. 83.10.
at Endor, and becoming: The second, of Domesticke Rebellions, whose Authors,
and Abettors are quickly espied by the watchful eye of the most wise and
religious Counselors of Estate, and seasonably caught by the faithful, and
strong hand of Gods Great Captains sighting 2. Sa. 22.8. etc
for Israel against these Philistims the sons of HAREPHAH, who digging Pro.
26.27.
a pit, fall into it themselves, and rolling a stone, find it returned upon
them, only because in Gods just judgment for the safety of his Servants, Pro.
5.21.
his own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his sins: Leuit. 26.1. Esaias 9.12. Ezech. 5.17. Amos 5.1, 2.
etc
Prophets are threatened, as true consequences, and rewards of Idolatry, as
Desolation, Famine, sudden Earthquakes, and universal Plagues, which justly
before-times befell unto the Idolaters within this Island both Heathenish, and
Popish, but since the Reformation, never came, either altogether, or upon the
whole Land at once, God in his mercy proportioning them severally unto our
ability, that we may bear them, now one, then another, as a light scourge for
a time to our true amendment.

So that where our Bell. lib. 4. de Eccles. Milit. ca. 18. and Anglo-Papistae
fere omnes.
Adversaries have it oftentimes in their mouths, Ob.
that since they left off the use of the Romish Religion, which is merely
Superstition, within this Kingdom, all things have grown dearer, things are
not so plentiful, and the Land is much disquieted with the Garboyles of War.

I cannot but condemn their carnal conceit, Sol.
in this their mad measuring of the Heaven by the Earth; of the Spirit by the
flesh; of Religion by prosperity, just like Ier. 44.7.
those Idolaters, who complained, that since they left off to offer burnt
incense unto the Queen of Heaven, and to power out drinke-offerings unto her,
they have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the Sword, and by the
Famine. For albeit this liberty of the Gospel, which we now do enjoy, does
counteruaile all these earthly good things in the true estimation of the Saints
of God, who should with Saint PAVL, Phil. 3.8.
account all things of worth, but loss and dung for the excellent knowledge
sake of CHRIST, because life eternal (as our John 17.3.
Savior says) is to know thee (that is, the Father) to be the very God, and
him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: yet 1. Tim. 6.6.
godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that which he has; since
1. Tim. 4.8.
godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. For Mat. 6.33.
seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all
these things shall be added unto you: added, says Saint Apud Aquinatem in
Catena super Eumgelia. and in locum.
AUGUSTINE, conveniently without your hinderance, and (...) and (...), both for
possession and for use: for possession: for England never had more wealth in
the ruffle of Popery, then it has now possessed, since the Reformation of
Religion amongst us, for the space of these last three and fifty years,
wherein all manner of Commodities have more abounded then ever before, partly
through the Vid M. Rich. Hackluits Discoueries.
great use of Navigations into all other parts of the World abroad, and partly,
by the exercise of Husbandry at home, according to the nature of every soil;
no place now left unmanured at all, but employed to his proper, and greatest
profit, for Cattle, or Corn; that even now the most desolate Regions of this
Island in times past lying waste, in the Northern parts, or in the Marches of
Wales, may verify what David spoke of Gods mercy, Psalm. 107.35.36.
who turns the Wilderness into standing water, and dry ground into water
springs, and there makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a City
for habitation; and sow the fields, and plant Vineyards, which For these
Kingdoms never had more people in them, since their first habitation, then now
in these last fifty years, when Cities are like Bee-hiues, sending swarms of
men abroad into Suburbs enlarged, or into the Country, now so full of Towns
Corporate, and scattered Villages, that Englands Commonwealth may well take up
the words of the Church in the Prophet, Esaias 49.20.
The place is too strait for me; give place to me, that I may dwell: and yet
they are not any way pestred with throng, since Peace has brought Plenty,
both to the comfort of the people, whose wants are supplied by store of Coin
more current now then ever before, and to the honor of the Prince, who may joy
in such an abundance of people, as faithfully now serve him in every place;
since as Solomon Prou. 11.28.
says, In the multitude of the people is the Kings honor; but in the want of
people is the destruction of the Prince. Surely as it happened to the good
Kings of Judah, David, Solomon, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Vzziah, Iothan, Hezekiah, and
the godly Josiah, that the more zeal they had for the purging of Religion from
Heathenish Idolatry, the better they prospered in outward things, according as
Iere. 22.6.
Jeremy said to the Son of JOSIAH; Did not thy Father eat, and drink, and
do judgment, and justice, and then it was well with him? So we may plainly
behold, and demonstrate the manifold blessings of God upon K. Henry 8. K.
Edward the 6. and blessed Q. Elizabeth.
those Princes, who reformed Religion within these Kingdoms, whereas Q. Marie.
she, who looked back to Sodom again, re-enslauing her self, and her
Kingdom to the Pope; lived always in troubles abroad, like ISMAEL, Gene.
16.12.
Every man's hand against her, and hers against every man; and at home, in
contempt like degenerating IEHORAM, 2. Chron. 21.20.
not being desired. They were rich, she poor; they were famous, she forlorn;
they were loved, she lothed; they were peaceable, she peevish; they were
bountiful, she bloody; they wanne, and kept, what she spent and lost, God in
truth 2. Chro. 15.2.
forsaking her, who forsook him. For as Nazianzen Nazianz. orat. 21. quae est
de Athanasio.
speaks to the praise of IOVINIAN; The Prince that gives strength unto
Religion, receives from Religion strength again.

Wherefore, now there is no reason, why Stapleton. lib. 4. cap. 10. doctrinal.
princip. and Bristow 10. Motive, and Kellison. lib. 2. cap. 4. etc. Ob.
Papists should term and call our Prince, and his people Schismatikes, and
Apostates, for departing from them, who depart from Christ;

Sol.
Since if the Pope be Antichrist, as we before have proved at large, we the
true members of the Catholic Church of Christ in England, by this our
departure from the Romish Synagogue, do nothing else at all, but what
Scripture commands, Reason persuades, Ancient Fathers preached, and some
learned Papists do allow. The Scripture commands it both in the Old, and
New Testament: In the Old both by the Law Exodus 23.32.
[ Thou shall make no covenant with them (meaning the Canaanites) nor with
their gods;] and by the Hos. 4.15.
Prophet, saying, Though thou Israel play the Harlot; yet let not Judah sin:
go not up to Gilg^l, neither go up to Beth-auen: In the New, both by the 2.
Cor. 6.14.
Apostle forbidding us to be unequally yoked together with unbelievers, and by
the voice from Heaven, crying, Revel. 18 4.
Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her For the Reason which persuades this departure Satyrist
expressed it, -- Iuuenal. Satyr. 14.
dedit hanc contagio labem,
Et dabit in plures, sicut grex totus in agris
Vnius scabiem cadit, and porrigine porci,
that is, Infection gave this spot,
and will give it to more,
Like one scabd sheep corrupting all.
And one swine mesling sore,
agreeing herein with the 1. Cor. 5.6.
blessed Apostle, who therefore will have us to shun bad company, because a
little leven leueneth the whole lump. The second, the Romans 6.23.
wages of sin is death, to be inflicted according to this true rule of
Justice, which Bernard delivered, Bernard. Meditat. cap. 4.
Vna poena implicat, quos vnus amor in crimine ligat: the same punishment
entangleth those together, whom the same love does bind in the same kind of
sin, as our English Proverb is, Like sin, like smart. And therefore well
might the Ancient Fathers, in their zeal for true purity, both in Greek
Church, Ignatius thus exhorts the Philadelphians; Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
Abstain from all those hurtful herbs, which Christ Jesus has not planted,
but that wild beast, that rejoices in man's blood shed; and amongst the
Latins, Hilarie Hilar. li. contra Auxentium.
thus earnestly urges against the Arrian AVXENTIVS: One thing I warn you;
take heed of Antichrist: for the love of those walls (meaning of the Church
where Arrians taught) do wickedly hold you: and ye do wickedly yield
reverence to the Church of God in the houses and buildings; badly ye embrace
the name of Peace under the color of these things. For even the learned
Papists themselves do allow, yea, and urge unto their Pseudocatholikes a
departure from Heresy, and Heretics, as not to trouble you with the cautions
of their Tolet. lib. 1. Instr. cap. 9. and Iacobus a Graph^is. p. 1. lib. 4.
cap. 18. and Azor. p. 1. lib. 8. cap. 11
curious Casuists, concerning the avoiding of heretical company, it is a
point of purpose handled by diverse concerning the Favorites, and Defenders of
Heretics, adjudged for Heretics, as by Felisius in 8. p. cap. 18.
Felisius, Henriq. lib. 9. n. or. theol. cap. 15.. 4.
Henriquez, Viguer. Instit. cap. 10.. 3. verse. 2.
Viguerius, Henr. Grauius in Annotat. super c. 20. August. lib. contra
Donatistas post. Collat.
Grauius, and our own good Countrymen, Stapleton in Or. de officio Pij viri
aduers. haereticos.
Stapleton, and Bristons Motiu. Antihaeretic. 23.
Bris^ow, who set all those earnest, and heavy exhortations, which they make
for Recusancie unto their Disciples, upon this only chiefest ground, that we
must not have any communion with Heretics. They grant the general, concerning
the flying from the company of Heretics; they would lay that in particular to
our charge, which we well prove upon them, only because they are in subjection
under the Great Antichrist, from whose heavy yoke our happy departure is
thoroughly justified by those fore-alleaged places of Scripture, in the
judgment of Tertullian, Tertullian. lib. de Coron. Milit. cap. 13. Ob.
who says, that we Christians are removed from dwelling in that Babylon,
mentioned in the Revelation of John, albeit, not as yet from the suggestion.

But our Stapleton. orat. quam vocat Apolog. Recentior. Ecclesiae.
Adversaries here would press us with an hard objection, as they judge of it,
drawn from our Ancestors, and natural Parents, living in times before, under
the darkness, and slavery of Antichrist, as if either we must condemn those
our forefathers unto Hell with Infidels, and Heretics; or approving them,
condemn our selves.

Sol.
But our Mornaeus de Eccles. cap. 10.
answer to this their poor Dilemma, is such, as Cyprian, upon this like
alleged prescription, gave against the Aquarians; Cyprian. Epist. 63.
If any of our fore-Elders, either ignorantly, or simply, has not observed,
and holden this, which God himself has taught us to do, by his own Example
and Mastership, there may be pardon granted unto his simplicity by Gods
indulgence: but we cannot be pardoned, who are taught and instructed of God,
seeing our Luke 12.49
Savior has given sentence, that the servant, who knows his Masters will,
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. For this charitable
Judgment we conceive of our fore-Elders, in that we do not single out any
unto damnation; but only conclude under these, or the very like general, and
indefinite terms: First, that they might hold sure the Jesus Christ: as I
could instance in very many of them; but that I am eased of this labor by
Illyric. Catal. test. verit. tom. 1. soll.
Illyricus, first gathering, S. Gowlart. tom. 3. art. 4.
Gowlartius well marshalling into their several Ranks and Orders, the
witnesses of truth living and dying before the days of Martin Luther. Yet can
I not omit the most lively obedience o^ these two in their times reputed for
great Men: the former is S. Bernard, who while he lived in the midst of
darkness, about the year Bellar. Chronolog.
of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred, and forty, was a principal Patron of
many Superstitions, imposed to the simple, upon the pretense of meriting
heaven; which carnal conceit, he at the very point of death thus plainly
confuted, when he humbly beseeched the hearty prayers of his Brother Arnaldus:
Lib. 5. de vit. S. Bernard. cap. 2. in tom. 2. Oper.
Be careful to strengthen by your prayers, me, the very heel [calcaneum,] or
lowest member of the body of Christ,] void of all merits, that he, who lies
in wait, may not find where to fasten his tooth, and to inflict a wound: the
latter is Doctor Fox. Martyrolog. page 1238.
Redman, a good man in his time, and a great Scholar, who albeit in his former
days he politikely took part with the Popish side; yet upon his deathbed
he freely renounced his former tenants, concerning the Real bodily presence,
and Purgatory, and Justification by Works, and such other like. For so strong
is Truth, that although some Politikes may smother it in their life time: yet
at the hour of their death, it will break forth, either unto comfort, upon
their true repentance, as it well appears in the former good examples; or
else unto condemnation, through the torment of conscience, arising upon their
retchlesse resistance, made against a known truth, whose strength is such, as
compels them, in spite of their proud hearts, to yield an assent to that
verity, which before they wilfully oppugned against their conscience, even as
we read of that proud Beast Fox. Martyrolog. page 1623.
Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, who upon his deathbed hearing Doctor
Day, Bishop of Chichester, speak of free Justification in the blood of Christ
our Savior, said, What, my Lord? will you open that gappe now? then farewell
altogether. To me, and such others in my case, you may speak it; but open this
window unto the people, then farewell altogether. Prou. 19.21.
There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the Counsel of the
Lord, it shall stand. For God never wanted a Witness of his Truth; but either
a Friend, to his own salvation, or an Enemy, against his will, confessed the
same to his own condemnation, the Gospel being then, as now, and ever to
some, 2. Cor. 2.16.
the savor of life unto life: to others, the savor of death unto death. How
our Forefathers stood toward God in these dark days of Antichrist, we are
not to judge peremptorily, Romans 14.5.
they standing or falling unto their own Masters. But yet, if they did as
truly believe, as they pithily penned their true confession of their faith in
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: if they did as heartily pray, as they
powerfully prepared themselves thereunto, especially upon their Deathbed,
according to the rules of comfort In Manuali Catholicorum edit. ^ Guil. Crashaw
in 16. Ann. Dom. 1611
ascribed to Anselmus and John Gerson; then surely we cannot but deem so well
of them, as Mal. 2.15.
of shining lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, wherein
they lived, as Gene. 12.14
Abraham in Egypt, Gene. 19.6.
LOT in Sodom, Psalm. 120.5.
DAVID in Meshec, the 1. Reg. 19.13
seven thousand in Israel, and Revel. 7.3.
the sealed Saints in the midst of the earth, from whom the Papists can have
no more allowance, then the wicked Ioh. 4.12.
Samaritanes could find from their pretended Father Jacob: since if our
Forefathers had seen but half so much of the Popish tyranny, superstition,
and abominations, they would have abhorred them with fair greater detestation
then ever we have: yet done, albeit we see them as openly manifested as the
Esaias. 3.7. The Conclusion applicatorie.
sins of Sodom. And therefore now, it is our only duty to supply their
defect in knowledge, by a better Pope and Papists, General to all
if not out of our Country, wherein they be inuolued as Moths: yet out of our
conceits, as men of a most massacring mind, declared by their Powder Plot, no
way to be pitied, or approved of us, whose utter subversion and ruin they
seek, as the Psalm. 137.6.
children of Edom cried against Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even
to the ground. For is it not a Law, made against the worshippers of any strange
god, that Deuteronomy. 13.8.9.
we must not consent to them, neither let our eyes pity them? Is it not a
practice ratified by DAVID, Psalm. 139.21.
to hate them that hate God, as if they were our enemies? And is it not the
Rule of Christ's Gospel, Math. 12.30.
that he who is not with us, is against us, and he that gathers not with
Christ, scatters? Experience does teach us, that as Nettles do not sting us,
but upon a light touch only: so evils increase not but upon forbearance,
according to that axiom given by S. AMBROSE, Ambros. Ser. 8. in Psalm. 119.
Facilitas veniae incentiuum tribuit delinquenti; Easiness of pardoning gives
encouragement to Offenders. So that, seeing it is most certain, that Prou.
20.8.
a King, (and so any other Magistrate, that rules under him) sitting upon the
Throne of Justice, chaseth away all evil with his eyes, because, as he Psalm.
101.8.
is careful to cut off from the City of God the workers of iniquity: so the
wicked, in the Prou. 28.1.
guiltiness of their consciences, will slye from the face of good Justice,
which, as the Prou. 25.23.
Northren wind the rain, so scatters abroad the backbiting tongue; and
since, upon the bad behavior of these wicked wights, many good and wholesome
Laws, to restrain their pride, and repress their fury, have been enacted,
which without due execution, are of no better worth, then Cic. 1. orat.
Catilinari^.
a rustie Sword in the scabberd: I cannot (most Honorable, Iehoshaphat,
Particular to the Honorable Judges and Lords then hearing.
spoken to all his Officers, set over the people, for deciding all causes of
either conusance, Ecclesiastical or Civil; 2. Chron. 19.6 7.
Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
with you in the judgment: wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
take heed, and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. For your Honors are to your
Sovereign, as these were to Iehoshaphat, Judges of State, whom these words do
warn of a double beware; first to know what ye do, then to do what you
know. To know what 1. Cor. 10.31
must be sought only, and above all things, ( for 1. Sam 2.30.
he that honors me, I will honor:) and secondly, GOD Himself is present
at the Judgment, to strengthen your hands, for doing whatsoever ye shall
judge aright, or to turn that upon your own heads, what ye shall put to
other men wrongfully, (for Gal. 6.7.
as a man sows, so shall he reap:) And to do Habac. 1.13
a God of pure eyes; and hating Covetousness, that opens a gappe for
respecting of persons, and taking of gifts to Job. 15.32.
your own destruction; because this case with you, is such as that was of the
children of Leui, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
who at Massah and Meribah, and the days of the golden Calfe, said to his
Father, and to his Mother, I have not seen him, nor did acknowledge his
Brethren, nor knew his own Children, he observing Gods Word, and keeping his
Covenant. For it may be, many of you have Parents, or Brethren, or Kinsfolk,
polluted and perverted by Popery, for whom Nature pleads; but Grace must
Math. 10.37
he that loves father or mother, son or daughter, more Secondly, the end of
your care in this case, is the sole preservation of our King, and the State,
which above all particular respects to your selves, you are bound to maintain
with as great zeal, as Liuius lib. 2.
Brutus had to hold up the free State of the people of Rome, when he caused his
own sons to be executed for conspiracy against the same; seeing, as ye
are men public; so your care must be public, for public security, Psalm.
45.6.
forgetting Thirdly, the persons, against whom ye are placed as Esaias. 49.16.
walls of defense, will not be won with love, being wholly enraged with
spite against us 2. Sam. 17.8.
like Be^res robbe^ of their whelps; but must be repressed by rigor of Law,
being every way as presumptuous as their Pope himself is proud, to take an
ell, if you give them an inch; to enter in at the least glat to spoil our
Vines; yea, upon the least conniuence, attempting some course for atchieuing
some mischief, having Prou. 4.17.
eaten the bread of wickedness, and drunk the wine of violence.

It may be, Ob.
they are favored in respect of their Gentry, and generous Nature.

But touching their Gentry; Sol.
as I grant it to be a worldly privilege: so it cannot be included amongst
August. in sentent. Prosperi. 301.
said well, Non nascendo, sed renascendo fit iustus: A good man is made not by
first birth, but by new birth. And therefore Popish Gentlemen cannot much
expect any favor at your hands in this regard, since Heresy is as odious in a
good man's eyes, as Genes. 49.4.
was Reubens Incest to Iaacob, who plainly denounced this sentence against
him; thou shall not excel. Now for their Romans 13.4.
as they be moved only, but for fear of a greater mischief, that may accrue
unto them upon their disobedience. For as Saint Augustine August. Epist. 50. ad
Bonifac.
says well, Sicut meliores sunt, quos dirigit amor; ita multo plures sunt,
quos corrigit timor; The better sort are directed by love, but the more, and
the worse must be corrected by fear.

I admit them generous, and kind, Ob.
and bountiful, and what other moral virtue else, you please, to be in them.

Sol.
Yet to God they are no better for all this Romans 14.23
without a true faith, then Ephesians. 2.10.
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel: and of you (my good Lords) they
cannot be esteemed for entire members of our body Politic, and
Ecclesiastical, without their true conformity unto Gods true Religion
established in this State, since Menander apud Stob. Ser. 42
one Law makes one people, and Iam. 4.12.
one God gives one Law, to which without exception we must 1. Pet. 2.13.
all be subject, holding all of one Head, both Mystical Ephesians. 1.23.
Christ Jesus, and 1. Pet. 2.14.
Political, our good King, if we will be lively branches and not rotten
boughs. Ye have well razed up the root of Popery, by casting off the triple
Crown, and casting out of their Wafer-god Now rush down the branches, that
remain, as a burden to this Realm and State, by wholesome severity in the
due execution of Statutes, and Laws, made against Jesuits and Seminary
Priests* Heresy, Schism and all manner of Recusancie; that Cantic. 2.14.
our Vine may be void of Foxes and our branches hold their Grapes, till the
Harvest of Happiness, when your Honors, amongst other Saints, shall reap your
reward by the favor of God, who meane-while will bless your labors of love
for the good of his Church, and this flourishing Commonwealth, wi^h all the
comforts of Grace and Peace, in Psalm. 122.6.7
the Peace and Prosperity of Zion, and Jerusalem, well cleared from all those
withered branches and rotten members, that hang, or depend upon this great head
Ant^christ, as now we are briefly to deliver in the second part of this
description, wherein it is said:

The third part, of all other Heretics.
. XXX. [ EVen now there are many Antichrists, The Exposition of the latter
part, concerning many Antichrists, which are Heretics.
whereby we know that it is the last time.] As the name of Christ in Scripture
is taken, either particularly for the Messiah himself, or generally for those,
who are either his Types forerunning, as were all the Prophets, Priests and
Kings living under the Law, of all whom it is Psalm. 105.15.
said, Touch not mine Anointed, or Deputies following, being consecrated to his
Service, by the unction of his Spirit, the Church with all the faithful
therein contained, being therefore called by the Name 1. Cor. 12.12
of Christ: so the poisonous name of Antichrist is used by the Holy Ghost,
either particularly for the great Fox himself, as the Article expresses in
this Text before; or generally for all his cubs together, who either forerunne
him, as Types or shadows in the first six hundred years after Christ, or
else succeed him, as his Deputies or Lieutenants, seeking to maintain his
standing in those particular visible Churches, out of which he was eiected by
the force of Gods Word, as we find the word used in all those places, where the
name of Antichrist is put, either in the plural number, as in my Text, or in
the singular number, collectiuely for any one Seducer whatsoever he be, as
where Saint John says, Ioh. Ep. 2.7.
He that is such an one, is a Seducer, and an Antichrist. For as the Types and
Deputies of Christ are so called, not only because of the outward anointing,
but also for the inward, and true ministration of the Grace of Christ unto
them, Who Coloss. 2.19
hold of the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit together by joints,
and bands, increases with the increasing of God, because they Coloss. 2.9.10.
are complete in him, who is the head of all principality, and power,
receiving John 1.16.
of his fullness grace for grace: even so the forerunners and followers of this
wicked Beast, which is the Great Antichrist, carry the name, and mark of
their Master, not only because of that outward opposition, which they all make
against Christ by several ways; but also for that inbred communion between
them, by which the forerunners prepare the way for Antichrist, through the
secret transfusion of their Poison into the Papal Sea, which through the
strength of stomach, does perfectly digest it, and deliver it to such
Sectaries, as depending wholly upon that See, through the vigor of their
venom, with the Pharisees in the Gospel, Math. 23.15.
compass Sea and Land, to make one of their profession, whom being so made,
they stuff him up with stubbornenesse, and line him through with all manner of
lewdness, to make him twofold more the child of perdition, then themselves.
So that Saint John from the multitude of these men thus opposed to Christ, does
most aptly demonstrate the approach of the last times, under this true form of
argument: When Antichrist shall come, it is the last time: But Antichrist is
come; Therefore it is the last time. For the name of Antichrist has the same
signification in both the Premises, noting thereby unto us a body of Heresy,
entirely consisting of an unhappy head, and many bad members, forerunning or
following the approach of their head, by opposing themselves against Christ
Jesus, and his holy Congregation, either in faith, or manners, even as both
Augustine and Aquinas, with all the approved Writers both of Papists, and
Protestants whom I could yet see, or peruse, expound this place: whence now
concerning Heresy, The doctrines drawn from this Text, thus expounded. The
former.
the very soul of Antichrist, we may learn these two most certain
Problemes: the former, that from the first coming of Christ in the flesh,
until his last coming to Judgment, in this last Age of the World, there
shall always be Heresies crept into the Church of Christ Militant here upon
Earth: The latter, The latter.
that all those Heresies whatsoever they be, shall always have some necessary
dependence upon the Great Antichrist. The former proved.
The former point appears true, first, from the Scriptures in Math. 13.30
the Parable which must grow amongst the wheat, until the Harvest. For God,
to Romans 9.22.
show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffers with long patience,
the vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction: secondly, from 2. Tim. 3.13.
grow worse and worse, as well in faith as in manners, the wicked deceiving and
being deceived. For, Luke 18.8.
when the son of man shall come, shall he find faith on the Earth? The
question implies this negative, 2. These. 3.2.
All men have not faith. And Luke 17.28.
as in the days when LOT came out of Sodom: so shall it be in the days of
the Son of man: then there were Gene. 18.32.
not ten Righteous, for whose sake the City might have been saved, as now,
and hereafter there shall be scarce any, that may be thought worthy, Mat. 24.12.
Charity cooling, and Iniquity The second of utility which the Apostle
delivers, when he says, 1. Cor. 11.19
There must be Heresies also among you, that they which are approved, may be
made manifest among you. For it must Math. 18.7.
needs be, that offenses come; but woe to that man, by whom the offense
comes. Because as in a Furnace the Gold is purged, but the dross consumed:
so God permits Heresies always in the World, that the faithful by their
trial, may be truly purged, when the wicked by their wilful Apostasies
shall be known, as Tertullian Tertullian. de praescript. aduersus haeres.
cap. 1.
therefore said very well; Haereses ad hoc sunt, vt fides habendo tentationem,
habeat etiam probationem; that is, Therefore are heresies, that faith by them
having a trial, might receive an approofe. For turn ye through all the
Histories Ecclesiastical, either written by the ancient Fathers, and Orthodox
Scribes the Churches Penmen, Eusebius. lib. 10 histor. Eccles.
Eusebius, Sozomen. lib. 9
Sozomene, Socrates lib. 7
Socrates, Theodor. lib. 5.
Theodorite, Prosper in appendice ad Chronolog. Euse.
Prosper, Victor. in historia. Vandalica.
Victor, Euagrius lib. 6
Euagrius, and Alij, vt Epip^an. Schol. lib. 1 part. hist. and Nicephor. lib.
18.
other such; or digested into Centuries for distinction of times by the
Magdeburg. tom. 10.
Magdeburgenses, Baron. tom. 10
Baronius, Osiand. Epitome pa. Centur. 16
Osiander, Bisciola Epitome Baron. tom. 3.
Bisciola, and Alij, vt Illyricus and Gowlart. in Catal. test. veritatis.
others: yet shall ye not find the purest Age of the Church, free from some
one Heresy or other, either going before that Great Antichrist, according to
that Catalogue made of them, with a sound Confutation by I^en. aduers. haer.
lib. 5.
Irenie, Tertull. in praescrip. aduers. haer. cap. 46.
Tertullian, Epiphan. in Pan^rio, and Anacephalaeos. 1.
Epiphanius, August. lib. de haer. ad Quod vult Deum to. 6.
Augustine, Philastr. lib. 1.
Philastrius, Theodorit. lib. 4. haeret. fabular.
Theodorite, Isidor. lib. 8. Etym. cap. 5.
Isidore, Nicetas lib 5. thesaur. Orth. sid.
Nicetas, Harmenopul. lib. 9. tom. primi Iuris Grae^o R^mani.
Harmenopulus, and Danaeus in August. Zeged^n. in tabul. etc.
other such: or following after, as his dregs, or relikes, retained in the
Church of Christ, by some Reformers of Idolatrous abuses, too much devoted to
pretended Antiquities, through the subtlety of Satan, who will have the
Proverb verified, Vbi vber, ibi tuber, Fatness breeds filthiness, as
Tertullian Tertull. lib. 4. contr. Marcion. cap. 5. The use of this doctrine:
Reproof of Brownists.
well observed; Faciunt fauos and vespae; faciunt Ecclesias and Marcionitae;
Waspes make Hony-combes, and Marcionites make Assemblies. For as we say in
England, Where God has his Church, the Devil will have his Chapel.

. XXXI. Wherefore, in mine opinion, our Schismatic Brownists ground their
stiff Apostasy from our Church of England upon a very shaken, and weak
foundation, when Barrow and Greenewood, in their Examinations, and Fran.
Johnson in his Answer to H. J. and T. C.
they pretend Heretical corruption growing in the Church, although it be not
of the substance of the Church, Apul^ius lib. 4. Florid.
to be the only cause of their departure from us; as if that a particular
visible Militant Church could be free from all corruption. For first, why is
it said, to be Militant, but only, because we in it, and it by us, Ephesians.
6.1^.
Wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual
wickedness in high places? Secondly, where shall this spiritual Combat be
fought, wherein Galat. 5.17.
The flesh rebelleth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so
that we cannot do the things, that we would? Out of the Church it is not,
where all is flesh; neither yet in Heaven, where all is Spirit. It must be
therefore in the Church, as yet Militant here upon earth, wherein the Prou.
24.16.
just man falls (into smart because of sin, for so the Hebrew word [(...)
of (...) cadu] does note a relapse into a double mischief, Vid. Mer^er. Remum,
and Wilcocks in locum.
first, of sin, because of infirmity, and then of punishment inflicted by
GODS judgment, for their recovery) seven times a d^y, and rises again. For
as a Garment newly washed, will gather by using more filth again, which must
be wrung out by washing continually, till the Garment be worn: so just men
fully purged by the blood Heb. 12.21.
of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of ABEL, even 1. John 1.7.
clensing us from all sin, while they live in this World, by the weakness of
the flesh are spotted with sin against which the blood of Christ is always
effectual, and of comfortable force, whiles they daily, and duly dippe and
bathe themselves* soul and body therein, by their lively faith, and unfeigned
Repentance, as Hierome Hiero^ym. Epist. c* 6. ad Rusticum.
expounding the fore-alleaged words of Solomon, says, Si cadat, quomodo
iustus? si iustus, quomodo cadit? Sed iusti vocabulum non amittit, qui per
poenitentiam semper resurgit: If he fall, how is he just? If he be just, how
does he fall? But he loses not the name of a just man, who always rises
again by Repentance.

I know, that (as the Apostle Ephesians. 5.25. and 27.
says) Christ loves his Church, Ob.
and gave himself for it, that he might present

Sol.
But this is spoken, not of a particular visible Congregation, set to warrefare
hero on earth; but of the universal Church of Christ, whose glory in this
world is inward and invisible, as the Psalm. 45.13.
King is glorious within. For if it be outward, and shining in the true
perfection thereof, then it cannot appear in this scandalizing world, wherein
the Revel. ^0.8.
Devil rages by the reigning of Antichrist; but in the world to come, in
which the Saints now militant shall rest from their Esaias 40.2.
warfare then accomplished; Romans 8.23.
they enjoying the glorious liberty of the sons of God, being 1. John 3.2.
then made like unto him, and seeing him as he is.

I cannot but grant, Ob.
that it is our daily duty 1. Cor. 5.6.7.
to purge out the old leaven, that we may be made a new lump,

But are we now therefore without any leaven? Sol.
Why must we then purge it out? Surely, we are said to be unleavened two
ways; first, by the free imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us through
faith, as therefore it is said, Romans 8.35.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Chosen? It is God that
justifies: Secondly, by the true working of the holy Ghost in us, according to
the several measures, and degrees of our sanctification, by which Gods Image
is daily renewed in us more and more, till we obtain our measure in
glorification, as the Apostle 2. Cor. 3.18.
expresses it most plainly in these words; We all, with open face, beholding,
as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: from the glory of Creation,
to the glory of Justification; and by this, from the glory of Faith, to the
glory of sight; and in this, from the glory of Grace, by which we are the
sons of God, to the glory of Glory, by which we shall be like him. Thus
Anselmus Anselm. in 2. Cor. 3.18.
glosseth this place, intimating what some Aquin. 2.^. q. 184. art. 20.
Schoolmen, and other Danaeus p 5. Isagog. lib. 2. c. 45 and Steph. Z^g^d^n
tab. de Perfectione, and Vrsin. Catechism. part. 3. q 114.
good Divines of late well note unto us, that since there is a double
perfection, the one inchoatiua, begun in this life, called, perfectio viae; the
other, consummata, finished in heaven, partly after our natural death, in the
soul alone; but fully in the whole man, at the last Resurrection, termed
perfectio vitae; that being, as Naturalist^ Aristot lib. 3. Physic. cap. 6.
speak, Actus in potentia; A perfection in motion, to a further degree; this
Actus in actu, or actus purus; A perfection absolute, wherein the motion
ends, by attayning to it proper form, and settled rest; we, who are
Christians militant here on earth, against the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil, are only perfect inchoatiue, as men beginning to go in the way, like
Gene. 17.1.
Abraham, commanded to walk before God, and be perfect, that Math. 5.48.
we may be perfect, as our Father which is in heaven is perfect, until our
perfection of life be consummate in blessedness eternal. For as August. hom.
34. ex 50. ho^^l.
Augustine says well, Omnes imperfecti sumus; ibi perficiemur, vbi persecta
sunt omnia: We are all here imperfect, there shall we be perfected, where all
things are perfect: because, when 1. Cor. 13.8.
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part, shall be done away.
Wherefore by this their proud assertion, what else do these fantastical
Brownists declare themselves to be, but the viperous brood of the ancient
Perfectists? such as were the Epiphan. haer. 52.
Adamians, August. contr. Calestrum.
Caelestians, Cyprian Ep. 52
Nouatians, and other Hilar. in Epist. ad August.
Catharits, against whom the Orthodox Fathers of the Church, assembled by the
Imperial authority, in the Council at Mileuis, Council. Mile^itan. can. ^.
pronounced the Anathema, a deadly curse, because by this their opinion of
perfection absolute, they plainly contradict, and oppose themselves to the
Apostle Saint John, auouching, that 1. John 1.8.
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us. For mark they well, and be they ashamed, to hear what Great Constantine
replied to Acesius a Nouatian Bishop, much glorying in his own personal,
together with his fellow-Schismatikes perfection, Erige tibi scalam, and solus
in coelum ascend: Rear up a Ladder for thy self, and climb up into heaven
alone: for thereby heed did not commend him, says Sozomen. lib. 4. cap. 21.
Sozomene, but notify to all men, that they, while they live in this
transitory world, should not imagine themselves to be [(...)] void of all
sin. But as Solomon Prou. 30.13.
has observed the misery of all times, There is a Generation that are pure in
their own eyes, and yet it is not washed from their filthiness. These idle
heads cry out against our Church, Corruptions, Corruptions, and yet they
themselves Psalm. 50.16.
still hate to be reformed: having a 2. Tim. 3.5.
show of godliness but yet denying the power thereof, as may appear; first,
Tho. White his discovery of Brownists corruption.
tenent concerning the goodness of God, and other attributes, which they do
not hold to be the same with the Nature of God, quite against Damascen. lib.
1. Orthod. fidei, cap. 5. and Aquin. part. 1. summae, q. 3. art. 3.
that axiom touching Gods Simplicity, Quicquid est in Deo, Deus est:
Whatsoever is in God, is God: and secondly, by their vilely confused anarchie,
wherein they live, every man as a King in his own conceit, superciliously
judging other men in those things, wherein themselves most offend; as, in
Malice, Pride, Adulteries, and Incests, besides many petty Crimes winked at by
their severe Catonian, Master Pastor, and his Mechanicke Elders, if we may
believe the constant reports of their George Johnson and others returned from
them.
own Sectaries, detecting both their weakness of judgment, and wickedness
of life, to their own true shame, but to our good instruction, who there-hence
may perceive, that all is not gold which glistereth; Amsterdam is not heaven,
and their sanctified Parlour no such sacred Cell, as Brownists pretend, being
no better then Math. 23.27.
whited tombs, and painted sepulchers: fair without, but within very filthy.
And therefore upon the due and true consideration of all these mischiefs, it
much concerns us all, to follow the advice of the Preacher, saying, Eccles.
7.16.
Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self ^uer-wise; why should
thou destroy thy self? It is good (says Apud Lauateran locum.
PLINY) to till the ground well, but to bestow upon it more cost then needs,
may prove great loss. Extremities are dangerous; Ovid. 2. Met.
Medio tutissimus ibis; The mean is the safest: for therefore in the Law of God
are we so oftentimes forbidden Deuteronomy. 5.32.
to turn either to the right hand, or to the left: because the Devil closely
lays for us his net upon both sides: at the right hand lies Heresy, at the
left hand Iniquity, to entangle us, if we wander at any times from faith or
righteousness. But Prou. 15.25.
the way of Life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.
Prosper. Epigram. 17.
Hos inter laqueos currentem ad gaudia vitae,
Non capiet mundus, cui via Christus erit:
That is, The world shall not catch that man,
Who runs amongst these wicked ginnes,
To joys of life, if that his way
In Christ, his life he well begins.


. XXXII. The latter doctrine proved.
Now concerning the latter problem of Heresy, that all these heresies
whatsoever they be, shall always have necessary dependence upon the Great
Antichrist, it is most certain; since first, the entrance Antichrist into the
Church, is by a mystery of iniquity which (as the 2. These. 2.7.
Apostle says) began then to work, even then in his time, by tyrants, and
seducers (says Aquinas lect. 2. in 2. These. 2.
THOMAS AQVINAS:) these, by false doctrine, making an highway thereunto in the
judgment of Sedul. Hibernicus in 2. These. 2.
Sedulius; as those, by outward persecutions show themselves to be the types
and figures of Antichrist: Secondly, the efficacy of the Great Antichrist, is
only Antichrist sucketh from the poisoning Dugges of whoorish Impostures, as
the Diogen. apud Erasm. in Chiliad. page 165.
Aspis is said to draw (...): and applicat Tertullian. lib. 3. in Marcionem,
cap. 8.
poison from the Viper, that in him may be fulfilled what was Ezech. 16.15
said of Jerusalem; Thou did trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the
harlot, because of thy renown; and powredst out thy fornications on every one
that passed by: his it was. Thirdly, the first abolishing of Antichrist,
howsoever it be begun 2. These. 2.8.
by the Spirit of Gods mouth, through the Preaching of Thyraeus cap. 52. de
demoniacis.
Exorcists, the devil dispossessed, and cast out of their Penitents, leaves
always behind him a filthy stink, to annoy the beholders of so worthy a
work, then known to be finished by that sweet sign: even so this Great
Antichrist disturbed out of a Christian Kingdom, by the preaching of the
Gospel (an act Heb. 4.12. and 1. John 3.8. and Act. 19.15.
more powerful for destroying the works of the devil, then all Popish
exorcismes) leaves always behind him some rotten smell of some filthy
abomination, which either openly is published by his sworn slaves and
servants, or secretly preserved by some of his Opposites, only in appearance,
being indeed his special favorites, as the Author Oper. imperfect. in
Mathaeum, homil. 49.
Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, inserted into Chrysostom,
mystically interprets, The abomination of desolation standing in the Holy
place; to be all such wicked heresies, as prevail in the Church, and stand up
in the Holy place, as if it were the Word of truth, when yet it is not the Word
of truth, but the abomination of desolation, that is, the army of Antichrist,
which has made the Souls of many men desolate from God: part of which Army
furiously marches like Iehu 2. Reg. 9.20
the son of Nimshi before in the Vaunt-gard; part of it slowly following,
like the gathering Numb. 2.31
host of the Tribe of Dan, behind in the Rereward. For since heresy to a
Christian, is as the Josh. 23.13.
Canaanites were to Israel, Scourges to their sides, and Thorns to their eyes;
Thorns in wounding the eye of their understanding, by 2. These. 2.11.
believing lies through strong delusion; and Scourges, in piercing their sides,
that is, their wills and affections, by their perverse choice, and stiff
defense of false opinions, according as the Aretius prob. loco 46 and Zegedin.
tab. 1. de haeres. and Tolet. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 3. and Azorius, tom. 1.
Instit. lib. 8. cap. 9
learned define of heresy out of Saint August. lib. contra Manich. vt and apud
Great. cau. 26. q. 3. can. 31.
Augustine, that it is a voluntary error of the understanding, whereby as the
wicked frowardly choose; so they stiffely maintain an opinion, which is
contrary to some substantial point, or doctrine of the Christian faith; We
cannot but include all heretics whatsoever, within the Sphere of Antichrist,
yea even holding their only proper motion under his truly Ecclipticke line,
at all his great points of Distinction in motion; as first of his Rising;
secondly, of his Height; thirdly, of his Setting or Fall from our Hemisphere.
His Philastr. de haer.
Philastrius made of them, which severally Zegedin. and Danaeus, vbi supra.
infused some poisonous point or other, to patch up the monstrous bulk of
great Antichrist; as some have taught him to tie the true Church of Christ to
one place only, as the August. Ep. 50
Donatists; some to buy the places of honor and charge in the Church with
money, and to pester it with Traditions, as that Tertullian. ca. 46. de
praescript. aduers. haeres. and Epiphan. haer. 21.
wicked Simon Magus, and his associates: some to let it out to hire unto single
men only, were they never so sensual, as Epiph. haer. 42
Marcionites, Jdem haer. 47
Encratites, Jdem haer. 66
Manichees, and August. cap. 87. de haeres.
Abelonians: some to ouer-burden the zealous followers of the true Church
discipline, with many Heathenish, Jewish, and most unprofitable and idle
Ceremonies: as first, of Unction, (the Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers. haer. c. 18.
Valentinians:) secondly, of Images, (the idem ibid. cap. 24.
Carpocratians:) thirdly, of Relics, (the superstitious Epiph. haer. 53
Sampsaei:) fourthly, of Crosses, washings, yelping in singing, Anticke
gestures in ministering, using diverse Garments from other men, and
hypocritically walking bare-foote, [ the Iren. vbi supr.
Valentinians, Epiph. haer. 17
Haemerobaptists, Eusebius lib. 7. histor. c. 24.
Samosatenus, Theodorit. lib. 4. haeretic. sabul.
Meletians, August. lib. de haer. cap. 68.
Nudipedales:] others, who seem more reasonable, although they were only
natural men, taught him a Doctrine of magnifying man's free will, only to
puff up his fellows with a vain conceit of their proper worth, as the
August. de haeres. cap. 88.
Pelagians; yea, some came so near him, as they instructed him to open his
mouth in blasphemy against Christ, either by a plain denial of Christ's
Person, as he is God, (for Vid. supra. 12. etc.
so the Arrians taught Liberius and Foelix) and as he is Man, (for so the
Monothelites suggested to Honorius;) or by a secret supplantation of him out of
his Office: first, as he is a Prophet by the new Gospel which the Epiphan.
haer. 26.
Gnostics first invented, and Balaeus Centur. 4. cap. 21. appendic. 2.
the Minorites afterward thought to have brought in, if the University of
Paris had not stood in the gap: secondly, as he is a Priest, by the invocation
of Saints, and the Deifying of the Virgin Mary, brought into the Church by
Nicephor. lib. 15. cap. 28.
Petrus Gnaphaeus, and the idle Epiph. nar. 79
Collyridians: thirdly, he is a King, ruling his Church with his Spirit and his
Word, against which the Epiphan. haer. 48. and Pappus in Epitome de haeres.
saec. 2.
Montanists pretended a spirit of comfort, that proved to be but a collusion,
raised up by the Devil, for the after-inspiring of this Antichrist, now
conceited of himself, that Bellar. lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans cap. 3.
he cannot err, especially in cathedra, if he sit in his Chair, like the
Diodor. lib. 16 Bibliothec.
old Witch at Delphos on her three-footed Stool.

To conclude this point of his first rising, as it was Ambros. Epi. 31. and
Prudent. lib. 2. contra Symmachum.
observed of the ancient Rome, that when after their Victories they settled the
Provinces, their course was to make this exchange, that the conquered should
admit of the Roman Laws, and the Romans embraced the Religion of the
conquered: by which means Rome became the very Epitome or abridgment of all
abomination, that reigned in the World: even so we may well find in reading
the Histories of the Church, that the suppressing of the former Heretics by
the authority, and learning, especially, of the Primitive Bishops of Rome
(most of them till Gregory, for the space of six hundred years after Christ,
being Orthodoxe Fathers in regard of faith, howsoever too too ambitious in
their manner of life,) was the only special help, and means for the speedier
growth, and rising of Antichrist, who put down their names, but took to him
their nature; extinguished the Heretic, but advanced the Heresy so far, as
it made any way for his best advantage. For mark him in his height Bonifacius
the Third, for the space of nine hundred years together, until Leo the Tenth,
and see, if upon any Legant Pontificij aut Mornaeum de Myster. Iniquitatis, aut
Osiandri Centurias.
controversy of faith arising in the Church, and discussed in a Council, the
Truth it self was not most commonly, either adjudged for Heresy, or filthily
mingled with many idle matters belonging nothing thereunto. Their Councels were
most commonly but Conuenticles of Coozeners; theirs Canons then enacted but as
Lesbian rules, appliable only to the Popes own pleasure, who not content with
the ouer-worne Blasphemies of the ancient Heretics, has stamped out a great
deal of new matter falsely coined, from his own breast and brain, as if time
would serve, I could easily demonstrate, by a bagfull of base Metal,
wherewith their Canon Law, their Missall, their Breuiarie, their Officium
Mariae, their Jesus Psalter, their Manuell, their Council, and Catechismes of
Trent and Rome, and other their Libels set out with Iussu Pij Quinti, and
Gregor. 13.
Popes privilege, to the shame of Christianity are wholly stuffed. But why
should we rake up a stinking kennell? we have opened to the World enough
before, concerning his Heresy, even out of these Monuments. Ovid. 1. Fasto.
Octo pedis frustra quaeruntur brachia Cancri;
Praeceps occiduas ille subibit aquas:
said the Poet of the setting of Cancer upon the third of January, being near
the beginning of the old Roman year, as we may in like sort speak of this
crabbed Antichrist, who going backward through Apostasy, sets forward by
his fall into hellish Cosmicall setting, through the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness upon this Western Reformed halfe-side of the Christian World,
in which yet this Antichrist has left behind him some thick, and gross mists
of diverse deep Errors, as yet to be tossed up, and tumbled out of our Skies,
by the nearer ascent of our bright Sun to our Vertical. I cannot deny what
all the World knows, heartily Judge. 5.16.
grieuing at the Divisions of Reuben. I would 1. Pet. 4.8.
in charity cover those spots, wherewith some have besmeared the face of their
Assemblies, in all other points so far as I can find by their several Vide
and Harmon. Confess. per Belgas and Corpus Confess. per Gasp. Laurentiu^.
Confessions, right truly Orthodoxall. But alas, they are too openly
discovered by L. Osiander sil. in 2. part. Enchirid. Controuersiarum, and
Eckardis in suo Compendio controuersicum Calumianis.
some, who take pains to put Matthew. 19.6.
those asunder whom God would have to join Ephesians. 4.2.
together in unity against the Great Antichrist, that daily gets ground
upon our dissentions. And therefore I must needs tell out, what I find in my
poor judgment, to be the base Relikes of Antichristian and Popish Opinions,
as yet maintained by some particular Teachers in some Reformed Churches, only
to give warning of a Snake in the grass; of a Act. 28.3.
Viper in the bundle of sticks, which comes sorth of the heat, that is,
flies the trial of the inlightning Spirit, and fasteneth upon PAVLS hand,
that is, makes seyzure upon the doctrine (which Saint Paul taught;) even to
puff up and kill those upon whom it settleth, if they do not quickly shake it
off into the fire, in which upon 1. Cor. 3.13.
trial it will quickly burn.

The first Relike is, that Vid. Hatterum in explic. lib. de Concordia art. 7.
and 8.
Consubstantiation, together Vbiquitie, both wholly depending upon that gross
John 6.52.
Capernaite, Council. Lateran. 4. sub innocent. 3. cap. 1.
Lateran, Council. Trid. sess. 13. can. 1.
Popish conceit of the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist.

The second is, that Monster Vid. Hannium in cap. 6. Ioh. and Hemingium de
Universally gratia, Sueca. Arminium, etc.
of universal Election, together with those their Consequents, the
uncertainty of Salvation, and denial of Perseverance unto the Saints, all
flowing from that Stobaeus lib. 2 Eclogarum cap. 7
Heathenish, August de haeres. cap. 88
Pelagian, Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 5
Popish maintayning of Free Will to good in man corrupted.

Church in regard of her Government, is that Vid. Bezam de Presbyter. and
Excomminat. and explicat. Ecclesiast. Discipl. per Trauers.
High and transcendent Consistorian authority of Pastor with Lay Elders,
aspiring to a Primacie above Kings and Princes, under the plausible pretense of
perfect Reformation, but indeed with the proud mind of the Spartan Plutarch. in
Agide, and Cleom.
Ephori, who to keep one King in compass, reared up above him five Thrones
far higher, and of greater Sovereignty, as these Bullinger, and Gwa there
haec scribunt apud D. Bancrofts discovery, cap. 35.
deluded Disciplinarians, in purposing to pull one down, set up many Popes. So
cunningly can the Devil play the Serpent Plin. lib. 8. not. histor. cap. 30.
Amphisbena, in going forward at both ends at once: and so like Aelian. de
histor. animalium lib. 6. cap. 14.
to the Hyena is wicked Heresy, that whom it catches by the counterfeite
voice of a reasonable man, it first does infatuate, and lull them asleep by
the soft touch of a sopiferous hand, and smooth discourse, but afterward
deuoureth with a cruel tooth, as the wise King said, Prou. 16.29.
A violent man enticeth his Neighbor, and leads him into the way that is not
good; and as the blessed Ephesians. 4.14.
Apostle notes the tricks of Heretics, that by slight, and cunning
craftiness, they lie in wait to deceive the simple.

Ob.
But it may be, some will ask, why such bad opinions, and so vilely erroneous
doctrines, and practices are suffered or maintained amongst men living in
Reformed Churches?

Sol.
To whom I answer first, that Math. 18.7.
offenses must needs secondly, by these faults, which although some do
stiffely maintain upon their own private motion, to their own destruction:
yet are cast out of the Church of Christ, by her faithful Pastors teaching,
and her godly Princes fighting for the Truth of Christ Jesus. So that such
Heresies and Schisms as arise in our Churches like Math. 13.32.
Tares in the field, are defended by none, but by such, as 2. Tim. 3.13.
wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived, as appears, either by
their secret colluding under colorable terms of a true meaning, craftily
devised for escaping of due punishment (so was it with Arminius in declarat.
sententiae, and Apologia.
Arminius Vorstius in Oratione, and Responsione ad articulos Angliae.
Vorstius, and others) or by their open and shameless reuolting to Papists, as
Schioppius, Iustus Caluinus, Walsingham, and others, or to Anabaptists, as
Smith, or to Brownists, as Johnson, or to the Anti-Trinitarians, as Laelius
Socinus, or to the most abominable Sect of Familists, as David George, Henry
Nichols, and some such Phantastikes in England, and the Low Countries, against
all which Viperous Generation, and Deuillish Brood of Hellish Heretics, Our
Churches pronounce 1. Cor. 16.20
a Maran-atha, and our Sovereign Princes, according to their several Estates
of Government under God in Christ Jesus, are careful to execute the sentence
of death, thereby Deuteronomy. 13.5.
to purge out all evil from Israel, and to root out the Relikes of the Great
Antichrist out of their Kingdoms. For what should be done else to meet with
these mischiefs?

. XXXIII. Surely, The use of the latter doctrine
what means God Himself used against the Head, the same must be taken in
hand, by good Men of God, to cut off the Tail; I mean, that against such
Heretics and Schismatikes, they must put in use the double Sword, Spiritual
and Temporal; that, for the Ministry, this, To Ministers.
For, that Ministers must fight with the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.16.
which is the Word of God, against these enemies, the Apostle does warrantize,
by this his prescription, directed to Titus, who Tit. 1.6.9.
must ordain in every City of Creete, where he left him, such Elders, or
Bishops, as hold fast the faithful Word, as they have been taught, that they
may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the
Gayne-sayers. For, as when Math. 2.14.
Christ, with Joseph and Marie, flying from HEROD, went down into Egypt,
Eusebius. lib. 6. de Demonstr. Euangelica, ca. 20.
the Images there trembled; and when the Gospel began to be preached by the
Apostles, the Oracles there Vid. Z^huerum, Adag. sacr. Centur. 5. Adag. 63.
ceased, according to that Prophecy of the burden of Egypt, Esaias 19.1.
Behold the Lord rides upon a swist cloud, and shall come into Egypt; and the
Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall
melt in the midst of it, etc. So when Christ shall speak by the preaching of
the Gospel, for reformation of Religion, then Antichrist shall fear, and
Heresies will fly away, (as John 3.23.
they, who do evil, hate the light) to the great encouragement of all Gods
servants, who because the Evangelical and Apostolic faith overthrows all
Heresies, therefore are always to be most mindful to keep that rule, says
Leo primus, Epist. ^6. cap. 1.
Leo to Anatolius. For to the Esaias 8.20.
Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according unto this word, it
is, because there is no light in them: since this Word is a 2. Pet. 1.18.
light, that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the Day Star
arise in our hearts. But it may be, this Word, howsoever it be Romans 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation in them that believe; yet cannot, through the
judgment of hardening, win the Heretic, although it most evidently
conuinceth the Heresy: and therefore the Temporal Romans 13.4.
who bears not the Sword for naught. To the Magistrate.
For Prou. 20.26.
a wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them: because
it is a Law, that Deuteronomy. 17.12.
the man that will do presumptuously, and will not harken unto the Priest
[that stands to minister there before the Lord thy God,] or unto the Judge,
even that man shall dye, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. For lo,
a double rule, fit for all Governors to observe for their quietness against
all such disturbances: the former Tertullian. lib. contra Gnostices, cap. 21.
TERTVLLIAN, Duritia vincenda est, non suadenda; Stubbornenesse must by force
be overcome, and not be persuaded by any fair means. The latter from Bernard.
BERNARD, Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas; It is better that one perish,
then that the unity should be dissolved. Princes are here to deal as
Chyrurgions do with ripened ulcers; lance the sinners, to let out sin, if
not from the Offender, who it may be is incorrigible, yet from the
ouer-lookers, and standers by, who by that means may fear, as Cyprian
Cyprian. Ser. de lapsis.
said, Plectuntur quidam, quo caeteri corrigantur; Exempla sunt omnium,
tormenta paucorum: that is, Some are punished, that others may be restrained:
for all may take example, although some only smart. To the people of God.
Therefore if Christian Heretics, or obstinate Schismatikes, according to
their due deserts, either with Death, or Exile, or Proscription, or
Imprisonment, or deprivation from Benefice, or by any other course, which by
Law is prescribed; we (my dear Brethren) must not grudge or murmr thereat,
as the Numb. 16.41
Israelites did upon the just destruction of rebellious Corah, and his company,
lest, as they were, so we may be plagued with some Judgment for our rash
coffeehouse, which if it proceed of pity, is folly; since they pity not
themselves: but if from a settled affection of good liking toward those wicked
Imps, then it is a part-taking, which is as obnoxious to punishment, as the
sin was of the principal Offenders, seeing, as the rule of 3. Henr. 7.10
Law runs, in high Treason (such as Heresy is to Godward) there is no
Accessorie. When Prou. ^9.16.
the wicked are multiplied, transgression increases; but the righteous shall
see their fall. Surely, we true Subjects unto His Sovereign Majesty, within
these His several Kingdoms and Dominions, Three duties.
are most entirely bound and obliged to a threefold duty; First, of
Gratulation: Secondly, of Supplication: And thirdly, of Obedience.

1. Of gratulation
Of Gratulation, or most hearty thanksgiving unto our great and best God, that
has so thoroughly inflamed the good heart of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord,
King JAMES, with so godly a zeal, for the just defense of the True, Ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic faith, that we may as truly report of His most
Sacred Majesty, as Eusebius. in orat. de laudibus Constantini.
Eusebius did of Constantine the Great, that whereas he alone is impugned by
all false gods, he alone of all Princes may most deservedly be reputed the
son of the true God, who said by his Prophet, 1. Sam. 2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor; and them that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed.

Of Supplication, 2. Of Supplication.
or most humble and daily Prayer, that God in his great mercy, toward us his
poor people, would most firmly corroborate and strengthen the Arm of His
most puissant Majesty against all enemies whatsoever, for the timely
destruction of the wicked of the Land, that he may with Psalm. 101.10.
holy David, cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. For, says
Solomon, Prou. 25.5.6
Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel
for the Finer: take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall
be established with righteousness: because, as Lampridius Aelius Lampridius in
Alexandro Seuero.
delivers of the Commonwealth, it is safer if the Prince be evil, rather
then that his friends be evil. For he is but one, and may be reclaymed by
good advice, whereas they are but as so many Waspes or Vipers, that not only
may hurt the head, but infect the whole body. And therefore Apud Euripidem in
Scirone.
one said well, That it was a good duty to punish badde livers; for that, as
Apud Stobaeum Ser. 44.
Isaeus thought, thereby is prohibited all injury from others.

Of Obedience, and due observance of that most wholesome counsel which S. Paul
Romans 16.17.
gave the Romans, 3. Of Obedience
saying, Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them. For that marking, [(...)] shows
sharpness of wit; this avoiding, [(...)] proves uprightness of will: and
both of them most behoofefull in dispatch of these duties, seeing Heresy lies
secret like Snakes in green grass, very hardly to be discerned by bleared
eyes, or dull pates: and Heretics are crafty, like their Master the Devil,
able to seduce and withdraw the most constant from their settled true course,
if they do not beware. Plutarch. de solertia animaliu^
of Thrace, by Plutarchs report, do not run or pass over any Ice, whereof
that Country has plenty in Winter, before they have laid their ears
thereunto, to find either the water underneath running, or the bottom soundly
frozen: so we in this wary wisdom of Foxes, as of Math. 10.16.
Serpents, are not to embrace any doctrine delivered unto us by any man
whosoever, before we have well tried the soundness thereof, both in matter
and form, whether it be 1. Cor. 3.13.
as Gold, Silver, and precious Stone; or, as Timber, Hay, and Stubble. For the
Ioh 32.3.
ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. Secondly, S. John Ioh. Ep. 2.10
gave counsel, saying, If there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. First,
bid him not God speed, by any inward approbation, either of his learning, or
of Quid me melior, si non iustior? said Plutarch. in Apop^thegmatis Lacoricis.
Agesilaus of the King of Persia? What is he better then I, if he be not more
just then I am? And so may we enquire of any man's learning, let him be never
so great a Doctor, what is he better learned then another man, if he be not
more orthodox? He surely, in my judgment, is the best Scholar, that is first
Esaias 54.13. and 6. John 45.
(...), taught of God, and then 1. Tim. 3.2.
(...), apt to teach other, what himself had well learned, as therefore the
Apostles, although Act. 4.13.
(...), unlettered men; yet were better seen in all Luke 21.15.
true learning, then any of the Jewish Rabbines: and so was Epiphan. haer. 64.
Methodius before Origin, Malchion Eusebius. lib. 7. histor. Eccle. c. 23
the Priest before the Bishop Paulus Samosatenus, only for that they held
and maintained what God taught them out of the holy Scriptures.

For as there Origin. homil. 3. in Leuiticum.
was no Gold either put in, or bestowed upon the Tabernacle, which was not
weighed with the shekell of the Sanctuary: so no kind of Learning is fit to
build up the Church of Christ, but that which being weighed in the balance of
Gods Word, is found to be Orthodoxe, by true agreement with the proportion of
Faith, since 1. Cor. 8.2.
Knowledge puffs up, and Act. 26.25.
much Learning will make a man mad, if it be not found in the words of truth
and soberness; as therefore Iustine Martyr Justin. Martyr in Exhortat. ad
Gentes.
accounted those to be the Teachers of our Religion, who taught us not
according to their own humane opinion, but only from the gift given unto them
from above by God: Of Gregory said Gregor. lib. 18. moral. cap. 2.
well; Profecto ab aequitate discrepat, quicquid a veritate discordat: Truly
that does disagree from equity, which differs from verity. Beware, says
Math. 7.16.
our Savior, of the ravening Wolves in the Sheep clothing. And therefore,
secondly, [ receive him not into your house] for any private conuersement at
all, lest, when he is warmely settled, he fill the house with Heresy, as
Aesops Aesop de rustica and serpente.
Snake is said to do with hissing, and so prove no better then the base Judge.
17.8. and 18.6.
Leuite did to rich Micah, first, a flattering Seducer, and then a false
Traitor, as I fear me, many Noble, and Worshipful Houses in England find by
woeful experience in their too kind, and bountiful entertainment of Jesuits,
or Seminary Priests; of Schismatikes, or other Sectaries. For as the Greek
Poet Theognis.
said well, (...)
(...),
that is, Thou shall learn good things from the best;
With bad thy soul to death is pressed.
Have Ephesians. 5.11.
then no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them. For your wits by the Scriptures are directed to discern them;
and your wills by Gods Spirit are preserved to avoid them; Read Scriptures;
ask Grace; know them; keep this; and although the imminent dangers be great
by the approach of the last time, and reigning of most vile Men, Antichrist and
Heretics: yet shall it never equalize, or match the great benefit of most
comfortable Deliverances, procurable to you two ways; first, in respect of
Antichrist, and his followers, by their plain discovery upon their Apostasy;
secondly, in regard of our good estate, who shall know all things necessary
for our Salvation, by the most sovereign Unction, the working of the Holy
Ghost, as it now remains to be declared from the words following in the two
next Verses of my Text.

But the handling of the Remnant as behoofefull to be spoken of, as what has
been said, The Conclusion of all, recapitulating the chief head or points
before delivered.
because through present plenty I could not attempt, I leave to be performed,
either by some other more perfect Scribe, or else by my self, if by Gods
providence at any time hereafter I shall be called again unto this High, and
fearful Place: now in the mean time most humbly beseeching your Honors
further patience for the brief recognizing in these few Propositio^s, what now
you have heard spoken rudely, but yet truly, in trigono per tetragonum (as
Geometricians talk) in a triplicitie of Quaternions, first, concerning the end
of the World; secondly, touching that Great Antichrist; thirdly, of the
deduction and continual propagation of Heresy from that Antichrist.
Concerning the end of the World, we delivered these four things: First, that
the World shall end, Partis primae Propositio 1.
and that by fire, although we know not, how it shall of an holy life. 2. Partis
Touching that Great Antichrist, you Antichrist, defined by his causes,
efficient, material, formal, and final, only as they are expressed in
several Texts of holy Scripture: Who this Antichrist is, even the Bishop, or
Pope of Rome, as we proved, both largely, and Antichrist, in all points
sitted unto the Pope, and then by a cloud of Witnesses, not only prophesying,
as the Ancient Fathers did, but also pronouncing, that the Pope was that
Antichrist, as the Jury of the Kings, Bishops, and England, are implunged by
their Prison, their Irons, their Diet, their Iaylors, by all which they are
become England enjoy, by the free use of the double Sword, Spiritual, and
Temporal, is so great in all due respects both inward and outward, that none
of us should any way either pity them in heart, or help them in action,
whiles they continue so stubborn and perverse, 3. Partis
as we daily find them. Of the deduction, and continual propagation of Heresy
from that Antichrist, it was declared, First, that Heresy must continue in the
World, from the first, until the second Separatist Brownist has no ground at
all for his Antichrist, either in his rising, or at his height, or in his
declining: Fourthly, that therefore they are all to be cut off by Church and
Commonwealth, to the glory of God.

Lord, we beseech thee, make haste to an end, Oration conclusiua.
that thou may abolish Antichrist for thy Churches full deliverance, and the
perfect restoring of all thy creatures unto the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, through our only Lord and blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, to whom one
only wise, powerful and merciful God with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory now and for evermore. Amen.

AMEN, Lord Jesus; come quickly: AMEN.
FINIS.
THE TRIAL OF GVIDES, By the touchstone of teachers, JESUS CHRIST: In a Sermon,
Preached upon the fourth SUNDAY after TRINITY: By THOMAS THOMSON, Bachelor in
Divinity.

ROMANS 2.21. Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self?

AMBROS. lib. de dignit. Sacerd. cap. 6. Ipsum magis credunt homines esse
laudabile, quicquid Episcopus habuerit delectabile: Men believe that thing to
be more praise-worthie, what a Bishop reputeth delightful.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby, for RICHARD MEIGHEN, and are to be sold at
his Shop at Saint Clements Church, ouer-against Essex House, and at Westminster
Hall. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER In God, RICHARD, by Gods most gracious
providence, Lord Bishop of Saint Asaph, mine Honorable Patron, and Diocessan,
Grace, Mercy and Peace, from God our Father, and from our Lord and Savior,
Jesus CHRIST.
HOw necessary it is (my Honorable good Lord) for a true Christian
Congregation, to have set over them a fit man of God, who by his learned tongue
may minister a word in due season to the weary, and by his good example of
life, guide the wandering and wilful Sinners, upon their true Repentance, into
the way of Peace, I need not demonstrate, since daily experience has well
approved, that where no Prophecy is, the people perish: or (as some Pagnine
and Arias Montanus in 29. Pr. 18
well learned men interpret the Original) the people are idle, spending the
Lords Day, and other good times, vainly, if not villanously in idle sports of
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, like the old Gentiles, carried
unto dumb Idols, even as they were led. For like people, like priests: they
must needs be lost sheep, when their Shepherds, in the times before, caused
them to err, and go astray, by turning them away upon the Mountains, either
to wander like Math. 12.44.
the dispossessed restless spirit, from the Church, or if they come near it,
to worship what they know not.

But albeit the murdering and the lying Devil, in his oldworne hatred against
man's soul, seeks still to devour, and darken all vision and knowledge of
God, by the stoppage or hinderance of the seasonable settling of powerful
Preachers of Gods most holy Word amongst Gods people, even Zach. 3.2.
as Satan stood at Ioshuah his right hand, to resist him from building the
Temple: yet God in his mercy so visits his holy Ones, that they at their need
shall not want a Scribe well taught unto the Kingdom of God, for perfecting
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body
of Christ: Because that some, either planting PAVL, or watering APOLLOS, shall
be sent from God, into the World, as into the Vineyard, at every hour, till
the end of the day.

For have there not beforetimes for the space of these sixteen hundred years
together, many Prophets and Righteous men appeared in the World? May not we
find by the delightful perusal of the Stories Ecclesiastical, how good men
were appointed from God, either by an extraordinary calling to reform things
amiss, or in ordinary function to preserve things well settled? Surely if
this present Generation will harken, neither to the piping, nor to the mourning
of their play-fellowes in the streets, that is, Hieron. Hilar. and Aquin. in
Matthew. 11.
if so they will not attend either to the Gospel, or to the Law, that
comforting, this correcting in the preaching thereof; then are they clean
without excuse; then must they expect from the mighty hand of God, most just
and severe punishment for their so wilful a Rebellion, and resistance of
Christ's reigning over them.

Indeed the Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few, if we regard who are
fit for these things. Yet, since one of a thousand may, by casting out the
draw-net, gather very many of every kind, as PETER wanne two thousand at once;
and since of those many, but a few may be chosen, as all the bidden guests had
not on a wedding garment; the Church may have choice enough of faithful
Pastors, if she seek them ^h^re they may be found in Naioth or Mount Ephraim,
in our blessed Universities, where the abundance of God^ Spirit most
comfortably appears in the multitude of Prophets, and the profitable variety
of refined conceits in Prophets Children; some excelling in doctrine, others in
exhortation; this man in the gift of tongues, that man in discussing of doubts;
one in sweetness, another in soundness, and every one in some degree endued
with such graces, as may justly give occasion to any careful Christian, of
doubt and distraction in making a good choice of such a fit man of God, as may
faithfully dispose the secrets of God. Yea, and further, as some may presently,
upon the touch of the coal from the Altar, in the zeal of Gods glory, say
with the Prophet, Here am I, send me: so other may offer their service
unseasonably, being either young Scholars, rather puffed up in pride, then
furnished with fit learning, or an ouer-worne Seniour superanited from pains,
and soaked so in ease, that he cannot well endure the watchful labors of a
faithful Pastor, or lastly, a Wolf in a Sheep clothing, who in his
College, might be like a young Serpent, not hardened in s^ing and harmless,
only by the most wholesome restraint of Collegiate discipline: but coming
abroad, may appear in his likeness, either of a politike-Popish Time-seruer,
or of a peeuish-pepusian disturber of the Churches peace.

And therefore the holy Ghost had good cause and great reason to lay down
plainly in sundry places of sacred Scriptures, the readiest means, and truest
marks of Teachers and Guides; those for finding, these for trial; and both
together for our direction, who are first to search, that we may find; and
then to try what we have found, whether he be a seeing or a blind Guide; a
Shepherd, or a Wolf. For we must try all things, and not believe, till we
have tried the spirits that are come into the world; seeing, as SOLOMON Prou.
14.15.
observed, The simple believes every word; but the prudent man looks well to
his goings; as did good IEHOSHAPHAT, in hearing AHABS prophets, and the noble
Beraeans, in trying by the Scriptures the words of Saint PAV^.

A Christian duty so absolutely necessary, that I, the least and meanest of
all Christ's servants, being called by Gods providence, at the godly appointment
of your good Lordship, signified unto me by my most faithful friend M. THOMAS
KYFFIN, your Lordships Chapleine, to preach at Welch-poole before your
Lordship, upon the next Sabbath after your Lordships Visitation there holden
before, could not think of any other better subject, then of this spiritual
trial, which the Church thought fittest to be taught to Gods people at that
time, by this Text of Scripture, which I then expounded, being a part of the
Gospel appointed to be read in the Church that day. For I thank God for his
mercy, those my poor labors were by his only blessing so well accepted,
first, by your good Lordship; secondly, by my learned and most religious
brethren of the Ministry; and lastly, by all Gods people then hearing me,
that upon the earnest request of diverse godly Christians for the sight of my
notes, I have (I fear, too boldly) enterprised to publish them unto the world,
somewhat enlarged in form more then in matter, as the judicious then hearing,
but now reading, will bear me witness.

Treasure hidden, and sealed fountains are unprofitable, said Apud Epiphanium
lib. de ponder. and mensuris.
PHILADELPHVS, exhorting the Jews to turn the Scriptures into other
Languages: and NERO Sueton. in Neron.
could apologize his presumptuous piping, by the Greek Proverb, There is no
respect of secret Music. For a candle must not be put under a bushel,
neither should the talent be hid: Horat. lib. 4. Od. 9.
Paulum sepultae distat inertiae celata virtus.

Only now my fear is in the disproportion of my poor gift, no manner of way
worthy to be offered to your good Lordship, whose dignity requires the
liueliode of a learned tongue, for the true expressement of that due
thankfulness, whereunto I stand for ever obliged, by the strength and
sweetness of your Lordships great favors, both generally declared by your
Lordships good proof of my poor endeavors, and particularly demonstrated by
your good Lordships late beneficence, collating most freely upon me, a further
good means for my greater encouragement in liberal studies, and the better
maintayning of my comfortable charge. For unthankfulness is a great sin, and
the least suspicion thereof is a great grief to a true honest man, who will
not be like a Cullinder, letting all slip through, reserving naught for
thankfulness, which is a binding virtue unto three good duties: Aquin. 22. q.
18. act. 2. in c.
first, of acknowledgement for the receite; secondly, of readiness in giving
of thanks; and thirdly, of recompense by an honest requital according to his
ability.

Yet since, as SENECA Lib. 5. de Beneficijs cap. 5.
well determined, it is no shame for inferiors to be ouer-matched by their
superiors in the intercourse of beneficence; here is my comfort, that your
good Lordship, according to that great measure of Gods Image in you, will
accept my willing mind, according to that I have. For in the offering of
Purification, the poor woman's Pigeons were as well accepted, as the fat Lambs
of the rich: in casting into the treasury, the Widows mite was more
commended, then the rich men's great and superfluous gifts: and in respect of
good use, or enjoying of worldly riches, a little that a righteous man has, is
better then the riches of many wicked.

I yet lessen no man's gifts; in the conscience of mine own weakness, much
fearing the success of this my bold enterprise, in offering this small token
of my bounden duty unto your good Lordship, to whom this my service most
properly belongs, in regard not only of the first preaching thereof before
your Lordship, in the time of your Lordships most godly Visitation of Priests
and people in your Lordships Diocese; but also of that true, right, and most
lively pattern of a good Guide and a faithful Shepherd, which by Gods grace
your Lordship most constantly exhibiteth in the sight of all the world,
formaliter and effectiue, as our Schoolmen say; formaliter, in your own
Person, by the full performance of all those Episcopal virtues, which S. PAVL
prescribed unto his son TIMOTHY; and effectiue, in ordayning and inducting
other fit Guides, whose breasts have in them Vrim and Thummim, light and
perfection, great learning and good life, unto Pastoral places within the
large precincts of your Lordships Diocese.

Vox beatitudinis tuae in toto orb pertonuit, and cunctis Christi Ecclesijs
laetantibus, diaboli venena siluere, said Tom. 1. Ep. 71.
HIEROME to THEOPHILUS: a Presbyter to a Bishop, in that hearty congratulation
of his godly zeal for the building of the Church of Christ, wherein I am bold
to present unto your good Lordships Patronage This Trial of Guides, used by
your Lordship for the example of others, to the good of the Church. Vouchsafe
then, my good Lord, for Christ his sake, a favorable acceptance of this my
small endeavor, till God by his grace, through your good Lordships great
encouragement, enable me unto higher and better things; seeing in solemn
devotion I profess before God in Christ, with GREGORY NAZIANZEN, Orat. 8.
(...), not only to look to mine own Commodity, but also to the Profit of
others, over whom by your good Lordship I am appointed, through the mercy of
God, a Watchman, and a Shepherd, to ouer-see and feed, not preaching my
self, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and my self their servant for Jesus sake.
For as all other Ministers of Christ are, Nazian. ibid.
so (...), I am only an Instrument of God, an Instrument by his only grace,
endued with reason, yea, an Instrument fitted, and stricken upon by the most
excellent Artist, the Spirit of God.

And therefore I conclude this my poor Dedication of this small Work, with a
double Commendam to the Guidance of this most gracious Governor, first, of you
Lordships Person, Family, and most comfortable Posterity, saying withal the
Lovers of your Righteousness, Psalm. 35.27.
Let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the prosperity of his
Servant; and secondly, of all us your Lorships Clergy, and all our painful
labors, with the words of MOSES, Psalm. 90.17.
Let the beauty of the LORD our God be upon us, and establish thou the works
of our hands, upon us; yea, the works of our hands, establish thou it: for of
him and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for ever. AMEN.

Mountgomerie, March, 10. Your good Lordships ever most THO. THOMPSON.

THE TRIAL OF GVIDES.
THE TEXT.
LVKE 6. 39. And he spoke a Parable unto them: Can the blind lead the blind?
Shall they not both fall into the ditch?

40. The Disciple is not above his Master: but every one that is perfect,
shall be as his Master.


WHat Solomon said of a rightly, wise man, does most truly befit our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ: Prou. 16.23.
The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. For
who is in heart wiser, then Wisdom Prou 8.12.
dwelling with Prudence, and finding out Knowledge of witty Inventions? or who
can add more Learning to his lips, then Christ, who himself is the Math. 13.52
Scribe well instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, like the good Householder,
bringing forth out of his Treasure things New, and old: Old in the Letter,
New in the Spirit; Old by the Law, New by the Gospel; Old according to the
plain way of teaching; New by Parables in an uncouth manner, that thereby he
might fulfill what was foretold by the Prophet, saying, Psalm. 78.2.
I will open my mouth in a Parable: I will utter dark sayings of old. For
after that he had plainly taught them many things of the Moral Law after a
plain manner, he turns his style unto an higher pitch, or way of teaching,
consisting in Parables, as it was a very familiar use by Saint Hieronym. in 18.
Math.
HIEROMES report, to all the Syrians, and especially to them of Palestina, to
annexe Parables unto their speech, that what could not be holden by the
Hearers under a simple phrase of speech, might be kept by them in memory
through similitude and examples. For what is a Parable, but (as it is defined
by Clement. Alexand. lib. 6. Strom.
CLEMENT ALEXANDRINVS) (...).
a speech showing effectually by other words things spoken properly, or to use
Saint Hiecronym. Com. in 4. Marci.
Hieromes words, Rerum natura dissimilium ad aliquam similitudinem facta
comparatio: A comparison of things dislike in nature made unto some similitude?
and that either in deeds or words; in deeds, which are Types, as the Heb. 9.9.
Tabernacle was a (...).
Type of future things; and ABRAHAM Heb. 11.19.
received ISAAC from the dead (...).
in a Figure, either of Christ rising again (so says Master Calvin apud
Marlaor. in Heb. 11.
CALVIN) or of Christ dying in his Manhood, as the Ram was sacrificed; and
living in his Godhead, as ISAAC was delivered (says Aq^in. Lect. 4. cap. 11.
Ep. ad Heb.
Aquinas:) in words, which express unto us a Similitude, either openly and
plainly, and so it is called (...) a Sentence, a Proverb, or a Parable, such
as were those Prou. 25.1.
Parables of SOLOMON, which the men of HEZEKIAH, King of Judah copied out; or
obscurely and darkely, and so it is termed in that holy Tongue (...) (of the
root (...) he spoke obscurely) an Aenigma, a Riddle, or a dark Speech, such
as Samson Judge. 14.12.
proposed to his Companions; such as the 1. Reg. 10.1.
Queen of Sheba demanded of Solomon, and such as our blessed Savior most
eloquently redoubleth, here in my Text, under most elegant Tropes and Schemes,
That the people about him, and his Disciples might the better believe what
before he had spoken. For I cannot think with Maldonat. in Luc.
Maldonatus, Tossan. in Lucan.
Tossanus, and others, that Saint Luke does (...), or confusedly heap up
together this maine multitude of moral Precepts without connection, or order
used by Saint Matthew, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of his
Gospel: because GODS Spirit, by which Saint Luke wrote, is no author 1. Cor.
14.33
of confusion, and this speech of our Savior registered by Saint Luke, is
another from that which Saint Matthew recorded, this being spoken in the
plain, that on the Mount; this containing many matters, which are there
wanting, as some things are there which are not here. For whereas we find many
of the same things written in both, yea and spoken to the same end; yet are
they not the same speech, since a (...).
good tale may be twice told, and for the hearers it is a Philip. 3.1.
sure thing, our blessed Savior by repeating those Doctrines, intimating unto
us the necessary use of them all in an holy life. Again, I cannot with
Theophilact. in Luc.
Theophilact, Iansen. harmoniae Euangel. cap. 43.
Iansenius and others, refer these words to that prohibition of rash
judgment set down in the 37. Verse: for then the speech should be
interrupted and broken by the putting in, between that prohibition and the
reason thereof, a precept concerning alms in the 38. Verse. And therefore
rather then to make such raw coherences and knittings of our Saviors words, I
prefer the witty judgment of Aquin. in Catena sup. Luc. 6.
Aquinas, and Caietan. in Comment sup. Luc.
Caietane, followed by Writers not only Popish, as Sella in 6 Luc.
Stella, Tolet. ibid.
Tolet, and Coster. postill. in Dominic. 1. post Pentecost.
Costerus, but also some of the Reformed Churches, as Piscat. in 6. Luc.
Piscator, and Zepper. postilla in Dominic. 4. post. Trinit.
Zepper; all who say jointly, that this my Text, and all the words following
have no coherence with any one special point of the former words, in
particular, but with all the whole speech together, whereof these words with
others following to the 46. Verse. make up the 3. part of this Oration, called
by our curious Cic. lib. 2. de Invent. and Io. Tho. Freigius in Analy in Cic.
ora.
Rhetoricians, Contentio, the troublesome part, wherein we labor to answer
and satisfy all objections. For he that can see but dimmely, as he who Mark
8.26.
saw men walk like trees, may in reading of this Chapter, easily find out
four several parts of this holy Sermon, as first, an Exordium or Preface
consisting of blessings, to the good, and woes to the bad from 20. to 27.
Verse. Secondly, a Proposition of many moral precepts, together with their
several Confirmations interlaced, to this 39. Verse. Thirdly, a Confutation of
sundry objections, which the unbelieving hearts might set out against the
former truths, unto the 46. Verse. Fourthly, a Conclusion, exhorting them to
obedience, from the 46. Verse, to the end of this Chapter. So that you see how
these words are to be referred to all the precedent Discourse, for the better
strengthening thereof, by preventing this secret objection, which the Hearers
in their hearts might imagine against the former instructions, under these or
the like words: [Thou teach far otherwise, Ob.
then do the Scribes and Pharisees, who sit in MOSES his Chair; how then can
we, who have left all to follow thee, believe thy sayings, and so be thy
Disciples?]

For our Savior answers by two several Parables or Proverbs, the one
concluding, that they must not follow the Scribes and Pharisees, who are but
blind guides without true knowledge, unless they will fall into the pit of
error, and destruction: the other inferring, that since he himself is the
only true Master, above whom none live, they must fashion themselves unto his
perfection, that therein they may, as near as they can, be like unto him. And
thus, (Right Reverend, Right Worshipful, and most dearly beloved Men,
Fathers, and Brethren in our most blessed Savior) ye have plainly pointed
out to your quick view, and godly considerations, the scope and sum of all
the several matters herein comprised, which being delivered in two excellent
Similitudes, the one from a Guide, the other from a Master, may for our better
memory and edification, be referred to those practical uses of Canonical
Scriptures, which the blessed 2. Tim. 3.16.
Apostle most properly terms, (...), a Correction, and (...), an
Instruction. For first, here is delivered a double Correction: the former of
presumptuous teachers [ can the blind lead the blind?] the latter, of
besotted hearers, [ shall they not both fall into the ditch?] secondly, unto it
is adjoined an instruction, first to humility, [ the Disciple is not above his
master:] secondly, to conformity in Christian perfection, [ Every one that is
perfect, shall be as his Master.] Or, take it more plainly thus in these four
points, two bad, two good: First, Proud teachers, blind leading the blind.
Secondly, Silly and simple hearers, falling with their Leaders into the ditch.
Thirdly, humble servants, acknowledging their Master to be above them.
Fourthly, Professors conformable by obedience to their Masters perfection. And
of all these in their order.

The first part.
. II. For the first point, touching the presumptuous Teacher, a question is
propounded [ can the blind lead the blind?] intimating the negative, that he
cannot lead the blind; and therefore his presumption here openly bewrays,
first, his weakness, secondly, his wickedness. His weakness is his blindness;
his wickedness is his attempting to lead the blind. His blindness is not
bodily, for such a blind man may see God well enough in his soul, by the eye
of his faith, as blind BARTIMAEVS Mark. 10.48
saw Christ passing by: but it is in his mind, so darkened by the 2. Cor. 4.4.
god of this world, that the light of the Gospel cannot shine unto them; and
so much dulled by fleshly pleasures, that Ephesians. 4.18.
through ignorance they are senseless, albeit selfeloue persuades them, that
they see, to their own confusion, as our Savior told them plainly, saying,
John 9.41.
If ye were blind, ye should not have sin; but now ye say, We see;
therefore your sin remains. For their ignorance was not purae negationis,
(as the Aquin. 1.2. q. 76. art. 2. and Azorius 1. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Schoolmen speak) of such things, as they neither could know, nor should
know: (for such an ignorance, as it is hurtlesse; so it may be holy, in S.
Augustines judgment, when he says, August. in Psalm. 6.
Nos quod nescire nos voluit Dominus, libenter nesciamus; What God would not
have us know, let us willingly not know:) but it was an ignorance prauae
dispositionis, of such things as by duty they were bound to know, and might,
if they had would, have known to their own good, being yet altogether
ignorant, not only (...), of singular and particular things, whereof there are
many, which all men need not know, but also (...), says the Aristot. lib. 3.
Ethic. Nicom. cap. 1.
Philosopher, of general things, or universal truths, which no man should be
ignorant of; it being ignorantia non facti solum, sed etiam iuris, (as Vid.
Scotum, Bonauenturum, Holcot, Biel, and Durandum in lib. 2. s. did. 22. q. 2.
and 3.
Schools, and Vid. Digest. lib. 22. tit. 6. l. 1. and 9. and Cod lib. 1. tit.
18. l. 2. and 7
Lawyers make the distinction) not ignorance only of the deed, but also of the
law, which (as the Apud Bonifac. 8. in 6. lib. 5. tit. de regul. iuris, reg. 13.
Rule is) does not excuse, especially since it is not in these Pharisees, crassa
ignorantia; gross ignorance, through negligence: but, affectata ignorantia:
affetated ignorance upon proud insolency, through the height of which, they
disdain to learn what they do not know, as our John 5.40.
Savior said of them; Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. So
ignorant are they, so blind, and so weak: and yet as wicked, as weak, as
appears by their proud undertaking to lead the blind. For whither do they
lead them? To Math. 23.13.
hell, as themselves are the children thereof. And by what way do they lead
them? By the bypath of Heresy, and the highways of Hypocrisy, Math. 23.24.
straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel. And how do they lead them?
Surely by delusions, and doctrines of doting, such as rather puff up, then
pull down pride, (for 1. Cor. 8.1. ibid. Sedul. Hibernic. Primas. and Aquin.
knowledge puffs up, especially proceeding from their own sense and brain)
yea such as make them stumble the more, being to poor ignorant people, as
Leuit. 19.14.
curses to the deaf, and stumbling blocks before the blind, which they cast
out without all fear of God, or remorse of conscience, notwithstanding God
has precisely forbidden it with this high sanction, or hallowing thereof [ I
am the Lord.] For (as that Author Author. Ser. ad fr^n cremo apud August. tom.
10. Ser. 38.
of those Sermons ad fratres in eremo, (I wish he had been correspondent in
other points) does well expound it) then ye curse the deaf, when ye know not
through ignorance how to give counsel; then ye lay a stumbling block before
the blind, when ye declare false things for true.

Wherefore now since our blessed Savior Jesus Christ condemns the Pharisees
and Scribes in Israel, of weakness and wickedness, in that being ignorant
themselves, they presumptuously undertake to direct others more ignorant then
they are in the way of truth: The doctrine of the first part
We for our instruction may hence gather, that no man must take on him the
office of a Teacher and an instructor, who is not endued with some measure of
learning, unless he would be to his own shame accounted a bold intruder; like
those false Prophets, in whose 1. Reg. 22.23
mouths the Lord had put a lying spirit for AHABS destruction; like Nehem. 6.12
SHEMAIAH the son of DELAIAH, who was hired by TOBIAH and SANBALLAT to
prophecy a lie, only to put NEHEMIAH in fear; like the seven sons of SCEVA,
who Act. 19.15.
proudly took upon them, without all authority, to call over them which had
evil spirits, in the name of the Lord Jesus: or lastly, like those
presumptuous proud spirits, which 1. Tim. 1.7.
desire to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm. For no man (says the Heb. 5.4.
Apostle) takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
was AARON; called I say, not outwardly only 1. Tim. 4.14.
by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, but inwardly also by the
special indowment of spiritual grace, Ephesians. 4 7.
given to every one of us according to the measure of the gift of Christ; as
indeed a John 3.27.
man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven, unless he will
rashly incur those reprehensions which the Holy Ghost most justly made
against the false prophets, first, by Esaias, Esa. 42.19.20
Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf as my messenger, that I sent? who is
blind, as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords servant? seeing many
things, but thou obseruedst not; opening the ear, but he hears not.
Secondly, by Jeremy, Ierem. 14.14
The prophets prophecy lies in my Name: I sent them not, neither have I
commanded them, neither spoke unto them: they prophecy unto you a false
vision, and divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart.
Thirdly, by Zachary, Zach. 11.17.
Woe to the Idol shepherd, that leaves the flock; the sword shall be upon his
arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right
eye shall be utterly darkened. For mark, what an excellent construction that
Nazianzen. or. 1. quae Apologeti^.
great Divine Gregory Nazianzene made to himself of these and such like
comminations, when he said, (his words are weighty,) The Pharisees reproched,
and the Scribes reproved do very much fear me, whom since it behooves us
far to surpass in virtue, as we are charged, if we desire the kingdom of
heaven; it is a great shame, if so be that we be found worse then they; that
thereupon we are justly termed Serpents, and generation of Vipers, and blind
guides, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing up a Camel, Tombs inwardly
filthy, although outwardly fair; Platters pure in show, and all other such
like which they both are, and are named. In these thoughts I am exercised days
and nights. These things melt my marrow, and consume my flesh, and neither will
they suffer me to be bold, or go with my face looking upward. These things
humble my soul, contract my mind, and put a bond upon my tongue, and make my
thoughts not run upon preferment, nor upon the correcting and governing of
others, which is a matter of very great business, but how I may flee the wrath
to come, and purge my self a little from the rust of sin. For it becomes
us first to be purged our selves, and then to purge others; to be wise our
selves, and then to instruct others: to be made light our selves, and then to
enlighten others; to come near to God, and then to draw on others: to be holy
our selves, and then to hallow others; to lead with our hands; to counsel
them with wisdom. Hear also how Barnard accords thereunto upon the very
same consideration, saying, Bernard. S^r. de conuers. ad Clericos. cap. 30.
It is a very great and wonderful thing to be a Minister of Christ, and a
disposer of the secrets of God: the order of peacemakers is far above you,
unless peradventure the degrees before declared being altogether omitted, it
is your pleasures to leap up rather then to ascend. Yet I would to God, that
whosoever so enters, if it were possible, might minister so faithfully, as
confidently he thrusts himself in. But hard, peradventure, and almost
impossible it is, that from the bitter root of Ambition, should proceed the
sweet fruit of Charity.

For use then of this point two sorts of people may take this, The Use.
as a just check unto them for their boldness of intruding themselves into
Gods Harvest: First, the Popish Mass Priests, Secondly, the Pr^ting-Precise
Vpstarts of our time; both which (I fear me) fulfill that judgment upon this
good Land, that Esaias foretold, should come upon Judah by her neighboring
enemies, Egypt and Assure, saying, that Esaias 7.18.19
the Lord shall hiss for the Fly that is in the uttermost parts of the Rivers
of Egypt, and for the Be, that is in the Land of Assyria; and they shall
come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate Valleys, and in the holes of
the Rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes. For Pt^lom. Geogr. lib.
7. c. 16. tab. 4. Asiae.
Egypt and Assure, that upon the South-West, and this upon the North-East, did
not so much molest poor Judah, with corporal conflicts, as the Popish
Priests, and peevish Precisians disturb the peace of our Jerusalem; those, as
the Flies of Egypt issuing from Rome, and Spain, upon the Southside; these,
as the humming and singing Bees of Assure, swarming out of the East-parts unto
us, resting themselves in the most secret retyring places of Cities and
Country amongst thorns and bushes, that is, poor seduced people, who if they
repent not, Heb. 6.8.
are near unto cursing, and whose end is to be burned. For observe the fit
resemblance of those, with Flies of Egypt, and of these with the Bees of
Ashur. Egyptian Flies, First, origin: in the offspring. Against Popish
Priests.
For as the Flies of Egypt rise Herodot. lib. 2. and Diodor. Sicul. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
out of the slime deeply settled in fennie places, by the ouerflowing of Nilus:
so come our Popish Masse-lings out of the slimie pit of the ouerflowing
Antichrist, as Revel. 9.2.
the Locusts came out of the smoke, that arose from the pit. motu: in motion,
and agilitie. For as Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2.
the Flies skip here and there, and seldom settle themselves, but on raw
sores: so these Thieves range every where, yet seldom or never make any long
abode, but only, in the houses 2. Tim. 3.6.
of silly women laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts, or of simple
men, who are ruled by their Wives, either to wink at such guests, or to give
them solemn entertainment, Reave. 13.16.
having received from them the mark of the Beast. Thirdly, leuitate: in
lightness of substance. For as those Flies are of no weight, or substance: so
these hollow Fathers are altogether void of grace and good learning, verifying
that saying of old BONIFACIVS, Hedio lib. 8. cap. 9. and Gowla^t. tom. 1.
Catalog. lib. 8. page 640.
Before-times there were but wooden Cups, yet golden Priests; but now it is
otherwise, golden Cups, and wooden Priests. For to examine what learning their
Jesuits have, we need go no further then to the report Watsons Quodlibet. q.
3. art. 6.
of their Secular Priests, and the Sorbonists Apud Anticott^n.
of Paris, who utterly condemn their dictate divinity, and their teaching of
other learning only by Epitomes, to the utter neglect of the Original Authors:
and for the skill of our Secular Priests, howsoever blundring Brislow motive
31. and ibid. D. Fulke.
Brislow boasts, and braggeth of their sufficiency: yet cannot I see upon
what grounds such brags are built, since so many as I could yet see of their
New-cut Shauelings, such as Bishop, Breereley, Walsingham, etc. are, but old
Fools in new Coats, flourishing anew those ouer-worne arguments, which
Harding, Allen, Stapleton, Sanders and Dorman, with other such monstrous 2.
Sam. 21.22
sons of Harephah, deuillishly devised against holy DAVID, I mean, Christ
Jesus, whose strong men, by their Masters most gracious assistance, put all
such uncircumcised Philistims to flight. So that now, albeit their great god
Beelzebub send daily out these Flies, as thick as dust: yet, abige muscas
puer, said Cic. lib. 2. de Orat.
he in Tully, a small flap will cause them all very quickly, either fly or
dye, as appears by private Conferences, and public Colloquies had by sundry
of our Divines with their Priests and Jesuits at Vid. Osiandr. p. 2. Centur.
16. lib. 4. ad Ann. 1600.
Baden, Ratispone, and other places. For the words Eccles. 10.12
of a wise man's mouth are gracious: but the lips of a Fool will swallow up
himself. But leave we these awhile in their Winter-holes. The other sort of
noisome Assyrian Be in two respects: First, of sound. Secondly, of sting.
Against our pra^ing Precisians.
Of sound: For as Bees, especially Droanes, fill all ears with humming,
wheresoever they fly: so these men perceiving, that 1. Cor. 9.15.
a necessity is laid upon Christ's Ministers to preach the Gospel, turn
preaching into prating, loding their Hearers with an hideous sound of witless
words, tending to no purpose. For first, following their own humor, they flee
their Text, shooting as far off it, as Laert. in Diogene.
Diogenes his Archers did from their mark: Secondly, all their course of
edifying is to pull down by thundering threatenings of the Law, what they
should seek to rear up by the comforts of the Gospel Thirdly the matter of
their discourses, if any wiseman will spend time to displume them, will be
certainly found, but either the feathers of other Fowls like Aesop. fab. and
Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 3.
Aesops Iay, or else like Plutarch. in Apophtheg. Laconicis.
the Laconians Nightinga^ unfeathered. Nil nisi vox; an huge heap o^ words,
but no matter at all; that we may well use against these Hornets those good
words of the Preacher, Eccles. 10.11
Surely, the Serpent will bite without enchantment, and a Babbler is no better.
For, secondly, see their sting, which as the Be carries in her tail: so
these always put forth in the last act of their Interlude, wherein we shall
find upon good search and right view, either Error against true Doctrine, or
Schism against Church Discipline, or Hypocrisy against Holiness, to manifest
themselves for the natural Progeny of the ancient Catharites in Asia,
Nouatians in Eur^pe, and Donatists in Afrike described by Saint PETER, 2. Pet.
2.17.
to be wels without water, and clouds that are carried with a tempest, to
whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever; being as Epiphan. haeres. 59.
Epiphanius says, like the Basiliscus, stately in name, as if they were pure;
but dangerou^ in nature, killing men, before men know them: and all through
hypocrisy, for which they may rightly be termed, as our Savior called the
Heretical and Hypocritical Pharisees, Math. 12.34
a generation of Vipers, which being evil, cannot speak good things. For
Pl^n. lib. 11. cap ^7.
as the Viper has his teeth covered over with his gummes: so these men seem
Pis^at. in Scho^. sup. 3. Mat
hurtlesse, their malice being covered, only with a show of holiness. But as
the Viper being full of poison, upon the pressing of his gums, through the
dints of his teeth, infuseth his venom: so these most poisonous and pestilent
Polypragmons, upon a pressing pinch, will power out their malice and vengeance
under sugared terms and sweet words, as Psalm. 10.10.
he who croucheth, and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his strong
ones: that we may well exclaim against such Serpents in these true words of
sweet Chrysologus, Chrysolog. Ser. 7.
Hypocrisis subtle malum, secretum virus, venenum latens, virtutum sucus,
tinea sanctitatis: Hypocrisy is a subtle mischief, a secret poison, an
hidden venom, a false dye of virtue, a moth of holiness. But falsehood will
fail: neither Fly nor Be shall trouble us long, since a Day draws near,
wherein all shall appear in their own proper likeness, that what God only
now sees in secret, then shall be manifest in the sight of all men, as Math.
10.27.
there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, and hid, that shall not
be known; for the 1. Cor. 3.13.
Day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire. Yet in the
meane-while, Cantic. 2.15
Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil our Vines: for our Vines have
tender Grapes, says the Spouse to the Pastors and Magistrates of Israel, who
are Act. 20.28.
to take heed unto themselves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made them Overseers, seeing that Prou. 20.8.
a King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil with
his eyes. For these noisome Vermines are not so hidden and secret, but that by
diligent and wary search they may be found, and rid out of our Coasts by a
most ready course.

For the Flies will quickly be voyded by the often sweeping of our Houses so
cleansed from dust: the Mass Priest cannot stay where Ecclesiastical
Visitations are frequent, for wiping out the filth of Idolatrous Superstitions,
that both Churches may be cleared of Buyers and Sellers, as our John 2.13.
Matthew. 21.11.
Savior purged the Temple of Jerusalem twice; and Churchmen may be clean
from all such pollution, as may give occasion for Flies to swarm, as the Esaias.
52.11.
Prophet said, Be ye clean, that bear the Vessels of the Lord. And as
nothing can better keep the humming Bees within their Hiue, then a sharp
cold wind; so nothing more restrains Hypocritical Schismatikes, then
severity of Discipline; For as Prou. 25.23.
the Northern wind drives away rain: so does an angry countenance, a
backbyting tongue.

Reverend Fathers, sat verbum sapienti. To prevent Flies and Bees, no way in
the World can be devised better, then besides your personal severity, the
seasonable appointment of some good Sweepers, who by the force of CHRIST'S
Matthew. 3.11.
fan may make clean the floor, and gather the wheat, and burn up the
chafe with unquenchable fire. For Matthew. 9.39.
the Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few: but if those few were fit
men, less were your labor, and greater your gain. Wherefore to help all,
Saint Paul has given a good rule to Timothy, for all you to follow, 1. Tim.
5.22. Vid. Danae. ibid.
Lay hands suddenly on no man: neither be partaker of other men's sins: keep
thy self pure. For you are those John 10.3.
Porters, which open the door unto the good Shepherds, who only are to admit
good Shepherds to a Flock, by whom a very great part or your care is eased,
it they be fit to sweep out the dust of Superstition for prevention of Flies,
and careful to hold by regular conformity, the strength of true discipline,
to keep in the Bees.

Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 18.
Qualem commendes, etiam atque etiam aspice, ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibi peccata pudorem:
That is, Look well whom ye to Cures shall name,
Lest others sins bring you to shame:


And with shame, grief: and with grief, blame. For if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch. And so I come

. III. To the second maine part, The second Part.
the simple hearer. [ Shall they not both fall into the ditch?] Where the ditch
is double; the former, of sin and error, as, Prou. 22.14.
The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the Lord,
shall fall therein: the latter, of punishment and destruction, as, God Psalm.
55.23.
will bring the wicked into the pit of destruction, and as Hell is called the
Revel. 9.3.
bottomless pit. For both the blind Leader, and the blinded people, shall
fall into both these ditches by their degrees: into the former, here in this
life, while they 2. Tim. 3.13.
wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. For, Psalm. 125.5.
such as turn aside into their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth
with the workers of iniquity: but into the latter, after their departure out
of this world, as the rich Luke 16.23.
Glutton was tormented in Hell: whither Psalm. 9.17.
the wicked shall be thrown, and all the people that forget God. For Esaias 5.14.
Hell has enlarged her self, and has opened her mouth, without measure: and
their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices, The
Doctrine.
shall descend into it. So that hence we may gather an infallible truth, that
those, who without due trial, or examination, will stiffely depend upon false
Teachers, shall most surely, with those false Teachers, fall into uncertain
errors, unto most certain dangers and destruction. For so the holy Ghost has
taught us, first, by the Prophets, both Esaias, Esaias 9.16.
saying, The Leaders of this people cause them to err: and they that are led
of them, are destroyed: and Jeremy in Gods Person exclaiming thus bitterly,
Ierem. 50.6.
My people have been lost sheep: their Shepherds have caused them to go
astray: they have turned them away on the Mountains; they have gone from
Mountain to Hill; they have forgotten their resting place. Secondly, by our
blessed Savior, thus denouncing, Matthew. 23.15
Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye compass Sea and Land,
to make one Proselite; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the
child of hell then your selves. Thirdly, by S. Paul, maruelling Galat. 1.5.
that the Galatians were so soon removed from him that called them into the
grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which yet is not another; albeit there
be some that trouble them, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. For as
Prou. 25.19.
Solomon says, Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, is like a
broken tooth, Vid. Ze^ner. lib. sacr. similitud. simili. 56.57
which is more cause of grief then gain, and a foot out of joint, that will
pain us, and hinder our way: because a faithless friend, such as all blind
Leaders are to the blind, is just like Esaias 36.6.
to the staff of the broken reed of Egypt, whereon if a man leave, it will
go into his hand, and pierce it; yea, rent Ezech. 29.6.
the shoulder, and make their loins be at a stand. For such relying upon liars
both benummeth the hands, to hinder the nimble practice of good things, and
sets both shoulders and loins out of joint, to shake their constancy in
the settled profession of spotles Truth; that the old Apud Erasm. Chiliad. tit.
Jgnorantia.
Graecians might well advise their younglings, (...), Neither to use a blind
Guide, nor yet a witless Counselor. For, as says TERTVLLIAN, Tertull. lib.
de praescript. aduers. haeres. cap. 14.
Tu qui proinde quaeris, spectans ad eos, qui and ipsi quaerunt, dubious ad
dubios, certus ad incertos, caecus ad caecos, in foueam deducaris, necesse est:
Thou who therefore searchest (to find,) looking to them who also seek,
doubtful to the doubtful, certain to the uncertain, blind to the blind,
it must needs be, that thou must be led into the ditch.

Wherefore for Use of this truth; The Use.
We are to give most diligent attendance to a double exhortation, which the
holy Ghost much presses: the former is for caution; the latter for trial. The
former is, 1. For Caution.
that we should all beware what Guides we follow, or what Teachers we learn
by, as it is said, Matthew. 7.15.
Beware of false prophets; and take heed and beware Matthew. 16.6.
of the leven of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces: and I beseech you, Romans
16.17.
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: and Philip. 3.2.
beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. And so in
many other places.

For if we be Shepherds of the Flock, and Ministers selves, the lewd example
of Idol Zach. 11.17.
shepherds, which feed themselves, and not the Flock, lest thereby we be
utterly deprived, either of our places, as God Ierem. 23.4.
will then provide him other Shepherds, or of true comfort in those places,
wherein, through idleness we do no good, ^laying, not feeding, killing, not
leading, not saving the soul, but showing the skin of a wandering sheep, to
the dangerous aggrauation of that great account, which we must make to him,
who Ezech. 34.10
will require his sheep at our hands, when those nominall Rabbis, whom we
placed before our eyes for patterns in the use of our Pastoral charge, shall
feel the same smart for this sin, of bringing in a skin without a
carcass. For, as S. August. lib. de Pastor. cap. 10.
Augustine says, What shall it profit him, that he brings the marked skin?
The good Man of the house enquireth for the life of the sheep. But a bad
shepherd brings the skin.

John 10.5.
the good sheep, because they know not the voice of a stranger, will not
follow, but flee a stranger; as the Theodorit. lib. 4. histor. Eccles. cap. 19.
and 20.
Orthodox Christians of Alexandria in Egypt forsook the Church, wherein the
vile Arian Lucius did preach, after the death of good Athanasius, and upon the
most injurious disturbance of the Reverend Bishop PETER. The Prou. 20.12.
hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them, that
the Job 34.3.
ear may try words, as the mouth tastes meat. For the Prou. 14.15.
simple believes every word; but the prudent man looks well to his going.
And the latter exhortation of the Holy Ghost is, 2. For Trial.
that we should most diligently try out who are the good Guides whom we may
follow rightly, (as Saint Paul says) 1. These. 5 23.
Prove all things; hold fast that which is good: And S. John secondeth him more
particularly, 1. John 4.1.
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God;
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. For all is not Gold
that glistereth, nor Silver that shines: and therefore Prou. 17.3.
the Fining-pot is for Silver, and the furnace for Gold: all doctrines are not
Orthodox, albeit they are set forth with the most entising words of man's
wisdom, neither yet are all Doctors right disposers of the secrets of God:
and therefore Gods Word is as the touchstone, and our faith therein is as the
file, by which we may make good trial and proof both of Doctrine and Doctor.
Plutarch. lib. de solert. animal.
Plutarch reports of the Fo^es in Thrace, a cold Country subject to much
frost, and so to be covered in Winter with much Ice, that when they are to
pass over any frozen poole, they come to it very sizely, and lay down their
ear unto the ground, to harken if any stream of water run bubbling underneath
the Ice, which if they find, then back they go, as from an unsound and
dangerous passage; otherwise if they hear nothing, they pass over boldy as
upon solid ground. This natural subtlety of wary Foxes is of us to be
followed, who in this cold world, wherein zeal is quenched, have very many
Icie, glassie, and slipperie ways to pass, I mean, many dangerous
conclusions, both for Doctrine, and manners to admit of: for 1. Cor. 14.10
there are many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them without
signification. Our best course then is to lay down our ears and
understandings unto the ground and foundation of all positions, that if there
be any vnder-water, that is, any subtle streams of erroneous doctrine
cunningly conveyed under smooth and fine speeches, we may avoid the danger of
falling; otherwise if it prove sound upon our due trial, we may boldly march
on with good luck to our honor of so wise, prudent, and provident discerners
of spirits and doctrines, and that by the example of many good men, as 1. Reg.
22.8.
Iehoshaphat, who suspecting the vnicent and agreement of Ahabs four hundred
false prophets, said, Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord besides, that we
might enquire of him? and the Act. 17.11.
Noblemen of Berea, who upon Paul's preaching received the Word with all
readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so:
and the Jews Act. 25.25.
at Rome, who desired to hear from Paul of Christianity, and after they had
heard him, reasoned much amongst themselves. For as Tertullian well Tertull. de
praescript. cap. 9.
advises, Quaerendum est, donec inuenias, and credendum vbi inueneris, and
nihil amplius, nisi custodiendum quod credidisti: Thou must seek, till thou
find; and believe when thou have found: and then no more, but thou must
keep, what thou have believed.

A great Question. How, and by what means may we know true Teachers, and good
Guid^s.
But here peradventure some one careful Christian, or other will demand, how,
or by what means he shall try, or know good Spirits from bad, right Teachers
from wrong. To whose just demand, I easily make this answer, that God in his
goodness has given us his Children, both Means to try, and Marks to know
good Spirits from bad, right Teachers from wrong. For the means, which GOD
has given us, by which we may try blind, The first Answer of the means to
try them.
and yet blinding Guides, are in number five; first, the Spirit of God,
secondly, the Word of God, thirdly, the sum of their calling, fourthly, the
testimony of ancient Fathers, fifthly, the conference with holy Brethren.

For first, Gods Spirit is Vid. Calvin. har. Euangel. in Math. 7.15.
a means of this trial, The first means.
when he gives to the faithful that excellent gift of 1. Cor. 12.10
discerning spirits, which is no natural perspicacie, or sharpness of
judgment, but Vid. Ambros. Aquin. and Marlaor. in 1. Cor. 12
a supernatural light and cleerenesse of understanding, by which the godly
both quickly and thoroughly perceive a plain difference between men speaking
by the Spirit of God, and by the deluding spirit of the Devil, as 1. Reg. 22.8.
Iehoshaphat found the false prophets of Ahab, and Nehem. 6.13
Nehemiah perceived that God had not sent SHEMAIAH the son of DELAIAH, but
that TOBIAH and SANBALLAT had hired him to pronounce that Prophecy against him.

This gift more abundantly appears in the full time of the New Testament, as
we may find not only by Act. 5.1.2, etc
PETER'S discovery of ANANIAS and SAPHIRA their treachery, or Act. 16.15.
Paul's expulsion of the spirit of divination out of the Maid at Philippi, but
by the continual course against Heretics, who no sooner appeared, but were
discovered either by the Councels, or by other good Christians, as Saint John
said to all the faithful in general, 1. John 2.27.
The anointing that ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye need not,
that any man teach you; but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things,
and is Truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him.

Ob.
For, albeit, that peevish Papist STAPLETON Stapleton in Promptuar. Cathol.
dominic. 7. post P^ntec.. 1.
would limit this gift only to the learned Teachers and Masters of Israel,
because it seems by the Apostle, to be appropiated only to 1. Cor. 12.10
some, and that albeit all Christians have a general judgment of any
doctrine: yet the particular determination of truth or falsehood in any point
belongs to the Church, and the Masters therein assembled in Councels, as the
Apostles and Elders Act. 15.6.
were at Jerusalem:

Romans 8.14.
Spirit of Adoption, are directed by the same Spirit, Heb. 5.14.
through long use and custom, to discern both good and evil: as the Spirit
1. Cor. 2.10.
searches all things, even the deep things of God, so far as God thinks
it necessary for those his Children to know; who in this respect are called
(...), Esaias 54.13. John 6.45.
all of them taught of God, Ierem. 31.34.
from the least of them to the greatest of them, to know the Lord. And
therefore where the Apostle says [ to another discerning of spirits,] Apostle
so speaks not in regard of the substance of the gift, which goes with Gods
Spirit, but of the measure, and use thereof, which some may have more then
others, as To every Ephesians. 4.7.
one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ: and
yet not gave it for themselves alone, but for others also, who by their skill
may be directed to flee false prophets; as thereupon all Councels, wherein the
Learned are Vid. Whitaker. contr. 3. q. 3. c. ^. arg. 2. and D. Willet. Synops.
Papis. page 110.
Ecclesia repraesentatiua: A Congregation of the Learned, representing the
whole bod^ of the Church of Christ, wherein not only Bishops, but also any
other faithful and learned men may be called to give suffrage, as well,
decisiuum: of deciding, as consultiuum: of counselling, concerning points of
faith, which as their Pope Apud Gratianum, did. 96. can. 4.
Nicholas the first said, is universal and common to all, and pertaining not
only to the Clergy, but also to Lay men, even altogether unto all Christians;
as in the Council of Jerusalem were gathered the Apostles and the Elders,
with whom Act. 15.22.
the whole Church there gave their assent also. So that if this gift of
discerning spirits be amongst the Learned, assembled in Council, it is a
means sufficient enough, unto any good Christian for trial of spirits, since
as they all assembled have it together, any faithful man may have it to
himself in particular, because both the Psalm. 51.12.
Spirit being free as the wind to blow John 3.8.
where it lists, 1. Cor. 3.17.
gives liberty to the Saints 1. Cor. 6.2.
to judge, and the Council being assembled for the good of the Church, is a
special direction to all the true members of that Church whose Council it is,
to approve or disprooue according to their judgment, as Constantine Apud
Eusebium lib 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 18.
called the consent of a general Council directed by Gods Spirit, the
explanation of the will of God, to which all and every Christian is to agree;
and as good Saint Augustine August. lib. 1. de Baptis. contra Donatist. cap. 18.
termed the sentence of a general Council, to be the consent of the whole
Church.

2. Means.
But to pass forward, lest this good gift of discerning spirits might be or
seem to be a delusion, therefore a second means is added hereunto, which is
the written Word of God, comprised in Canonical Scriptures. For this is a most
sanctified and sovereign means thus ratified by the Prophet, Esaias 8.20.
To the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them: thus reckoned of by the Apostle, 1.
Tim. 3.15.16.17.
the holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith,
which is in Christ Jesus: for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable (see the uses thereof) for doctrine (to wit, of truth,) for
reproof (of error,) for correction (of a bad life) for instruction in
righteousness (unto a good life,) that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. For the old and new Testament is (as
says Basil. de recta fide.
Basil) the treasure of the Church; the holy books of divine Scriptures are
(as says Isidor. Pelusiot. lib. 1. Ep. ^69.
Isidorus Pelusiota] (...), the very ladders, by which we climb up to God,
because August. tom. 4 lib. de b^no viduitat. cap. 1.
the holy Scripture has fastened a rule unto our doctrine, lest we should
presume to understand more then it behooves us to understand, but that, as he
says, we may understand according to sobriety, as God has given to every man
the measure of faith: therefore it is not my part to teach you any other thing,
but to expound unto you the words of the Teacher, and to dispute of those
things as God has given.

Ob.
But here again Doctor Stapleton is Stapleton vbi supra.
carping against this means also, granting what we say to be that the Word of:
secondly, that the common sort of the faithful does not understand this Word
of God so exact^y, as that they can judge of every new doctrine by the same
Word of God, and in the causes and grounds thereof: thirdly, that the
proportion of faith which rules Sol.
All which exceptions are but beggarly crauings of what will not be granted
neither to him, nor to any Papist now living in the world. For the first point
is most false, and a flat derogation Deuteronomy. 4.2. and Revel. 2^.18
curses those that add thereunto, and Fathers alleged by Morn. in praefat.
de Eucharist. and Polan. cap. 1. symbo^. Theolog. etc.
our side, and yet not answered by any of their Wranglers, even Aquin. 1. p.
Aquinas and Catetane their own great Rabbis have plainly avouched, he
saying, that our faith relyeth upon the revelation made to the Apostles and
Prophets, who writ the Canonical books, but not upon the revelation if any be
made to any other Doctors: this Caietan. in 2. Tim. 3.16.
expounding the word ((...), by divine inspiration) as the special difference
between Gods written Word, and all humane inventions. And the second point is
no better, being an uncharitable Paul was, 2. Cor. 11.6.
rude in speech, but not in knowledge. For since Gods Spirit, John 16.13.
which is the Spirit of Truth, leading into all truth, may be in Amos, as well
as Esaias, may be in unlettered Idiots, as well as in a learned Rabbie, we cannot
with any godly reason debar simple men from the knowledge of the Scriptures,
which are not the Esaias 13.12.
sealed book, but Habbac. 2.1.
written so plain, that a man may run and read them. And therefore albeit
they cannot, out of Scripture exactly decide, like a learned Schooleman, a
point of Controversy, yet may they, by Gods enlightening grace, attain to so
much knowledge of godliness out of the reading and hearing of the holy
Scriptures, as may, through Gods acceptance, suffice for their salvation,
according to their measure, as the Apostle exhorts, Col. 3.16.
Let the Word of God dwell in you plenteously. For hereby, says Hieronym. in
3. Coloss.
Hierome, is declared, that Lay men must have the Word of Christ, not only
sufficiently, but abundantly, and so teach and warn themselves mutually.

proportion of faith to the Church, and not to the tenor of the Scriptures, I
marvel how he dare so swerve from the Scriptures, which Clem. Alex. lib. 6.
Strom. August. lib. 2. contra Cresconium Grammatic.
all the Fathers call, The Ecclesiastical Rule both of faith and manners. For
what is this analogy, or proportion of faith, but Vid. Hyperium lib. 2. de
Theol. cap. 35.
the true agreement which one part of the Scriptures has with another, to make
up one faith? Fides, Tertull. lib. de praescript. aduer. her. cap. 14.
says TERTVLLIAN, in regula posita est; Faith is placed under a rule, to wit,
of Law and Gospel, that it should not depend upon Man, but upon God; and that
it should be made known by it own only principles, which are the Books of
Canonical Scriptures, the only best and Authentic John 5.39.
Witnesses of Jesus Christ, the Heb. 12.2.
Author and finisher of our faith. As then the Lawgiuer is the best
Interpreter of himself: so let God in the Scriptures have the place both of
Text and of gloss, Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4.
that he may be justified in his sayings, and clear when he is judged. For,
Irenaeus lib. 3 aduers haer. c. 12.
ostensiones quae sunt in Scripturis, non possunt ostendi, nisi ex ipsis
Scripturis, says IRENIE: Doctrines in Scriptures cannot be declared but out of
the Scriptures. Whereupon Tertull. lib. de veland* virginib. cap. 3.
Tertullian thus cutting off all customs or prescriptions which seem upon
pretense of antiquity to derogate from truth, cries out, Exurge Veritas;
Arise up, Truth; and quasi de patientia erumpe, and break forth out of thy
patience: nullam volo consuetudinem defendas; I will not have thee to maintain
any custom: Ipsa Scripturas tuas interpretare, quas consuetudo non nouit: Do
thou interpret thy Scriptures, which custom has not known: si enim nosset,
nunqua^ esset: for if it had known them, it would never have been.

Therefore, notwithstanding these cauils of an hellish Locust, we have now two
tried means, whereby we may find out good and bad Ministers, Gods Spirit, and
Gods Word, which of themselves were sufficient, if our strength were
answerable: but seeing we are weak to weild such weapons without some help,
therefore God has given, and good men have observed three other good, yet
secondary means, by which, together with the Spirit, and the Word, we may
quickly discern between good and bad Guides. And the first of these, 3.
Means.
which is the third in order, is, as we noted, the sum of their calling
described unto us in holy Scripture, first, in their Ingresse: secondly, in
their Progress: thirdly, in their Constancy and true perseverance.

Their Ingresse is by a lawful calling from God, John 3.27.
a man can receive nothing, except it be given from above, and that both
inwardly and outwardly: Inwardly, by special endowment of ability, and
willingness, wrought by Gods Spirit in their honest education, or trayning up to
learning, upon the certain conscience of which fitnes, they may as lawfully
crave admittance, as Ahimaaz did of Ioab, 2. Sam. 18.22
to run unto DAVID; otherwise not, lest they prove but either bold intruders,
or unconscionable undertakers of so honorable a Calling, which they cannot
discharge, as there are too many now adays blue coats turned to black, who
make the Ministry the last remedy or means of maintayning themselves, to
verify our old English Proverb, When he is good for nothing, then make a
Priest of him. But who is sufficient, 2. Cor. 2.16.
says the Apostle, for these things?

Well. To his inward indowments he must outwardly ^ee ordained, and put apart
unto that great Work, by the laying on of hands, as were Act. 13.3.
Saul, and Barnabas, 1. Tim. 4 14.
Timothy, and other Tit. 1.3.
Presbyters in Creete, by Titus. For this good order is a necessary let and
stop against all Iereboams 1. Reg. 13.33
Priests, who being of the basest people, commonly without both learning and
honesty, would consecrate themselves for Priests of the high places: as at
this day, Swen^kfel^ians, Libertines, Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, and
such other addle-brayned and idle Illuminates presume to do, without any
ordinary calling or appointment of their Superiors, like Ierem. 23.21.
those prophets, which ran when God sent them not. But forward.

they are set down in many places of holy Scriptures, especially in 1. Tim. 3.
and Tit. 1. where, as Chrysostom well Chrysostom. hom. 10. in 1. Tim. 3.
observes, what he speaks of one, agrees unto all, that are good Guides.

But who shall examine this? Not the people, Ob.
says Stapleton vbi supra.
STAPLETON, they being but sheep; but other Shepherds, or the whole Company
and Community of Priests, and especially the head of the Shepherds, Christ's
Vicar on earth must judge and know this.

But I answer: First, Sol.
that if by Christ's Vicar he mean the Pope, he beggeth a question that will
not Pope is neither the Vicar of Christ, but Vid. Sermon in 1. Ioh. 2.18.19.20.
Antichrist himself, neither has he more power or authority to make this
scrutinie, then any other Prelate, since, as in Cyprian. de Vnitate Ecclesiae
Cyprians judgment, the other Apostles were equal to PETER. So in August.
lib. 2. de baptis. cap. 2.
Augustines opinion, other Bishops in their Diocesses have as great power and
authority to judge of their inferiors, as has the Pope in his place, it
being the Decree Council. Carthag. 1. apud Cyprian. and August.
of the Council of Carthage, that none should call himself a Bishop of
Bishops, or by a tyrannical manner force his fellows to a necessity of
obeying, since every Bishop, according to the license of his liberty and
power, has his own judgment. Secondly, that the censure Ecclesiastical,
Priests in a Council, or Bishops in their Consistory, may lawfully give of
Ministers according to the Apostolic rules, and Canons Ecclesiastical, is no
let or hinderance to private men from their secret examination, and trial of
good or bad Ministers, by comparing their doctrine and lives with the Word of
God, for their own private quiet, and good satisfaction, they being bound Act.
20.32.
to slay the Wolf, and discover the John 10.3.
Thief as much as they may. For as in the Law, every Deuteronomy. 13.4.
man's hand was to be stretched out against the Intiser unto Idolatry; so are we
all in the Gospel, bound by our faith and love in Christ, 1. Cor. 16.20
to detest with execration all those, be they Ministers or people, who love not
the Lord Jesus: as every one, who will but examine the state of the Popish
Clergy by the Apostles rules, shall find that they have good cause to flee
such, both Heretics and Hypocrites, who swerve so far, both in their
doctrine and in their lives, from, not only the rules of the blessed Apostle,
but also from their own Canons, which I need not produce, being freed from
that labor, by the diligent and most godly pains of diverse most worthy and
reverend Divines of the Reformed Church, as yet not answered by any Papist,
referring all who hear me, to the reading of Beza. Confess. cap. 7.
Beza, Heming. in Antichrist. machi.
Hemingius, Binder, cap. 13. Theolog. Scho^asticae.
Binder, and our own good Countreyman, the most painful searcher of truth,
D. Willet. in Synops. Pap. pa. ^43.^44. etc.
Doctor Willet.

be Revel. 2.10.
faithful to the death, and to Revel. 3.11.
hold that he has, that no man take his Crown, since he Matthew. 10.22
that endures to the end, shall be saved. For albeit he cannot, being old,
endure so much labor, as he took when he was young; yet must he pro virili
employ himself as much as he can, both for the full discharge of himself, and
encouragement of others, who by his grave example will, if Grace be in them, be
provoked to pains. Luke 12.43.
Happy is that man, whom his Master, when he comes, shall find so doing:
and happy those people, who are blessed with such a Guide, that leads them
to life. Dan. 12.3.
They shall shine as the firmament, and be as the stars for ever and ever.

Now the fourth means of searching and finding out a good Guide from a bad, 4.
Means.
is the testimony of the ancient Fathers, whom we are to read, that from
them we may fully perceive what was the tenor of the Faith in the Primitive
Church, and examine how these Teachers agree thereunto. For remove not, Prou.
22.28.
says SOLOMON, the ancient Land-marke, which thy Fathers have set, that is, as
Apud Hieron. in appendice.
BEDA, Tomo. 2. Ortho. dograph.
SALONIVS, and Lauater. Morcer. Remus, Wilcockes, etc.
all our Interpreters do express the Allegory; transgress not the limits of
faith, which the Catholic Doctors have set down from the beginning: because
no Luke 5.39.
man having drunk old Wine, straight-wayes desires new: for he says, The
old is better.

But this means is common, and challenged by the Papists, as making most for
them, Ob.
who seem to hold most of the ancient Fathers, whom they usually allege for
maintenance of whatsoever they hold, yea, compiling whole Volumes, only stuffed
with sayings of ancient Doctors, as In Aug. Confessione.
Torrensis, Canis. in Catechismo M.
Canisius, and Cocc. in Catholicismo.
Coccius have gathered.

Therefore to clear the points of this prescription, Sol.
it shall not be amiss for any who will try the Truth by the testimonies of
ancient Fathers, as did that most Reverend Father, and strong Man of Israel, In
his Sermon at Paul's Cross, and in 26. Articl.
Bishop Jewel, to take these three Rules for his direction, in judgment of
Fathers: The first is, that the Father alleged, 1. Regula.
be no Bastard, that is, no counterfeite Work foysted into amongst his other
Books, by some coozening Babylonish* Merchant, that under the name of such a
good ^ather, it may be more saleable, and of better admittance. For how many
false Writs have come forth o^ this kind, and are alleged by craking Coccius,
I need not go far to find; their own Sixth. Senens. lib. 2. Biblioth.
Sixtus Senensis, Baronius passin. in Annal.
Baronius and Bellar. lib. de illustr* scriptorib.
Bellarmine, discovering more falsehood in this trick, falsehood in
counterfeiting of Authors, then I list to rippe up, seeing two helps we have
to discern true Fathers from bastardly Brats, viz. Hieronym. lib. descriptor
illust. in Minulio Felice, and August. Epist. 48. and Hyper. lib. 4. Theolog.
cap. 9. obseruat. 3.
first, phrase or style, secondly, matter or argument agreeing to their age and
time. For every Age of the Church had their several Controversies, which
ministered occasion of writing to the Learned accordingly.

2. Regula.
The second Rule is, that we must look to the Edition of the Fathers Works,
that they be not corrupted and wrested to say more or less then they say: For
how wickedly the Papists have of late years, and yet, do abuse the Writings
of the ancient Fathers their Index Expurgatorius, and their Copijsts, as
Azorius calls them, do too too manifestly demonstrate: that Vid. Tho. James
p. 4 cap. Mysteries of ^ndex Ex^urgator.
being but a Table made by the Inquisitors, of what they will have put in, or
taken out of any Author, (as appears by those five several Editions in
Rome, Naples, Lisbone, Madril, and Antwerpe, now of late to their utter shame
discovered:) these Vid. Az^rium tom. ^. Institution. lib. 1. cap. 2^.
being certain skillful Writers of old hands, set in the Vatican to copy out
old Manuscripts into any hand, as near the old hand as may be, by the
direction of the Master of the Palace, or the Cardinals of the Congregation; in
truth, thereby as it is justly feared, to make the Vatican Library, which
before-times was accounted a Treasury of true Books, now a shop of shameless
shifts, whiles for old good Monuments, we shall find foysted into their
several Deskes, a mass of new base Miniments. But be the Fathers true, and
truly printed, as the oldest print is best, and most void of villainy:

Yet here we have a third Rule, 3. Regula.
to examine the words of any Father alleged, by these three several
Touchstones, the first whereof is the Word of God: for Galat. 1.8.
If any man preach any other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let
him be accursed: the second is the Orthodoxie or right judgment in faith of
the former Fathers. For that, says Tertullian. de praescript. cap. 31
TERTVLLIAN, is the Lords and true, which is first delivered: but that is
strange and false, which is afterward intruded: the third is himself. For,
Ausonius in Catonis distichis.
Conueniet nulli, qui secum dissidet ipsi:
He will not agree with any, who varieth with himself.
A great assurance then it must needs be of credit to that Father, who is
constant in his tenent, being agreeable to Scripture and his Predecessors,
where James 1.8.
a wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways. So that let them now boast
as much as they please of the Fathers on their side; all their words are but
wind; their Fathers being either Counterfeits, or corrupted, or not well
agreeing to Scripture, to their Ancients, or unto themselves, as if we would
examine all Coccius his Conclusions, we could now prove as much, as the most
famous Thomas Vid. Doctiss. and pijss. D. Morton his Encounter. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Morton has declared against Parsons in the question of Purgatory.

5. Means.
The fifth and the last means of trying out good Ministers, is conference with
good men concerning those things, which we either hear spoken, or see done by
Ministers. For it is no trick of a Busie-body, or Whisperer, but a godly care
arising from zeal, lest we should be through a light belief seduced into
error, cunningly couched under soft and smooth terms: as 1. Cor. 14.35
Women are to ask their Husbands at home, if they will learn any thing: and
the Spouse in the Canticles is thus admonished, Cantic. 1.7.
If thou know not, O fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps
of the flock, and feed thy Kids besides the Shepherds Tents: For this
general good counsel given to the Church by Christ, is sit (as say Gregor.
Nyssen. orat. 2. in Cantic^.
Nysseene and Psellus apud Theodoretum in Cantic.
Psellus) for every good soul in the Church, which being ignorant of her own
estate (albeit by the 1. John 1.7. Mark,
blood of Christ being cleansed from all her sins, she is made of a black, a
comely creature;) must follow the counsel of Gods faithful Children, who are
Psalm. 100.3.
his flock and sheep of his pasture, walking Psalm. 84.7.
from strength to strength in this veil of misery, till they meet with God
in Zion: because (as says Gregor. Magnus in 1. Cantic.
GREGORY,) Whiles she neglects to imitate every wise man, she follows
reprobate acquaintance, whom foolishness has made like unto brute beasts.
Wherefore to help out of this error, she must bring her Kids, that is, as
Tres Patres, Theodorit, Psellus, Nysse. Grego. Barnard^s, Beza, M^rcer,
Guiliel. Thomson, etc.
all interpret, her unclean thoughts and inordinate affections, besides the
Shepherds Tents, that is, to that order which the Church by her Ministers will
prescribe.

For this is the fruit of spiritual communication, that as knowledge
ascends: so love descends, when Superiors most tenderly respect their
Inferiors, to guide them in the way; and Inferiors by obedience grow up in
true knowledge, as good ground by sweet dewes are cherished for growth. For
Prou. 15.31.
the ear that hears the reproof of life, shall abide amongst the wise. And
thus we have the five several means for trial of Guides, which
notwithstanding, the carping Cauils of Stapleton and others, are as an hedge on
every side set double, to keep us within the ring and compass of saving
Truth, against all Errors broched by men of a reprobate mind, whom as we may
fully try by these means: so shall we plainly know by their proper marks.

For the marks by which we know them, The second Answer of the Marks.
are the fruits which come from them, as our Savior forewarned, Matthew. 7.16.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. These bring forth fruits, though bad and
blasted, like the Esaias 5.4.
Vine, which brought wild grapes; and the bad tree yielding only corrupt
fruit: for of Luke 6.45.
thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes,
says our Savior, alluding to that common proverb thus expressed by Theognis.

Theognis in Epicis.
(...).
Non etenim e scilla Rosa nascitur aut hyacinthus.
Ad semen nata respondent, says Senec. Ep. 87.
Seneca; Every seed has his own body, says the 1. Cor. 15.38
Apostle; Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, says 1. Sam. 24.14
David. So that from a blind guide we cannot expect any curious conceit, or
profitable performance of necessary duties; that which they bring forth as the
best fruit they have, by which they may be known from other men, being bad
and base, most vile and villainous, whether we respect their doctrine, or their
life. For Vid. praecipue Aquinat. in Catena and Marlaoratum. Maldonat.
Tossanum, Piscatorem and Stellam in Luc.
all learned men, whom I have seen upon the Gospells, think these two to be
the fruits and marks by which good Ministers are known from the bad, and their
thoughts are grounded upon good reason, since both Doctrine is termed the Esaias
57.17.
fruit of lips, which God creates to good men's peace, as he said, Soc^ates
apud Diog. Laertium
Loquere vt videam, Speak, that I may know what is in thee: for Meander in
Senarijs.
(...) a man's fashions are known by his speech: and life or actions are, if
they be good, called Philip. 1.11.
fruits of righteousness, as sins are called Gal. 5.20.
fruits of the flesh. Now then first for the doctrine of bad Ministers, 1.
Mark.
it is known to be wicked by its both unheard of newness, and inbred
naughtiness. The newness of their doctrine is found out by the late sowing
thereof: for when Math. 13.25.
the good Husbandman had sown his good seed, then came the envious man by
night ( as John 3.20.
he that does evil, hates the light) and sowed the tares. In omnibus veritas
imaginem antecedit: postremo similitudo sequitur, says Tertull. de praescript.
aduers. haer. cap. 29.
Tertullian; that is, In all things truth goes before the image thereof,
afterward follows the resemblance. For praecedunt Creatoris bon^, says
Petrus Chrysologus Ser. 96.
Chrysologus, the Creatours good things go before: mala Diaboli post
sequuntur: the bad things of the Devil follow after; vt malum, quod est ex
Diaboli, sit accidens, non natura; that the evil, which is of the Devil, may
be an accident, and no substance. The naughtiness Theodorite Theodorit. lib.
3. haer. fab. in praefat.
well observed out of his own great experience, Impia and execranda dogmata
per se sufficient ad suum patrem ostendendum: impious and cursed doctrines are
sufficient of themselves to show their father, who is the Devil, whiles they
breathe and belch out either blasphemies against God, as in Vid. Epiphan. lib.
1. Panarij.
Atheism, Graecisme, Iudaisme, and heresies about the Trinity, and Christ's
Incarnation, or injuries against men, as Turks by Vid. Alcoran. Azoar. 8. and
Knoll. Turk. hist.
Mahomets doctrine, maintain murders and revenge, or impuritie and
uncleanness in themselves, as Casa Sleidan. Comment. lib. 21.
the Popes Legate in Venice, and B. of Beneuentum, most wickedly commended vile
Sodomitrie, verifying hereby the words of the Tit. 1.15, 16.
Apostle, Unto the pure, all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled,
and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is
defiled: they profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Therefore
says St. Augustine, August. lib 12 de Genesis ad tit. cap. 14.
It is no great matter then to discern him (that is, a malignant spirit) when
he shall come, or bring us to those things which are against good manners, or
the rule of faith, for then he is easily discerned of many. But to pass from
this note of Doctrine, their life is to be looked to; 2. Mark.
which will be found quickly to be most wicked and altogether dissonant or
disagreeing to the profession of a good Christian, by their habit, and their
acts. Their habit by our Savior Matthew. 7.16.
is noted to be sheep clothing, which is to be taken or understood two
ways: First, historically, for the usual garment of the true Prophets, who
were wont to wear Zach. 13.4.
a garment of hair, such as 2 Reg 1.8.
Elijah and other Prophets used, Pet. Martyr in 2. Reg. 1.
to express their repentance and sorrow for sin; whose fashion false
prophets took upon them, that thereby they might the more easily deceive
simple people; albeit some good men did well find them out, as Herodes Gell.
lib. 9. c. 2
of Athens discovered that counterfeit Philosopher, when he said, Video barbam
and pallium; Philosophum nondum video: I see a heard, and a cloak, but as yet
I see not a Philosopher: For Phaedrus lib. 1 fab. Aesop. fab. 11
as the Ass in the Lions skin by braying monstrously feared all other
beasts, but the Lion, who knowing him, mocked him therefore: So,
Virtutis expers verbis jactans gloriam,
Ignotos fallit, notis est derisui;
That is, as we may turn to meeter, A man that valor wants,
boasting in words of prowes,
Deceiues strangers, but those
him mock, who him best knows.
Secondly, morally, and so either for the outward profession of a Christian, as
Tertullian Tertull. de praescript. cap. 9.
calls it, Christiani nominis extrinsecus superficiens, The outward face or
show of a Christian, such as those, who Esaias 29.13.
come near to God with their mouths, but are far from him in their hearts,
having 2. Tim. 3.5.
a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof: or for an outward show of
godliness in many good Works, as Prayer, Fasting, and Almsdeeds, when yet they
are corrupted with naughtiness of life, as Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Mat.
homil. ^4. and Opere Imperfect. homil. 19.
expounds it. For, says our Savior, Many will say to me in that Day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out
Devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will profess
unto them, I never knew you. For why?

Their inward habit is [(...)] ravening Wolves, Apostle Act. 20.29.
calls the Asiatike Heretics, grievous Wolves, not sparing the Flock, yea,
even as Zephanie terms wicked Judges, [ Zeph. 3.3.
(...)] Wolves of the Evening, for their craft, and for their cruelty: their
craft, both in calling the sheep from their solds, by rents and schisms, as
it Heb. 10.25.
was the manner of some in the Apostles time, and in driving them into Deserts,
and Woods, by Heresies, as the Matthew. 12.43
spirit wandering in dry places: their cruelty, in spoiling their Nouices by
prejudice, both of sharpness of understanding, and of freedom in will, since
by Heretical Tyranny they are both Coloss. 2.8.
spoiled through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men,
after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ, and Galat. 4.18.
excluded through their jealousy to affect them only. So that it is no
marvel, if Christ and his Apostles resemble these Seducers thus finely
habituated Matthew. 23.27
to whited Tombs, and peinted Sepulchers, 2. Pet. 2.10.
to Wels without water, Jude 12.
to Clouds without rain, to Trees without fruit, twice And yet their acts are
far worse then their habit, as we may find easily by taking a view either of
the manner of their doings, Socrat. lib. 2. Eccles. hist. cap. 20.21.22. etc.
cunning tricks of Eusebius Nicodomedensis, and other Arians, to bring
themselves in favor with Emperors, and to put down Athanasius, who yet by
Gods protection, was Ierem. 2.16.
a defenced City, an iron pillar, and brazen walls against the whole Land.
Surely, Ephesians. 1.12.
it is ashame to speak of those things, which are done of them in secret. For
by 2. Pet. 2.10.
speaking evil of those that are in authority, or to cruelty, that Galat.
6.12.
they might glory in the flesh of their seduced Nouices, or to the maintaining
of fleshly filthiness, as they Romans 8.5.
that live in the flesh, Philip. 3.20.
whose god is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things. Surely Prou. 26.28.
hatred may be covered by deceit, but his wickedness shall be showed before
the whole Congregation. Heretics and Hypocrites must needs be like their
Master the Devil, 2. Cor. 11.14
seem Angels of light, and Ministers of righteousness: For as Leo the first
did well note, Leo. 1. S^r. 5. de ieiun. x. mensis.
Non possent veras, and simplices oues fallere, nisi Christi nomine tegerent
rabiem bestialem: They could not deceive the true and simple sheep, unless
they should cover their beastly rage with the Name of Christ. Yet Lib. ^. Gra^.
Epigr. and Hadrian. Iunius in Adag. titulo, Perspicuitas.
(...): what is dark to the simple, the Learned find to be light and clear.
Those means and these marks do not only discover the forepast Heresies in
the time of the Primitive Church, according as In Catalog.
Philastrius, In Panario.
Epiphanius Tom. 6. lib. ad Quod vult.
Augustine, Lib. 4. haer. fabular.
Thodorite, Lib. 4. and 5. thesauri.
Nicetas and Lib. 10. tom. 1. Iur. Graeco Romani. The Application of the
Answer.
Harmenopulus have compiled their Catalogue: but also do reveal with open cry
to men of judgment and understanding, who are, and where lie the false
prophets, and false teachers, even the Heretics of our time.

For by these marks, to make some Application unto those who are guilty, tell
me, I pray you, who are they that stiffely maintain new and naughty doctrine?
are they not Revel. 9.3.
the Locusts of the bottomless pit, 1. Doctrine.
issuing by swarms out of the smoke which darken the air? I mean those Monks
and Friars, the Popes graund Merchants, whose doctrine, howsoever it carry the
title of true Divinity, is a 1. Tim. 4.3.
doctrine of Devils, new, and naughty. New, as those points do Popes
Supremacy over Christian Princes, and of Transul^st^ntiation. For that, by
Bellar. lib. contr. Barkleyum cap. 1. Vid. Reverend. Patrem Episc. Roffensem,
lib. 1. de potestate Principis in temporalib. ca. 2.
Bellarmines own confession, was not generally received in the Church of Rome,
till Hildebrand brought it in, whom therefore he makes his first Author of
Italy to maintain his tenent against Doctor B^r^kley: but the time shows it
new, being in the year of Christ, 1076. and the Author to be deuillish, Apud
Sigebertum Gemblac. An Dom. 1085. and Florent. Wigor. Anno 1084.
confessing upon his deathbed, that he stirred up that wrath and hatred
against mankind, by the Devils persuasion. And this conceit, for maintenance of
the real bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament, was but a private opinion
of some misseled Doctors, through the vanity of Philosophy, such as Damascen.
lib. 4. Orth. sid. cap. 4.
Damascene, Theophilact in Mat. 26.
Theophilact, and Lombard. lib. 4. did. 8. tit. D.
Peter Lombard, the most ancient of which lived 700. years after Christ, till
the Council of Lateran, under Vid. Platin. in Innocent. 3.
Innocentius the Third, in 1215. year after Christ, when Gregor. Decretal.
lib. 1. tit. 1. Can. 1.
it was decreed to be generally holden as an Article of their faith; and so
from that time has been defended by their Schoole-Diuines, only by Logical
tricks upon the wrested grounds of Philosophy.

Naughty, as appears, first, by their blasphemy Christ's sole Priesthood,
when they say, Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 2.
that the Priest in the Mass offers a sacrifice propitiatory for quick and
dead: for then did not Heb. 1^.14.
Christ by one Offering consecrate for ever them that are sanctified.

Vid. French. Inventory.
James Clement, John Castle, and Raualiac, when they dare to Marian. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
maintain it to be lawful to kill a Prince, whom they think but in their
minds, to oppose himself to the Romish Synagogue, when David 1. Sam. 26.9.
said, Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless?

Syricius Ep. 1 Decretal. apud Binn. tom. 1. Council.
preferring of Virginity to Marriage, which they stick not to term a life in
the flesh: their forbidding of Wedlock to Priests; and their allowance Apud
Grati. did. 34. Can. 5.
of a Concubine unto him in stead of a Wife; when the Apostle tells them,
that Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and
Adulterers Godwill judge. But what need I rippe up more of their Doctrines? As
Leo vbi supra.
Leo said of the Manichees: so cannot I but speak of them; What is profane in
the Pagans, what is blind in carnal Jews, what is unlawful in the secrets
of Art Magic; and to conclude, what is sacrilegious and blasphemous in all
Heresies, this flows into them, as into a certain Sink, with the growing
together of all other filths.

For now to look a little into their lives; 2. Life.
Are they not so habituated? and do not they act what we before observed in
all false prophets?

What is their habit, either outward, but sheep or inward, but the qualities
of ravening Wolves?

The sheep clothing shines on them, whether we Historically or Morally. For
Historically, If we take it for Prophets garments, taken up by Counterfeits,
we need go no further to search, then into the rules and practice of the
several Orders of their Monks, amongst whom some use Cowle and coat, in
color, black, as Polydor. lib. 7 de Inuentor. rerum, cap. 2. and 3. atque
Rodolph. Hospinian. lib. 6. de ^rig. Monach. cap. 2.3.12 29. and 66.
Benedictines and Augustinians; white, as Carmelites; blue, as Bon hommes;
gray, as Franciscanes; or a white coat under, with a black Rochet upper, as
the Dominicanes; or, lastly, a Philosophers Cloak, as go the Jesuits, who yet
play the turne-coates into all kind of fashions for their own advantage. For
albeit, Basil. Regul. cap. 12.
neither Basil, nor Benedict. Regul. cap. 55.
Benedict, nor Francisc. Regul. cap. 2. and Hieronym. a Politio in exrosit.
Reg. cap. 2.
Francis, set down any other prescription for their Monks apparel, then to
be fit to cover their nakedness, and keep out cold, with as little cost as may
be: yet their Scholars here offend, not only in costlinesse of stuff, but
also in putting a necessity in their fashion, even unto salvation, expressly
opposing themselves, not only to Scripture, which accounts 1. Cor. 6.12.
all things lawful to them that are free in Christ, but also to the Fathers in
the Council al Gangra, Council. Gangrens. Can. 12.
accursing those who put more holiness in pa^lto quam in birro, that is, as
Iunius in Tertull de pall. cap. 1 and Binnius in 12 Canon. Council. Gangrens.
tom. 1
most learned men expound it, in a long Cloak, then in ashort. For Pope
Calestine Caelestin. 1. in Ep. Decret. 2. ad Episc. Narbo. cap. 1.
adjudged such as so thought, to attend rather to superstitious worship, then
to purity either of mind or faith: because we Priests are to be discerned
from the people, and from others, doctrina, non vest, by doctrine, not by
garment: conuersatione, non habitu, by conversation, not by habit: mentis
puritate, non cultu: by pureness of mind, and not by outward ornament.
Cucullus non facit Monachum; A Cowle makes no Monk. But if we understand this
sheep clothing morally, either for the outward Profession of a Christian with
Tertullian* or for the outward Works of Christianity with Chrysostom, then
Papists are portraied out unto us more fully, since, first, none make a fairer
show in Christian Profession then they, who yet most profane it, crying still,
Harding. in Apolog cap. 1. diuisi. 1. and Coste^. Apolog. part. 3. cap. 2.
The Church, The Church, as the Priests of Jerusalem said, Iere. ^.4.11.
The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, when as the Priests made the
House of the Lord Math. 21.13.
a den of Thieves, and an house of Merchandise: So these have turned their
Church into Revel. 7.5.
Babylon, Revel. 11.8.
Egypt, and Sodom spiritually; in that, as the Prophet said, Esaias 1.21.
The holy City is become an Harlot. Secondly, none boast more of good Works
then they, who make them to be Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 32.
meritorious, and precisely prescribe them according to their own rules, and
not to Christian liberty, as we find in their Books of these their three
great good works in particular, as first, alms, which Bellar. lib. 3. de
oper. in particul. cap. 9.
they hold may be lawfully given of goods ill-gotten, by Theft, Simonie,
Bawderie, etc. when Deuteronomy. 23.18.
God forbids the hire of an Whore, or the price of a Dog to be brought
into his House: Secondly, fasting, which they put, partly, in the Bellar. lib.
2. de oper. cap. 5. and 17.
observation of days, according to the Gal. 4.10.
rudiments of the World: and partly, in the abstinence of one meat more then
other, when they Act. 10.15.
should not pollute what God has purified. Thirdly, prayer, which they tie
unto time, which they most superstitiously tie both to a certain time in their
Vide Breuiarium in Rubr. de hor.
Canonical hours, when yet the Scripture wishes us 1. These. 5.17.
to pray continually, (they neither keeping their hours, as they seem, but
thinking it sufficient Great. did. 91. Can. 2. and Azor. p. 1. lib. 10 cap. 9.
to iumble up and mumble all their Prayers in the forenoone for the
afternoone-tyde;) and to a set Vid. Molan. tr. 3. cap. 9. pract. theologiae and
the Manuell and Jesus Psalter.
number of Pater nosters, Aues, and Creedes, repeated by the direction of
Beads in an Heathenish Matthew. 6.7.
Battologie, Pharisaically Matthew. 23.14
devouring Widows houses under color of long Prayers.

So cunningly can they collogue, and under woluish rauenousnesse. For lo,
Nouice, seduced to be a Recusant from our Christian Communion, by setting him
in the forefront of some dangerous Schism, such as the Vid Watsons
Quodlibets. q. 2. art 6.
Jesuits had of late against the Secular Priests, to their own deserved
overthrow, as Matthew. 12.25
an House or Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand, (for Babels
confusion Gene. 11.11.
must be by division:) secondly, in keeping him in the desperate course of
Heretical obstinacy, by the iniunction of that exercise, which Vid. Watsons
Quodlibets. q 3. artic. 10.
Jesuits have invented to the utter undoing of many silly souls, and simple
Gentles, who thinking all sooth that such men say, set Houses, Lands, Goods,
and all, yea, even their Allegiance unto their Sovereign, at six and seven:
Catalog. test. Verit. p. 2. lib. 20 page 31.
De vitio in vitium: de flamma transit in ignem.

Cruelty: first, in bereauing their Disciples of all Matthew. 23.15
by hiding the key of Knowledge, that is, Council. Trid. Sess. and Clem. 8. in
Append. ad 4. in Indice lib. prohibitorum.
by keeping the Scripture in an unknown language, forbidding all whatsoever
Translations into vulgar Tongues, (and so by necessary consequence the Rhemish
Translation,) whereas Esaias 45.23. and Romans 14.11.
Every tongue must confess Christ: secondly, in captiuating their wills, by
enforcing upon their Consciences a consent to their doctrine whatsoever it be,
Bellar. lib. 1. de Iustifi^. cap. 7.
through implicit faith, that so they only may be the men of Learning and
Truth; whereas CHRIST wills us John 5.39.
to search the Scriptures, in which we shall not only find Christ, but also the
Church, August. Ep. 166.
as Saint Augustine thinks. And therefore seeing the outside seems so
fair, and the inside is so filthy, we may conclude of a Popish Rabbie or
Doctor, as of an uncased Hypocrite, Esaias 32.5.
The vile person shall be no more called liberal; nor the Churl said to be
bountiful. For their acts discover their habit too plainly, as appears,
first, by their cunning conueyances to compass wickedness, happily, still
discovered to their own confusion, as their Vid. vitam. R. Elizabethae.
often defeated Conspiracies against Christian Princes, especially, the blessed
Queen ELIZABETH, and our most gracious In Powder Treason.
Lord King JAMES; and godly Ministers, as Vid. Act. and Monuments, and Bezam de
vit. Calvin.
Master Luther, Master Calvin, and diverse others do verify what Eliphaz said
of Gods great working, he Job 5.12.
disappointeth the devices of the crafty: so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. Secondly, by their ends and Emperor his Sovereign; as
sometime to depose him, as Hildebrand Platin. in Gregor. 7.
did Henry the Fourth; sometimes to tread him under his foot, as Alexander
H. Mutius lib. 18. rerum Germani^.
the Third, did Frederick Barbarossa? Secondly, the embondaging and keeping
under of all the World, as appears by their Vid. Act. and Monuments pass^m
and lac. Vsserium de Eccles. Occidental. cap. 8.9. etc.
Albigenses, Waldenses, and the faithful of Reformed Churches, which to their
power they would utterly subvert: and upon their friends, whom they tie to as
great observance, as Adonibesech Judge 1.7.
did the seventy Kings first lamed, then fed under his table. For they cut
short their power and jurisdiction Vid. Breuia Paul. 5. ad Anglo-Papistas.
by their Popes Supremacy; and feed Vid. Missale etc. Catechism. Vaux, etc.
them with the crummes of superstitious Rites, to their small comfort either of
soul so unsettled by diversity of opinions, or of body so brought low by
violent and strict usage. Thirdly, the fulfilling of their filthy lusts and
pleasures, too well known to the World, by their keeping of Platin. in
Alexand. 6. and Mantuan. lib. 3. Calamitatum and Ariost. in 7. satyr.
Concubines, nourishing of Bastardie, under the name of Nephews, keeping of
Stews in Rome and other places, yea, using of Ganymeds, and Catamits, and all
such like Sodomitrie, whereof their own Favorites are the most lively
Witnesses, especially Ariosto in his excellent Satyrs. Wherefore, dear
Brethren, since by this direct application of the marks before given to all
false teachers and blind guides, we find that Proverb proved upon Popish
Prelates, and Preachers, which Athen. lib. 7. cap 33.
Athenaeus has, Perca sequitur saepiam.
(...). Like will to like, as the Devil said to the Collyer; We here for our
part have good cause, Revel. 19.2.
thus judging the great Whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornications. For Matthew. 4.16.
now the people which sat in darkness, sees great light: and to them which
sat in the region and shadow of death, Light is risen; even such as many
Math. 13.17.
Prophets and righteous Men desired to see, and did not see; God Heb. 11.40.
in Truth, providing better things for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect. whose divisions cannot but be to every good man, as Reubens was
to other Tribes, Judge. 5.15.
great thoughts of heart; because this Schism is not only a weakening of the
whole body Ecclesiastical and Political in this flourishing Empire, but also
a most necessary cause of certain ruin and utter undoing of the parts
disioyned, be they never so strong; seeing they are imperfect by themselves,
and drawn by Deluders out Prou. 27.8.
of their own place, as a Bird from her nest, being in a snare, 2. Tim. 2.26.
led captive by the Devil at his Thirdly, to endeavor a reconciliation of them
to their Mother Church, from whom they are ^ent like unnatural Bastards, to
suck the breasts of the Babylonish Whore. For it is the Law of Charity to pull
out of the ditch Exodus 23.5.
a laden Ass, such as all those are, who Psalm. 32.9.
have no understanding, being blinded in Popery, and whose mouths must be
held with bit and bridle, lest they come near us, to hurt us either by secret
Treachery, or open Rebellion. Therefore as a good Physician, first, gently
prepares by some moderate Potion, before he strongly purges by violent
Physic his sick Patient; so our Magistrates and Ministers, Gods
Superintendents unto this charge, are, first, to labor by all gentle means to
win these stray and wandering Wights, in Gal. 6.1.
the Spirit of meekness, since, Prou. 25.14.
a soft tongue breaks the bone; as Saint Paul 1. Cor. 4.21.
wished to come to the Corinthians, not with a Rod, but in Love. For it
lighteneth, before it thundreth: God sent his Prophets before he sent his
Plagues: and all to see if they would Iere. 7.25. and 18.16.
repent of their sins, that he might repent of his punishments. But if they
be so stubborn that warning will not serve, then draw out the Sword; You good
Men of the Sanedrin, denounce by censure Ecclesiastical; and Ye Great Men of
Millo, strike home, and wound Psalm. 68.21.
the hairie scalpe of every one that goes on still in his trespasses. For you
must Luke 14.14.
compel them by force of Law to enter, you being Gods Lieutenants on earth,
Romans 13.4.
not to carry the Sword for naught. And therefore as Saint Augustine August.
Ser. 33. de verb. do. cap. 6.
concludes; For is inueniatur necessitas: nascitur intus volunt is; Outwardly
let them find a constraint; and inwardly a good will or liking may grow in
time. For the Spirit John ^.8.
blows where it lists, on Act. ^.5.
Saul the persecuter, on Eusebius lib. Eccles. hist. 6. cap. 4.
Basilides the tormentor, on Sleidan Comment. lib. 21.
Vergerius the confuter, and so it may work in those who are brought to the
Church by compulsion, that of Esaias 65.25.
Lions, they may be Lambs, of Cormorants, be made Doves, and of perverse
Papists, by the preventing and assisting grace of God become perfect
Protestants, willingly now renewing by true repentance, the covenant first made
in their Baptism to Christ, who is their only Teacher and Master, as it
follows to be declared now in the Instruction, first unto humility in the
lowly servant.

The third part.
The Disciple is not above his Master.] Theophylact. in 10. Matthew. 24
Theophilact expounding this place, understands it prouerbially spoken of any
Master, and any scholar, because so long as they are scholars, they are
inferior to their Masters, for when once they become better, they are no more
their scholars, as Apud Cic. lib. 9. Ep. sam. Ep. 14.
(...): many scholars are better then their But this interpretation is
somewhat too general, because albeit it be true in every Master and Scholar,
as they are so correlata: yet the article here is (...), declaring with an
emphasis or vehemency, who properly is that Master, to wit, as Beda in 6. Luc.
Beda, Strab. in gl^ss. ordin.
Strabus, Stella in Luc.
Stella, and Aquin. in Catena. and Marlaorat.
the whole stream of learned Interpreters have delivered, Christ Jesus
himself noted by the article ((...).) For so he applies it to himself; when
upon this very speech he infers, Mat. 10.24.25
If they call the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much shall they call them
of the household? Yea, and he plainly avouches, Matthew. 23.8.
one is your Master, even Christ: (...), ^lle Doctor, or ille Ductor, that
Teacher, or that Leader of Israel, far surpassing those, who by a special
commission from holy Iehoshaphat, 2. Chro. 17.6
taught the people, and had the book of the Law of the Lord with them; and
went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. They were
sent out by an earthly Potentate, but he John 16.28.
came down from the King of Heaven: They were directed by the book of the
Law: but he was that only true James 4.12.
Lawgiuer himself; they went throughout all the Cities of Judah only; but he
preached the Gospel in all Matthew. 4.25.
Palestina, to wit, in Gallie, and Samaria, as well as in Iudaea, only to
gather into one fold Matthew. 15.24.
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to whom he was sent. So that his
Disciples, be they never so well furnished with grace and power, either
extraordinary, as were Ephesians. 4.11.
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, or ordinary, as Pastors, Doctors, and
other good Christians had, and still from him may have, can neither be
superior, nor equal unto him, who did but either send them as 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors in his stead, or call them as lost Luke 15.4.
sheep into his sold. Wherefore hence we learn a most certain truth, that
Christ Jesus was, is, The Doctrine.
and ever shall be the sole supreme Teacher, Leader, Head, and Master Builder
of his holy Catholic Church, and of all and every member therein contained.
For so Scripture, Reason, 1. Regula.
and Fathers do demonstrate. Scripture under these two heads of places, as
first, where he is called the corner stone prophetically David, saying, Psalm.
118.22.
The stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner.
For our Savior Matthew. 21.42.
applies it unto himself, to the just conviction of the contemning Jews: and
St. Peter Act. 4.11.
feared not to urge it before the Elders in the Council, as the only pregnant
place, to prove Jesus to be Christ; because the Esa^ 11.10. Romans 15.12.
Gentile^ as the Jews shall ^rust in him, being as S. Paul says, built upon
Ephesians. 2.21.22
the foundation of the Apostles and the Prophets, Jesus Christ himself bring
the chief Corner s^one, in whom all the building fi^ly framed together,
grows unto an holy Temple in Secondly, where he is intitul^d the Ephesians. 1.22.
Head over all things to the Church, and the Ephesians. 5.23.
Head of the Church, as the man is of the wi^e. For hereby is signified a full
preeminence in regard, both of honor, since as the head is the chiefest part
of the body natural, so is Christ the Head Coloss. 1.18.
of the body the Church, even the beginning, the first borne from the dead,
that in all things he might have the preeminence, and of help which he
comfortably affords unto all the other members of this his mystical body
whatsoever they be, by due ministration of spiritual grace, according to their
several necessities, that in him they may be full, and want nothing, as all
the Colos. 2.9.10
fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily, and we are complete in him,
who is the Head of all principality and power. For whatsoever, says Ambros.
in Col. 2.
Ambrose, any thinks great in any man, he shall find more in Christ, because
all have from him, as members from the head, yet is he always full: like the
Sun ever shining, like the Sea always flowing* like the Fountain
everlasting; Horat. ad Carn. sedul.
be^t^ pleno copia cornu: a blessed plenty from the Psalm. 132.16.
bud^ing horn of salu^tion, Luke 1.6^.
raised up by the mighty God of Israel for us in the house of Reason drawn
from the proportion of faith enforces our consent unto this truth, because in
this Supremacy there cannot be either a fellow equal, or a deputy
substituted to our Savior Christ: For he alone is first in respect of his
person John. 1.14.
only begotten Son of God, both as God in the form Phil. 2.6.
of God, thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, with whom John 17.5.
before the world was, he had that glory, Esaias 42.8.
which he will not give unto another, no creature being capeable of that
glory, since Exodus 33.20.
no man can see God, and live: and as Man, only conceived Luke 1.35.
by the ouershaddowing of the Holy Ghost, only Matthew. 1.23.
borne of the pure Virgin Mary, only receiving John 3 34.
the Spirit without measure, only like to Heb. 4.15.
man in all things sin only excepted: secondly, in regard of his office, as
he is the Heb. 9.15.
Mediator of the both for Redemption, since Esaias 63.2.
he has trodden the Win^-presse alone, and for Intercession, since he Romans
8.35.
alone sits at the right hand of God, making continual Intercession for us.
For this his Office of a Mediator, he himself alone performs, First, as he
is the only Prophet, who John 6.68.
has the words of eternal life, being the only 1. Pet. 5.4.
(...), the chief of the Sheep. Secondly, as he is the only Priest of the
New Testament, after the Psalm. 110.4.
order of MELCHISEDECH, Heb. 7.24.
continuing for ever in an unchangeable Priesthood, in that, first, Heb. 10.14.
by one offering once offered, he has perfected and then, Heb. 7.25.
lives for ever to make intercession for us. Thirdly, as he is a King, who for
Psalm. 93.1.
ever reigns alone, Revel. 17.14
King of Kings they Prou. 8.14.
reigning by him, and Lord of Lords; who for him decree judgment: Lucan. lib.
1. Pharsal.
Nulla fides regni socijs, omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit: --
Kings will have no Copartners; The Heaven, Plutarch. in Apophthegmat.
said ALEXANDER, has but one Sun to shine: and the Church, yea, and the
World, has but one 1. Cor. 8.6.
God, who is Father of all, and one Christ, who is Lord of all.

So that well might the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, 3. Regula.
upon these good grounds, assent Greek Church three; namely, Clement of
Alexandria, Clement. Alex. lib. 3. Paed. cap. 12.
who plainly avouches, that Christ is (...), The only Master: (...), The
good Counsel of the good Father: (...): The proper true Wisdom, the
sanctification of our knowledge. Origin. lib. 6. contr. Celsum. tom. 2. p. 762.
Origin, who from the same great School, disputing against Celsus, aptly
resembles the Church to a Body, Christ the Son of God, to the Soul, and all
the faithful, to the members of this universal Body: because, as the soul
quickneth and moves the body, which of it self has no lively motion: so
That Word stirring up the body by a wonderful force unto those things which it
ought to do, moves altogether every member of the And Gregory Nyssen, who
expounding that sentence in the Canticles, [His Cantic. 5.11
head is as the most fine gold] concludes it Gregor. Nyssen. in Cantic. or. 13.
to be Christ, not as God only, but also as Man, the Branch of virginity,
without blot of sin: since the Head of the body, the Church, and the first
fruits of all our nature is

Secondly, for the Latin Church three other, as good and great men as the
former, to wit, Cyp^ian Cyprian. in Council. Carthaginensi.
thus speaking in the Council of Carthage of the paritie of Bishops,
concludes; Let us all expect the Judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who one
and alone has power, both to prefer us in the government of the Church, and
to judge of our actions. Ambrose, who Proverbs, [The Prou. 8.28.
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old:] thus
reasons; By this, Ambros. lib. 3. de sid. cap. 4.
Christ proves himself to be God eternal, because he is the beginning of all
things, and the Author of every virtue; because he is the Head of the Church.
And lastly, Saint Augustine, Vid. Kemnit. in orat. de Lecti. Patrum.
Christ and his holy Apostles, amongst the Doctors of the Church, the greatest
Pillar of Christianity, who many times sweetly redoubleth upon this point,
saying, Quia August. con^. 3. in Psalm. 37.
caput nostrum Christus est, corpus capitis illius nos sumus: Because Christ is
our Head, we are the Body of that Head. Omnes qui ab initio saeculi fuerunt
iusti, caput Christum habent: All the righteous, who have lived ever since the
World began, have Christ for their Head. And in another place thus, Idem in
Psalm. 139.
If Christ be an Head, Christ is the Head of some Body: the Body of that Head
is the holy Church, in whose members we are, if we love our Head.

But against this truth some may oppose these words of S. Paul; Ob.
1. Cor. 3.9.10.
We are laborers together with God: ye are Gods husbandry; ye are Gods
building: according to the grace of God, which is given unto me, as a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. For
here it seems that Christ has the Apostles both for his fellow laborers,
and to be Master Builders as well as he.

But yet Christ is all in all; and the Apostles, Sol.
with other his faithful Servants rightly called, first, (...),
Fellow Laborers: secondly, (...), Master Builders.

Vid. Keckerman. lib. 1. syst. Log. cap. 15. page 135.
Fellow Laborers only, as they are Instrumenta animata: Lively Instruments;
as Servants to their Master; Soldiers to their Captain, moving only of
themselves as they are directed by their first moouer, according as all other
second causes move not, unless they be moved by an higher cause; as the
Aristotel. lib. 8 Physic. cap. 5.
Philosophers axiom is; Non mouent nisi motae: second causes work not, except
they be wrought upon by another higher cause: and as the Schooleman Aquin. 3.
p. q. 63. ar. 5. in corp.
gives a Rule; Virtus instrumentalis magis attenditur secundum conditionem
principalis agentis: The virtue of the Instrument is more to be respected
according to the state of the principallagent. So that as the Centurion was
Matthew. 8.9.
under authority, having Soldiers under him: and he said to this man, Go,
and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes: and to his servant, Do
this, and he does it: in like manner are Ministers of Gods Word under Christ
appointed to be Stewards 1. Cor. 4.1.2.
of the mysteries of God, having committed unto their charge the souls of Gods
people, who as Ministers 1. Cor. 4.2.
must be faithful, are to obey Heb. 13.17.
them that have rule over them, being bound to give account of what they can in
no wise discharge themselves, but by the great blessing, and good acceptance of
God in Christ Jesus, as 1. Cor. 3 6.7.
Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but God it is who must give the increase:
for without John 15.6.
him, we can do nothing. Secondly Apostle terms himself (...), a
Master Builder, not simply and absolutely: for so Wisdom Prou. 9.1.
only builds her house upon the Matthew. 16.16
rock, which is her self: but, only in a certain respect either of time, as
he was the first who preached the 1. Cor. 4.15.
Gospel to them of Corinth, to whom he so became a Master, or first builder,
as Thomas Eusebius. lib. 3. histor. cap. 1.
to the Indians, and so the other Apostles in other parts of the world; or of
dignity, wherein he was under Christ a chief man, an Apostle (the 1. Cor.
12.26.
first degree of Ministers,) one that 1. Cor. 15.10
labored more abundantly then they all, yet not he, but the grace of God
with him. This place then notwithstanding being in it self (as you well see)
so plain, we conclude our proofs of the fore-proposed doctrine with these
sweet words of Gregory Nazianzen, Nazianz. orat. 26.
(...) For we all are one body in Christ, (...): every one of us members of
Christ, and one of another: (...): for this member rules, and sits before,
(...): but that member is led, and directed: (...): and although both these
members work not the same, unless we will say, that it is the same to rule,
and to obey: (...): yet are they both made one into one Christ; (...): sitted
together, and compacted by one Spirit. The Uses.
Wherefore to make good use of this doctrine, here we have good occasion first,
for correction, secondly, for caution, 1. Of correction.
thirdly, for consolation. The correction of Popish flattery, wherewith Monks
and Jesuits puff up that Antichrist, their Pope of Rome, by assigning unto him
such high names, and great titles, as indeed agree to none but to Christ
Jesus, whom they thereby blaspheme, and most sacrilegiously rob of his due
honor. For to go no further then to their Grand Cardinal, who is in stead of
the rest a right Goliath: we find his last Bellar. lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans cap.
31.
argument, whereby he would prove the Popes Supremacy over other Bishops, to
be drawn from certain names, and titles of the Bishop of Rome, amongst which
(being fifteen in number) some are unlawful, Vid. Whitaker contr. 4. q. 4.
ca. 2 and Arg. vltimo.
even merely blasphemous as these five especially, first, Pontifex maximus:
the chief Bishop. Secondly, Vicarius Christi: the Vicar of Christ. Thirdly,
Caput Ecclesiae: the head of the Church. Fourthly, Sponsus Ecclesiae: the
Bridegroom of the Church. Fifthly, Episcopus vniuersalis: the universal Bishop,
because they are the proper titles of Jesus Christ, betokening that
Soueraignetie over his Church, which none Pontifex maximus, the chief Bishop,
but Christ alone? Aaron Heb. 5.4.5.
in the Law, but Christ in the Gospel is the only high Priest, who Heb. 7.26.
both was here on earth without sin, and now Heb. 8.1.
is set on the right hand of the throne of Majesty in the heavens. Well
therefore did the Fathers assembled in the third Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 26.
Council at Carthage ordeine, vt primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur
Princeps Sacerdotum, aut summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi; sed tantum
primae sedis Episcopus: that the Bishop of the first See be not called the
Prince of Priests, or chief Priest, or such like, Ob.
but only Bishop of the first See. For whereas Bellarmine would restrain this
Canon unto the Provinces of Africa only, wherein there were many equal
Primates, and not to the Bishop of Rome, who by Gregory, Anselme, and Bernard,
with the sixth Synod, Sol.
is called chief Bishop: I answer, that then Gratian Gratian. did. 99. Can.
3.
would not have registered it in his Decrees for a common rule, which if
Gregory, Anselme, Bernard, and those of the sixth Synod transgress, we can
but hold them for flattering merchants of the purple Whore; albeit they may be
excused for this title, as giving it only after a common manner of speech,
because of excellency in learning and life, as Athanasius was called by
Ruffin. lib. 2. histor. cap. 28.
Ruffinus, Pontifex maximus, and all other Bishops are termed by Anaclet. Ep.
Decret. 2.
Anacletus, summi Sacerdotes: chief Priests: indeed somewhat too highly for
those that 2. Cor. 4.5.
should not preach themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and themselves your
servants for Jesus his sake, who is both the John 10.11.
good Shepherd, and the chief 1. Pet. 5.4.
Shepherd of the sheep.

Secondly, Why call they their Pope, Vicarium Is it in regard of Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom? He there needs no Vicar, Matthew. 28.20
being with us always to the end of the World: and as Tertullian says,
Tertullian. lib. de praescript. cap.
sending vicariam vim Spiritus Sancti, qui credentes agat, that is, the virtue
of the Holy Ghost, who draws the Believers in stead of himself. Or is it in
respect of Office and Administration Temporal? So are Kings and Princes called
Gods Vicars, as King In Epist. ad Lucium, apud Fox. lib. 1. Martyr^iog.
Lucius by Eleutherius, and Anastasius the Emperor by the Bishop Anastas. Ep.
^ecret. ad Anastas. tit. 6. apud Binnium, tom. 2. Council.
Anastasius. Yea, and all other Bishops and Priests are called Christ's Vicars,
by Eusebius. Papa Ep. 3. Decret. apud Binnium, tom. 1.
Eusebius, because, Christi vice Legatione sunguntur in Ecclesia: In stead of
Christ, they execute an Embassage in the Church. For it is Augustine his double
Rule, August in (...).
Omnis Antistes ^s^ ^hristi Vi^ius: Every Bishop is Christ's Vicar: and Idem
(...) q. 106.
Homo Impertum Dei habens, quasi Vicarius Dei est: Man having Gods Dominion, is
as Gods Vicar. How can the Pope then be Christ's Vicar, when Christ has not
made him so, neither does he behave himself, as a Vicar or Vicegerent: but as
a Lord-Royal; when yet his own Law is, That Io^. 22 Extrauag Con. lib. 3 tit.
2. cap. 5. ad init.
the Vicar of Christ should conform himself to the acts of Christ?

For, thirdly, is he not entitled, Caput Ecclesiae: Is not this Christ's
Freehold, whereupon he so usurps? And yet how can he be a Vicar of Christ,
and the Head of the Church? For as that Titular Patriarch of Antioch, spoke in
the Council of Basil, Joh. Patriar. Antioch. in append. Council. apud Binnium,
tom. 3. pa. 2.
Caput esse denotat praeeminentiam, quam Minister non habet supra Dominam: To
be Head, notes a preeminence, which the Servant has not above his Mistress.

Ob.
Yes, say they, Rhemists in 1. Ephesians.. 5.
He may be a Ministerial Head, as the Pope is to the Militant Church here on
earth. Well, be it so.

Sol.
But I demand what Scripture teaches this? For no place is yet to our knowledge
brought by any of them for ground of this distinction. But to deal kindly with
them, who so disgrace their Savior by magnifying their Pope, admit this: yet
then the Pope has not to do with the Church Triumphant, being only the
Ministerial Head of the Militant Church: neither yet can every Pope be a true
Head thereof, since some Popes are damned creatures in Hell, even, Watsons
Quodlibets q.
Sixtus Quintus, by Bellarmines judgment, and Landus with others of that
Rank, whom Vid. Baron. Annal. ad Ann. 900. etc.
Baronius, and Platina in Lando, etc.
Platina have censured either for Monsters, or obscure Villains. But if they
were never so good men, I marvel how the Church shall live, when the Pope is
dead: Shall it walk hop-headlesse? Poor Church! either the Pope is not thine
Head, upon whom thy life depends, as the life of the members is from the
Head, or else thou may make a great many Resurrections upon the enstalling of
every new Pope, yea, and must be sometimes like the triple-headed Cerberus,
(Absit dicto blasphemia!) upon any Schism. Answer these doubts, ye Papists,
or your Pope is no Head of the Militant Church.

But, fourthly, the Pope is Sponsus Ecclesiae, The if he be not the Head.
Nay, then he must be the Head, as the Ephesians. 5.23.
Husband is the Head of the Wife. But who durst call the Pope, the Bridegroom
to the Church, which by Saint 2. Cor. 11.2.
PAVL is espoused and presented to one Husband, even Christ, who (as the
Baptist says) John 3.29.
is the Bridegroom, because he has the Bride, whom he Hos. 2.19.
married unto himself for ever? Surely, neither Scripture, nor Council, nor
Father, ever gave this Title to the Pope, till a thousand, two hundred, and
forty years after CHRIST, when the Dog had his day in the very power and
hour of darkness, I mean, when Antichrist ruffled in the Council assembled
at Bellar. reports it out of the Sext. tit de Elect. ca^. Vbi periculum:
Where yet I cannot find any such word in their new Edition Gregorian.
Lions, where this Title (Sponsus Ecclesiae) was given to the Pope, far
contrary to Saint Bernards mind, who told Bernard. Ep. 237.
Pope EVGENIVS, that since he was the Bridegroomes friend, he should make no
challenge unto the Bride, unless it be to dye for her sake. For that were to
make the Church an Harlot, if She should be espoused to any other, since Christ
ever lives; because the Romans 7.3.
Woman, which has an Husband, is bound by the Law unto her Husband so long as
he lives.

Ob.
But may not an Husband have a Deputy in his absence?

Sol.
To what purpose? To beget Children of her? Then Gene. 39.9.
Joseph might without sin have layne with his Mistress. But she was
exempted from under his hand, as the Church is from under the power of any
Pope, Priest or Potentate, in respect of her conjunction in Marriage, which is
only with Christ, as she truly professes, Can^. 7.10.
I am my Beloueds, and his desire is toward me.

Ob.
Where then the Cardinal does not think it absurd in spiritual matters, that
one spouse should belong to many, howsoever it is gross in Temporal causes;

Sol.
Let him know, that as Man and Wife are by Marrriage Gene. 2.23.
one flesh; so Christ and his Church are by spiritual conjunction 1. Cor. 12.12
one body, of which, if the Pope be not a member, he is but a damned creature,
(for Cybrian. lib. de Vuit. Ecclesiae.
out of the Church is no Salvation:) and if he be a member, then is he not
Sponsus: the Bridegroom, or Head, but one over whom the Spouse has a power
even to be his Mistress, because he is but her Husbands Vicar, or Deputy, or
Steward, not to rule over her, but for her benefit to dispense their several
portions unto her servants, as Thomas Apud Aen^um Syluium lib. 1. de gest.
Council. Basil. ens.
de Corsellis did learnedly argue this Case before the Fathers in the Council
of Basil.

Yet, fifthly and lastly, he is called and must carry Episcopus vniuersalis:
The universal Bishop: albeit no Scripture ever gave him, or any other Bishop
such a name; nay, nor yet any Father of the Primitive Church, save Theodo.
diac. Ischyrion, diac. Athanas. presb. in Action 3. Council. Chalcedonensis.
three private men in the Council of Chalcedon, who entitled Leo the first,
universal Archbishop, or universal Patriarch; but if we may believe the
report of Gregory; Gregor. ad Mauritium, lib. 4. Ep. 32.
Although this name of universal Bishop was in honor of Saint PETER, offered
by that Council to the Bishop of Rome: yet none of his Predecessors ever
took it unto him, or gave consent to use it. For indeed Gregory himself did
Gregor. Ep. 36.38.39. lib. 4. Registri.
many times inueigh against John the Patriarch of Constantinople, for usurping
this name of universal Bishop, as a name too high for any man; and therefore a
proud, blasphemous and sacrilegious Title for a Minister of Christ: Yea, and
Gratian Gratian. did. 99. Can 3.4.
from the Council of Afrike, and from the following Decree of Pelagius, makes
this plain conclusion of (as the third Gloss. 10. Fan. ibid.
principal point of that distinction,) Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus
Pontifex appelletur: The Bishop of Rome must not be called universal.

But (mark a distinction! Ob.
) Bellar. vbi supra, and Sanders li. 7 de Vis. Monarch. number. 447.
the name of universal Bishop, is to be understood two ways, first, so as he
that is universal Bishop, be understood to be the only Bishop of all
Christian Cities; so that the rest are not Bishops, but only his Vicars, who
is called the universal Bishop, and so this name is truly profane and
sacrilegious, as Gregory thought: but, secondly, he may be called universal
Bishop, who has a general care of the whole Church: so as he does not
exclude particular Bishops: as in GREGORY'S opinion, the Bishop of Rome may be
called universal Bishop.

Sol.
But to answer him, and all their Crew, who ever understood universal for one
only singular man, but they, who might well know, that JOHN sought not to be
Bishop alone, but as Gregory expounds the Title, Gregor. lib. 4. Ep. 38.
to put all Christ's members under him, by the name of universal Bishop, and so
to be the chief of Bishops, or to speak us JOHN'S language, (...), that is,
Bishop of all the habitable World: a proud Title for one man, there being by
the order Council. Nicaen. 1. Can. 6. and Constantinopolit. 1. Can. 5 vid. Iunij
Animaduers. in Bellar. contr. 3. lib. 2. cap. 12. nota. 46.
of the Church, four Patriarchs, who had this name equally according, as their
Jurisdictions were equal in their parts allotted to them, as the Roman Bishop
had Italy and the West, the Bishop of Antioch had Syria, and the East; the
Bishop of Alexandria had Afrike and the South; and the Bishop of Constantinople
had Thrace, Greece, Asia-Minor, and the North; the Patriarch of Jerusalem
being more for honor then need, and yet somewhat convenient to decide doubts
by an odd voice, if it were so required.

For we find not only this name of universal Bishop given by Justinian. Cod.
lib. 1. tit. 5. l. 7.
Emperors to the other Patriarchs, as well as to the Bishop of Rome, but also
by the Bishop of Rome himself thus writing, Council. Nicaeno 2. act. 2.
THARASIO Generali Patriarchae ADRIANVS seruus seruorum Dei: To THARASIVS
General (so he reads (...)) Patriarch ADRIAN servant of the servants of
God. Wherefore, as John transgressed the bounds of modesty and order by his
affection: so does the Pope swerve far from all humanity, by his usurpation
of this title, which neither could Platina in Bonifac. 3.
Phocas give, nor Boniface take, nor other Popes after assume as their right,
without prejudice to the other three Patriarchs, as Apud Gratia. vbi supia.
Pelagius reasoned, yea, and as it is proved afterward, when upon this
Chiefedome, the Pope did not only ouersway the other three Patriarchs, but all
Bishops besides, not fearing to be called by his August. Anconitanit. q. 19.
art. 3.
Flatterers, Immediatum Episcopum cuiusque Ecclesiae: The immediate Bishop of
every Church. Is this to preach Christ Jesus the Lord? Is this to follow Peter,
who did not Act. 10.26.
suffer Cornelius to fall down before him because he was a man? No, no, it is
with proud Act. 12.20.
Herod to take to him the name of GOD. But what says their Gratian. did. 40.
c. 12.
Canon Law out of Chrysostom? In oper. Imperfect. in Mat. homil. 43.
Whosoever desires Primacie in earth, shall find confusion in heaven; neither
shall he be reckoned amongst the servants of Christ, that deals for
supremacy. For Prou. 16.5.
all the proud in heart are an abomination unto the Lord: and amongst men they
shall find, that Prou. 25.27.
to seek their glory, is no glory; since glory is Beza emblemat. 32.
like the Crocodile, it will follow them that flee it, and flee them that
follow it; that Bernard might well exclaim thus against this vanity in the
Prelates of his time; Bernard. lib. 3 de Consid. ad Eugen.
O ambitio ambitientium crux, quomodo omnes torquens, omnibus places! O
ambition, the Cross of proud men, how do thou please all, and yet torment
all! Wherefore I conclude this just correction of Popish pride, too clearly
made known to the World by these titles, with the words of Saint CYPRIAN,
Cyprian, lib. de Vnitate Ecclesiae
Nemo fraternitatem mendicio fallat: Let no man deceive the brotherhood by a
lie. Nemo sidei veritatem perfida praeuaricatione corrumpat: Let no man corrupt
the truth of faith, by faithless deceiving. Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur: There is one Bishopric, of which, part is
holden by every one wholly.

Yet, secondly, hence, that Christ Jesus is the only supreme Head of the
Catholic Church, 2. Of Caution.
we are not only to correct Popish error, but also to give good Caution to
our selves for the right understanding of the Kings most Royal Majesty his
Title, which we most lawfully and justly ascribe unto his most Excellent
Person, and unto all and every his lawful Heirs and Successors in the Oath of
Supremacy, when we acknowledge Vid. Oath of Supremacy in 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
apud Rastall, tit. Crown.
his Majesty to be Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things and causes, as Temporal. For hereby we give but Matthew.
22.21
Caesar his due, even under Christ such a power and authority, as not only
Scripture assigns him, when it wills us 1. Pet. 2.13.
to submit our selves to the King, (...), B. Tonstal in his Sermon before K.
Henry the eight.
as unto him, who has above all others a Chiefedome, or Headship; such as David
Psalm. 18.43.
had over the Nations; yea, and 1. Sam. 15.17
Saul over the Tribes: but also reason enforces us to yield, in regard, both
of his Name, and of his Nature, as he is a King. For what is his name? In
Hebrew it is (...), as some Auenar. in Lexic.
think, of (...), for that it is the Kings Office Pet. Mart^^. in 1. Reg. 3.7.
to go in and out before his people in all good government, as Solomon desired
2. Chro. 1.10
Wisdom therefore. In Greek it is (...) Etymolog. con.
(...), as the foundation of the people, because on him is settled their
safety, being 2 Samuel 18.3.
worth ten thousand of them. In Latin Princeps, Gregor. Tholosanus lib. 6. de
rep. cap. 4.
quasi primum caput, As their first and chief Head, upon whom, next under God
we are to depend, that 1. Tim. 2.4.
under them we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. So that Agapet. (...). ad Iustinia. apud Orthodoxograph. tom. 1.
Agapetus might well say unto Justinian, (...): The King is Lord over all, yet
Gods servant withal. For what is his Nature as he is a King? None better
expresses it then the Apostle Romans 13.4.
Saint Paul, saying, He is the Minister of God to thee for good. For here is,
first, his Maker, GOD, By Prou. 8.14.
me Kings reign: secondly, his matter or object of government, Thou, whosoever
thou art, Romans 13.1.
every soul must be subject unto the higher Powers: thirdly, his form, Gods
service, according unto his will, Psalm. 2.11.
Serve the Lord in fear: fourthly, his end, 1. Tim. 2.2.
Thy good, in an honest and a quiet life. So that, look how far God has
given him authority and power; so far must inferiors be subject unto it
without exemption, unless, against all conscience, by rebellion Romans 13.2.
they resist the Ordinance of God. Now certain it is, that God has given to
Kings an absolute power and Sovereignty under him, over all Persons, Goods, or
Causes within their Dominions.

For, first, Persons are subject unto obedience Let Romans 13.1.
every soul be subject to the higher Powers. Yea, says Chrysostom. hom. 23. in
Ep. ad Romans
Chrysostom, If thou be an Apostle, if an Evangelist, if a Prophet, or
whosoever thou art: for this subjection hinders not godliness; but ratifieth
Gods Order for reward of thy well-doing, as Solomon 1. Reg. 2.26.
preferred Zadoc: or for thy just punishment, if thou rebellest against thy
Sovereign, as did Abiathar deposed, Vid. Bennonem Cardinal. and Act. and
Monum. Io. Fox. de his omnibus.
Hildebrand, Lanfranke, Anselme, Becket, Beuford, Poole, Allen, and the rest of
our Romish Renegadoes.

Secondly, Goods are at Princes disposing for the good of Church and
Commonwealth, be they Nehemiah Nehe. 13.12.
did the Tithes, or upon abuse translate to other occasions, thereby to punish
the gross offenders; as Ioas 1. Reg. 12.7.
did disgrace the Priests, by forbidding them to take any further Offerings of
their acquaintance, since with what they had before received, they did not
repair the breaches of the Temples: so may Kings take Tribute of Church Lands,
as Christ Matthew. 17.25
himself paid to Caesar: so are Clergymen to yield subsidy, as members of
the body politic, even out of their Lands, and other revenues, which they
hold of the King in capite, as we Englishmen say in chief, according as the
Gratian. did. 8. Can. 10.
Canon Law judged out of S. Augustine August. tr. 6. in Ioh. prope finem.
thus disputing: Nolite dicere, quid mihi and Regi? Quid tibi ergo and
possessioni? Per iura Regum possidentur possessiones: Say not ye, What have I
to do with the King? Then, what have thou to do with Possessions? By the
Laws or right of Kings are Possessions kept.

Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil, are within the compass of the Kings
Jurisdiction, since otherwise there can hardly, either Kings be Esaias 49.23.
nursing Fathers, or Queens be nursing Mothers unto the Church. Was not the
Judge to Deuteronomy. 17.8.
join with the Priest in the sentence of Judgment? Did not Asa, I^hoshaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah, and such other good Rulers of Judah, meddle with
causes of Ecclesiastical conusance, when they commanded the 2. King. 18.4
Priests to purge the Temple, the 2. Chro. 19 4
Levites to teach the people, 2 Reg. 23.6.
put down all Idolatry, and restrained Nehe. 13.15.
abuses done upon the Sabbath day? Did not the Fathers of the Primitive Church
crave help Eusebius. lib. 7. histor. cap. 24.
of Aurelianus the Emperor for deposing of Paulus Samosatenus? Had not
Constantine the Great in his power what he determined between Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 4.
Alexander and Arius, in Alexandria, between Optatus Mileuitan. lib. 1. contr.
Parmenianum.
Caecilianus and Donatus in Carthage? Who called Councels? Who placed Bishops?
Who established Churches? Who received the Appeals of Bishops from their
Metropolitanes? The Emperor, while he stood, and since his deminishing, those
Kings of the Provinces, as we may plainly see by the Tomis 1. and 2. Council.
apud Binnium, and apud Caranzum.
Councels of Spain at Toledo; of France, at Orleance, and other places. For
this point is plain by those words of Leo the Leo 1. Epist. 75. cap. 3.
Roman Bishop, to Leo the Emperor; Seeing God has enriched your Gentleness
with so great enlightening of his Sacrament, you are presently to mark, that
this Kingly power is conferred upon you, not only for the government of the
World, but especially for the safeguard of the Church; that by the repressing of
bold attempts, you may both defend things well ordained, and restore true peace
to things in trouble, and that by driving out the usurpers of another right.
Therefore, in a word, we find that the King is called the Head of the Church,
not mystical and spiritual (for so is Christ Vt supra.
the only Head:) but political and corporal, as the Esaias 9.15.
ancient and Honorable is the Head: and yet so not an Head which does by it
self execute what is to be done for man's souls health in the Church of God, I
mean, he is not caput administrans: a ministering head, in his own person,
(for Kings in Gods law were not to sacrifice, as appears by Vzziah, 2. Chron.
26.16.
therefore smitten with a Leprosy:) but (as our most Now^l against Dorman, and
D. Rainolds Conference with Heart cap. 10. diuis. 1.
learned Divines have expressed it) the King is caput imperans, an head, who
howsoever he may himself execute any Sovereign duty concerning the affairs
of the Commonwealth, as to sit in judgment with 1. Reg. 3.15.
Solomon, and to Vid. Q. Curtium, lib. 3. etc.
make war with Alexander: yet in offices Ecclesiastical, only is to command
and see those duties performed by such as are thereunto allotted by Gods
special calling, as David 1. Chro. 24.8.
set the Priests in their orders and courses; Hezekiah 2. Chro. 29.4.
called them to purge the Temple. For this is the settled judgment of the
Primitive Church, as is manifest by these words first of Augustine; August. Ep.
50 ad Bonifac.
The King serves God otherwise, as he is a man, and otherwise as he is a King:
As a man, he serves God by living faithfully: but as a King, he serves him,
by ordaining with force, convenient Laws commanding just things, and
forbidding things contrary; and again, August. lib. 3. contr. Cres^onium
Grammaticum, cap. 51.
In this, Kings, as it is given them in charge from God, serve God; in this
respect they are Kings, if in their Kingdom they command good, forbid evil,
not only pertaining to humane society, but also belonging to divine Religion.
Secondly, of Isidore Isidor. Hispal. lib. 3. de summo bono, cap. 53.
Hispalensis, Princes of this world many times exercise the heights of
godliness obtained within the Church, that thereby they may strengthen
Ecclesiastical discipline, and that what a Priest will not do by speech of
doctrine, Authority may accomplish by terror of discipline. And this I hold for
caution sufficient in the right understanding of the Regal title, which is not
given in flattery, but acknowledged in his right as next under Christ, whose
servant he is; that so notwithstanding this subordinate power of earthly
Princes under Christ in the Church, as it is visibly militant in this or that
Kingdom and Country of this world, yet Christ may be all in all, even Eccles.
5.8. Of Consolation.
higher then those who are the highest. So that thirdly from the fore-spoken-of
doctrine we find to our particular benefit, unspeakable consolation, because
we depending upon this Foundation, this Teacher, this Head, this Master Christ
Jesus, shall never perish by a final fall. For we shall not fall finally,
being our Psalm. 119.105
light, and John 5.39.
our life, being ruled by him through his holy Spirit, 1. John 3.9.
his seed, and our Romans 1.4.
sanctifier: his teaching, his ruling, stays us in his Truth from damnable
Errors; John 17.17.
his Word is that Truth, John 16.13.
his Spirit leads to it. So that although we live in this world as in a
Labyrinth, going ever on, but never getting out, by the blinding and winding
ways of wickedness, yet need we not fear the want of an issue, since his
Word as a thread will show us the way; his Spirit our Comforter will strengthen
our hearts to encounter the Minotaurus; that killing his companion, our
treacherous flesh, and discovering his pathway, this wide and wild world, we
may put him to flight, and say with the People returned out of captivity unto
his holy Church, Esaias 26.1.2.3.4.5.
We have a strong City, (for Psalm. 48.3.
God is known in it,) salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks (to
cast out our enemies, and to keep us in compass.) Open ye the gates (ye
John 10.5.
Porters of the Lords house, who have the key Luke 11.52.
of knowledge, and whom he has appointed to carry the Esaias 22.22. Revel 3.7.
key of David for opening and shutting, for John 20.23.
remitting and retaining sin,) that the righteous nation which keeps the
truth, may enter in (through the Revel. 22.14
gate into the City, by grace to glory.) For thou, Lord, wilt keep him in
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee (as on the rock, against which
albeit Matthew. 7.25.
all waves do dash, yet are they done away) because he trusted in thee (for
the Lord never Psalm. 37.40.
fails them that trust in him.) Therefore trust ye in the Lord for ever: for
in the Lord Jehovah (who performs what he promises to be Exodus 6.3.
known by this Name) is everlasting strength. As therefore we cannot finally
fall, so shall we not perish, being set on that Foundation, being holden of
that Head. For 2. Tim. 2.19.
the foundation of the Lord remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his. Can we then be moved out of place by any storm, being so
well grounded? Our upper parts are safe too; for our Head is Phil. 3.20.
above, that we cannot be drowned in the midst of many waters, being Colos.
2.19.
knit unto him by so many joints and bands. If we be weak in our selves, as we
are all but flesh, yet are we strong in him, who first can so save us, that
John 10.27.
none shall be able to take us out of his hand: who, secondly, will save us
Luke 1.71.74.
from the hand of all that hate us, that in peace we may serve him without
fear: who, thirdly, as he Revel. 1.8.
is Alpha by preventing grace, will also be Omega by his gift of perseverance,
Phil. 1.6.
performing the good work he has begun in us, and bringing Z^ch 4.7. Vid.
Calvin. ibid
forth the head stone of his spiritual building in us, with shoutings (of his
gladsome Luke 15.8.
Angels for our conversion) crying, Grace, Grace unto it. For by Ephesians. 1.8.
grace we are saved, and not of our selves: his 1. Cor. 15.10
grace is not in vain in us; we Ephesians. 4 15.
growing both so fast, and so fully thereby into our head, that we cannot be
moved, Psalm. 30.7.
God by his favor having made our mountain to stand so strong. For first are
our foes many? Fear 2. Reg. 6.16.
not: for they that be with us, are more then they that be with them. Romans 8.31.
God is on our side, who can be against us? For, secondly, are our foes Gene.
49.9.
couchant of the Tribe of Judah, who is our shield, will Matthew. 4.11.
put to flight the 1. Pet. 5.8.
rampant roaring Lion of hell: yea, Romans 16.20.
the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. For, Revel. 12.12
they rage. He that saves us, sees them, Psalm. 59.9.
and laugheth them to scorn, for Act. 9.5.
kicking so foolishly against the pricks. Our tears are put into his bottles;
our troubles are registered in his book of remembrance, that they may be in
fresh suite against our enemies for our comfort and encouragement, who shall
find in the end Romans 8.23.24
a glorious liberty, by the full redemption of our bodies, from trouble by
death, and from death, by the coming of Christ unto Judgment. For here we
Heb. 13.14.
have no continuing City, but look for one to come; whereinto since in Revel.
21.^7
no wise shall enter any thing that defiles; he 1. John 3.^.
that has this hope in him, to enter therein, and be like him, shall purify
himself, even as he is pure. For this is that conformity unto our Master in
Christian perfection, of which we are now briefly to speak of in the last
place.

Every one that is perfect, shall be as his Master.] The original is [(...):
The fourth Part.
] which Theophylact. in 6. Luc.
Theophylact and Erasmus Erasm. in Annotat. in 6. Luc.
seem to understand as spoken Imperatiuely (Let every one be ((...)) perfect,
as his Master;) in truth, all to one and the selfsame sense, that others, as
the Vid. Bezam. in Annotat maioribus in 6. Luc.
Syriack, and the Vulgar does read, viz. that the Disciple must conform
himself to be like his Master, howsoever he Chirurgians, who (...), put
broken members into their own places, says Apud Henr. Stephan. in (...).
Aegineta, as Ephesians. 4 11.12 12. Vbi vid. Zanchium in Ephesians.
he gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and some,
Pastors and Teachers, ((...)) for the repayring and perfecting of the Saints,
who before by nature were out of the place of happiness, but by the Word of
Grace are restored, and made perfect. For the word ((...)) Gal. 6.1.
If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are Spiritual, restore ((...))
such a one with the Spirit of Meekness. Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.^0.
that there be no division amongst them, but that they may be perfectly joined
together (...)) in the same mind and in the same judgment.

The point then of Doctrine, The Doctrine.
which hence we learn, is this, that if we be the true Disciples of Christ,
we must always go forward toward that full perfection, which is in Christ
Jesus. 1. Regula.
For so it is commanded not only to Gene. 17.1.
ABRAHAM: I am the Almighty God* walk before me, and be thou perfect; but
also to all faithful Professors, both by our Savior; Matthew. 5.48.
Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father, which is in Heaven, is perfect: 2.
Regula.
and by Saint PAVL, Be 2. Cor. 13.11.
perfect: as JOB was, a Job. 1.1.
man perfect and upright, as 1. Sam. 13.4.
DAVID was a man after GODS own heart, as Matthew. 1.19.
JOSEPH was a just man, and ZACHARY Luke 1.6.
and ELIZABETH were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments
and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless. For if they will have Heaven, they must
do thus, 3. Regula.
since 1. Cor. 15.50
flesh and blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; neither corruption
inherit incorruption: And therefore let us go Heb. 13.13.
to him without the Camp, hearing his reproach; that is, as Primasius Primas.
Commentar. in 13. Hebr.
has fully expounded, Because he has suffered without the Camp, that he
might sanctify us; let us go forth unto him too, without the conversation of
carnal men, mortifying our members together with our sins, and
concupiscences: let us also imitate his Passion, by enduring Martyrdom for his
sake. For this is to bear his reproach, to suffer the same things, which he
sustained. For his Cross seems unto the Pagans to be his shame; but unto us
it is Sanctification and Redemption: therefore let us go forth to him out of
the Tents, despising things present, loving things to come; contemning things
visible, desiring to follow things eternal.

Ob.
But it may be, some will say, that no man living in this World can be perfect,
since in James 3.2.
many things we sin all, and if we say, 1. John 1.8.
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us; and we
1. Cor. 13.9.
know but in part, and prophecy but in part: why then does Christ command us
to be perfect? In Sext. lib. 5. tit. de Reg. iuris 6
Nemo tenetur ad impossible: No man is bound unto what is impossible for him
to do.

Sol.
Indeed men say so; but Psalm. 51.6.
God, who requires truth in the inward parts, commanded the observation of the
Moral Law, to all men under pain of the eternal Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Curse; and yet it is not possible for Romans 3.19 20
any man living to keep the Law, being so subject to all imperfections, that
the whole Esaias 1.6.7.
head is sick, and the whole heart faint: from the sole of the foot, even
unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and
putrefying sores.

And therefore to know what perfection Christ here speaks of, 2. Two
Questions of Perfection.
let us make search into two points: First, What is the perfection here
required? Secondly, How far can any man here living proceed therein? To find
out the former, 1. What it is?
know we that this perfection is the perfection of Christ, as Christ is our
Teacher or Master. For as the Master by teaching labors to bring his
Scholars to that perfection, which he himself has in any knowledge: so
Christ our Master teaches us daily to bring us to as much perfection of
knowledge and Grace, as we can receive, being in truth not capeable of any
more then it is his pleasure we shall receive, Phil. 2.13.
he working in us the will and the deed, of his own good pleasure. So that
this perfection of our Master Christ Jesus, is to be distinguished into formal
and effectiue, or into inherent and communicated perfection. Formal or
Inherent perfection, is the perfection of the person of Christ, as he is both
perfect God, and perfect Man, and perfect both God and man. For, first we
find him perfect God, (...), by an all-sufficiencie, Romans 11.35
of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things, and (...), by a
sole-sufficiency, since though 1. Cor. 8.6.
there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth (as there be
gods many, and lords many,) yet to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. Secondly, perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane
flesh subsisting, in both being every way like unto us, Heb. 4.15.
sin only excepted. Thirdly, perfect both God and Man ((...)) the Godhead,
and Manhood being Vid. Symbol. Council. Cha^cedonensis and Damascen. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
unchangeably, indiuisibly, inconfusedly, and substantially united in the
person of Christ, the only Mediator between God and Man; perfectly obedient,
both in action and in passion; in action Matthew. 3.15.
fulfilling all righteousness, to John 4 34.
do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his work: in passion; both
of soul, Matthew. 26.38.
heavy through sorrow (for Gods wrath due for man's sins) unto the death, and
of body sustayning many torments both in his life time, by Matthew. 8.20. Luke
8.1.
poverty and Luke 13.^1. John 7.32. etc.
persecutions, and at Vid. Math. 27 and Ioh. 18. and 19
his death, by mocking, buffeting, whipping, stretching, nayling, and piercing
his sweet side with a sharp Spear, upon the Gal 3.13.
cursed Tree or Cross, then turned to be a blessed Engine of man's true
happiness, in that Colos. 1.21.22.
we that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in our mind by wicked works,
now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh, through death, to present
us holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight. Now this his formal
inherent perfection is in himself, as he is alone God and Man, the only
Mediator between God and Man; and not that which here we seek, it being
only proper to himself, who only Esaias 63.3.
trod the Winepresse, Wherefore we must briefly consider of that perfection of
Christ, which we call effectiue and communicable, to wit, that which is
communicated unto us, by his working in us* through his holy Spirit, that we
Romans 8.29.
may be conformed to his Image, in which after Ephesians. 4.23.
God we are new men created in righteousness, and true holiness. A perfection
distinguished according to those degrees, which we make in it. For as after our
fall we cannot rise of our selves, but Christ Ephesians. 2.5.
must quicken us: so when we are revived by a new Birth, we cannot attain to
the height of perfection at one leap; but as Gene. 28.18
IAACOBS Ladder had certain degrees and steps, by which the Angels of God
did ascend and descend: so this course of perfection, wherein we are to ascend
unto GOD, has certain degrees of holiness and righteousness, through which
we must pass, before we can attain to the height of our happiness, as the
Apostle says, In Romans 1.17.
the Gospel is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith; by
which 2. Cor. 3.18.
we all with open face beholding, as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. Learned Divines Hemingius Syntagm. Gloss. 4. cap. 4. Aret. Probl. 163.
and Polanus sy^tag.
then out of their good experience observing the graduall proceedings of
Christians unto perfection, out of the holy Scripture set down this perfection
to be twofold: First, Perfectio viae: The perfection of the way: Secondly,
Perfectio vitae: The perfection of life: that is, the course wherein we must
run, this is the Crown, which we shall obtain, 1. Cor. 9.25.
So run, that ye may obtain. The perfection of the way, is a blameless
course of upright walking only in this life, of which the Psalmist thus
pronounces, Psalm. 119.1.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord: and it
is found to be twofold, Legal, or Evangelical: Legal perfection is that,
when a man according to the tenor of the Law fufilleth all the Commandments
of God, as it is required by Moses, saying, Deuteronomy. 10.12.13.
And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: to keep the Commandments
of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?
Evangelical perfection is a careful endeavor of a faithful man unto the true
obedience of Gods holy will revealed in his Word, fully settled for all his life
time, that he may still grow in grace unto glory, as Saint PAVL Philip. 3.13
14.
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things,
which are before, pressed toward the mark, for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus: and this perfection is wrought by the Holy Ghost,
First, in the nature and substance of a regenerate man. Secondly, in his
actions. In his nature and substance this perfection is wrought, when after the
remission of our sins, and the imputation of Christ's Righteousness for our
free and full ^ustification by a lively faith, that inbred corruption arising
from the blot of original sin is lessened in us, and Gods grace so restored,
as that by it we grow still better and better; for 2. Tim. 3.13.
as sin makes the wicked wax worse and worse: so Grace draws the godly on
in perfection to Psalm 84.7.
walk from strength to strength, till they appear before God in Zion. So that
look how far sin has defiled the natural man by the issues of corruption
throughout all the parts and powers of soul and body: even so far does and
shall the Grace of Gods Spirit work a restitution in the man regenerate, that
1. These. 5.23.
his whole Spirit, Soul, and Body may be preserved blameless unto the
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. For shall not Iaacob supplant ESAV? Shall not
the Spirit subdue the flesh? Shall man's sin eneruate, or hinder Gods Grace?
No, in no wise, if God send his holy Spirit, which John 3.8.
blows where he lists. And therefore this perfection of man's nature
reformed, spreads it self into many fair branches, First, in the mind, by
a quick perceiving and a sound judgment of heavenly things, not only for the
knowledge of the principles, and grounds of GODS Religion; but also for the
gathering of such good conclusions, as may both strengthen and increase faith,
since 1. John 2.20.
he has the anointing from the Holy One, and knows all things. Secondly, in
the will, by most ready inclinations, and settled resolutions for the right
performance of all holy Duties, prescribed by God for holiness,
righteousness, and sobriety; since thereto are we Tit. 2.12.14.
taught, and therefore are we purged to be a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works. Thirdly, in the conscience, both 1. John 3.18.
by boldness toward God, upon the full assurance of the remission of our
sins, and by an honest care of living uprightly in the fear of God, without
scarre of scandal given or taken to his own true quietness, and the
profitable edifying of other men, since the high way Prou. 16.17.
of the upright is to depart from evil; he that keeps his way, preserves
his soul, and the Prou. 19.23.
fear of the Lord tends to life; he that has it, shall abide satisfied.
Fourthly, in the outward behavior of body, by diligent watching over all the
whole body, and every part thereof, Romans 6.13.
to give it unto God as a weapon of righteousness, and not as a weapon of
unrighteousness unto sin, since the 1. Cor. 6.19.
body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in us. And so is this New-man
James 1.4.
perfect and entire, lacking nothing, if his actions be answerable to these
in-wrought good habits of body and soul.

Now all the actions of true perfection Evangelical, are reduceable, or to be
drawn unto one general head, which is Repentance, consisting of Vid. Rollocum
de Vocat. efficaci cap. 36.
two special parts; the one called, properly, (...), a sorrow after sin: the
other, (...), a true reformation after that sorrow. The former is esteemed an
action of Evangelical perfection, not as it is a sorrow arising from fear of
punishment denounced in the Law against impenitent sinners (for that Romans 8.15.
sorrow is wrought by the spirit of bondage, and may be in Reprobates, as in
Gene. 4.7.
Cain, and Act. 24 25.
Foelix:) but as it is godly sorrow, wrought in our hearts by the Romans 8.15.
Spirit of adoption, only because God is so dishonored by our sins, and so
displeased at us sinners, as David Psalm. 51.4.
lamented, saying, Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil
in thy sight. For, Act. 2.37.
this pricking of the heart, this Esa. 35.14.
chattering, this Matthew. 5.5.
mourning, tends to perfection two manner of ways: first, as it teareth
asunder our hardened hearts for our sore-past sins, that so they may become
the Psalm. 5.18.
Sacrifices of God, Heb. 9.14.
purged from dead works, to serve the living God; because God only looks
Esaias 66.2.
on him that is poor, and of a contrite heart, and trembles at his Word.
Secondly, as it makes a man always suspect himself upon the conscience of
his own infirmities, which minister seed unto his sins, as Job. 1.5.
Job did his sons, and David himself, saying, Have Psalm. 6.2.
mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: for thus he casts off the confidence
of the Ierem. 17.5.
fleshly arm, and trusts in the Lord, his helper: and so he seeing his own
spots and stains by the clear Glass of Gods Law, daily endeavors by a
lively faith to wash all white in Revel. 7.14.
the blood of the Lamb.

But all this cannot perfect us without a further proceeding, even unto the
latter part of repentance, (viz.) (...), which is an action of perfection,
only as it is a change, first, in the mind, from 2. These. 2.11.
the believing of errors, to the knowledge of the Truth: secondly, in the will
from evil to good, Jude 23.
hating that, inclining to this: thirdly, in the whole man, who before being
Tit. 1.16.
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, now yields himself unto all
due obedience, and service of God, (...): wholly, both in body and in Spirit
glorifying 1. Cor. 6.20.
God: for they are Gods in all points, whiles Psalm. 119.8.
that he has respect unto all Gods Commandments; for ever, in that he
desires but one Psalm. 27.4.
thing of the Lord, which he will seek after, that he may dwell in the House
of the Lord all the days of his life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord,
and to inquire in his Temple. For although the flesh allure him with subtle
baits: yet, Gal. 5.24.
by crucifying the flesh, with the affections and the lusts, he auoydeth the
danger of those inticements: although the world set blocks in his way: yet God
makes Psalm. 143.8.
his way plain by induing him Luke 21.19.
with patience to possess his own soul, and to Psalm. 18.29.
leap over such lets: yea, albeit the raging Devil, spiting at this perfect
man, mustereth all his forces of hard temptations, either to oppress him, or
incumber his way: yet Prou. 15.24.
his way is on high, to avoid from hell beneath; he easily defeateth them all,
Ephesians. 6.14.
by the putting on of the Armor of light, and the discreet using of the same
against the brunt of every temptation; according to their several kinds. For,
Prou. 18.10.
the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run into it, and is
safe: he is called a Act. 11.25.
Christian, and in Christ at the end he Romans 8.37.
shall be more then Conqueror, when the Romans 16.20.
God of peace shall tread down Satan under his feet shortly. It may be,
that he is stayed awhile from following his course by the heat and height of
violent temptations, as were Judge. 16.21.
Samson, 2. Sam. 11.2
David, Math. 26.76
Peter, and others of the blessed Martyrs and Confessors, as Niceph. lib. 5.
cap. 33.
Origin, Platina in Marcellin.
Marcellinus, and that true servant of Christ, Fox. Act. and Monum. p. 1710
Thomas Cranmer, by weakness of the flesh, yielding somewhat to sin: but yet
he falls not finally from the faith, 1. John 3.9.
the seed of God remaining in him, to hold him up, that in the act he should
not run too far, and in the issue he should not be slack to get himself
out; recompencing his stay by a swifter course afterward, with a greater
detestation and loathing of sin, and a zeal more inflamed to follow after
righteousness, as we find it true in the foresaid Saints, what was promised by
Esaias 40.27.
the Prophet, They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength; they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they
shall walk, and not be faint. For, says the Psalm. 6^.13. Vid. ibid. Mollerum,
etc. Lyram, etc.
Psalmist to all the Church militant, Though ye have layne amongst the pots,
(subject to much danger in dark obscurity) yet, for issue out of trouble, ye
shall be as the wings of a Dove, covered over with silver, and her feathers
with gold: For their wings are their prayers, by which they escape, especially,
being both qualified with the meekness of a Dove, and sincerity shining like
purest silver, and grounded upon a lively faith, which, as feathers, fly into
the golden estate of glory. And thus we see fully, what is that which they call
[ perfectionem viae,] the perfection of the way.

perfectio vitae: the perfection of life, it is that estate of perfect
happiness which the faithful shall enjoy in the life to come, with Christ in
heaven: of which I cannot make any explanation further then under such
metaphorical terms as the Scripture uses, only to let us see a glimpse of
that glory which we shall enjoy fully; as when it is called, a Luke 12.32.
Kingdom, for our reigning there; a Act. 3.21.
refreshing, for our comfort there; a Revel. 14.13
rest, for our quiet there, a Luke 23.43.
Paradise, for our pleasure there, John 14.2.
the house of our Father, Psalm. 16.11.
the fullness of joy, the Matthew. 25.21
joy of the Lord, Revel. 21.10
the holy City, Heb. 12.21.
the heavenly Jerusalem, Romans 3.23.
the glory of God, Abraham's Luke 16.21.
bosom, 1. Cor. 2.7.
our glory, Luke 1.9.
our peace, Dan. 12.2.
our eternal happiness, such as 1. Cor. 2.9.
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor ever entered into the heart of
man. For if S. Paul 2. Cor. 12.3.
being ravished in spirit, could not utter what he saw there, how can we
express, what God has reserved for present faith, and future sight, as we 2.
Cor. 5.7.
walk by faith, and not by sight? Colos. 3.1.
Let us seek it, and set our affections upon it, as upon the Matthew. 6.21.
only treasure of our hearts, since Mic. 2.10.
this is not our rest, who Heb. 12.13.
having here no continuing City, must look for one to come, that 1. Cor. 13.10
when that which is perfect, is come, then that which is in part, may be done
away.

But in the mean time, since we find now what this perfection is which our
Savior speaks of, to wit, a true conformity unto himself in that which is
perfect, not personal, but communicable, both in the way of grace, not only as
it is prescribed by the Law, but performed by the Gospel, in the nature and
actions of the regenerate, and in the life of glory; let us diligently search
the depth of this latter question, how far can any man here living proceed
in this perfection? The latter Question, how far here?
A maine point of perfect knowledge easily found by the due consideration of
the threefold estate of man in this world, as first, in his nature, secondly,
in his fall, thirdly, in his new birth. For first in his nature he created
Eccles. 7.31.
good, Gene. 1.26. Ephesians. 4.24.
according to Gods Image of holiness and righteousness; yet is he not
therefore any way with God to be compared in perfection. For Esaias 45.9.
woe unto him that strives with his Maker. Job 4 17.18.19.
Shall mortal man be more just then God? Shall a man be more pure then his
Maker? Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his Angels he charged with
folly: How much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust, 1. Conclusion.
which are crushed before the moth? Therefore our first conclusion is this, we
can never attain to the inherent perfection of Christ, as he is either God or
man, not as he is God, because so he is infinite, and Beda in axiomat.
there is no proportion between the infinite Creator, and finite creatures;
not as he is man, because though he be like us so, yet here we come far short
of him, who is unchangeable in his innocence, where we in Adam received only
grace, by which we might not have sinned if we had would, but not that grace by
which we would not or could not have sinned, being made with a free will either
to good or ill, that he might show thereby (says August. lib. de Corrept. and
great. cap. 11. etc.
S. Augustine) first, what man's free will can do, and then what the benefit of
his grace, and Secondly, in his fall he is wholly corrupted, and become so Psalm.
14.3.
abominable, that his very best parts, yea and all his Esaias 64.10.
righteousness is but as filthy rags. 2. Conclusion.
So that if Christ prescribe perfection from the Law, our second conclusion is,
that we can never attain to that legal perfection, since it requires so
much, and we can perform so little or nothing, that the Apostle makes it an
axiom, Romans 3.19.
By the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. in
store aut germine: in the bud, or flower Heb. 5.13.
, a milke-sop babe, altogether unskillful in the Word of righteousness,
foreslowed by the flesh in spiritual proceedings, Romans 7.23.
the law of his members rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him
captive unto the law of sin, which is in his members. And therefore hence we
determine in a third conclusion two things, first, 3. Conclusion. 1. Part.
that we are not yet come to the perfection of life, being (...), framed or
fitted toward it, but not (...), fastened in it. For now 1. John 3.2.
we are the sons of God, and yet it does not appear what we shall be. For
being yet in growing, we are not at our last period of perfection; the end is
the last and best thing, says the Great Aristotel. lib. 2. Physic. cap. 3.
Philosopher; for as the good Father Justin. Martyr. q. 113.
Iustine Martyr gives the reason, The perfection of God is in God, and no
other being can increase it; because when we are come so far, then shall we
rest. Secondly, that therefore, 2. Part.
since we are yet in continual motion our perfection present is only of the
way Evangelical, wherein we are always bound to walk Heb. 6.1.
forward from the beginning of the doctrines of Christ. For we are but (...)
not (...), in the disposition, not in the habit, perfect quoad M. Perkins upon
Mat. 5.48.
parts, according to the several parts of perfection, but not quoad gradus,
according to the several degrees thereof, as a sucking child is a perfect man
in regard of his substantial parts, although he is not yet at his full growth.
So Psalm. 101.2.
DAVID walked within his House with a perfect heart, and yet he 2. Sam. 11.2.
sinned therein with Bath-shebah: so 2. Chron. 17.15.
AS A his heart was perfect all his days; yet the high places were not taken
away: so Saint PAVL Philip. 3.12.
was conformable, but not already perfect. Omnes imperfecti sumus; ibi
perficiemur, vbi omnia perfecta sunt, says S. August. hom. 34. ex 50. hom.
cap. 9.
AUGUSTINE: We are all imperfect: there shall we be perfected, where all
things are perfect. For, Modo aedificatur Ecclesia, sed in fine saeculi
dedicatur, says the same Aug. in Ser. 21 de verb. Apost. cap. 1.
Father: Now is the Church builded, but in the end of World it is dedicated.

Ob.
Yea, but why then does the Holy Ghost absolutely command us to be perfect, if
we cannot be perfected here?

Sol.
Surely the reason of such precepts is two-sold, first, in respect of Gods
Elect, who by those exhortations unto perfection are the more encouraged to
follow good courses, knowing hereby, how GOD does approve them, and finding
withal by GODS assisting grace an ability, and a willingness in themselves
to perform them: because as in the Creation, Psalm. 34.9.
dictum, factum, by his Word were all things made: so in Regeneration, he
spoke, and he does of his own mere mercy enable us with means to perform what
he enioyneth us; since Esaias 55.11.
his Word shall not return to him void: Romans 1.20.
without excuse, being so plainley warned against their wickedness; but also
much restrained of their licentious and mad outragiousnesse, as Herod was by
Mark. 6.14.
John Baptist.

Wherefore, since the precepts for perfection prove that we are not yet made
perfect; Uses of the Doctrine.
the use of this Doctrine thus plainly declared, is twofold: First, 1. For
correction.
for correction: Secondly, for direction: The correction is of three sorts of
Perfectists: First, Pelagians and Celestians, who affirming, that a man in this
life may be so perfect, as to be without sin, were learnedly, and largely
confuted by Saint Augustine, Aug. tom 7. lib. in Caelest.
in his book against Caelestius, demonstrating man's present imperfection in
this life by his manifold omissions of necessary duties, and his infinite
committings of heinous transgressions, both in his nature unregenerate, which
is wholly sinful, and in his reformed course of life, so full of great slips,
as that he has need daily to pray; Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy Servants, O Lord: for no flesh is righteous
in thy sight.

Secondly, Papists, who stand so much upon the perfection of man's
righteousness in this life, as that they stick not to affirm, both Bell. l.
4. de Iustific. c 11. etc.
that a man in this life may perfectly fulfill the Law of God, yea, and that
Cassand. in confut. art. 21. and Rhemens. in 1. Cor. 9. 6.
he may do more, greater, and more holy works, then the Law requires, so
that those works of supererogation may be sold for money, or in courtesy
communicated to others for their help, as Petrus de Asoto said, In assert.
Cathol. de leg^ apud Tilem. H^shsiu^ de s^x^. Papist. er. art. 16. and Colon.
Antid^d. de bonis operibus and Inter. c. de banis operibus
Supererogamus non-nihi^ de his ad quae ex necessitate tenemur: we do
supererogate somewhat of those works, unto which we are bound of necessity.
For Pelagius went not thus far, as they, who make men of themselves, to be
in a manner equal with Christ, both for fulfilling the Law, as he fulfilled
all righteousness, and for meriting for others as well as for themselves. But
what will not proud flesh attempt to say or do, if it be not restrained? I
cannot for lack of time, lest I be tedious; neither will I further trouble
you with any long or laborious Disputation, in this double Controversy, which
we have with these Antichristian* Adversaries, since you may read them fully
answered in these points, by diverse of our Calvin. in Antidot. Council. Trid.
Sess* 6. cap. 11. and ibid. Kemnit. par. 1. Exam. and D. Abbots against Bish.
p. 2. page 550. etc. and D. Willet Synops. page 914. etc. Luc. Osiand. fill.
cap. 12. Ench. in Pontific. 4.3.
most Reverend and Learned Divines.

Only for a taste, we may thus far remember you, First, in the former point,
that indeed God gave his Law not altogether impossible for man to perform,
since he could in his integrity, Christ did it for us, and we shall
hereafter, when we are restored unto perfection fully in the life to come.
But, in the meane-time, albeit we are in Christ reclaimed and Sol.
yet is the Law, as Peter said, Act. 15.10.
a yoke, which neither our Fathers, nor we were able to bear; by reason of the
Gal. 5.17.
flesh still rebelling against the Spirit, and our manifold imperfections
arising from that 2. Reg. 4.39.40.
wild Gourd, our inbred concupiscence, which is death in the pot, such an hurt
to the heart, that albeit Christ's Matthew. 11.29
yoke is easy, and his burden light; his 1. John 5.4.
Commandments are not grievous, in respect of our Charity, or Romans 5.1.
love of God shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost: yet are none living
so able to bear them, to carry them, to do them, but he shall sometime fall
as the just Prou. 24.16
man falls seven times in a day, and rises again; he shall sometimes
transgress, as in James 3.2.
many things we sin all; because as Saint Augustine August. lib. 4. in
Julian. Pelag. cap. 2.
said excellently, So far as concupiscence is in us, it hurts, although not
to the destroying us out of the lot of Saints, if it be not consented
thereunto, yet to the lessening of spiritual delight of holy minds. So that
the fault of not fulfilling the Law of God is not, either in God commanding, or
in the Law commanded, he commanding what we should do, and this containing
the duties thereof; but in our selves, who should rather hereupon confess our
infirmities, then arrogate to our selves any such great perfection, seeing as
S. Paul said, Romans 7.14.
The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. And as Saint
Augustine concludes, August. in lib. de sp. and tit. c. 19.
Lex data est, vt gratia quaereretur: The Law is given, that Grace may be
sought: Gratia data est, vt lex impleretur: Grace is given, that the Law might
be fulfilled: Neque enim suo vitio non implebatur lex, sed vitio prudentiae
carnis: For it is not by any default of the Law, that we fulfill it not; but
by default of the wisdom of the flesh, which Romans 8.6.
is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be.

Secondly, in the latter point, where they hold supererogation, that is, that a
man may do more then is commanded, and that out of their abundance they may
allot such Works to the benefit of others, they sow up two Pillowes Ezech.
13.14
on all arme-holes, the one of Pride, the other of Security: of Pride, when
they think to do Works Interim August. vbi supra.
above commandment, whereas the Law Psalm. 19 8.
of God is so perfect, that if it Esaias 8.20.
be not answerable to the Law, what we do, there is no light in us, yea,
Matthew. 15.9.
we worship God in vain, teaching for Doctrines men's Precepts: of Security,
when they would have one so to depend upon another, as upon his Mediator, when
Scripture tells them plainly, That Psalm. 49.7.
no man can by any means redeem his Brother, or give to God a ransom for
him: and that, when we have Luke 17.10.
done all that is commanded us, we must say, We are unprofitable servants: we
have done that which was our duty to do.

Ob.
For where Cassander Consultat. vbi supra.
some would cloak this blasphemy under the color of the communion of Saints,
in which the weaker members are sustained by the stronger as ABRAHAM'S Gene.
20.7.
Prayer healed ABIMELECHS Household, and Jerusalem 1. Reg. 15.4.
was often saved for DAVID'S sake:

Sol.
They utterly mistake the question, or wilfully abuse the simple and ignorant,
by casting this mist before their eyes, which being cleared by the light of the
Gospel, may well perceive their false colloguing, if it be but in this, since
the communion of Saints between our selves, consists not in ministering to
others necessities, out of our superfluities, or Works (as they call them) of
supererogation, but in the use of graces given us for the benefit of others;
those graces being only such, as whereby one of us may edify another already
planted in the House of God, and not meritorious to procure eternal life, for
others as they think, instancing therefore most idly both in ABRAHAM'S Prayers
which profited ABIMELECHS House in body, not in soul; not by ABRAHAM'S
communication, but upon Gods only favor; and in DAVID, whose merits were not
the cause of saving Jerusalem out of the hands of their bodily enemies, but
only Gods mercy, remembering the Covenant made with DAVID before.

As therefore the wise Matthew. 25.5.
Virgins could not spare any of their Oil to the Foolish, lest they should
have wanted for themselves: so the best of GODS Saints cannot spare any whit of
grace to others, which themselves may have need of; seeing that, as Saint
Augustine gives the August. lib. 83. quaest. q. 59.
reason, Every man shall give an account for himself: neither is any man
helped by another testimony with God, to whom the secrets of the heart are
manifest: and scarsly is any man sufficient to himself, that his own
conscience may bear witness with himself: Howsoever it be, it is an Axiom
in PETER Lombard. lib. 1. did. 48. cap. 6.
LOMBARD; Nullius passione redempti sumus nisi Christi: We are redeemed by no
man's suffering but by Christ's.

But let these second sorts of proud Perfectists, now pass for this present.
Thirdly, Swenckfeldians, and our English Separatists now soiourning at
Amsterdam, who Vid. Osiand. f. in Enchir. 3. par. cap. 6. q. 1. and M. Barnards
second Book, page 93.
presume so very much of their own perfection, that they hold two gross
points concerning the visible parts of the Church Militant, as first in
general, That the true Church must be without Sinners or Hypocrites remaining
therein: the second in particular, that their Churches or Assemblies

But the falsehood of the former is many ways apparent in holy Scripture:
first, by parable, Sol.
Matthew. 13.32.38. etc.
in the field Math. 20.10
Kings guests at supper, whereof one wanted a wedding garment: and in a 2. Tim.
2.20.
great house containing vessels, not only of gold and of silver; but of wood
and of earth; some to honor, and some to dishonor. For all these demonstrate,
that in a visible Church militant are not only faithful children, but
hypocritical professors also. Secondly, by plain terms, as where the Prophet
Esaias 29.14.
said, what our Matthew. 15.8.
Savior seconded; This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and
honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: (these are
Hypocrites) and where the Apostle Gal. 2.5.
signified what we shall still find true, that false brethren, brought in
unawares, came in privily, to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage: (and these were glosing
Heretics) for 1. Cor. 11.19
there must be Heretics amongst you, that they which are approved, may be
made manifest among you. Thirdly, by necessary consequence in reason: for if
the parts be not sound, the body is not whole and entire: the Church is the
body, whereof all true Professors are members. But the best of these members
are crazed by corruption, as was David 2. Sam. 11.2.
by Adultery, Peter by dissembling, Gal. 2.15.
even after the great descent of Gods Spirit, and so the best men, that have in
them flesh. How then can the Church be so entire as they would make it? As the
Cantic. 2.2.
Lilly amongst the Thorns; so is my love amongst the daughters; pricked and
pained by manifold Matthew. 18.7.
offenses, which must needs come, while she is in this world, where the Revel.
12.12. and Ephesians. 2.2.
Devil so rages and reigns by open persecutions or secret seductions.
Fourthly, by Histories of all times. For in Adams House, which was the first
Church, there was a Gene. 4.1.
Cain; in Noah's, a Gene. 9.24.
cursed Canaan; in Abraham's, a Gene. 21.6.
mocking Ismael; in Isaacks, a Heb. 12.17.
profane Esau; in Jacobs, a Gene 49.3.4.5.
rude Reuben, and Simeon, and Leui, brethren in evil: but what should I
instance further? The Church of Israel, in the best days thereof, never wanted
corruptions, or corrupt caitifes; as false prophets, filthy priests, wicked
rulers, and worse people, if we may believe the good Prophets, bitterly
inueighing so many times against them. Nay, in the Church of Christ, what Age
wanted Heretics? or what faithful company was ever void of Hypocrites? The
Apostles had a John 6.70.
Judas; the seven Deacons, had a Act. 6.2.
Nicholas; the Samaritanes, a Act. 8.21.
Simon Magus: but I need go no further, since the continual reformation
which is to be sought for in all true Churches, does intimate corruptions
therein to be hatched.

I know, the Church is Cantic. 1.4.
fair, Ob.
and Ephesians. 5.26.
made glorious without spot.

But first, it is so by Christ, not of it self. Secondly, this beauty is
perfected in glory, not in grace. Sol.


I know, Ob.
we are commanded to separate our selves 2. Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5.11.
from sinners.

But such then are openly known; for secret tares must Math. 13.30.
stand till harvest. If some ask, Why so? Sol.
I answer, Because man may in partiality pluck up wheat for tares, and let
tares grow for wheat. Therefore God, who is never deceived, neither can be
corrupted, reserueth that judgment unto himself, to be revealed sometimes in
this world by some notorious judgment: but certainly hereafter in the world
to come, as Gregory Nyssen Gregor. Nyss. lib. de Resurrect. and anima ad sor.
page 193.
has worthily expounded that point of the Parable, [ Let them grow till the
harvest,] saying, The Husbandman lets alone amongst us some adulterous
seeds, not that they should always prevail against the more precious Corn;
but that the ground by its inward strength, may wither and dry up some of the
branches, and make others of them flourishing and fruitful; which if it be not
done here, then does he reserve the discerning of the fruit of the field unto
the fire.

the Church is here spotless; the second point is most false, that their
Churches and Congregations, or Conuenticles rather and Satanicall Synagogues
are pure and perfect. For to rake up this Sink a little, and make known their
filthynesse and abominations, mark their doctrine; They Vid. L. Osian. and M.
Barnard. vbi supra.
deny the old Testament: they hold it unlawful for any man to take an Oath
before a Magistrate: they forbidding the Baptism of children, allow
rebaptizing, and sebaptizing; as SMITH baptized himself: they hold
Justification by the works of Regeneration: they hold all things to be common,
even Wives, whom they divorce without just cause: they deny Magistracy,
pretending liberty, but practicing licenciousnesse. For look into their lives
a little: Are they not fantastical, depending upon Enthusiasmes? Are they not
schismatic, making rents without reason? Are they not Coozeners, deluding
the simple? Are they not proud, deriding the godly? Are they not debauched in
all filthy Venerie? Are they not disobedient to all good Order, by confused
Anarchie?

I need not send you further to seek how these men live, then to Amsterdam
and the Low Countries, where they Esaias 59.4.
hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weaue Spiders webs. Vid. Sleidan lib. 5. and 10.
Commentar.
Swenckfeldians were manifest in the rebellious rusticks of Germany:
Anabaptists, by those who were suppressed at Mounster; and our English
Brownists discover themselves too far by their manifold exorbitancies against
God, King, Church, Commonwealth, and their own fellows, if we may believe
Tho. White his discovery of Brownists.
Master White and others who have seen them, and conuersed with them.
Therefore plead they for perfection as much as they please, we know that all
is not Gold which glistereth: we find that they are Prou. 30.12.
not clean from their wickedness; but that they are the very brood of the
ancient Montanists, Manichees, Nouatians, Donatists, and Priscillianists,
making show without substance, and as they began idly, so ending odiously by
the judgment of God, who will not suffer them to reign any long time, that
Truth may prevail. So that now, dear brethren, leaving these three kind of
Perfectists unto Gods just correction, let us in the fear of God take
direction (the second use of our doctrine) hereby unto spiritual growth, and
proceeding in piety, 2. For direction.
as we are very often moved thereunto, first, by S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.15.
following the truth in love, grow up unto him in all things, which is the
head, even Christ. Secondly, by S. Peter, 2. Pet. 3.18.
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For
as Leo well Leo Ser. 8. de Pass. dom. cap. 8.
observed, Qui non proficit, deficit; and qui nihil acquirit, nonnihil perdit:
He that goes not forward, runs backward; and he that gets nothing,
loses somewhat, because his love chilleth, his hope halteth, and faith
fails, who runs not forward to gain the Crown. For no Luke 9.62.
man having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God, since as Tertullian Tertull. lib. de Idololatr. cap. 12
judged well, sepelire patrem tardum fuit fidei: to pretend for excuse against
spiritual proceeding the burial of our father, is a slowing of faith, that
should be always lively. And therefore as the old Romans Apud Plin. lib. 18.
cap. 19.
used to say, Arator nisi incuruus praeuaricatur: The plowman, unless he lie
hard upon the Plow-stilt, may make balks in goodland. So may we say of a
Christian, that unless he press very hard toward the mark, he 1. Cor. 9.26.
bears but the air, he cannot attain to what he seeks, since we Luke 13.21
must strive against flesh and blood to enter in at the strait gate. It may be,
that many blocks are laid in our way, some by adversity, some by prosperity.
But what says holy David? The Psalm. 92.12.
righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in
Libanon, like a Palm tree in adversity, and like a Cedar in prosperity. For
as the Gellius lib. 3. cap. 6.
Palm grows higher, and spreads it self broader, the greater the weight
is which is laid upon it: so the truly godly, the more they are pressed with
afflictions for the Gospels sake, the more they grow in the goodness thereof,
as Hilarie Hilar. lib. 7. de Triuit.
said very well of the Church: Hoc Ecclesiae proprium est, vt tum vincat, cum
laeditur, tum intelligatur, cum arguitur; tum obtineat, cum descritur: This is
the property of the Church, then to overcome when it is hurt; then to be
understood, when it is reproved; then to obtain, when it is forsaken: And as
the Cedar, Plin. lib. 16. cap. 40.
wheresoever it grow, never feels the worm, but always is found, so a good
man, wheresoever he live, yet carries a sound conscience without a gnawing
worm, no pleasure either pussing, or pampering him up, who Phil. 4.12.
can want and abound, taking every thing for an help to set him forward unto
all perfection. Are we men in nature? Be not Dwarfes in Grace. God, my
brethren, has, in his goodness toward us his children in Great BRITAIN,
given many many Motives, and means to this perfection, but especially four,
as first, the Word preached, never before so plentifully or so purely, as it
has been of late years to our wonderful comfort, while we profit thereby; as
to their utter overthrow and condemnation, who bring not forth fruits worthy
of it. For it is as desperate Physic as ever Par^celsus gave: 2. Cor. 2.16.
either the savor of life unto life, or else the savor of death unto death.
Secondly, good examples of many great and good Worthies of Israel, who going
before, provoke us to follow them; as Matthew. 5.14.15. Philip. 2.15
Candles in a candlestick, and Cities on a hill, and lights now shining in the
midst of a crooked and froward generation. Few they are to the fullness of
impiety; but I fear me, too many to be witnesses against us for our turning
back in the day of battle. Be ye followers of me, Philip. 3.17.
says the blessed Apostle, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for
an ensample. Thirdly, the quiet time, wherein we sit securely, every man under
1. Reg. 4.25.
his Vine, and under his Olive tree from DAN to BEERSHEBA. Civil wars
beforetime much hindered Reformation: Now let Peace breed piety, as well as
Plenty, that in our fullness we may be more faithful; as Revel. 3.11.
hold that thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Fourthly, the last day,
which is Romans 13.12.
now nearer, then when we first believed. It will make all perfect in their
own periods; let us be fit to take it in affection, Philip. 1.23.
desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ; and in action still, having
Philip. 4.20.21.
our conversation in heaven, whence we look for the Savior the LORD JESUS
Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself. Semper enim sanctis superest quo crescere possint:
Et perfectorum gloria, principium est.
says Prosper

Prosp. Epig. 27
Aquitanicus, whom thus I translate: Always to Saints something remains,
By which they may increase:
And the glory of the perfect is
The beginning of their peace.


The conclusion repeating all in a short sum.
And thus, Right Reverend, Right Worshipful, most dearly beloved in our Lord
Christ Jesus, you have heard this Scripture opened at large in these four
points: The first part.
First, of proud Teachers being blind guides, showing, that no man must take
upon him the Office of a Teacher, unless he be endued with some measure of
Learning, lest he be reputed but a bold Intruder, such as we manifested our
Popish Priests, The second part.
and prating Precisians. Secondly, of simple Hearers, who teach us, that those
who without due Trial or Examination, will stiffly depend upon false teachers
shall with those teachers fall into uncertain Errors, unto most certain and
damnable dangers: and therefore we are both to take heed of and to try our
Teachers, notified by their marks of inward habits and outward acts. Thirdly,
of the humble Servant, The third part.
who always acknowledges the Sovereignty of his Master, whom we proved to
be Christ only, to the correction of the proud Pope, caution to us for the
right understanding of the Kings Title, and consolation to all Christians
depending upon so good an Head. Fourthly, of a conformable Professor, The
fourth part.
such as we ought to be, not like Pelagians, Papists, or Anabaptists, dreaming
of an absolute perfection on earth, but as obedient Christians endeavoring our
selves by grace to be perfect here in the way, that in the life to come we
may be fully made perfect in endless Glory through Jesus Christ: in whom,
Lord, as we render unto thy Majesty all glory and thanks for thine
inestimable blessings, both spiritual and corporal: so most humbly we beseech
thee send us good Teachers, and make us right Hearers of thy most sacred Will
and Word, that acknowledging Christ Jesus to be our only Master and Head, we
may be conformed unto his Image, lost by sin, recovered by Grace, and fully
to be restored unto us in blessed Glory, to which the Lord of Glory, by his
Spirit conduct us, through Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, one Perfect, Everliving, most Gracious God, be all Honor and Glory,
now and for evermore. Amen.

(...).
FINIS.
A Prayer to be said at all times.
O Heavenly LORD and omnipotent Father, the pattern of all goodness, and
Flower of all virtues, most stout ouer-thrower of all wickedness, and sharpest
Rooter up of vices, mercifully behold our frailty and pronenesse to evil:
help us with thy supernall Power, that we may learn to despise all earthly
pleasures, and the vanities thereof, and love all Celestial and heavenly
things. Make us resist all sin, which stands between thy Majesty and our
weak spirits, ready to overthrow us, if thy mercies were not assistant to our
poor souls. Make us to withstand all temptations, firmly to embrace virtue,
to eschew all worldly honors, and carnal delights, and to bewail our
offenses committed in thy sight. We beseech thee refrain our unbridled desires
with thy loving hand, whereby we may abstain from a lewd and loose life, and
accustom our selves with goodness to the end: That by thy benefit and gift of
Grace, by the true worshipping and serving of thy omnipotent Majesty, we may
possess the Crown of everlasting life in thy Kingdom, prepared for thine
Elect, world without end, AMEN.


