THE LAWYERS PHILOSOPHY: OR, LAW BROVGHT TO LIGHT. Poetized In a Divine
Rhapsodie or Contemplative Poem. BY ROGER TISDALE, Gent.

Sat Sero. printer's device of G. Purslowe; device of an old man standing by an
olive tree; above him, on a scroll, the motto, Noli altum sapere (McKerrow 311)

At London printed for I.T. and H.G. and (...)

TO THE LEARNED AND REVEREND JOHN DONE, D. of Divinity, Deane of the
Cathedral Church of St Paul London, Roger Tisdale wishes peace of Conscience
in this world, and the joy of the world to come.
It Is late: and rather time to lie down and rest, then to sit up and discourse.
The very candles of my life burn dim, which shows it to be bedtime. But I
know not how, a friend, a dear and dearly respected friend, and worthy to be
so respected, Unready Age is ^eady for heaven.
knocked at the door, whilst I was making my self unready. No sooner I heard
who it was, but I had Done: left of vntiring my self, and wished rather to
tire al my powers, then he should want a welcome. I am now therefore ready
again, but so vnreadily ready, as I was enforced to rub mine eyes to put off
drowzinesse, before I could fit my self to give him entertainment. It Is you,
dear Sir, that after a soaring flight of many years, have now lighted upon a
fair Tree, Pos^ cubila quies
under whose branches it is my fortune to hold a poor cottage, (subject (God
knows) to wind and weather. The motion of your wings was to me a warning of
your coming: Vltimae Musarum aetas.
and though it be in the wayne-time of my life, I could not choose but open the
doors of my heart to receive you. To your friends I was heretofore bound in
duty, Obligation commands duty.
and (in our youthful society) to your self in love. But as the times are
now, I rejoice that I shall have cause to show you both my love and duty.
Flattery be far from me, as I wish my soul from Atheism. Yet I must
ingenuously confess, To observe, is a s^llable more then to serve.
as an ancient obseruant of your worth, that your young days were to me of much
admiration, as these days are now of deserved reverence. To show therefore my
duty, it becomes me to meet you with humility, as one of the Churches
Servants: and to show my Love, I have thought fit to provide for you such a
present, as for the present, I was able to give, and I know you do love pure,
and undefiled Poesy. In respect of my weakness, you may call it an April
Daisie, in the Lap of Winter, quickly blasted: but in respect of my aspiring
Love, and your affecting Goodness, I hope it shall be received and welcomed as
a Rose at Christmas, the New-yeeres gift of Art and Nature. ^its are best
welcome in Winter.
If I have soard into the Sun, and singed my plumes, my fall will be easy in
your arms. And I hope for the love of the Muses (who in your Youth initiated
you their Son, Worthiness (...) Youth, (...) venerable.
and now in your Age have elected you a Patron) you will open the embraces of
favor, and graciously give me your acceptance, with a pardon for my daring
into so high a Subject. And as to you in Capite, so to the rest in Capitulo, I
humbly come for acceptance and pardon: as well knowing, you will all think
better of me, that with Icarus I mount high, Os homini ^lime dedit.
and fall into a fair Sea; then I should have reeled about with Bacchus, and
fallen into a foul Puddle. A Poet that is obscene forgets his Scene: and I dare
promise, that if there be any spot or blemish in this Poesy, Venus had a Mole.
the fault is not in the Subject, but in the Accident. The black Ink may blot
the fair paper: and my unskillfulness mis-shadow the Laws Beauty. But seeing
velle and posse are not in every man, In things laudable, the will is pleadable.
Est voluisse satis shall be my pleading Advocate. And so with my Love and Duty
equally twined together, either into a Laurel or a Willow Garland (which you
please to account it) I offer it up with a desire it were worthy (I will not
say your best, but) any little acceptance: and therewithal rest

Most obseruant to your worthiness, TO: TISDALE.

TO THE LEARNED AND CONSIDERATE READER. Lege, Perge, Perlege.
I Entreat favor, that you will read me: and favor, that you will regard
me. Read therefore and regard, for so you will add some grace in the
reading: and read with delight, if it be with regarding. Conniue a little,
and so you may indulgeate my hopes. I have in many places of this work, rather
lost my Rhyme, then my Reason. It is worthy of your pardon, because I confess
my fault. As for the ignorant and inconsiderate, I will speak to every one of
them no more but thus: Quem recitas meus est,
Sed recitando tuus.


And so commending this my late-borne issue, to be fostered under your
favors, and expecting you will Socraticam dare veniam, in respect of my now
aged weakness, I rest

A poor well-wisher to the Muses, TO: TISDALE.

THE LAWYERS PHILOSOPHY:
AWake my Muse! and from this slumbring trance, Praeludium.

Lightly arise, and on thy wings advance,
Thy nimble-soaring Spirit, to the Sun,
Above the Clouds, that yet do ouerrunne
Thy bright-ey'd beauty! Rowze away this dream,
That eddies in thy brain, like to a stream,
Whose giddy windings with Plebeian storms,
Turn, and return, begetting sundry forms.
What though my sighs like clouds do fill the air?
Think it not night. Nor let us so duspaire,
As fainting to lie down in sorrows deep,
And there take up our last eternal sleep.
No, no, shake off the dewfals of the Night,
That dampe thy plumes, and soar into the Light,
With cheerful notes: whilst I retired sit still,
Sighing a sad Faburthen from my quill,
To thy more nimble warblings. Let not fear
Distract our hopes! there is One above will hear,
If all the world neglect us. And for rumors,
Breathed from the Vulgar, which are only tumors,
And swelling water-bubbles, that together
Do rise, and fall, according to the weather,
Why should we fear them? Let the inward Man
Look upward, then do Envy what she can.
Set therefore now thy voice in tune to mine,
In descant manner! and again to thine
I Will tune a ground: and both together we
Two parts in one, so sweetly will agree,
As whilst the rabble, and rude multitude,
With their uncivil clamours do intrude,
Breaking all Law, and Right, true Musicks lore,
We will in tune, them out of tune deplore.
Law, the subject of this work.
The Law must be our Song: not Pedlers French,
Nor old Prescriptions laid up in the Trench
Of rusty Time: Nor moth-eaten Decrees
Worn out of date: Nor that, whose golden fees
Makes the tongue flow with Arguments of wit,
And troll apace in Angell-Rethorick.
These are but wrangling Echoes. But the Law
We are to sing of, has the power to draw
The worthiness of this subject.
All Powers to Obedience, in Love,
And not constraint, as being set above
In the Seraphick Spheres of holy Angels,
Penning the songs of Peace, and sweet Euangels.
I mean that Law, that was beyond all Time,
And yet even now rings forth, so sweet a chyme
Into our cares and understanding parts,
As tunes the World, and glads all upright hearts, What this Law is.

It is the Law of Wisdom: whose right hand,
Is that eternal Power, that did command
Of nothing, All-things, in their several numbers,
And all in One brought forth a world of wonders.
His left hand Goodness, or eternal Love,
That on the Chaos like the silver Dove
On Noah's watery Deluge sweetly gliding,
Of new Discoueries brought the happy tiding,
And formed all forms, one for another sake,
And for himself them all as one did make.
Whilst in the midst Wisdom did fit enthroned,
Spangled with Stars, and with a crown adornd
Of awful Majesty writing a Lecture,
To all his creatures, with that sacred Scepter,
Of his just will, whereby he sets a border
To every form, and gives all forms their order. This Law is threefold:
Power, Wisdom, Love

Of this Law must I sing: the Law of Power,
Wisdom and Love, that from the heau'ny Tower,
On the wide-spredding sixe-wing'd Cherubins,
Descended down into this frame of things:
And in six days shed his trine-working Spirit
Through All of this Round-All, to dis-inherit
Confusion from his work, and make fair Light,
The true succeeding issue of black Night.
A Poetical Invocation.
O therefore thou most sacred Archy-Muse,
With dulced, and harmonious Tones transfuse
All my best Powers! Bear my frailety up
The great Olympian height! and reach the cup
Of heavenly Nectar, to my fainting hand!
That I may taste, and with that taste command
Dark Chaos to descend, and spritely fire,
From out dead Embers lightly to aspire.
That as the Snake by casting off her Slough,
The Eagle of his Bill aged and tough,
Renew their youthful temper: or more fit,
As did Elias let his garment slip,
Casting off humane fraileties, when his Spirit
Kindling with zeal, mounted the burning Charrie
To Jove's bright-shining Temple: So my powers,
Forsaking earths dark Elementall Bowers,
May nimbly soar into th'Angellick Tribe,
And be with them divinely stellifide.
Luciferous Beauties, fair, Of Angels.
and first of creatures
Light of the prime Light, intellectual features
Of the first Form, Heavens glorious Architype,
The sons of Elohim, and the days delight.
With you I first begin to show Laws power
And calculate the Birth and native hour
Of your great greatness, in whom first the Law
(As in the first of Subjects under awe,
Of heavens eternal Scepter) had his Being
In golden Thrones, but knew no golden feeing.
It Is you bright Mirrors of Maiesticke beauty,
Collecting in your Orbs with sacred duty
The Ideall Rays of Him, whose all-discerning
Does make you shine with intellectual Learning.
It Is you in whom I see as in a glass,
What is to come, what is now, and long since was
Before there was Beginning. So the Bell
Tolles to the Grave: So the clear Fountain Well,
Is by the eddying streams at last found out:
And the celestial eye that wheels about
This elementall Square, by his bright Rays,
That on the Christall-streaming River plays,
Is steadfastly therein discerned and seen,
That else by none but Jove's own Birds has been.
Homers golden Chain: God, Angels, Stars, Elements.
And so by your tralucent beams of Light,
Shot from the great Maiestick Throne of Right,
Into your dutyous Orbs, and then again
From you into the great celestial Maine,
And Sea of many Beauties, which descending
Into these lower parts, that have depending,
Only from things above, we read, and see,
In Charecters of State, and Majesty,
The Law of Power, Wisdom, and of Love,
That does in all inferior Subjects move,
Creating, Ruling, and withal preserving
Things in their Being, Order, and true serving.
Essence and Power
Essence and Being in this Round of things,
Shows the great Power of the King of Kings:
That could of Nothing such a Something make,
As does amaze and cause all Powers to shake,
In comprehending but the least Creation
His Power has framed in this Conglomoration.
Order and Wisdom.
Order shows Wisdom, setting every part
With such a sweet facility and Art,
Each in subordinate Order to another,
As that to this, and this to that is Brother,
In sympathy, and correspondent frame,
And all together dutyously proclaim
The God of Order to be only Wise,
Deserving Hecatomben sacrifice.
But when we look how every thing created, Beauty and Love.

Is from above us inwardly innated
With fruitful Virtues, thriuing qualities,
That out of their pure Natures do arise,
All beauteous in themselves, and fit for the use
One of another: who can other choose,
But see, and fairly read, Goodness and Love,
In this great Volume, written from above,
With Gods own finger, in such sweet inditing,
As if Eternal Love for his delighting,
Had penned a Poem all of Love and sweetness,
To show himself, and teach us Love and meekness?
All these (and these are all, no more but three
United in one sacred Unity:)
As Essence, Order, Beauty in this Frame,
And Power, Wisdom, Love above the same:
These three, I say, are the true Rules of Law,
Before all time, and in all time do awe
The creature in his bounds. For what is command
That wants Power? Or who can understand
What Power is, without a Being Subject,
Over which it has Dominion to judge it.
^ower without ^sedome is Ty^nny. ^isdome without ^oue, is subtilty. ^oue,
without Wisdom and ^ower, is folly.
Yet Power without foreseeing Wisdom erreth,
Not knowing: but with cruelty deterreth,
Where it commands: when Sapience joined with Power,
Ordreth extremes, and makes mildness lower.
It truly Gouernes, Wisdom is the Law,
Knows to instruct, and how to keep in awe.
But what is all th'essentiall frame of things?
And what is Order? Neither of them brings
Perfection to the work, without true use,
Which Love and Goodness sweetly does infuse.
So in a Clock we see the solid form,
On many nimble-mouing wheels is borne,
All ordered, with such Order, and such Art,
As one to All, and All to every part,
Is symmetrall, showing the Makers skill,
And Power to make. But should the Makers will
Have gone no further, and not motion lent,
To show the use, and his own fair intent:
Who could have called that well-fram'd form a Clock,
Or known it other wise then as a mock
Of powerful Art, that wants his proper end,
Feeding the eye, but does to nothing tend?
Will in the maker, tending to direction,
Of Power, and Wisdom, is the full perfection,
Which is true Love. The Court Ha^ of Law.
And so in this round Sphere
Finding sweet Beauty, Order, and Essence there,
We therewithal from the Floriferous Center, 1. Floriferous. 2. Stelliferous.
3. Luciferous.

Through you Stelliferous. Stations soon do enter,
Into your bright Luciferous Orbs of Beauty
(Fair sons of Elohim) and there read the duty
Of true-borne Subjects, ever held in awe,
Under the Trine-Vne sovereignty of Law.
Whereof that I may sing, first give me leave,
The triple Region of this World to cleave,
Just in three parts, as three Court Hals, wherein
Of Errors they the upper hand do win,
And in disposing right to every one,
Forbid withal, that wrong be done to none.
The first and lowest is this earthly Stage, The great Ha^ has 3. Co^

Whereon we tread in wandering equipage:
All richly hung about her flowery Stronds,
With precious Gemmes like Sparks of Diamonds
Dropped down from heaven: and is the common Hall
Where diverse Courts are kept, Kings Bench. Chancery. Common Plac^
that unto All
Give common Right, in Earth, in Air, in Seas,
With Royal, Peaceful, and with Common Pleas,
Whereof hereafter. But above all these,
Ascending upward by a few degrees,
^tar-Chamber.
One Court in glorious State above the rest,
Opens her Gates equally East and West:
Wherein the Sun of Majesty does guild,
Like April Flowers in a Meddowy Field,
Her starry Thrones of Judgment. Here does sit
The Power of War, and true Promethean Wit:
The Iouialist, and grauer Saturnine:
Mild Venus Dove, and quick-eyd Serpentine.
In brief, this Court holds Planetary Station,
And is the great Star Chamber Constellation.
^arliament.
Next this, up higher, through heavens Painted Chamber
And Galaxia of the great Commander
Of this round Universe, a third Court-Hall,
Sacred for State, and made Imperial,
Above all others, entertaines the King,
Crowned, and enthroned, upon whose right hand wing,
His Son the Prince of Peace, in Robes of State
Sits richly clothed. Where that they may debate
The Kingdoms great affairs (as from them sent)
The Breath of Majesty calls a Parliament
Of Angell-Senatours wise Intelligences,
Full of Divine, and sacred influences.
Poetical ^estie.
But stay, my Muse! dare thou aspire so high,
On waxen wings? Or dare thou mount so nigh
That powerful Wisdom? that All-sapient Power,
That made years, months, weeks, days, and every hour,
Yea, every minute, and times smallest moment,
To be the Register, and stately Comment
Of his admired works, and working Spirit?
Forbear I say! and and either climb the Charrit,
Of true Seraphick Love that does unite
Wisdom and Power (like a Favorite
Of that great King of Kings) or be still mute,
And humbly kneeling offer up thy suit
Of true Obedience, till that Arm descend,
To lift thee up, that Virtue does defend. A Poetical encouragement.

And with the thought me thinks already now,
I am all Fire, and I know not how
The dark confused Chaos of my brain,
And all those earthly Powers, that restrain
Man's climing Faculties, in an instant are
Like an inflamed Meteor in the Air;
And what was massy, intricate, and thick,
Is now become light, deleuer, and quick,
To mount through Heavens bright starry Regiment,
Into the highest Court of Parliament.
Where Power, Wisdom, Lone, do sit in acting
Laws truly good, that suffer no detracting.
Law is all Order and Harmony.
Sing then of these: and then thou sing'st of all,
That can within the Scale of Music fall:
For these are Music, and that rauishing Tone,
That from the Chaos wrought all things to One,
And ordered all disorders with one Fiat
Of heavenly sweetness, the true Key of Quiet:
Whereto all Unisons with one consent,
As strings are fitted on an Instrument,
Do seu'rally in tune and order rise,
And altogether sweetly harmonize.
Moses Beginning.
In the Beginning -- O where am I now?
Even at an ending. For my Muse does bow
In Circle-wise, whose first and last is One
And All in All, that never is alone,
And yet all One. In this Beginning was it,
When (but Eternity) none did surpass it,
Trine Elohim created Heaven and Earth,
And to this Round-All gave a timely Birth,
Chaos confusedly described.
Untimely though it seemed. For darkness then
Surrounded All this Round-All, even as when
A Point confusedly multiplide, does cloud
The Virgin paper, whilst the Artsman proud
Of his inacting Power, does blot it over
All black, intending after to discover,
Lines, Bodies, Shapes, and sundry beauteons forms,
Drawn out of darkness, as fair Peace from storms,
And Day from Night. For in this dark Abyss,
Heaven, Earth, and all therein contained is
Confusedly in one Conglomoration
Were symboliz'd as seeds of this Creation.
But in such strife, and orderlesse disorder,
As therein nothing had his proper border,
But each did War, to have another place,
And fight to give, or get unknown disgrace.
That in the smooldring heat, cold Earth and Water,
In dogged wrangle, did bring forth a Daughter,
Called the tempestuous Air. And Air and Fire,
Piercing the Chaos, did themselves retire,
Into the Centrelesse bosom of the Deep,
And through by-crannies here and there did creep,
Till at the last, joining their lawless forces,
To stir up War, like two untamed Horses,
They shook with tra^pling all the formelesse Mass,
And with that Ague-fit did boldly pass
Through every humor, every quality
Of heat and cold, drought and humiditie,
That altogether in an uproar were,
Yet to be sought out, no man could tell where:
For yet there was no place: but high and low,
Was all inforcement, none his place did know.
Which was the cause, turmoyle and hurly-burly
Rose like a tempest, and each thing was surly
Unto another, without giving way,
But proudly iustling, and enforcing stay
That as at Sea, when Aeolus vnbindes
The mustring clouds, and sends contrarious winds,
To rouse the fretful waves: a sulpherous thunder
With smoaky Lightning breaks the Air asunder,
To meet those raging Tidelings, and together
All join in conflict, forcing stormy weather,
That does not cloud, but dark this Hemisphere,
And in a grave transparent Light interre:
Save that upon the liquid Ocean glass
The nimble Lightning now and then does pass,
And gives a a glim'ring light, which who had seen it,
He could no more but as a twinkling deem it.
So in this undigested formelesse Matter,
Strife and Contention forcing up the Water,
A smoaky breath, from out their sulfurous bowels,
In dusky clouds, and stormy vapor rowles,
Here, there, and all about, that with the fogge
So forced from that deep and myery Bogge,
Cymerian Darkness was that nothing-All
And All-beginning Nothing: save withal,
That by odd starts, and suddainties, sometime
In this hot tumult, from the muddy slime,
A liquid sweat upon the upper face
Of the vast Deep (like Pearl or Isinglasse)
Did issue forth, casting a gleaming spangle,
Which by and by, thick darkness did entangle.
But now behold! God moved upon the face of the Waters.
(for now it is worth an Ecce)
When all was formelesse, void, and in perplexie,
Dark, and obscure, the Spirit of Elohim,
On the moist Superficies did swim,
Nay (as the Text says) incubat, and nessle,
To brood the unborn, who as then did wrestle
Together in the teeming womb of Nature,
Who should be first, and who of highest stature.
And all this in the dark: for Darkness still
The spacious Vault of Emptiness did fill.
And he that was chief Lord of this Creation,
Had Darkness made his secret habitation. Darkness is Gods Habitation. Psalm. 18.

^ecret I call it; for what quick-ey'd sense
Of the best Sophist, ever found from whence
Or how dark Chaos came? or could discover
What formlesse Matter was, though much they houer,
As I do now about it? Then much less,
Can the dull eye of Art, see or express
Light inaccessible
The Light that dims all Lights. Gaze on the Sun,
And thou shall find thine eyesight quite undone,
Stricken with endless Darkness. So much rather,
Who in his Essence seeks to know the Father
Of all created Lights, glorious beyond
What either Men, or Angels understand,
May in that search say to the Day, good Night,
And live for ever a blinded Sodomite,
Dwelling in darkness. For when all is done,
That nimble wit, and quick conception
Can pry into, we do but grope, and feel,
Like cupshot Bacchinals, that wandering reele
About the room, to find a burning Candle,
Which in the dark themselves do hold and handle,
And cannot see it. Fear, and admiration
Best fits a wise and sober generation,
In this inquiry. Whosoever seeks, does well,
For that great Light that does in darkness dwell.
God is Light and Life.
The Divine Eaglet that did tower so high
Into this Light, above the Starry sky,
Found him to be the very Life of all,
Within this new-created general.
And that this Life was Light, which by divine, John 1.5.

And sacred influence, did pierce and shine,
Even through the Chaos, in the secret dark,
And yet withal, he leaves it for a mark
Of eminence, and much to be commended,
That Light of darkness was not comprehended.
Again, the sixe-wing'd sacred Cherubim, Esaias 6.

The knowing sons of this great Elohim,
Prime scholars of the prime Light, and endowed
With learned graces, have their eyes yet shrouded,
With their two fore-wings, showing bashful fear,
And humble reu'rence to that Light so clear:
Which should it in full Majesty forth shine,
And they gaze on it with wide open eyne,
Those bright-ey'd Lamps would soon in darkness
Whom now he does with oily graces cherish.
Therefore, O Man! and thou my forward Muse!
Dare not too high! lest we our selves abuse.
An humble knowledge makes us to ascend:
Pride casts us down, unfit to comprehend.
So that to know the Light, with true discerning,
Is to confess it comes not in our learning.
For if that we could comprehend that Light,
Not it, but darkness should be infinite.
Yet that we might not altogether live
In lawless darkness, and our Spirits give
Up to dull ignorance, as nothing knowing,
Of this prime Light, behold, new light comes flowing
A Parliament of Power, Wisdom, Love.
From the bright Fountain. Power, Wisdom, Love,
In consultation being set above,
How to reduce dark Chaos into form,
And give a Law unto the lawless storm
Of the first then unformed Elements,
Shot nimble Lightning forth, and so preuents
The rage of rude disorder. Darkness fell,
Affrighted down into the depth of Hell:
And with the Word of Wisdom, Fiat Lux,
The Law of Light.
Light flowing came, in a most glorious flux.
Let there be Light! O, was there ever Law
So short, so sweet? or had more power to awe
Confused strife? when all was out of frame,
This was the Law, did reconcile the same:
Proclaimed a Peace: gave eyesight to the blind:
Light threefold.
And drossie Oar in Minerals refinde.
Peace is the song of Angels. Light of Eye,
The fair transparent beauty of the Sky.
In Elements, the Fire has supreme power,
The scumme and Tartar of the rest to skowre,
To purge, and quicken. So in a threefold Light,
The Dayspring rises, banishing the Night:
The Night of lawless Error, and of blindness;
Of warlike strife, and turbulent unkindness:
That sees not what is what: but in confusion,
All Law-rights breaks, with violent intrusion,
One on another neck, confounding Peace,
And wanting Love, and so without increase.
This Night, I say, was banished. And the Day,
The Light, and Law of things, as fresh as May,
Came like a Bridegroom forth in bright attire,
As the Meridian Sun, that does aspire
The Vertick Point. No shadow then was seen;
Nor the celestial Curtain drawn between
This Elementall and the supreme Light,
Whose round Expansion closes in the Night:
But All was all alike, and every where,
About the earth, transparent, bright, and clear:
For All was Light. Only in site and place,
There was some difference. That had highest grace,
That nearest to the Prime Light was advanced,
And that of less, that toward this Center chanced.
The middle Region did of both partake:
Yet but One Light The Eternal Power did make,
To light us into darkness, there to see
The sacred Light of all Eternity.
Law-rights observed, do show us what is right:
And Light it is that does discover Light.
Truth seeks no corners, there does darkness lurk:
And mighty Elohim, when he fell to work,
Lighted a Candle up that all might view him:
For In lumine suo videbimus Lumen.
The Light creating, by created Light,
Is out of darkness brought into our sight.
For had not Light struck Darkness underground,
How in the dark could any thing be found,
That now we find, and see? How could the Law
Have come to light? who could Essentialls draw
Number. Order. Unity.
Into their seu'rall Numbers? who could order
Those numbers right? and give a proper border
To every such Essential? Who (I say)
Could of these two find out the ready way,
And Number make with Order so agree,
As both should hold one useful sympathy?
This Light and Law can do. The Law of Light,
And Light of Law, that gives to all things Right,
Can Number, Order, and Unite in One,
With Fiat Lux: for so the Law begun.
Let there be Light! Here is a word of Power,
Beyond all Powers: an enriching Dower,
Beyond all Riches: and they both together, Law Commanding and forbidding

Are a Commandment, well I know not whether
Commanding, or forbidding. In the mean,
Wisdom took place, and being apt to gleane
Wealth from the One, and Power from another
Commanded this, and did forbid the the other.
So Light was cherisht, and dull darkness chidden:
Truth brought to Light, and Error was forbidden.
In brief this Law in Power being strong,
And rich in Love, because it does no wrong,
Grew upright Wise: for Wisdom is the Light
To Power and Love, and thereby makes all right.
So that a newborn Issue from above
Descended out from Power, Wisdom, Love: Law descended from Heaven.

And was no sooner borne, but by and by
Was entertained with gladsome melody.
And every one sung out this cheerful Salto,
I am noua Progenies Coelo demittitur alto. Virg. Eclog. 4.

And this was Law: the Law that lights All
Into the Light, and Darkness does inthrall
In chains below the Deep: strikes Error blind:
And the light way to Truth and Right does find.
The Law of Light inacted.
Nor only so: for with the promulgation
Of this great Law, issued a Proclamation,
Commanding as it went to each degree,
This loud proclaiming Summons, Let there be!
Let, is a word of Power: There shows the place:
Be, is all Being, Order, and due Grace.
And altogether with one Let there be!
Gives us fair Light, for every one to see.
And with that Light, does summon, and convent,
In Heaven, Air, Earth, a Royal Parliament,
Of powerful, wise, and graceful Senators,
True Lamps of Light, and Christall-shining Mirrors,
Who with that Word of Power no sooner had
Their due creating summons, but all glad,
Of such a Birthright, to that word of might,
Light threefold: Intellectual, Celestial, Elementall.
Humbly did Echo forth, Let there be Light!
Light Intellectual in the Angellick Mansion,
Celestial Light within the fair Expansion:
And in these Elementall Orbs down lower,
A Light of Fire, to cherish, not devour.
And so as Light, by Light created was,
From those true Lights, an Act of Light did pass,
Approved in all three Courts, and by the King*
Established as an everlasting thing,
Not to be darkened: for this Light was meant us,
To be a Law, to which Le Roy assentus:
And therefore is enacted unto All,
Not to be broke, but held perpetual.
Thus was there Light: which in the first Creation
Commanded was with Royal approbation.
Light had not only Being, but Command
Was laid upon that Light, that it should stand
Still in the ways of Light. Light must be Light,
Not stooping down to the Errors of the Night,
But hold dependence on the Word of Truth,
That made this Light, and still this Light renu'th.
This Light thus made, and this co^mmandment given
Behold upon the glorious Thrones of Heaven,
Great Elohim, the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.

And Father of Lights, did himself vp-raise,
To sit and view the bright resplendent beauty
Of this first work, and with what awful duty,
Each seu'rall Lamp shone in his proper Sphere,
About his Palace, either dim, or clear,
And what their Station was. Genesis 1.
Then Elohim saw
The Lights he made, and this commanding Law
Were good. And so from out the evening Chaos,
(That he no longer might in darkness stay us)
He brought the Spring-light of a cheereful morn,
With Light were Angels created.
And with that Spring-light, was the first day born.
Then in the Upper House incontinent,
Of this so great and Royal Parliament,
Assembled was before the dreadful Throne
Of Heavens Maiestick State, a beauteous Zone
Of many Lamps, round-shining in a Ring
Taking their Light from their creating King:
And shooting forth that Light in cheerful beams,
To glad this lower world, like dewy streams,
That from the dropping clouds sweetly abound,
Seraphim. Cherubim. Thrones.
And fruitful make the dry and barren ground.
There shone Seraphick Love: and there again,
Cherubick Wisdom: and that never does wayne,
Stayed Judgment sat on Thrones of heavenly Light,
With Love and Wisdom judging what was Right.
And these in Number, numberless did shine,
In seu'rall Orders: but with such Divine
And sacred Beauty far above the rest,
As that in place, both highest, and the best,
These did before the sacred Trinity,
Stand forth the prime-elected Hierarchy.
Dominations.
Next in the middle Order, Rule, and Power,
Without all servile Fear: and then the Flower
Of all fair Virtues, ever preualent, Virtues. Potestates.

Undaunted Fortitude: with whom forth went
True Potent Magistracy, ord'ring both,
That neither Tyran Cruelty nor Sloth
Had any place: this middle distribution,
Received all power, and governed by infusion.
The last and lowest (if in Heaven there be
Place, high and low, as there is of degree)
Are three Divine executory Graces
Principalities. Archangels. Angels.
Of warlike power in their seu'rall places,
Leading forth Armies, Legions, Regiments,
To guard fair Truth, and front all dark Events.
Whereof some held prime Principality,
As General Leaders in Authority,
Some intermediat Officers aduising,
And through the royal camp Archangelizing,
By Order from above: Whilst all the rest
Of this so glorious Army stand addressed,
Ready to do, and fairly execute
Great Elohims will, not making slow dispute.
Thus was Heavens Palace hung with shining Lamps:
And thus about great Elohim incampes
This Royal Host of Lights: whom could we see,
And well distinguish each in their degree,
What glory were it? But what glory more
Were it to see the everlasting door
Of Heaven set open, and behold within
Upon his Thrones the mighty Elohim,
Shining in Majesty, like a flame of Fire,
Brighter then is the Sun? His whole attire
Collucent like himself? And from his voice
Issuing a flood of Fire? And then the choice
Nine precious Stones, alluding to the nine orders of Angels. Ezech. 28.
Of those Eternal Lights like beautyous Stones
Set in fine gold, shining about those Thrones?
The fiery Carbuncle, and Topas green?
The Diamond, the Berill, and Sardine?
The many-colour'd Jasper? and the Saphin
That casts forth a bright resplendent Azur?
And amongst others, not to ouerpasse
Smaragdus and the golden Chrysopras?
These to behold with an enabled sight,
And how each Lamp gives to another Light,
And all do from that heavenly Fiat take,
That first did light them, and their beauties make,
Light set in Judgment.
Were glory beyond greatness. But to see,
The King of Lights sit in his Majesty,
Commanding Light and Truth: and with what awe
Those Lights receive that first commanding Law
Of Light and Truth: and what melodious order,
In casting forth their beams, they keep to further
Each one another Light; as in a Quire
Of many Tones, some low, some mean, some higher,
Each Voice does grace another, and all sing
A rauishing Antheme to the heavenly King,
Of Wisdom, Power, Love, Iod, Iah, Iohoue,
The Law of Light and Truth that reigns above.
This were a sweet melodious Rhapsodie,
T'inchant the Soul in Divine Ecstasy.
But yet again, what means you rising Cloud, The fall of Lucifer from Light.

And smoakie Vapor? what is that noise so loud?
As if some main Battallion were to join,
And Soldiers strive to rapine and purloyne?
What horror do I see? Is darkness yet
Brought once again out of the vasty Deep,
And Light in mourning clad? Or topsey-Turuy
Is all reduced to the first Hurly-burly
Of Chaos, and Confusion? O my Muse!
Recline that soaring compass thou did use,
And stoop thy flight! New storms begin to rise
And humble wings best then do fit the wise.
O see Ben-schachar that Luciferous Beauty! Esaias 14.

Son of the Morning! and bright Lamp of duty!
No sooner placed in Glory, but anon,
Elated in himself, he stands upon
His own proud worth, and with indignity
Shootes at the face of Heavens great Majesty,
His swift-aspiring Beams: Nor only so:
But straight he does a daring Trumpet blow
To all the Host of Heaven, proclaiming Wars,
And that he means to mount above the Stars
Of mighty Elohim, and there alone
Exalt and raise himself upon his Throne,
Upon the holy Mount, and place his worth,
Within the skirts and confines of the North.
Nay more then so: he venters up so nigh,
As he will rise even up to the most High,
And there be like to him. Then at the sound
There was a murmr heard, which passed round,
Through thousand Legions of Light-bearing Powers,
Who should first ioyn with him so proudly towers.
And many of those Lucifers took part,
To leave dependence, and to climb by Art.
O how on earth can ever things be even,
When there is so soon Rebellion raised in Heaven?
But that All-seeing Lawgiver that made him
So great a Light, found darkness to invade him,
And compass in those Centaures of the Night,
That were before the beauteous days delight.
And he that would not stand within the ways
Of Light and Truth, nor spend eternal days, Job 24. Ezech. 28.

Amidst those precious shining Stones of Fire
That Gods delightful Eden does attire,
Like Lightning down from his aspiring fell, Reu. 12.

And with his Angels was shut up in Hell:
In Hell, that but till then was not created, Hell created in Darkness.

But was a place of Darkness situated,
Far off from Light: in which a Moorish water
Like slimy Pitch, and a black sulfurous matter
Left in the Chaos (when Heavens Spagirist
Extracted Light, and formed it as him list)
Were molded up together. And till then
Was nothing else within that darksome Fen.
But then, even with the fall of daring pride,
The breath of Majesty did swiftly glide
Into the Deep, and in his anger kindle
Combustious matter, which himself did mingle,
Of purpose to bring forth eternal Fire,
To punish sin that proudly durst aspire
To break the Law of Light. Then smoky fume
Choakt up Snuf-lights, because they durst presume,
With a few flashes and unsavory vapors
To take the place of euer-shining Tapers.
Law executed.
Pride that would mount, and had not to aspire,
Was tumbled down, and punished in this Fire.
So he that was Ben-schachar, son of Light,
Was now Ben-schechor, son of eternal Night.
Thus was Sin punished: and sins great accuser
Esaias 36.
Did Tophet then prepare for the Seducer,
Smoking with Aetna breath. Law kept his power,
And struck him down that meant aloft to tower,
And chained him in (for falling from the Light)
In chains of darkness, deeply out of sight.
An allusion.
So have we seen Ambition in great Peers,
Corruption in false Scribes, and Chantocleers,
That sing before the Daylight songs of peace,
Not for the Truths sake, but for rich increase,
Have often climbed to high and great estate,
And in a twinkling been precipitate.
They left the ways of Light not being wise,
And took their paths upon the slippery Ice:
So let them fall. For it is not mine intent
Star Chamber.
To summon any to the Parliament:
Nor to discover in the great Star Chamber
What are Eclipses, and what signs of danger:
The dogged humor of dull Saturnes motion,
Jove's banqueting, and feminine Devotion:
The swearing Art of War, nor Venus lust,
Mercurian fraud, that finds but little trust:
Nor Moone-shine Flattery never constant proving,
But as the wind and weather cock still moving:
Against none of these will I prefer a Bill,
Lest they demurre upon it, for want of skill,
In drawing up the Book, and so get cost,
With an Attachment, for my labor lost.
But thou great Prince of Stars, the fair delight! The King is the Life of the
Law.

Of Heaven and Earth, in whom the Lord of might
Has placed his Tent, and built his Tabernacle,
That Euiternally shall stand a miracle,
To all the gazers eyes, and glad the ears
Of Musical inquiry! front my fears
With thy most cheerful Beams, and make me bold,
With Eaglet eyes thy beauty to behold!
In thee the Fountain is of worth and Power,
To give true beauty both to high and lower:
Of Wisdom for to guide in all thy Station
The aspects of Stars in every Constellation:
And of true Love and Goodness (Musicks Lore)
Wherewith thou do great Elohim adore,
And cherish others. Strike the golden wire
Of thy most sweet, and learned-sounding Lire,
Job 38.
And all the Morning Stars shall dance and sing,
At their vprising unto thee their King.
Magistrates.
Saturn shall cast his melancholy off,
And dance judicial Revels. Jove shall doff
His proud attire, and leave light heel'd Lauoltos,
To cloth himself in bounty, and tread Saltos
Worthy his Noble worth. Mars shall no more
Weakness depopulate, nor oppress the poor:
But hand in hand shall willingly advance
The Fatherless and Widow in this dance.
Venus shall change her Lust for fruitful Love,
And tread a constant measure: Mercury prove
No serpentine Deceiuer, but abound
In wise and witty footings at this Round.
Trencher Flies.
As for Lunarian Changelings that depend
Only upon the Light thy Lamp does lend,
And wax and waine, as to and fro thy Light,
Does come or go, not shining but by Night,
In darkness for their own advantage sake,
And not in public: what else can we make
Of them but Antikes, or strange Mimick Apes,
That in our dance can put on any shapes,
And yet be nothing? These do live, by Give give
These I fear me much
Will take, but what is given to others, grutch:
And never shall the Music of thy Harp
Make them keep Scene, but they will or beg or carp.
Beware of these! For were these set in tune,
The Flowers of May, each one might crop in June,
And every one have some. When one has all,
How can our dance in perfect measure fall?
The Country Swain leaves gleanings on his land, A Country content.

To help the needy. And with foot and hand
It is a dance worth looking on to see,
How busily each one does keep degree
To gather what is left. Here one does borrow
A little from the Sheafe: this in the furrow
Takes what is scattered: that the Cart attends:
Another binds up at the headlands ends:
And all at Night go cheerfully away,
And dance together a Harvest Roundelay.
Trust not dissembling Fire-drakes that caper, Some things seem and are not.

As if they knew to dance, yet are but vapor,
Seeming of fiery temper, but are cold,
And a poor Nut-shell will their substance hold.
Play not to them! Pans Music is most fit,
When Midas has more avarice then wit.
The Sun of Majesty in his Star Chamber.
But leave we these! And from the Suns diurnall,
That wheels a four and twenty hours iournall,
Let us observe how on the Eclipticke Line,
He progress makes, along from Sign to Sign,
Casting his Beams of Majesty so far
As from the lowest to the highest Star,
Guiding their wandering Eccentricities,
And crowning them with fair felicities
He is the Monarch there. His Law is Light:
And where he goes, he banisheth the Night.
Darkness must not control stelliferous Powers,
Nor come within the high celestial Bowers,
To All he gives himself. Light is his name,
And through his Court fair Light he does proclaim;
The only Law that never breeds wars
Twixt Peers and People, wandering and fixed Stars:
But all is Love and Peace. Where darkness dwells
Is Fear begot, then Hare, then nothing else
But black Eclipses wrestling to prevail,
And darken Light within the Dragons tail.
And when we hide the Light, keep truth unknown,
And tread the paths of Error of our own:
What hope is there of Peace? Light is the Law,
Keeps the cheeks bashful, and the Heart in awe.
Descend we now the high Star Chamber Court,
And let us to the lower Hall resort;
Where throngs of Creatures, like to clyents press,
With shouldring forwardness to seek redress
Of some dark errors that eclipse their Light,
And cloud the Truth to take away their Right.
Earth, is the Commonplace, The Court of Common Pleas
in which are fixed
All Actions, Real, Personal, and Mixed.
As where things made are of a Simple Nature
Such as the Elements; there the Creature
Claims Real Interest, Real actions.
and enters Plea
To hold his Birthright, by the rule and sway
Of the Predominant. And where we find, Personal actions.

Those Elements are altered in their kind,
And for our use with Powers so innated,
As the Elements become Elementated,
Each in his proper place: if any faction
Do rise amongst them, Mixed actions.
there lies a personal action.
But of all bodies decomposited,
Out of those Elements, and by Nature bred;
What quarrels do arise, receive their Trial,
By Action, part Personal, part Real,
As mixed of both. And thus is every Case
Begun and ended in the Commonplace.
The Court of Kings Bench.
The Kings high Bench is the transparent Air,
Where Light inthroned in a golden Chair,
Shoots forth his Eye-beames brighter the^ our fire,
And yet unseen makes all the World admire.
This strikes the Center with his piercing power,
Cheareth up queachy coldness, gives a Dower
To Natures Treasury, is the Life of things,
And virtue adds to Plants, and Crystal Springs.
In brief, this is chief Justice of the Court,
Under the Prince of Lights, who sends forth,
And gives him his Commission, to sit down,
Pleas of the Crown.
And try before him matters of the Crown:
Such as Eclipse the Majesty of Light,
And veil fair Truth with Vapors of the Night.
Worthless aspirers.
So in the Air, we see oft-times ascend
Dark foggy mists, which mounting in the end
Near to the Seat of Justice, angry breath
Flies from the Judge, and strikes them to the earth.
Politic aspirers.
Sometimes again, a far more subtle Vapor,
Proudly aspiring to be made a Taper,
At the celestial Altar: by and by,
Is fired, and shot, like Lightning from the Sky.
Traitrous aspirers
Another, but of some more viscous matter,
Raising himself, from Fens, and Moorish water;
Is hanged up in the air, and set on fire,
A wonderment for all men to admire.
Thus is their Treason judged, and punished right,
That strive against the Majesty of Light. The Court of Chancery.

But see, the Halcyon smoothness of the Sea,
Smiling upon me, whilst the Sun does play,
And cast a cheerful blandish on the waves,
To welcome All, that of their bounty craves, Equity. Goodness.

And stand in need. The barren thirsty ground
Does with their Spring-tides fruitfully abound,
And brings forth large increase. The lympid air
Is vapourized with a moisture rare,
And subtle in the rising, to refresh
The breathing nostrils of all living flesh.
This Court (in brief) is mild, and bountiful,
To supply wants: Contempts, punishable.
though sometimes Ships do Hull
At random on her waves, for want of skill,
Or for defection in the Stearemans will,
Not knowing when it is for safety good,
To bear up Sail, or Anchor in the Flood
If this do happen, then contemptuous Winds
Make the Court angry, and the Clyent finds
But little favor. This Ship at a stay,
Sticks in the Sands. That making swifter way,
For common Law-rights, is attached back,
And Fleetes the Surges to his utter wrack.
Another Sails, with full gale on the Tide,
Yet in the Deep, his last decree does hide.
More I might say! Some Ships at Anchor lie
Doing just nothing: and then by and by
The Court commands the Halser to be cut,
And to the Land they are dismissed, and put,
To seek their Fortunes to their grievous cost,
Since idly they their Anchor-hold had lost.
Some others near the Shore do lie at Road
Waiting the Wind: and spend in that aboade,
More then an Indian Voyage, All they have;
And then In forma pauperis do crave,
To pass the Port, and cannot be admitted,
To Launch the Deep, being so Shallow-witted:
The Chancellor.
Till at the last, great Neptune, Chancellor
Of these extremes, begins to show his power,
With a Quos Ego, brandishing his Mace,
Wherewith he calmes the Courts tempestuous face.
And so when storms had well-nigh ouer-duckt us,
Thus made he silence: Praestat componere fluctus?
And all was hushed, Then rounded in a Ring,
The peaceful waves did dance, and sweetly sing
About this earthly Stage, Equity tempers, but not controls the Law.
the Centre-Court
Whereto all Sub-celestiall forms resort
For common Law-rights, which are strict and grave,
But tempered, and made mild, with every wave,
That daunceth on the shore. The gentle Springs,
And crystal Riuolets; all freely brings,
From the great Ocean, fruitfulness, and Plenty,
To every Creature. Want does never go empty,
Without a sweet, and sovereign supply
Of that great Ocean-Court of Chancerie.
But whither am I led? O tell me whither? The Perclose.

(Great Archy-Muse, and powerful Lawgiver,
In all these Courts) unto what settled Port
Shall I now steer, and make my last resort?
Shall I? O shall I steer into the Main?
And launch the Deep of Law, that does ordain
In every Court a settled Rule and Order?
Shall I teach men what is the proper border
Circumferenceth every Court? and how
Obedience to Sou'raigntie does bow?
This were a task, fitting some youthful Merit,
Whose vigor shows a brave Mercurian Spirit.
Saturn in me is too predominant,
And retrograde withal. My blood does want
Castalian moisture, and Phebean fire,
To Iuuenize my Muse, that should aspire
So great a height. My breath goes thick and short,
As weary of this journey. Little Sport
Were it to climb Pernassus in mine Age,
Or with the Muses dance in equipage.
The sons of Learning well might think me jolly:
But sure they would deride my doting folly.
Therefore I now descend, and flagge my plumes
Low to the ground, whereon my Muse assumes
Her settled rest. Some other time perchance
Promethean fire may stir me to advance
A second, and a more aspiring flight
That shall descry the Majesty of Light,
And Law of every Court. Till when I cease,
And with a tongue-tide silence hold my peace:
As one that longs to hear what he has done,
In lighting up this Candle in the Sun.
FINIS.
R. T.

To the desire of my Youth, and hope of mine Age, my young son ROGER.
My Son,
I Commend the reading of this Poem unto thee, that in it, thou may first see
me what I am: and then learn what I wish thee to be. Make not Poesy thy
profession, but thy pleasure. Profit so gotten, is mercenary, and ends in
baseness. But if for thine own solace, thou sing to thy self the songs of the
Muses, thou shall find some Philomels will record to thy Dittie. In thy Verse
be not wanton, but wary Loose Numbers, argue light affections: and discretion
is the Badge of Wisdom. Do not Critically abuse, what thou can not amend:
neither flatteringly sublime, what thou see to be vile. Be thy self: and be
constant in thy self: but take heed that thou be seldom less, and never
more then thy self. Humility is neither Base, nor Proud. It Is a Poetical
fault, to presume, and compare. If at any time thou do so, let it be with
thine Equals. For Superiors will crush thee, and Inferiors disgrace thee.
Learn this, till I have occasion to teach thee more. And so I leave thee to
Gods blessing.

Thy loving Father, R. T.


