News from the North.

Otherwise called the Conference betvveen Simon Certain, and Pierce Plowman,
faithfully collected and gathered by T. F. Student.

Aut bibe aut Abi IMPRINTED AT LONdon at the long shop adjoining unto S.
Mildreds Church in the Pultrie by John Allde.

1579.

THE PRINTER TO Simon Certain and Pierce Plowman.
Go forth Pierce Plowma^, go forth Sim Gertain
right worthy both of commendation:
Of your de grees I turn you out for twain,
such as I never found where I have gone.
God let you wax to many thousands more,
that mine eyes may behold it, and that I:
May then say Lord now let thy Servant go,
for then shall I be well content to dye,
TO THE RIGHT HONOnorable and his singular good Lord Sir Henry Sidney Knight of
the most Honorable Order of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and Marches
of the same.
ALthough there can be no Freendship (right Honorable and mysinguler good Lord)
to speak properly where there is no equality betvveen the parties, yet may
the simplest and the meanest love and honor the highest and greatest, yea
so much the more as their inequality is the greater. But that is not properly
called freendship but rather a dutyful love and is harder to be expressed and
shevved for the inequality aforesaid. For Fr^^ndship is betvveen equals, or
at the least where the inequality is not so very great that the Offices and
Duties of Freendship which are the bonds and sinevvs thereof can have no
intercourse. I speak this for my self that have long desired occasion to show
my hearty goodvvil and affection unto your Lordship which has been somevvhat
hard for me to do for the cause abooue remembered. And therefore having
gathered this little conference: I made bold to dedicate it unto my good Lord,
A thing meeter to be my gift then worthy to be presented unto your Honor or
to go further under the name of such a Patron. How be it, my trust is that
your Lordship of your accustomed clemency vvil accept a simple thing of him at
whose hands nothing at all was looked for, and will aloovv my goodvvil
toward the reparation of such faults and Imperfectio^s as are heerin.

So praying God to bless your Lordship and prosper you. From London the
twenty six of November. 1579.

Your Lordships in all humility T F.

TO THE GODLY AND Gentle READER.
THou have here Godly and gentle Reader the Conference between Sim Certain and
Piere Plovvman two great Clarks as thou may understand by their Discourse,
which I have gathered and reported as faithfully and as truly as my simple
memory could retain the same, and that with some trauail which I accounted my
duty. First unto them and others by them heerin mentioned.

And secondly unto all and every good man and woman whose minds and hearts God
may stir up unto Godlynes and Virtue by their good ensample. Namely all such
as are Fathers and Masters of housholdes, but chiefly and principally of
common Innes and Tauerns whose good or evil example spreads far and wide and
I fear in these our days rather in corruption of life and manners then in
edifiyng or increase of Virtue and Godlynes according to the saying of Jesus of
Sirack that it is as hard for a Merchant to be no Liar and for a Tauerner or
Inholder to be no drunkerd which thing although he has said to be very hard
yet (for the Inholder) that his rule admits exception, thou may here find
with out traueling to Rippon in Yorkshire to learn and so for a grote or
sixpence thou may know ye which cost me abooue five marcks to learn besides
my trauail and time spent, which yet if it please thee to accept: I shall
account right well bestowed, which God grant and that in all thy Iourneys thy
head ache not before thou alight in such an Hostry. Farwell.

Aut bibe aut abi.
The Printer to the READER.
GENTLE READER IF THOU find any Imperfection in this woork either for the
matter in substance or else for the division, the manner and form thereof I trust
y^ wilt allow a reasonable excuse as well unto the Author as unto me, bewen
who^e thy blame is otherwise to be divided. Thou know y^ to write and
report a thing at the mouth of the Speaker asks a ^umble hand and a great
memory, if a man had his Tools ready for the purpose which yet this Author had
not ready for nothing so like as any such matter, and there fore was forced to
put his brain ^an in trust with all and to write it in his way homeward.

In doing whereof his care was greter to couch the matter truly in substance
then to part or to divide or otherwise to digest the same. Which he referred
unto me, a which also I have done as the shortness of the time gave me leave.
Both which excuses, if it please thee to admit, thou may in time to come
receive it in more perfection as well for his part being the matter in substance
whereof I dout not much has escaped him, and also for the division being mine.

Farwell.
VVM. in commendation of this Treatise.
Leaving at large the Brunts of brinish flood,
The pitched Feelds and fables finely pend:
This Author here to do his Cuntrie good,
On woork of worth his time and toil does spend.
The busy Brain with cankred Enuse fraught,
That sues and strives for sturring of a straw:
May read heerin his lesson largely taught,
And by the same descrie him-self a Daw.
The Countailor, the Spokesman, and the rest,
Who simple souls to needless lawing eg:
May learn heerby such dealings to detest,
As drive poor men their bread with tears to beg.
The prating Sot whose peremptory speech,
Is brayed forth all Lawyers to defame:
Not far from hence may find a (...) Leech.
To charm his tung and ^ro^d it in with ^aine.
But in few word ^iny meaning to (...),
If you deniaund what mine opinion (...)
He has done (...) Gods blessing on his ^art
Who send me (...).
Coelum, non Solum.
VV. M.

Antony Monday to all courteous and freendly Readers in commendation of this
VVoork.
AS Tully did of virtuous life define,
And O^id paint the od conceits of love:
And Maro squared in a direct line,
The hard assanles that valiant hearts did prove,
In bloody Battles for their fames behooue,
As fliering Fortune should them chance to pay:
In vaunting verse as Maro tells the way.
But leaving now at large such fond delights,
Such Fables fond as prattling Poets use:
This Author here presents to your sights,
Such tales of truth as may you force to muse.
To judge aright the crime of each abuse,
As here tvvixt Sim and Pierce be does compound:
Such wise conceits as seldom has been found.
When you have red, Judge then the Authors pains,
His tedious toil in vvisshing well to thee:
Thy Freendly thanks, he craves no other gains,
Which unto him more vvelcome sure shall be,
Then riches store if thou could give it free.
Wherefore my Friends do this at my request:
To hear and see and alvvay say the best.
Honos alit Arts.
A M.

Thomas procter in report of the Authors good vvil
AMong the moorthy Woorks,
which ^^arued Tully pend:
The care of Cuntrie and of friends.
he greatly does commend.
Which lesson in my mind,
the Man which took in hand.
To pen this pleasant History,
did perfect understand.
For in the same he shows,
a love unto his Friends:
Beside a zealous mind of good,
that to his Cuntrie tends.
Of Lovers lives, of vvarres,
ne yet of vvunders great:
He seems to publish unto us.
but simply does entreat.
Of silly Men, whose proof,
does such experience give:
As for Examples of our lines,
learnes each estate to live.
Wherein the Author sought,
such means to publish it:
As in my simple Judgment sure,
might seem to prove his Wit.
But for the careful pains,
which he has spent heerin:
He only craves for recompense,
your favors good to win.
Whereby you may him move,

to utter his good will:
When as occasion shall him serve,
in woorks of greater skill.
Nil melius Art;
T P.

John Peeterhouse to the Reporter of this History.
THou that have reported this pleasant History,
Whereof thine eyes and ears are a witness:
And have intreasured the memory,
Of Pierce and Simon for their woorthines,
Withouten hope of hire or recompense:
For thy long journey, or for thy dispense,
Thou have acquit thy duty unto them,
In this behalf, and if I guess aright:
Thou have deserved well of other men,
Before whom thou have set a Candle light.
Of Nurture and of Education:
By men of base and mean condition.
Which some for that cause will esteem the less,
Having respect unto the circumstaunce:
The great apparaunce of vnlikelynesse,
Waying all others in their own ballaunce.
As if that God could not reserve a few:
Such as him list his glory for to show.
For what though this age universally,
Seems given over to corruption:
Seemed it not so in the days of Elie,
When yet God had reserved many a one?
So has he now, that are not gone aside:
Nor sold them selves to Couetise and Pride.
As thou have well showed in this History,
What by thine own proof and experience:
What by thine Host Simons authority,
Which (for mine own part) I do reverence.
And therefore (I say) thank come to thy hand:
That have it given us to understand.
And put us in hope that Charity,
Is not stark dead, though she be wounded sore:
By Pride and Couetise her enemy,
And that our God yet keeps some in store.
That both in deed and word do seek his praise:
God let them wax and give them happy days.
FINIS.
The Reporter to his Book.
My little Book where so thou chance to dwell,
God give thee favor in thy Readers sight:
Whom if thou please all, thou must quit thee well,
And better then I fear is in thy might.
For that does seldom chance to any one:
Better or wurse without exception.
If any man or Woman challenge thee^
For any word or any argument:
Come not to seek thy defense at me^
For I am not thine Author verament.
Get thee into the North to Rippon Town:
And there enquire for Pierce y^ worthy Clown.
And eke for Simon Certain at the Sign,
Of the Greek Omega, there does he dwell:
Where welcome thou shall be as I diuine^
Ask them whether thou have reported well.
Their Conference according to the truth:
If they say yea, of others have no rueth.
FINIS.
How the Author coming homevvard out of Scotland through Yorkshire, chanced
to lodge in Rippon. At what sign, the name of the Host, the order and manner
of the House and Family. And his entertaynment there. Chap 1.
IN my last return from Edenbrough in Scotland, coming homeward through
Yorkshire: I traueled somewhat out of the common high London way of purpose to
see the Country. And one day among others, toward even: I chanced to come to
a little through fare Town called Rippon, where at the very entering into the
town I met a poor old Woman, of whom I asked if there were any good lodging
in the town. She answe red me, that there was good lodging at the Sign of y^
Greek Omega. The Greek Omega (quoth I) What do you mean by that? Nothing said
she, but that there is good lodging and honest entertainment which (I suppose)
is all that you require. Then I asked her what was the Good man's name of the
house. His name (quoth she) is Simon Certain, we call him commonly Sim Certain,
Sim Certain (quoth I) surely these are very strange names, and so bidding her
farewell: I departed into the town ward, much more desirous to be come to my
lodging, for the straungenes of the names, as well of the Sign: as also of the
Good man of the House. By that time I had entered a little way into the town: I
was ware of a very fair Greek Omega, hanging forth as a common Sign, even as
the old Woman had told me befors. And thither I went, and entering into the
house: I found in the Hall the Good man, his two Sons, his Chamberlain, and
his Hostler singing the C iiij. Psalm of David very distinctly and orderly.
The Goodwife with her two Daughters sat spinning at their Wheels a little
distaunce from them. All which things when I beheeld: I thought with my self
that these things were yet more strange to behold, then were either the Sign
or else the Good man's name to hear. So I had them God speed. The Host very
courteously arose, and had me welcome, so did the wife also, and asked me
whether I meant to tarry all night. I answered yea. Then he asked me if I would
see my Chamber. No gentle Host (quoth I) I will not hinder so much you good
exersise, for I am sure I cannot be lodged amiss in this house. Not so Sir
(quoth he) but ye shall have the best that we have and welcome. I gave him
hartye thanks. Then he enquired of me, of whence I was, where I had been, and
whither I was bound. I told him I was a Southern man borne and dwelling, and
that I had been at Edenborough in Scotland, and was thus far in my way
homeward. In good time Sir (quoth he) and ye are heartily welcome into this
part of Yorkshire. I thank you gentle Host (quoth I.

The coming thither of Pierce Plovvman, being newly come from London. His
request to the Host to lend him five pound upon a pavvn. The refusal of the
Host, the question thereupon moved, being the matter of the Conference.
Chap. 2.
BY that time we had talked scant half an hour: there came in a Country man a
Neighbor, a tolly old fatherly man, bringing under his arm a fardel of
Books, as many as be might well hold underneath one of his arms, he gave us
the time of the day. What Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) welcome from
London. Sir (quoth he to me) this Neighbor of mine is lately come from where
you are going God willing. Truly (quoth I) and this is happily met by grace of
God, and as I verily suppose near in the mid way between Edenbrough and
London. With that Neighbor ^imon quoth this Pierce plowman (for that was his
name) I am come to desire your help. What is the matter Neighbor Pierce (quoth
our Host?) Neighbor (quoth he) to lend me five pound for half a year, for
truly (quoth he) I have spent all my money at London, and have not left my self
so much as to buy my seed Wheat, wherewith to sow my land this season. No have
neighbor Pierce? (quoth he) that was very il handled, ye should always so use
your matters that the main stock be saved whole. Fie neighbor Simon quoth ve,
speak no more of that for y^ reverence of God, for truly I am ashamed of my
self, but what remedy now save patience, and to learn to be wiser hereafter,
What means all these paper Books (quoth our Host. Mary neighbor quoth Pierce
they shall be surety un to you for the ^^paiment of your five pound. With that
they were unbound, and being opened and looked upon: they were Bills,
Answers, Replications, Reioinders Copies of Depositions, and such like. Some
out of one Court, some out of an other. When our Host had seen them all: why
Neighbor (quoth he) do you think to meet with any man that is so mad to lend
v. pence upon such trash? Trash neighbor quoth Pierce: they stand me in abooue
fifty pound. Peraduentnre so quoth our Host, but that proves not that they
are worth fifty points, saving unto him that were as mad to buy them of you:
as you bought them at their hands that sold them unto you. But or you meet
with any such chapma^: I believe you will be weary of keeping them. With that
Pierce began to be half offended. Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host, five pound
is a small matter between us twain, you shall have it upon your word. But as
for your Books: here dwells a Lady not far hence, carry them to her, for they
are far f^t and dear bought, and such things (men say) are good for Ladies.

Pierce finds it strange that men should pay so dear for things, which in
their hands are so vile and little vvoorth, as concerning their return. Chap.
3.
Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) I can put up that mock at your hands, for I
know ya mean me no evil but good thereby, but verily me thinks it stands
hardly with their existimation that will be holden and termed woorshipfull yea
honorable, to take so extremely for things, whereof no better return is to be
made, yet must we pay them with great attendaunce, with cap in hand and all
reverence. Great reason quoth our Host, for they are woorshipfull, and right
woorthye of all those duties. Then have I been in an error a long time (quoth
Pierce) for I have always hitherto thought that woorship and honor had stood
in giving: I not in taking, in helping, releeuing and doing good: and not in
their contraryes, and this seems unto me both reasonable and also common
experience, for we honor God at whose hands we receive all goodness, and
therefore properly unto him is all honor and woorship due, and unto men but so
far forth as they approchen unto God in quality of virtue, justice, mercy and
other goodness, wherefore in all reason he ought to be most honorable and
woorshipfull that does the most good, and unto the greatest number, for
surely in my discretion, the woorship and the gain ought to be divided, and he
that gayneth, or is relieved, and is helped: ought to honor and woorship him by
whom he gayneth, is hot pen and relieved, for otherwise why does Servant
woorship his Master and not e conuerso. Neighbor Pierce quoth our Noste, our
honorable and reverend forefathers with great wisdeme and discretion affessed
these fees and charges, and that for the great zeal and love which they bare
unto Godliness and virtue, and to the persons quallified therewith.

With that Pierce clapped his hand upon ye board. I make God a vow (quoth he)
what so ever he was that first praised a sheet of paper with twelve lines
written therein at eight pence, nay at xij. pence, for I am sure I have CC. that
cost me after that rate, he was neither friend to godliness ne virtue, to God
neither to Good man or woman. Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host, this is but the
error of your judgment, and that shall appear unto you so evidently, that
your self shall confess that these fees and charges which you think so great
and so excessive had so great reason in their beginning: as that greater had
never any civil ordinance or co^stitution. Whether ye will regard the honor
and glory of God or the preservation of the commonwealth which chiefly
depends thereupon. That seems wunderful strange unto me (quoth Pierce) that
in such extreme taking and so small rendering there should lie hidden so great
mystery of good meaning and therefore gladly would I hear your reasons
thereupon. Very well Neighbor Pierce (quoth he) then I will take in hand to
prove it unto you, which I trust I shall do sufficiently: if I can prove
these are no proper nor private gain or proffit, but a public and a common
treasure to the ease and releef of the whole commonwealth and of the best and
godlyest Members of the same, yea verily (quoth Pierce) very well (quoth our
Host.)

Simon approoueth their great Fees and Charges as things meant, to be a revvard
and nurishment of Knowledge, Learning and Virtue, and punishment of
ungodliness and vice, and therefore true and just. Cap. 4.
FIrst I think ye will grant (quoth he) that Magistrates and Officers are the
Deputies and Leiutenaunts of GOD here in Earth, high and honorable, for that
they are in very deed the hand and mouth of the Law, and in few and plain
words the speaking and woorking Law, for by them the law commands and
forbids. So that their end and purpose is that God may be honored and
glorified, good and godly People cherished, shortly that peace and concord may
be maintained, I grant you all this (quoth Pierce) you will grant (quoth he)
that the way and mean to woork all these things is to punish and chastise the
wicked and the ungodly, and to give as little favor unto sin as is possible,
that is very true also (quoth Pierce.) Ye will grant quoth our Host that the
ways and means to punish sins and wickedness are diverse, according to the
quality of the offense, as some by death, some by other punnishment of the
body greater or smaller. And that there is also a pecuniall punishment by the
pursse, as by fine and ransom, and such like. I grant you all this quoth
Pierce. You will grant me also (quoth he) that all punishments are grievous
unto the sufferers thereof, neither are or ought to be pleasant unto the dooers
and executors. That is very true also quoth Pierce, except they be wicked
persons both the sufferer and the executor. Then quoth our Host, seeing all
punishments are fear full and grievous unto the sufferer thereof, and no
pleasure, but rather sorrow and grief of heart unto the erecutors thereof: such
and so must needs be the first causes and occasions thereof. That is very true
quoth Pierce. You know quoth our Host, that the causes and occasions of
punishment is sin, wickedness and misgouernment of life, for the word of God
tells us, that the reward of sin is death. All that is very true quoth
Pierce. Very well then quoth our Host, these Propositions which you have
granted: do suffice for the matter which I have taken in hand to prove,
which is, that these great Fees and charges were never meant, nor yet are
received or converted into private or proper use. I pray you Neighbor quoth
Pierce, let me hear how it is proved, for I promise you faithfully for any
thing I have yet herd: your proves are farther to fet.

You know quoth our Host, that the nature of the vngooly is to be quarelous
and contencious, and daily provoking one an other, and also to take no wrong
and do no right. That is very true quoth Pierce. You know quoth our Host that
the common weapon where with they will be aue^ged upon each other is the Law,
which indeed is the Magistrate, as ye have already granted, so that upon the
matter: he is made the executor of their wilfulnes and vengeance, which they
will needs do upon each other, which thing you have already confessed to be
grievous and unpleasant to every good man. Therefore has it ever been, and yet
is thought, and that very wisely and truly, that the likeliest way and mean
to dissuade their wilfulnes which no reason, love nor fear of GOD could
dissuade was to make their wilfulnes as dear and as heavy unto them as
reasonably might be done, to the end that they should not so lightly and for
every trifle ver and trouble both the Magistrate and one an other, which
effect although it failed to woork, and that their madness would not be
restrained thereby: that yet their ungodliness might return to the profit and
relief of others their Neighbors and Brethern that were better affected, and
so by one self and same mean: the ungodly punished and fleeced, and the godly
amended and enriched thereby, and that this was their meaning y^ was the first
assessors thereof: common experience teaches us, for in needful and necessary
actions, as debt, detinew, and account and such like: the charges are so
reasonable, as that no man would in conscience give less.

The reason is, for that they are actions of common right, and such as must
needs day by day arise between a man and his Brother, neither do they
dishonest either of the parties, which I dare not affirm upon actions upon
cases, neither did they so judge of them, as I verily believe, and therefore did
they set double and treble charges thereupon, for greater is the charges in a
brabble for a word spoken: then for three hundred pound of honest det.

So that the Magistrate, who for such Ale house actions and brabbles: should
otherwise never be at rest, except he should deny them his help, which might be
slanderous and perilous to the whole estate.

The Magistrate I say of pure pity and compassion was forced to set great
charges upon them, for the small favor that he bare unto them, and unto their
first causes and occasions.

The greatness of all which charges not withstanding, yet do we daily see how
the ungodly run together by heaps like brute beasts, and yet I dare safely say,
that by the greatness of these charges, and the terror thereof: many a brabling
matter has been and is daily put up without any revenge sought thereof, and
many a one having pursued and recovered in his action, yet have his charges so
gallded him: that he has been easier to deal with all his life after. And so
by this mean many a wilful body brought to know him self, and to honor God
thereby.

I cannot tell Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce, but I my self have had two or
three brabbles that have kept me doing these seven years, in which time I am
sure I have spent abooue fifty pound, beside my charges to and fro, loss of
time, and my hinderaunce at home. And what have ye gotten for all this? quoth
our Host. These papers quoth he. Well worth fifty points quoth our Host. I
think verily quoth our Host if any honest Neighbor had needed to have borrowed
ten Pound thereof: you would not have it so ready to have pleasured him withal.
If I should say truly (quoth Pierce) I think the very same. What are you
assessed unto the poor in your parish quoth our Host? A penny a week quoth
Pierce. And think you that enough quoth our Host? Yea verily quoth Pierce. Lo
Sir quoth our Host, whether comes this unto my saying and maintenance of
these great Fees and charges or not? Who can deny the excellency of this
institution? whereby the Covetous ungodly men are shot one against an other, and
do punish each other, and whereby also so plentiful provision is made for the
godly poor at their charges, and yet no thank to them therefore, and that those
things from the which they would depart unto any Honest or godly use or
purpose, with as good will as from their eyes to be plucked out of their heads,
or their tripes out of their bellyes, by this mean undesired of their own
accord, they bring it in by handfuls, and so as it has been said, plentiful
provision made for their godly Neighbors at their charges and yet no thank
unto them therefore.

Call you this a providing for the poor? Neighbor (quoth Pierce) I would I
had given you the best horse in my Plough to make this saying true, and I swear
to you (quoth he) prove it true: and you shall have him yet or this day Seven
night, for that would case my heart if I might perceive that any godly person
has fared the better or were amended by any part of all my great expenses.
For then yet should I think that I have done some good with all the loss of
my money. Why Neighbor Pierce (quoth Simon) do you doubt that all these
sommes or the greatest part thereof: comes not to the use of the commonwealth,
and to the relief and sustenaunce of the godly poor, and other easements of
common things in maintenance of the commonwealth? Nay Neighbor Simon (quoth
he) I dout it not, for I am fully persuaded the contrary. Truly Neighbor
Pierce (quoth he) this is an uncharitable and a very erroneous oppinion, and
that I will prove unto you by reasons manifest and apparent, and such as your
self have already granted and confessed. I pray you neighbor Simo^ (quoth
Pierce) let me hear how:

Simon approoueth these fees and charges as public and not private, by
argument taken from effects unto their causes. Chap. 5.
Whosoever he be that Coueteth privately to gain and profit by any thing
(quoth our Host) coueteth the thing whereby he gayueth and profits, this is
so true (quoth he) that I will not desire you to grant it unto me, for it is a
necessary argument from the effect unto the cause, and therefore if ye will
affirm that the Magistrate and officer coueteth these great fees and charges
and privately to thrive and wax rich thereby: you must necessarily conclude,
that he favors all the first and mean causes thereof, which were a horrible
and a fearful conclusion; and yet as I have said follows necessarily upon y^
premises granted, and therefore is couetise so much more odious and detestable
in a Magistrate then in a common person, for couetise as he exceeds all other
vices simply considered: even so respectively he exceeds him self, I say
respectively to wit, qualified by the person in whom he dwells, for in a
private person: he is but a private sin, and exte^deth unto his M. only, but in a
Magistrate he is a public and ge^erall corruption of all y^ people, for there
is no covetous person being but a private man or woman y^ wishes any other to
be such as they the^ selves are, the reason is, for that the Couetise of
others: is nothing whereby they should gain or be advanced, but rather lose
thereby.

Therefore could they be content that there were few or no others such as they
are, whereby it appears that couetise in a private Person neither woorketh nor
wishes any general corruption and yet fulfilleth the talent and habit of his
subject and so much the more. The very same is to be said of all other vices in
all other persons without exception of degree, as Whoordome, Pride, Gluttony,
Drunkenness and all other excess in voluptuous pleasure, in all which things
what soever has or ever had the greatest felicity and enjoyed most thereof yet
would they not that others did the like, or at the least no more then they them
selves must necessarily use for for tha'ccomplishment of their pleasures which
requires some company. The reason is already showed to wit for y^ other Folks
pleasures are not their pleasures, neither do increase the same, but rather
their pains and misery.

For the hunger, scarcity and want of others gives a good taste and savor
unto the voluptuousnes and pleasures of y^ ungodly, and therefore could they be
very well content to enjoy their own wickedness the^ selves, for pleasure have
they none nor gain in the lewdnes or the misgouernau^ce of other. And if they
had: yet want they power to corrupt others thereby otherwise then by example
which can not do much in any one private man or woman, for that they have but
the leading of their own lives. But of Couetise in the Magistrate it is
otherwise, for he has the leading and the fourming of other men's lives and
therefore differs from the common and private person both concerning his will
and also concerning his habititie and power to execute the same.

First concerning desire and will he cannot wish that the common people should
be godly and virtuous, for neither stands his great gain, nor his Ambition
therein, for why they are two things incompatible and contrary.

Then concerning his power to execute his will and desire: it is so great and so
mighty that the old Proouers has not douted to call the common People the
Image of their Magistrates and officers for as certainly as this antecedent.

The man cateth and drinks infers this consequent the man is a live: even
so certainly this proposition the Magistrates and officers are covetous
infers this conclusion.

The People are ungracious and ungodly. The reason is peremptory for the
Magistrate and Officer has the Bridls rain in his hand either to give liberty
unto ungodliness and dissolution of life: orels to refrain the same.

Now all men may daily see by proof that there is no wild Beast so very brute
and barbarous as man will wax and be through liberty and that for the
excellency of his nature booue all other Creatures and his great understanding
in good and evil.

And therefore to admit in a Magistrate a couetise and a desire of private and
proper gain, Namely by fees and charges arysing and growing as is already
confessed: these were to conclude an odious and detestable Consequence against
ye Magistrate and Officer of whom we are forbidden by God to speak or think
save all honor and reverence.

Wherefore I say it stands not with the reverend and honorable opinion that
we are bound to have of the Magistrate to say or to think that these great
gains and fees do return to him in private and proper use, but rather to Judge
and think that the Magistrate and Officer receives them as things excommunicat
and as a common Treasure dedicated unto godly uses and purposes in ease and
releef of the whole commonwealth.

Would God this were true quoth Pierce, for I dare lay my life (quoth he) that
if all the sums of money that are leudly and shamefully spent in one Term
about vain suits and brabbles were reserved and accounted in the end of y^
Term: they would amount to more then all the Collection for the Poor through
out all the parishes in England for half a year, nevertheless many a one
thinks him self sore charged, namely my self God forgive me.

Truly Neighbor (quoth our Host) I am of no other Opinion, neither do I
Judge that all these great Fees and Revenues are any other thing but a
Collection for the purposes and intents aforesaid, neither that the Receivers
of y^ same do differ from those other Collectors in Parish Church^ saving in
the greatness of their receipt and also saving that they are not forced to crave
it at the parties hands and some time to convent him before a Iusti^er of peace
for a grote or six pence as the others often times are, And also saving that for
their reverend and honorable estemation they are not accou^table. Saving unto
the Lord God the Author general and unto their own Consciences.

Pierce denies the reasons alleged as probable but not necessary, his reasons
therefore. Cap. 6.
Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce you have alleged many fair and coulorable
propositio^s and conclusions and have gone about me with this reason and with
that.

I am no School man, Neighbor quoth he, but yet some reason I have and some
experience I have seen, and some heed I have taken thereof, wherefore if you will
give me leave to answer you: you shall hear me as probably disprooue these
your allegations as you proved them, for I shall prove all your propositions
are probable and not necessary, neither do infer a necessary conclusion as
you have pretended, For the better doing whereof: first for orders sake, I will
reherce your propositions, reasons and arguments, whereof the first is: that the
Magistrate and Officer is to be had in all honor and reverence because he is
the Law which is most honorable and reverend, this I confess as an undoubted
truth, namely for that the end as well of the one as of the other, is that God
may be honored and glorified, godly People cherished. and maintain peace and
concord strengthened and furthered, whereupon stands the pro^peritie and the
good estate of all Cuntries and common welths, their ways and means you have
alleged are these.

To punish and chastise the wicked and the ungodly, and to restrain their
liberty as much as is possible. Ye have further alleged that punishments are
diverse, some corporal, some pecuniall, and that that all punishments are
grievous both unto the sufferers, and also unto the dooers thereof, but that I
will not grant ye without distinction.

Very true it is that all punishments without exception, are grievous unto the
sufferers thereof, but unto the executor thereof: they are not all so, namely
such as are pecuniall and the gain thereof returning unto the executor. For
although that to beat, burn, hang or whip any creature of God, namely a
Christian man or woman: is an odious thing, and wherein no good or Godly heart
can have pleasure: yet for advantage sake it is often otherwise, for otherwise
there would not so many Oxen, Sheep and Calves be murdered, and so few Hogs,
Dogs or Cats, their offenses being only their good flesh.

Wherefore, although that in all Godly reason your arguments have great
necessity: yet in human reason and experience it has butb are probability
and is no more. But as if for example you will say Women ought to be ashamed to
be seen bibbing Wine in common Tauerns, or to be seen at common lascivious and
bawdie Stage Plays: therefore they are ashamed thereof.

This is an argument gathered from posse to esse, to wit, from should or ought
to be, to is simply, and has not any necessity nor firmitie, and that shall
you see if you will go with me to London this next term.

How be it, you seem to enforce your antecedent, by the honorable existimation
wherein I am bound to have the Magistrate and Officer, and thereby you think that
of duty I ought to grant it you for the shameful consequence which
necessarily ensues upon the denial thereof.

Truly that not withstanding, me thinks all this but a very bare and naked
proof.

^ Simon maintains his assertion by authority of holy Scripture and
diversity taken betvveen the reward of Virtue, Learning and Knowledge and
the hire of servile trauail and labor. Cap. 7.
CAll you this a bare and naked proof Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host if you,
deny this proof (quoth he) you reuerse and overthrow all humain society
which is maintained and vpholde^ by giving unto God y^ which is due unto God,
and unto man ye which is due unto Man. But unto God what can we give save
honor, praise and glory, first and immediately unto him self, and secondly unto
his Deputies and Lieutenaunts, to wit, Magistrates and Officers whose calling
and appointing thereunto as it is of God: so must and ought we to think that it
is for their godlynes and virtues, for God him self has said them that honor
me I will honor, and they that dishonor me I will dishonor, wherefore our
wise and reverend Elders and Forefathers in their assessing these great Fees
and charges: did mean to honor them whom God honored. And therefore unto their
callings appoited they great and honorable revenues, knowing that their gain is
the punishment of vice and the reward of Virtue, and that the part and portion
of all the godly is therein, knowing also that there is not so great
Encouragement unto Virtue and Godlynes: as the liberal reward thereof, and
that all ungodliness and unthankfulness is measured by the greatness of the
goodness and benefit received either at y^ hands of God or man. Lastly knowing
ye they might not prosecute but persecute the causes and occasions of these
gains as has already been proved, and therefore I say abooue all common reason
and discretion they assessed these Fees and ^euenues that the gains might be
great and yet the causes thereof few, quite contrary to all other estates and
faculties, for what other reason is there that one man shall labor fore a
whole day and at night shall receive twelve pence or eight pe^ce for his hire:
An other for half or a quarter of an hours easy trauail shall receive xx.
shillings or sometime more, what is the cause of this diversity? even this,
the one is a hire and a price of a servile labor and travel, and is received
in proper and private use, the other is an honor done unto virtue, Godliness
and knowledge: which do receive nor hold, or account any so base things
proper or private, or can be so basely minded, as to joy therein, further then
they may glorify God thereby.

What other reason is there, that one man in the return of a Reame of paper,
shall gain xij. pence or xvi. pence clear, and yet where he laid out ij.
pence: the other laid out x. shillings. And after the same rate in Wax, that
one man shall sell more for vi. pence: then an other shall sell for viij.
pound, which nevertheless bought as dear as he, within xy. pence at xx.
shillings waring, and both laid out more money, and longer looked for the
return thereof. I say theris no reason other then is already made.

Pierce denies the calling to office, to be such as Simon has alleged. Chap.
8.
NEighour Simon (quoth Pierce) whereas you maintain your assersion by the
woorthines of the Magistrate and Officer, and do insist thereupon, alleging
that they are called by God, and that for their godliness and virtue. The first
part I greatly dout, for that many of them buy their offices, and pay very
dearly therefore, yea some sell their very inheritaunces for that purpose, I
mean to buy offices, now did I never read that ever God received Money for an
office, how be it I refer my self herein to my Masters that are learned.

The next part that they are called for their Virtue and Godliness, surely then
I verily suppose some of them are called for the things that never were in them
before, and then were the caller deceived, which God cannot be, except you will
say that God of his mere goodness and mercy called them for the virtues and
godliness which he means to call them unto, and in this order begins to
woork, I mean in bestowing upon them so liberally, and by that means to
charge them with his expectation, in respect of their great Talent committed
unto them, which thing you seem to allege, as no small cause and
consideration of the high assessing of the fees and charges aforesaid, and that
so great mercies and graces bestowed upon them by God, and so liberal reward
appointed unto them by men: should suffice to make them godly and verteous from
thence forth: what so ever they were or had been before. All which arguments,
although they be godly and probable: yet as I said before they stand doutful,
for the old Proverb, Honors change manners. I believe the godly and the
learned do dout whether it be taken in the better part, or in the wurse, for I
am very sure, that many are wurse disposed, and much more ungodly in high and
honorable calling: then while they were in mean estate and degree. Neighbor
Pierce (quoth our Host) there is no rule so general, that it admits not
exception, albeit I ^out not nor ever did, that honors change manners, is and
ever was meant in the better part. For the wise man says. He that is ungodly
in wealth: how much more ungodly would he be in poverty? The examples are many
that do prove that honors change men to the better, namely of Saul, of whom
it is said that being called from a simple boy after his Inauguration: he felt
him self sudenly changed, and as the book says: he felt a new heart in him.

The like examples we have of many Kings and Prophets in the holy Scripture.
But to come nearer, both for the time and also the place, in our English
History we read of that noble King H. the fifth, who in his Fathers life was of
evil government, and kept company with riotors and unthrifts, so that there
was small hope of him, but after the death of H. ye fourth. when this yung man
was placed in his kingdom: he sent for all his old companions, who were not a
little glad thereof, but when they wear come into his presence: he sharply
rebuked them, and giving them small rewards, yet better then he thought them
worthy, he forbad them during their lives to come within xij. miles of the
Court, and that upon great penalty. All these examples do manifestly prove,
that liberal reward of virtue, and high and Honorable calling do increase
virtue in them in whom it is already, and causes them in whom it is not save
only in apparaunce, yet for pure shame to embrace it, seeing that otherwise hot
coals are heaped upon their heads, through their shameless unthankfulness
unto them that have so thoroughly provoked the^ with the greatness of their
benefits.

And therefore against all these reasons and proofs, to say that the Magistrate
and Officer should privately Covet and convert so great sums of treasure: it
were to shameful and slanderous, considered that they are the effects of so
evil causes as has already been showed. And considered also the horrible and
wicked conclusion that would ensue thereupon, as also has already been proved.

Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) never tell me what might or does ensue
thereupon: but consider the truth and the matter as it is in deed. And if these
great fees and charges do not come unto their receivers and takers in proper
and private: what mean^ they to make so great labor, suit, freendship and cost
to get those offices and callings. And how comes it to pass that by the
means of such offices: such as before were of small ability, come to
purchase a Barons living, yea twain or three. Shortly, that their care is
greater to hear and learn where any Land or Lordship is to be sold: then for
the Money wherewith to purchase the same.

Simon confirms his assertion touching the desire to bear office to be good,
by the Etimologie and exposition of the word Officium. Chap. 9.
Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) all these matters are easily divided, unto
the which thus I answer. To the first which is their great desire to be in
such Offices of receipt, I say you misiudge of their desire because you do not
understand the meaning of this word Office and do think him to be an English
man whereas in very deed his Father is an Italian, whose proper signification
and meaning you do not understand, for in our English tung Office is no more
to say nor nothing else but Service, so that whosoever desires an Office he
desires to do service orles a place wherein to do service, now all men know
that a private man is not able to compare with the Magistrate or Officer in
ability and power. Therefore to desire an Office is to desire to be better
abled, to express and declare the hearty goodwil and affection which he has
to be serviceable unto God and his commonwealth, for that in private estate his
power answers not unto his goodwil therein, and therefore the better man the
more desirous to be in Office and in the more Offices, for the greater is his
power to show his good affection toward God who is the Giver of all these
things.

Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce I cannot tell what Cuntrie man's Office is, neither
do I greatly force whether his Father be an Italian, Spaniard or Frenchman,
but if he be the same in Latin that service is in English: I am sure that both
in Latin, French, Spanish and English he stinketh when he is to freely offered,
and that (I am very sure) did Aesop mean in his Fable of the Sow great with
pig unto whom (says he) there came a For who alleging unto her his great
skill in the art of a Midwife profferd her his service toward her deliverance,
unto whom she answered, that the greatest and best service that he could do
unto her, was to keep him far enough from her, which she also prayed him to
do, whereby you may gather what the Authors opinion was upon this voluntary
offer of service and yet he does not allege that the For offered any money,
I suppose because he had no money to offer. But Simo^ Magus offered money in
y^ Acts of ye Apostles, and what the holy Ghost thought thereof: you may there
understand, Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host this is a cold reason and no
Argument, to say that a man's earnest desire to have an Office argues his
desire of private gain and proffit, and so for his great desire to do good:
condemn him of evil without proof thereof. Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) I do
not so barely reason neither so nakedly as you have alleged if you did me
right in repetition of my Argument, not intercepting the same nor seuering the
parts there of as you have done, and so have answered the first part by it self
which is the weakest and have said nothing to the second part which is their
great purchase and the strength and effect of the first, for my Argument taken,
wholly together is thus much to say, that their great desire to have the
Offices, and their great purchase of Lands and living following the same,
shows that from the beginning there was meant naught else but private pouching,
for ever the act that is last in exception: is the first in Imagination in all
men's doings this is most assured. Neighbor (quoth our Host) this Argument
of yours which you hold so forcible is of no force at all, whither the parties
thereof be considered jointly or severally, neither does this great desire to
be in Office, neither ye great purchase ensuing the same in any wise disprooue
my first Assertion and maintenance of this great revenues, fees and charges as
you suppose, construing and taking my saying to near unto the letter. For
whereas I have alleged the Magistrates and Officers to be the Patrons and
Fathers of the commonwealth, and these great revenues a public treasure in
their hands to the uses and intents abooue rehearsed: ye allege against me
their great purchase of Lordships, Lands and Livings as a repugnancie and
dispraise thereof, which it is not but the greatest and strongest confirmation
thereof that I my self have alleged, for although I have made them receivers
yet have I not charged them merely as Receivers: but as Baylifs and Gardens of
trust whose authority exte^deth to improoue for ye benefit of their Cu^tries.
But a better Improouement can there not be made: then by altring of money which
is transitory: into land which is permanent, namely being delivered unto them
at their years of discretion upon the account of their said Balifs or garde^s.
And even as it fares between the Garden and his pupil, ye Balifs and him to
whose use he is put in trust. So fares it between these Magistrates and
Officers and the commonwealth as touching these receipts.

And therefore these purchases of lands and possessions the best and most
allowable discharge upon their account that can possible be made unto God, the
greatest and highest aduau^cement of his honor and glory, the greatest and
most assured comfort and stay of his godly people and servants unto who^e the
payment of the money from hand to hand had been but a temporal and a short
releef, for every man has not the government ne right use thereof, to slipper
is it and fugitive.

But these Lands in the hands of these Landlords are a stay perpetual and
permanent whereunto the godly and honest person is sure of preferment and that
for reason for why the Owners are such in whom is no acceptaunce of Woorship,
Freendship, or of the greater offer, neither of other thig then virtue and
godlynes, and therefore their rent must needs be easy, for who should rate it
by out bidding when the ungodly is no chapman neither dare present him self in
the place for the godly person does if no not unto the wicked much less unto
his godly Brother or Neighbor. This is no small commendation of Virtue and
godlynes and no small encouragement thereto, namely where a man may make as sure
and a more sure account of his Farm: then some other can make of their
Inheritance and patrimony, which thing although it seem strange: yet is it
commonly verified in the Farmers of such Landlords. For we see to often that
diverse honest and godly Men leave their Inheritance unto ungodly and
unthrifty Children who (falling into the hands of the executor do little
while enjoy the same. The cause whereof is for ye they came to their lands
before they came to their Wit, and being Owners waxed thereby proud and in
state being under no man's check and disdaining all men's council and so
forgetting God and them selves fall to folly and then (as the Prophet David
says) Their table is made a snare to take the^ and the things which should
have been for their proffit, ar^ unto them an occasion of falling, So fearful
and dangerous is the singular and sole propriety of great Lands and
possessions, as that often times it not only bereaueth the owners of their
right wit and Judgments: but also through their pride, unthriftiness and
prodigality it hazardeth the sincere administration and execution of laws and
Justice, procuring partialite and favor to ungodliness and dissolute living,
whilste they (whose duty were to rebuke such persons and to restrain their
liberty) had rather enter into their large revenues and possessions and to
take and use the opportunity of their wickedness and retchlesnes as the meetest
occasion herto. But in these Farmers and in their posterity otherwise it is
and that for the reverend and honorable regard^ between them and their Land
Lords at whose hands and during whose good will and pleasure they hold their
livings and whose great liberality and benignity charge them with no small
expectation as well of godly and honest conversation of life, as also of
hospitality and charitable dealing with their Brethren and Neighbors being
by their means very well enabled thereunto. These things (I say) are looked for
at their hands and that by them whose expectation they dare not nor can not
without great shame falsify, which godlynes, thriftines and liberality in
them is of no small force to move others thereunto, and so mutual love and
charity cherished between every degree, and where these things are, God has
promised to bless that house, Town, City or Cuntry.

It can hardly be spoken and much hardlyer written how greatly and how mightily
this procures and aduaunceth Learning, Godlynes and Virtue, how much it
furthereth the desire of contemplation and godly exercises of the mind,
against which there is no Impediment nor hinderaunce so great as either the
destitution or want of a competent living and maintenance, orels the daily
fear to de supplanted or disapointed thereof, and consequently the thoughts and
cares either to provide for a competent living orels to maintain and defend
the same against the daily Allarmes and assault^ of the Covetous and the
ungodly against which the benignity and goodness of Owners and Land lords is
the greatest yea the only protection. These are the effects and fruits of these
purchases alleged by you to be made by ye gains, fees and revenues aforesaid
which do far differ from the common purchasing of other private persons by
who^e (through your Ignorance orels of malice) you do Judge and measure these
which are in nothing like nor comparable, as the effects and fruits thereof will
evidently declare, namely in the purchase of the Merchant, the Chapm a^, the
Grasier, the Clothier and such other like Artificer whatsoever, at ye hands of
all which persons no such thing is hoped or looked for. First for ye they do
not sustain any such charge of expectation, neither is any reason that they
should, except a Shoemaker bying an Ox hide for three shillings and
fourepe^ce, might sell shoes for twenty shillings a pair: for that would
alter the case. Therefore as his calling is base and mean: so is his Judgment
as touching Virtue and the Felicity and end of man's life, which he Judges to
consist in getting and having, for that he seeeth men accounted and esteemed
thereafter, and other or farther. Contemplation has he very little or none. So
that in his Oppinion he speedeth his matters wunderful well if he return his
Chaffer to his gain, and the more and greater so much the better, be it land or
lease of Farm or house, if he can sell it again for double or treble that it
cost him or let it for three times the rent that he pays him self for it.
All this he accounts honest gain and very wisely handled, so that when he
has any thing to let or set up goes the Drum and as welcome to him the Devil
of hell, yea Belzabub him self as the Godlyest person in England, yea as an
Aungel of heaven, for godlynes, virtue or honesty is the last question that
he will ask, only Quid vultis mihi dare? Thus is the godly person sure to be
put back orels to take the thing to his utter detriment, so that upon the
matter no question or difference whither of them speed, for the evil man is
made a great deal wurse, namely for that the greatness of his rent stops the
mouth of him whose rebuke he should most fear and whom he would and should
most reverence and regard, and therefore will he be as wicked and as
ungracious and corrupt as many others as he can and dare for fear of the
laws. The godly person although he gladly would do good: yet wants he
power thereto being over set with the greatness of his re^t, so that in
conclusion whether the good or evil may speed: they are forced to deal hardly
with the world whereby aryseth little or no amity, freendship or charitable
love among men but even all for the penny as among mere Strangers nor any
zeal unto God nor to do any good for his sake.

By all these Arguments, it appears manifestly how much it were to be wished
and desired at the hands of Almighty God, that only or chiefly such were
purchasers and Land lords whose very estates and callings and the manner of the
getting of their gains wherewith they purchase do charge them with a reverend
and fatherly regard in letting and setting the same to the honor and glory of
God who has so mightily blessed them, yea so far abooue all that they ever
could with out shame have wished or desired, so heaping hot coals upon their
heds in their unthankfulness and dealing otherwise, which (as I have already
said) is not or at ye least not so greatly to be hoped or looked for at their
hands of bace and mean calling. And therefore Neighbor Pierce (quoth he)
admitting and confessing the greatness of their purchase: yet can ye not
conclude against me the proper or private receipt or employing of Charges, Fees
and revenues aforesaid neither will I grant it unto you, for the slanderous
and shameful consequence which it infers necessaryly as has already been
duly proved.

Pierce repeteth the Reasons and Arguments of Simon and co^futeth the^ by proof
and experience demo^stratise as from the cause to the effect and that upon his
own knowledge. Cha. 10.
Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) ye have made as your self does suppose many
strong reasons and conclusio^s to aprooue ye first asessing and ye now receiuig
of eight pence or twelve pence for a sheet of paper, and other excessive and
unreasonable Fees and charges of suits as not only tolerable, just and
reasonable: but also godly and most conducible unto the commonwealth, and to
the prosperous and good estate thereof, namely for that these Fees and charges
were meant and yet are the punishment of vice and the reward of godlynes and
vertne. And also ye they were and yet are meant a public treasure in the hands
of the Receivers thereof, to all godly uses, intents and purposes.

Whereunto I answered, alleging the grrat purchase of Lands and Lordships by
the Receivers of the same as a thig repugnant and contrary to your Assertion,
whereunto you have replied that their great purchase is not only contrary to
your first Assertion but a confirmation of the same.

For you say that their purchase of lands is a provision with out comparison more
assured and permanent then were or could have been the distribution of the
money or any part thereof from hand to hand, and also that the effects and
frute^ thereof are more and greater and do stretch farther and more generally
and universally do procure the honor and glory of God, and the public wealth,
peace and quietness.

To prove that these things are so: you have alleged the honorable calling
of the Magistrate and Officer, and ye great expectation that he susteineth
both before God and Men, and also the reverend oppinion ye we are bound to
have of him.

Ye have also alleged that the first causes of all these great gains and
proffits are such as of duty he is bound to persecute and not to prosecute,
namely for that they are ungodliness, wickedness and all kind of vice, by the
gain whereof (say you) no honest nor godly person can without great sha^e thrive
and wax rich, much less the Magistrate and Officer upon whose great
expectation heerin you do so greatly insist.

Truly Neighbor (quoth he) all these are goodly and also godly reasons and
do very well prove how things either have been orels how things ought to be.

But that they are so presently: these are either no proves at all or very
small and so your argument gathered and concluded from posse to esse as I have
said already, and as I will further prove by Arguments gathered from the cause
unto the effect and from the effect unto the cause even the very same that you
have alleged, tying them together in the same manner and form as your self
have alleged them.

First you say that the original cause of these grreat gains, Fees and
revenues was the hate that the first Assessors thereof bare unto ungodliness,
wickedness and all kind of vice, the favor and good affection which they bare
unto Virtue, and godlynes, and therein they meant the punishment of the one and
the preferment and aduauncment of the other, and so you conclude lewdnes,
unthriftiness and ungodliness to have been and yet still to be the first cause of
these great gains, Fees and revenues, and these great Fees and revenues their
effect, the effect of these fees, proffits and revenues ye have alleged or
rather I my self have alleged, and you have confessed and justified to be the
great perquisition and purchase of Lordships, lands and possessions by the
Magistrates and Officers Receiuors of the same.

The effect of their great purchase is by you aleadged to be a provision, a
stay of living and patrimony for the Godly and honest People of the commonwealth, and for their assurance, peace and quietness. The effect of so good a
provision for the Godly: you have alleged to be the increase of them, and the
decrease of the wicked, unthrifty and ungodly, the effect of the increase of
godly people you have alleged to be mutual love and charity and all good
affection both toward God and also one to an other, the effect whereof you
have alleged to be the manifold blessings of God according to the saying of
the Prophet in the hundred three and thirty Psalm.

Thus have you argued from the first causes producing their effects, and from
those effects as from causes of their effects very orderly and very probably
but not necessarilye as I have already alleged, and as I dout not hereafter
I shall prove unto you so directly and so evidently that you shall either
confess your own proves fallible and falls: orels you must and shall say that
causes produce no effects orels clean contrary effects, which is to reuerse and
to overthrow the order of Nature and all the law and rule of reason as to say
there can be a Father or a Mother without a Son or a Daughter or that between
a man or a woman there should be begotten a dog or a cat. And for proof
heerof I will allege both reason as strong as you have alleged any: and also
mine own experience which I my self have deerly bought and paid for. I pray
you Neighbor let me hear that (quoth our Host.)

Pierce Plovvmans first tale for that purpose where he sbevveth how his
Neighbor and he went to the Tauern and to the dau^cing School and what
happened there. Cha. 11.
AT my being in London this last term (quoth Pierce) it fortuned one after
noone having little or nothing to do, as God knows what Idleness and
ungodliness comes of our idle waiting and attending upon our days of hearing
as they term them, when in the mean time we run up and down in the streets,
and if happily we meet with any Friend or acquantaunce it is holden great
humanity to offer him the courtesy of London, which is as much to say to have
him to the Tauern and there to sit bibbing until neither of the^ can scant
find the way forth again. So as I was about to tell you, one day amongst all
others we met a company of Neighbors and Friends together in Poules six in
number all Cuntrie men and Neighbors, save one that was a Londoner a Neighbor
borne of ours, who was our Leader to many a good place dout you not, so on Gods
name needs we must to the Tauern, and so we went to the Tauern, there fast
by, whereby that time we ca^e forth again: our heds were better laden with
hear then with Wit, so on Gods name when our heds were well fraughted: we must
needs go to see some pleasures of the City that were strange and novelty
unto us of the Cuntrie, and so on Gods name we went into a dancing School
not very far thence, now was there one man of our Company that was as deaf as a
door nail.

When we wear come into the School: the Musitions were playing and one
dancing of a Galiard, and even at our entering he was beginning a trick as I
remember of sixteens or seuenteens, I do not very well remember but wunderfully
he leaped, flung and took on, which the deaf man beholding, and not hearing
any noise of the Music, thought verily that he had been stark mad and out of
his wit, and of pure pity and compassion ran to him and caught him in his
arms and held him hard and fast. The Dauncer not knowing his good meaning and
taking it to the wurst, and having a Dagger drew it out and smot the man a
great blow upon the head, and brake his head very sore.

The man sore moved and grieved therwithall, and being a man of great
strength: threw him from him with all his strength among the Musitio^s, and be
lighting upon one of the greatest and fairest Vialles, brake it all in pieces.

Therwithall up start the Musitions for him and we for to help the other
being our Friends and Neighbors, and then went out Daggers, up went
Pantotles, all the rest of the Instruments in the the throng were all to
trodden and broken, and but that Neighbors hearing the noise and bustling came
in and parted us: surely some of us had been in grea danger to have been slain.

I lost my Cloak and had my head broken and so had three of my Neighbors more,
and hardly the Musitions and their part takers went not scotfree. But shortly
to end and come to my purpose: you shall hear what followed.

First and formoste we were all arrested and committed to Prison for a fraie
and bloodshed, where I think you may make no question if it cost us any thing
before we gat out again. But having paid our Fees there, and thinking verily
that the wurst had been past: even at our coming forth from thence we were
all newly arrested by latitates and remained until we had put in Suretiee to
appear at the day of the return of the writ in the Kingsbench. So we laid our
purses together and went to a woorshipful and learned Lawyer that had been of
our council aforetime, and showed him the declarations that were against us,
whereof the first was at the suit of the Owner of the scoole, wherein he
alleged that with force and arms we had entered into his house and beaten,
wounded and evil entreated his Servants, by reason whereof he had lost their
service by the space of right days, to his hinderaunce and damage sixpound,
and also then and there three Instruments of Music commonly called Vialls did
spoil and break to his loss and hinderaunce sixpound.

Besides this, every of his Servants the parties themselves seuearlly declared
against us all jointly of an assault and battery made upon them, and that we
had beaten, wounded and evil entreated them to their several damages
fortipence, the Dauncer himself declared severally against the deaf man for
assaults and battery, upon all which matters we prayed his council and advise,
his answer was shortly ye in his opinion the law was against us in all and
every of our cases whereof he gave us the causes and reasons as I shall rehearse
unto you.

To the first point of the first delaration for forcible entrye we prayed his
reason, how or by what reason our entry might be said forciblo seeing the
doors were open, and if they had been shut our coming in was but to hear and
see, and our meaning not hurtful to any man. His answer thereunto was that a
man's meaning that comes into my house shall be co^strued and taken to have been
such from the beginning as is his act there done after he is entered, for ye
shall be taken for his meaning and the declaration thereof, namely where he
enters without special commandment or license of the party, and because
(says he) that after your entry into y^ house ye did there commit a force
and an unlawful act: therefore your first entry and coming into the house
shall be deemed and judged unlawful and forcible. Then we asked how or by what
reason our act could be said unlawful which was but y^ taking of a man in his
arme^ of very goodwill to stay him thinking that he had been mad and out of his
wit and might have mischeiued him self. His aunswers thereunto was that therein
the act was not lawful nor iusticiable but a Trespassers although no farther
harm had ensued thereupon, which yet (by your confession) there did, for to
speak generally: it is not lawful to embrace or strain any man against his will,
for if him list to take it to the wurst (especially if there ensue any evil
unto the party thereby) it shall not help the party to say that he meant him
good or at y^ least no evil thereby, for although that in felony the intent do
qualify the fact it is not so in Trespassers wherefore your act was not lawful
nor Iusticiable except ye had been Officers or otherwise ye ye had come in
and found the^ doing some felonious or unlawful act, by means whereof ye had
had sufficient coullour to have laid yourha^ds upon the^, for every man is an
Officer for peace sake and for the preseruacio^ thereof, and then (quoth he)
your case had been otherwise, unto this we answered that our act in all
reason seemed more lawful and tolerable then theirs, for that in their
exercise there is little good purpose or none at all, nor better end or purpose
then to induc^ such evil and unhappy events and consequents as happened in this
case of ours, and that therefore their cause ought not to have favor against us
as if we had hindered or interrupted their honest or lawful exercise in any
godlynes or in any thig tending unto virtue, to the glory of God or to the
proffit of the commonwealth. His answer unto that was that we are not to
dispute of that which the reverend and honorable Magistrates have established
yea and holden in no small reputation, it falls for y^ Magistrates, Rulers
and Officers to bear with them in all incidents and casualties otherwise
should they disalowe their own Acts and be contrary unto them selves, which
were inconvenient. Then we demannded of him why for the first Vial that was
broken: the Master should not bring the action against the Dauncer who in very
deed was the breaker thereof, and not the other man. His answer thereunto was
that in very deed we were both Trespassers unto him alike, and he at his
liberty and election to take his remedy aginst us both or against any of us
for (quoth he) although ye dau^ser were ye material cause yet was y^ other
man y^ efficie^t cause thereof, asfor proof, if a carter wilfully drive his cart
over a man, woman or Child, both the cart, the horses, and the Carter are
guilty of the fact whereof the deaf man is not excusable neither can plead not
guilty to the fact, because he was the first and cheef efficient cause,
thereupon we moved unto him this question, why the Musitions them selves
should not be said to be the first efficient cause seeing yt without their
noise the Dau^cer would not so have fared nor taken on, neither the deaf man
have taken him for a mad man, as both you and we would have done if we had
been in his case, and had heard no more then he heard.

Unto that his answer was, that whatsoever it seemed unto him or unto us, it
is (quoth he) at your peril, and at all men's perils else that resort and haunt
to such places to put on all our Senses, wits and understandings, and also to
desire God to give them wisdom and his grace to Judge wisely and well to digest
such things as they hear and see therein, and ye we be not snared in evil
thorugh ignorant appetite of our senses unto our hinderaunces more then we our
selves are able of our selves to Judge or think, for (says he) seeing we are
not able, neither is our authority to blame or challenge the places; neither to
disalowe the things there professed, which were to derogate from the Magistrate.

Yet if we have so much grace of God as to be Magistrates unto our selves and
in such cases to blame and reprove our selves, and our own senses, and
inordinat desires, either in due time before we are fallen, orels in some
reasonable time, and with our reasonable loss and hinderaunce it may suffice
for answer unto us by them unto whom otherwise we must creep and pray our
redress neither able to crave it at their hands without an inconvenience
aforesaid, which is condemn and disalowe the things by them selves allowed and
established.

We asked him what reason there was that we should be charged in several
actions and unto several Persons, for one trespass, as namely unto the
Master and also to the servants. His answer thereunto was that the Master
has a special interest in his servant for ye proffit he is to receive by his
service for which service he is to recover and not for the hurt done unto the
person for the party him self recouereth for that. To be short, his resolution
was that for all our harms and loss that we had gotten: we wear so far
from all hope of redress or amends, that we were in the wurse case in our
defense against the^ and very like to yield amends by judgment of law. And
thus you see (quoth Pierce) how poor guiltless and simple men in a far
honester cause are put to ye wurser end. Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) as
for ye, be as be may. But truly Neighbor you had but evil success in going
to see pleasure and to hear Music, and yet trust me if ye will, I suppose ye
you sped a great deal better then a number speed in such like places, who
think nevertheless them selves to have sped there well, and come away right well
contented, which in very deed is the only cause why in my fantasy they speed
wurse then you, for why you are hurt and feel it, but they are hurt but have no
feeling thereof until their hurt be past all cure, for a man is never so
daungerously sick or sore as when he has lost the sense and feeling of the
sore or of the sickness. So fares it in such persons as these, for although
they feel no evil that they contract, and yet in such places, yet do they
carry thence with them the seeds and radical causes of great Infortunes as the
woeful and lamentable end of many a good man's Child has witnessed daily, does
and will. But truly Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) you are waxen more then
half a Lawyer by these means.

Nay soft (quoth Pierce) I have an other matter to tell you and that almost as
strange as this, and that chanced to my self in a mischaunce about a four
years past, I pray ye let us hear it quoth our Host, marry quoth Pierce,
thus it happened, A Friend of mine would needs give me my dinner at an Ordinary
table where we fared very daintily, but I promise you for mine own part I
have thought my self better at ease many a time and often with bread and cheese
in other Company. So Sir in the name of God when dinner was done: in steed of
grace to ye dice they went on every side upon proper square tables fit I
warrant you for ye purpose, and there to the hazard they go xx. s. xl, s. v. l.
vi. l. a cast, I stood by and beheld. Anon there came a Stranger a plain
homely fellow of the Cuntrye much like my self and he seeing such sums of
money upon the boorde, and the dice trotting to and fro, and that now one
snatched a heap and now another snatched an heap, and there withal such devout
swearing, he came is me and rowning me in the ear, asked me whose wear
all those heaps of money that wear laid forth, mary (quoth I) his that can
get them, get them (quoth he) how? Marry (quoth I) by hazard, say you so
(quoth he) claim they no farther property in their money but by hazard
whether them selves shall have their money or an other man? no verily (quoth
I.) What are those white things full of black spots that are so chaced to and
fro? Those (quoth I) are called dice upon whom stands the hazard, and there
withal my Friend and I having dined and dispatched: went our way forth toward
the Temple, and before we had gone so far as a man might shoot a Bird bolte:
there arose an outery behind us, stop the thief, stop the thief, and there
withal I looked behind me: and lo the fellow of whom I told you, came
running with both his hands full of money and after him ran the ruler of the
Ordinary and three or four of his servants as fast as ever they could run with
hue and cry, we turned not back neither made us to do therein. So they
followed him until they came as far as Saint Dunstanes Church, and there the
fellow being out of breath, turned again and catching y^ Master of the
dicing house in his arms: cried I have him I have him, this is y^ thief (quoth
he) Now was ye thro^g so great that a man could not know which was which until
at the last the Officers came and took them both and knowing the Master of
the dicing house: asked him what the matter was.

Mary (quoth he) this Villain Thief has robbed diverse Men of Woorship my
Guests of great sums of money and I have followed him for he ded upon the
selony. And there-hee had sp^ed me in the Company and bad the^ lay hold upon
me for this knave (quoth he) gave him ye counsel and is as false thief as
he: There was no more to say, I was and laid hold upon apprehended, and both
he and I carried before a Iusticer of peace the Fellow and I, my Friend would
not leave me but went with me to see and hear the end. So Sir, when we were
come before the Iusticer: he laid fore to the Fellows charge that he had
broken his house forciblie and burglarlie and had feloniously robbed four
Gentlemen of woorship his Guests of diverse sums of money feloniously and
against the Queens laws and peace. Sir (quoth the Justice) what say thou
to this? Sir quoth the fellow I beseech you to sla^d my good Friend and
Master and let me have but law and reason at your hands, I trust it appears
unto your discretion (quoth he) that this matter alleged against me is not
sufficient to put me to answer thereunto. First for the forcible entry into
his house and burglarye supposed: I say his house was open, and daily is and to
long has been and unto to many if it pleased God and the Magistrate such as
your Woorship is, for I undertake he that has any thing to lose and cast
away: need neither break door nor wall to leave it behind him there, and
so much for mine answer unto that part. As to the money supposed to be stolen:
he declares no certainty thereof, neither conueieth to him self any property
therein, and so no felony of ye thing whereto no man claims property, very
true it is (quoth he) that I came into his house and seeing a company standing
about a square Table and diverse greet heaps of money laid forth thereupon: I
asked this honest man that was a stander by meaning (me) what was meant thereby,
and also by two white square things full of black spots that were chased to and
fro upon the board, he answered me that they were playing at the dice, for
that is quoth he the name of those square bones, and said farther ye the name
of their game was hazard. When, I had heard him say so: I considered with my
self that there might be good to be done for me among them, for having well
marked their order: I found them the most indifferent People to gain by that
ever I met withal in my life, for I perceived that he that laid the money
down: the rest meant that he should never take it up again, and for his part
he meant as well unto them and that all this stood in the favor of hazard, and
so often time it chanced accordingly, to wit that the box being the third
person: caught a share and by no other nor better title then me thought my
self to have, for me thought I was as indifferent to every of them as was the
box or as any of them was to osver, for I verily thought and yet do that if
neither of them ever fingered that laid down either had his desire against
other, moreover quoth he, when I beheld such lewd and shameful mispending of
ye time, such horrible swearing and blaspheming and knew not where neither unto
who^e to complain for reformation thereof and thought in Conscience I ought not
to suffer it as farfoorth as were in my might, and I saw no way so likely to
redress it as to take away ye cause which I perceived was the money: I thought
that both by law and good Conscience I might do it and ought also, and in
this deliberation I awaited my time and snatched up all that I could lay hold
upon and came my way, whereupon I pray your discretion and whether this be
felony wherein there is title or at ye least color of title. A Sir quoth
the Iusticer, you are a cunning thief indeed, it is time to look to such knaves
as you are. Sir quoth the poor fellow, I beseech you be good to me, I am a
poor man and I trust, saving against them ye lost the money the money is mine
against all men and as unto the^ when they demand me: let me answer. And as
touching that honest man quoth he, by me, I never dealt with him nor never saw
him before, to be short the Fellow was committed to Newgate, and I was fain to
find surety by recognisaunce to appeer at the next sessions there to make
answer to such matter as should then and there be laid to my charge, and that
cost me five shillings and this was all that I got by having my dinner given
me.

And what said your Lawyer to you for this said our Host, what comfort does
he give you of a mends against the party that thus misused you, truly (quoth
Pierce) he utterly discourageth me to stur or meddle farther therein, and all
upon the same reasons that he made before orels the very like in effect,
Truly Neighbor quoth our Host, that Lawyer was no Counceller neither for
your purpose and much less for his own. Why so Neighbor (quoth Pierce?)
marry quoth our Host, for there is no courage in him, neither has he ye way
to help him self, and to keep you in dooi^g, in y^ he gives such counsel to
peace and quietness, unto such fellows as you ye would gladly cut hi out woork
if him self were not his own hindera^ce. Nay surely Neighbor quod Pierce,
what council soever he had given me therein, or what council he or any other of
them all shall hereafter give me in such matters: I am taught already though to
my cost, while I live to love pear and ensue it, and to love mine own
house, my honest labor and travel and chiefly and abooue all other things to
serve God, wherein I find the only stay and comfort of man's life to rest, and
that when all is sought and tried: there is none other rule ne leuel well and
surely to guide and order our affairs and doings.

The application of Pierces tale by the Host, that the great charges of the
Law is profitable to the common wealth, and a repressing of vice and sin.
Chap. 13.
AHa, very well said then (quoth our Host) I am glad that yet at the last ye
are come to y^ point whereunto I have all this while labored to bring you,
which is to confess that these great and excessive charges and expenses have
reformed and changed you from an ungodly and troublesome man: to a godly, wise
and prudent man, able to give council not only privately and to your own
friends and family: but also to bear office and authority in your Parish, yea
in y^ whole Shire where we both dwell, so that I hope from henceforth we shall
have great store of you, and that of the greatness of such fees and charges of
suits in Law, and of the first Assessors and the now receivers thereof ye are
utterly concluded and estopped to speak or think save in all honor and
reverence, Do you think so Neighbor (quoth he?) Yea verily quothe he, for you
have confessed all this your reformation and amendme^t to have comen thence,
and look what effect it has wrought in you: ye are of charity bound to think
that it has wrought, woorketh and will woork in a number more then you, and the
money that you have or rather think that have departed from: is in their hands
who are treasurers thereof, as I have alleged toward the good and godly uses,
intents and purposes ye may or shall arise hereafter in common benefit, to wit,
service of the whole commonwealth, wherein your part is as far forth as
theirs. Do ye call this a mending Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce? In very deed
quoth he, I must needs confess, that these great and excessive Charges and
large Expenses have rebuked me, have chastised and amended me, but to say that
I think or judge it thank worthy unto them that have received my money: I say
the Devil kiss his arse that so amendeth me or any friend of mine, for verily
such amending in my judgment, deserves as much and the very like thanks as did
the Wife, who gave her husband two strong poisons, meaning to speed him in
deed, but the poisons being of contrary natures: wrought one upon an other,
and destroyed either others force, whereby the man being hardly handled for a
season, yet being driven into a lax by their extremetie: avoided them both
and with them much corruption, so that where before he was a very corrupt body:
he was by their clensings the better xx. years after. Thus she did him good by
accident, but far from her intent or purpose, and utterly against her will. And
surely they that take so excessiuely of me and of others our money, and by that
kinds of punishment amend and refourme us: I hold them worthy as much thank
therefore as was this Wife at her husbands hand for his amendment which was
wrought by her mean. For I dare safely undertake, that for our affliction and
punishment, or for the dishonor of God and other ungodliness that depends
thereupon: they are as sorrowful as was the parish Clark of a Town that was sore
visited with the Plague, who said unto his wife upon a day. Wife (quoth he) if
there come two corpses to day: we will have a shoulder of Mutton and a quart of
Sack to supper, and if there come but one: we will have a shoulder of Mutton
and but a pint of Sack. Content husband (quoth she). And verily I think that
as heartily as this good man and his Wife prayed for their recovery that were
visited: so heartily pray these for peace, quietness and the honor and service of
God, and the Godly and charitable dealing and living of their Neighbors and
Brethren.

Pierce proves that the sufferaunce of wickedness and ungodliness: increases
their gain who are and should be the rebukers and punishers thereof, and that
to be the cause of great injustice and unrighteous. Chap. 14.
Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) I pray you let me further understand what
ye do mean by this History, for it should seem y^ ye have alleged it
against me, not with standing that it makes for me by the wunderfull effect
which you your self are forced to confess, that it has wrought upon you. I
know what I have confessed Neighbor (quoth Pierce) and also in what manner I
have confessed it, far enough from your purpose or any confirmation thereof. And
where in maintenance of these great fees and revenues you have alleged that
they are public, and also how many and how good and godly are the'ffects and
fruits thereof: without proof made of them or of any one of them, either by
your own experience or by other necessary demonstration. There in proof of
the contrary to wit, y^ they are proper and private, and therefore excessive and
unreasonable which is my assertion, I have brought you this proof of mine own
experience, whereby I have sufficiently showed that the first causes of all
these great gains and profits are prosecuted as I have affirmed and not
persecuted as you pretend. For I have partly showed you here what leave and
liberty the common people namely youth has to follow their own lust and
desire, in all want^nnes and dissolution of life. For further proof whereof: I
call to witness the Theaters, Courtaines, Heauing houses, Kissing boothes,
Bowling alleyes and such places where the time is so shamefully misspent, namely
the Sabbath days unto the great dishonor of God, and the corruption and utter
destruction of youth. All which (I say) are either the causes or the effects of
these great gaynes and revenues, or else both causes and effects
interchaungeably. For I dare undertake that if either these gaynes and profits
were public as you pretend, or else if there were as great gayn and profit to
the Magistrates and Officers, in the godly lives and honest conversation of the
common people as there is in the contrary: these harbors of ungodliness and
misnurture, would have less favor and maintenance then they have, and
godliness, Sobriety and modesty of lives and manners: would be in greater
estimation then they are, and the honor and glory of God more advanced thereby.
But alas that the honor and glory of God and the vain glory, pomp and majesty
of man cannot stand together, and that one of them must needs fall in the
others exaltation, for certainly the more liberty unto wickedness and sin,
and the more falling from God through the same: and the more humbly
complainings unto your good Lordships, and unto your good Woorships. The more
Recognances for the peace and good a bearing, as well by the Godly as by the
ungodly, the one inuading and the other defending: the more praying, paying,
waiting, attending, dowking, crowding, and courtesying, procuring of freendship
by means, bribing of his flatterer, and bribing of her flatterer, this drives
ye great wealth and abundance into few men's hands. For where the ungodly
through misgouerment is fallen into danger of the Law, what will he not give
to redeem his life or his infamye? yea even unto them who were the first
causes and occasions of his fall into such folly and mischaunce through
liberty and not restraint of the contempt of God, his Laws, and service,
which he will not fail to measure and fully to reward unto all libertines,
contemners and despisers of his majesty and will, given then over into a
reprobate mind, from vice unto vice, until he has fully brought him to
naught. So dangerous and fearful a thing is liberty and not restraint of ye
beginning of evil, which although they appeer not such at the first: yet when
they are come to their ripenes and have brought forth their increase to wit,
Fellonyes, Thefts, Man slaughter, Murder and such like: there is not so
ignorant a person that will not say, the man or woman was never like to come to
better end, namely for his evil and dissolute life in the beginning.

This liberty is in the hands of Magistrates and Officers to bid or to forbid,
even after as they will prefer the honor and glory of God, or else their own
wealth, pomp and vaynglory. And therefore how heartily were it to be desired at
the hands of GOD, that such as are Magistrates and Officers: should not be
couetuous, orels such as are covetous should not be Magistrates, for heerof
lethro did warn Moses in y^ xviy. of Exodus, talking with him concerning ye
election and choice of Magistrates and Officers, and bad him choose such as
hated couetise, and spoke of no other vice. The cause whereof is apparent, to
wit least ye wickedness and ungodliness of ye people came to be valuable let and
set, re^ted and farmed, bought and sold, for what other thing is valuing,
letting and setting, re^ting, buying and selling of offices whose value is more
or less according to ye state of the people and their dishonournig of God
thereby. And where you maintain these great gains by their godly and worthy
effects, ye first whereof you allege to be their great purchase of Lordships,
Lands and possessions and the effect thereof you allege to be a provision and
patrimony for ye good and godly, the effect whereof ye say is ye increase of
them, and the decrease of ye contrary, the effect whereof you say is godlynes,
unanimity, love, charity and benignity one toward an other. And last of
all y^ effect thereof be the manifold graces and blessings of God, promised by
God in ye Psalms to the house, town, City or Cu^trie where these things are.
From ye first cause to his effect I grant your argument, ye these great gains
are cause of great purchase, but from y^ purchase to his effects ye show not
how it is: but how it ought to be, for in steed of ye effects whereof you have
spoken, I see many gay houses full of gay chineis, costly ba^quetig houses,
Galleryes, bowling Alleis, strange toies of point devise and woorkmanship, but
within I find no man dwellig save Pride, who has chased thence hospitality
and charity, and as for other preferme^t ye the godly have at their ha^d^ in
any of their purchases: I see none but even who will give most, and can make
mightiest friends, and who those are in our days: ye ungodly, unfaithful and
uncharitable dealing so universally, do plainly declare.

The people so evil given both yung and old, so ungodly in living so uncivil,
yea so rude and barbarous in manners, wherein me thinks they have prevailed
and increased more and more all after as these office? have waxe^ more gai^ful
and ye desire to have the^ greater. And therefore your distincton between the in
purchase and ye Mercha^t, Chapma^, and other common persons whatsoever (saving
his probability) vain and ridiculous to y^ purpose.

Therefore Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) your reasons are weak, and to
maintain the greatness of their fees unable. Abide Neighbor Pierce quoth our
Host, give me leave to answer you unto these matters, and first because that
in very deed probable reason gives place to necessary proof and demonstration,
wherein ye suppose that ye have gone beyond me, because that against my bare and
naked reasons as you term them, ye have alleged authority, and that of your
own experience: I will answer you with the like, and that of mine own
experience also, and more direct unto my matter then any of yours, which are
indeed indirect and stand in different, and I will prove that the Magistrate
and Officer in the beginning was and yet is such as I have alleged, and also
the first assessing of the said fees and revenues, and their great utility and
necessity, namely for the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid. For proof
whereof I will rehearse unto you a matter which I my self did both hear and
see.

The Host maintains the contrary, and for disproofe thereof, and for the
proof of his assertion: alleges the purchase of a certain vvelthie Officer
toward the Law. Chap. 15.
ABout two years agon it was my fortune to be beyond London in Kent, at the
house of a woorshipfull Officer toward the Law, who not past a Month before
my coming thither: had purchased a Lordship, wherein were diverse good Farms,
and their leases to expire at Michelmas then to come twelve Months. It came to
pass one day of my being there: thither came a rich man dwelling not very far
thence, whose suit was to this Gentleman to take one of his said Farms in
reuertion, and coming to him thus he began. Sir quoth he, I understand ye have
bought such a Lordship, God give ye joy thereof. Very true it is (quod he.) Sir
quoth this rich man, I pray you let me be your tenant of such a Farm, giving
more then any other man will give for a fine. The rent of the Farm was v. ^

What will ye give me for a lease for xxi. years quoth this Gentleman? Sir
quoth he, I will give ye an C. l. and unto our Mistress a Velvet gown, and xx.
Angels to buy her pinnes besides. You have bidden like a chapman said the
Gentleman, give me leave to be advised unto Monday next said he, and then I
shall give you an answer heerin, so causing him to tarry dinner he let him
depart, and this was upon a Thursday.

The next day being Friday: this Gentleman sent for the Farmer of the same
piece of land, who came thither, and with him three hansome young men his
sons. So when he was by the Landlords commandment brought before him: he
asked him of what age he was. He answered lxxv. years. He asked him how long
he had dwelled in that Farm. He answered that he had dwelt there all his life
for he was borne in it and his father before him. You know quoth the Gentleman
that I am now become your Landlord. I know it very well quoth he, and I beseech
you of your favor. What will you give for a new lease of xxi years quoth the
Gentleman? for you know your old lease is near an end. Sir quoth y^ poor
man, let me give you reason, only that I may be able to do my Prince and your
woorship service, and to relieve my poor neighbors as hitherto I have done,
and have been well able. Very well quoth the Gentleman, be here again upon
Monday next and then ye shall understand more. The poor man (his duty done)
departed. The next Monday beei^g Mu^day next before Bartholmew day: the poor
Man was come again, and brought with him a couple of fat Capo^s, and about an
hour or twain after came this Churl very well mounted his Gelding not dear
of x. I. and behind him was trussed a fat Buck, which he presented unto the
Gentleman by one of his servants. To be short: he was willed to come in to the
M. into a close little Parlor, whither were called also this old Farmer and I
my self, whom it pleased him to vouch safe all courtesy and humanity both in
this and also in other matters, so that only we four were there, saving a
young man attendant upon his person. This done: the Gentleman began, friend
quoth he, what accusation do you bring against this poor man pointing him to
the Farmer. Sir quod. be none, I do not know the man. No quoth the Gentleman?
except ye can accuse him of evil: ye have already condemned your self thereof,
and would do me. Why so Sir quoth he? Mary Sir quoth the Gentleman, for he
cannot be guiltless of evil: that seeks the destruction and death of a
guiltless man.

Sir quoth the fellow, ye charge me wrongfully, I never sought any man's death.
Sir quoth the Gentleman, he that seeks to take away the sustenaunce of a man's
life, y^ man say I, seeks his death, and that by so much a more cruel mean as
it is a more cruel and fearful death to starve of hunger or cold: then it is
to be quickly and readily dispatched and murdered, and so soon rid out of
pain. Ye have quoth he, desired to take this poor man's Farm from him, being
his only stay, and have so bidden for it: that I know he may not live but in
extreme misery if he take it at your hands. Sir quod. be, ye are the first
great purchaser y^ ever I heard of this opinion. I have six Farms quoth he,
taken all after this manner at their hands that do think them selves both wise
and woorshipfull, yet was there never put unto me such a problem as this by any
of them, yet drink I a C. l. a year by them abooue all charges. Friend quoth y^
Gentleman, other men's doing are no president unto me, further then they stand
with my duty unto God, and with the discharging of my calling, for he has
bidden us by his prophet to stand up and enquire after the old ways, and if
they be good: then to go in them or else not, which being spoken generally
unto all estates: how much more unto them of my calling, and therefore admitting
that such hard and extreme dealing might stand with the duty of every private
person, either unto God or unto their Country and commonwealth, or else with
their own assurance which I utterly deny, yet could it not stand with my
duty, nor of any man of my calling. First for the private person, and to prove
that such extre^e dealing stands not with his duty toward God, all his
co^mandeme^ts do manifestly prove wherein be so straightly commands unto us
charity, love and ^enignitie one toward an other, without the which a man dare
not say that he looueth God who^e he never saw, neither that he has any faith,
now what love or charity is there in him that lets unto his Neighbor a
lease of hunger, want and all misery and calamity, and so molesteth ye man,
which God forbad to do unto the Dxe? The next, to wit, it stands not with his
duty to the commonwealth, the very word commonwealth, does sufficiently
show, for if a man live in the commonwealth: he must have some of the joys
and fruits thereof, or else it is to him no commonwealth, namely traueling and
laboring fore therein, neither will be that a man bear any good will toward that
commonwealth wherein the joys and sorrows, wealth and woe are so unequally
divided, and this stands not with the assurance of the commonwealth, which
increases by the unity, love and concord, and falls and decays by their
contraryes.

These the two first being proved, it rests me to prove y^ such extreme
taking and exacting stands all with thassurance of the very party him self
in every private man's case, and this seems stranger and harder to prove:
then the residue has been, but it is not so, namely unto him that goes with
the Prophet David into the house of God and there inquireth thereof, for there
he shall plainly understand that all is not clearly gotten that is put into the
purse, for I my self have known a number quoth he, that have raised iitj.
times double y^ revenues that their ancesters lived welthily and woorshipfully
upon, yea and before their death would feign have sold land if they had had
any.

The cause whereof is for that God who is not present nor called to council in
such extreme taking: will never be present nor give council or advise in the
bestowing and spending of the same, either to his honor and glory: or else to
their own benefit, but gives them over to delight in vile and vain
pleasures, and to be gainful and beneficial unto the Ministers of
voluptuousnes and sensuality and flatterers, whose freendship ends when the
tap leaves running, and when a man's own living is gone and spent: there is
nothing to be had at their hands but a mock or a flout.

But the Landlord that deals well with his tenant has of him an assured and
unfeigned Friend, and that is proved by the very duties and services which by
our ancient laws are incident unto tenures. For what Friend or what Servant
shall a man find that will so abace him self as (kneeling upon his knees, his
head uncovered, his waste vngirded, (holding his hands joint between the hands
of his friend or Master) will say I become your man and faith will bear you,
saving the faith which I owe unto God and to my Prince. All which the homager
does unto his Lord, what may not a man hope at his hands that is thus allied
unto him, this also is farther veryfied by the said honorable and ancient Law
of this Land which does give unto the Lord a writ of aid Pour file marier aid
pour fair son fitz Cheualier. and do bind the Tenant to serve his Landlord
in the wars either in his person or by sufficient Deputy. In all which
things the Law has an honorable consideration to deliver the Landlord from
careful and heathenish desire, and care to gather for the preferment of his
Children, being already assured where to leave the same and neither charged
with the gathering in or with the dangerous keeping thereof, either from the
Thief or from his own misgouernment or intemperaunce of life in apparail or in
diet, which are most perrillous thieves. Also for the service of his Prince
and his own defense. It is not to tell what a mass of treasure is spent upon
how few men that are but hirelings and come but for their hire for the which
they ever think they do to much and are always ready to find occasion of
quarrel bearing (as I have said) no love to the man nor serving therefore but
for the hire.

But of the Tenant it is and has been well proved to be other wise and that
in many a famous and memorable Journey happily achieved by our Ancestors to
their great commendation. Shortly this freendship dies not, but with the
parties, except it be through the Landlords great default either selling the
land and there withal his dearest and most assured Friends, orels by extreme
couetise and cruelty taking from him all mean to live able to be a Friend.

Both which things are now of late years waxen to common, the more pittis.
Thus it appears quoth he, that such hard and extreme dealing stands not
with the duty of any private person either toward God and his common wealth,
nor with his own assurance and countenance. Now much less with our duties
which excels theirs as far as heaven excels the earth, namely toward
God and our Country before whom we sustain so great an expectation of
godliness virtue and all benignity, so largely and so liberally rewarded unto a
desire of private gain and lucre from the beginning, which desire would like
wise detect us of all impiety of percialitie and favor unto all ungodliness
and wickedness, being the first causes of all our great gain where through we
become Purchasers.

And therwithall he made an end and putting his hand in to his pocket: he drew
forth two Deeds indented, and causing his Clark to read the one part which
was a lease for one and twenty years after the old rent, he sealed and
subscribed it, and in^ our presence delivered it as his deed unto the old
Farmer. The rich Fellow beholding this, took him to be very glad and praised
God therefore, so great and reverend is the mystery of godlynes (as says Saint
Paul) that even they who in their deeds and woorks have denied the power
thereof, yet are they touched with remorce to reverence it in others and to have
their deeds in admiration.

This matter thus ended the rich Fellow took his leave and the next day I my
self having ended my business came a way also. A A A A A A Amen quoth Pierce
Plowman.

What mean you by such a very long Amen Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host?
Beati qui audiunt. quoth Pierce, what mean you Neighbor quoth our Host? Nam
miranda canunt quoth Pierce, I trow the man doteth quoth our host, Nay
Neighbor quoth Pierce I am afraid least you doat your self, why? quoth our
Host, does this matter seem so strange and marvelous unto you? I will tell
you another matter which is as true as this and of mine own exerience also. I
pray you let me hear Neighbor quoth Pierce.

An other tale by the Host of a yung Gentleman that had morgaged his Land,
coming to an other great Officer of the Law to whom be offered to sell his
land of whom he had great comfort. Chap. 16.
IT fortuned an other time I was in Rent also at the house of an other great
and rich Officer toward the Law, where I had occasion to soiourn certain
days, during which time there came thither a yung Gentle man to offer his Land
to sell, and made an offer thereof, unto this man in my presence, unto whom this
Woorshipful Lawyer spoke in this manner.

Wherefore will you sell your Lands (quoth he) being an ancient possession and
a fair living? Sir (quoth this yung man) I am fallen into great det coming to
my Lands before I was wise, and have morgaged my Land for two hundred pound,
which except I come with in these ten days: I utterly lose my Land.

You have brought your self into great extremity (quoth this Gentle man) how
be it, to sell your Land: me think a very hard remedy thereof, and great pity
if any other way might be taken, for he that sells away his Land: sells
away his best and most assured Friend. Besides that to sell away namely his
ancient Patrimony and which he never bought: is both shameful and
slanderous as to have disherited and destroyed his name, house and family,
which is an odious thing and the thing which the good Naboth the Iesraelite
denied even unto the King of Israel, for when Achab demanded of him his
Vinyard for as much as it was worth, God forbid said the poor man that I
should sell thee my Fathers Inheritance, being yet but a poor Vinyard: yet
did he defend it to the loss of his life. We may read in the old Testament
how greatly God himself favored the maintenance and preservation of
Inheritance and possession in their Tribes houses, names and families. For he
commanded by Moses expressly that if any man sold his Inheritance being
Land or house: it should return unto him again in the year of Iubile which was
every fifty years. Also that Women unto who^e Lands and Inheritance were
deuolute in default of heirs males should not marry into any other Tribe.
Wherefore (quod he) I wish you to have a great regard in departing from your
Inheritance so great a blessing of God, for it is a great infamy and reproach
to be said, an unthrift and ye first decaier of a house and famely whether it
were greater or smaller.

Alas Sir (quoth this yung man) I am in greater distress ye know these
Merchaunts of London are hard dealcts with whom there is no mercy but for
ready payment, well quoth the Gentleman, I will do thus much for you, I my self
will lend you an hundred pound which you shall repay by forty pound a year,
and that I suppose you may easily do ordering your self wisely, take that
quoth he and offer it to the Merchau^t if happily he may be entreated to give
you a year or twain for the rest upon reasonable consideration, ye yung man
gave him hearty thanks, ye money was fetched down, counted and delivered and ye
assurau^ce made accordi^gly, which being done: y^ yungma^ took his leave and
heartily desired me (although a mere stranger unto him, (yet because I was
present and a witness of so great courtesy and humanity) to go with him to
London unto this Merchants house, which I also was content to do, and having
dispatched the occasion of my there being, and having like wise taken my
leave: to London we came and to to the Merchants house we went, when we came
before this Merchaunt the yung Gentleman began to entreat him as fair as he
could and telling him of this good and godly Lawyer and of his great
compassion, his good council and persuasion: desired him to accept this C. I.
in part of payment, and to give him a year or twain for payment of the rest.
This Merchant having heard all the matter: now GOD forbid (quoth he) that ever
a Lawyer should heap coals upon Merchants head, or that a Merchant should not
be as willing and as ready to do a godly deed as a Lawyer, having received at
the hands of God the like ability thereto. And there withal having received
the C. l. he took his own bond for the rest to be paid by x. l. a year, his
first pay to begin after the Gentleman's C. l. full paid, and delivered unto him
all his Indentures and other assurances of the Mortgage, and making us great
cheer he let us depart. Now when I would have taken my leave of this young
Gentleman: I could by no means forbid him to bring me on my way hitherward, as
far as Ware xx. miles on this side London, where he paid all my charges for
that night, and the next day we took leave each of other and departed either
of us toward his own. Thus ye see how fruitful was the good and gracious deed
of one man, and how it provoked the zeal of an other to do the like.

A A A A A A A Amen (quoth Pierce.) Well quoth our Host, because you do so
hardly receive my proofs: I will bring you more store of them, and such as I
am ready to verifye against whom soever will deny their truth.

An other tale of the Host of a vvoorshipfull Lawyer that made leases to all
his Tenants of the Farms they heeld for Li. years. after a strange sort and
also very vvisely. Chap. 17.
I Was (quoth he) in Buckingham Shire not very long sithence, at the house of
rich Officer toward the Law whom I could name if need required, who during the
time of my being there, made unto all his Tenants leases of their Farms,
whereof I my self am witness, present at their Sealing and deliuerye. The leases
are for li. years from the day of the date thereof, the rent referued as
follows. Yielding and paying unto the said Leassor and his heirs yearly
during so many of the said li. years as thinheritaunce shall remain in him or
them, not sold, exchaunged, mortgaged, forsaited, leased in reuertion or
otherwise estraunged v. l. current money of England, and yielding and paying
from and immediately after any such act done by him or them or any of them v.
s^ yearly of like current money, and so after the rate of other rents were they
greater or smaller. Provided always, that the tenant shall not sellset nor
let their said Farm or any percel thereof, without the assent and license of
the said Leassor or his heirs, of which reservation I asked him a reason,
whereunto his answer was this. See (quoth he) how hard a matter it is for
young Gentlemen unto who^ it falls by the grace and gift of God to be
Landlords and owners, wisely to order and govern either their possessions,
lands and revenues or them selves. I know also (quoth he) that in the wisdom,
prudency and good government of such: stands the happy and prosperous estate
of a commonwealth, and her misery in the contrary, and therefore in my judgment
ought all men generally to wish, yea and to endeavor that the greatest lands
and possessions may be in their hands who both can and will order and dispose
the same to the honor and glory of God, and to the profit of ye commonwealth,
wherein me thinks saving reformation, the to often and to common translation
of possession, is not the least matter nor last to be considered, as well for
the causes thereof which are evil: as also for the effects thereof which are
wurse. The causes that make men to sell their patrimonyes and to spoil their
inheritance, who knows not to be these, riot, game, whordome, delight in all
ungodly pleasures and pastime of sensuality, shortly the not fearing of God,
nor serving him, and the not caring to know his will and commandments, nor to
live thereafter, these are the causes. The effects are these, first the spoil
of the land and the making it barren and bare of all the commodities thereof,
secondly the dislodging and disapointing of the honest Farmers and good house
keepers, for their sakes that will bid more then they, without any other
respect, and those are commonly the wicked and ungodly, and from thence arises
infinite suits and controversies, maintenaunces, champerties and such like.

This causes lands often to change their tenaunts and inhabitants, and by
that means breacheth and dissolueth one of the greatest and surest bonds of
love and freendship that is or ever was, namely, coeducation, conversation and
acquaintance, which hatcheth, nourishes and confirms love and freendship,
not only between men: but even between the brute and unreasonable beasts, who
having been ^^^tered long together in one place, will not only love and
defend one an other: but also even the very place wherein they were bred and
nourished, and they will very hardly be sundred or driven there from. And this
is the very law of kind, which can not effectually woork among neighbors, of
whom some are daily or yearly flitting and giving place unto new, namely such
as will bid more the which commonly are the wurser sort as has been already
alleged. These are two effects. The third is the sincerity of Justice and
also of discipline, both which it greatly hazardeth, namely for y^ buyers and
sellers are Corelatiues, and that the one cannot be without the other, and for
that also the causes of selling and spoiling of patrimonies are such as I have
already declared. These things are right perilous in a commonwealth, and yet
do almost necessarily follow the to often and common translation of
possession and inheritance, namely where it is by penny purchase, against the
which nevertheless it is marvelous hard to foresee and to provide, I mean for
heirs and inheritors of Lordships, lands and possessions to continue in the
same, being things that so many desire to have, yea often times such as have
in their hands the bridle of liberty, or restraint of good and evil, and of
the lives and manners of men, for what is there in all this earth so much
desired as houses, lands, Lordships and possessions, and to command over
people? What else is the end of all so many and so great travels, watch, study,
so many and so great hazards by Sea and land, so many shifts, sleights, deceit
and oppressions, of all which this world has been, is and ever will be full,
against all which who so will hold a thing of so great value: he must be well
provided and of great defense, and has need to have in him self the strength,
wisdom, council and judgment of many, and so much the rather by how much his
possession is ye greater, and that for two causes. First for that in his error
of life, fall and misgouernment: lies the fall, ruin and decay of a number,
what of his own blood, what of his tenaunts, faith full friends and servants,
Secondly for that his estate is subject unto many enemies, of whom the greatest
and most dangerous is the flatterer the old enemy of all man kind, as the
story of our father Adam and mother Eve and the Serpent does well declare.
This moved Juno as Ovid fableth to commit Io her Cow unto Argus to keep, which
Argus had an hundred eyes in his head, and therefore much a do had Mercury to
deceive him with all his sweet songs and Music, for when he had brought one of
his eyes a sleep, yea diverse of them, yet waked diverse others and stood upon
their ward, and whether his face or his back were toward Io: yet he all way
beheeld her.

A reason why Copyholdes, Customs and Corporations were first ordained, and
how that Pride and Flatterye are the chief causes that many a young Gentleman
comes to sell his Lands. Chap. 18.
ANd surely in mine oppinion this moved the wise and honorable fathers and
Magistrates of old time to incorporat so great livings and possessions, and
also to erect and establish in Lordships so many copy holds and custummary
tenures, as the most souereign remedy against pride and surcuydrie, which
commonly accompanies the private, singular and sole propriety, in la^d,
possession, office or any other thing whatsoever, and also a way and mean to
furnish the commonwealth with many both able to deserve well and to do good
also glad and willing thereto, unto the which pride is either the only lot and
impediment: or else of all other the greatest as he upon who^ flattery
attends, yea and in such sort that he leads him by the nose up and down
the house, making him to believe of him self any thing, causing him also to
delight no while in any one thing, whether it be apparail or the fashion
thereof, place, person, diet, friend, servant, Tenant or other thing
whatsoever, and this as daily experience teaches, is the high and ready way to
the Usurers house, and from thence to the Extorcioner, who dwells hard by, of
which twain by that time he has taken forth his lesson kindly: I dare be his
surety he will not be hasty to do good to any good body, neither if he would
shall he have wherewith all, for either shall he have no lands lest him at all:
or if he have any, he shall be glad to let the^ deerer then ye any honest man
shall do good thereon, so that in conclusion, both the Landlord and the
Tenant shall be miserable.

The cause heerof is Pride most and chiefly, as I have said, and often times
youth, good nature, or peradventure excess of Pleasure and Sensual delights,
where through young Gentlemen are often snared through evil company, being
overtaken sometime by giving their word, sometime through bribe of a little
present money, sometime by one deceit, sometime by an other, wherein men are
soon pampred, uamely such as are of small experience and judgment, and know
not the false lures of the wicked and ungodly, against all which these
Corporations and customs are of great force and a great defense, for in both
these cases: hardly can they be assaulted, much less invaded by any of the
enemies aforesaid.

First for that a corporation is never under age, as for example, Mayor and
Comminaltie, Deane and Chapter, Wardens and Fellows and such like, whose
succession is by election, their propriety is joint and in common, neither can
one do any thing without the rest, and therefore to flatter any one of them
vain, and to flatter them all very hard, namely men's Natures, Wit, Judgments
and Affections being diverse, and every man willing to maintain and prefer his
own oppinion or his friends. Pride atteinteth them not, for who is proud, or
at the least so proud of any thing, wherein a number has to command as much
as he, and without who^ he can do nothing, then being armed against Pride the
Father of necessity and need: they are better freely to afforde their good
word or deed, and therefore in vain were it to bribe them.

But admit that any of them would be bribed, it were also in vain and would
procure the euel will of all the rest without bribing them all which were heavy
and hard to do.

So that in any competition made unto such persons against any old Friend,
Tenant, Officer or servant: it is very hard to prevail except it be
through his own great misbehauiour. And where it is between mere Sraungers
one of them against an other, there the best and most worthy is sure to
speed, for certainly and infallibly there is nothing in all this world so
amiable, so belooued and favored as honesty, virtue and godlynes are. Where
private flattery or briberie stand not in their light, as in the case of
private Owners and proprietaries: I have alleged that it both may and often
does. And thus much of the Corporatio^s and of their effects. Now to speak of
ye customs of Manours the very sa^e or like in effect may be said, for ye
Inheritour of customary Land although he be seized thereof to him and to his
heirs: yet can he not sell it without license of the Lord and that solemnly
granted by his Steward in open Court and there entered, nay he cannot set or
let the same or otherwise impair the wood or other commodities thereof without
the license aforelaid.

So great an entresse and commandment has ye Lord, therein and yet not to the
hinderaunce or prejudice of ye Inheritance but econtra, namely that the
selling, setting or other government of such a royal possession as land is:
should stand in ye Judgment and discretion of diverse, and those of ye ripest
and best advised, and not to be sold, wasted or spoiled through the
intemperaunce of one foolish or ungodly man or woman either for need or
necessity or other wise for flatery or other fo^d or foolish affection what
soever, wherein the Lord and his learned Stuard and the homagers of the Court are
Judges. In all which cases it may evidently appeer how great a care those
honorable and reverend Forefathers had to enact and establish the greatest
possessions in the hands of such as were not like to misregarde so great and
high a blessing of GOD, the effects and fruits whereof have been many and great
as from time to time proof has verified and yet does, for it has always
been accounted and yet is a right happy thing to be tenant or Farmer to a
corporation or enjoy any commodity under them. For woorshipful and honorable
have always been their d^aling in ordering and government of their Lands,
liuinges and poss^ssions, and of their Tenaunts and Farmers of the same. But
chiefly and abooue all others to be Tenant unto the Prince, who indeed is a
Corporation, for from the Prince there can pass nothing but by writing under
seal, neither does or can without the conseut of diverse of the most honorable
and best advised. These (quoth he) are the causes and the reasons that have
moved me to make these leasses, and therein these reseruations which unto you
do seem so very strange. For I suppose this to be a strong mean to unite
the Landlord and his tenant together, and to counterballaunce the one of them
against the other in form of a corporation, orels as near unto the Nature
thereof as I could devise. For by this means, if my heirs or any of the^
chance at any time hereafter to prove unthrifty: his unthriftiness shall not
be so gainful unto any man y^ in hope to purchase his lands would therefore
strengthen his hands therein and by these means I have left them mo Friends and
fewer Flaterers. For he that shall by his Lands without the consent of the
Farmer: he shall for the time make as good a purchase as does he that
purchases of a Woman her Husbands lands while he is ^et alive, or as he that
goes to the Poultrie and buying there a Capon for two shillings puts him
into his bag, and when he comes home he finds there nothing but a Capons
leg, for in this case of mine: the buyer buyeth less then the Seller sells
by xix. parts, which me think should keep them from agreement upon the price
whilst either of them would fain make the best bargain for him self, as the
manner of all chapmen is. And for which reason Jesus Sirach says of them, that
sin sticks between the bier and the seller as fast as does a nail stick
between two stones in a wall.

This way have I thought to be stronger and better assured then any entaile
general or special, both which private ^ouetise has found a way to destroy
to the disherison of many a good kindred and to the great decay of virtue and
godlynes, and heerin (quoth he) I have done my heirs no wrong, for upon this
rent I have lived content and do, and if they prove honest and virtuous: so
may they do, and then I have left them enough, and if they prove otherwise:
then have I left to much and yet to little to serve them also.

Moreover (quoth he) I have here by provided against the malice of such
tenaunts as abuse the liberality of good Landlords setting and letting over
unto the third and fourth hand racking and enhaunsing the things unto excessive
and unreasonable, rents and such as the Landlord him self would never have done
for pure shame and pity, which nevertheless being raised to his hand by
others: is a perrillous president unto him at his return unto the possession
thereof.

Thus you have heard (quoth our Host) what a godly and Fatherly care this good
and virtuous Magistrate had to prefer the hononur and glory of God and also
the commonwealth of his Cuntrie and People, whereby it may appear how hartilye
to be desired is the purchase of such Persons whose riches is the Treasury
and Storehouse of the commonwealth, as well for the sustenaunce of the same
concerning worldly and bodily provision of transitory things: as also for the
furtheraunce and increase of Virtue, Godlynes and Piety, Love and Concord.

Hoe (quoth Pierce) lay a straw there for Gods sake, marry Sir here is stuff
indeed (quoth he) here has been a long discourse indeed, and even as true as
all the rest, with that I enterrupted their talk and spoke unto him.

The Author interrupteth Pierce, maintaining Simons Assercion, shevving that of
late in his sight he knevv a Lavvier gave x. li. to the building of a Bridge.
Chap. 19.
FAther Pierce (quoth I) these matters are not so strange nor so incridible as
you ween, for proof whereof I will (if it please you to give me leave) rehearse a
thing which Imy self did see and that no longer a go then Easter Term last.
It fortuned that I went into a Lawyers Chamber in Sergeants Inn with a Friend
of mine who was Plaintiff in a Repleuin in Bedfordshire, and being come into
this Law yers Chamber and having stayed there awhile about our business: there
came in an ancient Gentleman of the Cuntrie, whom I know very well by sight and
have done long, who^e when the Master had espied coming up even at the top of
the stairs: he spoke to him as follows. I know wherefore you come, go down
again to my man and bid him come up to me, which the Gentleman did, his
Servant being come: he took forth of his Cubbord (which was under the square
table that stood before him) a bag wherein was ten pound and delivering it
unto his man bad him go down and pay it unto the Gentleman, and if any of the
gold lack weight change it for him. The servant went down and did
accordingly. I thought verily it had been the rent of some house or land that
he had holden of him. But even while I was in this thought: the Gentleman
coming up again gave him humble and hearty thanks and that in the name and
behalf of a whole Cuntrie yea of diners Shires. Whereupon I taking occasion to
enquire farther of the matter: understood that he gave that ten pound freely
toward the erecting and building of a bridge, and that such charitable deeds
as this are no new things unto him. I sooner will believe this (quoth Pierce)
being of a man learned in the laws and whom Virtue and Learning have
preferred, then of the others that fishen for Offices with the golden hook and
never wist what learning meant.

Simons return to his matter again declares of an other rich Officer in the
Law who had two Farmers, one rich and the other poor and how he dealt
with them. Chap. 20.
WIth that our Host took hold again, saying y^ he had yet one other matter
to tell, and therewith he would conclude. I was another time (quoth he) at the
house of an other rich Officer toward the Law, who dwells in Kent also and is
a man of great wealth, and one time of my being at his house as (I thank him) I
have been very many times. There were two of his Tenaunts come to take new
leases of their Farms the lands being of equal rent and value, but yet the
Farmers not equal in wealth: the one having been blessed (as it should seem)
abooue y^ other, for the one of them was very welthie and vpheld his Tenament
in very good repair and offered the Lord at the first word forty pound for a
fine for one and twenty years. The other was poor and yet his Tenament in
decay, neither was he able to give five pounds for a fine, whereof the Landlord
having challenged him and warning him to look to it thereafter: willed the
other to lay down his forty pounds, which he did without delay. The
Gentleman when he had counted it: put it into a bag and freely gave it unto
the poor man, with these words, (One of you bear an others burden) where with
the other was so far from being all content, that he humbly praised God,
and gave the Gentleman right hearty thanks therefore: and so he sent them away
both very well contented. Since which time I hear of the poor man that he is
grown to great wealth and of such benignity and hospitality as are not many
Owners or Landlords dwelling near him. Thus (quoth our Host) I have confirmed
my first Assertion and have sufficiently avoided your reasons and examples
alleged in disproof of the same, and these have I done by Example and
demonstrations both more in number then yours are: and also more evident, apt
and proper unto y^ purpose. That is not so Neighbor (quoth Pierce) for
admitting that your Examples were all or any of them true, which for the most
part I will not grant, yet are they particular and cannot make any general
Couclusion, besides y^ you tender me an issue upon two affirmatiues which is
against the grounds of law as I have learned by mine own experience deerly
bought. For I have alleged against you the general Corruption of lives and
manners being the effect of liberty unto excess and dissolution which I also
have alleged and proved to be an effect of private desire to pouch, to
purchase and to wax rich, from all which causes and effects conuertly my
Argument is nescessary and infallible and therefore being alleged
affirmatively it demands a direct and general trauerse to the effects,
which effects being not disprooued: y^ causes thereof cannot be denied, against
all which matters you have answered in the affirmative also, alleging the
examples of some good men, which whether they be true or not, I do not greatly
force without a general denial of that which I have alleged, although that
for every example alleged you had brought fifteen, and so is my first
Assertion maintained and stands fast, and yours utterly disprooued.

The Conclusion of the Conference, and the preparation to the Questions being
the second Book. Chap. 21.
BY this time it was waxen even dark night and our Host speaking unto Pierce
said unto him Neighbor Pierce (quoth he) we have reasoned so very long to
and fro that the night is stolen upon us, and the purpose of your coming
hither utterly forgotten through our earnest disputation in these matters.

Truly Neighbor (quod Pierce) I cannot think this time ill spent, I would I
had never spent time wurse if it had pleasen God, and therefore quoth he, if it
please you to lend me this v. l. I will be gone home, for I know the way at
midnight. Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) your v. l. is ready, and ye shall
have it with you but not to night, for hence shall ye not depart before to
morrow God willing, and namely for this strangers sake, whom I will desire you
to accompany for this night, for in his country I have received many fold
humanity, as partly ye have heard, and therefore I gladly would do him some
here to my power, and therefore this night or a convenient part thereof we will
endeavor our selves to spend together in honest mirth and exersises. And
therwithall I spoke, and giving our Host hearty thanks: desired Pierce that it
might so ve. Who at my request did soon condescend, and was very well
contented therwithall.

Then quoth I, seeing that we have so well spent the fore part of the night
wherein I my self have done nothing but harkened: let us agree upon some mean
to pass the time with all after supper until bed time, no wurse then we have
done the time before.

Now verily Gentleman (quoth our Host) and that is very well spoken, I
beshrewe him that disagreeeth thereunto, if it be my self. Amen quoth Pierce
Plowman if it be I. Very well then quoth I, this is my order if it may please
you. After Supper every man shall put his question and tell his tale in order,
and by course whereunto each of the others shall speak to wit unto the question
shall give an answer of dissolutio^ of the saying and unto the tal^ shall
show their good or il likeing, and he that tells the best and wisest tale to
wit of highest and best sentence and puts the sharpest and wisest question
most tending to virtue and edyfying of the hearers or gives the wisest and
best solution: he shall have his breakfast here to morrow at the charges of
the other twain. Content with all my heart quoth our Host. Content quoth Pierce
Plowman. But to whose Judgment shall we stand heerin quod he? Truly quod I,
even to the doom of our Hostess if it please her to take it upon her,
whereupon she being called very willingly undertook it, so was the matter
fully agreeed and our hands given theruppon. And then was the table covered for
supper and (our Host having him self first given thanks to God) to supper we
went where we fared right well and were merry, and when we had supped: the
Cloth being removed, and thanks likewise given. After we had sitten still and
reposed our selves a little while: I my self began as follows.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK, DECLARING THE Questions and Answers between the Author, the
Host and Pierce Plowman.
1 THe first Question put by me, whether it be more proper to virtue and
godliness to give or to lend, or to pay that a man owes.

Pierce Plowman answered, that of those three to give was the best, to lend was
the next, and as for paying that which a man owes: he heeld it a duty, and in
doing of duty there stands no Godliness, neither lies there any thank
therein, and that (he said) appears by Christ his own words who says,
that when we have done that which was our duty: we are unprofitable servants,
neither has paying of debts any express testimony of Godliness or virtue in
the Scriptures of God, or by common experience among men, whereas giving has a
name of virtue, namely of liberality whereof the Prophet David speaks thus.
He has dispersed and given unto the poor, and his righteousness remains for
ever. Again of lending he says. The rightuous is merciful and lends, and
will guide his words with discresion, To be short, liberality (which
extends both unto giving and also lending) is a property of God, who both
gives and lends unto us his daily gifts and blessings, but borowe he cannot
neither pay his debt. And so shortly paying of debt in his opinion no virtue ne
property of Godliness, for that it is a thing which God him self cannot do,
and so the first twain, virtues, and the third no virtue, but a duty.

Our Host maintained the contrary, and that to pay a man's debt is the most
excellent quality and virtue of the three, and most p^culier and proper unto
the children of God, and that the other twain are no virtues, neither deserve
that name, save so far forth as they are included within this, and for proof
thereof thus he reasons. What soever is or may be cause of evil: that same
thing may it self be said to be evil. What soever act corrupts or
dishonesteth the dooer or the sufferer thereof, or else both: that act is or may
be evil, contrariwise, what soever act does not neither cannot corrupt or
dishonest the doer nor the sufferer thereof nor any other person: that act says
he neither is evil, neither by any means can be made or called evil. Lending
says he, often times corrupts and dishonesteth the dooer thereof, namely for
Vsurye, selling the deerer for day given, both these are lendings in their
kinds, and yet not any properties of Godliness nor virtue, But to speak of the
best lending and that which is simply without any of the regards aforesaid. yet
means the lender to have his things again, and therefore what godliness is
there says Christ if you bid them to dinner y^ can bid you agains, what great
godliness have you showed therein, and so much of lending. Gifts are given often
times to corrupt and to pernert Justice, and thereby both the dooer and
^ufferer dishonested. Gifts are given by the covetous in hope to receive
greater. Gifts are given by flatterers and clawbacks, namely superfluous and
excessive feasts and banquets unto Princes and great estates, to the end under
their authority to ride upon the poor and godly people, and to devour and
spoil the labors of all others of the common and meaner sort, to the great
oppression of virtue and godliness, and to the great increse of all wickedness
and ungodliness. Gifts are given in simulation of freendship when nothing is so
little meant, and so wickedness utterly concluded thereby. In giving is
ostentation and vain glory, and these two are the fathers and mother of
flattery. For where Thraso is Gnatho will be also, giving unto one friend and
not unto the rest, if a man have many: procures their hatred and envy against
both the giver and the receiver. Shortly it stands together to be a large
giver: and yet a most wicked and ungodly person, and thereof are great
examples namely of Cateline, of whom Salust writes that he was prodigal of
his own, and desirous of other men's. And of Silla that cruel Tirant he
reports this, he would give no man more frankly, lend he would also very
liberally, but what soever he could borowe: he would never pay again. Now unto
the third part, to wit paying a man's debt, and which (says he) I call the
most high and souereign virtue, and the most proper unto Godliness, and that
for these causes. First it neither corrupts nor dishonesteth the dooer nor
the sufferer thereof, for I am sure all me^ will confess that a man may honestly
pay that which he owes, and he, unto whom he ought it, may honestly crave the
same.

paying of det corrupts no Justice neither I suppose can be proved ever to
have done in paying of det there is no ostentation of vain glory, for it is not
the deed of a proud mind, whose property is not to acknowledge any good turn
for that might charge him with duty of acquitail whereon the proud and ungodly
differ chiefly from virtuous and godly, for the proud may not seem to have
needed any man's good turn neither to have used their help, both which things
in paying their det they should implicatiuely confess to have done, and
therefore are they ashamed to repay what so they can borrow, for the Conclusion
aforesaid. And that stands well with the saying of Jesus of Sirack who says
that what so the ungodly can borrowe: he accounts it as if he had found it,
whereof the reason is this, although pure need and nescessitie co^starin them
often to use this word (lend) yet they use him for a cloak of dissimulation as
the effect shows, for this is evident that there are but four ways of
attai^ment or getting of whatsoever thing, for it is either given us, lent us,
orels we take it perforce, orels we found it.

So that whatsoever is lent unto such people either it is given or lent, or
taken by force orels found.

Given you will say it is not, nor so meant by you, and you shall find the same
by him that took it at your hands, for he will never give you thanks therefore,
neither see you but against his heart.

Borrowed it was not upon his behalf, and consequently not upon yours, howsoever
you meant in departing therewith for except there be a borower: there can be no
lender, for they are corelatiue and none can be without other, no more then
there can be a Father without a Chi^de, then if the one did not borrow: the
other did not lend, he borrowed not, for you shall find that with his good
will he never meant to pay it again, Ergo you lent it not.

He took not from you perforce for your self delivered it, so then if you
neither gave it, lent it, neither left by force, then there remains but a
fourth, which is that you lost it and he has found it, according to the
saying of Jesus of Sirack, for what soever a man finds he took it from no
man neither is he bound to thank any man therefore, and that this is the manner
of the ungodly: the Prophet David bears witness where he says. The ungodly
boroweth and pays not again, but the rightuous is merciful and liberal. Thus
it appears (quoth our Host) that who so truly paseth his det: he can not
therein be called an evil person or be said to have corrupted or dishonested
neither him self or any other body, and therein far excels this quallitie
both the other.

But now it rests me to prove (quoth he) that this word (to pay a man's
det) does include both the rest so far forth as they may or can be called
virtues or properties of godlynes which I will prove in this order.

First I say, that whatsoever we have here in this world: we have it at the
bou^tiful and merciful hands of our God, as lent and which he may at his
pleasure take from us, as also we daily see him do. Then if we have nothing
but that we have received: (as Saint Paul says) we must needs confess we are
indetted unto him therefore. How then can we pay unto him our det for he
receives no money? we cannot feast him, for he neither eats Bulls flesh nor
drinks the blood of Gotes. It rests then that we give unto them that are
here his Bayliffes and Receiuours for that intent and purpose, and unto them in
whose persons he has figured him self unto us to wit unto his poor and
godly Saints and servant that are here upon Earth among us, unto whom
whatsoever we give he has promised to accept it, as given unto him as a
payment of so much det, a testimony not of our merit: but of our woorking
faith in his grace and mercy, and in this only sense and meaning, giving and
lending are virtues and proper unto the Children of God.

2. THe next Question put by our Host, was whether is the harder matter to
make a Lord or a Gentleman.

Pierce answered, y^ in all common reason and also by experience the harder
thing: the harder is the doing thereof, a Lord ((...) he) is greater degree
then a Gentleman, and therefore harder to be made then a Gentleman.

I answered that I thought and knew the contrary by experience, for I know
(quoth I) where a Churl by his purchase of a Manor is become Lord of a
number better men then him self, and so is he a Lord and yet no Gentle man.

3. THe next Question of Pierce Plowman was why poor men are not called to
office of estate and government in common welths but evermore the rich and
welthy.

Our Host answered, because quoth he, the poor would be rich and so are not
content with their present estate, but desire alteration and change and all
such persons are more meet to be commanded then to command in a commonwealth. But of the rich and welthie it is clean otherwise, for they are already
that which the poor have desire to be, and therefore content, and consequently
Free^ds and furtherers of peace and unity which is never nor never will be
where they have authority in their hands that are not content with their own
present state, and so great hazard of the common peace lies therein.

4. THe next Question by me what is the reason that the Sons and Children of
great purchasers, namely Lawyers and Merchants, are commonly such horrible and
shameless unthrifts.

Pierce answered that he knew no reason therein but he thought it a very
secret Judgment of God upon the parents that have eaten sour Grapes and set
their Childrens teeth an edge.

Our Host said it argued great equity and consience in their Children in that
they meant to buy wit, and to pay as deer therefore as their fathers and friends
had sold theirs.

5. THe next question by our Host, what was first y^ reason of giving and
wearing of mourning gowns and garments for such as are disceassed.

Pierce answered he thought it was in favor of our imbicilitle and weakness,
and for that reason: are not so prone and ready to weep so sore, namely rich
widows who cannot weep so redily as a dog can make water, and therefore it was
thought expedient that such mourning were, and that such as could not mourn
for other business: there might be allowed unto them some honest and coullorable
means to mourn by attorney, as we se y^ in matters of law, he that for other
nescessary business cannot attend upon his causes: is received by his Attorney,
and of these great heirs, executors and rich widows that are otherwise
necessarily occupied and have no leisure to weep: it was thought in like manner.
Also it was thought profitable for the parties them selves for that it is an
honest mean of publicatio^ a^wel of the widowhed as also of her great heuines,
therefore whereby the more Counselers may resort unto her, for in strange place
a widow is known from other by her mourning and sorrow.

6. THe next Question by Pierce what differs a covetous person from a
Niggard. Our Host answered a niggard is afraid to want him self, and therefore
husbandeth and spares, and often lives besides his own. But the ^ouetous is
wurse afraid least others should not want and therefore keeps and engrosseth
all to defraude the hungry soul, and to make the poor want bread.

7. THe next Question by me why such folk as delight in rich and costly
apparel, and also in delicat and dainty meantes and drinks, do not eat and
drink in y^ open streats as they do wear their apparel. Pierce answered,
because that for their delicat fare: no body would honor or reverence them
except they gave them part with them, which because they purpose not to do:
therefore they hold it best to eat it wtin doors and in seceret, but in their
brave apparel there lies some honor at the least as they suppose, because they
se many y^ meet them strike their sails thereat although as great and the like
reason in the one as in the other.

8. THe next Question by our Host why the best and daintiest meats and drinks
and such as breed and make the most and best nurishment in the body, do not
also breed the best manner but rather the contrary.

I Answered, because that commonly folk take to much of them, and have so
great felicity therein, the rather that the ministers of voluptuousnes and
sensuality may thrive, but the cheifest and best reason seems to be this,
that men may know that Godliness and virtue are not tied unto meat and drink,
neither do consist therein as, Christ has said. The kingdom of heaven is
neither meat nor drink, and to move us therefore to eat and drink to live, and
not to live to eat and drink.

9 THe next Question by me, what possession is the best and surest, and least
subject unto rauin and violence.

Our Host answered, the best things and the wurst for virtue which is the best
possession, a man may carry far enough without being robbed thereof, and or
that either man or woman offer to take it from him, and as it is of the best:
so is it of the wurst, for once (quoth he) I lost a Glove which was taken up
and brought after me.

10 THe next Question by our Host, whether beauty and honesty may dwell
together in one house, and be tenaunts both unto one Landlord or not.

PIerce said, he knew no cause to the contrary, except the Landlord (quoth he)
be a Purchaser of Land, or a great builder or both, then Beauty must have a
License of the Justice to keep a Seller or a Bowling alley or an inordinary
table or else all three, and then honesty must take a house farther of.

11 THe next question by Pierce, what is the reason that some Women do so
curle and lay forth their here is.

THe answer by our Host, for that to be beardlesse is in a man monstrous, and
to be bauld headed in a woman as in a tree never to have leaves, or ground
grass, and therefore lest for want of showing their here is they might
peradumture be suspected to be monsters: they make them selves ^^ry monsters in
deed.

Dum vitant stulti vicua in contrarium currunt.

12 THe next Question by our Host, what is the end and purpose of so stately
and sumpteous buildings of houses and so many Chimneyes therein now a days.

THe answer by Pierce physic and natural, that against all sicknesses,
namely Ethics and Ptisicks, all things delighting the senses are wholesome, and
also all things provoking and causing appetite. These delight the se^ses,
namely the eyes, these sharpen the appetite, for they argue hunger and
scarsitie within, neither is the smell of meat or drink hurtful to weak
stomachs, the Kitchen and the Buttrye being not so apparent, and even at the
first entrye as in old buildings, but rather far of, and hard to find, and
with some labor and exersise except to him that knows which way they are.
His reason oeconomicall politik, that it is a good defense against the haunt of
Beggars, for there is no Beggar that has either experience or wit that will
go thither for an alms, and so, money and charges saved thereby.

13 THe next Question by me, wherein differed flatterers from Crows and Kauens.

PIerce answered, they differ in this, that Crows and Ravens will pick out a
man's eyes when he is dead, but flatterers will eat him while he is yet alive.

14 THe next Question by our Host, wherein have the rich of this world
advantage and prerogative abooue the poor.

MY answer was, that their prerogatives are great and many, but chiefly these
that in the rich: vices get credit and estimation due to virtue, as for the
purpose in them rob very and extortion is purchase, and lechery is solace, and
so of the rest as it pleases their flatterers to magnify the^ in their folyes,
and contrarywisein the poor: virtues are slaundered, simplicity and plain
dealing are holden foolishnes, because they do not advance.

15 THe next Question by Pierce, what disease is mosts dangerous and hard to be
cured.

I answered Pride, and a fever Ethick in the third degree, for neither of those
admits either cure or council.

16 THe next Question by me, wherefore the Wise man had his son beware of
wealth, and said not so unto him of poverty.

Our Host answered, for that wealth is a flatterer, and bedoteth man and woman,
neither can he show them their friends, but poverty does, and like as foul
wether warns a fool to take his Cloak: so does fair wether warn a wise
man to do the same.

17 THe next question by our Host, who are they whose cost and labor deserve
best thanks.

THeirs (quoth) Pierce who the more they build the wurse others are lodged, and
the harder they fare and poorer do live, of these ask and enquire and ye
shall find but to many.

18 THe next question by me, what the Poets did mean by the story of Diomedes,
of who^ they reported y^ he had horses whom he fed with men's flesh, and that
lastly by Hercules he was given to be eaten of his own horses.

Our Host said, that by that tale as he thought, they mea^t the same or like
that they meant by Acteon and his hounds, to with that to delight in excess of
vain pleasures and pastimes, as in riding in Chariots or upon great horses or
in such stately manner to delight in hunting: requires excessive charges and
expeuces, whereby they are forced to deal hardly with all y^ have to do with
them, with their horses and hounds to devour both others and them selves also
at length, also y^ overmuch delight in such vanities: profaneth the mind of
man or woman, and makes them to wax barbarous and void of all co^ te^plation,
for else why should they imagine a pair of Hearts horns to set upon a man's head
but for his wild and beastly mind.

19 THe next question by Pierce, what vice hathdoon God the most and best
service of late years.

Our Host answered Pride, for he has been a punisher of all other vices, for
what pecuniall statute has not he preferred and begged for the gain thereof,
and whom has he not invaded therewith, and all to maintain the filthy pride
and excess of a few.

10 THe next question by Pierce, what virtue has of late years done most
harm unto men, and most dishonor unto God.

THat has liberality (quoth our Host,) namely theirs who use to please
others and yet depart from nothing the^ selves but all at other folks charges,
which has been very common of late years, bidding them spy out. etc. This
sets me^ one in an others top, and brocheth so much brabble, suit and
quarrel, this has begotten us so many reteiners, flatterers, promoters,
maintainers, vnconcelers and Sicophants, y^ hardly can any man account him self
assured in any thing that he possesses be it land, farm, lease or other
commodity what soever, that he shall not have his title scanned and searched to
the quick. This has caused the Merchants trade and his gain to be enquired
upon also, yea the very poor Artificer to be so sifted: that hardly can he
live by his trade, to the great offense of God and trouble of the commonwealth.

Here end our questions and solucions, and follow our tales.

Our Host began his tale as follows. It fortuned quoth he, within this
twelve months last within five miles of this place, there fell a brabble
between two rich men concerning trespasses by words and speeches, whereupon
one of them sued the other and had demanded by action M. l. damage^. I can not
tell how, at length they were both content to put y^ matter unto two men of
woorship their neighbors, and became bound in great so^mes either to other to
stand to their award and order therein. The plaintiff for their better
instruction: delivered unto tharbitrators a copy of his declaration and of y^
whole issue, wherein ye party Defendant to some of the matter had pleaded not
guilty: and other some had justified, whereupon tharbitrators having duly
considered, and heard their allegations: for further proof of both their
matters, ordered as follows, that the party defendant being guilty of
diverse misbehauiours by the Plaintiff against him alleged: should therefore
pay two hundred fifty pound unto the common tresure of five Parishes next
adioining, to be there employed and bestowed at the discretion of the most
honest and best of the said Parishes and unto y^ party plaintiff for all his
costs ij. d. this awarde being showed and red unto the parties they wear
both highly displeased thereat.

The plaintiff for that the Arbitrators had given that unto Strangers (says
he) which should have been his and so have exceeded the limmits of their
authority and the tenor of his submission. The defendant thought him grieved
with the greatness of the sum and so both the parties highly displeased.

The Arbitrators maintained there awarde and order to be both just and
reasonable. First for the Defendaunt, they said they were of duty bound to
punish him upon good and due proofs made by his Adversary of his il and
ungodly behavior, where nevertheless they had qualified his punishment and the
demand of his Adversary. As touching the plaintiff and the sum which he
demanded by the name and term of amends: their answer was that they meant it
such to wit an amends and that not only unto one of them but to them both for
they hoped that the Defendaunt by that time he has paid the two hundred and
fifty pounds will be better hereafter as concerning the like offense and so he
has his amends, but what or how you would have been amended by the receipt of
so much money paid unto you: if it might have appeared unto us we verily would
have adjudged it unto you, but y^ could we never perceive nor be persuaded to
believe, for we never heard that honor, virtue, godliness and the existimatio^
therein are or ever were valued or valuable by money taking, but rather in
departing therefrom, for as the last does show a noble, gentle and a godly
heart and mind: so does the first argue the most vile abject and basest
minded person that ever can be and one in whom is utterly misprision of all
virtue as well witnesses S. Peeter unto Simon Magus, wherefore (said they) we
thought that in this distributio^ which we mea^ to be your act: you have unto
the world sufficiently disprooued whatsoever evil your Adversary has purposed
to bring upon you as touching your existimation or good name and have showed
your self in very deed such a man as in the preamble of your declaration you
gladly would be taken to be, and such as if you be not already: we verily think
that the receipt of all this and ten times as much more will never make you, and
therefore can be called no mends unto you in the taking: but rather in the
honest distributing thereof, which we hold a just and reasonable Judgment in
all actions of such nature.

With that the two parties drew forth either others obligation and cancelled
them both, and took hands and departed home great Friends spite of the
Arbitrators and of their awarde, and so ij. Churles were made friends.

THis tale being ended, Pierce Plowman would needs acquit with an other tale
not unlike. It chanced one day (quoth he) while I was in my Councellers
Chamber in the inner Temple: there came a woman dwelling about the Strand, and
prayed his council, and what action she might bring against an other woman a
neighbor of hers, that had said to her in open presence of diverse of her
neighbors, that she had already twice escaped the Gallows. My Lawier asked of
her if she had never in her life passed by a pair of Gallows. She answered
yes. So have I done (quoth he) I thank my God, and that sometime when there
have been a dozen hanged, and so I think have you (quoth he). True it is Sir
quoth she. Then quoth he, ye cannot recover for those words, for they bear
good couller of justification, and also show that ye have had better fortune
then possible many a better man's child, and so have I my self also. With this
answer y^ good woman held her self well apaid, and went herway content.

THen began my tale. There is dwelling in Holbourne (quoth I and that not very
far from the place where I do lie, a certain man whom I have noted this
long time to be a man of a strange affection, for being a man of great wealth
and therefore the meeter for company, yet if any friend or neighbor require him
to go with them to the Tauern, to the Ale house, to the Theater, to y^
Courtain as they term it, or to Paris garden or any such place of expense: he
utterly refuses, and after their return that willed his company: his manner is
to go unto some one of them, desiri^g him to tell him truly what he has spent
since his going forth, which having learned at him whether it be a grote or
sixpence, more or less, he goes strait unto a Cofer that he has standing
secretly in his Chamber, which has a Til, in the which Til there is a little
clift, at the which clift he puts in as much money as the party said y^ had
spent, and this til, he never opens until the end of the year, so that often
times he finds therein forty shillings, often times three or four pound or
more, and this he takes and bestows upon his poor Neighbors, and upon
other godly business imployeth it.

And upon the lid of his Chest is written in great Romain letters, take from
thy kind, and give to the blind.

This tale being ended, the night some what far run: our Hostess warned us
thereof and that it was high time to go to bed, which we were all contented to
do saving Pierce Plow man, who had yet one other tale to tell, and prayed us to
give him the hearing, which we granted him, and then he began.

There is here about (quoth Pierce) a Gentleman that has enlarged his rent but
not his land (where in many are very expert at this day) and once upon a time
of my being in his house there came in a poor tenant of his, one that had
been long tenant both to his father and others his Ancestors, which poor
man pitifully said unto him as follows.

Alas Sir (quoth he) in your Fathers and Grau^dfather^ days I lived well and
kept at the least twenty Ki^e besides Oxen and horses, and now through your
hard dealing with me, I am not able to keep twain.

Well quoth the Gentleman thou lie, for I have been better to thee then ever
my Father or Graundfather was, for where by thine own confession in their time
thou did keep but twenty Kine: now thou may keep two hundred at the least,
for now (quoth he) through my freendship thou may be the common Neat heard,
and keep all the beasts in the Town.

And thus our tales being all ended: we required the sentence of our Hostess
therein, she said that truly in her opinion the Stranger (meaning me) had
told the best tale, and whereby she had gotten most Example of edification
and knowledge, whereby to help and instruct both her self and others, and
giving me great and hearty thanks therefore: she gave Judgment that I should
break my fast the next day at the charges of her Husband and Pierce Plowman,
she said farther that to that man of whom I told: the tale she was Detter,
if she knew him to do him good.

So here we ended, and went to bed, and the next day Pierce Plowman was up
very early, and called me up and our Host, (as since I have learned his
manner is always to do) gathered us all together with the residue of his
householde, meiny, Children and Servants.

And he him self red unto us a Chapter of the new Testament, and then we
altogether sang the fifteen Psalm of David, and that done to breakfast went,
and after breakfast: I my self would needs pay the whole charges thereof, and
did, (notwithstanding the awarde of our Hostess and their great instaunce to
the contrary.)

And when I would depart: my Host and Pierce Plowman would (whether I would
or no) bring me on my way to Doncaster, and did, and there caused me to have
great intertainment with out a penny charges for one whole day, and then we
took either leave of other, and departed each of us toward his own.

After which departure, upon the way as I traueled: I remebred the Prophet
David who says. I was glad when it was said unto me, we shall go into the
house of the Lord. which I suppose he never meant by a common Inn or hosterie,
where never the less I may safely say I found it. And therefore full true it is
y^ Ovid says, there is oftentimes a good fish in a water where a man would
little think. We boast much of civility and nurture in the South parts of
this land, namely in London, and dispraise and despise the North as rude and
uncivil, but surely for mine own part (that am a Southern man and borne in
Kent) to speak indifferently for any thing that ever I have found in all my
travel in both the par^es: I cannot see nor know why the Northern People
should should not rather pity us then envy us concerning either Godlynes,
Virtue or good manners, for here I have spoken of the basest kind of people
whereby it may partly approve what hope there is of the Gentlemen, Merchaunts
and them of the good Towns and Cities, for whose sakes and generally for all
others I undertook to gather and to report this little Conference, and with
Gods good help and favor have done it as near accordant to the truth as I
rould, neither adding thereto nor taking therefrom, the desire whereof caused me
to take the lesser Iourneyes home ward and to write it by parcels at my Innes
lest I might have forgotten it.

And heerin I protest, that I have neither flattered nor belyed any man, for my
meaning is truth and the commendation thereof, and therein is no flattery, for
surely if I have flattered any body: it is mine own self in y^ that where
before I was persuaded that pride had utterly corrupted this whole commonwealth
and had clean over spread it with his generation of all ungodliness and wickedness
whereof all times and ages do agree him to be the father: sithince this
Journey. I begin to hope y^ God will have mercy upon us, and has, and that he
has reserved unto him self a remnaunt as he did in the time of Elias, for
whose sakes he will spare the rest as he offered unto Abraham touching Sodom
and Gomorra.

Therefore the intent of this my collection thus appearing: I refer my self to
the Judgment of the^ to whose hands it shall hereafter come, desiring their
good word in recompense thereof, and also of my long and weary Journey whereof
this labor was mine only reward.

Beseeching Almighty God of his great mercy and clemency to grant unto the
same no wurse effect then I have meant therein, and that by the Appostles
counsel, we may consider that we are but Strangers and Pilgrims here in
Earth, and that there after we may order our lives and conversation longing
for our own Cuntrie, content to suffer, and to forbear and glad to hear or
see the thing that may be for our edifying, learning and knowledge to be the
meeter and better welcome into our Cuntrie which is the heavenly Jerusalem
whither God for Christ's sake bring us all. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo.
Foelix quipotuit rerum cognocere ca^sas. Who will arise with me against the
wicked, or who will take my part against the evil Dooers.
THE APOLOGY and Conclusion of the Author.
THus ended is this short Collection,
Rude and imperfect for his want of skill:
Who should have given it perfection,
And would, if his might had been to his will
Or else if time had thereunto suffised:
To have perused it and recognized.
But for as much as I did fail of both,
To wit, of learning and also of time:
And to let dye such matter I was loathe,
Though I ne could it duly enlumine.
Yet for my God and for my Countries sake:
Me thought of force I must it undertake.
And namely for the worthy Shire of Kent,
Famous of old time for humanity:
As is to find in writing ancient,
Besides what daily proof does restifye.
Since I was borne in her me thought of right
I ought to bring this matter into light.
So strongly rules love the heart of man,
Namely that love which is so natural:
To do his Country good in what he can,
That his good heart is to be borne withal.
For God requires of a man but will:
Although he want wherewith it to fulfill.
These are the causes why I took on me,
To be reporter of this Conference:
Which I have done as here is plain to see
As near as I could follow their sentence.
Wherein if I have failed any whit:
I pray you in good part to taken it.
For first touching the matter in substance,
The speakers are the Authors and not I:
As for the order in deliueraunce^
I put it in the Readers courtesy.
To mend it, or to take it as it is:
For he is wise that does nothing amiss.
FINIS.
Aut bibe, aut abi.

