A CHRISTIAN AMENDMENT Delivered in a Sermon on New-yeares day 1631. in St
Martines Church in Oxford, and now published: By H. TOZER Mr of Arts and Fellow
of Exceter College in Oxford.

Rev. 21.5. He that sat upon the Throne, said; Behold, I make all things new.

Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean Heart, o God, and renew a right Spirit
within me.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield Printer to the Famous University. 1633.

TO THE R. WORSHIPFVLL Sr WALTER PIE Knight, Justice of the Peace in the County
of Hereford; and Heir to the R. Worshipful Sr Walter Pie, K. His Majesty's
Attorney in the Court of Wards.
Worthy Sir,
IF any should ask me (as mine own thoughts do) upon what confidence J
adventure in this Censuring Age, the Publishing of this poor ensuing
discourse; I would then answer them (as now I do my self) that, when I
review and consider the Nakedness thereof, I cannot value it worthy of the
Title of such a Mite, as deservedly might, when cast into the Treasury, find
acceptance. Nor is it my care and desire to please the Humors of those, who
can, with sweet content, spend that time in Censuring of other men's endeavors,
which they might with as good Honesty employ in the Bettering of their own.
There is a Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua, which I leave to their Grave
considerations, until such time, as after some long-expected Parturiunt
montes, the world happily find as good cause to laugh at their folly, as they
at other men's good intentions. Never was J yet taught either to flatter, or
(without offense given) to fear Mortality, much less to make a Time-seruing
Disposition the least part of my happiness; and therefore if any shall think
it fit to vilify these my weak endeavors, (that there may between us be no
love lost) I shall care as little for their censure, as they do, or can, for
this my labor. It Is your deserving Goodness, and that in particular toward my
self, which has (I may truly say) enforced me thus far to appear unto the
world; and therein to express that I am ready (though not able) to recompense
that kind love, which by me has been received from you: The beginning
whereof I then happily enjoyed, whiles it pleased your good Father, my much
Honored Friend, to commit you unto my Charge and tuition; in which time, as my
small Labors were abundantly rewarded by a full Hand, so were my true desires
toward You further encouraged by many pregnant Testimonies of your good and
loving disposition, which, since that time, has fully appeared in many real
expressions. Beside, others will confess too that your deserving goodness
has been further spread in a willing readiness toward this your College;
Honoring most worthily the religious and flourishing estate thereof (which
stands yet (blessed be the Highest) unquestionable) and still thankefully
acknowledging their love toward you, whose care has been employed in the
government of the same. So that most here have some cause, but my self most of
all, to honor (at the least in a true desire) the good Deserts of so worthy a
friend. For this cause desiring to devote unto you some part of my weak and
slender labors in testimony of my thankefullnesse, I have at the last
adventured on this small Parcel; the subject whereof will, I know content you
well, as being that, which your self with your virtuous Lady in the government
of your family, as good stewards, daily practice; only my unworthy moulding of
so good a Matter, might justly expect to fall short of Acceptance, but that I
am well assured of your Goodness therein too. If any shall, for your sake, be
pleased to afford hereto a favorable Aspect, I shall thankefully acknowledge
them my Courteous Readers; and to him, that is not purposely Curious, some
small requiting Benefit may happily accrue. Each man, if not wilfully blind,
may see how that All things hy Gods disposing Providence become daily new to
him, and that it is therefore necessary, he should in Heart and Soul be Such to
God. However, J am fully assured of Your Readiness in embracing a seasonable
Memento tending unto this purpose; Especially seeing that as all men have some
cause thankefully to confess the Renewing of all things unto them; so You much
more: Considering that, besides the abundant sufficiency of worldly riches by
the Providence of your Heavenly directed Father still flowing toward you, God
has so quickly invested you with New Dignities of Honor and Service
(Knighthood and Iusticeship) employing you farther in a new charge, the
Guidance of a great Family, of which you are made the Head; and (which is the
Complement of your other felilicities) has seasonably blessed you with an
hopeful Son; a Son borne to you by a sweetly disposed Lady, who is, both
of your Happiness a joyful Partaker, and also a true Consort in your love to
Gods words. So that nothing remains now, but that you continue to endeavor
(as you have begun) the Renewing of your Heart in Thankfulness unto that
God, who has so plentifully crowned you with those New blessings. And, that
you may thus labor continually to make a sanctified use thereof, for the
increasing of them unto your self, (which otherwise cannot be looked for) and
also the setting forth of Gods glory (who bestowed them on you) you have for
Gods directing of your heart, the daily prayers of him, who desires to be and
remain ever

Yours in all faithful respects HENRY TOZER.

A CHRISTIAN AMENDMENT. As it was delivered in St Martines Church in Oxford.
2. Corinthians. 5.17. Behold All things are become new.


THE Text is an argument persuading unto Newnes of life, which S. Paul does
urge here to confirm what he had proposed and prosequuted in the former parts
of this Chapter; wherein he declares his hope and confidence of that Glory,
that was prepared for him, ver 1. and further shows what they ought to be,
who look to be partakers thereof; namely such, as labor to be accepted of
God, v 9 And that he might himself thus appear, he endeavors to approve
himself faithful in the dispensation of the Gospel committed to his trust;
adding further what is required of him and others hereunto; and that is to be
such, who no longer know Christ according to the flesh, ver. 16. but are
rather become in him New Creatures: which we must be, if We will be accepted of
Him; if partakers of that Glory: for if we look to have our habitation in
those buildings, which are eternal in the Heavens, ver. 1. we must be in
Christ; and they, which are in Him, must be New Creatures; for, Old things are
passed away; and, Behold, all things are become New.

'Twere needless to enlarge an introductory Preface with the different
Expositions of Interpreters on these words, in showing what is meant here by
Renewing; and what by these All things, which are said to Become new. for
although some understand hereby those Types and Ceremonies of old, which, say
they, are now gone and past; and so we have in stead of an Old a New Testament:
yet if we rightly consider their several interpretations, we shall find them
all tending to persuade a Renewed sanctity in life and conversation: which
indeed is that whereunto our Apostle does here direct His discourse, and which
I shall accordingly prosequute in Mine.

In the words we have 1. An Invitation; or a Stirring of us up to an attentive
Observation; in this word, Behold. 2. A Proposition to be considered. All
things are become new.
The first word, Behold, as it often presents it self unto us in the
Scripture, so it commonly foresheweth something following, that is worth our
notice; that commonly is, may be, or should be known of us: such as indeed is
the matter here proposed; namely this point of Renewed sanctity.

If we look into the several portions of Scripture, which are prefac'd with
this Jntroduction, this term Behold, we shall find the significations of it
to be diverse.

Sometimes we meet with an Ecce Admirantis, a Behold of wonder; as Joh: 11.36.
BEHOLD, how he loved him. Sometimes an Ecce Admonentis, a Behold of Caution or
Admonition; as Ioh. 5.14. BEHOLD thou art made whole, sin no more. Sometimes
an Ecce Excitantis; a Behold to Rouse up and put in remembrance; as 2. Cor.
6.2. BEHOLD, now is the accepted time, the day of salvation. And sometimes an
Ecce certum facientis; a Behold of Assurance: as Genes. 1.29. BEHOLD, J have
given you every herb bearing seed, etc. These and several more be the
Acceptions of this word, BEHOLD, in the Scripture, some whereof are agreeable
unto it, as it is in this Text; which notwithstanding I shall not severally
prosequute by way of Preface unto the Matter following: only from the common
use of the word we may observe, that, whereas we have this Note of Invitation
proposed in the first place, there is some matter of consequence worthy of our
Notice following after; and that is the Proposition before mentioned; namely.
All things are become new,

wherein are considerable as the Parts thereof. 1. The Subject; in this term,
All things. 2. The Predicate, or Attribute. Become New.
I shall speak of these two jointly; and therein show how some things Do, and
how other things Ought to Become New. This Term (All things) notes to us 1
The things that are besides Man. 2 Man himself


The things besides Man are 1 Times and Seasons. 2. Those things, which have
Times and Seasons agreeing to them.
Of all which We may generally conclude in the Phrase of our Apostle, that in
their Turns they have their Renouation, they Become New.

True it is, Which Solomon speaks, Eccles. 1.9. that there is no new thing
under the Sun: that is, there is nothing now which has not been heretofore;
for so it follows ver. 10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, see,
this is new? It has been already of old time, which was before us: so that in
this respect there is nothing New: for that were indeed to make the Creation,
Gods own proper work, imperfect: yet the things, which are, may be said to
Become new, which is the Phrase of our Apostle in this place, noting unto us a
Renewing of the things, which are; and not a New producing of the things, that
were not.

In this Sense; first Times and Seasons become New. For we know that the Moon
is appointed for certain Seasons, and the Sun knows his going down. Psalm.
104.19. Whence it comes to pass that we have New hours, new days, new
weeks, new months, new years: that is, the old renewed. And, as times and
seasons are thus renewed, so are likewise those things, which have times and
seasons agreeing to them.

And these are 1 Actions and labors. 2 The Fruits of them.


Both Renewed: the first for the second; and the second in recompense of the
first. Thus the laboring man, recalling his former travailes, rejoices (with
the sun) to run his course; and at the expected season reapeth the New
fruits of his endeavors; the earth bringing forth Anew to him Grass, and
Corn, and Herbs, with such other Fruits as God has appointed for the Service
and use of Man. Thus all things besides Man become New: but does Man, for whose
sake all these things renewed are become New too? He either does or should so;
for these in respect of Him are but as shadows and resemblances; it is He,
that is the Substance; He, that must make up the Principal part of these
similitudes leading us unto Newnes of life.

If we look into Romans 8.22. we shall find that the whole creation is said to
groan: for indeed the Bondage of Corruption, the burden of sin is very heavy
and grievous: but, if we consider aright, we shall perceive, that it is Man,
which has drawn this burden upon the Creature; it is Man, that is out of order;
Man, that is corrupted; Man, that is grown as old in sin as the world in
years: and therefore it is Man, that must be set right again; it is He, that
must be cleansed; it is He, even sinful Man, that must become New. And indeed
if He be once right, then are all things well: if Man be once Renewed, there
is nothing any longer Old: for He has, as it were, all other things contained
in Him; being (as he is called) that Microcosme, or lesser world, the Epitome
of nature and of the works thereof; so that if He be New, then are all
things so.

Now Man is said to become New; first Inwardly in the Root, by Justification;
and thus are Infidels, men not called before, said to become New, when by the
power of Gods spirit they are converted to the faith of Christ.

Next, Outwardly in the Fruit, by sanctity and holiness in life; and thus are
the Regenerate, the Justified members of Christ, again said to become New,
when, leaving the deceitfulness and allurements of sin, they devote
themselves unto God in a renewed conversation, by conforming their lives unto
His word as the rule thereof. This Renouation, this becoming new, this Amending
of our lives in the fear of God is that, which here I intend briefly to urge;
and, for the more useful dispatch thereof, shall endeavor plainly to show.

1 The Necessity, why we must become New.

2 The Manner how, or the Particulars, wherein this Renovation should consist.

3 The Means, whereby the same may be effected.

4 The Fruits, which will arise thereupon.

The Necessity of this duty will appear from the consideration of the several
urging reasons persuading us thereunto. And these may be drawn.

First, from those examples, that are afforded to us in Nature it self. The
Sun, without failing, measures out unto us New days and New years; the
Moon New months: and the Earth, for our Instruction as Well as profit, is in
the appointed season adorned with New fruits: which indeed are but as so many
resemblances, to show unto us, what Man should be; A new creature. It is a rule
of the Philosopher, that In natura nihil est superfluum, there is nothing in
nature superfluous: which rule is here made unquestionably true; for in nature
there is nothing, but some good use may be made thereof; we having therein so
many Arguments pressing us to the Renewing of our Conversations. For if God for
Man's use and profit cause all these things in their appointed seasons to be
Renewed, shall Man, for whose benefit all these things Renewed are, remain Old
still, and have nothing in him New, except it be some new sins; new
Idolatries, new prophanations, new murders, new blasphemies; or the old
renewed, to provoke God afresh? Nature it self will teach you, says S. Paul,
that if a man wear long hair it is a shame unto him. 1 Cor. 11.14 We may use
the like argument and say; that, if any man grow Old in Sin, as he must in
years, Nature will accuse him of a shameful neglect, in not having better
learned God, and the necessity of a renewed conversation before Him, even from
his Works of Nature, which are made therefore manifest to him to guide and
instruct him; for Nature does freely offer it self, as a guide unto us, and
blind are they, who see not how to follow it. It is, we know, a common
observation, that God has two books to instruct us. The one is his book of
Scripture, Wherein we may (and happy are they, which therein daily do) read
and consider the sum of their Duty and the mystery of their redemption. The
second is his book of Nature, written with his own hand in the six days of
the Creation: a volume as large as the world it self; but every Page therein
plainly teaching man the knowledge of God, and the necessity of his own
becoming new in his sight. And S. Chrysostom seems to make this the very
drift of our Apostle in this text; S. Paul (says he) draws a new argument
from nature it self, to lift up the minds of these Corinthians from the
things here below to God above, the maker of them, to teach them from these
what they should be toward Him, namely, in Christ new creatures. The necessity
of which Renovation will farther appear by a second reason, drawn from the
Expectation of God requiring it of us. God expects, and therefore it is
necessary that we should become new creatures.

Now that God expects from us a renewing of our conversations, a reforming of
our lives, we may plainly read in his other Book, before mentioned, namely
his book of Scripture; wherein we shall meet with Precepts, and Threatenings
and Judgments, and promises, and the Mercies of God: all which are but as so
many calls and warnings, and gracious invitations to an Amendment of life.

First, a precept or Command we have, recorded by S. Paul Ephesians. 4.24. where
the Apostle tells us, that we are taught in Christ to put on the new man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true holiness; wherefore
(says he) putting away lying speak every man truth; be angry and sin not;
give not place unto the Divill, etc. in all which we are by the H. Ghost
plainly commanded to renew our conversation in true Holiness and
righteousness before God. And the same Apostle will farther tell us 1. Tim.
1.5. that the end of the commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart, and a
good Conscience, and faith unfeigned. So that where a Precept or Command is,
there must be Obedience; especially when the command proceeds from God
himself, whom we cannot disobey, but with the loss of our first love, and the
hazard of our own safety: when God therefore requires us to become new men,
as here and elsewhere he often does, we carefully should endeavor to be such:
for precipientium Authoritas and preceptorum qualitas attendenda est, faith
Bernard: the Authority of the commander, and the condition of the command it
self are diligently to be regarded. Now God, who requires this duty at our
hands, is that Greatness, which knows no denial; and his command is of
that condition, that as it tends to his own glory, so is it likewise for our
good and salvation: wherefore, a God expects, so it is necessary in regard of
the Precept that we should become new.

Secondly, that God expects and requires this of us will farther appear by
his Threatenings against sinners, and his Judgments upon man for sin. Woe,
says the Lord. Isai. 5.18. there is his threatening. A woe there is for Corazin
and Bethsaida; for Edom, Moab and Nebo: A woe for the Idol sheaphards and
blind Guides; for the Deceitful Lawyer and hypocritical Pharisee; and
generally a woe for all, that sin with greedynesse, and still draw iniquity
with coards of vanity. Neither is there a bare pronouncing of woe, but a misery
inflicted too; Judgment as well as threatenings: Sodom and Gomorrah, with the
cities about them, set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire Jude 7. all which woes and Judgments, with many more, are
written for our Admonition, that we should not lust as they lusted, nor be
Idolaters, nor commit fornication, nor tempt Christ, nor murmr. 1 Cor. 10.6.
So that the threatenings and Judgments of God upon sinners, recorded in the
Scripture, were not only for the Punishment and Destruction of those, on whom
they fell, but also for warnings unto us, to drive us, with Lot, out of wicked
Sodom, to terrify us from delighting in sin, and to show what we must be,
if we will be accepted of Him; New creatures. Wherefore, as God requires, so
it is necessary, in respect of his Threatenings and Judgments, that we should
become New.

Thirdly, As in the two former, so does he likewise manifest his expectation in
his Promises and Mercies, which are as so many gracious Invitations to become
New creatures. To reckon up all the promises of God were far to exceed.
Saint Paul has recorded one, which may serve for all the rest. Come out, and
be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, says the Lord; and I will
receive you, and will be your father, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. 2. Cor: 6.18. If God be once pleased to be our Father,
we can then pray for no more, then to become obedient children and to be
thankful: this he has promised to be, if we become New creatures before
him; and his promises fail not; for his Mercy will make them good, and that
lasts to a thousand generations of them that love and fear him Exodus: 20.6.
Hence Eternal life is said to be the end of the Commandments. Our obedience
indeed is the first end thereof, as I noted before: but that is directed to a
second, namely our salvation; and both unto a third, as the chief and
principal, which is Gods Glory. In respect of our selves then the end of the
commandment is salvation, which God is pleased, not only to Promise, but also
in mercy to make good unto us upon our Newnes in conversation: yea therefore
are his promises and mercies made known to us, that so with a cheerful
readiness we might become new creatures before Him: for that is the use which
S. Paul makes of them, as we may read 2. Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these
Promises, says he, (namely, that God will be our Father, etc. as it is in the
end of the precedent chapter) what must we thereupon do? Let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. It is
doubtless (if we know it) our great happiness that we have so many Promises
and Mercies proposed to us: and we must farther know, that it is but our bounden
duty to embrace them, and to make a sanctified use thereof. Having therefore
such gracious Invitations to become new creatures in the sight of God, let us
not cast off his free promises and mercies by growing Old in our sins; but
let us rather turn to Him, who so lovingly inviteth us, and who therein
plainly shows, that he desires not our destruction, but that we should
Return and Live: this desire of His includes his expectation of our
obedience. Wherefore, as God expects, so it is necessary in regard of his
promises and mercies, that we should become New. Thus have I laid open my
second Reason, taken from the expectation of God himself; which is clearly
manifest (as it has been showed) in His precepts, threatenings, judgments,
promises, and mercies; by all which we may see that God requires, and that it is
therefore undoubtedly necessary that we become new creatures.

Thirdly this necessity will yet farther appear by a 3d reason drawn from our
vocation to the faith of Christ, and our Justification by his merits; the very
end whereof (next unto Gods glory and the salvation of our souls) is the
Amendment of our lives.

What is our happiness, in that we are called to be the members of Christ,
we shall never fully understand till we come at the last to receive the Crown
thereof, when we shall see God face to face, and know him as we are known:
yet may we in some measure be sensible of it; for we know that we are
Thereby freed from that Egyptian bondage and Thraldom of sin, as S. Luke for
our comfort, has recorded in the words of our Savior. Luke 4.18, 19. This
day, says Christ, is This Scripture fulfilled in your ears: but what
Scripture? That, which the Prophet Jsaiah had foretold of him; namely, that He
was sent to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance unto the captives,
and recovering of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty those which are
bruised: all which benefits acrue to those that are called and made the
Justified members of Christ. We then have received liberty, being made Heirs
of the covenant of Grace: but to what end? that we may do what we list, and
walk as we please? Shall we freely sin, because we are under grace? S.
Paul will take that off with a God forbid. Rom 6.15. for that were to turn the
grace of God into wantonness, and to use our liberty, whereunto we are called,
or rather to Abuse it for an occasion to the flesh Gal. 5.13. We rather should
walk as S. Paul exhorts his Ephesians, cap. 4. v. 1. worthy of the vocation
wherewith we are called: we are made the members of Christ, the adopted
sons of God, therefore (to make good our calling) ought we to live as His
children, His servants; not serving our selves in the flesh, but him in the
spirit: for the immediate end of our conversion is and ought to be a regularity
and reforming of our Conversation; and therefore in this respect it is likewise
necessary that we should become new.

Fourthly, A fourth reason (and that urgent enough) to prove and persuade the
same, may be taken from the consideration of our own Condition for, if we
look well at home, we shall every one of us find within himself a Soul
that needs Repentance; and which may therefore justly call upon us for this
Renovation. That we daily sin, I suppose no man so much as doubts,
especially if he consider, what it is to be the son of a transgressing Adam:
for, although a man may be sine querela, yet he cannot be sine peccato; as S.
Austine speaks: so live he may, as that the world shall have but little to
say unto him; he may carry himself without offending any, and so be
accounted, with Zacharias, blameless. Luke 1.16. Thus he may be sine querela,
not deserving any complaint of man against him; yet cannot he be sine peccato,
without offense against God: for He will still behold iniquity, and that
manifold, even in his best Actions; which indeed, without the Advantage of a
gracious acceptance, could be in themselves nothing but Sin. Now those
sins, whereof we stand guilty and which we daily commit (though sometimes
we know it not) What are they but as so many partition-walls between God and
us, as S. Bernard calls them; which hinder us from sending up acceptable
prayers unto Him, and stop likewise the beams of his gracious favor from
descending down upon us. Christ indeed has taken away that great wall of
separation, that our sins had made, but, if we rightly consider, we shall
see that by our daily transgressions We do but seek, as far as in us
lies, to build it up again: and, while we thereby keep off the mercies of
God from us, we kindle in our hearts nothing but sinful Lusts and Desires,
which are a fire, faith Chrysostom, Lachrimis extinguendus, that is to be
quenched by the tears of repentance: And, because we daily sin, therefore,
says one, our whole life should be accounted but as one day of Repentance,
and this Repentance the work of that whole day. And surely while we neglect
this, we either do or would, forget our own customs; which might, if well
considered, be very useful to put us upon this course of Renovation: for
because our Hands daily contract soil; and our houses dust, and sometimes
decay too; do we not therefore daily sweep the one and Cleanse the other,
and Repair and Build, as need requires? hence then let us admonish and teach
our selves: we sweep, and wash, and repair, and all because there is need:
Look now into thine own Soul, search the corners of thy heart, and (if thou
have a Christian eye) see What contractions are there, what multiplied Heaps
of Iniquities, what Ruins, and Decays: Darkness in the understanding,
Perverseness in the will, and affections, good desires well nigh lost: and
then tell me (if thou have a christian feeling too) whether now thou have not
cause enough to sweep, and cleanse, and repair thy heart by a daily
Renovation. The world perhaps may tell thee that all is well; yet deceive not
thy soul; for there is a Conscience within, which cannot be bribed, that will
tell thee it is otherwise: and, si conscientia criminis mordet laus mundi
parumprodest: to be soothed up by sinful men, like unto thy self, will but
little avail thee, when thine own conscience shall accuse thee of
transgression, and plainly show that there is need of Amendment. Wherefore, in
regard of our own souls, and the sinfulness thereof, it is necessary that
we should become New.

Fifthly, a fifth reason to prove this necessity may be taken from our utter
Indisposition to receive any future good until such time, as we be thus
Renewed. It is a rule in Philosophy, that Intus apparens prohibet alienum:
That, which is first in, does commonly keep out the rest. If the Devil can
but get and retain his hold in our heart, he Will then suffer none to come
there but such as are like himself. First therefore we must out with Him, and
then shall good Instructions take place the better, and become the more
profitable unto us. So much our Savior Christ has noted, Matt: 9.16. No man,
says He, puts new cloth unto an old garment, for then is the rent made
worse; neither do we put New wine into old bottles, for then shall they
break, and both perish; but New wine must be put into new bottles, and both
are preserved. Christ and Belial, sanctity and sin, the Divill and Goodness
can never dwell together; but there must, there will be a Rent, a Division
between them: Out therefore With those Old sins, which have dwelt so long in
thy heart, that so thou may the better receive and make use of those good
Motions and Jnstructions, which tend to the Perfecting of Holiness; and which
otherwise will be unto Thee but as so many Pearls cast before swine: and
therefore in this respect it is like-Wise necessary that we should become New.

Sixthly, A sixth (and the last) Reason to urge the same may be taken from the
common Practice of our Adversary the Divill. He is that envious man, which
sows in the field of our hearts the Tares of corruption whiles we sleep
securely in our sins; His Devises to withdraw us from the performance of this
Duty, are as many, as we can meet with Helps to further us in it; and, He
being (as he ever has been) a professed enemy unto all goodness, we may
even Thence learn and know, that it is most necessary we should endeavor to
become New creatures.

So that now if any shall ask, why he must amend his conversation? I will
answer Him, that, which way soever he looks, he shall meet with some
Argument to urge the Necessity. If above himself; There is a God who calls for
it by his Precepts, who Warns and Drives us to it by his Threatenings and
Judgments; and who Allureth unto the same by his Promises and mercies. If
within himself, there is a Soul, that needs it, and a Conscience that will
tell him so. If below himself, yea if round about him, there stand the works
of Nature to lead him to it; and there is likewise a Divill, that still
Opposes and seeks to divert him from it. So that in regard of God requiring
it, and our own Souls wanting it, and the Divills destructive policies
against us to prevent and withstand it, it is undoubtedly necessary that we
should by all good means labor to become New creatures. Thus have we seen,
by way of Perswation, the necessity of becoming new. In the next place we are
to consider, by way of Direction, the Manner how, and the Means whereby the
same may be effected.

For the first, to become new in this place (as before has been showed) is to
Amend our lives, to Reform whatsoever has bin amiss in our conversation:
which indeed is the same with that Duty of Repentance, that is so much
preached and spoken of, and so little practiced. To a right performance
whereof; things (says Piscator) are required.

1 Displicentia vitae anteactae; A disliking of our former life.

2 Studium Gratiae; A desire of Gods mercy and grace for the disposing of our
hearts to a Better conversation.

3 Propositum sancte progrediendi; A firm resolution, not only to Begin, but
also to Continue in a better course. So that, if we as we ought, will become
New indeed, we must have respect unto the Time past, present and to come. In
regard of the Time past, there must be an hearty sorrow, upon due examination,
for whatsover has been done Amiss before: in respect of the present, a
diligent endeavor to be better settled; and, for that, which is to come, a
Resolute purpose to continue so unto the end. For to be Renewed presupposes a
Remouall of what is Old; therefore must we cast away our Old sins: it
consists in a better composing and setting in order; Therefore must we
labor to be furnished with Goodness instead of them: And it requires a
continual care that we grow not Old in our sins again; and Therefore
likewise must we resolve to remain such in the future, as we desire to become
in the Present.

The two former (namely, the Renouncing of sin, and the entertaining of
sanctity in the room thereof) must be done not in one Part alone but in the
whole: there must be a general renewing of the whole man; of the Heart, and
whatsoever proceeds from it.

The Renewing or Reforming of the Heart is termed by Saint Paul the
circumcision of it: which is that circumcision alone, that God does now require
at our hands; for true Circumcision now is not in the Flesh, but that in the
spirit. Romans 2.29. And indeed if we will make right use of our Saviors
circumcision (which we this day celebrate) we must learn and labor to be
Circumcised in our Hearts, and so to become New creatures In and To him.

Now the Heart (according to the Scripturall acception of the word) includes
the will and all the Affections of man: so that, if we desire to become fully
New, we must in the first place have New thoughts, new Meditations, new
desires; and then like Fruits proceeding from them; namely, new words, and new
actions: for, as we daily sin both in our Thoughts, and words, and Deeds,
so must there be a Renewing, a Reforming of them all, if we will become
perfectly New.

To endeavor the renewing of our words and deeds, without a former Refining
of our Thoughts, were but to Pretend, not seriously to Purpose a Renovation:
for Cogitatio orationis fons est; our Thoughts are the Fountain, from which
our words and actions flow: wherefore, if They be still troubled with the
Corruption of sin; These cannot run so clear as to have no Tincture of
impurity. Or (if you will) good Thoughts are unto Like words and actions, even
as the Coal unto the Flame; if the one be extinguished, the other appears
not. Wherefore, that we may become new as we ought, we must in the first
place reform our thoughts and desires: and therein we shall find matter
enough to work on.

When I was a Child, says S. Paul 1 Cor. 13.11. I thought as a Child, yea and
did so too. The case is ours, but in a far greater measure of infirmity: for,
when he became a Man, he put away Childish things, as Himself there testifies:
But we, that after a long Jnstitution (in a glorious sunneshine of the
Gospel) should now be complete men, fall back again to be Babes in
Christ, and to Think as Children; to employ our Thoughts on Vanities and
Folly; to think with those Psalm. 49 11. that our houses shall continue for
ever; and, with Haman, Esther 6.6 to set on work our Meditations about
expected Honors and Preferments; who Thought in his Heart (says the Text) to
whom would the King delight to do Honor more then to my self. Neither do
we only think as Children in Christ (that is not the worst) but sometimes too
as men, that have no reference to him; as Atheists, as men without God; when
God is not in all our thoughts: as the Prophet David speaks Psalm. 10.4. Such
are our thoughts of malice and murder; when, with Cain, we think to cut off
righteous Abell; and with Jshbibenob, to slay David, 2 Samuel 21.16. Such are our
thoughts of Rebellion, when we Curse the Lords Anointed in our Thoughts.
Eccles. 10 20. Such are our Thoughts of Adultery and Uncleanness; when we
Think on a wanton Harlot to Lust after her. Matt. 5. verse. 28. Such are our
thoughts of deceit and falsehood, when we imagine in our hearts mischievous
plots and devices to circumvent our neighbors. Such be our unjust Thoughts of
Covetuousnesse and Discontent; when with wicked Ahab, we are troubled on our
beds how to get Naboths vineyard. 1 King: 21.4. and Such are our Profane
thoughts against God himself, when we Think Him (though in vain) to be such
a one, as our selves, that can be deceived: Psalm: 50.21. And these Thoughts of
ours although the Devil directly see not, (for that belongs to God alone) yet
our own woeful experience can sufficiently tell us, that he often fitteth us
with occasions answerable thereunto; and we may thence imagine, that (by
observing our temper and complexion) He comes very near unto them. Matter
enough then we have to be reformed in our thoughts, and the necessity is no
less urgent. But happily a carnal worldly minded man will say, I may securely
thus Think and Meditate, because the World perceives it not: be it so; yet
God does, which is more: but however; Dare thou to boast hereof, and to say
unto the World, that such as these, are thy Thoughts and Desires? If not, then
let the Fathers Rule be thy Remembrancer, Quicquid pudet dicere, pudeat and
cogitare: If thou blush (as doubtless thou will) to make it openly known,
that thy Drifts and Intentions are either Bloody, or unchaste, or Rebellious, or
Deceitful, or Coveting, or Profane, then forbear and tremble to Think of
these things in thy Heart. But How (says the well disposed Christian) shall I
Rectify and Renew my Thoughts being thus perverted? Pliny will give thee a good
rule for that: Homines aut Mortalitatem, aut Jmmortalitatem cogitare debent,
says he; men should ever be Thinking either of their Mortality, or of their
Jmmortality. If of the first; then Bethink thy self (as S. Bernard directs
thee) 1. Vnde venis, whence thou art derived; namely, from sinful Adam, and
erubesce, and blush at thy fall. 2. Vbi sis, where thou art, namely, in a vale
of iniquity; and ingenmisse, and so bewail thine own misery 3 Quo vadis,
whether thou must; namely, unto the Grave; and Contremisce, and then Tremble at
thy Danger. And thus shall thy Thoughts make thee truly Humble in the sight of
God. But, if, on the other side, thou Think and Meditate of thy Immortality,
of thy Soul, which must remain somewhere for ever; then lift up thy heart in
pious Thoughts and Meditations to Him, that has redeemed it; to Him, that
Sanctifies; to God, that must receive it: Think then seriously of thy ways,
and turn speedily unto His Testimonies; as David has directed thee by his
own example, Psalm. 119.59. For There shall thou learn to Think no more of
malice, or lust, or deceit, or coveting, or Profanation; but rather to settle
thy Meditations on Sobriety toward thy self; on Love and Mercy, and Justice
toward thy Neighbors; and on Piety and devotion toward God. Thus we must
Think and Meditate, if we will have right, if New thoughts: for Turpes
Cogitationes vitare non potest, qui Honestas non habet: if we Think not of
Good things, we shall of Bad; if God be not in the Heart, the Devil will be
there: Wherefore, if thou will be happy in the One, cast out the other. Think
no more, as thou have done, to thrive by Deceiving; Think no longer to make
thy self secure by intrapping, ensnaring, and circumventing others; Imagine
not to maintain thine own credit by slandring thy Brother: In a word, Think
not in thy heart to be Accounted Good, much less to Be so, by doing Evil.
But make way for New desires, new Affections, and then New fruits will quickly
follow: if once thou kindle this Coal of New Love within, there will come
forth a Flame; if New Thoughts, there will soon follow New words, and Actions:
And 'twill be therefore the less needful to add much concerning These, and
the Renewing of them; for, if the Thoughts of the Heart be once set right, our
Words and Actions are seldom out of order.

Yet we know, that sometimes a coal (though quick in it self) is unhappily
smoothered before there break forth a flame; a Fountain now and then blocked
up, and so the current is lost; good desires many times corrupted; before they
can proceed so far as to appear in our Speeches and Practices: for it is the
preventing Policy of the Divill, if he can but once guess at an intended
Reformation in our Thoughts, to use all his mischievous devices, that so he
may stop it from going farther, and then it is lost there too. It will not
therefore be amiss to show farther in a word, that (for the perfecting of
this Renovation) we must labor to reform and renew our words and actions, as
well as our Thoughts and Desires.

Saint Austine (to manifest unto us the Abuses, that are usual in our Speech)
distinguishes of a five fold Tongue. There is, says he, Lingua impudica,
vaniloqua, dolosa, maledica, and dissoluta: An Immodest or Unchaste Tongue; A
vain or foolish Tongue: A treacherous or deceitful Tongue: A slaundring or
injurious Tongue: and, A dissolute or Profane Tongue.

The Immodest or unchaste may be called a Fiery Tongue. Jam 3.6. for it is set on
fire by the sinful Lusts and concupiscence, that is within: or else it may be
termed an infectious, a poisoning Tongue; because it often times stirs up
unchaste desires in those, Which hear it. The vain or foolish is a Perverse
Tongue Prove: 17.20. which will utter all its folly, notwithstanding any
prejudice Whatsoever. The crafty or deceitful is a Lying Tongue, Prove 6.17. a
flattering Tongue, Psalm. 5.9. a Double Tongue, 1 Timothy 3.8. the slaundring or
injurious is a Scourging tongue: Job: 5.21. a Sharp tongue Psalm. 140.3. a
tongue whetted like a sword: Psalm: 64.3. And the Dissolute or Profane is an
unbridled, a Raging tongue Hos 7.16. a tongue that will needs prevail against
God Himself; Psalm. 12.4. And all These Tongues too often sound loud amongst
us. In our Speeches then we have a Large subject for a Reformation.

Pass we from These unto our Actions, and we shall find them as differently
evil, as are our thoughts and words: for, as there is a lustful thought, and
an Immodest tongue, so is there an unchaste practice too: if the Heart conceive,
and the tongue utter vanity, falsehood, wrong, or whatsoever of that sort; there
will not be wanting a Diligent Hand, and a swift foot to put the same in
Execution.

Now, to Reform all this; and so to become New; not only in our thoughts and
desires, but also in the Expressions of them, which are our words and deeds:
Saint Paul's rule (before mentioned, Ephesians. 4) may serve as a full Direction.
Putting away lying, says he, speak every man truth unto his neighbor: be no
more angry beyond measure: steal no more: Let no more corrupt communications
proceed from you, etc. But, laying aside whatsoever is hurtful, take in
steed thereof that golden chain which the same Apostle has made, Gal. 5.22.
Consisting of the fruits of the spirit; as love, meekness, and the rest there
mentioned, and (as the wise man exhorts his son, Prove. 6.21.) bind it upon
thy Heart, tie it about thy neck; for, when thou go, it shall lead thee,
when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; when thou awakest, it shall talk With
thee, and make thee acceptable in the sight of God. Then shall thou be renewed
wholly, and then may thou with comfort say unto thy soul, that All things
are become new, when thou thy self art become New in All.

And, being once thus Rectified, know that in the last place there must be
studium sancte progrediendi; and therefore resolve (as God shall enable thee)
ever to continue so: for as we must be cleansed, and become Holy; so must we
likewise labor to perfect holiness, as Saint Paul speaks. 2 Cor 7.1: Now
finis coronat opus; it is the end, that brings perfection; and it is continuance, a
well guided perseverance that must reach unto the end: wherefore, be New to
Day, but remain so to morrow too: become New this year, but let the next
year find thee such; and then may thou truly say that thou art become in
All things, and Always, and therefore perfectly new. The means, whereby the
same may be effected, are in the next place to be considered.

These means are diverse; but there are two rules in the Scripture, which will
direct us unto the principal thereof. The first is recorded by Solomon, Prove.
19.15. An Jdle soul, says he, shall suffer hunger: the second is mentioned
by Saint James c. 1. v. 17. Every good and perfect gift is from above. The
first rule holds true, as in matters Temporal, so likewise Spiritual: in
Both, if a soul be idle, it shall suffer hunger, it shall always be in want:
It may seemingly desire, Hunger, and thirst after goodness; but, if it Labor
not to obtain the same, it shall still be without it. Our first means then is
our own Endeavor: we must Labor and be diligent in frequenting conscionably
the House of God; in making right use of his Word, and in Communicating
constantly at his table for These means will both direct us unto, and confirm
and stay us Jn our Newness of life. But withal we must remember, that every
good and perfect gift is from Above, wherefore in the next place we must
betake our selves by earnest prayer unto God; Which is the second means; and
necessarily required to make the former effectual: for it is not said here, that
we do make all things New; but that they are Become or made new for us. The
word in the original ((...), are become) notes (as most observe) an act of
Creation; a Creation, (says Aquinas on this Chapter) not of Nature but of
Grace; and that, not the first grace of Justification in our conversion; for
that is presupposed to be done before: but a second of Sanctity in our
Conversation, which is here meant. Both belong unto God alone; for He only can
Renew the Heart of man both by conversion and sanctification, who did first
Create and make it. Hence the Prayer of David was; that God would Create in him
a New heart to fear him: and we must also Pray, and that Earnestly (if we
will become New men to God) that God will be pleased to make his Word and
Sacraments powerful and effectual in us, and perfect our Endeavors to the
sanctifying and Renewing of the soul.

Hereunto we might add a 3d means; and that is in the course of our lives the
choice of Such company, as will desire and seek to become New with us; which
indeed is both profitable and necessary: for He, that still associateth
himself with Blaspheamers, with men of a Dissolute, Slaundring, or foolish
Tongue, must not think to cast off and leave at pleasure his custom of
swearing, of backebiting, of Immodest or Idle talking: in vain do men hope to
be Sober amongst Drunkards; and it is little availeable to pretend Honesty, as
long as we cast in our Lot, and have one purse with those, that are Deceitful.
Evil communications, says Saint Paul, corrupt good manners; and the infection
of Dissolute companions perverteth Honest Desires: if we therefore will become
New our selves, we must not walk in the way with Those, who still desire to
remain in their old sins.

Thus have we for Direction, seen both the Manner, and also the Means of
this Renovation: we are now in the fourth and last place to consider the
fruits, thence arising, by way of Encouragement to the more speedy and
cheerful performance thereof.

When Laban would allure Jacob unto his Service, his Argument, to encourage
him, was that he should not serve him for nothing, and therefore demanded of
him what (according to his own desire) his wages should be Genesis 29.15. If the
World were as ready to persuade true service, or to recompense the same where
they find it, they which labor, would happily find less cause to object the
withholding of their Hire, then sometimes they do. But let Mortality fail (as
it ever has and will do) it is notwithstanding of all most certain, that God
is Bountiful and changes not: yet the Devil himself (who seldom speaks
true, never for the love of Truth) even he will let us know that Job did not
serve God for nothing Job. 1.9. Never yet was any man the Worse (what ever in
our slothful security and carnal delicateness we may and do misconceiue) I
say never any man the worse, but many Degrees bettered by the Service of God
duly performed. To run over punctually the Fruits thereof, were to enlarge
this discourse into a second Sermon. One may serve for all the rest (being
indeed as much as all) namely, that, if we become New and Amend our lives as
we ought, our God is thereby Glorified: for so speaks our Savior, Mat: 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven: Our good works, our Newness in
Conversation is that which tends unto the Honor and Glory of God; which (if
rightly considered) cannot but be, to a truly Christian, to a Religious and
Filial Heart, the Sum of all Fruits, the utmost, the Only end of all
Endeavors. And surely (considering hoW Unworthy of our selves we are, and how
little acceptance our best righteousness, for its own deserts, might look to
find at the hands of God, it being (as the Prophet Jsaiah speaks) but as so
many filthy rags, and so no way profitable, no way acceptable) I say,
considering this, it is encouragement enough (if any will suffice) for us,
sinful Mortals, to become New creatures, namely, that God willbe pleased
Thereby to be Honored.

Yet, if the Weakness of Mortality either can or will look no farther then
our selves, we shall There likewise see unparalleled Profit; Benefits, that
cannot be equaled. If any man shall ask me, what they are? I will answer
him; they are all comprised in This one, the Saving of the Soul, the drawing
of it out, as it were, from the Bondage of sin to that Glorious Liberty, that
Happiness incomprehensible, which Christ has purchased with his own Blood.

If These or any Other Encouragements (though none more strong) can now
persuade and allure us to Renew our conversations before our God, then shall
we most happily offer up our selves an Acceptable sacrifice, a Sanctified Gift
unto God, that looks for it. And happy that Man, who shall thus dispose of his
own soul: for if we shall Thus become New in all things, then shall All
things become New to us: We shall have in This life new Mercies, new
Blessings; or rather, the old Mercies, and Favors of God Renewed to us; And,
when this life shall be no more, we shall have New Heavens, wherein we shall,
with a New company of Saints and Angels, sing for ever a New song of rejoicing
unto our God, in whose service We became New creatures here on earth.

Thou O Lord, who alone see the hearts of all men, know that we are all
full of corruption; and can of our selves do nothing but sin; be pleased
therefore, O Father of Mercy; to make thy good word powerful in us to the
casting down of sin and the Devices thereof, that so we may thence learn
to Renew our Conversations before Thee; and, by thy Assisting Grace, to bring
forth the fruits of an Holy life, in some Thirty, in some Sixty, in some an
Hundred fold, to the Glory of Thy name and the Salvation of our own souls,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Glory be to GOD. Good will toward Men.
FINIS.

