LINGVA: Or The Combat of the Tongue, And the five Senses For Superiority.

A pleasant Comoedie.

AT LONDON Printed by G. ELD, for Simon Waterson. 1607.

LINGVA.
DRAMMATIS Personae.
LINGVA. COMOEDVS. AVDITVS. TRAGAEDVS.
MENDACIO, LINGVA his Page.
TACTVS. ODOR OLFACT. US. TOBACCO. VISVS LVMEN. COELVM. TERRA. HERAVLDRY. COLOR.
GVSTVS. BACCHVS. CERES BEER.
APETITVS a Parafite. PHANTASTES, HEVRESIS, PHANTAS^TES his Page. CRAPVLA,
GVSTVS his follower. COMMVNIS SENSVS. MEMORIA. ANAMNESTES, MEMORY his Page.
SOMNVS.
Personae quarum mentio tantum fit.
PSENCE. ARCASIA. VERITAS. OBLIVIO.
The Scene is MICROCOSMVS in a Grove.

The Time, from morning till night.

Prologue.
Our Muse describes no Lovers passion,
No wretched Father, no unthrifty Son:
No craving subtle Whore, or shamlesse Bawd,
Nor stubborn Clown, or daring Parasite,
No lying Servant, or bold Sycophant.
We are not wanton, or Satyricall.
These have their time and places fit, but we
Sad hours, and serious studies, to repriue,
Have taught severe Philosophy to smile.
The Senses rash contentions we compose,
And give displeased ambitious TONGVE her due:
Here Is all Judicious friends; accept what is not ill,
Who are not such, let them do what they will.
Actus. 1. Scena 1.
LINGVA, apparrelled in a Crimson Satin gown, a Dressing of white Roses, a
little Skeane tied in a purple Skarfe, a pair of red Buskins drawn with white
Ribband, silk garters* gloves, etc. AVDITVS, in a Garland of Bays
intermingled with red and white Roses upon a false hair, a cloth of Silver
Mantle upon a pair of Satin Bases, wrought sleeves, Buskins, Gloves, etc.
LINGVA. AVDITVS. LING. NAy good Auditus do but hear me speak.

AVD. Lingua thou strik'st too much upon one string,
Thy tedious plaine-song grates my tender ears.

LING. It Is plain indeed, for Truth no descant needs,
Vna's her name, she cannot be divided.

AVD. O but the ground it self is naught, from whence
Thou can not relish out a good division:
Therefore at length sur-cease, prove not stark mad,
Hopeless to prosecute a hapless suit:
For though (perchance) thy first strains pleasing are,
I dare engage mine ears, the cloze will jar.

LING. If then your confidence esteem my cause,
To be so frivolous and weakly wrought.
Why do you daily subtle plots devise,
To stop me from the ears of common Sense,
Whom since our great Queen (...) has ordained,
For his souod wisdom, our Vice-gouernour,
To him, and to his two so wise assistants,
Nimble Phantastes, and firm Memor^e:
My self and cause, I humbly do commit,
Let them but hear and judge, I wish no more.

AVD. Should they but know thy rash presumption,
They would correct it in the sharpest sort:
Good low what Sense have thou to be a Sense;
Since from the first foundation of the world,
We never were accounted more then five;
Yet you forsooth, an idle prating Dame,
Would feign increase the number, and vp-start
To our high seats, decking your babbling self
With usurped titles of our dignity.

LING. An idle p^ating dame: know fond Auditus,
Records affirm my title full as good,
As his amongst the sieve is counted best.

AVD. Lingua confess the truth, thou art wont to lie.

LING. I say so too, therefore I do not lie,
But now spite of you all I speak the truth.
You five among us subjects tyrannize,
Making the sacred name of common sense,
A cloak to cover your enormities:
He bears the rule, he is judge but judges still,
As he is informed by your false evidence:
So that a plaintiff cannot have access,
But through your gates he hears but what, naught else
But that thy crafty ears to him conuaies,
And all he sees is by proud Visus showed him:
And what he touches is by Tactus hand,
And smells I know but through Olfactus nose,
Gustus beginns to him what ere he tastes:
By these quaint tricks free passage has been bard
That I could never equally be heard,
But well it is well.

AVD. Lingua thy feeble sex,
Has hither-to withheld my ready hands
That longd to pluck that nimble instrument,

LING. O horrible ingratitude? that thou,
That thou of all the rest should threaten me:
Who by my means conceiust as many tongues,
As Neptune closes lands betwixt his arms;
The ancient Hebrewe clad with mysteries,
The learned Greek rich in fit Epithites.
Blessed in the lovely marriage of pure words,
The Caldy wise, the Arabian Physical,
The Roman Eloquent, and Tuscane grave,
The Brauing Spanish and the smooth-tongd French,
These precious Jewels that adorn thine ears.
All from my mouths rich Cabbinet are stolen,
How ost have thou been chaind unto my tongue.
Hanged at my lips and ravished with my words,
So that a speech fair fetherd could not fly:
But thy ea^es pit-fall caught it instantly,
But now O Heavens.

AVD. O heavens thou wrongst me much,
Thou wrongst me much thus falsely to vpbraide me:
Had not I g^anted thee the use of hearing,
That sharp edged tongue whetted against her master,
Those pussing lungs, those teeth those dropsy lips,
That scal^ing throat those nosthril^s full of ire*
Thy palate proper instruments of speech,
Like to the winged chanters of the wood,
Vttring naught else but idle siflements,
Tunes without sense, words inarticulate:
Had near been able to 'haue abused me thus.
Words are thy Children but of my begetting.

LING. Perfidious Liar how can I endu^e thee,
Cal'st my unspotted chastity in Question:
O could I use the B^eath mine anger spends,
I^de make thee know.

AVD. Heavens look on my distress,
Desend me from this railing viperesle:
For if I stay her words sharp vinigar,
Will feet me through, Lingua I must be gone:
I hear one call me more then earnestly.
Exit Auditus.
LING. Nay the loud cannoning of thunder-boults,
Screeking of Wolves, houling of tortured Ghos^s
Pursue thee still and fill thy amazed ea^es
With cold astonishment and horrid fears:
O how these senses mufftle common sense:
And (...), and more with pleasing objects strive,
To dull his judgment and preuert his will
To their be-hests, who were he not so wrapped
IN the dus^kie clouds of their dark policies,
Would never suffer right to suffer wrong,
Fie Lingua will thou now degenerate:
Art not a woman, do not love revenge,
Delightful speeches, sweet persuasions
I have this long time vsd to get my right,
My right that is to make the Senses six;
And have both name and power with the rest.
Often have I seasoned sauorie periods,
With sugared words, to delude Gustus taste,
And often embelisht my entreatiue phrase
With smelling flowers of vernant Rhetorique,
Limming and flashing it with various Dies,
To draw proud Visus to me by the eyes:
And often perfumed my petitory style,
With Ciuet-speach, t'entrap Olfactus Nose,
And clad my self in Silken Eloquence,
To allure the nicer touch of Tactus hand,
But all is become lost labor, and my cause
Is still procrastinated; therefore now,
Hence ye base offspring of a broken mind,
Supple entreaties and smooth flatteries:
Go kiss the loue-^ick lips of puling Guls,
That still their Brain to quench their loves disdain,
Go guild the tongues of Bawdes and Parasites,
Come not within my thoughts. But thou Deceit,
Break up the pleasure of my Brim-full breast,
Enrich my mind with subtle policies.
Well then I Will go, whither? nay what know I?
And do, in faith I will, the devil knows what,
What if I set them, all at variance,
And so obtain to speak, it must be so,
It must be so, but how? there lies the point:
How? thus: cut the devise will never prove,
Augment it so, 'twill be too soon descride,
Or so, nor so, it is too too dangerous,
Pish, none of these, what if I take this course? ha?
Why there it goes, good, good most excellent,
He that will catch Eeles must disturb the flood,
The Chickin's hatched in faith, for they are proud,
And soon will take a cause of disagreement.

ACTVS. 1. SCENA. 2.
MENDACIO, attired in a Taffata suit of a light color changeable, like an
ordinary, page, Gloves, Hamper. LINGVA. MENDACIO. LING. I see the heavens nurse
my newborn devise,
For lo my page Mendacio comes already,
To file and Bu^^ish that I hammerd out,
Never in better time Mendacio,
What have thou done?

MEN. Done, yes long ago.

LING* Is It possible thous should dispatch so soon?

MEN. Madame, I had no sooner told
Tactus, that Gustus would feign speak with him:
But I spied Visus, Gustus and the rest,
And se^ued them all with sauce of several lies,
Now the last Sense I spoke with was Olfactus,
Who having smelt the meaning of my message,
Straight blew his nose, and quickly puffed me hither,
But in the whirle-winde of his furious blast,
Had not by chance a Cobweb held me fast,
Mendacio had been with you long ere this,

LING. Witness this lie, Mendacio's with me now,
But sir out of jesting will they come?

MEND. Yes and it like your Ladyship presently:
Here may you have me pressed to flatter them.

LING. I Will slatter no such proud Companions,
'Twill do no good, therefore I am determined
To leave such baseness.

MEN. Then shall I turn and bid them stay at home.

LING. No, for their coming hither to this grove,
Shall be a means to further my devise,
Therefore I pray thee Mendacio go presently,
Run you vile Ape.

MEN. Whether?

LING. What do thou stand?

MEN. Till I know what to do.

LING. S'pretious it is true,
So might thou finely ore-run thine errand.
Have to my Chest.

MEN. I, I,

LING There shalt-thou find,
A gorgeous Robe, and golden Coronet,
Convey them hither nimbly, let none see them.

MEN. Madam, I fly, I fly.
Exit Mendacio.
LING. But here you sir?
Lock up your fellow Servant, Veritas,

MEND. I warrant you,
You need not fear so long as I am with you.
He goes out, and comes in presently. What color is the Robe?

LING. There is but one.

Mendacio going, turns in have. MEN. The Key Madam, the Key.

LING. By ^uno how forgetful is sudden speed.
Here take it, run.

MEN. I Will be here instantly.
Exit Mendacio.
ACT. 1. SCENE. 3.
LINGVA Sola, LING. Whilome this Crown and gorgious ornament,
Were the great prize, for which five Orators,
With the sharp weapons of their tongues contended:
But all their speeches were so equal wrought,
And a-like gracious, that if his were witty
His was as wise; the thirds fair eloquence
Did pararell the fourths fi^me g^auitie,
The lasts good gesture kept the Balance even
With all the rest so that the sharpest eye,
And most judicious censor could not judge
To whom the hanging victory should fall,
Therefore with one consent they all agreed,
To offer up both Crown and Robe to me,
As the chief patroness of their profession,
Which heretofore I holily have kept,
Like to amisers gold, to look on only.
But now I Will put them to a better use,
And venture both, in hope to --

ACT. 1. SCENA. 4.
MENDACIO. LINGVA. MEND. Have I not hied me Madam? look you here,
What shall be done with these temptations?

LING. They say a golden Ball,
Bred enmity betwixt three Goddesses,
So shall this Crown be author of debate,
Betwixt five Senses.

MEND. Where shall it be laid?

LING. There, there, there, it is well, so, so, so,

MEND. A Crown's a pleasing bait to look upon,
The craftiest Fox will hardly escape this trap.

LING. Come lets us away, and leave it to the chance.

MEND. Nay rather let me stand close here-abouts,
And see the event.

LING. Do so, and if they doubt
How it came there, feign them some pretty fable,
How that some God --

MEND: Tut, tut, tut, let me alone,
I that have fained so many hundred Gods,
Can easily forge some fable for the turn:
Whist Madame, away, away, you fright the Foul,
Tactus comes hard by, look you.

LING. Is It he for certain?

MEND. Yes, yes, yes, it is he.

LING. It Is he indeed.
Exit Lingua.
ACT. 1. SCEN. 5.
TACTVS, i^ a dark colored Satin mantle over a pair of silk Bases, a
Garland of Bays mixed with white and red Roses, upon a bl^cke Grogaram, a
Faulchion, wrought sleeves, Buskins. etc. MENDACIO. TACTVS. MEN. Now chaste
Diana grant my netts to hold.

TACT. The blasting Childhood of the cheerful morn
Is almost grown a youth and ouer-climbes
Yonder gilt Eastern hills, about which time,
Gustus most earnestly importund me,
To meet him here abouts, what cause I know not.

MEN. You shall do shortly to your cost I hope.

TACT. Sure by the Sun it should be nine a clock.

MEN. What a star-gazer, will you near look down?

TACT. Clear is the Sun and blewe the Fi^mament,
Me thinks the heavens do smile.

Tactus sneezeth. -- MEN. At thy nishap.
To look so high and stumble in a trap.

Tactus stumbleth at the Robe and Crown. TAC. High thoughts have slippry
feet, I had well ni^ fallen.

MEN. Well does he fall that rises with a fall.

TACT. What Is this?

MEN. O are you taken, it is in vain to strive.

TACT. How now?

MEN. You Will be so entangled straight.

TACT. A Crown?

MEN. That it will be heard.

TACT. And a Robe.

MEN. To loose your self.

TAC. A Crown and a Robe.

MEN. It had been fitter for you, to have found a fools
coat and a Babble, hey, hey.

TAC. Jupiter, Jupiter how came this here?

MEN. O Sir Jupiter is making Thunder he here is you not,
here is one knows better.

TACT. It Is wondrous rich, ha, but sure it is not so, ho,
Do I not sleep and dream of this good luck, ha.
No I am awake and feel it now
Whose should it be?

He takes it up MEN. Set up a Si quis for it.

TACT. Mercury alls mine own, here is none to cry halfes
mine.

MEN. When I am gone,
Exit Mendacio.
ACT. 1. SCEN. 6.
TACTVS solus: TACT. Tactus thy sneezing somewhat did pottend,
Was ever man so fortunate as I?
To break his shinnes at such a stumbling Block,
Roses and Baies pack hence: this Crown and Robe,
My Brows and Body circles and inuests.
How gallantly it fitts me, sure the slave,
Measurd my head that wrought this Coronet.
They lie that say Complections cannot change:
My Bloud's (...), and I am transformed,
Unto the sacred temper of a King,
Me think I here my noble Parasites
Stiling me Caesar, or great Alexander,
Licking my feet and wondering where I got
This precious ointment; how my pace is mended,
How princely do I speak, how sharp I threaten:
Peasants I Will curb your head strong impudence:
And make you tremble when the Lion roates,
Yea earth-bred wo^mes. O for a looking glass:
Poets will w^ite whole volumes of this scarre,
Where Is my attendants? Come hither Sir quickly.
Or by the wings of Her^es. --

ACT. 1. SCEN. 7.
OLFACTVS, in a Garland of Bays intermingled with white and red Roses upon a
false hair, his sleeves wrought with flowers under a Damaskt mantle over a
pair of silk Bases, a pair of Buskins drawn with riband, a flower in his
hand. TACTVS. OLFACTVS. TACT. Ay me Olfactus comes, I called too soon,
Heel have half part I fear what shall I do!
Where shall I run? how shall I shift him of!

Tactus wrappes up the robe and crown and sits upon the^. OLF. This is the
time and this the place appointed,
Where Visiu promised to confer with me,
I think he is there -- No, no, it is Tactus sure.
How now? What makes you sit so nicely?

TACT. Its past immagination, its so indeed.

OEF. How fast his deeds are fixed and how melancholy he
looks. Tactus, Tactus.

TACT. For this is true, Man's life is wondrous brittle.

OLF. He Is mad I think he talks so Idely, so ho, Tactus.

TACT. And many have been metamorphosed,
To stranger matters and more uncouth fonnes,

OLF. I must go nearer him he does not hear.

TACT. And yet me thinks, I speak as I was wont
And --

OLF. Tactus, Tactus.

TACT. Olfactus as thou love come not near me,

OLF. Why art thou hatching eggs thou art feared to break them

TACT. Touch me not least thou chance to break my life.

OLF. What Is this under thee?

TACT. If thou meddle with me I am utterly undone,

OLF. Why man what ails thee?

TACT. Let me alone and I Will tell thee,
Lately I came from fine Fantastes house.

OLF So I be^eeue for thar't very foolish.

TACT. No sooner had I parted out of doors,
But up I held my hands before my face:
To shield mine eyes from the lights percing beams,
When I protest I saw the Sun as clear,
Through these my palms as through a prospectiue*
No marvel, for when I beheld my fingers:
I saw my fingers near transformed to glass,
Opening my breast, my Breast was like a window,
Through which I plainly did perceive my heart:
In whose two Concaues I discernd my thoughts,
Confus^dly lodged in great multitudes.

OLF. Ha, ha, ha, ha, why this is excellent,
Momus himself can find no fault with thee
Thou'st make a passing live* Anatom^^.
And decide the Question much disputed:
Betwixt the Galenists and Aristotle.

TACT. But when I had ariu'd and set me down,
Viewing my self, my self ay me was changed.
As thou now see to a perfect vrinall.

OLF. TO a perfect vrinal, O monstrous monstrous, art not mad to think so?


TACT. I do not think so, but I say I am so,
Therefore Olfactus come not near I advise you:

OLF. See the strange working of dull mellanchollie.
Whose drossy drying the feeble Brain,
Corrupts the sense, deludes the Intellect.
And in the souls fair table falsely graves,
Whole squadrons of fantastical Chimeras
And thousand vain immaginations:
Making some think their heads as big as ho^ses,
Some that they are dead, some that they are turned to Wolves:
As now it makes him think himself all glass,
Tactus diswade thy self, thou do but think so.

TACT. Olfactus if thou love me get thee gone,
I am an vrinall I dare not stir.
For fear of cracking in the Bottom.

OLF. Will thou sit thus all day?

TACT. Unless thou help me.

OLF. Bedlam must help thee, what would have me do!

TACT. Go to the City make a Case fit for me.
Stuff it with wool, then come again and fetch.

OLF. Ha, ha, ha, thou wilt be laughed out of case and countenance.

TACT. I care not, so it must be, or I cannot stir.

OLF. I had best leave troubling him he is obstinate, (Vrinall I leave you) but
above all things take heed Jupiter sees you not, for if he do heel nere make
water in a sieve: again thoult serve his turn so sit to carry his water unto
Aesculapius, Farewell Vrinall, Farewell.


TACT. Speak not so loud, the sounds enough to crack me, What is he gone? I an
Vrinall, ha, ha, ha, I protest I might have had my face washed finely, if he had
meant to abuse me: I an Vrinall, ha, ha, ha, go to* Vrinall you have escaped a
fair scou^ing, well I Will away, and get me to mine own house, there I Will lock up
my self fast, playing the Chimick, augmenting this one Crown to troops of
Angels, with which gold-winged messengers, I mean,

To work great wonders, as to build and purchase,
Fare daintily, tie up men's tongues, and loose them,
Command their lives, their goods, their liberties,
And captive all the world with chains of gold,
Hey, hey, tery linkum tinkum.
He offers to go out, but comes in suddenly amazed. O Hercules!
Fortune the Queen, delights to play with me,
Stopping my passage with the sight of Visus,
But as he makes hither. I Will make hence,
There Is more ways to the wood then one.
He offers to go out at the other door, but returns again in have What more
Diuils to affright me?
O Diabolo, Gustus comes here to vex me.
So that I poor wretch, am like a Shittle-cock betwixt two
Battledores* If I run there, Visus beats me to Scilla, If here,
then Gustus blows me to Carybdi^.
Neptune has sworn my hope shall suffer shipwreck.
What shall I say?
Mine Vrinal's too thin to bide the fury of such stormcs as these.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 8.
VISVS, in a Garland of Bays mixed with white and red Roses, a light colored
Taffata mantle striped with silver, and fringd upon green silk Bases,
Buskins. etc. GVSTVS in the same fashion, differing only in color. TACTVS, in
a corner of the Stage. VISVS. GVSTVS. TACTVS. VIS. Gustus good day.

GVST. I cannot have a bad,
Meeting so fair an omen as your self.

TACT. Shall I? wilt prove? ha? well it is best to venture.

Tactus puts on the robes. GVST. Saw you not Tactus, I should speak with him.

TACT. Perchance so, a sudden lie has best luck.

VIS. That face is his, or else mine eye's deceived,
Why how now Tactu^, what so gorgious?

GVST. Where did thou get these fair habiliments?

TACT. Stand back I charge you as you love your lives,
By Stix, the first that touches me shall dye.

VIS. I can discern no weapons, will he kill us?

TACT. Kill you? not I, but come not near me you had best.

VIS. Why, art thou mad?

TACT. Friends as you love your lives,
Venture not once to come within my reach.

GVST. Why do threaten so?

TACT. I do not threaten, but in pure love advise you for the best,
Dare no to to touch me but hence fly a pace,
Add wings unto your feet and save your lives.

VIS. Why what is the matter Tactus prithee tell me?

TACT. If you will needs ieopard your live; so long,
As hear the* round of my amazedness,
Then for your better safety stand aside.

GVST. How full of ceremonies* sure he will conjure,
For such like Robes Magitians use to wear.

VIS. I Will see the end* though he should unlock Hell:
And set the infernal hagges at liberty,

TACT. How rash is man on bidden arms to rush.
It was my chance, O chance most miserable,
To walk that way that to Crumena leads.

GVST. You mean Cremona a little Town hard by.

TACT. I say Crumena, called Vacua,
A Town which does, and always has belongd,
Chiefly to Scholars: from Crumena walls,
I saw a man came stealing craftily,
Apparelled in this vesture which I wear,
But seeing me eft-soones, he took his heels,
And threw his garment from him all in have,
Which I perceiving to be richly wrought,
Took it me up: But good now get you gone,
Warned by my harms, and escape my misery.

VIS. I know no dange^, leave these circumstances.

TAC. No sooner had I put it on my back,
But suddenly mine eyes began to dim,
My ioints wa^e sore, and all my body burn
With most intestiue torture, and at length,
It was too evident, I had caught the plague.

VIS. The plague, away good Gustus lets be gone,
I doubt it is true, now I remember me,
Crumena Vacua never wants the plague.

GVST. Tactus I Will put my self in ieopardy to pleasure thee.

TACT. No gentle Gustus, your absence is the only thing I wish,
Least I infect you with my company.

GVST. Farewell.
Exit Gustus.
VIS. I willingly would stay to do thee good.

TACT. A thousand thanks, but since I needs must die,
Let it suffice, death only murders me,
Oh 'twould augment the dolor of my death,
To know my self the most unhappy Bow,
Through which pale death should aim his shafts at you.

VIS. Tactus farewell, yet die with this good hope,
Thy corpse shall be interred as they ought.
Exit Visus.
TAC. Go make my Tomb, provide my funerals, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Excellent Asses thus to be deluded,
Bewail his death and cruel destinies,
That lives, and laughes your fooleries to scorn,
But where is my Crown, oh here: I well deserve,
Thus to be crowned for two great victories* ha, ha, ha,
Visus take care my corpse be well interred:
Go make my tomb, and write upon the stone.
Here lies the Sense, that lying guld them all,
With a false plague, and fained Vrinall.

ACT. 1. SCENE. 9.
AVDITVS. TACTVS. AVD. Tactus, Tactus.


TAC. O Jupiter, it is Auditus all is mard, I doubt the sly knave here is so
far, but yet I Will grope him: how now Ea^es, what make you here, ha?


AVD. Nay, what make you here, I pray what were you talking even now, of an
Ass, and a Crown, and an Vrinall and a plague?


TAC. A plague on you what I?


AVD. Oh, what you.


TAC. O I had well nigh forgot nothing, but I say --


AVD. What?


TA. That if a man (do you mark sir) being sick of the plague (do you see sir)
had a a, a, hem, hem, (this cold troubles me, It makes me cough sometimes
extremely,) had a French Crown, (sir you understand me) lying by him, and
(come hither, come hither) and would not bestow 2. pence (do you hear) to buy
an vrinall (do you mark me) to carry his water to the Phisitia^, (hem)


AVD. What of all this?


TA. I say such a one was a very Ass, this was al I use to speak to my self,
when I am alone; but Auditus, when shall we hear a new set of singing-books,
or th'viols, or the co^^ort of Instruments.


AV. This was not al, for I heard me^tio^ of a tomb, and an epitaph.


TAC. True, true, I made my self merry with this Epitaph, upon such a fools
tomb thus a, thus, thus, plague brought this man, (foh I have forgotten) o
thus, plague brought this man (so, so, so) unto his burial, because, because,
because, (hem, hem) because he would not buy an vrinall, come, come Auditus
shall we here thee play, the Lyeroway, or the Lut^-wa^ shall we, or the Cornet,
or any Music, I am greatly revived when I hear.


AVD. Tactus, Tactus, this will not serve, I heard all, you have not found a
Crown: you, no, you have not.


ACT. 1. SCEN. Vltima.
TACTVS. AVDITVS. VISVS. GVSTVS. MENDATIO. TACT. Peace, peace, faith peace,
come hither, hark thee good now.


AVD. I cannot hold I must needs tell,


TACT. O do not, do not, do not, come hither, will you be a fool?


VIS. Had he not wings upon his feet and shoulders?


MEN. Yes, yes and a fine wand in his hand,
Curiously wrapped with a pair of snakes.

TACT. Will half content you, pish it will nere be known.

GVST. My life, it was Mercury.

MEND. I do not know his name but this I am sure his hat had wings vp'ont.


VIS. Doubtless it was he, but say my Boy what did he?

MEND. First I beheld him houering in the air,
And then down stouping, with a hundred gires:
His feet he fixed on Mount Ch^phal^n,
From whence he flew and lighted on that plain,
And with disdainefull steps soon glided thither:
Whether arrived, he suddenly vnfoulds
A gorgeous Robe, and glittering ornament,
And lay them all, upon that hillocke:
This done he wafts his wand, took wing again,
And in a moment vanished out of sight,
With that mine eyes began stare, and heart grew cold,
And all my quiuering joints with sweat bedewd:
My heels my thought had wings as well as his,
And so away I run, but by the way:
I met a man as I thought coming thither,

GVST. What marks had he?

MEND. He had a great -- what this is he, this is he,

VIS. What Tactus?

GVST. This was the plauge vexed him so,
Tactus your Grave gapes, for you are you ready:

VIS. Since you must needs die, do as others do,
Leave all your goods behind you; bequeath the
Crown and Robe, to your executo^s.

TACT. No such matter I like the Egiptian Knights,
For the more state, will be buried in them.

VIS. Come, come deliver:

Visus snatcheth the crown and sees letters graven in it. TACT. What will you
take my purse from me?

VIS. No but a Crown, that's just more then your own.
Ha, what is this? it is a very small hand,
What Inscription is this?
He of the five that proves himself the best,
Shall have his Temples with this Coronet blessed.
This Crown is mine, and mine this garment is,
For I have always been accounted best.

TACT. Next after me, I as your self at any time: besides I found it first,
therefore it is mine.


GVST. Neither of youres, but mine as much as both,

AVD. And mine the most of any of you all,

VIS. Give me it or else --

TACT. I Will make you late repent it --

GVST. Presumptious as you are --

AVD. Spite of your teeth --

MEND. Never till now a ha it works a pace,
Visus I know it is yours and yet me thinks:
Auditus you should have some challenge to it,
But that your title Tactus is so good:
Gustus I would swear the Coronet were yours,
What will you all go braule about a trifle:
View but the pleasant coast of Mycrocosme,
Is It not great pity to be rent with wars,
Is It not a shame, to stain with brinish tears,
The smiling cheeks of euer-cheer^full peace,
Is It not far better to live quietly:
Then broyle in fury of dissension,
Give me the Crown ye shall not disagree,
If I can please you; I Will play Paris part,
And most impartial judge the controversy:

VIS. Sauce-box go meddle with your Ladies fa^ne, and prate not here.


MEND. I speak not for my self, but for my Countries safe commodity.

VIS. Sir be still.

MEND. Nay and you be so hot the devil part you,
I Will to Olfactus and send him amongst you.
O that I were* Alecto for your sakes:
How liberally would I bestow my snakes.
Exit Mendico.
VIS. Tactus upon thine honor,
I challenge thee to meet me here,
Strong as thou can provide in tha^flernoone.

TACT. I undertake the Challenge, and here is my hand,
In sign thou shall be answered.

GVST. Tactus I Will join with thee, on this condition,
That if we win, he that fought best of us,
Shall have the Crown, the other wear the Robe.

TACT. Give me your hand I like the motion.

VIS. Auditus shall we make our forces double,
Upon the same te^mes.

AVD. Very willingly,

VIS. Come lets away fear not the victory.
Rights more advantage, then an host of soldiars.

Exeunt omnes. Finis. Act. primi.
Actus. 2. Scena 1.
APP^TITVS. Along lea^e Raw-bou'd f^^llow in a Soldiers coat, a sword, etc.
MENDACIO. APPETITVS. MEND. I long to see those hot-spur senses at it, they say
they have gallant preparations, and not unlikely, for most of the soldiers are
ready in Aames since the last field fought against their yearly enemy
Meleager, and his wife Acr^sia; that Conquest has so flesht them that no peace
can hold them. But had not Meleager been sick, and Acrasia drunk, the senses
might have whistled for the victory.


APP. Foh, what a stincke of gunpouder is yonder?


MEND. Whoes this! oh oh it is Appetitus, Gustus his hungry Parasite.


APP. I cannot endure the smoking of Gunnes, the thunde^^ng of drums, I had
rather here the merry hacking of pothearbs, and see the reaking of a hot capon.
If they would use no other Bucklers in war, but sheilds of Brawne, brandish
no swords but sweards of Bacon, traile no spears, but spar^ibs of Porke, and
instead of Hargebush pieces discharge Hartichockpies, toss no pikes but boiled
pickrills, then Appetitus would rouse up his crest, and bear up him self with
the proudest.


MEND. Ah here is a youth stark naught at a trench, but old dog at a trencher,
at tall squire at a square table.


APP. But now my good masters must pardon me, I am not for their service, for
their service is without service, and indeed their service is too hot for my
diet. But what. If I be not my self* but only this be my spirit that wanders
up and down, and Appetitus be killed in the Camp, the Diuill he is as soon,
howes that possible? tut tut I know I am, ^, I am (...), and alive too, by this
Infallible token, that I feel my self hungry.


MEND. Thou might have taken a bette^ token of thy self, by knowing thou a^t
a fool.


APP. Well the^ though I made my fellow soldiers admire the beauty of my back
and wonder at the nimblenes of my hee'es, yet now will I at saftie at home, tell
in what dangers they are abroad, ^le speak nothing but guns, and glau^s, and
sta^es, and phalanges, and squadrons, and barracadoe, ambus^adoes, palmedoes
blanke point dept, counterpoint, counter sc^ate, ^allies and lies, saladoes,
tarantan^aras, ranta, ta^a tara, hey


MEND. I must take the fife out of his mouth or he will nere adone.

APP. But above all I Will be sure on my knees to thank the great --


(...) him. MEND. Who am I, who am I, who I?

APP. By the bloud-staind fauchion of Mauors -- I am on your side.

MEND. Why, who am I?

APP. Are you a soldier?

MEND. No.

APP. Then you are master Hell^^ the Bear-heard,

MEND. No, no, he is dead.

APP. Or Gulono the gutty Seriant, or Delphino the Vinter, or else I know you
not, for these are all my acquaintance.


MEN. Would I were hanged if I be any of these.


APP. What Mend^cio, by the faith of a Knight thou art welcome, I must borrow
thy Whetstone to sharpen the edges of my martial complements.


MEN. By the faith of a Knight, what a pox, where are thy Spurs?


APP. I need no spurs, I ride like Pegasus on a winged horse, on a swift
Gennet, my Boy, called fear.


MEN. What should thou fear in the wars? he is not a good soldier that
has not a good stomach.


APP. O, but the stink of powder spoils Appetitus stomach, and then thou
know when it is gone, Appetitus is dead, therefore I very manfully drew my
sword, and flourisht it bravely about mine ears, kissed, and finding my self
hurr, most manfully ran away.


MEN. All heart indeed, for thou ran'st like a Heart out of the field, It seems
then the Senses mean to sight it out.


APP. I and out-fight themselves I think, and all about a trifle, a paltrie
babble, found I know not where.


MEN. Thou art deceived, they fight for more then that, a thing called
superiority, of which the Crown is but an Emblem.


APP. Mendacio hang this superiority, Crown me no Crown but Bacchus Crown
of Roses, give me no Scepter, but a fat Capons leg, to show that I am the
great King of Hungary, therefore I prithee talk no more of state-matters, but
in brief, tell me my little rascal, how thou have spent thy time this many a
day?


MEN. Faith in some credit since thou saw me last.


APP How so, where?


MEN. Every where; in the Court your Gentlewomen hang me at their Apron
strings, and that makes them answer so readily. In the City I am honored
like a God, none so well acquainted with your tradesmen: your Lawyers all the
Term time hire me of my Lady, your Gallants if they hear my name abused, they
stab for my sake: your Travelers so dote upon me as passes, O they have good
reason, for I have carried them to many a good meal, under the Countenance of
my familiarity: nay your Statesmen have oftentimes closely co^ueied me under
their tongues, to make their policies more current, As for oldmen they
challenge my Company by authority.


APP. I am exceeding glad of your great promotion.


MEND. Now when I am disposed I can Philophy it in the University, with the
subtilest of them all.


APP. I cannot be persuaded that to art acquainted with Scholars ever since
thou were pressed to death in a Print-house.


MEND. No, why I was the first founder of the 3. sects of Philosophy except on
of the Peripatetticks who accknowledge Aristotle (I confess) their great
Grandfather.


APP. Thou Boy, how is this possible? thou art but a Child and there were sects
of Philosophy before thou were borne.


MEND. Appetitus, thou mistakest me, I tell thee, 3000 years ago was Mendacio
borne in Greece, nursed in Creete and ever since honored every where: I Will be
sworn I held old Homers pen when he write his Illiads, and his Odisses.


APP. Thou had need, for I hear say he was blind.


MEND. I helped Herodotus to pen some part of his muses, lent Pli^y ink to
write his history, rounded Rabalais in the ear when he historified
Pantagruell, as for Lucian I was his Genius, O those two Books De Vera
historia howsoever they go under his name, I Will be sworn I writ them every
title.


APP. Sure as I am Hungry thou'st have it for lying. But have thou rusted this
latter time for want of exercise?


MEND. Nothing less* I must confess I would feign have ^ogged Stow and great
Hollings-head on their elbowes, when they were about their Chronicles, and as I
remember Sir John Mandeuills trauells, and a great part of the Decads were of
my doing. But for the mirror of Knighthood, Beuis of Southampton, Palmerin of
England, Amadis of Gaul, Huon de Bordeaux, Sir Guy of Warwick Martin
marprellate, Robin-hood, Garragantua, Gerilion and a thousand such exquisite
monuments as these, no doubt but they breath on my breath up and down.


APP. Downwards I Will swear for the'rs stinking lies in them.


MEN. But what should I light a Candle to the bright Sunneshine of my glorious
renown, the whole world is full of Mendacios fame.


APP. And so it will be so long as the world is full of fame.


MEND. But Sir how have thou done this long time?


APP. In as much request as thy self. To begin with the Court as thou did, I
lie with the Ladies all night, and that's the reason they call for Cullies, and
Gruellies, so early before their praie^s, your galla^ts never sup, breakfast,
or Beauer without me.


MEND. That's false for I have seen them eat with a full stomach.


APP. True, but because they know a little thing drives me from them,
therefore in midst of meat they present me with some sharp sauce or a dish
of delicate Anchoues, or a Cauiare, to entice me back again, nay more your
old Sirs that hardly go without a propp, will walk a mile or two every day to
renew their accquaintance with me, as for the Academie it is beholding to me,
for adding the eight province unto noble Heptarchie of the liberal sciences.


MEND. What Is that I prithee.


APP. The most desired and honorable art of Cookerie.
Now Sir in the City I am -- st, st.
O the body of a Louse.

MEND. What art a louse in the City?


APP. Not a word more for yonder comes Phantastes, and some body else.


MEND. What a pox can Phantastes do?


APP. Work a miracle if he would prove wise.


MEN. It Is he indeed, the vilest nup: yet the fool loves me exceedingly but
I care not for his company for if he once catch me, I shall never be r^d of him.


Exeunt Appe^: and Mend. ACT, 2. SCEN. 2.
PHANTASTES. Aswart complexion'd fellow but quick y'd, in a white Satin
dublet of one fashion, green velvet hose of a^ ^ther? Aphentasticall hat with
a plu^e of feathers of several colors, a little short tasfata cloak, a pair
of Buskins cut, drawn out with sundry colored Ribands, with scarfes hung
about him, after all fashions, and of all colors, ringes, Jewels, a fan,
and in every place other od complements. HEVRESIS. A nimble sprighted page in
the newest fashion with a garlend of Bays. etc. PHANTAST^S. HEVRESIS. PHAN.
Sir Boy He^resi^^boy how now biting your nails?


HEV. Three things have trobled my brain this many a day, and just now, when I
was laying hold on the Invention of the^, your sudden call, made them like
Tantalus apples, fly from my ^ingers.


PH. Some great matters questionles, what were they?


HEV. The quadrature of a circle, the Philosophers stone and the next way to
the Indies;


PH. Thou do well to meditate on these three things at once for th^ile be
found out altogether, ad gra^cas calendas, but let them pass and carry the
conceit, I told you this morning to the party you wot of. In my immagination
it is Capritious, it will take I warrant thee.


HEV. I will Sir* But what say you to the gentleman that was with you yesterday?


PH. O I think thou meanest him that made 19. sonnets of his mistress
Busk-point;


HEV. The same, the same, Sir. You promised to help him out with the twentieth.


PHA. By Jupiters cloven pate it is true. But we witty fellows are so
forgetful, but stay, hu, hu, carry him this.

The gordian knot which Alexander great,
Did whilom cut with his all conquering sword:
Was nothing like thy Busk-point pretty Peate,
Nor could so fair an a^gury afford.
Then to conclude let him pervert Catullus his zonam soluit diu ligatam thus,
thus.

Which if I cha^nce to cut or else untie,
Thy little world I Will conquer presently.
It Is pretty, pretty, tell him it was extemporall,

HEV. Well Sir, but now for Master Inameratos loue-letter.


PH. Some netling stuff in faith; let him write thus* Most heart commanding
faced Gentlewoman, ^uen as the stone in India called Basaliscus, hurts all that
looks on it: and as the Serpent in Arabia called Smaragdu^ delights the
sight, so does thy celestial orb assimilating eyes, both please, and in
pleasing wound my loue-darted heart.


HEV. But what trick shall I invent for the conclusion?


PHA. Pish any thing Love will minister Ink for the rest, He that once begun
well, has half done, let him begin again and there is all.


HEV. Master Gullio spoke for a new fashion, what for him?


PHA. A fashion for his suit -- let him button it down the sleeue with four
elbowes, and so make it the pure heiroglyphick of a fool.


HEV. Nay then let me request one thing of you.


PHA. What Is that Boy? by this fair hand thou shall have i^.


HEV. Mistrisse Superbia a Gentlewoman of my acqua^ntance wished me to devise
her a new set for her Ruff, and an odd tire, I pray sir help me out with it.


PHA. Ah Boy in my conceit it is a heard matter to perform, these women have
well nigh tired me, with devising tires for them, and ferme at an non plus for
new sets, their heads are so light, and their eyes so coye, that I know not how
to please them.


HEV. I pray Sir, she has a bad face, and feign would have suitors,
Fantastical and odd apparel, would perchance draw some body to look on her.


PHA. If her face be naught, in my opinion, the more view it, the worse, bid
her wear the mu^titude of her deformities under a mask, till my leisure will
serve to devise some durable, and unstained blush of painting.


HEV. Very good Sir.


PHA. Away then, hye thee again, meet me at the Court within this hour at
the farthest. Exit Heuresis. Oh heavens, how have I been troubled these latter
times with Women, Fools, Babes, Taylers, Poets, Swaggerers, Guls,
Balladmakers, they have almost disrobed me of all the toys and trifles I can
devise, were it not that I pity the poor multitude of Printers, these
Sonnet-mungers should starve for conceits, for all Phantastes. But these puling
Lovers, I cannot but laugh at them and their Encomions of their Mistresses.
They make forsooth her hair of Gold, her eyes of Diamond, her cheeks of
Roses, her lips of Rubies, her teeth of Pearl, and her whole body of Iuory:
and when they have thus Idold' her like Pigmalion, they f^ll down and worship
her. Psyche, thou have laid a hard task upon my shoulders, to invent at ^uery
ones ask, were it not that I refresh my dullness once a day with my most
Angelical presence, 'twere impossible for me to undergo it.


ACTVS. 2. SCENA. 3.
COMMVNIS SENSVS, a grave man in a Black velvet cassocke like a Councellor,
speaks coming out of the door. COMMVNIS SENSVS. PHANTASTES. COM. S. I cannot
stay, I tell you it is more then time I were at Court, I know my sovereign
Psyche has expected me this hour


PHA. In good time, yonder comes Common-sense, I imagine it should be he by his
voice.


COM. S. Crave my counsel, tell me what manner of man he is? can he entertain
a man into his house, can he hold his Velvet Cap in one hand, and vale his
bonnet with the other? knows he how to become a Scarlet gown, has he a pair
of fresh posts at his door?


PHA. He Is about some hasty State-matters, he talks of posts me thinks.


COM. S. Can he part a couple of Dogs brawling in the street? why then
choose him Mayor^vpon my credit, heel prove a wise officer.


PHA. Save you my Lord, I have attended your leisure this hour.


COM S. Fie upon it what a toil have I had to choose them a Mayor yonder?
there is a fustie Currier will have this man: the^e's a Chandlor wipes his nose
on his sleeue, and swears it shall not be so. There Is a Musterd-maker looks
as keen as Viniger will have another: O this many headed multitude, it is a
hard matter to please them.


PHA. Especially where the multitude is so well headed. But I pray you where is
Master Memory? has he forgotten himself that he is not here.


COM. SEN. It Is high time he were at Court, I would he would come.


ACT. 2. SCEN. 4.
MEMORY, an old decrepit man, in a black Velvet Cassock, a Ta^fata Gown
furred, with white Grogaram, a white beard, Velvet slippers, a Watch, Staff,
etc. ANAMNESTES his Page, in a grave Satin suit Purple, Buskins, a Garland of
Bays and Rosemary, a gimmall ring with one link hanging, Ribbands and Threads
tied to some of his fingers, in his hand a pair of Table-bookes, etc* MEMORY.
ANAMNESTES. PHANTASTES. SENS. COM. MEM. How soon a wise man shall have his
wish.


COM. SE. Memory the season of your coming is very ripe.


PH. Had you staid a little longer 'twould have bin stark rotten.


MEM. I am glad I saved it from the Swine -- Spretious I have forgot something.
O my purse, my purse, why Anamnestes? Remembrance where art thou Anamnestes
Remembrance, that vild Boy is always gadding, I remember he was at my heels,
eue^ now and now the vild Rascal is vanished.


PHA Is he not here? why then in my imagination he is left behind, o la*
Anamnestes remembrance.


AN. (running in have.) Anon, anon, sir anon, anon sir, anon, anon sir, anon,
anon, sir.


MEM. Ha sir, what a brawling's here?


AN. I do but give you an answer with anon Sir.


MEM. You answer sweetly, I have called you three or four times one after
another.


AN. Sir, I hope I answered you 3. or 4. times, one in the neck of another. But
if your good worship have lent me any more calls, tell me, and I Will repay them
as I am a Gentleman.


MEM. Leave your tattle* had you come at first I had not spent so much breath
in vain.


AN. The truth is Sir, the first time you called, I heard you not, the second I
understood you not, the third I knew not whether it were you or no: the fourth
I could not tell where you were, and that is the reason I answered so suddenly.


MEM. G^e sir, run, seek every where, I have lost my purse some where.


AN. I go sir; Go sir, seek, run, I have lost, bring, here is a Dogs life
with a pox, shall I be always used like a water-Spanniell.

Exit Anam:
COM. Come good Master Register, I wonder you be so late now-adayes.


MEM. My good Lord, I remember that I knew your Grandfather in this your
place, and I remember your Grandfathers great Grandfathers, Grandfathers
Fathers, Father, yet in those days I never remember that any of them could
say, that Register Memory ever broke one minute of his appointment.


COM. S. Why good Father, why are you so late now a days?


MEM. Thus it is, the most customers I remember my self to have, are (as your
Lordship knows) Scholars, and now a days the most of them are become
Critticks, bringing me home such paltry things to lay up for them, that I can
hardly find them again.


PH. Jupiter, Jupiter, I had thought these Flies had bit none but my self, do
Critticks tickle you in faith?


MEM. Very familiarly: for they must know of me forsooth how every idle word is
written in all the mustie moath-eaten Manusripts, kept in all the old Libraties
in every City betwixt England and Peru.


COM. SEN. Indeed I have noted these times to affect Antiquities, more then is
requisite.


MEM. I remember in the age of Assaracus and Ninus, and about the wars of
Thebes, and the siege of Troy, the^e was few things committed to my charge, but
those that were well worthy the preserving, but now every trifle must be
wrapped up in the volume of eternity. A rich pudding-wife, or a Cobbler cannot
die but I must immortalize his name with an ^pitaph: A dog cannot piss in a
Noblemans she, but it must be sp^inkled into the Chronicles, so that I (...)
could remember my Treasure more full, and never emptier of honorable, and true
heroycall actions.


PH. By your leave Memory you are not alone troubled, Chronologers many of them
are so so Phantasticke, as when they bring a Captain to the Combat, lifting
up his reuengefull arm to dispart the head of his enemy, they will hold up his
arms so long till they have bestowed three or four pages in describing the
gold hilts of his threating Fauchion. So that in my Fancy the reader may well
wonder his adversary stabs him not, before he strikes, moreover they are become
most palpable flatterers always begging at my gates for Invention.


COM. This is a great fault in a Chronologer to turn Parasite: An absolute
history should be in fear of none, neither should he write any thing more
then truth for friend-ship, or less for hate, but keep himself equal and
constant in all his discourses, but for us we must be contented, for as our
honors increase, so must the burden of the cares of our offices urge us to
waxeheauy.


PH. But not till our backs break, ^lud there was never any so haunted as I
am, this da^e there comes a Sophister to my house, knocks at my door, his
errand being asked, forsooth his answer was to borrow a fair suit of conceits
out of my wardrop, to apparraile a show he had in hand, and what think you is
the plot?


COM. Nay I know not, for I am little acquainted with such toies.


PH. Meane-while he is somewhat acquainted with you, for he is bold to bring
your person upon the stage.


COM. What me? I cannot remember, that I was ever brought upon the stage before.


PH. Yes you and you, and my self with all my Phantisticall tricks and humors*
but I trow I have fitted him with Fooleries I trust heel never troble me
again.


COM. O times, O manners, when Boys dare to traduce men in authority was ever
such an attempt heard?


MEM. I remember there was* For (to say the truth) at my ^ast being at others
(It is now, let me see, about 1800. years a go) I was at a Commedie of
Aristophanes making, (I shall never forget it) The Arch-gouernor of Athens
took me by the hand and placed me, and there I say, I saw Socrates abused most
grossly, himself being then a present spectator: I remember he sat full
against me, and did not so much as show the least countenance of discontent.


COM. In those days it was lawful, but now the abuse of such liberty is
vnsuf^erable.


PH. Think what you will of it, I think it is done, and I think it is acting
by this time; ha^ke ha^ke, what drummings yonder, I Will lay my life they are
com^ to present the show I spoke off.


COM. It may be so; stay we will see what it is.


ACT. 2. SCENA. 5.
LINGVA. MENDACIO. COM. SEN. and the rest. LING. Feign thy self in great have.


MEN. I warrant you Madam: I doubt it is in vain to run, by this they are all
past ouer-taking.


COM. SEN. Is not this Lingua that is in such have?


PH. Yes, yes stand still.


MEN. I must speak with him.


COM. SEN. With whom?


MEN. Assu^e your self they are all at Court ere this.


LING. Run after them, for unless he know it --


COM. SEN. Lingua.


LING. O is it your Lordship: I beseech you pardon me have, and fear, I protest
put out mine eyes: I looked so long for you, that I knew not when I had found
you.


PHA. In my conceit, that^s like the man that inquired, who saw his Ass, when
himse^fe rid on him.


LING. O my heart beats so, fie, fie, fie, fie,


MEN. I am so weary* fo, fo, fo, fo.


COM. SEN. I prithee Lingua make an end.


LING. Let me begin first I beseech you, but if you will needs have the end
first, thus it is. The commonwealth of M^crosme at this instant, suffers the
pangs of death, it is gasping for breath. Will you have all? it is poisne^.


PH. What Pothecary durst be so bold as make such a confection: ha what poison
is it?


LING. A golden Crown.


MEM. I mistake, or else Galen in his book De sanitate tuenda, commends gold as
restoratiue.


COM. SEN. Lingua express your self.


MEN. Madam if you want breath, let me help you out.


LING. I prithee do, do.


MEN. My Lord, the report is, that Mercury coming late into this country, in
this very place, left a Coronet with this inscription, that the best of the
five should have it, which the Senses thinking to belong unto them --


LING. Challenge each other, and are now in arms, and 'tlike your Lordship.


COM. SEN. I protest it likes not me.


LING. Their battles are not far hence ready ranged.


COM. SEN. O monstrous presumption? what shall we do?


MEM. My Lord, in your great Grandfathers time, there was I remember such a
breach amongst them, therefore my Counsel is, that after his example by the
strength of your authority you convent them before you.


COM. Lingua go presently, command the Senses upon their allegiance to our
dread Sovereign Queen Psyche, to dismiss their companies, and personally to
appear before me without any pretense of excuse.


LING. I go my Lord.


PH. But here you Madam, I pray you let your Pages tongue walk with us a
little, till you return again.


LING. With all my heart.

Exit Lingua.
ACT. 2. SCENE. 6.
PH. Hot youths I protest, saw you those warlike preparations?

MEN. Lately my Lords, I spide into the Army,
But oh, it is far beyond my reach of wit.
Or strength of utterance to describe their forces.

COM. SEN. Go to, speak what thou can.

MEND. Upon the right hand of a spacious Hill,
Proud Visus marshalleth a puissant army,
Three thousand Egles strong, whose valiant Captain,
Is Jove's swift Thunder-bearer, that same Bird,
That hoist up Ganimede from the Troyan plains:
The vant-gard strengthened with a wondrous flight.
Of Falcons, Haggards, Hobbies, Terselets,
Lanards and Goshaukes, Sparhaukes, and Ravenous Birds.
The rereward granted to Auditus charge.
Is stoutly followed with an impetuous heard
Of stif-neckt Bulls, and many home-mad stagges,
Of the best head the Forest can afford.

PH. I promise you a fearful troop of Soldiers.

MEN. Right opposite stands, Tactus strongly mand,
With three thousand brisled Vrchens fo his Pikemen;
Four hundredth Tortesses for Elephants.
Besides a monstrous troop of ugly spiders,
Within an ambushment he has commanded,
Of their own gutts to spinne a cordage fine,
Whereof to have framed a net (O wondrous work)
That fastened by the Concaue of the Moon,
Spreds down it self toth'earths circumference.

MEN. It Is very strange, I can not remember the like Engine at any time.

MEN. Nay more my Lord, the maskes are made so strong,
That I my self upon them scal^d the heavens,
And bouldly walked about the middle region,
Where in the province of the Meteors,
I saw the clowdie shops of Hail and Rain,
Garners of Snow, and Christals full of dew,
Rivers of burning Arrows, Dens of Dragons,
Huge beams of flames, and Spears like firebrarnds,
Where I beheld hot Mars and Mercury,
With Rackets made of Spheres, and Balls of Stars,
Playing at Tennis for a Tun of Nectar.
And that vast gaping of the Firmament,
Under the Southern pole is nothing else,
But the great hazard of their Tennis Court,
The Zodiac is the line. The shooting Stars,
Which in an eyebright evening seemed to fall,
Are nothing but the Balls they loose at Bandy,
Thus having took my pleasure with those sights,
By the same net I went up, I descended.

COM. SEN. Well S^rra to what purpose tends this Stratage^e?

MEND. None know directly, but I think it is,
T'intrappe the Eagles, when the Battles join.

PH. Who ^akes Tactus his part?

MEND. Under the standard of thrice hardy Tactus,
Thrice valiant Gust^s, leads his warlike forces,
An-endles multitude of desperate Apes,
Five hundred Marmose^ts and long-ta^^^ Monkees:
All trained to the field, and nimble Gunners.

PH Ima^gine there is old moving amongst them: me thinks a handful of nuttes
would turn them all out of their Soldiers coats.


MEN. Ramparts of Pastie-crust and fortes of pies,
Entrenched wi^h dishes full of Custard stuff:
Has Gustus made; and planted ordinance,
Strange ordinance: Cannons of hollow canes:
Whose pouder's Rape-seed, charged with Turnip shot.

MEM. I Remember in the Country of Vtopia, they use no other kind of Artille^y.


COM. SEN. But what is become of O^factus?

MEND. He pollitickly leane^ to neither part,
But stands betwixt the camps as at receite:
Having great wine his Pioners to entrench them.

PH. In my foolish immagination Olfactus is very like the Goddess of victory
that never takes any part but the Conquerers.


MEND. And in the woods he placed secretly.
Two hundred couple of hounds and hungry Mastiffs:
And ore his head houer at his command,
A cloud of Vul^u^es* which over spread the light,
Making a night before the day be done:
But to what end not known but feared of all.

PH. I conjecture he intends to see ^he^ ^ight and after the ba^taile to feed
his Dogs, Hoggs and Vultures upon the murdered ^^^cases.


MEN. My L. I think the fury of their Anger will not be obedient to the
Message of Li^gua, for otherwise in my conceit the^ should have been here er
this: with your L. good liking we will attend upon you to see the field for more
certainty. It shall be so; Come Master Register lets walk.


Exeunt omnes. Finis. Act. secundi.
Act. 3. Scena. 1.
ANAMNESTES. With a purse in his hand. ANA. Forsooth Obliuio shut the door upon
me I could come no sooner, ha? is he not here? O excellent. Would I were hanged
but I looked for a sound rappe on the pate and that made me before hand to lift
up this excuse for a Buckler, I know he is not at court, for here is his purse
without which warrant there is no c^^ming thither, wherefore now Anamnestes sport
thy self a little, while thou art out of the prison of his company. What shall
I do? by my troth anatomize his purse in his absence. Plutus send there be
Jewels in it, that I may finely geld it of the stones -- The best sure lies in
the bottom -- poxt o^t here is nothing but a company of worm eat^n papers;
what is this? Memorandum that Master Prodigo owes me four thousand pounds and
that his lands are in pawn for it: Memorandum that I owe; that he owes? it is
well the old slave has some care of his credit, to whom owes he trow I? that
I owe Anamnestes? What me? I never lent him any think; ha this is good, there is
som-thing coming to me, more then I looked for. Come on, what is it, Memorandum
that I owe Anamnestes -- a breeching; I faith Sir I will ease you of that
payment ( He rendes the bill) Memorandum that when I was a child Robusto tript
up my heels at foot-bale: what a Reuengfull dizard's this?


ACT. 3. SCEN. 2.
MENDACIO. With Cushions under his arms, tripps up Anamnestes heels.
MENDACI^. ANAMNESTES. ANA. How now? MEND. No-thing but lay you upon the Cushion
Sir, how so?


ANA. Nothing but lay the Cushion upon you Sir?


MEND. What my litt^e N^m? by this foot I am sorry I mistook thee.


AN. What my little Men? by this hand it grieves me I took thee so right, But
Sir whither with these Cushions?


MEN. To lay them here that the Judges may sit softly least my Lady L^ngua's
cause go hard with her.


AN. They should have been wrought with gold; these will do nothing; But what
makes thy Lady with the Judges?


MEN. Pish, know not? she sueth for the title of a Sense, as well as the
rest that beat the name of the Pentarchy.


AN. Will Common sense and my Master, leave their affairs to detennine that
Controversy?


MEN. Then thou hearst nothing,


AN. What should I hear!


MEN. All the senses fell out about a Crown fallen from heaven and pitched a
field for it, but Vicegerent Common sense hearing of it took upon him, to
vmpire the contention, in which regard he has appointed them (their arms
dismissed) to appear before him, charging every on to bring as it were in a
show, their proper objects, that by them he may determine of their several
excellencies.


AN. When is all this?


MEN. As soon as they can possibly provide.


AN. But can he tell which diserues best by their objects?


MEN. No not only; for every sense must discribe his Instrument, that is his
house, where he performs his daily duty, so that by the Object and the
Instrument, my Lord can with great ^ase discern their place and dignities.


AN. His Lord-ships very wise.


MEN. I hou shall hear all anon, fine master Phantastes, and thy master will
be here shortly. But how is it my little Rogue? me thinks thou look lean
upon it?


AN. Alas how should I do otherwise that lie all night with such a Rawbo^d
Skeleton as Memory and run all day on his Ertands* The Chur^e's grown so old
and forgetful, that every hour he is calling Anamnestes, remembrance, where
art Anamnestes? Then presently some thing's lost, poor I must run for it, and
these words, run Boy. Come Sir quick, quick, quick, are as familiar with
him as the Cough, never out ons mouth.


MEN. Alack* alack poor Rogue, I see my fortunes are better. My Lady loves me
exceedingly; she is always kissing me, so that (I tell thee Nam) Mendacios
never from betwixt her lips.


AN. Nor out of Memories mouth; but in a worse sort, always excercising my
stumps and which is more, when he favors best then I am in the worst taking.


MEN. How so.


AN. Thus when we are friends, then must I come and be dandled upon his
palsie-quaking knees, and he will tell me a long story of his acquaintance with
King Priamus and his familiarity with Nester and how he played at blowe-point
with Jupiter when he was in his side-coates and how he went to look
Birds-nests with Athotis, and where he was at Deucal^ons sloud and 20. such
old wives tales.


MEN. I wonder he being so old can talk so much.


AN. Nature thou know, (knowing what an vn^uly Engine the tongue is) has
set teeth round about for watchmen, Now Sir, my Maister's old age has cought
our all his teeth and that is the cause it runs so much at liberty


MEN. Philosopicall;


AN. O but there is one-thing stings me to the very heart, to see an ugly foul
idle, fat, dusty clog-head, called Obliuio preserred before, me do know him?


MEN. Who I, I; But care not for his acquaintance, hang himblockhead I could
never abide him? Thou Remembrance art the only friend that the arms of my
friendship shall embrace. Thou have heard Oportet mendacem esse memorem. But
what of Obliu^o.


AN. The very naming of him has made me forget my self. O, O, O, O, that
Rascal is so made-of every where.


MEN. Who Obliuio?


AN. I, for our Courtiers hug him continually in their vngrate-ful bosoms, and
your smoth-belly fat back, barrel-pauncht, tu^-gutted drones are ever without
him, as for Memory he is a false hearted fellow, he always deceiues th^^, they
respect not him, except it be to play a game at Chests, Primero, Saunt, Maw, or
such like.


MEN. I cannot think such fellows have to do with Obliuio since they never
got any thing to forget.


AN. Again, there prodig all swagerers that are so much bound to their
Creditors, if they have but one Cross about them, they will spend it in Wine
upon Obliui^.


MEN. To what purpose I prithee?


AN. Only in hope heel wash them in the Lethe of their cares.


MEN. Why then no man cares forthee.


ANA. Yes a company of studious Paper-wormes and lean Scholars, and niggardly
scraping Usurers, and a troop of hearteating envious persons, and those
cancker-stomackt spiteful creatures, that furnish up common place-bookes with
other men's faults^* The time has been in those golden days, when Saturn
reigned, that if a man received a benefit of another, I was presently sent for
to put him in mind of it, but now in these Iron after-noones, save your
friends life, and Obliuio Will be more familiar with him then you.


ACTVS. 3. SCENA. 3.
HEVRESIS. MEND: ANAMNESTES. HEVR. Phantastes not at Court? is it possible it is
the strangest accident that ever was heard often, I had thought the Ladies and
Gallants would never lie without him.


AN. Hist, hist, Mendaicio I prithee observe Heuresis, it seems he cannot
find his Master, that is able to find out all things; and art thou now at a
fault, can not find out thine own master? nor? I Will try one more way. O
yes.


MEN. What a Proclamation for him?


ANA. I, I, his nimble head is always full of proclamations*


HEV. O yes.


MEN. But does he cry him in the wood?


ANAM. O good sir, and good reason, for every beast has Fantasy at his
pleasure.


HEV. O yes^ if any man can tell any tidings, of a spruce, neat, apish, nimle,
finbe, foolish, absurd, humerous, conceited, Phantastique Gallant, with hollow
eyes, sharp look, swart complexion, ^e^ger face, wearing as many toys in his
apparel, as fooleries in his looks and gesture, let him come ^orth and
certify me thereof, and shall have for his reward. --


ANAM. I can tell you where he is, what shall he have?


HEVR. A box of the ear sura, (snappe)


ANAM. How now Invention, are you so quick fingred? in faith, there is your
principal sir, (snappe) and here is the interest ready in my hand (snappe)
[They fail together by the cares.] Yea? have you found out scratching? now I
remember me.


HEVR. Do you bite you Rascal?


MERD. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, here is the lively picture of this axiom, A quick
Invention and a good Memory can never agree. Fie fie, fie Heuresis, beat him
when he is down?


ANAM. Prithee lets alone proud Iack-an-Apes, I Will --


HEVR. What will you do?


ANAM. Untruss thy points, and whip thee, thou paltry --

Let me go Mendacio if thou love me, shall I put up the --


MEN. Come, come, come you shall fight no more in good faith: Heuresis, your
Master will catch you anon.


HEVR. My Master, where is he?


MEN. I Will bring you to him, come away.


HEVR. Anamnestes, I scorn that thou should think I go away for fear of
any thing thou can do unto me; here is my hand as soon as thou can pick the
least occasion, put up thy finger I am for thee.

Exit Mendacio and Heuresis.
AN. When thou dare Heuresis, when thou dare, I Will be as ready as thy self
at any time.

This Heuresis, this Invention, is the proudest Iack-a-napes, the peartest
self conceited Boy that eue^ breathed, because forsooth some odd Poet, or
some such Phantastique fellows, make much on him, there is no ho with him, the
vile dandi-pra^te will ore-looke the proudest of his acquaintance: but well I
remember me, I learnt a trick the other day, to bring a Boy ore the thigh finely,
if he come, in faith I Will tickle him with it.


Mendacio comes running back in great have. MEN. As I am a Rascal Nam, they
are all coming, I see Master Register trudging hither, as fast as his three
fee^e will carry up his four Ages.

Exit Mendacio.
ACTVS. 3. SCENA. 4.
MEMORIA. ANAMNESTES. MEM. Ah you le^den heeld Rascal.


ANA. He^e it is Sir, I have it, I have it,


MEM. Is this all the have you make.


AN. A^^t like your worship your Clog-head Obliuio went before me, and foiled
the traile of your foote-steps, that I could hardly undertake the quest of your
purse forsooth.


MEM. You might have bee^e here long ere this: Come hither sir, come ^ither,
what must you go round about, goodly, goodly, you are so full of circumstances.


AN. In truth Sir, I was here before, and missing you, went back into the
City, sought you in every Alehouse, Inn, Taue^ne, Dicing-house,
Tennis-court, Stews, and such like places, likely to find your worship in.


MEM. Havillaine, am I a man likely to be found in such places, ha?


ANA. No, no sir, sir but I was told by my Lady Lingua's page that your Worship
was seeking me, therefore I inquired for you in those places where I knew you
would ask for me, and it please your worship.


MEM. I remember an other quarrel sir, but well, well, I have no leisure.


ACT. 3. SCENA. 5.
COM. SENS. LINGVA. PHANTASTES. MEMORY. ANAMNESTES. COM. S. Lin^ua, the Senses
by our appointment anon are to present their objects before us; seeing
therefore they be not in readiness, we lice^se you in the mean while, either
in your own person, or by your Advocate, to speak what you can for your self.


LIN. My Lord if I should bring before your honor all my friends ready to
importune you in my behalf, I should have so many Retoricians, Logitians,
Lawyers and which is more, so many Women to attend me, that this Groa^e would
hardly contain the Company, whe^e^o^e to avoid the tediousness I willay the
whole cause upon the tippe of mine own tongue.


COM. SEN. Be as brief as the necessity of our short time requires.


LING. My Lord, though the Imb^^ill tas of my fe^ble sex, might! d^awe me
back, from t^is T^^bunall, with the habenis to wit Timorss and the Catenis
Pudori^, notwithstanding being so fairly led on with the gracious (...) of
your iustissimae. (...) Especially so aspremente spurd' con gli sproni di
necess^^a mia pungente, I will without the help of Orators, commit the tot^m
sal^tem of my action to the Volutabilitati (...), which (aucc vos^r^ bonn^
playscur) I will finish with more then Laconic^ bre^itate.


CO. SE. What Is this? here is a Gallemaufry of speech indeed.


MEM. I remember about the year 1602. many used this skew kind of language.
Which in my opinion is not much unlike the man Pla^^ny the Son of Lagus, King
of Egypt, brought for a spectacle hal^e white half black.


COM. SEN. I am persuaded these same language makers have the very quality o^
cold in their wi^, that freezeth all Heterog^n^^ll languages together,
congealing English Tynne, Grecian Gold, Roman Latin all in a l^mpe.


PHA. Or rather in my imagination like your Fantastical Gulls Apparel,
wearing a Spanish Felt, a French Doblet, a Granado Stocking, a Dutch Slop, an
Italian Cloak, with a Welsh frise Ierkin.


COM. SEN. Well, leave your toying, we cannot pluck the least fether from the
soft wing of time. Therefore Lingua go on but in a more formal manner, you know
an ingenio^s Oration must neither swell about the Banks with insolent words,
nor cre^pe too shallow in the ford, with vulger terms, but run equally,
smooth, and cheerful, through the clean current of a pure style.


L^^. My Lord, this one thing is sufficient to confirm my worth to be equ^ll
o^ better then the seases, whose best operations are nothing till I polish them
with perfection; for their knowledge is only of things present, quickly
subluned with the deft file of time; whereas the tongue is able to recount
things past, and often pronounce things to come by this means re-edifying
such Excellencies, as Time and Age do easily depopulate.


COM. SEN. But what profitable service, do you undertake for our d^ead Q^^ene
Psych^?


LING. O how I am ravished to think how infinitely she has grace^ me with her
most acceptable service. But above all (which you Master Register may well
remember) when her highness taking my m^uch for her instrument, with the Bow
of my tongue st^ooke so heavenly a touch upon my teeth, that she cha^med ^he
very Tigers a sleep, the lystning Bears and Lions, to couch at her fee^^,
while the Hills leaped, and the woods d^^nced, to the sweet harmony of her
most Angelical accents.


MEM. I remember it very well, Orpheus played upon the Harp, while she sange
about some four yea^es after the Contention betwixt Apollo and P^^, and a
little before the excoriation of M^^syas.


AN. By the same token the River Alpheus, at that time pursuing his beloved.
(...), dischanel'd himself of his former course to be partaker of their
admirable consort, and the music being ended, thrust himself h^ad-long into
earth, the next way to follow his amarous Chase; if you go to A^cadi^ you
shall see his coming up again.


COM. SEN. Forward Li^gua with your reason.


LING. How often has her Excellency employed me as Imbassador in her most
urgent aff^ire^ to foreign Kings and Emperors I may say to the Godds
themselves. How many bloudlesse Battles have my persuasions attained, when
the senses forces have been (...). How many Rebels have I reclaymed when her
s^cred authority, was little regarded (her Laws without exprobation be it
spoken) had been altogether vnpubli^hed, her will unperformed, her illustrio^s
deeds vnrenoumed had not the silver sound of my trumpet ^illed the whole
circuit of the Universe with her deserved fame. Her Cities would dissolve,
tra^^ique would decay friendshippes be broken, were not my speech the knot*
Mercury, and M^^tique, to bind, defend, and glewe them together. What should
I say more; I can never speak enough of the unspeakable praise of speech,
wherein I can find no other impe^fection at all, but that the most exquisite
power and excellency of speech cannot sufficiently express the exquisite
power, and excellency of speaking.


COM. SEN. Lingua your service and dignity we confess to be great, nertheles
these reasons prove you not to have the nature of a sense.


LING. By your L. ships favor I can soon prove that a sense is a faculty, by
which our Queen sitting in her privy Chamber has intelligence of exterior
occurrents. That I am of this nature, I prove thus. The object which I
challenge is --


Enter Appetitus in have. APP. Stay, stay my Lo. defer I beseech, defer the
Judgment.


COM. SEN. Who Is this that boldly interrupts us this, hum.


APP. My name is Appetitus, Common servant to the Pentarchy of the senses, who
understanding that your Honor was handling this Action of Lin^uae^ sent me
hither thus hastily, most humbly requesting the Bench to cons^der these A
ticles they allege against her before you proc^ede to judgment.


COM. SEN. Hum, here is good stuff, Master Register read the^ Appetitus you
may depart and bid your Mistrisse make convenient speed


APP. At your Lordships pleasure.


Exit A (...). 3 MEM. I Remember that I forgot my spectacles, I left them in
the 349. page of H^lls Chronicles, where he tells a great wonder of a
multitude of Mise which had almost destroyed the Country, but that there
resorted a great mighty slight of Owls, that distroyed them, ^n^mn^stes ^eade
these: ^^ticles distinctly.


1. Ar. AN Inprimis we accuse Lingu^ of high t^eason, and (...), against the
most honorable Com^on-^e lth of lette^s, for vn^ler pretense of pro^iting the
people with translations, she has most vilye prostituted the hand mysteries
of unknown Languages to the profane ears of the vulga^.


PHAN. This is as much as to make a new hell in the upper world, for in Hell
they say Alexander is no better th^n a Cobbler, and now by these translations
every Cobbler is as familiar with Alexander as he that wrote his life.


2 art. ANAM. Item that she has wrong^ully imprisoned a Lady called ^^cr^tas.


3. art. Item that she is a wi^ch and exce^ciseth her tongue in exorcismes.


4. art. Item that she is a common whote and lets every one lie with her.


5. art. Item that she railes on men in Authority deprauing their Honors,
with bitter Jests and tauntes and that she is a Backbyter setting strife betwixt
Bosom friends.


6 art. Item that she lends wives weapons to fight against their husbands.


7. art. Item that she maintains a train of prating petty foggers, prouling
Sumners, smooth tongued bawdes, artlesse Empericks, hungry Parasites,
Newes-carriers, Ianglers, and such like idle Companions, that delude the
Commanalty.


8. art. Item that she made Rhetorique wanton, Logic to babble, Astronomy to
lie.


9. art. Item that she is an incontinent Tel-tale.


10. art. Item (which is the last and worst) that she is a Woman in every
respect and for these causes not to be admitted to the dignity of a Sense.
That these Articles be true we pawn our honors, and subcribe our names.


1. ^isus. 4. Olfactus. 3. Gustus. 2. Au^itus. 5. Tactus. COM. SEN. Lingua
these be shrewde allegations, and as I think vn-answerable, I will defer
the judgment of your cause till I have finished the contention of the Senses.


LING Your Lordships must be obeyed, but as for them most ungrateful, and
perfidious wretches.


COM. S. Good words become you better, you may depart if you will, till we send
for you, Anam^^stes run, remember Visus, it is time he were ready.


ANAM. I go. (Exit ANAM: et redit) he stays here expecting your Lordships
pleasure.


ACTVS. 3. SCENA. 6.
A Page carrying a Scu^chion argent charged with an Eagle displayed proper,
then. Visus with a Fan of Peacocks feathers, next Lumen with a Crow^e of
B^yes, and a Shield with a bright Sun in it, apparrelled in Ti^^uc, then a
Page bearing a S^ield before Coe'um, clad in A^ure Ta^^^ta, dimpled with
Stars, a Crown of Stars on his head, and a Scarce resembling the Zodi^ck
over thwart the Shoulders, n^xt a page clad in gree^e with a terr^st^iall Globe
before Terra, in a green Fel^et gown stuck with branches, and flowers, a
Crown of Turrets upon her head, in her hand a Key, then a (...) leading in his
hand Color clad in changeable si^ke, with a R^inbowe out of a Cloud on her
head, last a Boy, Visus M^rshalleth his show about the Stage, and presents it
before the (...). VISVS. LVMEN. COELVM. PHANTAS. COM. SENS. MEMORY. VIS. Lo
here the object that delights the sight,
The goodliest objects that ma^s heart can wish,
For a^l things that the Orb first moveable,
Wrappes in the circuit of his large-stretcht arms,
Are subject to the power of (...) eyes,
That you may know what profit light does bring,
Note Lumcu^ words that speaks next following.

LVMEN. Ligh^ the fair Grandchild to the glorious Sun,
Opening the casements of the Rosy morn,
Makes the abashed heavens soon to shun,
The ugly darkness it emb^ac'd beforne,
And at his first appearance puts to fl^ght,
The utmost relics of the Hell-borne night,
This heavenly shield soon as it is displaide,
D^smayes the vices tha^ abhor the light,
To wanderers by Sea and Land gives aid,
Conquers display, ^ecomforteth astright,
Rowseth dull Idleness, and starts soft sleep.
And all the world to daily labor keeps,
This a true looking glass impartial,
Where Beauties self, her self does beautify,
With native hue, not artificial,
Discovering falsehood, opening verity,
The days bright eye colors distinction,
Just judge of measure and proportion.
The only means by which each mortal eye,
Sends messengers to the wide firmament,
That to the longing soul brings presently
High contemplation and deep wonderment.
By which aspitement she her wings displaies,
And her self thither whence she came vpraisd.

PH. What blew thing's that, that is dappled so with Stars.

VIS. He represents the heaven.

PH. In my conceit it were pretty, if he thundered when he speaks.

VIS. Then none could understand him.

COEL. Tropic colors the Equinoctial,
The Zodiac poles, and line Eclipticall,
The Nadaz, Zenith, and Anomalie^,
The Azimeth and Ephimerides,
Stars, Orbs, and Plannets, with their motions,
The Oriental Regradations,
Excentricks, Epicyctes, and -- and -- and --

PH. How now Visus is your heaven at a stay?
Or is it his Motus trepidationis that makes him stammer:
I pray you Memory set him ag^^e again.

MEM. I remember when Jupiter made Amphitrio Cuckold, and lay with his wife
Alcmena, Coelum was in this taking for three days space, and stood still just
like him at a non plus.


COM. SEN. Leave jesting, you will put the fresh Actor out of ^ountenance.


COEL. Excentricks, Epicyctes, and Aspects,
In Sextile, Trine, and Quadrate which effects
Wonders on earth: also the Oblique part
Of signs, that make the day both long and short,
The Constellations, rising Cosmicall,
Setting of Stars, Chronicke, and Heliacall,
In the Orizon or Meridionall,
And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the soul de^iued by the eye.

PHA. Visus you have made Coelum a heavenly speech, past earthly capacity, it
had been as good for him he had thundered. But I pray you who taught him
speak and use no action, me think it had been excellent to have turned round
about in his speech.


Vis. He has so many motions he knows not which to begin withal.


PH. Nay rather it seems he is of Copernicus opinion, and that makes him stand
still.


Terra comes to the midsts of the Stage, stands still a while, says nothing,
and steps back. COM. SE. Lets hear what Terra can say -- just nothing.

VIS. And't like your Lordship, it were an indecorum Terra should speak.


MEM. You are deceived, for I remember when Pha^ton ruled the Sun, I shall
never forget him, he was a very pretty youth, the earth opened her mouth wide,
and spoake a very good speech to Jupiter.


ANAM. By the same token Nylus hid his head then, he could never find it since.


PH. You know Memory that was an extreme hot day, and it is likely Terra
sweat much, and so took cold presently after, that ever since she has lost
her voice.


HERAVLD. A C^uton Ermines added to the field, is a sure sign the man that
bore these Arms, was to his Prince as a defensive shield, saving him from the
force of present Arms.


PH. I know this fellow of old, it is a Herald, many a Centaure, Chimera,
Barnacle, Crocadile, Hippotame, and such like toys, has he stolen out of the
shop of my Invention, to shape new coats for his vpstart Gentlemen. Either
Africa must breed more monsters, or you make fewer Gentlemen M. Herald, for
you have spent all my devises already, but since you are here, let me ask you
a question, in your own profession, how comes it to pas^e that the victorious
Arms of England, quartred with the conquered Coat of France are not placed on
the dexter side, but give the flower deluce the better hand?


HER. Because that the three Lions are one coat made of two French Duke-domes,
Normandy and Aquitaine: but I pray you Visus, what Iaye is that, that follows
him?


VIS. It Is Color an object of mine, subject to his commandment.


PHA. Why speaks he not?


VIS. He is so bashful, he dares not speak for blushing: What thing is that,
tell me without delay.


A BOY. That Is nothing of it self, yet every way,
As like a Man, as a thing, like may be,
And yet so unlike, as clean contrary,
For in one point it every way does miss,
The right side of it a man's left side is
It Is lighter then a Feather, and withal
It filles no place, nor room it is so small.

COM. SEN. How now Visus, have you brought a boy with a riddle to pose us all.


PHAN. Pose us all? and I here; that were a jest indeed: My Lord, if he have a
Sphinx, I have an Oedipus assure your self, lets hear it once again.


BOY. What thing is that Sir.


PHAN. This such a knotty Enigma? why my Lord, I think it is a Woman, for first
a Woman is nothing of her self, and again she is likest a man of any thing.


COM. SEN. But wherein is she unlike?


PHA. In every thing, in pecuisnnes, in folly. -- 'st Boy.


HEV. In Pride, Decei^, Prating, Lying, Cogging, Coins, Spite, Hate Sir.


PHA. And in many mo such vices: Now he may well say, the left side a man's
right side is, for a cros^e wife, is always contrary to her husband, ever
contradicting what he wishes for, like to the verse in Martial, Velle tuum.


MEM. Velle tuvm ^olo. Dindine nolle volo.


PHA. Lighter then a feather, does any man, make question of that?


MEM. They need not, for I remember I saw a Cardinal weigh the^ once, and the
Woman was found 3. graynes lighter.


COM. SEN. It Is strange, for I have seen Gentlewomen wear feathers oftentime^,
can they carry heavier things then themselves?


MEM. O sir, I remember, it is their only delight to do so.


COM. SEN. But how apply you the last verse, it fills no place Sir?


PHA. By my faith, that spoils all the former, for these fardingalles take up
all the room now a days, it is not a woman questionless, shall I be put down
with a Riddle sirrah, Heur^si^ search the corners of your conceit, and find it
me quickly.


HEV. Hay (...). I have it, it is a man's face in a looking Glass.


PHAN. My Lord, it is so indeed, Sirrah lets see it, for do you see my right eye
here?


COM SEN. Wh^t of your eye?


P^. O Lord, sir, this kind of frown is excellent, especially when it is
sweetened with such a pleasing smile.


COM SE. Phantastes.


PHA. O Sir my left eye is my right in the glass, do you see? by these lips my
garters hang so neately, my Gloves and shoes become my hands and fee^e so
well: Heuresis tie my shoes strings with a new knot; -- this point was scarce
well trust, -- so, it is excellent. -- Looking-glas^es were a passing invention,
I protest the fittest books for Ladies to study on --


MEM. Take heed you fall not in love with your self Phantastes, as I
remember: Anamnestes who wast that died of the looking disease?


AN. Forsooth Narcissus, by the same taken he was turned to a Daffadill, and as
he died for love of himself, so if you remember there was an old ill-fauoured,
precious nosed, babber-lipt, beetle-browed, Bleere-eyd, slouch-eard slave that
looking himself by chance in a Glass, died for pure hate.


PH. By the lip of my-I could live and die with this face.


CO. SE. Fie fie Phantastes, so effeminate for shame leave off. Visus your
objects I must needs say are admirable if the house and instrument be
answerable, letts here therefore in breife your description --


VIS. Under the forehead of mount Cephalon,
That ouer-peeres the coast of Microco^me,
All in the shaddowe of two pleasant groves,
Stand my two mansion houses, both as round
As the clear heavens, both twins as like each other*
As star to star, which by the vulger sort,
For their resplendent composition,
Are named the bright eyes of mount Cephalon:
With four fair rooms those lodgings are contrived.
Four goodly rooms in form most sphericall,
Closing each other like the heavenly orbs:
The first whereof, of Natures substance wrought,
As a strange moate the other to defend,
Is trained moveable by Art divine:
Stirring the whole compacture of the rest,
The second chamber is most curiously
Composed of burnisht, and transparent horn.

PHAN. That Is a matter of nothing, I have known many have such bed-chambers.


MEM. It may be so, for I remember being once in the towns Library, I read
such a thing, in their great book of monuments called, Cornucopia, or rather
their copia-Cornu*


VIS. The third's a lesser room of purest glass,
The fourth's smallest, but passes all the former,
In worth of matter built most sumptuously;
With walls transparent of pure Christaline.
This the souls mirror and the bodies guide,
Loves Cabinet bright beacons of the Realm,
Casements of light quiver of Cupids shafts:
Wherein I sit and immediately receive,
The species of things corporeal,
Keeping continual watch and centinell;
Least foreign hurt invade our Microcosme,
And warning give, (if pleasant things approach)
To entertain them, from this coastly room:
Leads my Lord an entry to your house,
Through which I hourly to your self convey
Matters of wisdom by experience bred:
Arts first invention, pleasant vision,
Deep contemplation, that attires the soul,
In gorgeous roabes of flowering literature:
Then if that Visus have deserved best,
Let his victorious browe, with Crown be blessed.

COM. SEN. Anamnestes, see who is to come next.

ANA. Presently my Lord.

PHAN. Visus, I wonder that amongst all your objects, you presented us not with
Platoes Idea, or the sight of Niniuie, Babtlon, London, or some Sturbridge
faire-monsters, they would have done passing well, those motions in my
immagination are very delightful.


VIS. I was loath to trouble your honors with such toies,

neither could I provide them in so short a time.


COM. SEN. We will consider your worth, mean while we dismiss you.


Visus leads his show about the stage, and so goes out with it. ACT. 3.
SCEN. vltima.
AVDITVS. etc. AVD. Hark, hark, hark, hark, peace, peace, O peace: O
sweet, admirable, Swanlike heavenly, hark, O most melli^uous strain, O what
a pleasant cloase was there, O full, most delicate.


COM. SEN. How now Phantast^s, is Auditus mad?


PHAN. Let him alone, his musical head is always full of od ^rotchets.


AVD. Did you mark the dainty dryuing of the last point, an excellent
maintayning of the song, by the choice timpan of mine ear, I never ^eard a
better, hist, st* st, hark, why there is a caden^eable to ^auish the dullest
Stoicke.


COM. SEN. I know not, what to think on him.


AVD. There how sweetly the plane-song was dissolved into descant, and how
easily they came of with the last rest, hark, hark* the ^itter sweetest
Achromaticke.


COM. SEN. Audatus.


AVD. Thanks good Apollo for this timely grace, never could thou in fit^er:
O more then most musical narmony, O most admirable consort, have you no ea^es?
do you not hear this music?


PHAN. It may be good, but in my opinion, they rest too long in the beginning.


AVD. Are you then deaf? do you not yet perceive the wondrous sound the
heavenly orbs do make with their continual motion, hark, hark, O honey
sweet.


COM. SEN. What tune do they play?


AVD. Why such a tune as never was, nor ever shall be heard, mark now, now
mark, now, now. PHAN. List, list* list.


AVD. Hark O, sweet, sweet sweet.


PHAN. List how my heart enuies my happy ears, hisht, by the gold strung harp
of Apollo, I hear the celestial music of the spheres, as plainly as ever
Pithagoras did, O most excellent diapason good, good, good, It plays fortune
my ^oe, as distinctly as may be.


COM. SEN. As the fool thinks, so the bell clinketh I protest I hear no
more then a post.


PHAN. What, the Laualta hay? nay if the heavens fiddle, Phansy must needs
dance.


COM. S. Prithee sit still, thou must dance nothing but the passing measures.
Memory do you hear this harmony of the spheres?


MEM. Not now my Lord, but I remember about some 4000. years ago, when the
Sky was first made, we heard very prefectly.


ANA. By the same token the first tune the planets played, I reme^eber Venus
the treble ran sweet diusion upon Saturn the base. The first tune they played
was Sellengers round, in memory whereof ever since, it has been called the
beginning of the world.


COM. SEN. How comes it we cannot hear it now.


MEM. Our ears are so well acquainted with the sound, that we never mark it.
As I remember the Egiptian Catadupes never heard the ro^^nge of the fall of
Nilus, because the noise is so familiar unto them.


COM. SEN. Have you no other objects to judge by, then these Auditu^?


AVD. This is the rarest and most exquisite,
Most sphericall, divine, angelical,
But since your duller ears cannot perceive it:
May it please your Lordship to with draw your self,
Unto this neigh-boring grove, there shall you see:
How the sweet treble, of the chirp^ng birds,
And the soft stirring of the moved leaves.
Running delightful descant to the sound,
Of the base murmuring of the bubling brook,
Becomes a consort of good instruments.
While twenty babbling echoes round about,
Out of the stony concaue of their mouth:
Restore the vanished music of each cloase,
And fill your ears full with redoubled pleasure*

COM. SEN. I will walk with you very willingly, for I grow weary of sitting.
Come Master R^gister, and Master Phantastes,


Exeunt omnes. Finis. ACT. 3.
Act. 4. SCENA. 1.
MENDATIO. ANAMNESTES. HEVRESIS. MEN. Prithee Nam, be persuaded, is it nor
better go to a feast then stay here for a fray?


ANA. A feast? d^est think Auditus will make the Judges a feast?


MEN. Faith I, why should he carry them to his house else?


ANA. Why sir^ a to hear a set or two of songs, slid his banquets are nothing
but fish all soll, soll? soll? I Will teach thee wit boy, never go me to a
musitions house for lunkets, vn^esse thy ^^omake lies in thine ea^es; for there
is nothing but commending this songs delicate air, that motects dainty air,
this sonnets sweet air, that madrialls melting air, this dirgesse mournful
air, this Church air that Chamber air, French air, English air, Italian
air, why Lad, they be pure Chamaelions, they seed only upon the air.


MEN. Cham^elions? I Will be sworn some of your Fiddlers be rather Ca^^els, for by
their good-wills they will never leave eating.


ANA. True, and good reason, for they do nothing all the day but stretch and
grate their small guts; but o, yonder is the Ape Heuresis: let me go I prithee.


MEN. Nay good-now stay a little, let us see his humor.


HEV. I see no reason to the contrary, for we see the quintessence of Wine will
convert Water into Wine; why therefore should not the Elixar of gold turn lead
into pure gold?


MEN. Ha, ha, ha, ha, he is turned Chimick sir, it seems so by his talk.


HEV. But how shall I devise to blow the fire of Beechecoales, with a
continual and equal blast? ha? I will have my bellows driven with a wheel,
which wheel shall be a self mouer.


ANA. Here Is old turning, these Chimicks seeking to turn Lead into Gold, turn
away all their own Silver.


HEV. And my wheel shall be Geometrically proportioned into 7. or 9. concaue
incircled arms, wherein I will put equal poises, hai, hai, hai, (...), I have
it, I have it, I have it.


MEN. Heuresis?


HEV. But what is best to contain the Quicksilver? ha?


ANA. Do you remember your promise Heuresis?


HEV. It must not be Iron, for Quicksilver is the tyrant of Mettles, and will
soon fret it.


ANA. Heuresis? Heuresis?


HEVR. Nor Brass, nor Copper, nor Mastlin, nor Mineral, (...), I have it, I
have it, it must be.


ANA. You have indeed sir, and thus much more then you looked for. ( snappe.)


Heuresis and Anamnestes about to fight, but Mendacio parts them. MEN. You
shall not fight, but if you will always disagree, let us have words and no
blows; Heuresis, what reason have you to fall out with him?


HEV. Because he is always abusing me, and takes the upper hand of me every
where.


ANA. And why no^ sir? I am thy better in any place.


HEV. Have I been the Author of the seven liberal Sciences, and consequently
of all learning? have I been the patron of all Mechanical devises, to be thy
inferior? I tell thee Anamnes^es thou have not so, much as a point but thou
art beholding to me for it.


ANA. Good, good* but what had your invention been, but for my remembrance: I
can prove that thou belly-sprung invention, art the most improfitable member in
the world, for euersince thou went bor^e thou have been a bloody murderer,
and thus I prove it: In the quiet years of Saturn (I remember Jupiter was
then but in his swath-bands) thou rentest the bowels of the earth, and broughts
gold to light, whose beauty (like Hellen) set all the world by the ears, then
upon that thou foundest out Iron, and put weapons in their hands, and now
in the last populous age, thou taugh'st a scab-shin friar, the hellish
invention of powder and gunnes.


HEV. Cal'st it hellish? thou lie it is the admirable'st invention of all
others, for whereas others imitate nature, this excells nature her self.


MEM. True for a Cannon will kill as many at one shot, as Thunder does commonly
at twenty.


ANA. Therefore more murdering art thou then the light bolt.


HEV. But to show the strength of my conceit, I have found out a means to
withstand the stroke of the most violent culuering: Mendatio thou saw it
when I demonstrated invention.


ANA. What some wool-packes? or mudwalls? or such like?


HEV. Mendatio I prithee tell it him for I love not to be a trumpeter of mine
own praises.


MENDAT, I must needs confess, this devise to pass all that ever I heard or
saw, and thus it was, first he takes a Faulcon, and charges it without all
deceiptes, with dry powlder well canphred, then did he put in a single bullet,
and a great quantity of drop shot both round and lach^imall, this done he sets
me a boy 60. paces off, just point blanke over against the mouth of the piece,
now in the very midst of the direct line he fastens a post, upon which he
hangs me in a cord a Siderits, of Herculean stone.


ANA. Well, well, I know it well, it was found out in Ida, in the year of the
world -- by one Magnes, whose name it retains, though vulgarly they call it an
Adamant.


MEN. When he had hanged this Adamant in a cord, he comes back, and gives fire
to the tutch-hole, now the powder consumed to a void vacuvm.


HEV. Which is intolerable in Nature, for first shall the whole Machin of the
world, heaven, earth, sea, and air, return to the misshapen house of Chaos,
then the least vacuvm be found in the universe.


MEN. The bullet and drop-shot most impetuously from the ^ierie throat of the
Culuering, (but ^ strange) no sooner ^ame they near the Adamant in the cord,
but they were all arrested by the Sargent of Nature, and houered in the air
round about it, till they had lost the force of their motion, clasping
themselves close to the Stone in most lovely manner, and not any one flew to
endanger the mark, so much did they remember their duty to nature, that they
forgot the errand they were sent of.


ANA. This is a very artificial lie.


MEN. Nam believe it, for I saw it, and which is more, I have practiced this
devise often: once when I had a quarrel with one of my Lady Veritas naked
knaves, and had pointed him the field, I conuaide into the heart of my Buckler
an Adamant, and when we met, I drew, all the foynes of his Rapier, whether so
ever he intended them, or howsoever I guided mine arm, pointed still to the
midst of my buckler, so that by this means, I haut the Knave mortally, and my
self came away untouched, to the wonder of all the beholders.


ANA. Sir you speak Metaphorically, because thy wit Mend^cio always
draws men's objections to thy forethought excuses.


HEV. Anamnestes it is true, and I have an addition to this, which is to make
the bullet, shot from the enemy, to return immediately upon the Gunner: but let
all these pass, and say the worst thou can against me.


ANA. I say Gunnes were found out for the quick dispatch of mortallity, and
when thou saw men grow wise, and beget so fair a child as Peace, of so
foul and deformed a mother as War, least there should be no murder, thou
deuisest poison.


MEN. Nayfie Nam, urge him not too far.


ANA, And last and worst, thou foundest out cookery, that kills more then
weapons, gunnes, wars or poisons, and would destroy all, but that thou
inuentedst Physic, that helps to make away some.


HEV. But sir, besides all this, I devised Pillories for such forging
villains as thy self.


ANA. Calst me villain?


They fight, and are parted by Mendatio. MEN. You shall not fight as long as I
am here, give over I say.


HEV. Mendatio you offer me great wrong to hold me, in good-faith I shall fall
out with you.


MENDA. Away, away, away, you are Invention, are you not.


HEV. Yes Sir, what then?


MEN. And you remembrance?


ANA. Well sir, well.


MEN. Then I will be Iudicium, the moderator betwixt you, and make you both
friends, come, come, shake hands, shake hands.


HEV. Well, well, if you will needs have it so?


ANA. I am in some sore content.


Mendatio walks with them, holding them by the hands. MEN. Why this is as it
should be, when Mendatio has Invention on the one hand, and Remembrance on the
other, as heel be sure never to be found with Truth in his mouth: so he
scorns to be taken in a lie, hai, hai, hai, my fine wagges whist?


ANA. Whist.


HEV. Whist.


ACT. 4. SCEN. 2.
Comunis, Sensus, Memory, Phantastes, Heuresis, Anamnestes take their places on
the bench, as before, Auditus on the stage, a page before him bearing his
target, the field sable, an heart or, next him Tragedus appareled in black
velue^, f^ire bus kins, a fauchion etc. then Comediu in a light colloured
green ta^fata robe, silk stockings, pumps, gloves. etc. COMMVNIS SENSVS,
MEMORY, PHANTASTES, HEVRESIS, ANAMNESTES. etc. COM. They had some reason that
held the soul a harmony, for it is greatly delighted with musicque, how fast
we wear tied by the ears to the consort of voices powder; but all is but a
little pleasure, what profitable objects has he?


PHA. Your ears will teach you presently, for now he is com^ing, that
fellow in the bays me thinks I should have known him; o it is Comedus, it is so
but he is become now a days something humerous, and too too, Satyricall, up
and down, like his great grandfather A ^istophanes.


AN. These two my Lord Comaedus and Tragedus,
My fellows both, both, twins, but so unlike,
As birth to death, wedding to funeral:
For this that rears him self in bus kins quainte,
Is pleasant at the first, proud in the midst:
Stately in all, and bitter death at end.
That in the pumpes does frown at first acquaintance*
Troble the midst, but in the end concludes,
Cloasing up all with a sweet catastrophe?
This grave and sad disdain with btinish tears,
That light and quick with wrinckled laughter painted;
This deals with Nobles, Kings, and Emperors:
Full of great fears, great Hopes, great enterprises,
This other trades with men of mean condition:
His proiects small, small Hopes and dangers little,
This gorgeous broidered with rich sentences:
That fair and pursled round with merriments*
Both vice detect, and virtue beautify:
By being deaths mirror, and life's looking glass.

COM. Salutem iam primum a principio propitiam. Mihi atque Vobis spectatores
nuntio.


PHA. Pish, pish this is a speech with no action, lets here TERENCE, quid
ig^tur faciam. etc.


COM. Quid igitur faciam? non eam ne nunc quidem cum accusorvliro?


PHA. Phy, phy, phy, no more action, lend me your baies, do it thus. Quid
igitur. etc. (he acts it after the old kind of Pantomimick action.)


COM. SEN. I should judge this action Phantastes most absurd, unless we should
come to a Commedy, as gentlewomen to the comencement, only to see men speak.


PHA. In my imagination it is excellent, for in this kind the hand (you know)
is ha^bingerto the tongue and prou^des the words a lodging in the ears of the
Auditors.


COM. SEN. Auditus it is now time you make us acquainted with the quallity of
the house you keep in, for our better healpe in judgment.


AVD. Upon the sides of fair mount Cephalor,
Have I two houses passing human skill:
Of finest matter by dame nature wrought,
Whose learned fingers have adorned the same
With gorgeous porches of so strange a form,
That they command the passingers to stay:
The doors whereof in hospitallity,
Nor day, nor night, are shut, but open wide,
Gently inuit all comers; whereupon,
They are named the open ears of Cephal^n.
But least some boulder sound should boldy rush,
And break the nise composture of the work,
The skillful builder wisely has inrangd,
An eatry from each port with curious twines,
And crookt Meanders, like the laborinth,
That Dedalus framed to enclose the Minotaure;
At end whereof is placed a costly portall:
Resembling much the figure of a drum,
Granting slow entrance to a private closet:
Where daily with a mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Upon an Anuile and so make them fit:
For the pere: vinckling poor; that winding leads,
From my close chamber to your Lordships cell.
Thither do I chief Justice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosmes front:
Learnings rich treas^re, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foraigne states,
Loud fame of great Heroes virtuous deeds:
The marrowe of grave speeches and the flowers:
Of quickest Wits, neat Jests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heavy burden,
Of government, your Lordships shoulder bear,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptials:
Of sweetest iustruments with heavenly noise.
If then A^ditus, have deserved the best:
Let him be dignified before the rest.

COM. SEN. Auditus I am almost a Skepticke in this matter, scarce knowing which
way the balance of the cause will decline, when I have heard the rest, I will
dispatch judgment, mean while you may depart.


Auditus leads his show about the stage, and then goes out. ACTVS. 4. SCENA. 3.
COMMVNIS SENSVS, Memoria, Phantastes, Anamnestes, Heuresis as before, Olfactus
in a garland of several flowers, a page before him, bearing his target, his
field vert, a ^ound argent, two Boys with casting bottells, and two with
censors with incense, another with a velvet cushion stuck with slowers, an
other with a basket of herbs, an other with a box of Ointment, Olfactus leads
them about, and making obeisance presents them before the bench. I. BOY. Your
only way to make a good pomander, is this, take an ownce of the purest garden
mould, cleansed and steeped seven days in change of motherlesse rose water,
then take the best Labdanum, Benioine, both Storaxes, amber greece, and Ciuet,
and mus ke, incorporate them together, and work them into what form you
please, this if your breath be not to valiant, will make you smell as sweet
as my Ladies dog.


PHA. This Boy it should seem represents Odor, he is so perfect a persumer.


ODOR. I do my Lord, and have at my command,
The smell of flowers, and Odoriferous drugs,
Of ointments sweet, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart would wish as I suppose:
That all your Body were transsformed to Nose.

PHA. Olfactus of all the Senses, your objects have the worst luck, they are
always iarring with their contraries, for none can wear Ciuet, but they are
suspected of a proper badde sent, where the proverb springs, he smells
best, that does of nothing smell.


ACT. 4. SCENA 4.
The bench and Olfactus as before, Tobacco apparelled in a taffata mantle, his
arms brown and naked, buskins made of the pilling of Osiers, his neck bare,
hung with Indian leanes, his face brown painted with blewe stripes, in his
nose swines teeth, on his head a painted wicker crown, with Tobacco pipes set
in it, ^lumes of Tobacco leaves, lead by two Indian boys naked, with tapers in
their hands, Tobacco boxes and pipes lighted. PHA. Foh, foh, what a smell is
hear? is this one of your delightful objects?


OLF. It is your only sent in request Sir.


COM. SEN. What fiery fellow is that, which smoakes so much in the mouth?


OLF. It is the great and puissant God of Tobacco.


TOB. L^doch guevarroh pufuer shelvaro baggon, Oisia di quanon, Indi cortilo
vraggon.


PHA. Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.


MEM, No I remember it very well, it was the language the
Arcadians spoke, that siued long before the Moon.

COM. SEN. What signifies it Olfactus?

OLF. This is the mighty Emperor Toba^co, King of Trinidado, that in being
conquered, conquered all Europe, in making them pay tribute for their smoke.


TOB. Erfronge inglues conde hisingo,
Deuelin sloscoth ma pu cocthinge.

OLF. Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all agues, your guts only salve for
the green wounds of a non plus.


TOB. Alvulcam vercu, I parda poraside gratam, kafamala mara, che Bau^o
respartera, quirara?


OLF. Son to the God Vulcan, and Tellus, kin to the father of Mirth, called
Bacchiu?


TOB. Viscardonok, pillostuphe, pascano ^inaromagas,
Pagidagon stollisinfe, carociba^o scribas.

OLF. Genius of all Swaggerers, professed enemy to Physicians, sweet ointment
for sour teeth, firm knot of good fellowship, Adamant of Company, switt
wind, to spread the wings of Time, hated of none, but those that know him not,
and of so great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him, can hardly forsake
him.


PHA. It seems these last words were very significant, I promise you a God of
great denominatio^, he may be my Lord Tappes for his large Ti^les.


COM. SEN. But forward Olfactus, as they have done before you, with your
description?


OLF. lust in the midst of Cephalons round face
As 'twere a fron^is-spice unto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The roots whereof most richly are enclosed,
With Orient Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emerauds and Turchois,
And Rubies red, and flaming Crisolits,
At upper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head between two spungeous pillowes,
Like fair Adonis twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the air inspired.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And sit to serve the lungs with lively breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Unto the neighbor brain, perfumes of force
To cleanse your head, and make your fanta^ie
To refine wit, and sharp invention
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old devotion, ^ncence did ordain
To make man's spirits more apt for things divine,
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In leiw whereof your Lordships I request,
Give me the crown if I deserve it best.

Olfactus leads his company about the Stage, and goes out. ACTVS. 4. SCENA. 5.
The Bench as before: a Page with a shield argent, an Ape proper with an apple,
then Gustus with a cor^^-copia in his hand, Bacchus in a Garland of leaves and
Grapes, a white suit, and over it a thin sarsenet to his foot, in his hand a
spear wreathed with vine leaves, on his arm a Target with a Tiger, Ceres with
a Crown of ears of corn, in a yellow silk robe, a bunch of poppy in her
hand, a schutcheon charged with a Dragon. COM. SEN. In good time Gustus, have
you brought your objects?


GVST. My servant Appetitus follows with them.


AP. Come come Bacchus, you are so fat; enter enter.


PH. Fie, fie Gustus this is a great indecorum to bring Bacchus alone, you
should have made Thirst ^ed him by the hand.


GVS. Right Sir, but Men now a days drink often when they be not dry,
besides I could not get red hearings and dried neates tongues enough to
apparel him in.


COM. SEN. What never a speech of him.


GVS. I put an Octaue of lambicks in his mouth, and he has drunk it down.


AP. Well done, M^scadine and Eggs stand hot; what buttered Claret? go thy way
thou had best, for blind man that cannot see how wickedly thou look ^ how
now, what small thin fellow, are you here? ha?


BOY. Beer forsooth, beer forsooth.


AP. Beer forsooth? get you gone to the buttery, till I call for you, you are
none of Bacchus attendants, I am sure, he cannot indare the smell of Malt.
Whereas Ceres? o well, well, is the March-pa^e broken? ill luck, ill luck, come
hanged, never stand to set it together again; serve out fruit there; ( Enter
Boys with a Ba^ket, M^rmolet, sweet etc. deliver it round among the
Gentlewomen, and go out) what do you come with rostemeat after Aples, away
with it. Disgestion serve out cheese; what, but a pennyworth, it is just the
measure of his nose that sold it? lambs wool; the meekest meat in the world,
it will let any man fleece it. Snap-dragon there.


MEM. O I remember this dish well, it was first invented by Pluto to intertaine
Proserpina with all.


PHA. I think not so Memory, for when Hercules had killed the flaming Dragon of
Hesperdia, with the Apples of that Orchard, he made this siery meat, in memory
whereof he named it Snap-dragon.


COM. SEN. Gust^s, lets here your description?

GVS. Near to the lowly base of Cehalon,
My house is placed, not much unlike a Cave.
Yet archt above by wondrous workmanship
With hewn stones wroght smoother and more fine
Then Ieat or Marble fair from Island brought.
Over the door directly does incline
A fair Percullis of compacture strong,
To shut out all that may anoy the state,
Or health of Microcosme; and within
Is spread along board like a plyant tongue,
At which I howerly sit, and trial take,
Of meats and drinks needful and delectable:
Twice every day do I provision m^ke
For the sumptious kitchen of the common wealth,
which once well boiled, is soon distributed,
To all the members, well refreshing them
With good supply of strength-renewing food,
Should I neglect this musing diligence
The body of the Realm would ruinate:
Your self my Lord with all your policies
And wondi^ous wit, could not preserve your self,
Nor you Phantastes, not you Memory;
Psyche her self, were it not that I repair
Her crazie house with props of nourishment,
Would soon forsake us: for whose dearest sake
Many a grievous pain have I sustained,
By bitter pills, and sour purgations,
Which if I had not valiantly abidden,
She had been long ere this departed,
Since the whole Microcosme I maintain,
Let me as Prince, above the Senses ra^gne.

COM. SEN. The reasons you urge Gustus breed a new doubt whether it be better
to be commodious or necessary, the resolution whereof I refer to your
judgment, licensing you mean while to depart. ( Gustus leads his show about
the stage, and goes out)


ACTVS 4. SCENA. 6.
The bench as before; TACTVS, a Page before him bearing his Scutcheon, a
Tortesse sables. TAC. Ready anon forsooth? the Devil she will,
Who would be toiled with wenches in a show.

COM. S. What in such anger Tactus? what is the matter?

TAC. My Lord I had thought as other Senses did,
By sight of objects to have proved my worth;
Wherefore considering that of all the things,
That please me most, women are counted chief.
I had thought to have represented in my show,
The Queen of pleasure, Venus and her Son,
Leading a Gentleman enamored,
With his sweet touching of his Mistrisse lips,
And gentle griping of her tender hands,
And ^^uers pleasant relishes of touch,
Yet all contained in the bounds of chastity.

PHA. (...), of all I long to see your objects,
How comes it we have lost those pretty sports.

TAC. Thus it is, ^iue hours ago I set a douzen maids to attire a boy like a
nize Gentlewoman: but there is such doing with their looking-glasses, pinning,
vnpinning, setting, vnseting, formings and conformings painting blew veins,
and cheeks, such st^rre with Sticks and Combs, Cascanets, Dressings, Purles,
Falls, Squares, Buskes, Bodies, Scarffes, Neck laces, Carcanets, Rebatoes,
Borders, Tires, Fannes, Palizadoes, Puffes, Ruffes, Cuffes, Muffes, Pussles,
Fussles, Partsets, Frislets, Bandlets, F^^lets, Croslets, Pendulets, Amulets,
Annulets, Bracelets, and so many lets, that ye: she is scarce dressed to the
girdle: and now there is such calling for Fardingales, Kirtlets, Busk-points,
shootyes etc. that seven Pedlers shops, nay all Sturbridge Fair will scarce
furnish her: a Ship is sooner rigd by far, then a Gentlewoman made ready.


PHA. It Is strange, that women being so mutable,
Will never change in changing their apparel?

COM. SEN. Well let them pass; Tactus we are content,
^o know your dignity by relation.

TAC. The instrument of instruments, the hand,
Courtesies index, Chamberlane to Nature,
The bodies Soldier, and mouths Caterer,
Psyches great Secretary, the dumbes eloquence,
The blindmans Candle, and his forheads Buckler,
The minister of wrath, and friendships sign,
This is my instrument: nevertheless my power
Extends it self, far as our Q^eene commands,
Through all the parts and climes of Microcosme.
I am the root of life, spreading my virtue
By sinews that extend from head to foot,
To every living part.
For as a subtle Spider closely sitting,
In center of her web that spreddeth round:
If the least Fly but touch the smallest thread,
She feels it instantly; so does my self,
Casting my slender nerve and sundry netts,
Over ^uery particle of all the body,
By proper I kill perceive the difference,
Of several quallities, hot, cold, moist and dry;
Hard, soft, rough, smooth, clammy and slippery.
Sweet pleasure, and sharp pain profitable,
That makes us wounded seek for remedy:
By these means do I teach the Body fly,
From such bad things as may endanger it:
A wall of brasle can be no more defense,
Unto a town then I to Microcosme?
Tell me what sense is not beholding to me,
The nose is hot or cold, the cies do weep:
The ears do feel, the tast's a kind of touching,
That when I please, I can command them all,
And make them tremble when I threaten them:
I am the eldest, and biggest of all the rest,
The chiesest note, and first destinction,
Betwixt a living tree and living beast;
For though one hear, and see: and smell: and taste
If he wants touch, he is counted but a block?
Therefore my Lord grant me the royalty:
Of whom there is such great necessity.

COM. SEN. Tactus stand aside; you sir Anamnestes tell the
Senses we expect their appearance

ANA. At your Lordships pleasure^
Exit Anamnestes.
ACT. 4. SCEN. 7.
COM. SEN. PHA. MEM. HEV. ANA Voun the bench consulting among themselves: VIS.
T^CT. GVST. and OLF. ^uery one with his shield upon his arm? LINGVA and
MENDATIO with them. COM. SEN. Though you deserve no small punishment for these
vp-rores, yet at the request of these my asistants I remit it, and by the power
of Judgment our gracious souera^gne Psuche has given me. Thus I determine of
your controversies: hum? By your former objects, instruments and reasons, I
conceive the state of (...) to be divided into two parts, one of commodity,
the other of necessity, both which are either for our Queen or for our
country, but as the Soul is more excellent then the Body, so are the Senses
that proffit the Soul to be estimated before those that are needful for the
Body; visus and Auditus serve your selves, Master Register give me the crown;
because it is better to be well, then simply to be, therefore I judge the crown
by right to belong to your of the Commodities part and the robe to you of the
Necessities side; and since you Visus are the author of invention, and you
Auditus of increase and addition to the same, seeing it is more excellent to
invent, then to augment, I establish you Visus the better of the two, and
chief of all the rest, in token whereof, I bestow upon you this crown to
wear at your liberty.


VIS. I most humbly thank your Lordships.


COM. SEN. But least I should seem to neglect you Auditus, I hear choose you
to be the Lords intelligencer to Psuche^ her Majesty, and you Olfactus, we
bestow upon you the chief Preisthood of Microcosin^, perpetually to offer
ince^se in her majesty's temple. As for you Tactus upon your reasons aleaged, I
bestow upon you the roabs.


TACT. I accept it most gratefully at your just hands, and will wear it in the
dear remembrance of your good Lordship.


COM. SEN. And lastly, Gustus we elect you P^uche her only taster, and great
purueior for all her dominions, both by sea and land, in her realm of
Microco^^^.


GVS. We thank your Lordship, and rest well content with equal arbitrament.


COM. SEN. Now for you Lingua.


LIN. I beseech your honor let me speak, I will neither troble the company
nor offend your patience.


COM. SEN. I cannot stay so long; we have consulted about you, and find your
cause to stand upon these terms, and conditions. The number of the Senses in
this little world, is answerable to the first bodies in the great world: now
since there be but five in the Universe, the four elements and the pure
substance of the heavens, therefore the^e can be but five senses in our
Microc^sme, correspondent to those, as the sight to the heavens, hearing to the
air, touching to the earth, smelling to the ^^^e, tasting to the water, by
which ^^^e means only the understanding is able to apprehend the knowledge of
all Corporeal substances? wherefore we judge you to be no Sense simply,
only thus much we from hence forth pronounce, that all women for your sake
shall have six (...), that is seeing, heating, tasting, smelling, touching, and
the last and feminine sense, the sense of speaking.


GVS. I beseech your Lordships and your asistants, (the only cause of our
friendship,) to grace my table with your most welcome presence this night at
supper.


COM. SEN. I am sorry I cannot stay with you, you know we may by no means omit
our daiely attendance at the Court, therefore I pray you pardon us.


GVS. I hope I shall not have the denial at your hands my Masters, and you my
Lady Lingua, come let us drown all our anger in a bowl of hippocras.

Ex^^^t (...) ^mnes exteriores.
COM. SEN. Come Master Registe^ shall we walk?


MEM. I pray you stay a little? let me see? ha, ha, ha, ha ha,


PHA. How now Memory so merry? what do you trouble your self with two palsies
at once? shaking, and laughing.


MEM. It Is a strange thing that men will so confidently oppose themselves
against Plato^^ great year.


PHA. Why not.


MEM. It Is as true an opinion as need be; for I remember it very readily now,
that this time 49000. years ago all we wear in this very place and your
Lordship judged the very same controversy, after the very same manner, in
all respects, and cercumstances alike.


COM. It Is wondrous strange.


ANA. By the same token you held your Staff in your right hand, just as you do
now, and Mr. Phantastes stood wondering at you, gaping as wide as you see him.


PH. I but I did not give you a box on the ^are sirrah 49000. years ago, did
I? (snappe)


ANA. I do not remember that Sir.


PHA. This time Platoes twesue month to come, look you save your cheeks
better.


COM. SEN. But what intertainment had we at Court for our long staying?


MEM. Lets go, I Will tell you as we walk.


PHA. If I do not seem pranker now, then I did in those days, I Will be hanged?


Exeunt omnes interiores Sensus, manet Lingua. ACTVS 4. SCENA. 8.
LINGVA. MENDATIO. LING. Why this is good by common Senses means,
Lingua thou have framed a perfect comoedy
They are all good friends, whom thou made enemies,
And I am half a Sense: a sweet piece of service,
I promise you a fair step to preferment.
Was this the care and labor thou have taken,
To bring thy foes together to a banquet,
To loose thy Crown, and be deluded thus,
Well now I see my cause is desperate,
The judgments past, sentence irreuocable,
Therefore I Will be content and clap my hands,
And give a Plaudite to their proceedings:
What shall I leave my hate begun imperfect?
So fowly vanquished by the spiteful Senses?
Shall I the Embassadresse of Gods and Men
That pulled proud Phoebe from her brightsome sphere
And darkt Apollo's countenance with a word
Raising at pleasure storms, and winds, and earthquakes
Be ouercrowed? and breath without revenge?
Yet they forsooth base slaves must be preferred,
And deck themselves with my ^ight ornaments:
Does the all-knowing (...) see this shame
Without redress? will not Hea^ens help me?
Then shall Hell do it, my enchanting tongue
Can mount the skies, and in a moment fall,
From the Pole Artick to dark Acheton.
I Will make them know mine anger is not spent,
L^ngua has power to hurt, and will to do it.
Mend^^io, come hither quickly sir.

MEN. Madame.

LING. Hark hither in thine ^are.

MEN. Why do you whish thus? here is none to hear you.

LING. I dare not trust these secrets to the Earth, ^re since she brought forth
Reeds, whose babbling noise told all the world of Midas Asses ea^es, ( She
whispers him in the ear^) Do understand me?


MEN. I, I, I -- never fear that -- there is a jest indeed -- pish, pish, --
Madam -- do you think me so foolish? -- tut, tut, doubt not.


LIN. Tell her if she do not.


MEN. Why do you make any question of it -- what a stir is here -- I warrant
you -- presently?

Exit Mendats^?
LING. Well, I Will to supper, and so closely cover,
The rustie cancker of mine Y^on spite,
With golden foil of goodly semblances,
But if I do not t^ounce them --
Exit Lingua.
Finis Act. 4.
Actus. 5. Scena 1.
MENDATIO with a bottle in his hand. MEN My Lady (...) is just like one of
these ^eane-witted Comedians, who disturbing all to the fist Act, (...) cowne
some Mercuri^ or (...) in an Eng^^e to mak^ (...). So she, but in a contrary
man^er, seeing her (...) plots dispur^osed, sends me to an old Witch called
(...) to w^eake (...) spite upon the Senses: the old ^ag after many an
incricled circumstance, and often naminge of the direful Hecate, and
Demogorgon, gives me this bottle of wine mingled with such hellish drugges and
forcible words, that whosoever drinks of it shall be presentile possessed with
an enraged and mad kind of anger.


ACT. 5. SCENA. 2.
MENDACIO, CRAPVLA, APPETITVS crying. MEND. What Is this Crapula beating
Appetitus out of doors? ha!


CRAP. You filthy long Crane, you meager slave, will you kill our guests with
blowing continual hunger in them? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe) the Senses have
ouercharged their stomachs already, and you Sir serve them up a fresh
appetite with every new dish, they had burst their gutts if thou hadd'st
stayed but a thought longer? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe,) be gone or i will set
thee away, begone ye gnawe-bone, raw-bone, rascal.


MEND. Then my devise is clean spoiled. Appctitus should have been as the
bowl to present this medecin to the Senses, and now Crapula has beaten him
out of doors? what shall I do?


CRAP. Away Sir, (tiff toff, tiff. etc.


APP. Well Crapula, well, I have deserved better at your hands then so, I was
the man you know first brought you into Gustus his service, I lined your gutts
there, and you use me thus? but grease a fat sow. etc.


CRAP. Do thou talk (tiff, toff) hence, hence tiff, tiff, hence auaunt
curre, auaunt you dog!

Exit Crapula.
APP. The belching gor-bellie has wellnigh killed me; I am shut out of doors
finely, well this is my comfort, I may walk now in liberty at my own
pleasure.


MEND. Appetitus, Appetitus^


APP. Ah Mendaci^, Mendaci^,


MEND. Why how now man, how now? how is it (can not speak.


APP. Faith I am like a bag-pipe, that never sound's but when the belly is
full.


MEND. Thou empty, and come from a feast.


APP. From a sray I tell thee Mendaci^. I am now just like the Ewe that gave
suck to a wolfes whelpe. I have must up my fellow Crapula so long, that
he is grown strong enough to beat me.


MEND. And whither will thou go, now thou at banished out of service?


APP. Faith I Will travel to some College or other in an University.


MEND. Why so?


APP. Because Appetit^^^^ is well beloved among'st Scholars, for there I can
dine and suppe with them and rise again as good friends as we sat down, I Will
thither questionles.


MEND. Hear'st thou? give me thy hand; by this hand I love thee; go too then,
thou shall not forsake thy mai^^ers thus, I say thou shall not.


APP. Alas I am very loath; but how should I help it?


MEND. Why take this bottle of wine, come on, go thy ways to them again.


APP. Ha, ha, ha, what good will this do^?


MEND. This is the N^p^nth^ that reconciles the God's: do^ but let the Senses
taste of it, and sear not, the^e love thee as well as ever they did.


APP. I pray thee where had it?


MEND. My Lady gave it me to bring her: (...) stale it from H^^^ for her: thou
know there were some ia^res betwixt her and thy masters, and with this
drink she would gladly wash out all the relics of their disagreement: Now
because I low thee, thou shall have the grace of presenting it to them and so
come in favor again.


APP. It smel^es well I would saine begin to them;


MEND. Nay stay no longer least they heue supp't before thou come.


APP. M^ndacio, how shall I requite thy infinite (...).


MEN. Nay pray thee leave, go catch occasion by the ^^^etop, but hearst thou?
as soon as it is presented, round my Lady Lingua in the ear, and tell her of
it.


APP. I will, I will, I will, Adue, adue, adue,

Exit Appeti.
ACTVS. 5. SCENA. 3.
MENDACIO solus. MEN. Why this is better then I could have wished it,
Fortune I think is fallen in love with me,
Answering so right mine expectation.
By this time Appetite is at the Table.
And with a lowly Cringe presents the Wine,
To his old Master Gustus, now he takes it,
And drinks perchance to Lingua, she craftily
Kisles the Cup, but lets not down a drop,
And gives it to the rest; it is sweet, they will swallow it,
But when it is once descended to the stomach,
And sends up noisome vapors to the brain,
Twill make them swagger gallantly, the^^e rage
Most strangely, or (...) Art deceiues her,
When if my Lady stir her nimble tongue,
And closely sow contentious words amongst them,
O what a stabbing there will be? what bleeding?

ACTVS. 5. SCENA. 4.
LINGVA. MENDACIO. LING What art thou there M^ndacio? pretty rascal,
Come let me kiss thee for thy good deserts.

MEN. Madame do take? have they all tasted it?

LING. All, all, and all are well nigh mad already:
Oh how they stare, and swear, and fume, and brawle,
W^ath gives them weapons; Pots and Candle-sticks,
Ioin'd stools and Trenchers fly about the room,
Like to the bloody banquet of the C^utaure^,
But all the sport is to see what several thoughts
The potions works in their Imaginations.
For Visus thinks himself; a ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

ACTVS 5. SCENA. 5.
APPETITVS, MENDATIO, LINGVA. AP. So-hoe Mendatio! so-hoe, so-hoe!


MEN. Madame I doubt they come, yonder is Appetitus, you had best begone, least
in their outrage they should iniure you. (Exit Lingua) How now Hunger? how
do thou my fine may pole, ha?


AP. I may well be called a may pole: for the Senses do nothing but dance a
morice about me.


MEN. Why? what ails them? are they not (as I promised thee) friends with thee.


AP. Friends with me? nay rather frenzy: I never knew them in such a case, in
all my life.


MEN. Sure they drank too much, and are mad for love of thee.


AP. They want common Sense among'st them: there is such a hurly burly Auditus
is stark deaf, and wonders why Men speak so so^tly that he cannot here them:
Visiu has drunk himsel^e ^^a^ke blind, and therefore imagines himsel^e to
be Polyphemu^: Tactus is raging mad, and cannot be otherwise persuaded, but
he is Hercules furens; there is such conceits amongst them.


ACT. 5. SCENA. 6.
VISVS, APPETITVS. MENDATIO. VIS. O that I could but find the villain Outis,
Outis the v^llaine, that thus blinded me.

MEN. Who is this? Visus?

AP. I, I, I, otherwise called Polyphemus.

VIS: By heavens bright Sun, the days most glorious eye,
That lightneth all the world but Polypheme,
And by mine eye that once was answerable
Unto that Sun, but now is extinguished.

MEN. He can see to swear me thinks?

VIS. I^ I but once lay hands upon the slave,
That thus has robbed me of my dearest tewell,
I Will rend the Milcreant into a thousand pieces.
And gnash his trembling members 'twixt my teeth,
Drinking his liue-warme blood to satissie,
The boiling thirst of pain and surio^snesse,
That thus exasperates great Pol^pheme.

MEN. 'Pray thee Appetitus see how he graspes for that he would be loath to
^inde.


AP. What Is that? a stumbling block?

VIS, T^ese hands, that wh^lom tote up sturdy Oaks,
And rent the rock that dashed out Acis brains,
Both in the stole-blisse of my Galate^,
Serve now (o misery) to no better use,
But for bad guides to my unskillful feet.
Never accustomed thus to be directed.

MEN. As I am a rogue, he wants nothing but a wheel, to make him the true
picture of Fortune; how say? what shall we play at blind-man-buffe with him?


AP. I if thou will, but first i will try whether he can see!

VIS. Find me out Outis, search the rocks, and woods,
The hil^es and dales, and all the Coast's adjoining.
That I may have him, and revenge my wrong,

AP. Visus me thinks your eyes are well enough.

VIS. What Is he that calls me Visus? do not know.

(They run about him, playing with him, and abusing him.) AP. To him Mendatio,
to him, to h^n.

MEN. There, there Appetitus, he comes, he comes; ware wa^e, he comes, ha, ha,
ha, ha,


( Visus stambles falls down, and sits still, ACT. 5. SCENE. 7.
MENDATIO. APPETITVS, TACTVS with a great black lack in his hand. MEN: Is this
he that thinks himself Hercules?

AP. I, willt see me out-swagger him?

MEN. I do, do, I love not to sport with such mad play-fellowes; tickle him
Appetitus, tickle him, tickle him.

Exit Mendatio
TAC. Have I not here the great and puissant Club,
Where with I conquered three Chopped Cerberus.

APP. Have I not here the sharp, and warlike teeth,
That at one breakfast quaild thrice three hogg's faces?

TAC. And are not these Alcides brawny arms,
That rent the Lions jaws and killed the boar?

AP. And is not this the Stomach that defeated
Nine yards of pudding, and a rank of pyes?

TAC. Did nor I crop the seauen-fold Hydras crest,
And with a river cleansed Augeas stable?

AP. Did not I crush a seuen-fold Custards crust,
And with my tongue, swept a well furnished table?

TAC. Did not these feet and hands oretake and slay,
The nimble Stagge, and fierce impetuous bull?

AP. Did not this throat at one good meal devour,
That Stagges sweet venison, and that strong Bulls beef?

TAC. shall Hercules be thus difparaged?
I^no! you pouting. Queen, you low^ng trull?
Take heed I take you not; for by Jove's thunder
I le be revenged

( Appetitus draws Visus backward from Tac^us. AP. Why Visus, Visus. will you
be killed? away, away.

Exit Visus. TAC. Who have we here, see, see the Giant Cacus,
Draws an Ox backward to his theeuish den,
Has this devise so long deluded me?
Monster of men Cacus restore my cattle,
Or instantly I Will crush thy idle Cox-combe.
And dash thy doltish brains against thy Cave.

AP. Cacus, I Cacus? ha, ha, ha. Tactus you mistake me.
I am yours to command. App^titus.

TAC. Art Appetitus? Thou Art so; run quickly villain.
Fetch a whole Ox to satissie my stomach.

AP. Fetch an All to keep you company.

TAC. Then down to Hell, tell Pluto Prince of Devils,
That great Al^^des want's a kitchen wench.
To turn his spit, command him from my self!
To send up Proserpine shee'^ serve the turn.

AP. I must find you meat and the Devil find you cooks
Which is the next way?

TAC. Follow the beaten path thou can not miss it
It Is a wide Causie that conducteth thither,
An easy tract and down hill all the way,
But ^f the black Prince will not send her quickly,
But still detain her for his bedfellow,
Tell him I Will drag him from his iron chair,
By the steel tres^es, and then sow him fast,
With the three furies in a letherne bag.
And thus will drown them in the Ocean.

(he powers the Jack of beer upon Appetitus) AP. You had better keep him
alive to light Tobacco-pipes* or to sweep chimneys.


TAC. Act thou not gone, nay then i will send thy soul,
Before thee, 'twill do thy message sooner (tiffe, tiffe.)

AP. Hercules, Hercules, Hercules? do not you hear Omphal^^
Hark how she calls you, hark?

TAC. It Is she indeed I know her sug^ed voice?
Omphale dear Command resse of my life
My thoughts repose, sweet Center of my cares
Where all my hopes, and best desires take rest.
Lo! where the mighty Son of Jupiter
Throws himself Capture at your conquering feet
Do not disdain my voluntary humbleness.
Accept my service, bless me with commanding,
I will perform the hardest imposition
And run through twelve new labors for thy sake,
Omphale dear* ommandresse of my life.

APP. Do you not see how she beckons to you to follow her?
Look how she (...) her distaffe, look you?

TAC. Where is she gone, that I may follow her?
Omphal^ stay, stay, take thy Hercules!

APP. There there man, you are right.

Exit Tactus. ACT. 5. SCENE. 8.
APPETITVS Solut. APP. What a strange temper are the Senses in?
How come their wits thus topsie turme turned?
Hercules Tactus, Visus Polypheme,
Two goodly surnames have they purchased:
By the rare Ambrosian of an Oyste ^ie;
They have got such proud imaginatious,
That I could wish I were mad for company:
But since my fortunes cannot stretch so high,
I Will rest contented with this wise estate.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 9.
APPETITVS. AVDITVS with a Candlestick. APP. What more anger? Auditus got
abroad too.

AVD. Take this abuse at base Olfactus hands?
What did he challenge me to meet me here,
And is not come? well I Will proclaim the slave,
The vilest dastard that ere broke his word;
But stay yonder is Appetitus.

APP. I pray you Auditus, what ailes you?

AVD. Ha, ha!

APP. What ailes you?

AVD. Ha! what say thou?

APP. Who has abused you thus?

AVD. Why do thou whisper thus? Can not speak out?

APP. Sa^e me I had clean forgotten; why are you so angry Auditus^


AV. Bite us, who dare bite us?

AP. I talk of no bitting, I say what is the matter between Olfactus and you?


AV. Will Olsactus bite me? do if he dares, would he would meet me here
according to his promise: Mine ears are somewhat thick of late, I pray thee
speak out louder.


AP. Ha ha ha ha this is sine in faith: ha, ha, ha. Hear you, have you lost
your ears at supper.


AV. Excellent cheer at supper I confess it:
But when it is sawc'd with sour contentions,
And breeds such quarrels it is intolerable,

AP. Pish, pish this is my question. Has your supper spoild your hearing?


AV. Hearing at supper, tell not me of hearing:
But if thou saw Olfactus, bring me to him.

AP, I ask you whether you have lost your hearing?

AV. O do thou hear them ring? what a grief is this
Thus to be deaf, and loose such harmony?
Wretched Auditus now shall thou never here
The pleasing changes that a well tuned Cord,
Of trowling bells, will make, when they are true rung.

AP. Here Is a do indeed, I think he is mad, as well as drunk or deaf.


AVD. Ha. What Is that.

AP. I say you have made me hoarse with speaking so loud.

AVD. Ha, what say thou of a creaking Crou'd?

AP. I am hoarce I tell you, and my head aches.

AV. Oh I understand thee! the first crowd was made of a horse-head
It Is true, the sinding of a dead horse-head,
Was the first invention of string instruments,
Whence rose the Gitterme, Vial, and the Lute:
Though others think the Lute was first devised,
In imitation of a Tortesse back
Whose sinews parched by Apollo's beams,
Ecchoed about the concaue of the shell,
And seeing the shortest and smallest gave shrillest sound,
They found out frets whole sweet diversity
(Well couched by the skill-full learned fingers)
Raises so strange a multitude of Cords,
Which their opinion many do con^irme,
Because Testudo signifyes a Lute.
But if I by no means. --

AP. Nay if you begin to critic once, we shall never have done.


(Exit Appctitus and carries away Auditus perforce ACT. 5. SCEN. 10.
CRAPVLA a fat bellied slave, clothed in a light veil of Sarsnet, a Garland of
vi^c-l^aues on his head. etc. SOMNVS in a mantle of black Cobwe^-laune, down
to the foot over a auskie colored taffata Coat, and a Crown of poppy tops
on his head, a company of dark colored silk scarfs in one hand, a Mace of
Poppey in the other, leaning his head upon a pillow on Crapula's shoulders.
CRA. Somnus, good Somnus, sweet Somnus, come a pace!

SOME. Hei-oh, oh, are you sure they be so? oho, ho, oho, hei, waw?

What good can I do? ou, hoh, hawe.

CRA. Why I tell you unless you help
(Somnus falls down and sleeps) Soft son of night, right heir to Quietness,
Labors repose, life's best restoratiue,
Digestions careful Nurse, bloods Comforter,
Wi^s help, thoughts charm, the stay of Microcosme,
Sweet Somnus cheifest enemy to Care:
My dearest friend, liftvp thy lumpish head,
Open thy dull eyes, shake of this drowsines,
Rowse up thy self.

SOMNVS. O Crapula, how now, how now, oh oh how whose there?

Crapula speak quickly what is the matter?

CRA. As I told you, the noble Senses peers of Microcosme;
Will eft soon fall to ruin perpetual,
Unless your ready helping hand recure them:
Lately they banqueted at Gustus table.
And there fell mad, or drunk, I know not whether,
So that it is doubtful in these outrageous fits,
That the^e murder one another.

SOME. Fear it not if they have escaped already,
Bring me to them, or them to me,
I^e quickly make them know the power,
Of my la^ge stretched authority,
These co^^es of sleep wherewith I wont to bind,
The strongest arms that ere resisted me,
Shall be the means, whereby I will correct
The Senses outrage, and distemperature.

CRA. Thanks gentle Somnus, I Will go seek them out,
And bring then to you soon as possible.

SOME. Dispatch it quickly, least I fall a sleep for want of work.

CRA. Stand still, stand still? Visus I think comes yonder.
If you think good, begin and bind him first:
For he made fast, the rest will soon be quiet.
Exit Crapula.
ACT. 5. SCEN. 11.
VISVS. SOMNVS. VIS. Sage Telemus, I now too late admire,
Thy deep foresight and skill in Prophecy,
Who whilome toldst me, that in time to come
Ulysses should deprive me of my sight.
And now the slave that marched in Outis name,
Is proved V^sses, and by this device,
Has escaped my hands, and fled away by Sea,
Leaving me desolate in eternal night.
Ah wretched Polypheme, where is all thy hope,
And longing for thy beauteous Galatea?
She scornd thee once, but now she will detest,
And loath to look upon thy darkened face:
Aye me most miserable Polphemus.
But as for (...), heaven and earth
Send vengeance ever on thy damned head.
In just re^enge of my great injury.
Somnus binds him. Who is he that dares to touch me? Cyclops come?
Come all ye Cyclop's help to rescue me.
Somnus charms him, he sl^^^es.
SOME. There rest thy self and let thy quiet sleep,
Restore thy weak immaginations.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 12.
LINGVA, SOMNVS, VISVS. LIN. Ha, ha, ha: oh how my spleen is tickled with this
sport.
The madding Senses make about the woods,
It cheeres my soul and makes my body fat:
To laugh at their mischances, ha, ha* ha, ha,
Heigh ho, the stitch has caught me, oh my heart!
Would I had one to hold my sides a while,
That I might laugh a fresh: oh how they run,
And chafe, and swear, and threaten one another,
(Somnus bind's her. Ay me, out alas, ay me help, help, who is this that bind's
me?
Help Mendatio, Mendatio help, here is one will ravish me.

SOME. Lingua content your self you must be bound.

LING. What a spight's this? are my nails pared so near? Can I not scratch
his eyes out? What have I done? what? do you mean to kill me? murder, murder,
murder,


(she falls a sleep) ACT. 5. SCEN. 13.
GVSTVS with a voiding knife in his hand, SOMNVS, LINGVA, VISVS. GVST. Who
cries out murder! What a woman slain?
My Lady ^ing^a dead? oh Heavens iniust
Can you behold this fact, this bloody fact!
And shower not fire upon the murderer?
Ah peerless Lingua mistress of heavenly words,
Sweet tongue of eloquence, the life of fame,
Heart's dea^e enchauntresse* what disaster fates
Have reft this Jewel from our commonwealth.
Gustus the rubie that adornes thy ringe,
Lo here defect, how shall thou lead thy days,
Wanting the sweet Companion of thy life.
But in dark sorrow and dull melancholy,
But ^taie? whose this? inhumane wretch:
Blou^-^hi^stie miscreant, is this thy handie work?
To kill a woman, a harmless Lady?
Villain prepare thy self draw, or i will sheath my faucheon in thy sides.
There take the guerdon fit sor murderers.

Gustus offers to run at Somnus but being sudd^nly charmed falls a sleep.
SOME. Here Is such a stir I never knew the Senses in such disorder.


LING. Ha, ha, ha; M^nd^cio, Mendicio? See how Visus has broke his forehead
against the oak yonder, ha, ha, ha, ha.


SOME. How now? Is not Lingu^ bound sufficiently? I have more trouble to make
one wom in sleep, then all the world besides they be so full of tattle.


ACT. 5. SCEN. 14.
SOMNVS, CRAPVLA, (LINGVA, VISVS, GVSTVS,) A VDITVS, (...) OLFACTVS by the
nose, and OLFACTVS wringing AVDITVS by the ears. AVD. Oh mine ears, mine
ears, mine ears.

OLF. Oh my nose, my nose, my nose,

CRAP. Leave, leave at length these base contentions, Olfactus let him go?


OLF. Let him first loose my nose?

CRAP. Good ^u litus give over?

AVD. IIe have his life that sought to kill me.

SOME. Come, come I Will end this quarrel, bind him Crapula!

They bind them both. ACT. 5. SCEN. 15.
TACTVS, with the robe in his hand, SOMNVS, CRAPVLA, LINGVA, GVSTVS, OLFACTVS,
VISVS, AVDITVS. TAC. Thanks Dei^neira for thy kind remembrance,
It Is a fair shirt I Will wear it for thy sake.

CRAP. Somnus here is (...) worse then all his sellowes
Stay but a while and you shall see him rage!

SOME. What will he do? see that he scapes us not!

TACT. It Is a good shirt, it fitt's me passing well,
It Is very warm indeed, but what is the matter.
Me thinks I am somewhat hotter then I was,
My heart beats faster then it was wont to do
My brains enflamed, my temples ache extremely, oh, oh,
Oh what a wildfire creepes among my bowels:
A^tna's with in my breast, my marrowe f^ies,
And ^unes about my bones, oh my sides:
My sides, my raines, my head my raines, my head;
My heart, my heart, my liver, my liver, oh,
I burn, I burn, I burn oh how I burn:
With scorching heat of implacable fire,
I burn extreme with flames insufferable,

SOME. Sure he does but try how to act Her^ules:

TACT. Is it this shirt that boiles me thus? oh heavens,
It fires me worse, and heates more furiously
Then loves dire thunderbolts; oh miserable,
They bide less pain that bathe in Phlegeton;
Could not the triple kingdom of the world,
Heaven, earth and hell destroy great Hercul^?
Could not the damned sprights of hateful Inno?
Nor the great dangers of my labors kill me?
Am I the mighty son of inp^^er?
And shall this poisned linen thus consume me?
Shall I be burnt? villains s^ie up to heaven,
Bid (...) m^ster up a troop of clouds,
And shower down cata^acts of rain to cool me?
Or elce I Will break her speckled bo^e in pieces?
Will ^^e not? no she hates me like her mistress;
Why then descend you roagues to the vile deep,
F^^ch. (...) hither charge him bring the sea,
To quenc^ these flames, or else the worlds fair frame:
Will Be in greater danger to be burnt,
Then when proud Phaeton ruld the Suns rich Chariot.

SOME I Will take that care the world shall not be burnt:
If Somnus cords can hold you.

Somnus binds hi^. TACT. What Vulcan's this that offers to inchaine,
A greater soldier then the God of Mars.

SOME. He that each night with bloudlesse battle conquers,
The proudest conqueror that triumphs by wars:

CRA. Now Somnus there is but only one remaining,
That was the author of these outrages.

SOME. Who Is that? is he under my Command?

CRA. Yes, yes, yes, it is Appetitus; if you go that way, and look about those
thickets, i will go hither, and search this grove, I doubt not but to find him?


SOME. Content.

Exeunt Somnus, et Crapula. ACT. 5. SCEN. 16.
APPETITVS, IRRASCIBILIS, with a willowe in his hand pulled up by the roots.
SOMNVS, CRAPVLA. The Senses all a sleep. APP. So now is the time that I would
gladly meet,
These madding Senses that abused me thus;
What? haunt me like an owl? make an Ass of me?
No they shall know, ^I scorn to serve such masters,
As cannot master their affections,
Their iniurie^ have changed my nature,
Now I ^le be no more called hungry parasite:
But he^ceforth answer to the wrathful name
Of angry Appetite, my choller's up:
(...) cool me quickly with thy fan,
Ore^ce I le cut thy cheeks, why this is brave:
Fa^^e better then to faune at Gustus table,
For a few scrappes, no, no, such words as these,
By Pluto stabbe the villain, kill the slave:
By the infernal hagges, I Will hough the rogue,
And paunch the rascal that abusd me thus,
Such words as these fit angry Appetite.

Enter CRAPVLA. CRA. Somnus, Somnus, come hither, come hither quickly, he is
here, he is here.


APP. I marry is he sir, what of that? base miscreant Cra^ pula.

CRA. O gentle Appetitus.

APP. You muddy gulche, dare look me in the face, while mine eyes sparkle,
with reuengfull fire? (tiff, toff, tiff, toff,)


CRA. Good Appetitus.

APP. Peace you fat bawson, peace, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff,)
See not this fatal engine of my wrath?
Villain I Will maule thee for thine old offenses,
And grind thy bones to powder with this pestle:
You when I had no weapons to defend me,
Could beat me out of doors; but now prepare,
Make thy self ready, for thou shall not escape.
Thus does the great reuengefull Appetite,
Upon his fat foe, wreake his wrathful spite.

APPETITVS heaueth up his club to brain CRAPVLA, but SOMNVS in the mean.
time, catches him behind and binds him? SOME. Why how now Crapula?

CRA. Am I not dead? is not my soul departed?

SOME. No, no, see where he lies, that would have ^iurt thee? fear nothing?

SOM^^S lays the Senses all in a circle, feel to feet, and wa^ts his wand
over them, So rest you all in silent quietness,
Let nothing wake you till the power of sleep,
With his sweet dew, cooling your brains inflamed,
Has rectified the vain and idle thoughts,
Bred by your surfeit, and distemperature:
Lo here the Senses late outrageous,
All in a round together sleep like friends,
For there is no difference twixt the King and Clown,
The poor and rich, the beauteous and deformed,
Wrapped in the veil of night, and bonds of sleep,
Without whose power, and sweet dominion,
Our life were Hell, and pleasure painfulnesse,
The sting of envy, and the dart of love,
A^arice talons, and the fire of hate:
Would poison, wound, distract, and soon consume,
The heart, the liver life and mind of man;
The (...) Mower, that with ^rawnie arms,
Wi^^deth the crooked sith, in many a swathe,
Cutting the flowrie pride on the velvet plain,
Lies down at night, and in the weaty folds
Of his wives arms, forgets his labor past,
The painful Mariner, and careful Smith,
The toyling Plowman, all Artificers,
Most humbly yceld to my dominion,
Without due rest, nothing is durable.
Lo thus does Somnus conquer all the world
With his most awful waud, and half the year
Reigns over the best and proudest Emperors.
Only the nurslings of the Sisters nine,
Rebels against me scorn my great command:
And when dark night from her bedewy wings,
Drops sleepie silence to the eyes of all,
They only wake, and with unwearied toil,
Labor to find the Via lac^ea,
That leads to the heaven of immortallitie,
And by the lofty to towering of their mind,
Fledgd with the feathers of a learned muse,
They raise themselves unto the highest pitch,
Marrying base earth and heaven in a thought;
But thus I punish their rebellion,
Their industry was never yet rewarded,
Better to sleep then wake, and toil for nothing.

Exeunt Somnus and Crapula. ACTVS. 5. SCENA. 17.
The ^iue Senses, LINGVA, APPETITVS, all a sleep, and dreaming, PHANTASTES,
HEVRESIS. AVD. So' ho Rocwood, so ho Rocwood, Rocwood, your Organ, hay Chanter,
Chanter, by (...) hed-tyre it is a very deep mouthed dog, a most admirable
cry of hounds, look here, again, again, there, there, ah wa^e counter.


VIS. Do you see the full Moon yonder, and not the man in it, why me thinks
it is too, too evident, I see his dog very plain, and look you, just under
his tail is a Thorn bush of Furs.


GVS. 'Twill make a fine tooth-pick: that Larkes heel there, o do not burn it.


PHA. Boy, Heuresis, what think thou I think, when I think nothing?


HEV. And it please you sir, I think you are devising how to answer a man that
asks you nothing.


PHA. Well gest boy, but yet thou mistookst it, for I was thinking of the
constancy of women, (Ap^titus snoares alowd. Beware sir, take heed, I doubt
me there is some wild Boar lodged here about? how now? me thinks these be the
Senses, ha? in my conceit the elder brother of death has kissed them.


TAC. Oh, oh, oh, I am stabd, I am stabbed, hold your hand, oh, oh, oh.


PHA. How now? do they talk in their sleep? are they not awake Heuresis?


HEV. No questionless, they be all fast a sleep.


GVST. Eat not too many of those Apples, they be very sl^tiue?


OLF. Foh, foh, beat out this Dog hear, foh, was it you Appetitus?


AVD. In faith it was most sweetly winded, whosoever it was, the warble is very
good, and the horn is excellent?


TAC. Put on man, put on, keep your head warm, it is cold.


PHA. Ha, ha, ha, ha, st, Heuresis, stir not sir.


App. Shut the door, the pot runs over, sir Cook that will be a sweet
Pastie, if you nibble the venison so?


GVST. Say you so, is a Marrow Pie the Helena of meats? give meet, if I play
not Paris hang me, Boy a clean Trencher?


APP. Serve up, serve up, this is a fat Rabbet, would I might have the
maidenhead of it, come give me the ^ish there, who has meddled with these
maids? ha?


OLE. Fie, shut your Snuffers doser for shame, it is the worst smell that can be.


TAC. O the crampe, the crampe, the crampe, my leg, my leg.


LING. I must abroad presently, reach me my best Necklace

presently.


PHA. Ah Lingua are you there?


AVD. Here take this Rope, and I Will help the leader close with the second Bell:
Fie, fie, there is a goodly peale clean spoilde.


VIS. I Will lay my life that Gentlewoman is painted: well. well I know it, mark
but her nose, do you not see the complexion crack out, I must confess it is a
good picture.


TAC. Ha, ha, ha, fie, I pray you leave, you tickle me so, oh, ah, ha, ha, take
away your hands I cannot endure, ah you tickle me, ah, ha, ha, ha, ah.


VIS. Hai, rett, rett, rett, now bird, now, -- look about that bush, she trust
her thereabout, -- here she is, ware wing Cater, ware wing, auaunt.


LING. Mum, mum, mum, mum.


PHA. st, sir take heed you wake her not.


HEV. I know sir she is fast a sleep, for her mouth is shut.


LING. This it is, to venture upon such uncertainties, to loose so rich a Crown
to no end, well, well.


PHA. Ha, ha, ha, we shall here auon, where she lost her maidenhead, st,
boy, my Lord Vicegerent, and Master Register are hard by, run quickly, tell
them of this accident, wish them come softly.

Exit Heuresis.
LING. Mendatio never talk farther, I doubt'tis past recovery, and my Robe
likewise, I shall never have them again, well, well.


PHA. How? her Crown, and her Roabe, never recover them? hum, wast not said to
be left by Memory? ha? I conjecture here is some knauery-fast locked with
sleep, in good faith. Was that Crown and Garment yours L^ngua?


LING. I marry were they, and that some body has felt, and shall feel more,
if I live.


PHA. O strange, she answers in her sleep to my question, but how come the
Senses to strive for it?


LING Why, I laid upon purpose in their way, that they might fall together by
the ears.


PHA. What a strange thing is this?


ACT. 5. SCENA. 18.
The Senses, APPETITVS and LINGVA a sleep. PHANTASTES. COMV. SENSVS. MEMORIA.
ANAMNESTES. PHA st, my Lord, softly, softly, here is the notablest piece of
treason discovered, how say you Lingu. set all the Senses at ods, she has
confessed it to me in her sleep.


COM SEN. Is It possible Master Register? did you ever know any talk in their
sleep?


MEM. I remember my Lord many have done so very often, but women are troubled,
especially with this talking disease, many of them have I heard answer in their
dreams, and tell what they did all day awake.


ANAM. By the same token, there was a wanton maid, that being asked by her
Mother, what such a one did with her so late one night in such a room, she
presently said, that --


MEM. Peace you vilde rake hell, is such a jest fit for this company, no more
I say sir.


PHA. My Lord will you believe your own ears, you shall hear her answer me,
as directly and truly as my be. Lingua, what did you with the Crown and
garments.


LING. I Will tell thee Mendac^^.


PHA. She thinks Mendacio speaks to her, mark now, mark how truly she
will answer: what say you Madame?


LING. I say Phantastes is a foolish transparent gull; a mere fanatic nupson
in my immagination not worthy to ^it as a Judges assistant.


COM. SEN. Ha, ha, ha, how truly and directly she answers.


PHA. Faw, faw, she dreams now she knows not what she says, I try her once
again: Madame? what remedy can you have for your great losses?


LING. O are you come Acrasia? welcome, welcome, boy reach a Cushion sit down
good (...)? I am so beholding to you, your potion wrought exceedingly, the
senses were so mad, did not you see how they raged about the woods?


COM. SEN. Hum, Acra^^^? is Acrasia her confederate? my life that witch has
wrought some villainy, -- Linguariseth in her sleep, and wa^keth. how is this?
is she a sleep? have you seen one walk thus before?


MEM. It is a very common thing, I have seen many sick of the Peripatetick
disease.


ANA. By the same token my Lord, I knew one that went abroad in his sleep,
bent his bow, shot at a Magpie, killed her, fetched his arrowe, came home, locked
the doors, and went to bed again.


COM. SEN. What should be the reason of it?


MEM. I remember (...) told me the reason once, as I think thus: The nerves
that carry the moving faculty, from the brains, to the thighs, legs,
feet, and arms, are wider far then the other nerves, wher^ore they are not
so easily stopped with the vapors of sleep, but are night and day ready to
perform what fancy shall command them.


COM. SEN. It may be so, but Phantastes enquire more of Acrasia.


PHA. What did you with the potion Acrasia made you:


LIN. Gave it to the Senses, and made them as mad as -- well, If I cannot
recover it -- let it go, I Will not leave them thus.


She lies down again. COM. SEN. Boy a wake the Senses there.


AN. Hoe, hoe, Auditus, up, up, so hoe, Olfactus have at your nose, up Visus,
Gustus, Tactus, up: What can you not feel a pinch? have at you with a pin.


TAC. Oh, you stab me, oh,

COM SEN. Tactus, know you how you came hither:

TAC. No my Lord, not I, this I remember,
We sup't with Gustus, and had wine good store,
Where of I think I tasted liberally.
Amongst the rest, we drunk a composition,
Of a most dellicate, and pleasant relish,
That made our brains, somewhat irregular.

ACT. 5, SCEN. 19.
The Senses awake, LINGVA asleep, COMMVNIS SINSVS MEMORY, PHANTASTES,
ANAMNESTES, HEVRESIS ^rawing CRAPVLA. HEV. My Lord, here is a fat rascal was
lurking in a bushe very suspitiously, his name he says is Crapula.


COM. SEN. Sirrah, speak quickly what you know of these troubles,


CRA, Nothing my Lord, but that the Senses were mad, and that Somnus at my
request laid them asleep, in hope to recover them.


COM. SE. Why then it is too evident, Acrasia at Lingua's request, bewitched the
Senses, wake her quickly Heuresis.


LIN. Heigh ho, out alas, aye me, where am I? how came I here? where am I? ah.


COM. SEN. Li^gua look not so strangely upon the matter, you have confessed in
your sleep, that with a Crown, and a Roabe, you have disturbed the Senses,
using a crafty help to enrage them, can you deny it?


LIN. Aye me, most miserable wretch, I beseech your Lordship forgive me.


COM, SEN No, no, it is a fault unpardonable,


(He consults with Memory) PHAN. In my conceit Lingua, you should seal up
your lips, when you go to bed, these Feminine tongues be so glibbe.


COM. SEN. Visus, Tactus, and the rest, our former sentence concerning you, we
confirm as irreuocable, and establish the Crown to you Visus, and the Roabe
to you Tactus, but as for you Lingua --


LIN. Let me have mine own, howsoever you determine, I beseech you.


COM. SEN. That may not be, your goods are fallen into our hands, my sentence
cannot be recalled, you may see, those that seek what is not theirs,
oftentimes loose what is their own: Therefore Lingua granting you your life, I
commit you to close prison, in Gustus his house, and charge you Gustus, to
keep her under the custody of two strong doors, and every day till she come
to 80. years of age, see she be well guarded with 30. tall watchmen, without
whose license she shall by no means wagge abroad, nevertheless use her
Lady-like, according to her estate.


PHAN. I pray you my Lord add this to the judgment that whenever she
obtayneth license to walk abroad, in token the Tongue was the cause of her
offense, let her wear a velvet hood, made just in the fashion of a great
Tongue, in my conceit it is a very pretty Emblem of a Woman,


TAC. My Lord, she has a vild boy to her page, a chief agent in this
treason, his name's Mendatio.


COM. SEN. Ha? well, I will inflict this punishment on him for this time, let
him be soundly whipped, and ever after though he shall strengthen his speeches
with the sinews of Truth, yet none shall believe him.


PHA. In my imagination my Lord, the Day is dead to the great toe, and in my
conceit it grows dark, by which I conjecture it will be cold, and therefore
in my fa^cie, and opinion, it is best to repair to our lodgings.


Exeunt omnes, praeter Anamnestes and Appetitus. ACTVS. 5. SCENA. 20.
ANAMNESTES, APPETITVS a sleep in a corner. ANA. What Is this? a fellow
whispering so closely with the Earth? so, ho, so, ho: Appetitus? faith now I
think Morpheus himself has been here, up with a pox to you, up you luske,
I have such news to tell thee sirta: all the Senses are well, and Lingua is
proved guilty, up, up, up, I never knew him so fast a sleep in my life.

(Appetitus snorts.) Nay then have at you a fresh, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)

APP. Iogge me once again, and I Will throw this whole mess of pottage in your
face, cannot one stand quiet at the dresser for you?


ANA. Ha, ha, ha, I think it is impossible for him to sleep longer then he
dreams of his victuals. What Appetitus, up quickly, quickly up, Appetitus,
quickly sir, (toff, toff, toff, toff,)


APP. I Will come presently, but I hope you will stay till they be roasted, will you
eat them raw?


ANA. Roasted? ha, ha, ha, ha, up, up, up, away,


APP. Reach the sauce quickly, here is no Sugar, whaw, wam, oh, ou, oh.


ANA. What never wake? (Tiffe, toff, tiff, toff,) wilt never be? Then I must
try another way I see.


Epilogus.
IVdicious friends, it is so late at night,
I cannot waken hungry Appetite:
Then since the cloase upon his rising stands,
Let me obtain this at your courteous hands,
Try if the friendly opportunity,
Of your good will, and gra^ious Plauditie,
With the thrice welcome mumure it shall keep,
Can beg this prisoner from the bands of sleep.
Upon the Plaudite, APPETITVS awakes, and runs in after ANAMNESTES.

FINIS.

