THE ART OF MEMORY, THAT otherwise is called the Phoenix. A book very behouefull
and profitable to all professors of scyences. Grammaryens / Rethoryciens
Dialectyke / Legystes / Phylosophres and Theologiens.

The prologue of this present book.
FOr as much as many (i^ these time modern yt p^se^tly re^neth) be of a slow
memory and late minded, this little book was made and composed, for to give and
present it to all people, albeit that at the beginning it was dyrected to the
Italyke nation. Know ye therefore all noble reders that if any do keep these
precepts and commandments of this book, easyly and in short time he may
touch ye su^mite, and reach ye heyght of these art It is of a great effect and
profyt to them that have not their minds prompte, strong and ready. For it
seems more to be invented by dyuyne inspyracion than by art or science of
mankind. I have also found by writing that when the author of this present
work experymented his knowledge through all the Itallies that many affirmed to
have seyne this work more dyuyne than humayne, so that some did bliss the^ by
great admiracion The author reported that he had no teacher of this art, but yt
it came to him by inuencion through the socour and help of god that lyghtned
and inspired his spyrite. Read therefore my precepts right dear and dyscret
persons and if thou take labor and dyligence to understand these purposes
perfytly thou shall gather the grain thereof, and bear with the great and
prosperous work of proffytte and honor.

THe first conclusyon shall be such. This art is, and consysteth of places and
magnytudes The places be as cards or scrolles or other things for to write
in. The images be ye symylytudes of the things that we will retain in mind.
Than I will first p^pare my card wherein we may colloke and order ye images in
places. And for the foundation of this first co^clusyon I will put four rules.
THE first is this. The places are the wyndowes set in walls, pyllers, and
anglets, with other like. THE.ii. rule is. The places ought not to be to nere
together nor to fare a so^der. For the nerenesse trouble greatly the natural
memory, by the opposytion of things for if ye places were to fare dystaunt. We
will recyte with a little leaser the things that shall be given to places, where
by they shall be of mean dystaunce. And that shall be done when one is. vi. foot
fro ye other. THE.iii. rule is such. But it is vain as me seems. For it is
the opinion of talkers that the places ought not to be made where as me^ do
haunt, as in church and common places. For it suffyseth to have seen church
vacaunt where as people walk not always and in that has been taught ye contrary
experyence. Which is the master of those things. THE.iiii. rule is these.
That the places be not to hye. For I will that the men set for the images or in
the stead of images may touch the places, yt which I have judged as
behouefull. I take than the church greatly known by me, the parties where of I
do consider, and go into it walking it.iii. or.iiii. times, and tha^ return
home to my house, and there I turn in my thought to remember the things by
me seen. And in that manner I give the beginning of the work to ye places on ye
right side of the gate fro the which men go in the right pathe or isle to the
high auter there I fyx and ordain the first place, and the second on ye wall
next it a.v. or.vi. foot of. And if there be any notable thing set, as a pyler
in the wyndowe, or other like, there put the place. And if the notable thing be
not there, or lack I feyn that in my ymagynation or at mine arbytre ymagynary
although some forgynge these places would leave the^, fearing that he should
put in forgetfulness. The thing opposyd to that is taken and suffered, so that
he be myndfull to have constytued and ordained the place. And so to be proceeded
fro place to place till yt ye fabrycant of ye places return to the same gate.
And these things to be done on ye first wall of the church, al things lest
that be in the myds thereof. And if any desire to have ye circu^fere^ce of the
places enter by order in to a monastery, and fill it full all of places or
compare the places on the walls without the church. And he that wylbe
remembered of many things, must compare many places. But because yt I have
wylled to surmou^t all the men of Itally by habundau^ce of things and holy
scryptures, in Canone law and Cyuyl, and in other authoritees of many things,
while that I was but young adolescent I have prepared a C. M. places. And now I
have added to them ye other.x. M. places wherein I have put the things which
are to say and utter by my self, so yt they be prompteme^ts when I will
experyment the virtues and strengthes of my memory. And when I do leave my
country assigned I visit ye cytyes of Itally as a pilgrim or a wayfarer. I
may freely say that I bear with me all my things, and yet I ceas not to edyfy.
I do you to wit yt the places in any church or mynster is seen only for to
repose and mark the thiges which must be recyted every day as be ye
arguments, reasons, hystoryes, fables and predicacions made in Lenten. And let
this office be deputed to these places only. And I have set and declared at
the end for these places a thing that shall be Judged necessary and vtile. For
I will that the young infa^ts shall be couyetous hereof by my right docume^t
ensygned by the places so constytuted and put in order, by often repetynge,
three or four times in a month. For the repeticion of places can not be
praised in any manner.

THe second conclusyon shall be that when any has the card or scroll I will
show the manner to wryt in the same, as I was some time being young adolescent
in ye company of sundry noble me^. It was proposed of the^ to recyte names of
men, that one of ye assysten^s should say I deny not that. And these be the
names that follow. I did set in the first place a certain friend of mine
having the same name. In the second place likewise, and as names did I
colloke and set in place as they had named, and they thus collocated were by me
recyted afterward. And let the collocatoure advise him to set always his friend
doing the thing that he is accustomed to do comynly, and proceed this
conclusion clearly, and names known. And if the friend be known have such a
name Boxdrab, Zorobabell, than set ye same thing that is spoken or named in
his place I say as much of like things in names of beasts as of the horse, ye
ox, and ass, do that the horse be set in the first place. In the second ye
ox, and the ass in the third. And thus must be done in things that have no
life, as the book, the cote, ye gown, and of other things in likewise. But he
well ware that thou be not deceived, if the book were set in the first place,
and the cote in ye second for so thou may symply when thou should recyte ye
names The office of this art is to excyte the mind natural yt never is not
nor can be admonested. For ye gest of the image is to set and unset and
apposyted therefore ye ought to be set in the place that moves. And if it can
not moeue to be moeued with another, put such a thing in the hand of mouer,
because that by the mouynge the memory be moved to the natural. But some young
man of his spyryte and subtle wit will say that these precepts and
commandments be not perfyte in all parties. For ye ampt set in the place
moves. And howbeit because that it is so little it ca^ not move for the grain
of peper put i^ the hand of the mouer nor also lift it, which I grant, if ye
only ampt be there collocat. But if ye set a multitude of ampts mou^tynge and
desce^dynge on a tree. That yt ye only ampt could not do alone, ye multitude
will do it. And the friend also will move in the place diverse graynes of peper.
Some other yonglynge will co^traryenge. The full belly does not move me ye
multitude of fleas, may not be set nor well collocated. But I will collocat
there for the flea the friend taking a flea. And I have before set in the place
of the flea the right excellent master of all the^ of our time the good
phisitien Gyrard of Uelonne, ye which I beheld ones taking a flea.

THe.iii. co^clusyon is al of gold if I take men for the lettres of the
alphebete, and so I have the living amages. For I set for the lettre. A.
Anthony. B. for Benet, and so the other persons and names of whom the first
lettre is that which I will collocat. And I do set by ye lettres some fair
mayde^s for they excyte greatly my mind and frequentation when I was young I
did collocat Iunipere pistorien or of pyse which I loved greatly. Believe
hardily to my sayenges that if I set the fa^yre maidens most facylly and
decently recyte this yt I have set in my memory. Reteyne these secret very
behoueful tha^ into ye artificial memory, which I have of a long while put
in science. And for fear of blame or shame ye thou would have a remembrance
inco^tynent collocat fair maidens. For the mind by the location of maidens
and vyrgyns is a merueylous mouynge to him that has seen ye wytnes testyfyeth
the thing. But this behouefull precept can not profyt to the^ that have women
in hate and dyspyle the^. Nor shall not follow the fruit of this art but
dyfficylly, and slowly, howbeit all good and chaste men are except. For the
precepts yt has borne me so much honesty I ought not to hyde, saing yt I
desire, and enforce me with all my powers to leave it to my successors
excellently learned in goodness.

THe.iiii. conclusion is, that the images of the alphabete, or ye names
demonstratyfs of lies should be well retained and fyxed in mind and often
repeted, I begyne than this wise if it chance me to set in place of this
copulatyue. And I set in place Eusebe and Thomas, howebeit that in this order
eusebe be in place, and Thomas standing before him, but if Thomas hold of
eusebe, and eusebe hold the copulatif of Thomas that is mas, yt of mas we se
this pronowne of Thomas And in ye place apposed in this art the rule is such
that first in order is most presed of the place, and so of the end. And first
we write in this copulatyfe and likewise in ye place. And like things is to be
observed generally in all dyctions, and other things to be colloqued.

THe.v. co^clusio^ is i^ ye syllables of.iii. letts, in who^ we proceed thus,
for if ye vowel be in ye myddel as these syllable (bar) I take than ye image of
the last lettre and add some thing thereto, of the which let be ye beginning
in likewise to the two other letters yt do proceed. Tha^ if I set in the place
of Raymonde smyttynge the place with his stafe, the syllable (bar) shall be
raised in ye place. And if Simon hit ye place we shall have the syllable
below. Than let this rule be kept which is thus. Repeted there where ye
vowel is in the myddle of the syllable of the letters the image of the last
letter.R. is taken apposynge another mobyle, or mouynge her self to the two
letters before. But if the vowell beyne the end as the syllable (bra) than I
colloke to yt image of ye first letter of yt thing mobyle or mouynge, whereof
let the beginning be like to ye two following Than I set and appose Benet
among the Frogs in the place shall have the syllable (bra) And if I set
Thomas I shall have the syllable (tra) The habundaunce than of these things
that begin as the syllable if they be redyly had here great vtylyte and
profit. But if the vowell be in the beginning, making any syllables as i^
these word (Amo) tha^ always the image of the first letter is to be colloqued in
the place of ye thing having his like beginning of the syllable follow, if
ye harnest turn ye mylstone, these word (Amo) set there shall be ye place. And
if, this eusebe, read, this word, enio to us ye must always know if we may
profytably collocat, the diction of three or four syllables, and it is no need.
For in vain one is to be made by many things when it may be by few. It
suffyfeth to have set the first or second syllable, we may always collocat the
total dyction of two syllables as, Pater, I will set in the place the thing or
ye man for the image of the syllable. Pa. as Paul, and for the syllable, ter,
sithe that the vowell is in the myddel I will take Raymonde having a pyece of
lynnene clothe in his hand. I conclude than thus nobly that the images of ye
alphabete adjoined together, and the habundance of ye things beginning as the
syllables will serve us ever, if the images do lack in the^. For if I can have
other I will leave these whereof we shall speak in the other conclusions.

THe.vi. conclucyon is in these dyctions, bread, wine, wood, and other like.
And in all dygnitees as is the Emperor, the King. etc And so of each I make
collocacion by the so^unde of ye voice, the which all things do understand,
and ye Rustykes in their demonstration, and to speak more euyde^t they are
concordinge and vnyformal in speech vulgar and latin. In such dyctions I
demand none other images. But put that same that ye said dyction sou^de, and
all the syllables of such dyctions may be by good mention collocate easyly.
For in ye body of man I have sound images of cases so that the head is the
case Iuuima. The right hand the genityfe. The lift hand ye datyue, The right
foot the accusatyue, the lift foot the vocatyue. And the belly or stomach the
ablatyue. And for the synguler no^bre I set a fair maiden naked. And for the
plurell the same maid, well arrayed and rychely or her that I would be
remembered of. Or I will collocate some thing, or a man if it be some thing as
bread I will collocate a maiden all naked in the place touching ye bread with
her right foot And if I will collocat any dyctio^ I set a man constytued in
office or dygnyte as a Bishop, I collocat a Bishop in the place, smiting ye
bare earth with his right foot. And if thou consider dylygently these things, O
right sweet reder, this mention will show very goodly unto the, and thus I was
accustomed for to collocat these dyctions.

THe.vii. conclusyon is that we may collocat dyctions by sou^de of the voice,
Iestures of the body, of the symilytudes, and of their images. I use it ofter
for I set my friend for the dyction. I knew a doctor that had always in his
mouth communication of ye law speaking of the time of appellations. This
doctor of law said he could say all the law by heart or rote only I than
willing to collocat the said law I set this dolor that always hytteth
laughters, and by the Iestes of the body are set ye images when any Iestures be
made in the dyction I make my friend (for this word spolio) the which
dyspoyleth another. And for this word, Rapio, I set my friend rauysshynge
somewhat by force, by symylytude I set the images when I find ye thing at the
dyction semblable letters, howbeit that they are unlike in sygnyfycation when I
colloke well for this word cano.

THe.viii. conclusyon is for the lords Iurisconsultes, a lawyers. And I will
begyne to speak of the volumes of the civil law. And when I will give these
things to the places I take ye colors of ye couerynges, as for F. veteri. a
black skin. For ye Code a grene skin. For a volume a skin of varyable
color. For the instytutions a little book. And ye autentyke a Notary having a
great Instrument. For ye autentike I set a maiden having a pryuylege. For the
book of feodes, I set some castle. For the decret autentyke I set an old
man writing in the place, by cause ye auctorytees of holy fathers is in it.
For yt decretalles a bishop sitting in a chair. For clementynes, a maiden
named Clemence. For the syxt, an instrument, so called in Itally, whereof Ouyde
writes. Altera pars staret, pars altera duceret orbet. For ye conme^tatours of
the law I set the^ that have like name. But I take the image of ye gloss of
the doctrine by my self of me first given in ye collocacions of dyctions. And
I have for the Dygestes fair Iunipera gyuynge a harp to a florentyne, that he
may sing the Iester of Rome. The allegations of ye decrete shall be thus
collocated, for a maiden is set for ye allegation. And this maiden makes a
cloth or a cedule. And set for the question ye fair Iunipera beatynge her
maid. And for the consyderation I set a priest consecratynge the host. And
for Penance I set Iunipera shryuyng her to me of her light sins.

THe.ix. conclusyon shall be, that I will show how places ought to be given to ye
rubrysshes of each law, and set two images for ye same as I am wont, for if I
will remember me of the rubrysshe of transaction I set Thomas having frogs or
the gest of the body. I feyn two men that would not of long time cease their
contension and debate and gyuynnge each to other tokens of peace. That is the
fair image of the rubryshe of the transactions But the pryncyples of the laws
where as chapyters be set in place by alphabete or sound of voice symylytude
or gestures of the body, whereof is spoken before and plainly enough.

THe.x. is in collocatynge, arguments. For the which I am accustomed to set
two images. The first is the gest of ye body, as if one said thus. The
testament a vayleth to none but if it be made with.vii. witnesses. Therefore I
feyne the testatour to have made this testament before two witnesses, and a
ring that seals the said testamente. The second image is it that
collogateth two other diction more princypall of the argument. Take here of an
example, thou Iurisconsul, of this phylosophres wot my meaning. When in the
act the will is demanded of any, he ought to proceed. Here be sundry words,
but it suffyseth to collocat and set the will fro procedynge. And than we may
say by and in memory ye other parties of the argument of the collocation of two
or three dyctions. The other things we shall recyte elegantly, and believe this
yt the master has experyme^ted it right well.

THe.xi. conclusyon, and thus I have the images unto the no^ of a C. which
are.x. I have also.ix images of the nombre beginning from one to ye no^bre.x.
The which I have dyuyded on the fyngers of men. I have given to the first
finger of the right hand for the fyr^t no^bre, or for one. The second for ye
second, or for two. And so I proceed to ye.iiii. finger of the left hand. And
because that these things may the better be retained in mind. I say the
first finger of the right hand to be of the Gelfes, The second of the
Gelbilayts. The third of the Jews the forth of the rings. The v. of the
ears. And so of the left hand I call the first finger of the Gelfes, for
Gelfes be esteemed rich and of great estymation, the second of the Gelbelayts.
And the third of the Jews, For if ye point to a Jew with that finger he will
look away fyersly. And who that will know the cause, shall find it euydent.
Therefore I call the forth and the.v. even so for the nombre of a M. I have set
here, if any no^bre be to me proposed easyly to have the image of the same. The
conclusyon is such, if any should ask if that in one self place he ought to
set many things. I answer thus if I would put the things in places that are
proposed to me of other because that I ought forthwith to reherce the said
things proposed I will collocat only in the place the images of one thing.
But if I dyspose to set in places the things that I read i^ my books, so that
I may recyte by heart in remembrynge them, I doubt not to set very often in
one place the images of many things

THe.xii. conclusyon shall be very propre. That is I will make and show in what
manner ought to be made the images of nombres for all nombres that we can think
I have only found.xx. images. And therefore I will descrybe them chyefly, For
ye nombre of.x. I take a great cross of gold or silver, for the nombre of.xx.
I take the symylytude of ye lettre of yren or of wood vnioyned to any thing
that is round. For we shall write the no^bre of.xx. in ye card or scroll in
this manner, or for.xxx. and ye symilytude of this figure is coniunct in this
manner to the thing. Therefore I shall find some examples which I will set
whereby the reder may understand in the more easyly, although it be of a rude
wit or conclusion, if I will say.ii.q.iii. I must have a g^lfe in the place
holding in his right hand a cross. and a Jew that with all his strengths
seeks to take it fro him by vyole^ce of that made fro the ryghthande. If I
will say.ii. Corinthios.iiii. I will feyn the Gebelyn in the place that shall
hold a curtayne in his ryghthande showing it to a fair maiden which shall
receive it in her ryghthande, for the fourth finger I will set a maiden married.
And so I collocat and set for the. iiii. and.ix. nombre, if I will remember me
of penance in the.iiii. dystynction, I will colloke an old preeste and not
young to whom Iunipera shall shryue her fautes. And she shall do a wou^derous
thing, for she shall absolve the priest holding her right hand over his
head, and so of the other. And because that this be not that process let us
here make an end of the art of memory artificyall, and precepts, of whom all
things is comprised simplycytyuely, at ye lest so explycityuely to leave any
thing, that I promised to write in this place to Judge an vtyle thing heri^
in place to set in ye.v. place a hand of gold In the.x. a cross gylted, in
ye.xv. a hand of silver. And in the.xx. ye image of ye same nombre. And this
my doctrine teaches for to do in all other things

Thus ends the art of memory / other wise called the Phoenix. Translated out
of french in to english by Roberte Coplande. And Impryted at London in
Fletestrete at the sign of the George by Wyliyam Myddylton.


