THE TRANSFORMED Metamorphosis.

By Cyril Turner.

Malo virum pecunia, quam pecuniam viro indigentem

Printed by Valentine Sims, and are to be sold at the sign of the white Swan
on Adling hill. 1600.

Pursue the bloody, that does rob the poor,
And drowns the orphants in their purple goare:


So shall thy race, wherein thou have begun;
In heaven end, for which thou so do run.
To the right Worshipful, Sir Christopher Heydon, C.T. wishes aeternall
fruition of all felicity.
THou, thou that art the Muses Adonie,
Their Pyramid, adorner of their mount,
Thou Christalizer of their Castalie,
Thou Lillian-rose, sprung from the horse-foote fount,
To thee, Arts Patron, Champion to the highest,
That give the Sun a fairer radiance,
To thee Musophilus, that still appliest
Thy sacred soul, to be Trueths esperance.
To thee (this Epinyctall register,
Rasde out by Eos rays) I write to thee.
To thee (this hoarie Hiems, killed by Ver:)
To thee (this metamorphosde Tragoedie)
To thee, I write my Apotheosie:
Moecenas, strengthen my Tyrocinie.
Your Worships ever, Cyrill Turner.

The Author to his Book.
O were thy margents, cliffes of itching lust;
Or quotes to chalk out men the way to sin;
Then were there hope, that multitudes would thrust
To buy thee: but since that thou do begin
To pull the curtains back, that closde vice in;
Expect but flowts: for it is the hair of crime,
To shun the breath that does discloude it sin.
What? (will he say) a recluse from the time?
Nor can thou hope that thy weak ioynted rhyme
Shall please the more, because it shrowdes it self
Under his shade, whose mighty arms do clime,
Even to the highest heaven; disdaining pelf:
For heavenly minds, the brightlier they do shine:
The more the world does seek to work their tine:
This only be thy hope; to please the best:
And to be safe from malice of the rest.
To the Reader.
IT may be (Reader) I may gall those men,
Whose golden thoughts think no man dare them touch;
It may be (too) my fearelesse ayre-plume-pen,
May rouse that sluggish watch, whose tongues are such,
As are controlled by fear or gold too much:
Yet were Apelles here, he could not paint
Forth perfectly the worlds deformities;
For as the troubled mind, whose sad complaint
Still tumbles forth, half breathed accenties,
The Idea does confuse and chaoize:
So will the Chaos of vp-heaped sin
Confound his brain, that takes in hand to lay
A platform plainly forth, of all (that in
This Pluto-visag'd-world) hell does bewray,
When death or hell, does work it lives decay:
So perfect is our imperfectionesse,
For imperfection is sins perfectness.
Yet seek I not to touch as he that seeks,
The public defamation of some one;
Nor have I spent my void hours in three weeks,
To show that I am unto hatred prone;
For in particular I point at none:
Nay, I am forced my lines to limit in
Within the pale of generality;
For should I seek by unites to begin,
To point at all that in their sin do lie;
And hunt for wickedness advisedly:
As well I (then) might go about to tell,
The perfect number of the ocean sands,
Or by Arithmetike go down to hell,
And number them that lie in horrors bands:
(Never to be ransomed from the devils hands.)
Who finds him touched, may blame himself, not me:
And he will thank me, does himself know free.
Thine as I see thy affection. Cyrill Turner.

The Prologue
O Who persuades my willing errorie,
Into this black Cymerianized night?
Who leads me into this concauitie,
This huge cancauitie, defect of light,
To feel the smart of Phlegetontike fight?
O who, I say, persuades mine infant eye,
To gaze upon my youths obscurity?
What ashie ghost, what dead Cadauerie,
What Geomantike iaw howles in mine ears,
The ecchoized sounds of horrorie?
What chaoizd conceit does form my fears?
What object is it that thus my quiet tears?
Who puts a flaming torch into my hand,
And bids me charily see where I stand?
Who fills my nosthrills with thick foggy sents?
Who feeds my taste with hony-smacking gall?
What pallid spirit tells of strange events?
Of euiternal night? of Phoebus fall?
Where is that Symphonie harmonicall,
Wherewith my heart was wont to tune sweet lays,
And teach my tongue to sing th'Aeternall's praise?
O who, O who has metamorphosed
My sense? and plutoniz'd my heavenly shape?
What martyred Diana is it does read
The tragic story of Lucretia's rape?
O who affrights me with black horrors gape?
Who tells me that the azure-colour'd sky,
Is now transformd to hel's enuironrie.
Are not the lights that Jupiter appointed
To grace the heavens, and to direct the sight,
Still in that function, which them first anointed?
Is not the world directed by their light?
And is not rest, the exercise of night?
Why is the sky so pitchie then at noone,
As though the day were governed by the Moon?
Look on my sight you lycophosed eyes,
And tell me whether it be blear'd or no:
Daz'led with objects contrarieties,
With opposites of sad confused woe,
Or else transpiercing ayre-cleare brightness, lo:
My eyes, whether they be, or dimmed or clear,
Clearly discern a Transformation near.
The Transformed Metamorphosis.
O Whence comes this? awake sad Mercury;
And Pegase-winged pace the milkie way:
Awake heavens harbenger; awake and fly
To high Jehovah: O awake I say;
Why sluggish Mercury, art made of clay?
O where can life celestial inherit,
If it remains not in a heavenly spirit?
Awake O heaven; for (lo) the heavens conspire:
The siluer-feather'd Moon, and both the Bears,
Are poasted down for Phlegetonticke fire:
Lo, now they are upon the azure spheres,
(My soul is vexed with sense-confounding fears)
Now are they mounted into Carol's waine,
With all the stars like to an armed train.
I, even those stars, which for their sacred minds,
(They once terrestrial) were stellified,
With all the force of Aeol's saile-swell'd winds
And fearful thunder, vailer of earth's pride,
Upon the lofty firmament do ride:
All with infernal concord do agree,
To shake the strength of heavens axeltree.
Eue'n from the artique to the antartique pole,
All in a row in rank proportionate;
Subject unto th'vnstedfast mooues control,
Do stand the lights that should truth animate;
And by their shine her woe extenuate.
With Phlegetonticke flame these tapers fed,
Celestial light have quite extinguished.
O see how dampy shows yond' torches flame,
Earth stop thy sent, for their infernal smell,
(O let me speak, lest I incur heavens blame)
Will all thy arterizing strength expel;
And make thy heart an agonizing hell.
See how their sulphur gathers to a cloud;
And like black Orcus vault the earth does shrowde.
What Morpheus rocks the sense of heaven asleep?
Why heaven awake; though long Endimionie
Has pierced the clearenes of thy sight so deep,
Thou can not see them prowdly mounted high;
Yet may thou hear them plot their treachery.
Their treason's plotted, they with fiery shot,
Are driving Phoebus from his chariot.
Lo, lo, the sky whose hue was azurie,
Is clothed with moorie Vesperugoe's coat,
The formed Chaos of this Cosmosie,
Is now transformed to tawny Charon's boat;
And on the Acheronticke maine does floate.
Th'olimpique Globe is now a hollow ball:
The huge concauitie black Plutoe's hall.
Where shall I stand, that I may freely view,
Earths stage complete with tragic sceans of woe?
No meade, no grove, whose comfortizing hew
Might make sad Terror my sad mind forgo?
No sun-grac'd mount soule-frighting horrors foe?
No sun-grac'd mount? how can the sun mounts grace
When mountains seek his countnance to deface?
See, see, that mount that was the worlds admire,
The stately Pyramid of glorious price;
Whose seau'n hill'd head did over all aspire,
Is now transformed to Hydra-headed vice:
Her hellish brain pan of each enterprice.
On sins full number (lo) she is erect;
For why? Great Pluto was her Architect.
Black Avarice, makes sale of Holiness,
And steeming luxury does broach her lust;
Red-tyrannizing wrath does souls oppress,
And cankred Envy falsifies all trust,
To Enrich her coffers with soule-choaking dust;
On sloth and gluttony they build their bliss,
Whereon they raise Ambitions Pyramid.
The frame's too slender for continuance,
Too earthly high for souls to build upon;
And of her strength my only esperance,
Is for to see her sad confusion;
Whose vapors are the worlds infection.
Her high esteem, is of high heaven despisde;
O see ere long her Babel Babelliz'd.
Where shall I find a safe all-peacefull seat,
To whose prospect the worlds circumference
Presents it self? high Jove I thee entreat,
Let Dodon's grove be lavish in expense;
And scaffoldize her oaks for my defense.
Forgive me God, for help does not consist:
In Dodon's grove, nor a Dodonian fist.
Where shall I stand? O heaven conduct me now,
Jove Israellize my tongue, and let my voice
Prevail with thee; show me the manner how
To free me from this change: O soul rejoice,
For heaven has freed me from black hels annoies.
O see, O see, Jove sets me free from thrall,
Such is his love to them that on him call.
Lo where I stand upon a steadfast rock,
Whose peerless trust is free from all compare:
See how it brooks the Phlegetonticke shocke,
And bides what foemen to each other share:
The raging sea, on this side does it dare,
On that side flames; such is the earthly state,
Of those from earth seek them to alienate.
Now eyes prepare, and be your sight as clear,
As is the Sky, when none but Phaetons sire
Inhabites it: for O (alas) I fear
They will be dazzled with smoke and fire,
That with repulse of heaven does down retire,
Heart, teach my tongue directed by mine eye,
To be the Chorus to this tragedy.
Mark, you spectators of this tragic act,
(If any rest vnmetamorphosed)
O you whose souls with hell are not contract,
Whose sacred light is not extinguished;
Whose intellectual tapers are not fed
With Hells flame: mark the transformation,
Wrought by the charms of this rebellion.
That sacred female (which appeared to him,
Who was inspired with heavens intelligence;
Who was the last that drunk upon the brim,
Of deep divining sacred influence)
That heavenly one, of glorious eminence.
She, whom Apollo clothed with his robe:
And placed her feet upon the inconstant globe.
So clothed, his mantle might her shelter be,
To shrowde her safe from Acheronticke mistes:
So placed, her ground might feed her egencie,
Far as it on necessity consistes;
And not t'exceede the bound of heavenly listes;
So clothed, she might to heaven her mind apply:
So placed, to use it in necessity.
But (mark O woe) her high rebellious stars,
(Their minds ambitioniz'd) do seek her fall,
And having dimmed the Sun with smoaky wars,
Have found his dearest one how to appall;
And mix her honny with the bitterst gall.
See, how her eyes are fixed on the globe:
Which, which (O woe) has quite tra^sformd her robe.
Her robe, that like the Sun did clearly shine,
Is now transformed unto an earthy coat,
Of massiue gold: because she did combine
Affection with the Moon; and did remote
Her heart from heavens book where her name was wrote.
The globe takes head, that was her footstool set:
And from her head does pull her coronet.
Her twelve starr'd glorious coronet, (which Jove
Did make her temples rich enuironrie:
And for the more to manifest his love,
Encircled them with fair imbrodetie,
Of sacred lights in ayre-cleare azurie.)
She is deprived off and does begin,
To be the couerture of laethall sin.
The vines Aedonides; dead Murcianie;
Smooth Philoxenus; murders ground;
Disquiet Eriphila; hel's Syrenie;
Philocrematos; the souls deep wound;
And whatso else in Hydra's head is found,
Do mask themselves within her pleasing smile:
And so with deadly sin the world beguile.
What dreadful sight (O) do mine eyes behold?
See, frosty age, that should direct aright,
The grassie brain (that is in vice so bold)
With heedie doctrine and celestial light;
Has bin conuersing with hells taper, night,
Whose devilish charms, like Circes sorcerie,
Have metamorphosde Eos Eonie.
Apolloe's herald, that was wont to cheer,
Night-wounded souls with bright celest'all rays:
Fair Phosphorus (whose look was wont to fear
Infernal hagges, that haunt frequented ways,
To draw the soul to hell that wandering strayes;
Is metamorphosde to a torch of hell:
And makes his mansi'on-house black horrors cell.
Whose deep foundation's raisde from Phlegeton,
The fi'rie river of black Orcus hall:
Whence pillars rise, which do themselves upon
Quadrangle wise, uphold Erebus wall:
Worlds trustlesse trust, souls vnmistrusted fall.
Birds, vines, and flowers, and every sundry fruit
Do compass it; for best that place they suit.
For since the spirit the bodies prisner,
Of heavenly substance wholly is compact:
And since the flesh the souls imprisoner,
Of excrementall earth is wholly fact:
Since this with that it self cannot contract,
Needs must the soul (the earthly prison doubled:
For all earths pleasures slime) be smothered.
From out the lake a bridge ascends thereto,
Whereon in female shape a serpent stands,
Who eyes her eye, or views her blew vain'd brow,
With sence-bereauing gloses she inchaunts,
And when she sees a worldling blind that haunts
The pleasure that does seem there to be found:
She soothes with Leucrocutanized sound.
Thence leads an entry to a shining hal,
Bedeckt with flowers of the fairest hew,
The Thrush, the Lark, and nights-ioy nightingale,
There minutize their pleasing lays anew,
This welcome to the bitter bed of rue;
This little room, will scarce two wights contain,
T'enioy their joy, and there in pleasure reign.
But next thereto adioynes a spacious room,
More fairly far adorned then the other:
(O woe to him at sinne-awhaping doom,
That to these shadows has his mind given over.
For (O) he never shall his soul recover:
If this sweet sin still feeds him with her smacke:
And his repentant hand him hales not back.
The fraudfull floor of this deceitful place,
Is all of quagmires, to entrap the wight
That treades thereon: yet covered over with grass
Of youthful hew, al pleasing to earth's sight,
For so does satan work his diu'lish spite.
This room will centuries of worlds contain,
How small mirths place, how large the place of pain!
Who ere's deceived by this illusion,
Must surely fall into this deep abisse,
Down to the horror of deep Phlegeton,
Whose fi'ry flames like vultures gnaw on flesh;
Yet jot of it never consumed is.
O let no wight trust to this worldly sheene:
For such joys hate, of God best loved been.
Erinnis purueyor, young elth I mean,
Tears up our mothers womb to find her slime:
And does ysearch her bowels all unclean,
For noisome filth; the poison of our time,
(Base dunghill slave) for means for his to clime;
So may he well, for now earths baddest good,
Makes every peasant seem of gentle blood.
Yet certs, if the naked truth I say,
Nor from the golden mine comes gentry true,
Nor can this age, the next, and so for ay,
Each his succeeding age with it indue:
For it is no heritage to heirs t'ensue,
But shines in them to heaven their mind that give:
Then who does so, in him does gentry live.
O, that old age (that kept the treasuries
Of great Apollo once,) whose faltring tongue,
Intreates old earth perform his obsequies,
Should now by hell be metamorphosde young,
And with desire of soule-infecting dong,
Seek unto vice, weak infancy to win,
And make his heart, Epithesis of sin.
The oldest man, says each day, one day more,
One day? nay sure a twelue-months time it will be,
Ere seriant death will call me at my door;
Crazed drooping age, why can thine eyes not see
Pale death arresting tender infancy?
O that his memory thee still would tell,
Now out of me might death my breath expel.
Where are the sentinels? the armed watch,
Who draw their breath from Phoebus treasury?
Somnus, awake; unlock the rustie latch,
That leads into the caves somniferie,
Rowze up the watch, lulled with worlds Syrenie,
Somnus, awake: pull off their golden mask,
And bid them strait finderesize their task.
Somnus, awake: hell and the world conspire:
Pan is transformed, and al his flock near drowned;
Pan that from heaven received his due paid hyre,
He that was wont, upon the fertile ground
Of Arcadie to feed, wherein was found,
No golden India that might prevent,
That high estate of poor, mean, rich content.
Pan, that was wont to make his quiet life,
Th'exordium of each soule-sweet argument:
Pan, that was wont to make his void of strife,
The period of each sentence of Content;
Tempered with surrop of heavens document,
Pan, that was once a clear Epitimie:
Is now transformed to hot Epithymie.
O, where are they, Apollo did appoint,
To guard Arcadia's sea-enuiron'd banckes?
The oceans monarch, whom Jove did anoint,
The great controller of the whaly ranckes
Is landed on Arcadia's tender flanks.
Enuies protector, Pan, with gold has fed:
And Pan with gold is metamorphosed.
Wealth's shipwreck; India's minerie;
The pearly pibble which the Ocean keeps;
The Treasure-house of Neptunes Thetisie;
The fair sweet poison of the infernal deepes,
Hell's twinckliug instrument that never sleeps;
Is that great gift Tridentifer presents,
To make fair passage for his soul intents.
O see that head that once was covered,
With fleecy wool, that hung on earth-low brakes,
Is scarce contented now, it self to wed,
With what Eriphila from India takes,
Now Pan of gold, himself a Cor'net makes.
His eyes that before were clearly cophosie,
Now cannot see but in a minery.
His hand, to paws, his sheep-hooke to a mace,
Are metamorphosed; his heart (whose height
Did never before o're-peere Arcadia's face,)
With cloud-high thoughts aspiring high is freight,
And chaoiz'd Idea's of conceit,
Does make his gesture seem a troubled sky:
And fills his countenance with sad meteorie.
Awake O heaven, and all thy powers awake,
For Pan has sold his flock to Thetis pheer:
O how the center of my soul does quake,
That barbarous India should ouer-peer
Fruitful Arcadia, the worlds great Peer!
Hot fiery dust, with trickling tears ec'n weeps,
To see Arcadia's flocks drowned in the deeps.
O how vnworthie's he a heard to be,
That leaves his flock for each temptation!
As, into magistrates each man may see,
When by the means of vice they are called upon,
To execute their duteous function;
O even as they are known, when vap'rous vice,
Breathes forth a mist of black iniquities;
Even so a shepherd tells where to he is bent,
When mighty Jove after long summers joy,
(Of high celestial kindness to us lent)
Does please us try with winters sharp annoy;
Or tempt his heart with earthly seeming joy,
Which time, if he with care his flock does feed,
Shows love to's flock, and hate to's earthly meed.
But though I speak against this hypocrisy,
This hellish ill o'remask'd with holiness,
Na'th less I neither can, nor will deny,
That if thereby we reaue no wight of bliss,
We may prevent our earthly wretchedness,
For lawful it is our own harm to prevent,
If not by ill we compass our intent.
Is It possible the world should yet afford,
More cause of woe, then yet mine eyes have seen?
Can Pluto in his horrors cave yet hoord,
More woe then in this tragic scene has been?
Is It true I see? Or do I ouerweene?
O, O, I see more then I can express,
Amazed with sence-confounding wretchedness.
In Delta that is enuiron'd with the sea,
The hills and dales with herds are peopled,
That tend their tender flocks upon the lea,
And tune sweet lays unto their pipes of reed,
Mean while their flocks upon the hillockes feed;
And sometime nibble on the buskie root,
That did his tender bud, but lately shoot.
Long while the herds enjoyed this sweet content,
Not fearing wolves that might their flocks molest:
(For nothing harbor'd near that harm the^ meant)
And this content long might they have possessed,
Had not a beast spoiled this their sweetened rest.
Whether the soil him bred, or foes him brought,
I doubt; seems, some that Deltaes damage sought.
Among the shrubbes had set him privily,
To spoil the lambs that sometime did estray;
Nor only thus devoured them theeuishly;
But often allured them from out their way.
With such chaung'd voice, no mortal wight could say,
But that the notes were voice of man he sung:
O what deceit is lodged in the tongue?
This daily spoil through each man's ear did run,
At length Mauortio, a gallant Knight,
The mean whereby his Country honor won,
Heard of the harm wrought by Hyenn'as spite:
Scarce heard he of the spoil, but that his sp'rite
Aethereall (not hable to endure,
His heart should knowledge of such harm immure
An hour, and th'wrong rest vnirrooted out)
Him drove as sail-swel'd barks are drove by wind,
And strait he armd him (mou^ting's prancer stout)
He forward pricks, spurred by a noble mind,
Awaited on by Truth his Page full kind,
And by a'squire that artfull strength was called:
Seemed, Hercules him could not have appalld:
Thus (pricking on the plain) at last he eyed
The grisly beast as in her den she lay,
Tearing a lamb with jaws far stretched awide,
A seely lambkin which she made her pray,
Straight with a courage bold began assay,
How he could buckle with the monsters force:
Not meaning once to harbor mild remorce.
Down he alighted, from his milk-white steed,
And gave him Veramount to walk o'th plain:
Then stepped to the monster with a wise-bold heed,
Thou monstrous fiend (quoth he) thy pray refrain,
For with my sword I Will work thy mortal pain:
The beast began look as one tbat were adrad,
Fearing her future hap would prove full bad.
At length, as one that from a trance awakes,
She stretched forth her self upon the ground;
And to her cursed tongue herself be takes,
Hoping her speech would yield best aid that stound.
Fair Sir (quoth she) it is said this soil has found,
That I have brought this Countries good to spoil:
But (knight) believe me, I have t'ane much toil.
To fear the wolves with changed voice of tongue,
When they have even been ready to assail
The ewes that have been suckling their young:
Then has my speech their purpose causde to fail:
My very heart does bleed; O how I wail
To think upon the spoil the wolves would make;
Did not my Care them force their prey forsake?
To her Syrenian song, the Knight gave ear,
And noted in her speech how subtle Art,
Her gesture framde to every word so near,
That (had he been a man of massiue heart,
He would have melted at her Mermaides part:
But he being a Knight of noble spirit:
Her tongue could not him of his heart dis'nherit.
But spurred him to revenge the spoil she made;
(Commixt with poison of hypocrisy)
He strait vnsheathes his trusty steeled blade,
And (silent) does demonstrate presently,
The bottom of his mind effectually.
Soon as she feels the smart, she startes abacke,
And (for defense) with poison hellie black.
Forth hurled from her wide stretched foaming throat,
She thinks t'infect the vninfected Knight:
But stowt Mauortio wore a steeled coat,
So iunctly ioynted, that in all their fight,
Her hellish poison, never enter might;
(All were it natured still to search for way:)
To save her life by her foes lives decay.
Short had the fight bin, had she only been,
(And great his honor by her only death)
But every drop of blood his sword all keen,
Causde issue from her noisome steeming breath,
Transformed were to monsters on the heath.
All with their poison like a rounding ring:
The good encombred Knight encompassing.
So that the more that she enhoped him,
(By deadly gaspes) the conquest soon would end;
The more his labor sprung: and seemed to dim
Eftsoons (alas) the hope his toil did send.
Yet he of all was victor in the end.
And for this act until the end his fame,
Will through the world high raise Mauortio's name.
The Knight (about to sheath) chaunc'd turn his eye,
And spies the multitude that him enround:
Nay (then quoth he) no time approaches me,
To take our leaves of this thiefe-harb'ring ground
Before Apollo Thetis lap has found,
They all shall die; if heaven does smiling stand:
Viewing the heart of his Mauortio's hand.
His 'squire with artfull courage aides his knight:
Both used their blades unto so good avail,
That who had ei'd this bloody fi'rie fight,
Might here see maimed wights low creeping traile
Their own hewed limbs, there gasping jaws that wail
To see their limbs lopt from their bodies lie,
On hugie heaps, like unto mountains high.
And twixt the^ streams of streaming blod swift running
With bloudles trunks, lop'd heads, legs, thighs, and arms,
Upon the river like dead fishes swimming;
Ere Sol with Neptune sleeped, slept their harms;
All being shook with deaths all deadly charms.
O happy hour! that so Mauortio joyed:
To see the monsters by his arm destroyed.
This noble conquest made him famouzed,
By all the herds throughout the Deltan soil,
Who vowed his name should be aeternized,
(Despite of Fortune and her trustlesse foil)
In memorizing lines, which worldly broyle,
Nor Enuies canker, never should deface,
Long as the world retaine's her worldly face.
O peerless worth! O worth Mauortian!
Heaven upholding Atlas; wars melody;
Knight of the lilly; heavens champion;
Arts patron; Muses dearest Adonie;
Vrania's soul refreshing Castalie;
Worthy the world; the world not worthy thee:
That art deemed worthy of the deity.
Of heaven it self, that but even now lamented
The sun-fall of thy self, whom heaven (disdained)
Whom heavens high trinary was not contented,
That in the world thy spirit be contained,
But there should dwell where Jove himself remained;
For that on earth, thy spirit earth directed,
Heaven has thy spirit for high heaven elected.
While heaven did daigne the world should him enjoy,
The nine-fold Sorory themselves exiled,
Even from their native home to arts annoy,
From twin-topt mount, unto a place defiled,
(Where pined writ and starued art compiled)
Their harm they knew, and harm with heart embraced,
To nurse their dear heart by their cheap art graced.
Graced by nurses (arts nurse highly graced him)
Who fed him with pure marrow of the Muses;
And when he list, with moisture to refresh him,
He drunk clear Helicon: clear from abuses,
He bent his mind to pure Vranian uses,
Vranianie, him did to heaven vpreare:
And made to man, him demi-god appear.
Since wisdom then vpreares a man to heaven,
Since wisdom then (that does high God adore)
When he of all that earth yields is bereau'n,
When all else fails, does God-like him decore,
O world erect thy bliss on wisdoms lore.
The greatest man decores not wisdoms horn:
But wisdom does the meanest wight adorn.
Pieria's darling; cleare-streaming Helicon;
Boeotia's pearl; the nine voic'd harmony;
Heart crystalline; tongue pure Castalion;
Delta's Adamant; Elizium's melody;
Vrania's self, that sung coelestially;
Was then for Mars apt, by the Muses nursed,
For Mars his knights, are 'squires to the muses first.
Down to the world descended Mars at length,
When the Pierides had knit the veins,
That from his heart did give his body strength,
With soule-sweet Manna, marrow of the reins:
Down he descended, and no whit disdaines
To live on earth, leaving the sacred skies,
Only the muses dear to Martialize.
But (O) when Delta's hope, the muses wonder,
Foes fear, fears foe, Jove's martialist,
On Thetis began like to a fearful thunder
Make Hydra shake with a Dodonian fist;
When Delta deemed her self in him thus blessed,
Then Delta of her hope was quite bereaved:
See how the world is by the world deceived!
The Phoebus of his soil, scarce showed his sheen,
And faced the West with smiling Aurory,
When fatal Neptune with his trident keen,
(Behind him) haled him to his Thetisie,
But Jove down sent swift-winged Mercury,
And charged him to lay him's wings upon,
And be the conuoy of his champion.
When Mercury approch'd the seat of Jove,
With Mauors spirit on his winged arm;
Jove daign'd descend down from his seat above,
And him embraced with all heavenly charm.
Above the lofty skies, deuoid of harm
Sits Mauors spirit, as a demi-god:
Instead of Mars, swaying his warlike rod.
While Mars himself goes wandering up and down,
Associated with the sacred brood,
That hand in hand (like an enchaining rowne)
Encompasse him: even dead with want of food;
(If want may heaven hurt with deadly bood)
Much teen they bide in search for such an one:
Whom they may make their nurs'ries paragon.
A pitchie night encurtained with clouds
(That kept from it heavens star-bright comforture)
Is the sole Theater that them enshrowdes;
Fogs, damps, trees, stones, their sole encompassure,
To whom they moan, black todes give responsure:
Their woe is like unto that wretches pain,
Whom (s'parents dead) no man will entertain.
Before that death by life had stellified
Great Mauors spirit in the lofty sky:
Befote his spirit in heaven was deified,
Mars and the Muses had their dignity,
The sacred sisters did him aptifie
For Mars: he kindly fed his parents want,
And made that plenty which before was scant.
But now (O woe) they long may go unfed.
Aid (mighty Jove) for Nilus Crocodiles
Are bathing in the pure Castalian head.
Pure horse-foot Helicon, their filth defiles,
Art, like Egyptian dogs, must escape their wiles.
O dreary woe! the Muses did but sup,
And are infected with that poisonous cup.
How like black Orcus looks this dampy cave,
This obscure dungeon of Cimmerian sin,
This hugy hell! my spirit gins to rave,
To see black Pluto banqueting within
The once-form'd world with his fair Proserpin.
O see the world, all is by heaven rejected,
Now that the sacred Muses are infected.
See, where Urania, onelie's seated on
The twin-top'd hill, the steepie craggy mount,
That ouer-peeres, (once) cristall Helicon:
There bides she every storm, that once was wont
To bathe her self in the Castalian fount.
Yet this me gladdes, though she of joy be reau'n,
Yet is she now come nearer unto heaven.
O where is Mauortis? may the Muses say:
And have the heavens bereaved us of bliss?
O heavens! nay O sweet heaven fed Muses stay.
Exclaim not on the sacred heavens for this:
But as a mother (that her child does miss)
Lament: and be your heart from despair won:
Your womb may bring forth such another son.
And as thy Sun not still could face the north,
But by his falling reaued thee of day;
(Because the day light's by the night put forth)
Nor can thy nights black hew endure always:
Then hope sweet Delta hope, from murmr stay,
Thy Phoebus slumbreth but in Thetis lap:
He Will rise before thou think of such a hap.
See that same rock, the rock of my defense,
Is metamorphosde to an Unicorn:
Whose shining eyes of glorious eminence,
Does all the world with brightness clear adorn,
And with Jove's strength, her life-preseruing horn,
Has purified the cristallized fount,
That streams along the valley of Arts mount.
Her streaming rays have pierced the cloudie skies,
And made heavens traitors blush to see their shame;
Cleared the world of her black vironries,
And with palefeare does all their treason tame.
Delta's Bellonian, (name of peerless fame)
Has freed Apollo from their treachery,
And placed him in his former dignity.
Come, come, you wights that are transformed quite,
Eliza will you retransforme again;
Come star-crown'd female and receive thy sight,
Let all the world wash in her boundless maine,
And for their pain receive a double gain.
My very soul with heavenly pleasure's fed,
To see th'transform'd remetamorphosed.
Urania sits amid Pernassus vale,
Over shelterd with an aire-cleare Canopie:
O senses nurse! soule-sweet refreshing dale,
Gods nectar; heavens sweet ambrosianie;
Convert each river to pure Castalie.
That India it self, may sweetly raise,
Her well tuned notes in high Iehouah's praise.
FINIS.
The Epilogue.
NOw are the pitchie Curtains (that enclosde
The heavenly radiance of Apollo's shine)
Drawn back; and all that in hels cave reposd,
Are dancing chearely in a silver twine,
With heavens Urania, shaming Proserpine.
Hell's Phlegetontike torches are put forth:
And now the Sun does face the frosty north.
Sacred Apollo, cheeres the lightsome day,
And swan-plum'd Phoebe gards the star-faire night,
Lest Pluto's forester, should cause estray,
Dark Cosmos Pilgrim's wandering without light;
Heavens star-embroderie does shine full bright,
Heavens sacred lights agree in one consent,
To drive the clouds from forth the firmament.
Now is the Moon not blemished with a cloud,
Nor any lamp (that should illuminate
And lighten every thing that heaven does shroud)
Darkened; or else my sight gin's to abate,
And s'reaued of it intellectuate.
Each obscure cave is lightened by the day:
Or else mine eyes are forced to estray.
But when my heart was urged forth to breath,
Fell accents of soule-terrifying pain;
My subject was a heavenly tapers death;
Night was my lamp; my ink, hell's pitchy maine:
Then blame me not, if my wits light did waine,
Since but with night, I could with none confer
In this my Epinyctall register.
FINIS.

