THE HISTORY OF OUR B. LADY OF LORETO.

TRANSLATED out of Latin, into English.

IMPRINTED with License. 1608.



APPROBATIO.
NOs Ant. Maria, miseratione diuina tit. S. Agnetis in Agone S. R. E. Presb.
Card. Gallus nuncupatus, Dei and Apostolicae Sedis gratia Episcopus Auximanus,
Almae Domus and Ciuitatis Lauretanae Protect. and Guber. perpetuus.

Vidimus and probauimus Historiam Lauretanam R P. Horatij Tursellini e
Societate IESV, in quinque libros distinctam. consentit enim in omnibus cum
antiquis traditionibus and scripturis Almae Domus Lauretanae. In cuius rei
fidem, hoc ei testimonium dedimus. Auximi in nostris aedibus Episcopalibus, Die
XIV. Maij, Anno M.D.XCVII.

Ant. Mar. Card. Gallus. Laur. Prot. and Guber. perp.

EGo Claudius Aquauiua Societatis IESV Praepositus Generalis, Lauretanae
Historiae libros quinque a P. Horat^o Tursellino compositos, per tres alios
Theologos nostrae Societatis recognosci mandaui: quos cum illi approbauerint,
probo etiam, vt possint imprimi, si ita placuerit Reuerendissimo D.
Viceregenti, ac Reuerendissimo Patri Magistro Sacri Palatij. Datum Romae die
VIII. Octobris. Anno Domini M.D.XCVII.

Claudius Aquauiua.

Imprimatur.

Alex. Prouicesg.

Imprimatur.

P. Paulus Picus Reuer. Mag. Sac. Palatij socius.

TO THE MOST GLORIOUS, AND MOST B. VIRGIN OF LORETO, The most merciful
Patroness, and greatest Joy of Christians.
WHEREAS a custom has long prevailed among mortal me^ (most singular Queen
of heaven) to dedicate their labors and works to great men on earth, either
to advance the glory of their family, by recording the worthy memory of
their virtues, for the perpetual view of people and nations, or else to gain
their singular love and favor by so special a grace, toward them and their
posterity. Which albeit it be the full intent (if my mind deceive me not) of
them that labor to fill the world with knowledge: yet this kind of gratitude
(not to be misliked nor censured according to every man's conceit) does little
avail to further and help the imbecility of humane understanding, and to
infuse the true spirit of the work into the Readers mind, whereby he may
attain (specially in the Treatises of spiritual discourses) to the knowledge
of true Christianity, which only by the direction and grace of the heavenly
spirit, leads a devout soul out of the banishment and peregrination of
mortality, to the sacred fountain of everlasting felicity. Which happiness
being the whole intent, and the only desire of the Author and Translatour of
this work, and the true cause wherefore thou (most merciful Mother of Loreto)
by so great a miracle, have made thy most dear and most beloved house to
follow the religion and honor of the Christian name from Country to country,
and from place, to place, to incline the hearts of sinners to repentance, that
the Father of heaven might be truly scrued and honored upon earth, and the
work of our Redemption take such effect in the frail hearts of thy devout
suppliants, that with great zeal they might wish themselves wholly devoted to
the service of Allmighty God, and most desirously taste of that happiness, which
does not only give life, but life without end, purchased and bought with the
dearest blood of the immaculate Lamb of God, for the inhabitants of the whole
world. Among which that thy Own Dowry may have the grace once again to reap
the singular benefit of so heavenly a favor, vouchsafe, most glorious and
before all creatures the most happy Mother of God, to receive from the hands
of an unworthy seruitour of most B. Mary of Loreto (unfeignedly desiring that
true honor should be done unto thee) this labor, as a small token of his
service, and ever bounden duty to the most B. Queen of Heaven: being most
willing heerby (if so be it may stand with thy good liking) to advance and
propagate the worthy and most comfortable name of most B. Mary of Loreto in
every angle, yea and in every Christian heart of this distressed Island: which
indeed unless it be performed by thee the general Patroness of our miseries,
my slender endeavor (not worthy to obtain for poor Lazarus the least cru^be
that does fall from the rich table of those heavenly bankets) will little
avail. For these outward words may sound to small increase of sincere
devotion, if the heart be shut from the true feeling of divine mysteries: which
by none more willingly, more admirably, and with less entreaty than by thee,
either can, or are revealed to those souls, which now sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death; drawn thither by the deceit and fraud of thy enemies,
with such lamentable woe, as most of thy Clients (heretofore much devoted to
thy holy Name) now by evil information and damnable doctrine, seem to make it
an honor to their God, and a point of their religon, to renounce thy service,
to contemn thy prayer, and from their hearts to reject thy thrice fortunate
protection and help. But (O vouchsafe to hear) will the Mother of mercy, the
gate of heaven, the glory of Jerusalem, the joy of Israel, turn her desired
countenance, her merciful eyes, her melting bowels, her inflamed zeal of
souls from her Own Dowry, besieged and fiercely assaulted with the deadly
enemies of Mary, even of Mary the Mother of God? Do not respect, look not at
abuses and great wrongs, think not of injuries done unto thee; for now mercy
is expected, now favor is sought, now pardon is obtained for the greatest
offenders, and by whom but by B. Mary of Loreto? The more perverse, the more
obstinate, and greater that the offenders converted be; the more glory does
come to Loreto the beloved Cell of thy habitation, and to Mary the giver of all
gifts and graces next after God: Which at thy beloved Loreto, are most
abundantly bestowed on them, that by thy holy intercession and mean, crave
humble pardon of their sins from God. Therefore for the beloved name of Mary,
for the Mother of God, for Loreto it self, mollify and mercifully incline the
hearts of them, that shall read these thy wonders and miracles, inspire into
them the light of grace, give them (by thy holy intercession) true
understanding, prompt will, and willing perfourmance to embrace all which
belongs to know the service of the true omnipotent God, and of Jesus Christ,
his and thy only Son. Which once performed, is not the straied sheep found
out, and carried on the Pastors shoulders to his fellows, and placed in the
cherishing bosom of his dearest Mother the holy Catholic Church? Is not the
prodigal Child received with all exultatio^ and joy again into his Fathers
favor? Is not dead Lazarus revived? does not all heaven rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner? and does it not sound with the praises of B. Mary of
Loreto, whom Allmighty God has so glorified, that he has made her the
instrument and the mean to have all the chosen sheep of Christ's flock to
return to Paradise, and to taste of the immortal fountain of salvation by
her, that as the most wretchedest of all women was the occasion of bringing all
misery on our heads so the most glorious: not only of women, but of all
creatures whatsoever, should direct and guide us unto our former state of
bliss again. Wherefore blessed Mother of mercy, and the most comfortable
refuge of all offenders, give ear and harken, I beseech thee, to these
plaints of thy unworthy suppliant. Neither the voice of a wretched sinner, nor
his poor wishes and prayers alone durst presume to present themselves before
so singular a Patroness, to entreat so great a benefit, as pardon, peace, and
grace for thy distressed England; if the merits of all holy Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, devout Matrons (yea and that nothing at all may
be wanting) even thy own abundant and well-deseruing merits themselves did
not come to entreat, to request, and to call unto thee in behalf of this
outcast and abandoned Island. If it be exceeding joy and contentment to thee to
have Loreto glorified and most reverenced of all places in the world, work
means with thy beloved Son, that this unfruitful vineyard may have the
earth and soil of her heart sown with that heavenly seed which at Loreto is
most abou^dantly powered from heaven into the souls of thy devout Clients: that
all the people of our Country may rejoice, not only to have understanding, but
also to see planted in their souls the beautiful flowers of the mystical
Paradise, where the spiritual Ada^ CHRIST JESUS our Lord and Savior was
framed and made man of the virginal earth of thy body, where he found all
delicacies and dainty fruits of virtues, the sweetest flowers which heavenly
grace could produce, and the comfortablest nourishment and food which Angels
taste. Amidst which was made and framed the Lord of Angels in thee, the
earthly Paradise of this world, and the joy of our God: which does well show,
that thou indeed (O glorious) art the Paradise which was never defiled, never
was stained with any imperfection, nor never saw the least blemish of
earthly corruption. Witness hereof not only the glorious Resurrection of Christ
our Lord thy Son, thy most happy Assumption into heaven both in body and
soul: but the very precinct, the circuit, and the place where this Paradise
was planted; those very walls (I say) and the rest of the sacred House of
Loreto it self, which by a great miracle have stood from the very time that you
lived till this day, without any alteration or change at all, either by default
of antiquity or injury of the weather: declaring unto us the rare wonders and
mercies of Allmighty God, who by his only will does make mortal things
immortal in a sort for ever. Wherefore that the gate of this Paradise may
always be open, and that all may have free passage to gather the sweet
flowers and seeds of virtue, which undoubtedly do cure both spiritual and
corporal infirmities; request, entreat, importune thy Lord, thy Creator, thy
Savior, and thy Son, that the Angel may terrify and prohibit no longer,
that the fiery sword of wrath and revenge may be removed, that in Loreto all
may come to taste of the tree of life, whose fruit does not only heal and take
away sin, but also does so comfort all them that be in distress and misery,
that neither death nor the fruits thereof can have power to reign in them any
longer, but that the sacred fountain of life it self, which there was made man
to save man, by thy B. merits, and most holy prayer, may most happily be
planted, given, and bestowed on man to the welfare of his everlasting
felicity, and desired salvation.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND RIGHT VIRTUOUS Gentlewoman M.ris M. B.
T. P. Wishes increase of virtue, and true felicity in JESUS CHRIST.
CONSIDERING with my self (right virtuous M.ris M.) to whom of mortal
creatures, even next after that glorious Virgin the Mother of our merciful and
great God, I might present and deliver this discourse (being as it were the
gate of the flourishing place where the true spiritual Paradise was planted,
to be opened for the welfare of our distressed Country: me thought none
could better perform so singular an office of duty toward B. Mary of Loreto,
than they, who with the example of Virginal purity, have eue^ from their
cradle been allwaies specially devoted to that place, and have much desired to
hear and to read the marvelous wonders of so merciful a Patroness, that
their souls might be fully replenished, and happily blessed, with the great
comfort of so divine a benefit. Among whom, who may be judged more worthy than
she, in whom from infancy, the disposer of these celestial graces, has
dwelt both by name and grace? And that she may allwaies dwell in your religious
heart, to the increase of your noble virtues, and to the good of many souls; to
you (devout M.ris M.) I present this small token of my dutiful affection, that
by your singular piety, and true Christian zeal toward this miraculous place,
others may know what unfeigned happiness (if any be on earth) this little book
does set before their eyes. For as by her glorious merits, and the disposition
of the Father of mercies, B. Mary of Loreto has deserved the principality, and
to be Queen of all heavenly creatures: so by the sanctification and will of
Mary, the most sacred House of Loreto, has ever been the first of all places
consecrated to her name on earth; and that in so marvelous a manner, that the
most B. Queen of Angels does bestow her Angelical benefits so bountifully in
this place, that there is none, although he do not visit her with corporal
presence (if conveniently he can not) but in spirit only, that departs hence
without the special reward and blessing of Loreto: such a fountain of
sanctity have the merits of this Virginal Queen produced for our miseries and
infirmities, that (O wonder!) these burde^s seem, as it were, to be removed
and taken from us, during our abode in that Paradise, which B. Mary's
habitation, touchings, and virtues have truly sanctified, for the good and
welfare of her Suppliants for ever. Which you devout M.ris M. knowing to be
true, will not cease this haruest-tyme of your life to gather into the treasury
of your heart, all spiritual seeds of celestial glory, with more singular
example and zeal of the honor of her your Patroness, of your own
perfection, and the good of all that shall concur with you, in this most
profitable service of the heavenly Queen. And that you may most faithfully
perform it, here once again you your self, and they by you, receive the full
view of that true flourishing vineyard and of all her heavenly fruits, that
among such variety, you may make special choice of some of her odoriferous
virtues, which have so singular a quality, that they never change their first
beauty, but still adorn the soul with greater purity, than the brightest
planets, these corruptible heavens: which God grant to be your happy choice,
that still in this earthly peregrination, you may be made more like to her,
whose name you bear, that as a well-deseruing servant, you may sollace with
her, in the joy of eternal beatitude.

In all sincere affection Ever ready to do you service in Christ Jesus. T. P.
From my poor dwelling, this 29. of March. 1608.
TO THE GODLY READER.
AMONG all the wonders which have happened on earth since the mysteries of our
Redemption, what more marvelous, more wonderful, and profitable to man, than
to have an infallible refuge and harbor of security, against the fury and
storm of the divine wrath, where he may be delivered from the imminent blow of
that dreadful sword, which perceth with so great woe, as the extreme and
insufferable pain which it causes, can never be mitigated, nor in any sort
abated, but rather more and more increased: as by meditating, considering, and
reading the holy Scriptures, it is plain to all, that can conceive the
misfortunate state of sinners. Which is the chance of all that die the children
of wrath, and are plunged into the fiery pittes of damnation, because they did
not succor themselves in their life on earth, in the harbor of Gods
unspeakable mercies: which very specially do appear at his beloved Loreto, the
precinct, the walls, and the circuit of that Paradise, where Christ our Lord
was not only made man, and the Savior of our souls: but also the sentence of
malediction was taken from the damned posterity of Adam, and happily changed
into the former benediction. If that the place where our first Father was
created, was the delight and joy of man; if the place where the sentence of
death was pronounced against us, were holden of such wonder, estimation and
desire, that no words can declare it: what I pray thee ought that to be, where
Christ himself was framed of our nature; where in steed of damnation,
benediction was brought from heaven and given to all well deserving people?
Which was not made the bar, the tribunal, and the throne of the rigorous
and severe judgment of our death, but the Paradise, the treasury, and the
sacred Fountain, where that heavenly salve was made, that cures the grieved
wounds of our manifold sins. If Allmighty God destroyed the former Paradise,
as the place of our damnation, and by a miracle unheard of from the beginning
of the world, has preserved this in the very same state, wherein it was, when
he himself was there made man: can any imagine, dare any say, will any judge
that it is for no end? This special wonder was for some great purpose, as
indeed the marvelous, the daily, and the manifold benefits bestowed there on
mankind, by the prayer of the immaculate Mother of our God, do undoubtedly
declare; yea and do signify to all, that God, Allmighty has made this a very
special harbor of refuge and succor unto us, in the manifold dangers of our
earthly peregrination: which not only many thousands of supernatural wonders,
wholly surpassing the power of all natural means, but also the incredible
devotion of all Christians, does acknowledge, testify, and approve the same,
with more effectual zeal, than any words can deliver to the godliest Reader:
in so much indeed, that they who have not seen and tasted this whereof I
speak, at first will not so easily believe to be true. For the like concourse,
the like fervor, and such continual devotion, was never heard of from the
beginning of the world. And what is the cause of all this so great fervor and
reverence? The reviving of dead men? the curiug of diseases, that by natural
means were utterly despaired of, and past all hope of cure? the heavenly
visions and revelations, which have been showed to devout people in this most
Maiesticall Seat of the whole world? No, no, not only these, but chiefly the
abundance of Gods grace, the Fountain of heavenly joy and consolation, which
seems still to flow, and to be powered into men's hearts beyond all measure in
this celestial place: which is so evident and so manifest, that (...) one nor
two hundred thousands of people, which dwell near at hand, but even very many
of the remotest parts of the world, yearly pilgrimage thither, to drink of
this fountain and sacred River o^ heaven. Seeing therefore that these things are
so evident, that the very enemies of the Christian name neither do, nor can
deny them: what will they say, who deny that Saints can hear our prayers?
That their sacred Relics can work any effect above nature? What answer
will they frame and shape to this? Well may they blush and be much ashamed, to
have denied, hated, contemned, and rejected Christ himself, by rejecting these
things with such malicious contempt and hatred? But what? can any answer be
made to the inscrutable judgments of Allmighty God, who does work thus
meruailously by the things, which he and his B. Mother touched and sanctified
by their own habitation, whiles they lived on earth? If in the old Law,
allmighty God did work these and such like wonders, in the Pond upon Probatica
(Joan. 5.) which he never commanded to be made, either for the cure of
infirmities, or for people to resort unto it, for that, or any other end, but
approved their devotion and godly reverence by miracles from heaven: will he
then be less beneficial to Christians in the new law, than to the Jews in
the old? Or will he do less honor to the Relics of his dear Saints, than
to the waters which only washed the sacrifices of the old Law? Or have people
less need of these things now, than at those times they had? Or be there not
now as many diseases in the new, as before in the old Law? Why therefore should
not Christ bestow benefits on his beloved in this and in other places, by the
merits of his B. Mother? Why should not diseases be cured in this devout House
before the Image of our B. Lady now a days, as well as in the waters of that
Pond, in the time of the former people? Is Christ power less now in his own
House, than in time past in the waters of that place? But why by more words
should I seek to prove and declare the possibility of Gods grace and power,
which so admirably, so comfortably, and most merueilously does not only show it
self; but also does flow into men's souls in the sacred House of Loreto: that
by his holy Conception and education there, Christ our Lord does seem to have
made it the gate of heaven, for our comfort and everlasting joy. Have not all
nations Christian by their vows, votaries, gifts and donaries approved and
most religiously desired to taste (as indeed they have) of the sweetness of
Loreto? And which is more, do not heathenish nations admire and confess the
divine power, which allwaies is so present there, that to them it seems as it
were to dwell in the most sacred House of Loreto? All Barbary is full of the
reverence of Loreto, and does tremble to hear the name of Mary of Loreto
mentioned, whom many times that country people thinking to have robbed and
spoiled of her wealth, were taught by many great miracles, and infinite loss
of men, not to touch, nor approach unto her, but to reverence and honor her
with religious respect and devout words. Only England of all nations under the
sun does not know, does not honor and reverence this glorious Paradise of
the earth. What, is she worse than Turks and heathen people, who dare not
attempt any hostility, nor utter any irreuerent thing of Loreto, being taught
this fruitful lesson by their great harm? Truly for that presumptuousnes,
which makes thee O England to say that Saints cannot hear our prayers, that
Mary the Mother of Christ is no better than other women, that she can not
hear, nor help her Suppliants. But if the Catholic Church can not teach
thee, if Turks, if heathenish people cannot inform thee; let wonderful
works of God, this miracle of the world, the marvelous benefits bestowed on
mankind in this most sacred place by the prayers of the Mother of God, make it
manifest unto thee, that Christ does hear his Mothers prayers, and that the
contrary, irreuerent, impious, and blasphemous opinion does bring damnation of
body and soul to all those that believe such fancies and devilish inventions,
as to contemn, to deride, and to detract the Saints of Allmighty God: whereas
the contrary, that is, to honor, to reverence, and by humble prayer to
entreat the help, the assistance, and the aid of his Saints, is so pleasing,
acceptable, and dear in the sight of his divine Majesty, that he does confirm
this belief of his Catholic servants with daily and innumerable miracles from
heaven: whereby the contrary is so confounded, detested and hated by Allm. God
himself, that he can do no more to make the^ to know and see their detestable
and damnable error, and indeed their heresy, as palpable Christ's Conception?
who would not see the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost, and the virtue of the
Highest desce^d on the B. Virgin in her little house of Loreto? who would not be
present at all the wonders that Christ wrought in that little place of his
abode? who would not allwaies most effectually desire to pray with his body in
Loreto, before the glorious Images of JESUS and MARY, that his mind may be
carried to greater joy than words can express? O what increase of virtue will
come to your souls, to think that B. Mary the Mother of God does work in
your hearts all those miraculous cures which she has done in the bodies of
her suppliants! what joy will it be to your hearts to see your sins taken
away, to feel the working of the holy ghost in your breasts, to see damnation
turned into salvation, and deep auersion into sweet embracing love! These
things are so wonderful and admirable, that nothing can be more desired of
your souls. Therefore give your selves to Mary, offer your selves to Mary,
consecrate your hearts and wills wholly to Mary, and Mary will allwaies be with
you in Loreto; she will teach you to pray, she will be an example still before
your eyes, and in your behalf before the Altar of his divine presence, she will
also offer up every Aue Maria, and every devout naming of Jesus, to the
increase of your holiness on earth, to your great comfort in all your
tribulations, and to the full accomplishment of your heavenly Crown in the
Paradise of eternity.

Your Welwiller. T. P.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND Lord Peter Aldobrandino CARDINAL Of
the Holy Roman Church, HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS WISHES FELICITY.
THE providence of Allmighty God does appear in many great and wonderful
things (Right honorable Cardinal:) but specially in this, that he has made
his B. Mother the Patroness and parent of mankind. For seeing that humane
imbecility was subject to innumerable chances, he ever determined to appoint
such a keeper and defendresse unto the same, as chiefly above all others, both
would and could deliver their health every way beset with dangers, and bless
their life with true and happy goodness. For our mighty God has made his B.
Mother a companion of his divine majesty and power, as far as may be lawful;
long ago bestowing upon her the special prerogative and principality of all
heavenly and earthly creatures. According to whose will (as much as the
protection of mankind does require) he moderateth the earth, the sea, heaven
and nature it self: at whose entreaty, and by whom, he bestows divine
treasures and heavenly gifts on mortal men: that all may understand that
whatsoever does flow from that eternal and most sacred Fountain of goodness to
earth, that it does flow unto us by Mary his most B. Mother. What region
therefore, what people, what nation is there, where the Patronage of Mary is not
illustrated with miracles, consecrated with Houses, adorned with titles? But
among all the sacred Houses dedicated to the B. Virgin Mother of God, one House
of Loreto does excel: which with the fame of her name, has both filled the
whole world: and also for the space of these many ages, is reverenced daily
more and more with the concourse and frequency of all people and nations. For
as other Churches of our B. Lady are (for the most part) the refuges of
particular Cities and Countries: so this seems to be the common refuge of
all people and nations. And therefore to you (Peter Aldobra^dino) I specially
dedicate the History both of this House and Church, as well in the name of our
whole Society, which you favor with singular benevolence, as in my own, who
for the same cause must needs confess my self to owe more to your singular
humanity, than I am able to perform. Nether must any marvel why we write
this History in Latin, for they err (by some men's leave be it spoken) and
measure the thing rather by the love which they bear to their native tongue,
than by the truth it self, if any think, that more fruit of a History may be
received by this our late and Tuscane language, than by the old and Latin
tongue. For the Tuscane tongue does not much pass the bounds of Italy it self,
which hereafter an interpreter of this History may satisfy: but the Latin
tongue does go far and near, almost through all people and nations, that the
Roman language may extend further than in times past the Roman Empire did. And
if the protection of the B. Virgin of Loreto be showed to all Countries of the
world: truly with good reason we may wish, that her glory and fame, may go as
far, as the Christian Religion and reverence has done. Wherefore (most
honorable Cardinal) with that benignity wherewith you are wont to receive our
Men, receive this small gift of our Order; and permit the most famous name of
Peter Aldobrandino to be carried over most remote nations and countries,
together with the History of Loreto, that it may be a monument of your
singular devotion toward the B. Virgin of Loreto, and a pledge of our
grateful and propense good will toward your name.

Farewell.
THE AVTHORS WHICH ARE ALLEGED IN THIS HISTORY.
Friar Leander Albertus. Ambrosius Nouidius The Annals of Flumen alleged by
Hier. Angelita. The Annals of Recanati alleged by the same. The Annals of
Loreto which Raphael Riera left in manuscript. S. Antoninus Bishop of Florence.
Baptista Mantuanus. Venerable Bede. S. Bernard Abbot of Clareuallis. Bernardine
Cyrillus Blondus.
The Breues.
Of Benedict the XII. Of Boniface the IX. Of Martin the V. Of Nicolas the V. Of
Xystus the IV. Of Paul the IV. Of Julius the II. Of Leo the X. Of Clement the
VII. Of Paul the III. Of Julius the III. Of Gregory the XIII. Of Clement the
VIII.
The Books wherein the donaries of Loreto are recorded.
The Chronicle of S. Francis. Diarium Iulij Secundi. Francis Vicciardinus.
William Tyrius. S. Hierome. Hierome Angelita. James Victriacus. John Villanus.
Iudocus Clitoueus. Nicephorus Callistus. Onuphrius. Paulus AEmilius. Platina.
Terema^ the Governor. Sabellicus. Victor Brigantius.


THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reverend F.
HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Society of JESUS.
THE PREFACE.
HAVING now a long time done my endeavor to unfold from the beginning to our
age, the History of the house of Loreto, which many have rather begu^ne then
finished, and most earnestly desired: I pray God as the work has been
difficult and painful, so it may be profitable. For almost all the monuments
of this History, which are to be found of Loreto, Recanati, Rome, or els-where,
have been perused with great labor and diligence; out of which I have
gathered, and so digested, whatsoever seemed to appertain to this matter, that
they might make one reasonable volume. And the solicitude of the success, made
the care of this present work the greater. For no small, nor few things to be
spoken of, did occur unto me, as I was about to enter into it, to disanimate
and auert my mind, from that which I purposed. And first truly the very
beginnings of this sacred Chapel are so admirable and so unusual, that they
may seem almost incredible, if the judgments of Almighty God were to be
weighed by humane reason. Then the indiligence of our forefathers in committing
such things to writing, has diminished a good part of this History. Besides,
it seemed a spice of arrogancy, to hope for better eue^t in a thing which many
writers of no small account had assaied with no good success. And last of all
my own disabilitie began to accuse me; lest I might be thought to have
undertaken the burden of so weighty a work, with greater confidence then
judgment; being specially to rehearse those things, which because they seem
in a sort incredible, by discoursing might be made less then they be indeed.
Whereupon it was to be feared, that I might rather withdraw, then add any
thing to the worthy fame of this most Sacred Church, and with my lost labor
might purchase nothing else, but the reprehension of the wise. But when I had
recollected my self, my mind was animated, and difficulties ceased. For
although the thing be admirable, and never heard of before: yet now it is
known to be so certain, and manifest, as to controue^se or doubt thereof, were
wickedness. For being received of our forefathers, as it were, from hand to
hand, with great fidelity; even so did they deliver it to posterity. Which
is not grounded on the monuments of the Sclauonians, and of Recanati only, but
also on the authority of Historiographers, and of the Roman Bishops. Also the
constant consent of so many Ages, and the concourse of all nations, has
confirmed the ancient report hereof. Besides, the incredible multitude, as
well of Vows, as the abundance of Donaries, make the religion of the place
most illustrious. And finally the old Miracles of this most Sacred House, do
not more beautify the same; then the new ones daily do: that none may doubt of
a thing so witnessed and known, unless he will either doubt of the power and
providence of God, or take away from mankind humane fidelity. And truly if we
show, that the beginings of this most Sacred Church, ennobled with the birth of
the B. Virgin, and with the Conception of God, are far more maiesticall then
others, all nations must allow that special grace, with no less willingness,
then they approve the special help thereof. And albeit the indiligence of our
fore fathers, has bereaved us of the fulness of many things; yet it has not
deprived us of the substance of the chiefest matter, who not regarding small
things, showed them selves diligent in greater. Therefore if this my simple
present, shall be acceptable to the B. Virgin, (as I hope it will) truly I
mistrust not, but that the rest will be facill and expedite unto me. For when
MARY assisteth, nothing can succeed amiss. But if peradventure this my labor
be not answerable, either to the greatness of the thing, almost incredible, or
else to the expectation of the learned; truly it shall be my contentment, to
have done my uttermost endeavor, to perpetuate the memory of so famous a
miracle, being the glory of the B. Virgin mother of God, the protection of
mankind, and even the inflamed desire of all godly people. And unless the
affection of this present work deceive me, there is scarce any History of this
kind, more famous for miracles, richer for examples, more frequent for
practice, or pleasanter for profit. For here may you behold the diverse and
manifold protectio^s of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Here her present help in all
manner of dangers: here most of her miracles and wonders, laid before you in a
worthy monument: from whence you may entreat help for your self, for your
family and City; for the diversity of times as need shall require. And to
me truly Italy seems to have a great pledge of Gods benevolence, to the
which, even from Galiley it self, was sent so rare and so great a gi^t; that
in time of aduersuie she may hope, that she shall never want her patronage,
whose native House she enjoys as a suertie and bail from God himself.
Moreover Almighty God has inspired into the hearts of mortal men, such
devotion toward the place, that whosoever come to the house of Loreto seem
not so much to come to the house of the Virgin, as to the B. Virgin herself.
For here in very deed, both Almighty God and his B. mother, declare their
presence, after a certain marvelous manner: Hence is stricken that divine
fear into the hearts of all, at their very entrance into this most Sacred
House: Hence comes that desire to them that are to depart from it, to reuisit
it again: Hence that notable mutation of desperate and notorious wicked minds
to the contrary. Which continual miracles of the House of Loreto, are so
evident, that albeit others were wanting, as they abound, yet these alone might
make sufficient proof to any creature, of the presence of Almighty God in so
much that there is none (though desperate and wicked) but if he visit the house
of Loreto may not easily perceive Almighty God to be present with his B.
Mother, in his Mothers little House. This is special and proper to the Church
of Loreto, to have her religion and sanctity to flourish every day more and
more, which may easily appear in comparison of other famous Churches, either
of our B. Lady or else of other Saints. For when their celebritie and reverence
has flourished for a certain time, we know that it has diminished by little
and little: but by the space of so many ages, we evidently see, that because the
majesty of this Church, is grounded on most firm foundations, it does daily
become more glorious and more holy. Wherefore Almighty God, and his B. Mother
assisting us, of whom this whole work does entreat, and on whose help we
most rely; we will now begin the History it self, which truly through
their gracious favor, will not be so painful I hope unto the writer, as
profitable unto the reader. And albeit the beginning of the House of Loreto, be
scarce derived above three hundred years; yet necessarily must it be deduced
higher, that the whole discourse may more purely flow, from the head and
fountain it self.

THE NATIVE HOUSE of our B. LADY is reverenced with great honor in Galiley,
whiles the Christian faith remains in Palestine. CHAP. I.
THE native house of the B. Virgin, in time past was in Galiley, a Province of
Syria, where in the town of Nazareth, our B. Lady herself was borne and
brought up; where she conceived our eternal God, by foretelling of the Angel:
And where the footstepes of God and his F. mother, sovereign to mankind, were
first imprinted. The sanctity of which place, was neither unknown, nor at any
time neglected of godly people. For first of all it is well known, that our B.
Lady has always been of great name and veneration among Christians; whereof
the Apostles themselves were the authors, The Apostles consecrate the h use of
our B. Lady.
who rightly consecrated the B. Virgins house, either to preserve the memory
thereof to posterity, or else to increase the Christian religion thereby. From
which time the Apostles themselves reverenced it with exceeding honor, and
also commanded that others should worship it with like devotion. And the
Apostles authority prevailed with posterity. For all succeeding ages have
co^tendingly reuere^ced the birthplace of the heavenly Queen, and the stepps
of Gods Conception, with such devotion and honor, as it deserved. Therefore
about 300. years after Christ's Nativity (Christian affairs beginning then
to flourish, with long peace renewing all things, under the protection of
Constantine the Great) S. Helene the Empress adorned this little House of the
Blessed Virgin with a goodly Church. For pilgrimaging into Palestine (as
Nicephorus delivers) and with sacred buildings adorning the places, which
were sanctified with divine mysteries, S. Helen does adorn it with a Church.
lib. 8. ca. 30
She came to Nazareth, and finding out the House of the Angelical Salutatio^,
built there a sumptuous Church. From which time, those holy places began to be
reverenced more then before, not only by the Asians and Africans, but of the
Europians also; and the native House of our B. Lady, glorious for the heavenly
Embassage and Conception of the divine issue, was more earnestly reuere^ced of
godly people. Proof is that S. Hierome, a pillar of the Roman Church, S.
Hierom and S Paula do visit it.
and B. Paula a woman of the chiefest nobility of Rome, visiting that holy
Land, went as S. Hierome terms it, to Nazareth the nourcerie of our Lord. And
this devotion continued many ages; Epist. 27 ad Eusto.
for about the 700. year of our Redemption, when Jerusalem was taken by the
Saracens by force of arms, the sacred places of Syria, Guil. Tyr. lib. 1 bell.
Sac.
and the Church, wherein was the House, in which the Angel saluted our B. Lady,
was visited of the Europian pilgrims. Author hereof is Venerable Bede, soon
after that age: for the State of Jerusalem, De loc. Sanc.
and of the Christians in Palestine, was not then so bad under the Saracens, as
afterward it was under the Turks; who conquering Syria and Jerusalem about
the year of our Redemption, Guil. Tyr. lib. 1
one thousand and fifty, began to dishonor the Christian name many
reprochefull ways. The same whereof incensed Pope Vrbane the second, Idem lib. ^
by a new Breue to proclaim sacred war. In which by the forces of the
Europians, but specially of the French nobility, under the conduct of Godfrey
Duke of Loraine, Paul Aemil. lib. 4. Jerusalem is recovered.
Jerusalem, and Palestine were recovered, about the year one thousand one
hundred. Whereby as long as the Kingdom of Jerusalem stood, the religion of
those holy places did chiefly flourish, among which the native House of the B.
Virgin, obtained not the meanest place. For which cause Tancred a Norman by
birth (whose worthy virtue was very famous in the sacred war) and being
President of Galiley adorned the Church of Nazareth with many notable gifts,
which afterward, not so much the wealth, The Church of Nazareth is made the
Metropolitan
as the sanctity of the place, made the Metropolitan or principal Church, as
witnesses William Archbishop of Tyrus, who lived here those times. Likewise
James Victriacus Patriarch of Jerusalem, who lived shortly after, Guil. Tyr.
lib. 9
does also deliver, that he often went to Nazareth for devotion sake, and
sundry times celebrated divine service in the House, where our B. Lady was
saluted by the Angel, the very Anniuersarie day of the Annunciation it self.
About which time began the two most notable Orders of sacred soldiers, Guil.
Tyr. lib. 12. and 13. Paul. Aemil. lib. 5.
to wit, the Templaries, and S. John's, both chiefly ordained to entertain and
defend the Pilgrims, that visited those holy places. The fame whereof prevailed
so much, that the native house of our B. Lady of Nazareth was reverenced of the
Transalpines, and them that dwelt beyond the seas, as well as the Sepulcher at
Jerusalem, and at Bethleem the birthplace of our Lord. But this quietness
continued not long: For Saladine King of Egypt ouerco^ming and taking in
battle, Balduine the fifth, (then King of Jerusalem) forthwith waged war on
every side, and brought Jerusalem, Paul. Aemil. lib. 4.
and other Cities and towns ther-about into his Dominion, about 90. years
after the Christians had recovered them. Whereupon Conrade the Emperor, Philip
of France the second, and Richard King of England, Paul. Aemil. lib. 6.
passed over into Syria with great forces, either to recover Jerusalem, or else
to keep the possession of Palestine. But they returned home without their
purpose, circumuented and dissolved, either with the subtilties of the Enemy,
or with the guile of the Country or else by discord among themselves. After
whom followed the Emperor Frederick the second, who also was King of Sicilie,
and entitled to the Kingdom of Jerusalem: who through the persuasion and
instigation of Gregory the 9. at last conveyed an army into Syria. Paul.
Aemil. lib. 7.
But entering into friendship and society with the King of Aegipt, he
recovered Jerusalem and other bordering towns, with money, and not by arms,
the year 1225. whereby his fame was greater then his deserte; the possession
thereof proving no longer, then glorious. For few years after, the Parthians
being driven out of their country, by the Scithians and Tartarians, invaded
Syria, and razed Jerusalem, (lately repaired by Frederick the Emperor) down
to the grownd. Whereupon Jews the 9. (who at that time was King of France)
about the 45. year or that age, Paul. Aemil. lib. 7.
sailed into Syria with great forces, to aid the Christian cause upon
decaying. But all his endeavor came at length to nothing: for the godly King
subduing the fro^tiers of Aegipt (sometime called Pelusium but now Damiata) in
the beginning waged many fortunate battles with the King of Aegipt: but
afterward being pestered with the plague, he was constrained to purchase peace
of his enemy, by surrendering up Damiata. Finally when his enterprise in Syria
had no prosperous event, he withdrew his army: but before his departure, that
his expedition into Syria might not be in vain, he purposed to carry thence
some profit, if not of war, Iod. Clito. ser. de S. Ludou.
at least of piety. For visiting those holy places of Palestine, from the
mount Thabor (as some affirm) he went to Nazareth. And as soon as he saw the
House of our B. Lady, he speedely alighted from his horse, S. Jews does visit
the house of our B. Lady.
fel^ down on his knees, and with great veneration saluted the native House of
the B. Virgin, and the B. Virgin herself, going thence afoot to the Church to
reverence and worship the Son of God, there made man for the love of man, and
also his most holy mother the B. Virgin MARY. And the sacred and festival day
of the Annunciatio^ of Gabriel the Archangell, and of the B. Virgins Conceiving
or God being then at hand, the godly King (as the sanctity of the place and
his own devotion moved him) did fast the day before with bread and water
only, wearing a haire-cloath next unto his skin. Upon the festival day it
self, he commanded that divine service should be celebrated with great
sole^nitie, and Princely ornature, and after the Dreadful Sacrifice, he
himself received the most sacred Eucharist, in the maiesticall Cell of the B.
Virgin the Mother of God, with great abundance of tears, and singular
devotion. Truly a rare docume^t of Christian piety unto posterity,
especially in a King, whereby we may conjecture how highly the sacred house of
the B. Virgin was esteemed even in those days. But the Christian name, and the
reverence of the holy places of Syria, were not quite extinguished by the
departure of King Jews. S. Antonin. par. 3. Paul. Aemil.
For the Templaries remained yet in their Catholic faith, and in their
office, and now and then being aided with help beyond the Seas, defended the
Relics of the holy land with all their might. But in very deed as soon as
Civil wars began to rage in Italy, by the deadly factions of the Guelses and
Gibellines; and at the same time, the Kings of England, France and Aragon,
breaking also into arms, the Furopia^s altogether neglected the Christian
state in Syria, and the Barbarians much decaying it, gave it at last an utter
overthrow. For the King of Aegipt thinking the dissension of Christian Princes
his advantage, took Tripolis by force of arms, and razed it down; and from
thence went to beseege Ptolemaidis, the famous and most frequented City of
Phenicia, which then alone of all the Cities in Palestine, did stand for the
Christians, and at last having conquered it, he destroyed it with fire and
sword. And the Barbarians had so desperate a hatred to the Christian name, that
they slew all the Cittize^s, threw their houses and walls down to the ground:
and which is more, dug up the very foundation of the walls themselves, that
no memory of Christianity might remain in Syria. And thus having lost
Ptolemaidis, we were driven for ever (as it may seem) out of the possession of
Palestine, the year of our Redemption, one thousand two hundred nintie one,
whereby the Christian inhabitants partly forsook Syria, and partly, as
sometimes it happens, conformed themselves to the manners of their Lords.
And forrenners and Pilgrims had been frighted thence by this terror of the
Turkish fury, but that their access is allowed for money Yet this fatal
calamity has not utterly abolished the ancient reverence of the holy
Sepulcher, which for devotions sake was held in chiefest reverence. For the
opportunity of Jerusalem once a Kingly seat, but now the chiefest City
inuiteth Pilgrims unto her; whose fame the neernes of the birth place of Christ
our Lord do the maintain and favor. But the distance of the places and desert
ways, not a little infested with the arms of the Barbaria^s, made the native
house of our Lady (situated in Galiley) inconvenient for the devotion of
Pilgrims, which was the cause of a wonderful miracle, and such a one indeed,
as from the memory of man, was never heard of to that day.

The sacred House having lost her honor in Galiley, is miraculously
transported into Dalmatia. CHAP. II.
WHEN due reverence could not be done to the most Sacred Chapel, neither by
the inhabitants nor foreign people, Almighty God permitted not the sovereign
footstepps of himself and his B. mother, to lie long neglected among the
Barbarians. For the very year, which was notorious for the extreme overthrow
of Palestine, this sacred House most dear to God himself, together with the
Christian Religion departed out of Syria. John Villanus a famous
Historiographer of that age, Toan Villa. lib. 7.
does witness, that Ptolemaidis was taken about the midst of the month of
April, the year 1221. and in the next month of the same year, that is to say
the 7. of the Ides of May, Anual. Flum.
Nicholas the fourth being Pope (as the Sclauonian Chronicles record) the
sacred House of the B. Virgin was transported into Europe, Annal. Elum. apud
Hiero. Angel.
reco^pencing the calamity of the East, with this inestimable good of the
West. Some there are, who considering the wealth of Ioachim the B. Virgins
father, think that this was not his house, but rather a chamber apart, from
the rest thereof. But truly it misliketh not me, to be of their opinion, who
think it to be both the Chamber and House of the B. Virgin, to wit, the
chiefest part of her fathers house. Proof whereof (to say nothing of the
armorie of the earthen vessel there to be seen) is the door far greater,
then for a chamber alone, separated from the other building. Neither must the
state of Ioachim move us; for Nicephorus Callistus delivers, Niceph. lib. 1.
c. 30
that by reason of the warlike tumultes of Iewrie, the parents of the B. Virgin
forsaking the town of Bethleem, their ancestors seat, and going into Galiley,
set up a little house at Nazareth: that we may understand, that this was not
their ancestors, but the B. Virgins fathers house, not fitting peradventure
his calling, but being provided for the time, it was not surely incommodious,
nor differing from the use of that ancient simplicity: Yet altogether such a
one it is, that it seems to breath the exceeding love of our B. Lady toward
poverty. But whether it were the Chamber or the House of the mother of God,
truly being dedicated by the Apostles (as we said before) and reduced into the
form of a Church, continually all Christians did devoutly reverence and adorn
the same.

Wherefore this most sacred House, by his virtue and power, who at the prayers
of S. Gregory Thaumaturge, in time past removed a mountain out of his place,
and tra^sferred it an other way, in favor of the Queen of heaven, was taken
up from the foundations, and doubtless by the handworke of Angels was
transported (a wonder to be spoken and heard) by great dista^ces of land and
sea, even from Galiley into Dalmatia, which is more the^ twenty hundred miles.
Between Tersact and Flumen (two towns of Dalmatia) there is a mountain not
very high, in the top whereof the plain superficies of the ground, does make
a pleasant seat, open to the Adriaticke sea, which in time past being
notoriously dangerous by reason of many daily and foul tempests, since that
time (as the report goes) is become very calm and quiet. You may believe that
the B. Virgin would restrain those furious seas by the presence of her Cell;
that even by this we might conjecture, what she would effect in the life of
mortal men, which is daily tossed with diverse chances, and as it were, with
sundry storms. Therefore even here, about the second Vigill of the night, by
commandment of the mother of God, heavenly ministers did seat the most sacred
house of Nazareth, that it might be a most certain succor to all that were
any way endangered: and as soon as the morning light showed this gift of the
divine liberality to the inhabitants, in very deed not only admiration, but
also devotion and piety was powered into their hearts, dismayed with the
strangenes of the thing. Whereupon they that were nearest at hand, as soon as
they espied it, ran contendingly with desire to see it. The description of
the House of Loreto, as it was in those days
And they beheld a little house with a sharp roose, graced as well with the
top of a chimney, as with a little bell hanging up on height; but in nothing
more remarkable, then for the antiquity thereof. Forthwith going into the
house it self, they prostrated their bodies on the ground to worship Almighty
God, who mercifully vouchsafed to replenish them with a certain sacred dread
and unwonted joy. After their prayer to Christ and his B. mother, whose Images
they saw, they began leysurely to view and review all with their eyes; and
perceived that the sacred Chapel, was of a long square form, built of
ordinary stone, having a fair roose vaulted with fretts: which being divided
with small squares, and flourished with blew colors, was beautified with
gilded stars which glittered in the diuisio^s, as if it had bin in a
certain heaven. Under the vaulted roof, round about the walls, there
appeared small semicircles touching each other, the midles whereof were adorned
with painted potts. The walls were almost a cubite thick, levied neither by
rule nor square, but covered with plaistered work; whereupon was drawn an
ancient painting, to express the mysteries of the house it self; which upward
till this day remains in many places, but downward has decayed by antiquity
of time. The length of the sacred house, is about 40. foot; the breadth less
then 20: and the height about 25. Some thing near the midst of the wall, which
in time past (as I suppose) was the forefront of the sacred house, there is a
large door, but truly not differing from the common sort, which in steed of
a transome, has a plain beam laid upon it. On the left hand stands a
little Cupbourd of simple work, made to keep earthen vessel: on the right
hand in the next wall, there is a window, not very bigg, and over against the
window, a mean and a slender chimney of common workmanship, as the rest are.
And even here stands a high nicet, and vaulted with an arch of the same
work, resembling five moons joined together. In which Nicet is placed a
Cedar Image of our B. Lady standing, The Image of our. B. Lady.
being about two cubits high; who with her left hand imbraceth the sweet child
Jesus about the midst, and supporteth him with the right. Her face is
vernished with amber, giving a s^uer glass, but darkened with the smoke of the
lights; yet this very darkening (a token of antiquity and religion) does
exceedingly increase the majesty of her virginal countenance. A crownet of
jewels does adorn the top of her head. Her train of hair does fall along
her bare neck and shoulders, after the fashion of the Nazarens. The Image it
self is clothed with a guilt garment, which is girded round about with a broad
girdle, hanging down to the feet, according to the use of that country, and
also covered with a blew mantle sitting decently about her from the top of her
shoulders, both the one and the other carved, and wrought in the same stem.
The sweet child Jesus, does rest on his mothers right hand, more maiestically
then in mortal shape, resembling in his countenance, the disposition of a
certain divine Majesty, and lifting up the foresingers of his right hand, as
if he would bless something, and in his left hand holding a golden globe; so
that with his train of hair, with his long garment and girdle, he also does
represent the Nazarens attire. Before the Image of the mother of God, there is
an Altar of free stone squared, seeming to breath forth sanctity. When the
Dalmatians had viewed all this with leisure, albeit they were ignorant what it
was, yet with common consent they agreed, that whatsoever it was, it was
doubtless the gift of God: neither was it newly erected from the ground, but
verily by the ordination and will of God, was brought from some other place.
Departing therefore thence, whomsoever they met, they told what they had
seen: whereupon many (and among them some diseased people) flocked to the new
spectacle of so great a thing, expecting some help thereby. And their hope
deceived them not: for to sound bodies the religion of the place imparted
health of mind, and to diseased, the our of their infirmities.

By revelation of the mother of God, her house is known, and honored, with an
evident miracle. CHAP. III.
THE fame of this prodigious Chapel, Annal. Flum. apud Hiero. Angel.
coming speedily to Tersact anm Flumen, kindled in the healthful a desire to
see it, and in the diseased, no small hope of recovering their health.
Alexander a man of great virtue, dear both to God and man, Alexander Bishop of
Tersact
being Bishop in the house of S. George of Tersact; and having layen sick of a
long and a grievous disease, lived in little hope of life, when very
opportunely, he was certified of this divine House by his familiar friends.
Whereupon he had a vehement desire to behold the comfort of so great a miracle:
but sickness oppressing him he could not be carried unto it, without manifest
peril of his life; which seemed more grievous unto him, then the burning of
the fever it self, that his distressed body would not follow the affection of
his mind. Notwithstanding he dispaired not or him self, being acertained that
the Image of the mother of God was brought thither with that divine House.
Thinking it therefore to be a Chapel of our B. Lady; he earnestly implored her
help, and made a Vow unto her, hoping not only to recover his health, but also
to know from above, the mystery of that heavenly gift. Our B. Lady appears
to Alexander.
In the quiet night when he was between sleeping and waking, the Mother of God
descending suddenly from heaven, presented herself unto him in glorious
brightness, and filling all the chamber with a most clear light, with a
gracious countenance said unto him. Be of good comfort, my son, behold being
called upon, I am come to bring thee present help, and notice of the thing
thou desire. Therefore so it is, that the Sacred House, which was lately
brought to your coasts, is the very same, where in times past I was borne, and
for the most part was brought up: where by foretelling of Gabriel the
Archangell, through the work of the Holy Ghost I co^ceined the Divine issue,
where also the word it self was made flesh. Therefore after our descease, the
Apostles did rightly consecrate the House which was honored with such
mysteries, and did contendingly celebrate there divine service. The Altar which
is brought therewith, is that which Peter the Apostle did consecrate: the Image
of Christ crucified, the Aposties them selves placed, where at this present it
stands: and the Cedar Image is out representation, made by the hand of Luke
the Evangelist, who for the familiarity that was between us, expressed our
similitude in colors, as lively as a mortal creature could do. And this very
House, most dear to heaven it self, was reverenced in Galiley with great
honor for these many ages; but now the reverence thereof failing together with
the Catholic faith, it is come from the town of Nazareth to your parts:
whereof no doubt at all is to be made, for God him self is the worker of it,
With whom no word is impos^ible. And that thou thy self may be both the
witness and the publisher of this, which I have said, be thou cured; that thy
sudden recovery of so long a sickness may give credit unto the miracle. And
when she had spoken thus unto him, she mounted up toward heaven, leaving a
certain heavenly odor behind her in the house. And that it was not the
fallacy of a dream, or of a distracted mind, but a true vision indeed, the
event of the thing did show. For the Bishop awaking between joy and fear,
began to be all bedewed with sweat, Alexander is cured.
and perceiving that the fever was suddenly gone, arose safe and sound out of
his bed. And conceiving no less joy for the tidings of the House of Nazareth
then for his own recovery, he fell down on his knees, and listing up both
eyes and hands to heaven, gave manisold thanks to God and his B. mother for
the double benefit, greatly rejoicing that they had vouchsafed to bestow so
great a gift on him self, on his country and people. As Soon therefore, as it
was day, with exceeding gladness he came forth among the people, and being a man
of that age, he forgot gravity and authority, and like to one distracted,
began to run up and down the streets, the Courts and bywayes, declaring
his nights vision to as many as he met, known or unknown, and every where
publishing that gift of God, and his B. mother, as well common to all, as
peculiar to him self. And such was his voice and countenance, such fervor of
mind appeared in his eyes, as might easily give credit to his speeches.
Whereunto was added an undoubted argument, to wit, sudden health of body and
strength in him, who before was so cruelly afflicted with a long and grievous
fever, that the other day he was known to be in exceeding danger. And as soon
as this news was diuulged among the greater part of the Inahbitants of that
town; forthwith great concourse was made unto the Bishop, and striuingly with
one common voice, they extolled the heavenly gift, in token of thanks giving to
God and his B. mother. As chief among the congratulatours and reioycers, went
the Bishop him self, exulting with joy, and making have to see the native
house of the B. Virgin. Whither as soon as he came, he very reverently
performed the Vow which he had made: whose religious example imprinted greater
devotion in the hearts of mortal men, specially because he him self the
author thereof was no vain man, nor an uncertain report noysed abroad.
Whereupon this most holy house (illustrious for miracles) was daily celebrated
and reverenced of the Inhabitants with greater devotion. News whereof first
passed to the bordering, then to places far remote, and in short time all the
people there-about esteemed it most holy, and burned with desire, at length to
see so unusual and so venerable a thing.

The miracle is sought out by certain men sent into Galiley. CHAP. IIII.
VERY happily at that time, Nicolas Frangipane a man of the chiefest nobility
of Rome, for his piety and godliness, being made President of Croatia, Dalmaia
and Istria (of the inahbitants called the Great Ban) governed that Country
where this miracle happened, who also was Lord of Tersact and Flumen: and being
not a little moved both with the miracle which happened on his land, as also
with the relation and sudden recovery of Alexander the Bishop, at first he
was amazed thereat. But afterward rejoicing that the heavenly gift had seated it
self happily in his Jurisdiction, he hastened spedily unto the mountain, and
determined to reverence and adorn the most Sacred House, with such gifts as
was behoouefull for him. But because the stra^genes of the thing passed the
memory, and the greatness, the belief of man, he thought good that so unwonted
and unknown a miracle with diligence was to be inquired of: for he seared lest
their credulity might be suspected of others, or that so notable a thing,
might be of greater admiration then credit with posterity. Whereupon co^sulting
thereof with the Bishop, they determined to send certain men into Galiley, to
inquire out the matter with great care. Among all the people, four of approved
credit and virtue, were chosen, whereof Alexander the Bishop was one, whom they
sent to Nazareth, commanding them to bring them word of all that they found
concerning the native House of the B. Virgin: who without delay, shiping them
selves, and sailing along the Adriatike, the Siculum, the Cretike and Cypress
seas, arrived at Palestine with good success: and pacifying the Barbarians
with money, worshipped the most sacred Sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem. From
whence with public pasport, and guarded with a strong company of armed men,
they continued their journey to Nazareth, a City of Galiley, the end of their
travel; where carefully inquiring of the inahbitants (not Christians so much
in effect, as in word) they assured them that the native House of the B.
Virgin, was taken thence not long before; and brought them to the Church, which
long agone Helene the Empress caused to be made to inuirone the sacred house
that they them selves might behold the ruins thereof miraculously broken down.
They also showed them the floor, where the sacred house had stood, that they
might likewise view the foundations, and the late impressions of the house
which was taken thence. Whereupon measuring the length and the breadth of the
floor, and the thicknes of the foundatio^s, they found all things exactly to
agree with the measures of the House and the walls transported into Dalmatia,
which for that purpose they had brought with them: Also the time of the
departure of the maiesticall Chapel from thence, and the coming of it into
Dalmatia does well accord. So returning home again with exceeding joy and
gratulatio^, they related all that they had found to Fra^gipane the President;
who taking no small contentme^t in such a message, with flowing tears of joy,
gave manifold thanks to Almighty God and his B. mother, that not only in his
life time, but in manner looking on, so great a miracle had happened, confirmed
with such evident wonders, and the authority of such men. Wherefore
incontinently they made a solemn and a religious procession to the House of
the B. Virgin, and performed it with great concourse both of men and women,
where Alexander the Bishop in steed of a Sermon, related the matter in order
unto the people, protesting openly before God and the B. Virgin, before mortal
and immortal, that he would add nothing to the manifest truth, if it were
otherwise, he would not gainsay, that the wrath of God should lay punishment
upon him: yet in this respect they well hoped to be in greater favor with the
mother of God, for that they had made a thing almost incredible most manifest
and known. When the assembled multitude heard these speeches, falling as it
were from heaven, they were suddenly overcome with so great joy, that they
could not refrain, but with their gratulations and tears confused him,
uttering these things unto them: so that the prayers of the auditorie giving
thanks to God and his B. mother, with the hartiest signs and tokens they
could, hindered the Bishops conclusion. It is wonderful what credit, not only
the inhabitants, but even strangers them selves gave unto him rehearsing and
affirming those things; and what concourse and reverence was done to the most
sacred Cell at the report of such men. Neither were there wanting many and
famous miracles, seeing from all parts, feeble, impotent and possessed persons
were there to be cured; notwithstanding there wanted some, to have delivered
them particularly to writing. With the concourse of people and the manifold
miracles, the religion and reverence of the place did not a little increase.
For the exceeding care which they saw settled in the hearts of the inhabitants
toward this maiesticall House (because the B. Virgin her self seemed as it
were present at suppliants prayers) filled all with so great devotion, that
they imagined, that that place was inhabited, and nor beloved only, of the B.
Virgin mother of God. Therefore with striving emulation, they began to reverence
and beautify the native House of the Virgin, and the B. Virgin her self, by
all the means they could and were able: but scarcity of wealth hindering
their liberal minds, they adorned it rather with piety the^ with
magnificence; but so that in short time, it began to be reverenced and honored
with the recourse of far remote people. For news of the thrice fortunate
House, being daily more and more spread abroad, to wit, that the native
habitation of our B. Lady, was miraculously brought from Galiley to Tersact,
and that men of approved virtue and credit, going to Nazareth, found it was
most certain and manifest, did not only provoke the remotest Sclauonians, but
also the Istrians, Croatians, Bosnians, Seruians, Epidaurians, and the other
people of that Country, to visit so great a miracle and gift. And the present
help of the B. Virgin, imparted to many in time of their distress and
calamity, did also daily increase the celebritie of the p^ace; so much, that
the Sclauonians which dwelled by, greatly rejoiced at such concourse of people
to the Sacred House, boasting that their Country was of great glory with
foreign people and nations, and by the common vice of humane arrogancy
believed, that Almighty God himself had preferred them before other nations,
measuring heavenly gifts rather by the merits of men, the^ the benignity of
Al. God.

The Sacred House departs out of Sclauonie with great lamentation of the
Dalmatians. CHAP. V.
Annal. Flum. Hieron. Angel.
BUT this joy and heavenly gift continued not long with the Sclauonians: within
less then four years (for there wanted five months) the Sacred House
departed out of their coasts; the the cause whereof is uncertain, for diverse
do diversely report. Whether therefore the inhabitants did reverence it with
less care then they ought to have done, or whether from the beginning (to the
short comfort of that nation) our B. Lady did purpose to make it a place of
passage, rather then of abode, or whether it were to relieve Italy, the
fortress of Christian Religion with present help, at that time afflicted with
wars and calamities; suddenly the heavenly gift was taken from the
Dalmatians, when they mistrusted no such thing, and brought into Italy with as
great good and joy of the Italians, as damage and lamentation of the
Dalmatians. For as soon as it was known and published abroad, that the divine
pledge, and the most Sacred Cell of the B. Virgin was carried to some other
place, in very deed the admiration of so strange and unexpected news struck
the people of Tersact and the borderers therabout into great astonishment,
being so moved with the desire which they had unto it, that they ran to and
fro like distracted people, and all their country over, sought and inquired
after the gift, which Almighty God had given and taken from them again. And
when they could not find it, nor learn whither it was removed; the confused
multitude of men and women (wounded with the grief of so great a loss)
remained a while in mornfull silence. But when their astonishment was a little
past, they brake out all together into tears and plaints, and with wonderful
lamentation began to discover the great damage of their nation. To wit, that
the heavenly gift was but showed to them, and given unto others: that, that
refuge of Dalmatia, that succor of the diseased, that solace of the wretched,
that ornament and defense of their nation, was taken from them, that such a
Patroness of the Dalmatians, and such a Protectresse of their neighbourly
people, had now forsaken them: that they were altogether unworthy of such a
pledge, because they reverenced it with less devotion and care, then they
ought to have done. But what religion, what care, what reverence of any people
whatsoever can be answerable to that heavenly and most excellent gift? If this
were the cause, why she changed her seat, whersoeuer she is seated, forthwith
she may well change her seat again. This and such like moan they all made,
for the departure of it, which the present feeling and grief of their loss
suggested unto the^, not easy for the writer to relate. Finally being overcome
with wearisomnes, rather then with the satietie of lamenting, they went
swarming to Frangipane the Praetor, and there again renewing their wayling,
they asked of him advise and help. And though he him self did need comfort,
as wounded with the common grief, and more sorrowful the^ was fitting for his
part; notwithstanding he overcame him self, and dissembling his sorrow,
assuaged the lamentation of the people with his authority and wisdom: In very
deed (quoth he) so it is, that you have received so great a loss, that
Almighty God could hardly lay upon you a greater for offending him; that no
tears, no sighs, no wayling, is able to extinguish your grief of mind. But
now truly you seem to complain without cause seeing Almighty God has
granted you the use of the heavenly gift without prescribing any time, and
therefore there is no reason, why you should grieve that it is required again,
when he would have it so, that gave it; but rather should give God thanks for
granting you the use of so great and so fruitful a pledge for certain years,
and should recompense the present disco^moditie, with memory of the former
commodities. And he promised them to do his best endeavor, in some sort to
supply the great loss, which they had received by the departure of the
heavenly gift, and to satisfy their desire toward so great a good: For in
the very impression of the most Sacred Chapel, he was determined to erect
such an other house to the B. Virgin, that it might be as well a monument of so
great a thing to posterity, as a solace to them for their grievous loss,
whereby he was in good hope, though the native House of the B. Virgin was
wanting, that her help would not be wanting unto them. And indeed the
Presidents words were not more magnificent then his works. For within few
years at his own cost and charge, he caused a new Chapel to be placed in the
same impressions, which was dedicated to the mother of God, and environed it
with a Church, magnificent for workmanship and reverence, which at this day is
extant, for no less a monument of the Frangipanes munificence, then of so
great a miracle. Neither did the B. Virgin suffer the words of the fou^der of
her Church to be uttered in vain: for afterward sundry miracles were wrought
in that place, to show plainly that the seat it self was pleasing to the B.
Virgin, and her help not wanting to the Sclauonians. And the said Church at
this day is committed to the government of the Franciscans, The desire of the
Dalmatians to the most sacred House.
which are called De obseruantia, and is most famous for celebritie and fame in
those parts. But this did not so much extinguish as enkindle the Dalmatians
desire to the House of Nazareth: for it is now three hundred years since it
departed thence, and yet they bewail to remember that so great a good was
taken from them, as if the damage were newly done them. Proof is, that yearly
passing the Adriaticke sea, and coming to Loreto in great troops, they do not
seem to do more reverence to the native House of the B. Virgin, then to lament
the detriment of their nation: whose solemn plaintes, Return to us O MARY,
Return to us, do not a little signify, that their desire shall be
everlasting, seeing it is nothing at all abated in the space of three hundred
years, and also witness that the House of Nazareth was transported out of
Sclauonie into Italy.

The Sacred House is transported into Picene, and seated in a wood of Recanati.
CHAP. VI.
Praep. Terem. Hier. Angel.
THIS heavenly gift was passed over into Italy very happily the year, 1294. at
which time, Italy being divided with the deadly factions of the Guelses and
Gibellines, was all miserably vexed with hatreds and more then civil wars.
Therefore in the inter-raigne, when Bonifacius the 8. was created Pope, the
fourth of the Ides of December, a remarkable day, and worthy everlasting
memory, the B. mother of God, bringing peace and quietness to Italy, chose her
House a seat in Picene. In Italia^ called Marc-Aneona.
Picene is a Province of Italy of no small renown and wealth, situ^ted over
against Dalmatia, the Adriaticke sea flowing between, which also is called the
Superum. And this most sacred House being brought out or Dalmatia into Picene
over the Adria icke sea, where the passage is n^e^e an hundred miles, was
seated in a wood of the territory of Recanati, about a mile from the sea,
which belonged to a certain matrone of Recanati, both rich and godly, whose
name was Laureta: of whom ever after b^ing called the House of Loreto, it gave
immortal praise to her, from whom it took that name. The report goes
(neither is it without truth) that the trees which were in the way as the
little House of our B. Lady came thither, bowed down as it were to reverence
it; and afterward remained stooping until they were consumed with age, with
wind or with the axe. And as long as the wood stood (which at this present is
cut down) the said trees were wont to be showed to the Pilgrims in a long
rank, to witness so great a miracle. Which some do yet well remember; for a
man of good credit told me, that sundry times with great admiration, he him
self had seen very many of those trees, not much above twenty years ago;
that is to say, stooping with all their bodies, and bowing toward that part of
the sea, over which the most sacred House passed on high, to her ordained seat
in the wood. And the same trees being preserved for devotion sake, did also
remain long after the underwood was destroyed: but at last about 20. years
agone, they were cut down by the foolishnes of the rude husbandmen, lest they
should hinder their tillage. In the quiet night the sacred House of the B.
Virgin was seated in a void place of the aforesaid wood. At which time the
sheepheards of Recanati keeping their flocks in the next chase, and dividing
the vigill of the night amongst them (as their manner is) suddenly a great
light inuironing the sacred House, drew the eyes of the warders unto it: To
whom it seemed wonderfu^l upon the sudden, to see a new house in that
solitary place, but specially glittering with great brightness: and there was
one among them who avouched that he saw it, when it came on high over the sea.
Wherefore awaking their fellows to behold the spectacle, first they questioned
among the^ selves (as the fashion of wonderers is) and then with mutual words
animating each other to go see what it was, all began to conjecture, as in deed
it was, to wit, that it was some heavenly thing. When they came unto it, they
went into the House it self, and as soon as they had passed the threshold, a
great dread came suddenly upon the^; but presently being replenished with a
certain unwonted sweetness, they spent the night devoutly in prayer, diligently
viewing whatsoever was under the roof. Whereupon at the break of day certain
of them went to Recanati (almost four miles from that place) to relate unto
their masters, what they had seen. At first for their simplicity, they did
not only contemn them, but also the matter it self, supposing that they
related a vain thing, and peradventure a fancy represented unto the^ in their
dream. But the sheepheardes affirming with all asseueration, that their own
eyes might witness it unto the^, if they would, their masters were more
willing to believe them, them indeed they durst. And at last, lest it should
either be thought, that they had given to rash credit to so unwonted a miracle,
at the testimony of those simple men, or else lest by their negligence they
might let that pass as vain, which might be true indeed, they went with them
to see what it was. When they came to the place of the wood foretold, and the
sheepheardes news proved true; none almost believed their own eyes, nor them
selves: for in very deed, that House was never seen there before, nor newly
built, as the antiquity thereof did manifestly show.

Doubtless therefore it was brought from some other place by miracle, or sent
from heaven it self. And with great wonder discoursing thus among them selves,
they went nearer unto it, to behold the roof, not so much to be noted for
fashion, as for antiquity: and greatly admired that such ancient building
could stand without a foundation or any support at all. Forthwith putting away
these cogitations, they went into the House it self, and suppliantly
reverenced the B. Virgin, embracing the sweet child Jesus in her arms. Neither
did their piety want her reward: For upon the sudden, such sacred dread and
joy was powered into them, that they confessed, they never felt the power of God
more present in all their lives. Whereupon they ran back again to the City
with all speed, rejoicing much among them selves, that Almighty God had
vouchsafed to bestow so rare a gift on them, and on their Country: which was
exceeding joy to the devout matrone Laureta, in whose wood the sacred House had
seated it self. The concourse of the people of Recanati.
And as soon as the news of so great a miracle came into the City, a
wonderful concourse of people, of all sorts and degrees repaired unto the
wood, as if a set sign had been given, coveting to satisfy the desire they
had to see that admirable spectacle; in so much, that boys, girls, old and
feeble folks could not stay them selves at home. The diseased also forsaking
their bedds, crepte along; their very desire to see it (as sometimes it
happens) yielding them strength therefore. And many running with a certain
veheme^cie of fervor, striued to come thither before other, that they might be
the first, that might behold that heavenly spectacle with their eyes. The
nearer their hope was of approaching unto it, the more the multitude of the
concurrents, and their desire to see it increased: so that, when the most
Sacred House (which all this while was intercepted and hidden from them with
the boughs of the trees) suddenly appeared unto them by entering into the
sheerer wood, speedily all at once began to hasten unto it, and incontinent so
great concourse was made on every side from all parts of the wood, covering to
go, to touch and to kiss the sacred walls, that pressing near together they
were like to fall over each other. And as soon as they came into the
maiesticall seat it self, and devoutly saluted the B. Virgin, they were all
replenished with such devotion, and powered out so many tears, that they
purposed the amendment of their lives and could not be drawn from it. This
mean while great noise was heard on every side, specially of the diseased and
feeble, with confused speeches inuocating their Patroness, their mother, the
Queen of heaven, the mother of God, and with earnest prayer entreating for
recovery and health. Neither were their plaintes vnaccepted, nor their
petitions unheard. For by and by the power and virtue of God, appeared in
curing of diseases, and in restoring of strength to many: whereupon the noise of
the tha^ksgiuers was doubled, that they might give Almighty God and his B.
mother hearty thanks, and publish the heavenly virtue and help which they had
now obtained. Wherefore as soon as this light of Gods liberality showed it
self to the people of Recanati, with striving emulation they began to
reverence and adorn the Cell of the B. Virgin; but among all those public
honors, the private endeavors of Laureta did excel, The Lady to whom the
vvood of Laureta did belong called the Sacred House by the same name.
whereby ever after it was called the House of Loreto. In this mean while, fame
(then the which in like cases nothing is swifter) flew to the bordering people
to bring news that the House of Loreto was glorified with miracles; wherewith
out of hand, as every ones devotion or necessity did urge, all began to run
unto the wood, to bring or convey them that were molested with any infirmity,
to entreat help and to make vows. That they obtained their vows, their often
thansgiuing to Almighty God and his B. mother, and their votiue tablets
hanging openly about the walls did evidently show: for the mother of God was a
clement and a potent Patroness in the sight of the divine majesty, both to
show them the way which sought it, and also to entreat help and health for
them that request it. And the solitarines of the place did greatly reco^mend
the devotion of the assembled people. For then there was no house, no lodging,
nor any little receptacle in the wood, but trees, which being void of leaves in
the winter time, gave but cold hospitality to the Pilgrims. Yet there might
you have seen many, both wealthy and delicate in their own houses, lodge
abroad in the air, annoied with rain, cold, snow, and tempests. Likewise all
the people, dividing them selves into companies about the most sacred House,
and sitting down on the grass among the trees, did there eat their meat, and
afterward lodged on the bare ground, not to sleep and take their rest, but to
sing psalms and hymns, without any fear at all of wild beasts or thieves,
such inflamed piety might easily overcome all disco^modities and dangers.

The Sacred House is transported out of this wood into the hill of the two
Brothers. CHAP. VII.
BUT the everlasting enemy of mankind being nothing g^ad at this honor of the
heavenly Queen and so great good of Christians, Praep. Ter^m. Hie^o. Angel.
with all his might decreed to disturb the exceeding joy and re^igion of the
Picentians. Therefore lest the sacred place should increase the devotion of the
people, before it was of so great reverence as in likelihood it would be, he
purposed to make war against; the Pilgrims and strangers as they came unto
it. The Chapel of our B. Lady was in a solitary place, near to the sea, and
compassed about with a thick wood and high trees: and though there was no way
unto it, but among these thick bushes and trees; yet many went without
weapons, putting great considence in the P. Virgin, the defendresse of the
place. Whe^upon certain notorious wretches of desperate boldness, not more
allured with a fit opportunity of preying, then stirred with infernal
furies, as it may be supposed, beset the ways that went unto the sacred House,
and began to ly in ambush in places compassed about with thick bushes. From
whence rushing forth, they took the Pilgrims as they went unto it, set on
them unawares, robbed them of their money and clothes, yea and of their lives
also, if so be they resisted by force. Whereby in short space all that Wood
being infested and notoriously reproached with robberies and murders, was
reduced to a wilderness, by reason that the Pilgrims were frighted thence: and
the reverence and devotion of this holy place waxing daily less and less, the
most sacred House it self departed thence. For Almighty God thinking it an
indignity, that the malice of the infernal enemy should turn to the
destruction of mankind, the refuge which he had provided for their salvation;
he chose a safer and a fitter seat for Pilgrims, for his own, and his B.
mothers little House. There was a little hill not very steepy almost a mile
from that place, nearer to Recanati, and not far from the high Way, whither the
sacred House was carried on high by Angels and placed in the top thereof, about
eight months after it was seated in the wood. Two brothers of Recanati
possessed the said hill in common with mutual agreement, and taking exceeding
joy in the heavenly gift, began to reverence the most sacred House, with
brotherlike endeavors. And as the mutation of the place, and the fame of the
new miracle increased admiration, so likewise the devotion of the inhabitants
and strangers. For as soon as it was spread abroad, that the House of Loreto
had changed her place, and forsaken the wood, which was infested with
robberies, and seated it self on a hill free from thieves and convenient for
pilgrims; forthwith it enkindled a desire in adioining people to reuisit it.
Therefore either to recompense the benefit of so great a good omitted for fear
of thieves, or else couerting to see with their eyes the new migration, which
they heard reported with their ears, many flocked unto it from all parts with
great willingness: whereof diverse had worshipped the same house lately in the
wood, which now they reverence out of the same in the top of the hill, to their
great admiration and wonder. For which cause, with vows and fervent prayer,
the inhabitants did co^tendingly reverence this most holy Chapel, venerable
as well for ancient wonders as lastly for the miracle of her changed seat. And
every one for his own particular, gave Almighty God and his B. mother great
thanks, that they had not removed the most religious seat, defiled with
robberies and murders, to some other p^ace; but had seated it on a safe hill,
convenient for the devotion of Pilgrims. Whereby the multitude of Pilgrims
daily increasing, increased also the celebritie of the Sacred House, that the
walls began to be covered with votiue tables, with Images of wax, with
precious hangings, and the Altar to be heaped with gifts and money. But the
wealth of the sacred Chapel thus increasing, lessened their devotion, whose
fervor should chiefly have increased. So that avarice now again, made the
aboade thereof shorter in the hill, then it had done in the wood.

It departs from the hill of the two Brothers, by reason of their avarice and
discord. CHAP. VIII.
THE said hill (as we showed before) was common to two Brothers, Praepos.
Terem. Hieron. Angel.
who at first reverenced the most sacred House godly and devoutly, as was most
meet they should: happy they, if they had used the heavenly gift rather for
devotion, then abused it for gain. For when they saw that the most religious
House was adorned with richer donaries, couertousnes overcame their greedy
minds, and wholly extinguished piety and devotion. Therefore both supposing
that the inheritance of the said hill came wholly to him self; first they
began to covet the sacred gold and silver, but afterward, avarice egging them
on, to disagree between themselves, with more the^ brotherly hatred. Finally
whiles either striued to get all the commodity for him self, and reasoned the
matter with altercation, from wrath they fell to arms. And there let not
much, that two brothers had not defiled them selves, and the most maiesticall
Cell of the mother of God with brothers blood (for nothing is so holy that
avarice defiles not:) had not God prevented so great wickedness, by taking away
the occasion thereof. Wherefore being no less offended with the discord of these
brothers, then with the robberies which were committed in the wood, he removed
his mothers House unto the next hill toward the sea, being about an arrows
flight from that place, and seated it in the very high way that goes to the
haven of Recanati, being also about two miles from the sea; so the cause both
of discord and theft was taken away, and at last a steadfast and firm remaining
seat was given to the most sacred House, which stood but a few months in the
hill of the two brothers. For it is well known that within less then a year,
after it came into Italy, it was seated on that hill where at this present it
remains: so that either through the default of the inhabitants, or rather by
the providence of Almighty God, within the compass of a year, she changed
her seat three times in the territory of Recanati; and within five years
after her departure out of Galiley, honored sour places with her residence:
yet by change of place she changed not religion, but more and more increased
the same.

The impressions of the places, where the Sacred House did stand. CHAP. IX.
AND at this day there are extant in all these places, Hiero. Angel.
undoubted proofs hereof. For Nicolas Frangipane (as we showed before) builte
a magnificent Church about the new House, which he caused to be made to
resemble that of Nazareth, and set it in the very impressions where the other
stood; calling it the Church of our B. Lady of Tersact, either for an ancient
memory of the most sacred Chapel, or else for that it was honored with new
miracles. And in this Church not far from the door of the resembled house of
Nazareth, there is yet a worthy monument of Nicolas Frangipane, who founding
that Church, in token o^ his great devotion, toward the native House of the
B. Virgin, chose for him self and his posterity, a tomb near to the
impressions thereof: where also remains a very ancient marble table, to
witness so great a miracle to posterity, wherein is engraven: THIS IS THE
PLACE, WHERE THE MOST SACRED HOUSE OF THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO SOMETIME WAS,
NOW REVERENCED IN THE TERRITORIES OF RECANATI. Which many of good credit have
reported, assuring me, that the^ selves have seen them. And in that place
where it rested, when it came first into Picene, as long as the wood stood (and
it stood until the 75. year of this age) there appeared no obscure signs of
the remouall of the sacred House, and of the miracle. For that parcel of
ground on which it was seated, was always beautified with green herbs and
flowers, when all the rest thereabout being ouer-growne with thick bushes and
thorns, were savage and rude. Neither is the thing doubtful. For Hierome
Angelita does so deliver it in his story of the B. Virgin of Loreto, which he
dedicated to Pope Clement the 7. at that very time, when this was a miracle to
the beholders holders. And with this part of ground were seen the impressions
of the sacred walls, imprinted in the earth, representing holiness, and as it
were some divine thing. In so much that I my self received the same from
Raphael Riera, a man of sincere credit and religion, who was wont to tell that
he often beheld the impressions of the sacred House, and the beauty of this
parcel of ground with great delight. But the wood being lately cut down, and
the land made arable, this exceeding pleasantnes thereof was so spoiled by the
rude husbandmen with diging and sowing, that it utterly decayed. Yet to
preserve the religion of the place, in those very impressions, the said Riera
raised little low walls, both for a monument to posterity, that the sacred
House of Loreto had in time past been there, as also for a defense against the
abuses of cattle and simple men. I my self saw and viewed this place, when I
committed these things to writing, and observed that the parcel of ground
enclosed within those walls was every way answerable, both in length and
breadth, to the House of Loreto. But now it is altogether like to the other
ground thereabout; having lost the exceeding pleasantnes which it had, before
the rude husba^dmen violated the sanctity of the place: yet truly it has so
lost the sweetness, that it retains the religion. For at this day it is
visited of many for devotion sake, and would also be visited of more, but that
the place is unknown to the common people. In time past when it was more
known, either by reason of the exceeding pleasantnes or better commodity of
the ways, it was wont to be so reverenced of the Pilgrims, that none almost
would believe, that he had visited the Cell of the B. Virgin of Loreto, that
had not also reverenced those first impressions of the same Cell. Now the place
is altogether unfrequented and without passage, neither has it a known way
unto it, so that if any will visit it, he has need of a skillful guide. It is
distant from the town of Loreto almost a mile, and as much also from the sea,
not so much right on, as by many turnings. It is situated between the mont
Vrsus and the River Musion, with almost the like distance, as between Loreto
and the sea, and is commonly called Banderola, peradventure of a banner, which
in time past was set up in a certain tree, to demonstrate to Pilgrims as
they came, and to seafaring men sailing along that coast, that the most sacred
Chapel was seated in that wood: Certes the Italians do call a little Banner,
Banderola. By the sacred part of ground, whereof I have spoken, there is a great
well, which continually yeldeth water, and easy to be drawn of: you may
believe that this unusual and large well was made for the use of some great
multitude, to wit, for people which came to visit the sacred House. But in the
hill of the two Brothers, the signs are more obscure; for that hill was
leuelled to fill up the valleys to make them commodious for bulding, and also
built upon when the town of Loreto was built, yet the place, or rather a sign
thereof remains. For without the walls of some private houses, there is a
certain rude and a round piece of a hill, like to a bound-marke, which is
graced with a little house, being now the only sign of the seat that our B.
Lady made choice of there, and forsook again. The house whereunto this
bou^dmarke is joined, being situated not far from the gate of the Bishops
Palace on the right hand as we enter, is as it were the navel or midst of the
town of Loreto. And if that part of the Bishops Palace which is already
begun be continued, it will occupy almost all that space, but then also (as
I suppose) some monument of this place and miracle shall be left, that the
sign of so memorable a thing may not perish.

The special place, and the admirable situation of the house of Loreto. CHAP.
X.
IN the before named places the B. Virgin mother of God, chose her self a seat
rather to rest in than to dwell, that is to say, of no long continuance,
because she determined ever from the beginning to make a settled seat in this
place, where at this present she remains, and (unless some offense of the
inhabitants or borderers do hinder it) we hope an everlasting. Neither is it
lawful to doubt, but as the mother of God from the beginning foresaw, so
could she have avoided the indiligence of the Dalmatians in Sclauonie, the
cruelty of the thieves in the wood, and the detestable hatred of the two
brothers in the hill, that was common unto them. For well knowing all this,
even from the time that her sacred house departed first from Nazareth, and
forsook her native soil, she her self made special choice of this place, to
settle her a firm and a perpetual seat. And in very deed to give credit to
so unusual a miracle, The cause of her manifold remoouall.
and never heard of before, the repetio^ of the same miracle was needful, that
the often mutation of the place in so few years might make a thing of it self
incredible, credible enough. For how could mortal men doubt, whether that
House was brought from Galiley; when them selves had heard that in their own
age, the same was transported out of Sclauonie into Picene; and had seen, that
in Picene it self within less then the compass of a mile it changed seat and
place, thrice before the year was expired. This third and last mutation fell
in the year of our Redemption 1295. Prep. Tere^. Hier. Angel.
which ensued after the coming of the sacred House into Italy. And it is a
thing worth the labor to know the admirable situatio^ thereof, which does
easily show that the most sacred Cell was not so placed by humane, but by
divine providence and power. For it is situated, if ever any were, just to the
four regio^s of heaven and earth, according to the rule of the Mathematicians:
And not according to that rule only, but also by an ancient institution of the
holy Fathers, who commanded that the Altars of sacred houses, should stand
toward the rising of the Sun. Therefore the fore-wall of this most sacred
House (beautified with the window whereat the Angel is said to have entered)
does stand toward the Sun set; and the hinder (adorned with the Altar
standing before the Image of our B. Lady) looks so directly toward the
Sun rising, that in either Equinoctial, for the space often days, In either
Equinoctial the Su^ne does seem to reverence and salute our B. Lady.
the Sun when he rises, shines on the hinder part, and when he sets on
the former part thereof: whereby a little before he sets, the Sun shining in
at the window, which I have mentioned, comes to the B. Virgin, as it were to
salute her at night, since he cannot salute her in the morning, being excluded
by the interposed wall of the sacred House it self: which also as they report
was obscrued to be so, since the Sacred House, was environed within a Church,
until the forefront of the Bishops Palace, being opposite unto the Church,
was placed on the west side. Yet nevertheless I doubt not, but when the gate
thereof shall stand open (which can not be until the work be finished) it
will easile yield again, the self same view of the sun by the window of the
sacred Chapel, that it may salute the B. Mother of God from the entrance of
the Church it self. The left wall of this most sacred Chapel does stand
toward the north, and the right toward the south: and therefore when the
magnificent porch of the Bishops palace standing against the south (for the B.
Virgin by the situation of her Cell, prescribed as it were to the Architect the
situation of the Bishops palace) does daily receive the sun directly into
it, infalliblie it betokens high noone. And that this so admirable a
situation of the most sacred Chapel, happened not by chance, but was so
appointed by the providence of God; proof hereof be the impressions in the
wood it self, yet extant (as I my self have diligently observed) which do
sufficiently show that the B. Virgin herself did delight in such a situation.
The same peradventure happened in the hill of the two brothers, but it can not
be judged by reason that the impressions are obscure. And percha^ce also the
same happened by course in the Dalmatian seat; yet we have no certainty
thereof, but that the thing it self is consonant unto the others. And two
chief mysteries, to wit, the nativity of the B. Virgin, and the Conception
of the Eternal Word, have made this sacred house most illustrious; whereof
that happens in the Autumn, and this in the Equinoctial spring. Wherefore
as the sun has just cause to visit her in either Equinoctial; so likewise
(being as it were mindful of these sacred mysteries) with a certain kind of
ambition, a little after his rising, and before his setting, he seems to comme
to the B. Virgin mother of God, to salute her.

By manifestation of the Dalmatians, the Picentians know that the native house
of the B. Virgin is brought unto them. CHAP. XI.
BUT to return to the order of the mateer whence the wonder of the rare
situation made us to digress; at first the new migratio^ of this sacred house,
seemed wonderful to the people of Recanati, but afterward grateful and
pleasant. And as the same and admiration of the place was more increased by the
miraculous multiplication of the triple transmigration of the holy Cell; so
likewise did Alm. God, dilate the honor of his B. Mother, both among the
inhabitants and strangers. For the remoouall of this most sacred house from
Nazareth and Dalmatia, being spoken of, Praep. Terem. Hier. Angel.
and credibly reported much about this time, struck the Picentians into
great fear, lest it might also in time forsake them, specially being already
dishonored in two places of their Country. News of the House of Loreto, and
of these her wonders, being lately reported in Sclauonie, by certain
merchants, enkindled the Dalmatians (beginning to suspect something) to visit
the House that was so glorified with miracles, and to emulate the piety of the
Picentians. Whereupon certain of them beholding the Chapel of Loreto (for the
remembrance of her departure from Sclauonie was yet fresh) acknowledged it not
unwillingly to be the same, and performed their dutiful veneration with
flowing tears: and presently renewing their former grief, and sighing with
the desire they had to see their lost treasure, thus they began to bewail
their late damage. This House which now is honored in Picene, with so great
concourse of mortal men, was lately reverenced in Dalmatia, with almost the
like endeavors of our people. This native House of the B. Virgin was first
co^ueied by heavenly power from Galiley into Sclauonie, that afterward the
Picentians might have it brought unto them out of Dalmatia it self. This
wonder was showed to the Dalmatians by a heavenly sign, and made manifest by
certain men sent into Galiley. Therefore let them acknowledge, and reverence
this heavenly gift, with great devotion, lest the same happen to them, which
they hear has chanced unto others: and what manner of gift it is, they may
rather know by wanting, then by enjoying the same. Neither do we despair (if
our deeds were answerable to our desires) but that this very House of the
Blessed Virgin, would return into Sclauonie again, from whence it departed
not many years agon. But because these and such like speeches of the
Sclauonians were strange and wonderful to the Picentians (for as yet they had
heard nothing of her transmigration from Nazareth and Dalmatia) many esteemed
the^ vain and foolish. But in short time a new wonder from heaven declared
them to be true indeed.

By revelation of our B. Lady, an Hermit importuneth the Picentians to inquire
of the matter. CHAP. XII.
NEAR to the wood and seat which the B. Virgin mother of God did first make
choice of in Picene, Praep. Terem. Hiero. Angel.
there is a little hill called the mount Vrsus, whither a holy man of great
sanctity had retired him self not many years agone, coveting to be near the
most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin; his name is not delivered, but my mind
inclines to think that it was Paul de Silua of who^ afterward we are to
speak: who being wholly devoted to our B. Lady, came daily to visit her seat of
Loreto, where he spent many hours in devout prayer. And having a great desire
to be present at the miracles which were done by the help of the B. Virgin, or
else were related by strangers, as already done; he gave diligent ear to those
wonderful things, which the Dalmatians had published with great asseueration:
now and then also he heard the Dalmatians the^ selves lament their mischance,
and bewail the loss of their nation, that the native House of the B. Virgin
was taken from them, and they deprived of the protection of so great a
Patroness. The godly Hermit rejoicing at the other praises of our B. Lady,
was amazed when he understood that it was her native House. And truly to him
the thing seemed almost incredible, but yet worthy to be inquired of with all
diligence; because when so worthy a thing was found out and known, it would
add great name and honor to the House of Loreto, to the which he was
exceedingly devoted. And having a vehement affection to know the truth, and to
increase devotion to our B. Lady, he desired to understand from heaven whether
that were true or false. Whereupon without delay; he punished his body with
fasting, with haircloth, and stripes, gave him self to prayer, and omitted
nothing whereby he thought he might please and pacify Almighty God: specially
he prayed and besought the B. Virgin mother of God by some certain sign to
manifest what Chapel it was, or from whence it came. Neither did the B.
Virgin frustrate his inflamed piety and desire. The sacred House is known by
revelation of our B. Lady.
For the second year after the coming of the sacred House into Italy, our B.
Lady appearing unto him in his sleep, and bidding him be of good comfort, told
him that in Italy she had chosen a seat for the little House, wherein her self
did live on earth; which because it was negligently reverenced in Galiley, was
now by the ordination of Almighty God transported thence by handworke of
Angels, that it might be brought into Dalmatia, and so into Picene it self.
There she her self was borne, and there also did she conceive the divine
issue: for which cause that House was, and ever shall be dear to God and her
self. She likewise declared all that she had related to Alexander Bishop of
Tersact in his sleep, as before has been said; concluding at last that by
the special grace and favor of the Almighty, that heavenly gift was given to
the Picentians and Italians, as a solace to their evils, and as a pledge of
pardon and peace in time of so many storms and calamities of their Country;
and then as a most certain refuge and defense unto all nations in the perils
and dangers of this mortal life: commanding him to go and to declare these
things to the Citizens of Recanati, and to the adjoining people: wherewith
awaking out of his sleep, with exceeding joy of mind for the heavenly warning,
he straight fulfilled the commandment of the B. Virgin. And first going to
Recanati, he declared his vision to the people of the City, and related unto
them the rest, protesting that our B. Lady her self was the author of his
speeches. Leaving the people of Recanati in a wonderful maze, he made great
haste unto other places, to declare the same to them, with like ^eruour of
mind. But at first the Pi^emi^ns esteemed it a vain fancy, and many reputed
the reporter for a teller of dreams: Yet afterward because about that time,
there was a certain flying fame, that this very Chapel was given and taken
again from the Dalmatians by the handworke of God; and also now the Dalmatians
them selves acknowledged it at Loreto, they remembered them selves, and thought
that so weighty a matter was in no wise to be neglected. And likewise calling
to mind the late wonder, how the most sacred House had changed her seat three
times in one year, in their own territory of Picene, they were moved
therewith to send messengers to and fro, to inquire thereof. And at last the
Citizens of Recanati propounding the matter, by common advice of the
Picentians, it was decreed, that with general contributio^ of money, certain
men should be sent into Sclauonie, and from thence to Galiley, to seek out the
truth of the matter, by the testimony of their own eyes, and other certain
and manifest tokens.

Sixteen men sent into Dalmatia and Galiley, confirm the truth of the
miracle. CHAP. XIII.
SIXTEEN men honorable for faith, religion, Praep. Terem. Hiero. Angel.
and authority, were chosen out of all Picene; to whom commandment was given,
that first inquiring in Dalmatia, and then in Galiley, they should diligently
seek out the whole matter, and should bring them word of all that they found
concerning the native House of the B. Virgin, which was said to be in those
parts: who forthwith passing the Adriaticke sea, and arriving at Tersact,
opened to the inhabitants the cause of their coming; who yet smarted with the
grief of their late wound, and lamented to remember, that such a treasure was
taken from the^, witnessing the great desire they had unto it, with many
plaints and tears. At the entreaty of these Ambassadors they showed them the
floor, and the house, which they had built very proportionable and like to
that of Loreto for a monument thereof. And there again renewing their
lamentation, they grieved to think, that those were the only signs which the
Sclauouians had of the heavenly gift, that the glory thereof was granted to
others; and the bare fame left unto them. Whereupon the Picentian Ambassadors
applying a measure of the House of Loreto, (which for that purpose they had
brought with them) to every side of the vacant space, found it in all respects
agreeable to the House of Loreto. Then demanding of them how long since the
most sacred Chapel departed from them, they assuredly know, that at the very
same time that it was taken from the Sclauonians, it was given to the
Picentians. And having well sought out the matter, and each recounted the
chiefest miracles wrought in either place, they parted with abundance of
tears, the one sorrowful with desire, the others rejoicing with gladness. So
out of hand the Ambassadors returning again to sea, and passing the Superum
and the Siculum seas, and speedily sailing along by Corcyra, by Creet, and
Cypress, they arrived at Palestine with good success. And understanding that
the ways were nothing secure, by reason that the Turkish armies wa^dred up and
down all Syria; they hired a Conuoy which conducted them safe into Galiley,
and from thence back again to their ship. When they had worshipped the most
glorious Sepulcher of CHRIST our Lord at Jerusalem, they held on their journey
to Galiley, and coming to Nazareth, inquired of the native House of our B.
Lady, and diligently demanded of it of the Christians, who (such as they were)
dwelt in the midst of that depraved nation, of whom being told, what they had
received from their forefathers, and what they had seen with their own eyes,
whilst the Christian religion remained in Syria, they brought them to the
desired place, that they might behold the floor, with the foundations of a
house raised up from thence, yet in the ground to be seen: which measuring
with very diligent care, they found that in every respect, all things did
agree with the impressions in Sclauonie, with the floor and the walls of the
House of Loreto. And having dispatched their business in both places, according
to their own desire, they shipped them selves with great gladness, and with
happy passage were recarried safe to Ancona, whence they set forth. Whereupon
making haste home, and relating all that they had found to the Magistrates and
Governors of the Cities, from whence they were sent, they imparted unto the^
what great joy they conceived therewith. And the Citizens of Recanati being
very glad of the good success of this Embassage, whereof they were the
Authors, and desiring to have a monument there to remain, registered the whole
matter in public record, Hier. Angel. Praep. Terem.
adding thereunto the names and testimonies of the 16. Ambassadors, that the
matter might be well witnessed to all posterity. Certain copies whereof being
reserved in the houses of private men are yet to be seen. And thus much was
known and found by these Ambassadors, the year of our Redemption one
thousand, two hundred, nintie and six.

The Picentians choose the B. Virgin of Loreto for their Patroness. CHAP.
XIIII.
FORTHWITH news, as it is wont, was speedily carried to the Cities and
towns adioining, that 16. Ambassadors returning from Sclauonie and Galiley,
had found by manifest signs that the House of Loreto, was the very same where
the mother of God was borne and saluted by the Angel, and that by heavenly
power, it was first transported out of Galiley into Sclauonie, and from thence
into Picene it self. And much about this time the same fame diuulgating the
third remoouall thereof in the terrtories of Recanati, many greatly desired
(conceiving as it were more fervor of mind by this new report) to see and
honor, in this new seat, the heavenly pledge which was brought unto them from
the Fast it self. For all did verily think and say, that the mother of God
had special care to protect the Picentians; in regard whereof, they thought it
most meet to commit them selves to her protection and defense. Whereupon in
continent the inhabitants of all the towns of Picene, The concourse of the
Picentians.
filling all the passages and ways that went to the House of Loreto, began to
set forward in this journey: neither did the healthful and strong alone make
have to do it, but also the diseased and feeble, neglecting the Physicians
command, crept along, if they were able, if not, they desired to be carried in
what sort soever. And the people of the wealthiest Cities and towns of
Picene, went in surplisses, dividing them selves into several companies,
adorned with ensigns and colors, like bands of men under their Ancients, who
with great emulatio^, singing solemn praise to God and his B. mother, filled
all round about, with the pleasant sound of their tymbrels, fruits, and
instruments. After whom followed boys, and girls, among the women, as it were
in a company among them selves. When they came to the Chapel of the B. Virgin
(because the straitnes of the place would not admit so great a multitude of
people) at the very sight of the most sacred House, bowing down their knees,
and giving most hearty thanks to God and his B. mother, they most devoutly
entreated for pardon and peace among so many evils, as they already suffered,
or else were likely to do: and earnestly besought the B. mother of God, because
she had offered her self a voluntary Patroness unto Picene, afflicted with
diverse miseries and calamities, that she would also receive the Picentians
themselves, into her protection and patronage, and willingly and favorably
would always vouchsafe to defend their people. The name of her protection and
patronage was not in vain: For since that time the B. Virgin has showed her
self a most assured patroness to the Picentians, and they in like manner them
selves always devout clients of our B. Lady, not only in adorning, but also in
defending her House of Loreto.

The sacred House is honored with heavenly flames, and reverenced daily more
and more. CHAP. XV.
TO the daily miracles in restoring health to humane bodies, now and then were
added heavenly signs, not obscurely signifying that the B. Virgin did favor
and protect the Picentians. For many times upon the sudden a flame of fire
was seen to spread it self abroad and to come from heaven in the night time,
Hiero. Angel.
which at first glittering, as though it were dispersed in sundry places, but
afterward making as it were one stream, and going toward the Cell of the
mother of God, filled all round about with heavenly lights. And the roof it
self was often seen to flame with great brightness, with such admiration of
the beholders, that you would think you had seen an army of Angels, warding
the House of the heavenly Queen. Whereupon the Bishop of Recanati, in whose
Diocese it happened, thinking it an honor of religion, according to his
office, advertised Boniface the 8. thereof, of whom obtaining the government of
the Chapel of Loreto, and thinking it most convenient to make room for the
Pilgrims out of hand, he cosecrated all the ground that was about the sacred
House, to the B. Virgin by gift of the Citizens of Recanati, wherewith the
celebritie of the place was also increased. For first they began to build
cabbines, and cottages to entertain the Pilgrims (who before that time
thronging together in the open air, lodged in the high way, The town of
Loreto is built.
) but afterward larger houses. And because the vneuennes of either hill
(specially a valley lying between) was no fit seat for building, the hill of
the two brothers being higher then was convenient for their enterprized work,
was leuelled; the valley filled up, and the vneuennes plained; that there might
be level ground enough to build upon by the high way side. Whereby in short
time, what with rude cottages and houses, there was erected no small village,
extended on the top of either hill, and called Loreto, that both the village
and the House, might take their names from that LAVRETA, who was so singularly
devoted to our B. Lady. This commodity of lodging joined to the Religion of
the place, meruailously increased the multitude of guestes and strangers, S.
Anto. part. 3. Plat. in Boni. 8. Joan. Villan. lib. 1
which shortly after was not a little forwarded by a thing of new celebritie.
For about that time Bonifacius the 8. (whose Popedom the coming of the sacred
House into Italy has made very famous) being much moved with the vehement
earthquakes and afflictions of Italy, partly past, and partly near at hand;
and bending all his care how he might turn from the^ the heavenly wrath, with
happy resolution either instituted the secular year (called the Iubiley) or
else renewed it, granting to all that rightly visited the Territories of the
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, release of all the pain due to their offenses.
Whereupon the year of our Redemption 1300. being the first that was memorable
for the celebritie of the Iubiley, the fame of this new Pontifical Indulgence
coming into all the countries of the Christian world, caused an innumerable
multitude of all nations, and specially of the West, to travel to Rome it
self. For every way there was such confluence of all nations to the City,
that albeit it be very large, yet could it scarce contain so great a multitude
of strangers, for in a manner there passed no day, that the City gave not
hospitality to two hundred thousand Pilgrims, besides an innumerable
multitude, which was on the way. Whereof many (specially to whom Recanati was
not much out of the way) being moved with the fame of these miracles, went to
the house of Loreto, that every one might be witnesses and messengers to their
own country people: of all which they received of so unusual and unknown a
miracle, not by the report of others, but saw with the view of their own eyes.

The walls adjoined to the sacred House for a support, give back: to the
which notwithstanding large Cloisters are added. CHAP. XVI.
MEAN while, the people of Recanati; Hier. Angel. Bap. Mant.
being moved with this great concourse of Pilgrims, determined to reverence
and defend the most sacred Chapel with all care. For seeing that the walls
were both weak and ancient, and had stood many years without a foundation,
they were very solicitous and fearful, lest by little and little they might
fail by injury of the weather, and also lest the worthiest memory of the B.
Virgin in the whole world, might utterly decay and come to ruin. Therefore
thinking it for the best, to defend on every side (as much as by humane art and
industry they might) the sacred House, seeming much decayed, they went about
to lay foundations, as well as they could, and to compass it about with a
brick wall. But it is reported by no feigned writers, that the new foundations
would by no means adhere to the sacred walls; that you may think the
fortunate House of our B. Lady standing by divine power, Trad. Laur. Bapt. Mant.
conte^ned all humane help and industry. Moreover in process of time, the
new walls adjoined to the old for a support, by little and little gave back
so far, that between the two walls, as often as it was needful, a boy
might go with a burning torch, thereby to make the credit of the disioyned
walls manifest to them that desired to see it. Neither is it long since it was
well remembered: for there lived diverse honest and godly men, not many years
agone, who told Raphael Riera, a man of approved virtue and testimony (of whom
we made mention before, and afterward are to make, and of whom I also learned
it) that they had seen a boy pass with ease between the said walls. To whom
also Raynerius Nerusius, an excellent Architect, and ouerseer of the work of
Loreto, for the familiarity that was between them, reported that by
commandment of Pope Clement the 7. the pulling down of these brick walls
being committed to his charge, when in steed thereof the Pope went about to set
up the marble Crust which at this day all behold with great admiration, then to
his own wonder he found, that against all reason of Architecture, these walls
were removed from the sacred Chamber; neither were they ruined so much with
antiquity, as by a certain hidden judgment of Alm. God; that it might
sufficiently appear that the B. Virgin mother of God would exclude all humane
industry, Trad. Laur.
from the supporting of her House, to the end the divine power might be more
notable, if that a most ancient house could stand so many ages without a
foundation or any human help. The Image of Christ Crucified does return into
the most Sacred House of it self.
The report also goes, that the most ancient Image of Christ Crucified,
brought thither with the sacred house, about that time became very famous for
the iteration of a strange miracle; for when the Bishop and Citizens of
Recanati had removed it thence, and placed it in a Chapel adorned of purpose
for it, that it might be reverenced with great honor, the holy Crucifix
remoouing thence of it self, and returning into the most sacred House, it
seated it self in his own place again: who often reassaying the same without
effecting their purpose, at last they desisted, and turned their care an other
way. For seeing that neither the houses nor cottages were able to receive so
great a multitude of strangers, nor in the sacred House any vacant place for
votiue Images and Donaries; and also lest the Pilgrims (whereof many deuoid of
houseroome and lodging as it were in Stations, should be enforced to remain
all night in the open air:) or lest their votiue gifts exposed to the injury
of the weather, should perish, near to the sacred Chapel, they built very
large Cloisters, to receive strangers and their Donaries. And also erected an
Altar without the sacred Chapel, that the Pilgrims who were excluded by the
straitnes of the place, might there behold the Priest exercising his holy
function. To these Cloisters, as it is reported, were adioined houses, where
the Priests, the keepers, and other officers of the most sacred Cell should
dwell. And in the walls of the said Cloisters, Hiero. Angel.
the chiefest mysteries of the sacred House, and her manifold remoouall, were
exposed in colors, by an excellent painter of those days.

Heavenly lights make the day of the B. Virgins Nativity more solemnized in
her native House. CHAP. XVII.
IN the mean season a heavenly vision wonderful to be spoken or seen, Bapt.
Niant. Hier. Aug.
signified to mortal men, at what time the B. Virgin desired to have her
native House reverenced with greatest devotion. There was a certain solitary
man called Paul, venerable for the gift of abstinence and sanctimonie, Paul de
Silua.
surnamed A Silua, that is to say, Of the wood, where he dwelt, from the first
coming of the sacred House into Italy: which as soon as it had removed out of
the wood, this holy man thinking it also his best to depart thence; built a
cottage in a convenient place of the next wood, from whence he might both
easily behold and go to the most sacred House: for of an ancient custom he
daily went unto it, to adore God and his B. mother in the place where his seet
had stood: Whereupon Paul giving him self to prayer, and to the meditation of
heavenly things, in the sight of the most sacred Chapel (as his custom was)
as if it were in the fight of our B. Lady her self, he often observed that a
heavenly flame spreading abroad far and wide, Heavenly fire does rest over the
sacred House.
in manner of a great blazing star, rested over the Cell of the B. Virgin.
And observing the thing, and the time very diligently, he found that on the 6.
of the Ides of September, that is to say, on the very day of the B. Virgins
birth, yearly about the fourth Vigill of the night, a great flame falling from
heaven, and covering the roof of her sacred house with an uniform brightness,
within a while ascended on high from whence it came. Which wonderful spectacle
did not only replenish him with great joy, but also amazed him. And as he was a
man of true simplicity, he supposed that the B. Virgin her self came from
heaven into her native House, in likeness of a flame to celebrate her birth.
Whereupon having a desire to behold so great a wonder near at hand, he began to
expect the opportunity of the time, the^ the which nothing seemed longer unto
him. At length when the year came about, and that heavenly flame showed it
self again, he speedily ran unto it, to behold with his eyes (as he
believed) and with all devotion to salute the Queen of heaven environed with
blisle. But the nearer his hope was of approaching unto it, the more the thing
and the flame at first diminished, and at last vanished away, and withdrew it
self quite out of sight; leaving the credulous beholder frustrate of his
expectation; which inflamed his godly heart with a more ardent affection and
desire, as if he had received all that heavenly fire into him self, though he
was altogether ignorant, what it might portend. And having thus spent ten
whole years, year by year always the self same day, this heavenly flame
hanging over the sacred House, deceiving the hope of the beholder, more and
more inflamed his godly desire. But at length obtaining it of Almighty God by
prayer, he had his wish. For in his quiet rest in the night time, he learned by
a heavenly vision, that the native House of the B. Virgin, was honored with an
anniuersary flame, the very day of her nativity, because it was to her liking
to have that day to be kept and reverenced there with great solemnity.
Wherefore Paul, who until this day had concealed this admirable spectacle in
great silence, now either upon devotion, or else (as it may be supposed)
compelled by the B. Virgin in his rest, went speedily to Recanati, and declared
the whole matter to the Bishop, and to the Magistrates of the City; who
through the opinion of his sanctity, was esteemed a grave author, even of so
great a thing. And the Bishop being moved with the authority of the man, and
with the congruencie of the thing, and the time, believed that the heavenly
vision was unfeigned, and presently published it abroad, that the people of
Recanati might reverence the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, with special
honor and devotion, the very day of her nativity. Whereby it came to pass,
that afterward the adjoining, and also remote people either imitating the
example of the people of Recanati, The day of our B. Ladies nativity is had in
greatest reverence.
or else stirred with the fame of this miracle, chiefly in the month of
September, assembled to Loreto with great zeal, to celebrate the day of our B.
Ladies birth. And shortly after, the new bounty of the Popes, increased the
devotion of the people, who chiefly at that time (as in due place we are to
declare) granted most ample Indulgences to the House of Loreto. And these
spectacles of the heavenly flames continued not only many years, but also many
ages. For about 20. years agone, diverse Citizens of Recanati, The vvonder of
the heavenly fires is renewed.
remarkable for virtue and gravity, reported to Raphael Riera, of whom I
received it, that about the day of the B. Virgins nativity, flames of fire
were seen to fall from heaven in the night time, on the House of Loreto, all
the whole City of Recanati looking on, and that them selves had seen the
same many times, with exceeding joy of mind: adding withal that the day
before, about night, when it began to be dark, the Citizens of Recanati
having a great desire to see so grateful and so pleasant a sight, flocked
commonly to the houses and walls, whence they might behold the House of
Loreto, that they might delight their eyes and minds, with the admirable
beauty of that heavenly flame: which every year was seen (as it was
reported) until the time of Pope Paul the third: Riera in Annal. Laur. Ambro.
Noui. Fast. l. 9.
so that among all the wonders of Loreto there is scarce any more notable than
this: which not only historiographers set down in writing, but also Nouidius a
famous Poet, recorded it in a notable poem, which he dedicated to Pope Paul
the third, which we thought good to insert in this history. Wherefore thus he
writes, extolling the B. Virgin with worthy praise.

To thee therefore are temples built; rare monuments of love,
As many as be tongues on earth; or shyning stars above.
Yet none with that may be compard; in which the Virgin bright,
The Queen of heaven to bless the world; at first was brought to light.
With wonder great this worthy House; to good for Parthia land,
Did mount into the lofty air; borne up by Angels hand.
When after stay in diverse coasts; to Italy it came:
And of the Picene people there; did lastly bear the name.
And lest succeeding ages, should the truth hereof suspect,
This night strange lights upon the roof; do glittering beams reflect.
When the town of Loreto was governed by laws, the Citizens of Recanati
environed the Sacred House with a Church. CHAP. XVIII.
THE Citizens of Recanati being moved with these heavenly signs, Bap. Mant.
Hiero. Angel.
determined to defend and adorn the House of Loreto with their uttermost
endeavors. For when the town of Loreto was daily more and more frequented, by
reason that many came thither from all places to dwell, either upon devotion to
the B. Virgin, or else for desire of traffic, the Citizens of Recanati
thinking it most convenient to order them by laws and statutes, The town of
Loreto has a Governor given unto it.
set them down laws and gave them a Magistrate for execution of Justice.
Having disposed matters in the town, they turned their care to things abroad.
For certain necessitous and notorious wretches allured either with a fit
occasion of robbing, or else with the sweetness of the prey it self, spoiled
many straying and wandering Pilgrims, setting on them among bushes and woods
adjoining to the high way; which seeming to concern the dignity and
reputation of the Citizens of Recanati, they charged the governor of the
City, that with a great company of soldiers, he should make the ways that
went to the House of Loreto, secure from thieves. And as their counsel was
godly, so had it good success. For the Governor him self most diligently
searching the most hidden and lurking places of the wood, put the malefactors
to death, and in short space purged all that country with great commendation:
whose praise redounding to the City that made him Governor, from that time
the City of Recanati was surnamed the Most Just. Shortly after a new
calamity of those times, and the neglect of sacred things, S. Anto. Par. 3
Plat. in Clem. 5 The Pontifical sea is translated into France.
made the piety of the people of Recanati very famous. Whiles these things
were done in Picene, Clement the 5. the third Pope after Bonifacius (for
Benedict the 11. the successor of Bonifacius was Pope but a few months) the
5. year of that age translated the Apostolic Sea into France, to the great
detriment of Italy, and almost of all the Christian common wealth; which
doubtless the casual burning of the Latera^ Church at that time, did portend to
the City of Rome. For whiles Clement the Roman Bishop established a new Sea
at Lions, the Lateran Church at Rome being the ancient seat of the Roman
Bishops was set on fire, whether by malice or by chance, it is not known.
Neither was the state of Italy much better under John the 22. who succeeding
Clement, established the Pontifical Sea at Auinigon, nor under Benedict the
XII. nor the rest of the Roman Bishops, who afterward through John's example
sat at the same place. But the piety and devotion of the people of Recanati
did flourish in building of a new Church to our B. Lady this most distressed
time, both of all the Christian, and specially of their own common wealth. For
of late, that is to say, the year of our Redemption 1322. the City of
Recanati was thrown down by commandment of John the XXII. because it had
revolted from the Pope, Joan. Villar. lib. 9.
and the Citizens compelled to provide them dwelling in an other place. But
when they had made their agreement with the Pope, and built their town in that
place, where at this present it stands, their wealth was almost consumed,
either with the overthrow of their City, or else with bulding this new town.
Yet notwithstanding their devotion to our B. Lady their Patroness provoking
the^, they intended to build a Church about the Chapel of Loreto. For when
the adjoined cloisters could neither contain the Pilgrims, their tablets, nor
votiue Images, by reason that they, and their donaries daily increased; the
Bishop of Macerata, in whose Diocese Recanati was, with great approbation of
the people of Recanati, went about to build a Church about the most sacred
Chapel. For which purpose easily obtaining a great space of ground lying
there about, he pulled down the Cloisters, and at the common charge built a
new Church from the foundation, low indeed for the greatness, The sacred House
is environed with a Church.
but wide and large enough: whereunto he adjoined larger houses for the Priests
and ministers to dwell in, and for the hospitality of the better sort of
Pilgrims; there also shortly after erecting an hospital for the relief of
poor Pilgrims.

When Benedict the XII. had adorned the new Church of Loreto with Indulgences,
it was frequented with greater devotion. CHAP. XIX.
WHEN the Church was finished, a greater ornament was done unto it. For the
Citizens of Recanati making humble request to Benedict the 12. to
grantremissio^ of sins to all that rightly visited the Church of Loreto,
Hero. Angel. The Indulgences of Benedict the XII.
easily obtained it. From which time so great fervor was enkindled in the
hearts of the people of Recanati, that most of the^ would not be hindered
almost by any business, to go every day three miles to visit the House of
Loreto, for so far is it distant from their town. Moreover every morning
as soon as the little children came out of their cha^bers, their parents and
nourses taught the^to turn them selves straight toward the native House of
the B. Virgin, and devoutly to acknowledge and salute the mother of Loreto. But
old and sick folks being hindered with age or sickness, not able to go to the
Church of Loreto as the custom was, procured that the Image of our B. Lady of
Loreto, expressed in colors, should be set up in the market place: about
which, building a Chapel and an Altar, they obtained of Benedict aforesaid, a
Breue engraven in golden letters, wherein was granted remission of sins, to
them that prayed at the said Altar. Hierome Angelita one of the Magistrates of
the City of Recanati (who flourished about 70. years agone) affirms that
himself has seen the same Breue, defaced with rottennes and antiquity.
Moreover the Bishop of Macerata (who at that time was also Bishop of Recanati)
thinking it good to deliver to Posterity the true relation of the House of
Loreto, took order that a little book might be published, wherein was contained
the admirable coming of the most sacred House into Italy, her triple
transmigration in the territories of Recanati, and the chiefest wonders and
miracles of our B. Lady of Loreto. And because the people of Recanati had a
special desire to imprint in the hearts of tender years great devotion
toward the B. Virgin of Loreto, they made a Decree that all schoolemaisters
in teaching the first principles of learning, should first inure childrens
ears and minds with such discourses, and by little and little should
accustom tender age to the reading of that little book; which ingraffed in
them an exceeding devotion and piety toward the native House of the B. Virgin.

The state of the House of Loreto, whiles the Roman Bishops sat at Auinigon.
CHAP. XX.
BUT what deep impression the religion of the House of Loreto made in the
hearts of the Picentians at that time, this one thing may show, that being
nothing almost furthered by the Roman Bishops, it flourished of it self. For
about that time, as before has been said, the Roman Sea passed into France.
And because the Pope was absent from the City, and from Italy it self, the
House of Loreto wanted many ornaments and furderances, which now it has, and
then also had had, but that this most sacred House ennobled with so many
miracles and signs, was so far from the sight and intelligence of the Popes.
But even in that state, she wa^ted not their Pontifical ornaments, albeit the
Po^tificall Sea was the only cause, that she was not so much adorned, as not
neglected of the Roman Bishops, whiles they sat in France. For when Benedict
the XII. had graced the House of Loreto with a gift of Indulgences, Clement the
VI. his Successor being absent from the City (for he sat at Auinigon)
published and kept the celebritie of the secular Iubiley, S. Anto. par. 3.
Plat. Cle. vt.
reducing it to the 50. year: whereby the multitude of people which came from
all places to Rome, was almost incredible, whereof many, to wit the Inhabitants
of Flaminia, and Emilia, came out of their way to go to the House of Loreto
most illustrious with fame. But shortly after a horrible plague beginning at
Rome it self (the head City of the world) wasted all Italy almost with
funeralles, and continued three whole years, at which time every hundredth
person scarce remaining alive, the Cities of Italy were reduced even to waste
and desolation. Which infinite calamity (as I may term it) in very deed
enforced many Italians to implore the help of our B. Lady of Loreto, that in
so horrible a tempest and storm, they might be protected with the shadow of
heavenly help. About twenty years after, Vrbane the V. succeeding Clement,
at last reuisited Rome, but not so much to recall thither the Pontifical Sea,
as to compose the affairs of the City, and the troubles of Italy. But soon
after his return from the City into France, he departed this life. After
whom Gregory the XI. received the Popedom: who was so moved with the
miseries of Italy, and with the worthy prayers of S. Catherine of Siena, a
virgin of admirable sanctity, that at length he returned the Pontifical Sea
to Rome, about 70. years after it was translated into France.

The continuance of Schism depriueth the House of Loreto of many benefits of
the Popes. CHAP. XXI.
SHORTLY after Gregory being taken out of this mortal life, Vrbane the VI. was
created Pope, against whom the French faction subrogated Clement the VII. a
false Pope, who opposed his Auinigon seat, against the Sea of Rome, which he
would have to be called the Roman, whereby the Church was troubled and divided
into two parts. But what hinderance the absence of the Roman Bishop was to the
ornament and commodities of the House of Loreto, was well perceived even at
that time by his presence. For though Vrbane the Pope was molested and
disquieted with schism, The Indulgences of Vrbane the V I.
and with the arms and treachery of schismatic Princes: yet in the midst
of so many troubles and cares, he had some regard to adorn the B. Virgin of
Loreto. For being acertained of the heavenly flames wont to be seen over the
House of Loreto, the 6. of the Ides of September; he applied his mind to honor
the heavenly Queen, and with Pontifical gifts from the Vicar of God, thought
good to adorn the native habitation of the B. Virgin, beautified with heavenly
signs from God him self. Wherefore to them that visited the House of Loreto,
the day of the B. Virgins nativity, he granted most bountiful remission of
their sins, the 90. year of that age, in very fit time. For Bonifacius the
IX. succeeding Vrbane, did not only by example of his Predecessor adorn the
House of Loreto with new Indulgences, but also kept the celebritie of the
Iubiley, which according to the institution of Bonifacius the VIII. fell in the
year of our Redemption 1400. And as the Pontifical Sea recalled again to
Rome, and a desire to see the Pope, drew an innumerable multitude from all
parts to the City, to visit the Churches of the Apostles, so also the fame
of these heavenly flames and Pontifical Indulgences excited many of them to
visit the Cell of Loreto, chiefly in the month of September, and there to
celebrate the nativity of the Blessed Virgin. About the same time, Hier. Ang.
the Citizens of Recanati (that also in the winter time people might have free
passage to the most sacred House) took order that the way which went to Loreto
should be paued and bordered with brick; by which they erected little
oratories of like distance from each other, as instigations to increase devotion
and to succor the Pilgrims in stormy weather. This example of the people of
Recanati, provoked the people of Picene to imitate that pious work; whereby the
ways which went to Loreto from the bordering Cities, and towns, began
straight to be paued: and from Ancona, Auximo, Montesanto, and Firmo, were
brought even to Loreto it self. Also bridges were made over the Rivers, which
ran through Pecene, that they might give secure and speedy passage to the
Pilgrims. But the continual disturbance of the Christian state, did no less
hinder the ornaments of the House of Loreto then the abode of the Roman
Bishopps in France had done. For that long and variable schism (whereof the
like has never bin) troubled many Popes for forty years together, S. Anto.
par. 3.
until Martin the V. with the great liking of all, was created Pope in the
Council of Constance, who at last brought peace and concord to the Christian
world. And truly as that foul tempest of discord, oppressed the Church and
the Popes with many evils; so in like manner it deprived the House of Loreto of
no small heap of commodities, and that the times ensuing did well declare.

Martin the V. adorneth the House of Loreto with Indulgences and faires. CHAP.
XXII.
HITHER TO I have rehearsed many things not very manifest, not only for their
antiquity and the disquiet of the whole world, but also for that they were
badly committed to writing in good part of the time, which happened from the
translation of the House of our B. Lady out of Galiley, till she was settled at
Loreto, and began to be more and more frequented, in this great variety and
disturbance of the Christian state. Also if there were any things, in the
records of Recanati, or in other public or private monuments, which might
give light to this History, for the most part they perished (as we said
before) when the Registry, together with the City was consumed with fire.
But the industry of the Dalmatians supplied the want of the Citizens of
Recanati; For the Flumentians bordering on Tersact, Hier. Angel.
in time of Pope Leo the 10. did give no small light to the first beginning of
the history of Loreto, sending those things to the people of Recanati, signed
in writing, which they found in the ancient Chronicles of their forefathers,
concerning the first remoouall of this most sacred House into Dalmatia, their
inquisition, reverence, and the miracles of the same. Whereof the Citizens of
Recanati certified Leo the Pope, as witnesses Hierome Angelita, who at that
very time, was Secretary to the City of Recanati, and afterward dedicated
his history of Loreto (where he delivered these things to posterity) to
Clement the VII. Cosin-german to Leo, and partaker of his secrets. So having
followed Angelita, an author of no small reputation and credit, out of the
chronicles of Sclauonio, we have collected the first part of this history,
adding thereunto out of the proper momuments of Recanati, what the merciless
fire left unconsumed. But hereafter all that we are to relate, will be more
evident and copious, because greater diligence was used not only to deliver
them to posterity, but also to preserve the^ by record, that they might come
safe to our age and hands. The Indulgences and benefits of Martin the V.
Martin therefore bringing peace and quietness to the Church, desired nothing
more, then to leave the House of Loreto (famous for miracles and wonders)
graced with some gift of his: whereupon granting many and great Indulgences to
the most sacred House, he invited all to visit and reverence the Chapel of
Loreto, chiefly in the month of September. Moreover about the 20. year of
that age, this benefit he augmented with an other, instituting solemn faires
at Recanati, to the praise, glory, and honor of the B. Virgin of Loreto (as in
the Apostolic Breue he delivers) aiming at that which proved true, that by
propinquitie and neerenes of the places the celebritie of the mart of Recanati,
would also increase the celebritie of the House of Loreto: seeing the choice of
wares might draw the bordering people, and Indulgences of sins, those
merchants to reverence the sacred House: which Indulgences he granted for three
months, answerable to the mart of Recanati, so that in any part of September,
October, and November (all which the mart of Recanati was to be held) these
Indulge^ces might be gained at Loreto by them, that with due deuouotion went to
visit the House of the B. Virgin. Afterward many Popes following the example of
Martin, as Julius the 2. Xystus the 4. and Leo the 10. (as in due place shall
be said) confirmed the mart of Recanati by their authority, and graced the
Church of Loreto with Pontifical benefits. But under Martin the V. not only
the celebritie, but also the ornaments of the House of Loreto had good
increase. For the goodly buildings (now called the Chanonry) were raised on the
south side, for the Priests, which voluntarily came to serve in the House of
Loreto. And also a Palace and an Hospital were then built, to entertain as
well the noble as the poorer sort of Pilgrims.

The wealth of the Church of Loreto in time of Pope Eugenius the IIII. CHAP.
XXIII.
EVGENIVS succeeded Martin, but he was so troubled with the garboiles of the
City, and with the wicked decrees of the Counsel of Basil, now corrupted,
and also with the schism of Felix V. the Antipope, and so solicitous for the
Council of Florence, which him self had summoned, that he had almost no
leisure to think of adoring the House of Loreto. Notwithstanding Flauius
Blondus Secretary to Eugenius, The testimony of Flauius Blondus.
and no obscure historiographer of those times, performing as it were the,
Popes duty, graced the Cell of Loreto with these eloquent words.

Betwixt Recanati and the Adriaticke Sea (says he) a little from the River
Musion, in an open and vnsensed town, is seated the most famous Chapel of
the glorious Virgin MARY in all Italy, called our Lady of Loreto. In which that
the prayers of suppliants are heard of Almighty God, by the intercession of
his B. mother, this is a great and a most certain argument, that they, who
have obtained their vows, have hung up donaries of gold, silver, wax, cloth,
linen and woollen, of great estimation and worth, filling almost all the whole
Church, which the Bishop preserves untouched, to the glory of God, and of his
B. Mother. Whereby it well appears, what fame, what religion, and what
celebritie the House of Loreto was of, and also what variety and plenty of
donaries it had, Eugenius the fourth being Pope, that is to say, about the
year of our Redemption 1450. which being famous and memorable for the Iubiley,
increased the celebritie and the wealth of Loreto, as it was wont to do. About
the same time, by the instigation of Philip Vicecount, Duke of Milan, Blond.
lib. 5. Dec. 3. Sabel. l. 2. En. 10.
Francis Ssorza making war against the Pope, and bringing Picene by force and
policy into his power, the victor purposed to visit the most illustrious
Church of our B. Lady of Loreto. But John Vitellescus Bishop of Recanati, John
Vitellescus Bishop of Recanati.
an active and a wise man governing Picene with great command, and fearing lest
the Chapel of our B. Lady (very wealthy by reason of so many donaries) might
be ransackt by a soldier puffed up with victory, went about to remove the
occasion of avarice, and conueying the chiefest ornaments of the Church of
Loreto secretly into a ship prepared for that purpose, he himself speedily
transported them first to Venice, and then to Rauenna, to take away the
occasion of sacrilege, and to preserve the sacred donaries in safety; and
after that tempest was assuaged, brought them back again to Loreto. But the
protection of the B. Virgin was not doubtful in defending her own House in
time of these stirs. For when so many armies of Ssorza, of the Pope, and of
Alsonsus King of Naples wandered freely up and down all Picene in this long
and cruel war, and so many Captains of ba^ds came to Loreto; yet in the
ransacking of so many towns and Cities, a village unfortified, and famous for
the wealth of the Church, (as then things stood) remained always untouched and
undefiled: so much either the sanctity of the place, or else the protection of
the B. Virgin toward her own state, prevailed with mortal men.

The House of Loreto is enriched with Indulgences by Nicolas the V. and
fortified against the force of the Turks. CHAP. XXIIII.
AFTER the death of Eugenius, The benefits of Nicolas the V.
Nicolas the 5. received the Popedom, who not to be overcome by Martin in
honoring of our B. Lady, Hiero. Angel.
graced the Cell of Loreto with Pontifical gifts. For knowing that the
festival day of the B. Virgins salutation by the Angel, was most famous and
memorable in that House (because God him self put on humane nature the same
day in that very place) he adorned the most joyful light, in which was laid
the foundation of man's salvation with an anniuersarie Indulgence: whereby the
Church of Loreto (as the memory of so great a mystery well deserved) yearly
on that day began to be exceedingly reverenced. And when Nicolas had adorned
the House of Loreto with these Indulge^ces, he thought good also to provide for
the wealth of the same, straightly ordaining that the donaries of Loreto should
not be alienated nor sold, suspending the Bishop of Recanati from his function
in the Church, if hereafter he presumed to diminish the lest jot thereof, or
turn them to other uses. And if he did not recover them already sold and
dispersed within the space of a month, he should be put out of his
Bishopric. Also in the same Breue he gave commandment to the Citizens of
Recanati, both to recover and defend the donaries of Loreto. Not only in peace
but also in warlike tumult, the worthy piety of Nicolas the Pope was very
notable toward the House of Loreto. For about that time Mahomet king of the
Turks, S. Anto. p. 3. The Turks do take Constantinople.
having slain Constantine Paleolagus the Emperor of the East, and taken
Constantinople by force, and filthily spoiled it, translated the seat of the
Turkish Empire into Europe, the year of our Redemption 1452. whereupon as soon
as it was spread abroad, that Constantinople, the fortress of the Christian
Empire was taken by the Barbarians: that the Emperor him self, with the
nobility, was slain, and that the Emperor of the Turks, pussed up with so
great a victory, near at hand insulted over Greece, and also threatened
destruction to Italy it self, truly so great terror was stricken into the
Christian forces, that all Italy trembled. Wherefore Nicolas having great care
of the House of Loreto, fortified her against the invasion of the Barbarians
with strong defense, and prepared to rise against them with all his forces, to
repress their fury.

The House of Loreto is fortified against the Turks, by Callistus the III. and
puts the Barbarians to flight, much frighted with a great overthrow. CHAP.
XXV.
NICOLAS departing this life with grief in the very preparation and meditation
of the Turkish war (as it is reported) Callistus the III. succeeded; S. Anto.
par. 3. Plat. in Call. 3.
who, because it was given out, that the Turks (having conquered P^loponesus
and subdued part of Epyrus) were bent into Dalmatia, The benefits of Calli^tus
the (...).
and into Italy it self with great fury and madness, desired nothing more,
then to defend the House of Loreto; not doubting but if she were safe, all the
rest of Italy would be in safety, by the protection of the mother of God.
Whereupon he committed his forces to Rodericke Borgia his brothers son, and to
Lord John Milianus his sisters son, with the office and title of his Legates,
out of hand sending the one into Picene, to whose special charge he committed
the House of Loreto, and the other to Bolognia. Both these Legates coming to
Loreto with their armies, and entreating peace and pardon of Almighty God and
his B. mother, strengthened the House of Loreto (void of walls and
fortifications) with rampires and other fortresses made up in haste and
unorderly. But though the B. Virgin contemned not the good will of the Pope and
his Captains toward her, yet she her self defended her own House, taming,
and turning the furious Turks an other way. For at that time the Popes navy
(albeit not very big) spoiling the coasts of Asia with happy adventure and
success, Anton. p. 3. Sabel. A^ne. 10. lib. 6.
and vanquishing the huge forces of Barbary, under the government of the
Patriarch of Aquileia, overcame the Turkish navy in battle, and took most
of their Galleys. Moreover by the instigation of Calistus Vsumcassanus King of
Persia, roading into the borders of the Turks with a strong army, obtained
famous victories of the most insolent enemy, not so much by humane force (as
him self confessed in his letters sent unto the Pope) as by heavenly aid. And
much about the same time, John Humatez President of Hungary setting on the
Turks as they besieged Belgrade (a famous town of Hungary) with great forces
and strength, made great slaughter among the^ with a few soldiers, which
seemed not to be the work of man. For when John Capistranus a holy man of the
family of S. Francis, brought in the sign of Christ Crucified, the Barbarians
were put to flight and slain, and Mahomet their Emperor was wounded; which
doubtless did proceed from the goodness of God: for the Captains them selves
acknowledged that so notable a victory was gotten by heavenly favor. Wherefore
having obtained so many and so great victories of so mighty an enemy by
heavenly aid, as all confessed, it animated the Christians to hope well of
their common cause. And shortly after, no small thing to be spoken of,
increased their godly hope, and carried the name of our B. Lady of Loreto, into
all the Christian world.

By restoring of health to Pius the second, the House of Loreto began to be far
more reverenced and famous. CHAP. XXVI.
PIUS the second a wise and a virtuous man was elected for Callistus, Plat. in
Pio. 2.
who not only by his letters and Legates, but also by his own presence and
words animating Christian Kings and Princes to the Turkish war in the
Council of Mantua, with the labors of his journey fell into a long and a
dangerous sickness, this most distressed time of the Christian common wealth.
For great part of the sacred soldiers, who had received the Cruzado, and given
their names to the sacred war, were to meet at Ancona by Pius his commandme^t,
and there to expect his coming, as was agreed upon. But a burning fever and a
most vehement cough, did so afflict the aged and ouer-wearied body of Pius in
this most adverse time of the Christian state, that he was not only, not able
to go, but even out of hope to come to Amona, as he had appointed. Therefore
relecting the hope and help of the Physicians, he impsored the assistance of
our B. Lady of Loreto, whose worthy power in curing of diseases was miraculous
as he understood, not so much desiring to seek a remedy for his present
sickness, as for his journey to Ancona. And doubting not, but that his prayers
were heard, forth with he gave and dedicated to the B. Virgin, a golden Chalice
very notable for workmanship and weight, wherein the Pope him self caused this
writing to be incised, for a monument of his vow and gift.

HOLY MOTHER OF GOD,
Though thy power be not restrained to any copasse, but fills the whole world
with miracles, yet because it is thy will oftentimes to be delighted more with
one place then with an other: and day by day adornest thy beloved seat of
Loreto, with innumerable graces and miracles: I unhappy sinner, with heart and
mind, recurre unto thee, suppliantly beseeching thee to take from me this
burning fever, and most troublesome cough, and to restore my feeble body his
wonted health, profitable, as we hope, to the Christian common wealth: In the
mean time accept this gift, as a token of my service.

POPE PIUS
THE II. THE YEAR OF OUR SALVATION M.CCCC.LXIV.
His gift was so pleasing to the B. Virgin, that the hope of Pius the Pope
deceived him not any jot at all. A wonder to be spoken: For he had no sooner
made his vow, but the heat of the fever began to relent, the cough to diminish,
and strength to return to his diseased body almost consumed with sickness and
age. Whereupon Pius unwilling to delay the time (though he had not yet recovered
perfect strength) undertook his journey toward Ancona, Pius the 2. does Visit
the B. Virgin of Loreto.
by the way to perform the vow which he had made to visit the B. Virgin of
Loreto. Many Cardinals and Peers of Rome went with him, riding in a
horse-litter, whom partly the charitable and reverend respect they bare unto
him, as also the fame of the miracle, and partly the desire they had to see the
sacred army caused to accompany from the City it self. In this journey the
nearer the Pope came to the House of Loreto, the better he felt him self, that
it might plainly appear how he recovered his strength: For when he came to
present him self before the B. Virgin his Patroness, he was perfect well: and
well remembering the help which he had received in the City, and likewise in
they way, he performed his vow with great devotion, whereby the majesty of
Loreto did appear more then ever at any time before. For at the same instant,
you might have seen many Cardinals and Peers of Rome, attending on Pius, and
many famous Captains of the war which came from Ancona to meet the Pope,
and the high Priest him self praying with fervent devotion before the B.
Virgin of Loreto. And when Pius had religiously performed his vow, he went to
Ancona with all that company waiting on him. But the delay of the Captains of
the sacred war, was the only hinderance, that he received no such benefitt as
he desired, by the vow which he obtained by the intercession of the B. Virgin
of Loreto. For being more and more impaired with age and feeblenes, and fitting
at Ancona in all the summer heates, expecting the Venetian fleet, and other
confederates of the war, he began to pine away, either ouer-wearied with
their delay, or else with old age oppressing his feeble body, wherewith falling
into a gentle and a continual fever, he was at last consumed, and departed to
heaven to receive the reward of his labors, and of that most worthy endeavor,
the 66. year of that age, deserving worthy remembrance as well for his notable
gifts of mind, as for his piety and religion. Neither is it to be reckoned
among the least of Pius praises, that such a man recovering his health by the
help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and so many Princes and Nations reporting it
abroad, greatly increased the worthy name and reverence of the House of
Loreto. For until that time (very near a hundred and sixty years from her
coming into Italy the fame of the House of Loreto) did not much pass the
bounds of Picene: so that a certain obscure or doubtful rumor thereof scarce
came into the bordering or into remote Countries: that none may think it
strange, that news of the transportatio^ of the sacred House from Galiley into
Italy, had neither pierced to S. Vincent Ferrier in Spain, entangled in the
schism of Auinigon, and busied in the religion of Mont-Seratto, nor to S.
Antoninus, nor other Tuscane writers of former times in Tuscane, all miserably
vexed and divided with Civil wars. Which truly was the cause why S. Vincent
in a certain sermon, following the ancient report, affirmed that the B.
Virgins House was then in Galilie: and S. Antoninus and other ancient
Historiographers of Tuscane, made no mention at all of the House of Loreto, as
ignorant of her memorable translation and coming into Italy. Yet Blondus the
Historiographer, almost equal with the above mentioned, being the Popes
servant, and having sufficient knowledge thereof, left (as we showed before) a
worthy testimony of the sacred House of Loreto. And of her miraculous
transportation, therefore peradventure ancienter Historiographers made no
mention at all, lest they might seem to have reported a vain and an
incredible thing, specially seeing so unusual a miracle, never heard of from
the beginning of the world, was not as yet confirmed by the Popes authority.
But as soon as Pius the Pope, ready to dye, in the sight of the City, and as
it were of the whole Christian world, was restored to his health by so evident
a miracle, at the intercession of our B. Lady of Loreto; it so meruailously
increased her religion and honor, that from that time the House of Loreto
filled the remotest Countries with the fame of her name: and out of the fardest
part of the world invited Pilgrims to Loreto; where a few years before the
divine providence had prepared a very convenient refuge and succor for all.

The sacred House is endowed with goodly possessions by the Bishop of Recanati,
for the relief of poor Pilgrims. CHAP. XXVII
NICOLAS ASTIVS a man famous for sanctimonie and learning, Hier. Angel.
being Bishop of Recanati, by reason of his exceeding devotion to the B. Virgin
of Loreto, Out of the Bull of Julius the second.
purposed to augment and maintain her honor, with his uttermost endeavor. For
a great multitude of poor Pilgrims resorted daily to Loreto either to
perform their vows, or else to gain the Indulgences, whom the treasury of
Loreto very bountifully relieved for her ability, bestowing large portions to
every one. And lest the fountain of this benignity might in time decrease,
the Bishop of Recanati thought good to increase it with the revenues of
certain lands. For having many pleasant and fruitful possessions, near to
the House of Loreto, he gave and dedicated them to the B. Virgin mother of God,
the 58. year of that age. The Charter of which Donation, we thought good to
insert in this place, that all might not only know the exceeding piety or
Nicolas the Bishop toward the B. Virgin of Loreto; but also how much money the
House of Loreto bestowed on poor Pilgrims, The liberality of the Sacred
H^use to the poor.
when she had no possessions at all. And thus it is: Nicolas Bishop of Recanati
and Macerata obtaining the government of the Church of our B. Lady of Loreto
in the Diocese of Recanat^, by dispensation of the Sea Apostolic; and
^onsidering the continual devotion and sincere love, which he always had to
the a^ores^id Church of our B. Lady, the great multitude of Pilgrims and of
other people w^i^^ came thither to per^orme their vows, and to gain the
Indulgences, and o^ many feeble and poor men, who daily resorted to the said
Church of our B. Lady (^esides the festival d^ie of the aforesaid most
glorious Virgin Marie) AND ALSO THE EXCEEDING GREAT ALMS, WHICH CHRIST'S
POOR RECEIVED OVT OF THE HOUSES OF THE AFORESAID CHVRCH, AND NECESSARILY MVST
RECEIVE, and the rest that follows. Which is so much the certainer, for that
it was committed to writing by him, who by reason of his office and function,
must needs best know the state of Loreto. And the house of Loreto being
enriched with these revenues, increased her liberality to the poor, in such
sort that the fame of this bounty joined to her religion propagated the most
comfortable name of the House of Loreto far and near, inuiting the people of
all nations to visit the House of Loreto. For as soon as the poor Pilgrims of
the remotest countries (Who had been partakers of that necessary relief)
returned home; they did no less praise the liberality, then the religion of
the B. Virgin of Loreto; which stirred others to experience that, which they
heard the^ report. And very opportunely, a small thing to be spoken of, did not
alittle increase this report beginning to be much spread abroad in Cities and
foreign Countries.

The sum of the History of Loreto is set up in the Church by Tereman the
Governor. CHAP. XXVIII.
PETER GEORGE TEREMAN the Governor, a man of great integrity and wisdom,
having governed the House of Loreto many years, Hiero. Angel.
after the death of Nicolas Astius, was also made Bishop of Recanati: who in
time of Pius the second, about the 60. year of that age, in favor of the
Pilgrims, set up in the House of Loreto, the sum of that history (gathered
out of that little book which in time past, as we showed before, was published
at Recanati) that all might have means to know it; which he caused to be set
down in a simple and a plain style, comformable to the understanding of the
Communaltie, that it might be an acceptable and grateful repast to the
Pilgrims not altogether unlearned, and no small orname^t of the House of
Loreto it self. And this endeavor of Tereman was so allowed by posterity,
that as often as that writing decayed with antiquity, they repaired it again.
For indeed the History it self, is repeated from the first remembrance of the
people of Recanati; and the religion and diligence of Tereman did not a little
authorize the thing it self: who demanding it by oath of the witnesses which
then were living, desired to have so great a thing testified as much as might
be. Whereupon he alleges two sufficient witnesses, Paul Rinalducius, and
Francis surnamed Prior, both Citizens of Recanati, good men and of approved
credit. And first Rinalducius often witnessed before Tereman the Governor (as
he him self delivers) that he had heard his grandfather sundry times report,
how he saw the House of the B. Virgin when the Angels carried it on high over
the sea, and placed it in Recanati wood: and that he had also gone sundry times
unto it with many Citizens of Recanati, whiles it stood in the wood. And also
Francis Prior often heard his grandfather, being a man of a hundred and twenty
years of age, and having the perfect use of his senses, report (as for his
testimony he delivers) that he had gone very often with many others to the
sacred House, whiles it stood in the wood, and that in his remembrance it was
translated into the hill of the two Brothers. Moreover Hierome Angelita,
continual Secretary to the City of Recanati, in his History of the B.
Virgin of Loreto does deliver; that Paul Kinalducius and Francis Prior upon
their oaths ministered unto them by Tereman the Governor, who was not only
Rector of the Church of Loreto, but also Bishop of Recanati, did testify those
things to be, even as Tereman the Governor had related them. Whereby it may
sufficiently appear, that Tereman the Governor, when he rightly took their
testimony of this so great a miracle, was as well Bishop of Recanati, as
Governor of the House of Loreto. And lest any should doubt of Teremans
sincerity, Nicolas Astius Bishop of Recanati, in the book of his Donation
(which we mentioned before) does set down a worthy testimony of his
sincerity and religion in these words. Considering the grateful offices of
devotion, the sincere fidelity, and the very great diligence, which the
Venerable and circumspect men, Sigor. Pietro Giorgio Rector of the Church of S.
Sinideus of Teramo, Governor of the sacred House, and also Sigor. Antonio etc.
Priests, Reside^ts in the said house, for a long time have bestowed in
spiritual matters, and in other affairs and temporal business of the same
Church, and of the beloved house, and yet sail not daily to bestow and
exhibit, with diligent and vigilant care, with prudent endeavors, and
solicitude: and the rest that follows. Wherefore the approved religion and
authority of such a man, must needs make much for the credit of this short
History, and from that time, either the health of Pius restored unto him by
miracle, or the fame of her liberality toward poor Pilgrims, or else the
publication of the History of Loreto, made the B. Virgin of Loreto famous and
illustrious among all nations.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reverend F.
HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS, Of the Society of JESUS.
POPE PAVL THE SECOND being cured of the plague, goes about to beautify the
house of LORETO with a new Church, and to adorn it with his Decrees. CHAP. I.
HEREAFTER I will continue and go forward with the miracles and ornaments of
the House of Loreto renowned and illustrious, in all the Christian world: for
that their fame has now filled men's ears and minds. After the decease of
Pius the Pope; the Cardinals who accompanied him to Ancona, determining to go
to Rome, to the election of the new Pope, a horrible plague began at Ancona, by
reason of so great an assembly of people (as commonly it happens) being much
distempered, with the exceeding heates of of the summer; which at the first,
infected the communa^tie, but then the nobility and Peers them selves.
Therefore, the terror of the present danger hastened the departure, or rather
flight of the Fathers; though truly the flight it self, delivered not one of
them from the sickness, Hier. Ang.
to be an occasion of glory to Loreto. Peter Barbus Cardinal of S. Mark
(remarkable among the rest, for years, wisdom and experience) being infected
with the sickness, began to be grieved in mind, The Cardipall of S. Mark is
cu^ed of the plague in the House of Loreto.
to see the dreadful shape of imminent death before his eyes. But Pope Pius
the second, was a fresh example of the help of Loreto. Calling therefore to
mind, how Pius was miraculously restored to his health, forthwith he gave
commandment, that he might be carried to the Church of Loreto. Whither as soon
as he came, the multitude was removed, and he him self was brought into the
sacred Cell of the mother of God; where with great devotion, lying down on the
ground, he put all the hope of cure (next after God) in the B. Virgin, craved
remedy against the danger of imminent death, and heartily reco^mended the
Christian common wealth, deprived of her Bishop, to God and the B. Virgin.
Neither in vain: For as he was in prayer, a certain gentle and sweet sleep
came upon him, in which (as it is reported) the mother of God appeared unto
him, in a certain heavenly shape: who bidding him be of good comfort, told him
that his prayers were heard; that e^^soones the sickness should be taken away,
and that ere long, through the providence of God, he should be created Pope.
The eue^t showed that the vision was unfeigned. For when he awaked, the sickness
was gone: and by virtue of his vow, he recovered strength both of body and
mind, beyond all expectation. Whereof being exceeding glad, and joyfully
acknowledging the manifold benefits of God and his B. mother, he gave hearty
thanks to them both, and came safe and sound out of the sacred Chapel,
leaving all that were privy to his sickness, amazed and astonished, with the
admiration of the thing. And being put in good hope of the high Priesthood, by
the promise of the B. Virgin, and also well remembering the benefit, which he
had received, he commanded the Governor of the House of Loreto forthwith to be
sent for. To who^ he openly declared, how he purposed to build, a most
magnificent Church, in honor of our B. Lady of Loreto; out of hand in his
name, and at his cost, willing him to provide lime, mortar, and other stuff,
sufficient for such a work. Departing thence to Rome, to the election of the
new Pope, he him self was created Pope, taking on him the name of Paul the
second: Paul the 2. does build a new Church about the House of Loreto
and having scarce entered into his Popedom, he determined to begin the Church
of Loreto; as not unmindful by whose help, he obtained not only health of
body, but even the highest dignity that may be. And foreseeing already in his
mind, the greatness of that place in time to come, as soon as the old Church was
taken down, he occupied great space of the ground adjoining, with goodly
foundations, and speedily went forward with the work it self. That a great
part of the Church of Loreto was built by Paul the second, Baptista Mantuanus
does testify, by whom in his Poem Agelariorum, that is, Of the Shepherds,
the Governor of the ship, speaks this to Antonie, a princ pall man sailing
along the Picene shore. Bapt. Mant. lib. 6.


That building which on Picene shores, you now far of behold,
Belongs to Her, that did Gods Son, in Virgins womb infold;
Which hither from Assyria once, by powerful Angels aid,
With passage strange, above the seas, was through the air conveyed.
And a little after.

Laureta's House they do it call, yet must it not be thought,
That this high Temple also was, from foreign Countries brought.
These ornaments were added since, to grace the House withal,
At charge and great devotion of the Prince of Prelates, Paul.
Whereby we may conjecture, that he brought the Church of Loreto, almost unto
the roof. And whiles the Church was forwarded with all expedition, the Pope
did not only adorn the House of the mother of God with buildings, The
Indulgences of Paul the 2.
but also with letters and Pontifical gifts. For to them that visited the
House of Loreto, all the festival days of our B. Lady, and the sundays of
the year ben^ides, he granted full remission of their sins. It seems a
thing worth the labor, to insert the beginning of both his Breues, that all
may see the worthy testimony of the high Bishop, concerning the great
sanctatie of the House of Loreto, and a monument of his own health restored
unto him by miracle. The testi^^^^ie of Paul the 2.
Having therefore spoken a few things, according to the ancient use of the Roman
Bishops, thus he writes. Though for the Greatness of the graces which by the
intercession of the glorious Virgin MARIE, the Mother of his Son, the
Almighty, daily works to the faithful, making their godly Vows unto her,
holy Churches, dedicated in honor of her name, are to be reverenced with
great devotion; notwi^hstanding that honor is to be exhibited more carefully
ton ardes those, in which by the intercession of the said B. Virgin, the
Highest works greatest, and most evident miracles: as the experience thereof
is manisest at the Church of our B. Lady of Loreto in the Diocese of
Recan^^^i, where miraculouslie was placed the true Image of the B. Virgin her
self; and whither devout people assembled from diverse parts of the world, by
reason of the great, of the wonderful, and innumerable miracles, which there
are wrought by the help of the glorious Virgin: AND WE IN OUR OWN PERSON
HAVE EXPERIENCED THE SAME, The b^^^e^^ (...).
and the rest that follows. Moreover with these Indulgences, he granted
singular priu^edges. The House of Loreto S. ^^^pted from (...) iurisdict^o^ o^
the Bishop of Recana^i
For he ex^mpted the House of Loreto, together with her ministers, and all
things thereunto belonging, out of the jurisdiction o^ the Bishop of Recana^i,
receiving it into his, into the protection of the Sea Apostolic, and of the
holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: and granted most ample ^acult^e to the
Priests of Loreto, to abso^ue Pilgrims, from sins and offenses, reserved to
the Bishop, An other testimony of Paul the 2.
or to the Sea Apostolic. I thought good also to set down the proeme of this
^ater Decree, in which he makes very honorable mention of the House of
Loreto, as follows. Seeing to the Church of our B. Lady of Loreto, seated on
one side the walls of the City of Recana^i, in which through the great
cleme^cie of God (as credible persons have delivered) the House and the Image
of the glorious Virgin her selse was placed by the handworke of Angels, and to
the which, for the often and the wonderful miracles, which by the meri^es and
intercession of the same glorious Virgin, the Almighty works on all that
recurre unto her, and with humility implore her help, daily out of diverse,
even the remotest parts of the world, multitudes of people being delivered by
the aid of the said glorious Virgin, do flock and assemble: and the rest that
follows.

James a Franciscan is delivered from an incurable disease, and from the
assaults of Devils. CHAP. II.
CERTAIN miracles of this time are delivered, which are not to be omitted.
James of Picene, a holy and a learned man, of the family of the Franciscans,
being a worthy preacher of the Gospel, Chron. Franc. li. 6. c. 3. et 4.
about the 70. year of that age, was taken with an incurable disease, which
did much disquiet his mind: for so great was the force of his sickness, that the
very name thereof, took from him all hope of helping people, by mean of holy
sermons: whereupon despairing of humane help, he turned his hope and his vow to
God and his B. mother; and forth with, notwithstanding his infirmity, coming
to Loreto in manner of a Pilgrim, in the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, in time
of the dreadful sacrificewith flowing tears he earnestly besought the Queen
or heaven, that through the mercy or Jesus her son, she would obtain for
him hearth of body, which peradventure might be to the salvation of many
people, by preaching his holy Gospel. Without delay our B. Lady appeared unto
him, bidding him ask of her some other thing, for that which he requested was
already granted. And James in co^tinent perceiving, that he was restored unto
his health, gave hearty thanks unto the B. Virgin, and returned home, not so
much ioying his own hap, as theirs whose salvation he tendered. Neither in
this only, was he made partaker of the help of our B. Lady of Loreto. For
certain years after, being long and much vexed with the importunate feinds,
he made haste to Loreto, the most certain solace of his evils; where as he
was celebrating at the Altar of the B. Virgin, with much grief and sorrow of
mind, he besought her experienced help, and entreated that at last his
trouble some and dangerous combat might have an end. His prayers were heard:
For as he was fervent in prayer, our B. Lady appeared unto him again, and
said: Son be of good comfort, and be thankful to the giver of all goodness:
the end of thy combat is at hand, and a celestial Crown remains for thee
the Conqueror. And the event approved the predictio^. For not long after, the
sorces of the cu^bersome enemies were vanquished, joyful peace suddenly
followed, and then was he called into heaven to be rewarded with celestial
bliss

Pope Xystus the fourth increases, and graceth the old Decrees, with new-ones.
CHAP. III.
NEITHER was Xystus the fourth the successor of Paul inferior to him in
adorning the B. Virgin of Loreto. Hier. Angel. Bern. Cyril.
For he granted new Indulgences unto the old, and confirming the privileges of
Paul with his authority, he freed the Priests of Loreto from paying of
tithes, and increasing their number, gave the^ faculty to dispense with vows.
Moreover the 75. year of that age (memorable for the celebritie of the
Iubiley) with Pontifical authority he ratified the Donation of Nicolas Astius
Bishop of Recanati (whereof we spoke before) and witnessed his hearty affection
and piety toward the B. Virgin of Loreto in the beginning of a certain
Breue in these words. Being desirous that the Church of Loreto, to the which
we bear special affection of devotion, should be frequented with due honor,
and that faithful people may more willingly recurre thither for devotion sake,
we confirm; and the rest which follows. Neither does it a little redound to
the praise of Xystus, and to the dignity of the House of Loreto, that when the
Carmelites had undoubtedly acertained him, that all the holy places of
Palestine (and among the^ the native House or the B. Virgin) before the
Sarace^s took the^ by force of arms, were credited and committed to them, in
their favor, he witnessed the same in Apostolical writing: which was the
cause, Hierome Cardinal Roboreo is made Patron of the House of Loreto
why afterward the government of the most sacred House was redeliuered unto the
Carmelites, as in due place we are to declare. Besides Xystus committed the
patro^ship of the House of Loreto, together with the Bishopric of Recanati,
to Hierome Cardinal Roboreo his sisters son, to no small good of the sacred
House it self. For what at his uncles request, and his own godly
disposition, he finished the Church which Paul the second had begun, and
increased the celebritie thereof, with sacred ornaments, with selected Priests
and Quiristers.

A great army of Turks ready to spoil the wealth of Loreto, is put to
flight by miracle. CHAP. IIII.
ABOUT that time there happened a great storm, to show both the wealth and
religion of the House of Loreto. Hier. Aug
For when Mahomet the Turkish Emperor, had assaulted the Island of Rhodes in
vain, he sent one of his Captains with his navy into Italy: who about the
70. year of that age, coming on the sudden to the noble town Otranto, in
the province of the Salentines, got even the key of Italy: And having ransackt
the places ther-about, he was ready to spoil the other maritime coasts of
the Adriaticke sea. Whereupon the people of Recanati (albeit much terrified with
news of imminent danger) without regard of their own Country, purposed to
defend the House of Loreto with all their might, and putting a strong garrison
into the town, kept watch day and night. And lest a vain hope of getting the
wealthy prey might allure the Barbarians to assault the sacred House of Loreto,
they resolved to convey the cheifest Donaries of Loreto into safe custody: so
taking them out, and recording them as the manner is, by certain men they were
brought to Recanati, and laid up safe in the Castle, being then estimated at
six thousand Crowns. Among which there was a silver statua of Laurence Medices
(the son of Peter, who was nephew to great Cosmo) which kneeling, was above a
Cubite high; and peradventure the short inscription thereof (wherein was Laurence
P. F. Medices) deceived Angelita, to interpret that Laurence Per-sancis, which
signifies Petrifilium, that is to say, the son of Peter. Truly I believe
that when Laurence was so pressed with the Arms of Xystus the Pope and his
Colleges, that he was constrained to fly to Ferdinand King of Naples his deadly
enemy, he vowed that gift, and when the war and danger was past, he either
brought or sent it to the B. Virgin of Loreto. But the godly resolution of the
people of Recanati, and the remoouall of the sacred gold and silver out of
danger, hindered not the Barbarians from assaying their mische^^e. For coming
with their navy to the castle of the haven of Recanati, to ransacke and
sposse, and neglecting small preyes, they made haste to the prey of Loreto,
which they understood to be most wealthy, not knowing that it was transported
thence: The Citizens of Recanati defended the House of Loreto, as we have
said, but to small purpose truly against so great an army of Barbarians,
puffed up with victory, unless the Gouernesse of the place, had been the
saseguarde of her own house. For at the very sight of the Sacred House, such
terror came suddenly on all the Turkish army, that most unwillingly it
caused the^ forthwith to retire, all together dismaying them, and making the^
to confess that God himself did protect and defed that sacred House. Neither
was their sacrilegious attempt long unpunished. For soon after the most proud
Tyrant, was taken away by sudden death, Otranto recovered by the Christians,
and the Turks driven out of Italy. And this very danger moving Card. Roboreo
Patron of Loreto, to fortify the Church of Loreto, with the intended
fortifications, soon after the Church it self was fenced in manner of a
Castle, against the sudden incursions of the enemy.

Pope Innocentius the VIII. does honor the sacred House with gifts, and
commits it to the government of the Carmelites. CHAP. V
AFTER Xystus, Innocentius the eight was chosen, whose reign was so molested
with his own and with the troubles of the City, and so entangled with the
Neapolitan war, that he had almost no ability nor leisure, to deserve well
of the Church of Loreto: yet he was not altogether without this praise. For
Innocentius sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift a golden tablet of great
beauty adorned with the arms of his gentry, Cod. Laur.
to hang about her neck, as a token of his devotion toward her; an ornament
of velvet for the Bishop (called a Cope) set forth magnificently with excellent
flowers of gold, well imbrodered and glittering with pearl, and tapestrie made
of silk and gold. Bapt. Mant.
In whose Popedom Cardinal Roboreo, as well Patron of the House of Loreto, as
of the amilie of the Carmeli es, calling to mind how those Fathers had
undoubtedly acertained Xystus the IIII. his uncle, that the sacred house
before it departed out of Galiley, was committed to their government, by the
Popes authority, he appointed them to govern it again: who many years agone
being driven out of Asia by the Barbarians, filled Europe no less with good
examples then with Monasteries; and in Italy lately reformed their discipline
with new rules by little and little decaying. Also out of their whole number,
they selected thirty fittest for the government of Loreto, whereof Bapt.
Mantuanus, Vicar general of the congregation of Mantua was one, who wrote the
History of the House of Loreto, and dedicated it to Card. Roboreo, the same
year that he came to Loreto, which was 1489.

The testimony of Baptista Mantuanus. CHAP. VI.
BAPTISTA MANTVANVS a divine and an excellent Poet, The testimony of Baptista
Matuanus.
in the beginning of his history does set down a worthy testimony of the
House of Loreto, which shall not be amiss to insert in this place. When of
late (says he) I came to the sacred House of the most holy Virgin Marie, and
saw how great and wonderful miracles Almighty God did work there, as most
manifest signs of his virtue and clemency; a horror came suddenly upon me,
and me thought I heard the voice of our Lord saying to Moses; approach not
hither, but put of thy shoes, for the place in which thou stand, is holy
earth. And soon after he delivers, that in the Church of Loreto he had read
a table, fastened to a wall, defaced and spoiled with moisture and antiquity,
wherein was written the history, how, and by what means, that place came to be
of so great fame: having, I say, spoken thus, he adds. The History therefore
contained in that table was thus: The Church of the B. Mother of God at Loreto,
was sometime the Chamber of the B. Virgin herself, where she was borne,
brought up, saluted by the Angel Gabriell, and ouershaddowed by the Holy
Ghost. And he relates the rest which Tereman the governor delivered to
memory, and set up in the Church of Loreto, that it may plainly appear, that
he took them out of the Table of Tereman. Finally beginning to praise this
most maiesticall House, he does not only compare it to the earthly Paradise,
where Eve was framed of Adams side; To the mount Sinay, where the law was
given; To the Temple of King Solomon, ennobled with the special presence of
Almighty God; To the den of Bethleem, the birth place of our Savior; To the
mount Thabor, where Christ our Lord environed with most beautiful brightness
appeared talking with Moses and Elias; To the mount Oliuet whence he
triumphantly ascended into heaven: but also prefers it much, and far before
the most sacred Sepulcher of Christ, then the which, nothing on earth, is
accounted more holy: Specially because God himself taking upon him our
humanity in that Sacred place, laid there the fou^dations of ma^s salvation.
Of which praise this truly is aworthy and a fruitful conclusion. But why
proceed I to say more of the ineffable dignity of this most Sacrea House? For
I may well conclude with the saying of the Patriarch Jacob: This place is
terrible here is nothing else but the House of God, and the gate of heaven. And
as soon as the History of Loreto was committed to writing, by Mantuan a most
famous man, (until that day delivered by word of mouth) it was straight
published with great increase of devotion to Loreto, and good of mortal men.
For this History whereof I speak, being spread abroad in a little volume, and
being greedily and every where read, stirred many to visit and reverence the
sacred house of Loreto. But this very year is not only memorable for the
history of Mantuan, but also ^or the gift of a most noble Prince. Stephen
Bathorius Prince of Transiluania (whom they call the Vayuode) sent to the B.
Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a silver Image of our B. Lady, The gift of the
Vauode of Transyluania.
almost a cubite and a half, of excellent workmanship, and curiously inlaied
with gold. At whose feet the Vayuode him self being all in armor is expressed
in a silver Image as if he were praying, which the Inscription of the base
declares to be a vot^ue gift.

THE MAGNIFICENT LORD STEPHEN EARL OF BATHOR, VAYVODE OF TRANSYLVANIA, EARL
OF SICVLVM AND IVDGE OF THE COURT OF THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE, MATTHIAS, BY
THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF HVNGARIE, BOHEMIA etc.

DEDICATED THIS SILVER IMAGE IN HONOR OF GOD, AND OF HIS MOST BLESSED MOTHER,

FOR THAT BY THE INTERCESSION OF THE SAID GLORIOUS VIRGIN, HE WAS DELIVERED OF
A CERTAIN GREAT DANGER THE YEAR, M.CCCC.LXXXIX.

A noble woman of France being possessed with seven Devils is delivered.
CHAP. VII.
AND the same year is memorable for a worthy miracle. Bapt. Mant. Hier. Ang.
Peter surnamed Argentorix, a noble and wealthy Citizen of Grenoble, having
Antonia his wife, a woman of like nobility possessed with seven horrible
Devils, was so solicitous for her deliverance, that when he had left nothing
vnexperie^ced in France, he brought her into Italy, where solemn exorcismes
were used to little avail: first at S. Julius in the territory of Nouara, then
in Modena, at S. Geminian, and lastly at the sacred Pillar in Rome, God
reserving the honor of this woman's delivery to the B. Virgin of Loreto.
Whereby Argentorix getting neither remedy for her, nor knowing what course to
take, despaired of his purpose, and thought to return into his Country: but
meeting with a knight of Rhodes of his acquaintance who knew very well what
cures were done by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, he persuaded him to
bring her thither with great confidence, the 89. year of that age. Whither
as soon as they came, the woman striving with great force, was lifted up by ten
strong men, who bringing her into the most sacred Cell, presented her before
the Image of our B. Lady. Stephen Francigena a Cham^n of Osimo (a man of
approved honesty and virtue) being then keeper of the most holy Chapel,
began to conjure the most troublesome Devils, with exorcismes a the manner is;
and at his command they confessed their names, but obstinatlie refused to go
forth. Yet the constancy of the Priest, and doubtless the power of god,
overcame the obstinacy of the devils. A possessed vvoma^ (...) delivered from
Devils
For in the virtue of God, and in the name of the B. Virgin of Loreto, four of
the^ being driven out one after an other, filled the sacred house with great
roaring. The three which remained were more obstinate then the former, whom
Stephen encountering with greater fervor, pressed to cast them out, often
calling on the name of our B. Lady. Whereby not long after, the fifth (whose
name was Heroth) being wearied with the torments, went his way, as by the
sign was understood, and speaking to Stephen said unto him; Mary has cast us
out, and not thou. Shortly after the sixth breaking forth cried with mornfull
plaint, Marie, Marie, thou art to cruel against us. When the rest were cast
forth, the last named Arctus, more stubborn the^ all the other, with
sorrowful lamentation and howling began to say: M^^ie thou art to potent,
specially in this place, where thou do thrust us out of our possession most
unwillingly. The Devil making such honorable mention of that place, put into
Stephen a desire, to question with him ther-about. Wherefore to wrest the truth
out of a liar, he was fully determined neither to cease to dema^d of him, what
manner of place it was, nor to desist to command him, in the name of God and
his B. Mother to tell the truth. Neither in vain: for Arctus being constrained
by virtue of the exorcismes, at last confessed that it was the Chamber of the
Mother of God, where the conceived Almighty God by the foretelling of Gabriel;
adding withal that Almighty God enforced him to tell him the truth. Which
enkindled in Stephen a desire to know where the Angel stood, when he saluted
the B. Virgin; and where the B. Virgin prayed, when she was saluted by the
Angel. Therefore to wrest the truth out of the father of lies, he was most
diligent to compel him with solemn exorcismes, to show both places out of
hand. Who at last compelled by divine power, declared, that indeed the B.
Virgin praying to Almighty God, in the angle of the sacred Cell, a little
beyond the place where the Gospel is read being on the right hand of the most
sacred Chymney (where at this present stands a footstool to kneel upon) was
there saluted by Gabriell; and that the Angel stood right against her in the
contrary angle, on the right hand of the window, that it may easily appear,
the Angel for reverence of the B. Virgin, sought out the remotest place,
within the walls of the sacred Cell. And when Arctus had declared these things,
he was at last forced out of the body of the possessed woman, leaving her
without sense: who not long after, coming to her self, and arising from the
floor, where she lay prostrate, together with her husband, gave manifold
thanks to the B. Virgin of Loreto, and devoutly performed her vow. There is
scarce any thing of this kind more notable, and better witnessed. For many of
the magistrates of the City of Recanati were present, amongst whom was John
Francis Angelita, his father that composed the history of the B. Virgin of
Loreto. Antonie Bonsino Asculanus, he that wrote the Decades of the Kingdom of
Hungary was there, and also John Baptista Ma^tuanus, as in his History of
Loreto, he himself delivers; who to that which we have said, adds this.
That the said Arctus being rightly compelled by virtue of the exorcismes, told
this also among the rest, that the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, before it
departed out of Nazareth, was committed to the government of the Carmelites.
Which albeit they were declared by the manifestation of the lying Devil; yet
because they were extorted in the power and name, of the true and omnipotent
God, they are not to be esteemed as vain, specially seeing they may be true,
and may increase the reverence of the Christian Religion.

The gift of the City of Recanati, for her deliverance from the plague. And
the departure of the Carmelites. CHAP. VIII.
AFTER Innocentius the VIII. Alexander the VI. succeeded, whose Popedom was
nothing more peaceable the^ that of Innocentius, because Italy burned still
with Civil and foreign wars, albeit more memorable, for the celebritie of
the Iubiley which fell in the year of our salvation, 1500. About which time a
horrible plague was so fierce at Recanati, that the infection increased more
and more, and consumed many of the Citizens, daily threatening greater
calamity to that City. Whereupon by advice of the nobility, the magistrates
resolving to go in solemn procession to the House of Loreto, made a public
vow. Neither was their hope and prayer in vain. For presently by the votiue
supplication, the plague was (as it were) taken away by the hand of God, and
the City delivered out of danger. Wherefore the Citizens of Recanati, The
gift of the City of Recanati.
in due of their vow, gathering a great sum of money toward a votiue gift,
according to every man's ability, in solemn procession carried to the B. Virgin
of Loreto for a gift, a golden Crownet, besett with precious Jewels, the 96.
year of that age: which Crownet being putt on the B. Virgin, they obtained of
Cardinal Roboreo, that it might never be removed; and got the Cardinals
benefit confirmed by the authority of Julius the 11. and afterward of other
Popes. And the example of this grateful piety prevailed so much with the
bordering people, that hence proceeded that religious custom which at this
present is so much used, to wit that the Cities and towns of Picene, with
solemn supplication and pomp, bring yearly a Crownet to the B. Virgin of
Loreto. Not long after Hierome Roboreo the Cardin all perceiving that the
floor of the most sacred Cell was decayed partly with kneeling and partly
scraped up with men's hands (for the stones were taken thence, and wrapped in
silk to be preserved for relics) paued it very beauti ullie with souare
spotted marble, which was so notable a checker work, that in as great
magnificence, as the Church of Loreto now is, the same remains yet to be
seen. Near to the porch of the Church by the Popes consent, Roboreo began to
build most magnificent houses, plotted by Brama^t, an excellent Architect of
that time: and also opened and adorned a well of huge bigness in the Cloister of
the Church, that the townesfolke and strangers might not want water: and
providing for the welfare of the Inhabitants, and of the Pilgrims, he put the
ancient Procurators of the Church of Loreto in office again. For the grosnes
of the air which was then at Loreto (proceeding from the woods and ditches
therabout) having consumed many of the Carmelites, Peter Taruisine their Vicar
General commanded them to forsake the government of the Church of Loreto, and
to depart to more healthful places about nine years after they came thither.
In whose place the Cardinal Patron substituted certain godly, but hired
Priests, who continued till the reign of Leo the 10. in whose time the
government came at last to Chanons.

The Decrees of Julius the second, his works in the new Church, and the
Donaries of Noble men. CHAP. IX.
ALEXANDER the VI. being taken out of this mortal life, Pius the 4. was chosen
Pope; but his reign was so short, that it hardly continued above three
weeks. After Pius, Julius the second succeeded, second to none of the
precedent Popes, in devotion toward the B. Virgin of Loreto. For the IIII.
year of his Popedom, either by the example of Xystus the fourth his uncle, or
else because in recovering the Popes dominion by war, our B. Lady of Loreto had
obtained for him the help which he desired, he began to adorn her House to
the uttermost of his ability. And first of all he thought good to impresse the
ancient report of the sacred house more deeply in the hearts of mortal men,
with Pontifical authority, as a thing most effectual to increase the
religion of the place it self. Therefore in the beginning of his first Breue,
The Bull and testimony of Julius the 2.
recounting the Decrees of his predecessors, very honorable to the house of
Loreto, of Vrbane the 6. of Bonifacius the 9. and Martin the 5. and then
relating the cause of so great devotion to the House of Loreto, he says that
it is the Chamber of our B. Lady (as it is piously believed, and the report
goes) where she was conceived, where she was brought up, where by the
salutatio^ of the Angel she conceived and nourished Christ: which House since
that time being consecrated by the Apostles, first by miracle departed out of
Nazareth, then out of the wood infested with thieves into the hill of the two
brothers; from thence by reason of the brothers discord, into the hill where at
this present it stands. And afterward declaring that he was bound to adorn
the House of Loreto with no less care then Paul the second, or Xistus the
fourth (whose worthy benefits toward the same were well known to all) he
confirms their gifts and immunities, and rceiuing the House of Loreto into
the protection of the Sea Apostolic, The benefits of Julius the 2.
calls it the Popes Chapel, commanding that divine service should be
celebrated there with folemne rites, in like manner, as in the Popes Chapel
at Rome. He also privileged all the Ministers of the Church of Loreto, to be
of the Popes family and retinue with as much prerogative as the best: and
ordained a Governor over Loreto to be chosen by the Pope himself, to whom he
gave mixed authority. From which time the town of Loreto, The town of Loreto
is exempted from the iurisdietio^ of other Cities
being exempted out of the Jurisdiction of Recanati, began to be free of it
self. Moreover he gave commandment that ^^ey, which brought provision of
victuals, or other vendible things to Loreto, should be freed of portage and
tole. And straightly ordained that none should pilfer, neither the Donaries, nor
the money which was offered to our B. Lady of Loreto, under the pain of
excommunication, Latae Sententiae. For about that time I find that the sacred
House was enriched, not only with money, but also with gifts. George Monachus
of Padua, The gift of George Monachus
brought for a gift a silver Image of our B. Lady of Loreto of five pound
weight. Cardinal Tranensis an other of the same substance and form, but of
double weight And others brought other Donaries not needful to be rehearsed.

A noble woman is cured of the Palsy. CHAP. X.
THIS time was also memorable for miracles; whereof that was the chiefest which
fell in the year 1508. The king of Naples had a certain person of his
Council called Lo^gus, Bern. Cyril.
famous for many notable things, whose wife being a woman of great account,
and also called Longa by the surname of her husband, was so taken in all her
body, and tormented with such bitter pain, that she lead a most miserable
life, more like to death then life: who at last rejecting the help of
Physicians, entreated her husband that she might be carried to Loreto, When she
came thither, she requested her sonne-in-law (who accompanied her in that
journey) to procure a certain Mass to be said in the most sacred Cell of the
B. Virgin, agreeable to her purpose, the beginning whereof is, Repleatur os meum
laud: Let my mouth be filled with praise: in which is recited the gospel of
the palseyma^ whom Christ our Savior did cure: which being assigned for the
friday in Whitso^ week, was not the proper of that time, seeing that day was
past long since; but Longa desired that votiue Mass. She had scarce given this
commandment to her sonne-in-law, when she her self (her sonne-in-law atte^ding
on her) was brought into the most sacred nouse, and presented before the B.
Virgin, not doubting but that our B. Ladies prayers, would be profitable unto
her. Behold, before her sonne-in-law could fullsill his mother-in-lawes
command, a strange Priest came to the Altar, who beginning divine service with
this Introite, Let my mouth be silled with praise, stroke her into so great
admiration, that she remained a while dismayed therewith. But presently turning
to her so^ne-in-law (who was not yet gone to procure that Mass, but now
prepared to go) stay, said she, it is booteles for thee to go, for this is the
very Mass which I desired. And when it was come to that place of the gospel,
He said to the sick of the palsy, I say to thee arise: a wonderful thing to
be spoken and seen, the Palsy woman perceiving, that by a certain
supernatural grace, her body was suddenly cured, and her soul replenished
with unwonted sweetness, arose presently out of her chair with greatioy,
leaving all amazed at the strangnes of the thing; with flowing tears of ^oy
made no end of thanks giving to the B. Virgin. And when Mass was done, went
on foot to her lodging to the great astonishment of all her acquaintance, who
were present at the miracle of so great a thing. At which time the Duke of
Termero being by chance at Loreto with a chief company of horsemen, to go to
the war of Lombardie, as Julius the second had appointed, and knowing Lo^ga,
and her incurable disease very well, and also seeing her go on her feet, was
first amazed at the novelty of the thing: but presently being moved with so
evident a miracle, he joined with her in praising Almighty God. And eftsoons
a new wonder made the miracle it self most evident. For the Priest who had
said Mass to Longa, being long and much sought for, was not to be found; that
you may believe, he was sent by miracle, to be the minister of the heavenly
work. And Longa having obtained her vow, returned to Naples, purposing to
consecrate to Alm. God, her health restored unto her by miracle. Whereupon
building a Monastery of sacred Virgins at Naples, she betook herself to the
service of incurable diseases, whiles Raymund Cardona was Viceroy of Naples.

Pope Julius the second finisheth, and fortifieth the Church of Loreto. CHAP.
XI.
MOREOVER Julius granted many other benefits, to the former which are declared
and set down in a long Breue not needful to be rehearsed. And when he had
graced the house of Loreto with these immunities, he was very care^ull to
fortify the same. Therefore beginning the works of peace with no less courage,
the^ he waged his huge and troublesome war, he prepared not to build up, but
also to fortify the Church of Loreto, which Paul the 2. had begun; the
finishing whereof was hindered by diverse accidents and misfortunes. Considering
therefore that this most sacred House (not only illustrious for her wealth, but
also for the fame of her sanctimonie) was seated in an unfenced town, as a
prey to the avarice of soldiers and Barbarians, by the advice and help of
Bramant the notable Architect, he began to forward this his intended work by
Hierome Roboreo Patron of Loreto. And Hierome thinking it the office and
honor of his family, to adorn the House of Loreto with all his might, built
and fortified the Church in manner or a Castle: for the very Chappells the^
selves are made like to bulwarks; and round about in the top of the Church
walls, are conveyed little p^nnacles and passages under the roof, that on
every side the soldiers may pass safely up and down for defense thereof. To
the beholder a far of, it has the form, rather of a Castle then of a Church.
And a little hill does help the fortification thereof, in the top whereof it is
seated, specially on that side which stands toward the sea. The body of
the Church does stand on twelve great Columns, like to pillars, whereof six on
each side support the vauted roof. And the said body has also on either
side, as it were, two wings, in which are erected six little Chapels,
answering to one another between the pillars Al^o about the head of the
Church, are placed seven greater Chappells, among the which are four
Vestries, wherein all the Donaries of Loreto are reserved. Under the thole,
which is as the head of the Church, the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin has
the most principal place, and on every side perspicuous, many caire Chappells
of admirable workmanship, as we have said, erected round about.

Pope Julius the second, is protected from a great shot, and adorneth the House
of Loreto with gifts. CHAP. XII.
MEAN time by an evident miracle, the Pope was more enkindled to honor and
salute the B. Virgin of Loreto: for going to Bologna to repress the commotion
of the Bentiuolians he came to Loreto; and the very day of the B. Virgins
nativity said Mass in her native Chapel. After Mass with solemn pomp, he
went into a pulpit prepared of purpose for him, where blessing the people, who
flocked thither, more then usually, by reason of the Popes coming, he granted
remission of sins, unto all that rightly visited the sacred House of Loreto
that day. Some there be, who write, that Julius made a vow to the B. Virgin at
that time, going to prosecute the Tyrants with godly and just war: and truly
the event thereof and the donaries which he sent, for the victory obtained, do
testify the same. Julius therefore coming to Bologna, Vicciar. lib. 9. On. fr.
in ^ul. 2.
expelled the Bentiuolians, and pacified the City. And when he had taken
Fauentia, Foroliuio, Raue^na and other Cities and towns of the Popes
Dominions by force, and seeing that the siege of Mira^dula was prolonged by the
negligence of his captains, by a new example, he himself went into the Tents,
to animate the Captains and soldiers with his presence. Where, as he was
consulting of the war with the Cardinal in a Pauilion, he escaped manifest
danger by heavenly protection. For an iron bullet as big as a man's head,
being suddenly shot out of a great brazen piece by the enemy, overthrew the
Consistory, but hurt the Pope nothing at all, nor any that was with him in
Council. Whereupon the Pope confessed, that he was wholly bound to the B.
Virgin of Loreto, for that good benefit, either because he had made a vow unto
her, when he went unto the war, or else for that at the first noise of the
piece, he inuocated the said B. Virgin of Loreto. Having therefore taken
Mirandula with honor, and gotten other victories, he came to Loreto to
perform his vow, and when he had given hearty thanks to God and his B. mother,
he commanded that the bullet should be reserved in the most sacred Chapel,
for a monument to posterity, how great danger he eschued, by the protection of
the B. Virgin of Loreto: which was hong up on the left wall of the Altar,
commonly called the Epistle side, there now remaining to be seen. But
afterward Julius the Pope, that he might not be only devout, but also
grateful to the B. Virgin, began carefully to adorn the Church of Loreto. And
thinking it best, to enrich the high Altar with sacred ornature, he sent from
the City an excellent suit for the Altar, of tissue cloth of gold, a silver
Cross of forty pound weight parcel guilt and carved with excellent
workmanship; two Candlestickes of a cubite and a half, of the same substance
and work, of 26. pound weight. And in the round base of the Cross, there is
an inscription, for no small token that the Popes victories were gotten by the
help of the B. Virgin mother of God.

POPE JULIUS THE SECOND DEDICATED IT TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO THE YEAR
M.D.X.

IN THIS SIGN THOU SHALL OVERCOME.

But Julius thinking these gifts not sufficient, gave also two ornaments of
blew velvet for the Altar, (called frontlets) adorned with gold, precious
stones, and imbroderie: wherewith he sent ornature for the Ministers, a Myter of
excellent workmanship, and other Pontifical vestments for Popes or Bishops to
use in time of Mass. Besides he gave and dedicated to the B. Virgin of Loreto
purple tapestrie to adorn the walls of the Church, and many other gifts.

A girl of seven years of age, is brought to Loreto by the B. Virgin her
self. CHAP. XIII.
MVCH about the same time that the B. Virgin of Loreto defended the Pope in the
war, she in time of peace, made sure to her self a poor girl, by an vnwo^ted
miracle. One Sabine, of no mean village in the country of Picene, (called
Roccha Co^trada) had a daughter named Alexandra seven years of age, who kept
his sheep not far from the town; and whiles the sheep were feeding, the
girl was accustomed to pray to almighty God with great devotion under trees,
whereby before she was ^ullie of age, she dedicated her self to Almighty God
by miracle; and by the iustruction and teaching of so good a master,
perseuering still in her prayer to reverence the mother of God with great
devotion, a Lady appeared sudde^lie unto her in heavenly brightness (without
doubt it was the mother of God) who taking the girl by the hand, commanded her
to follow her. A wonderful thing to be spoken, the Queen of heaven herself
brought the little maid to the House of Loreto, thirty miles from that place,
and when she had replenished her with great joy, at the sight of her Image and
of her House, she brought her back again to her sheep. Whereupon Alexandra
had a great desire to see that place and sight again (though she was ignorant
what the House and Virgin was:) for when the tasted sweetness of the House of
Loreto, once entered into her mind, with flowing tears she never ceased to
entreat and importune Sabine her father to bring her to that house which shined
with so many lights (for otherwise she could not describe the place) where
that most beautiful Virgin dwelt. The father iested at his daughters request,
either thinking it to be a childish toy, or else ignorant what place she
described: but not long after it happened, that Sabine with his family
pilgrimaging to Loreto, Alexandra straight acknowledged the place, triumphed
and exulted for joy; and turning to her father; Behold father, said she, this
is the house, whither that most beautiful Virgin, clothed in white brought
me: hither I desired to return, and this is the sight that I was so willing to
enjoy again. Whereat the father was amazed, but pondering in his mind the
exceeding devotion of his daughter to the mother of God, he perceived that she
was dear to the B. Virgin her self; specially seeing the mother of God drew
her unto her from her tender years, by a certain unwonted course. For which
cause, he neither foreslowed to further the piety of his daughter, nor thought
good for him to co^ceale this wonder. And Alexandra her self, when she came to
riper years, told it often to godly men, who afterward related it to others,
and to me my self. This miracle happened the 7. year of this age: neither in
vain. For Alexandra being trained in this Nouiceship, lived always a Virgin,
and lead a most holy life, until she was 90. years of age, every year
reuisiting the B. Virgin of Loreto. And so great was the fame of her
sanctimonie, that she was made Abbess of a Monastery of Virgins, in the town
Montabodo, where she flourished not only with virtues, but also with miracles.

Near to the Porch of the Church of Loreto, the Popes Palace is begun, by
Julius the II. and the caruing of the most sacred House is purposed. CHAP.
XIIII.
JULIUS using all diligence to finish and adorn the House of Loreto, was
easily induced to greater expenses. For when the most sacred Chapel was
fenced with the walls of the Church, he thought good to ad a fortification to
the town it self, against the assault and sudden incursions of the enemy.
Hierome Roboreo Patron of Loreto of worthy memory, who undertook that work
lately departed this life, having scarce laid the first fou^dations thereof.
Therefore Julius the Pope, prosecuting those worthy beginnings by means o the
said Bramant (whom we mentioned before) began the Popes Palace near to the
Church, being a great and a magnificent work, chiefly designed for the
intertainement of noble men. The form whereof is such. That part of the
Palace (where the entrance is into the square Court) being right against the
Church, does compass it with two wings as it were with arms. The four angles
have as many turrets. All the whole work does bear the true form of a
square Castle, having the Church for a fortress. And at this day with the
continual labor and expe^ces of many years, the one half thereof is hardly
finished. Nether did Julius, Hier. Ang. Bern. Cyril,
whiles the Popes Palace was in hand, desist to adorn the Church it self. A
Quire for the singers, made for the ornament of the place, the excellent Organs
of music set forth with stately work and gold, two bells notable for bigness
and form, and the foundations of the Bellfray were the worthy works of Julius
the second. When he had adorned the Church, he prepared costly marble enough to
garnish the most maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin on the outside: which
doubtless had been the greatest of all his works, if speedy death had not even
then prevented his designments, Almighty God reserving that excellent praise
to another. And it is not to be esteemed the least, which in this kind was the
last of his mortal works. The gift of Antonie Perotto.
Peter Antonie Perotto, General of the Siluestrines, bearing great affection
and devotion to our B. Lady of Loreto, gave the Abbey of S. Laurence near to
Loreto (to wit in the territory of Castro Ficardo) with all the villages,
houses, meadows, fields, oliueries, and woods thereunto belonging, to the
Church of Loreto, with the Popes approbation, the 12. year of this age.
Whereupon a few days before his death, in behalf of the House of Loreto, he
confirmed the Donation of that Abbey, with his Pontifical Breue, and ordained
Perotto him self Governor of Loreto, supposing (as it fell out) that he, who
took contentment to increase the wealth of Loreto, would also be careful to
preserve and defend the same when it was increased.

The Queens of Naples visit the House of Loreto CHAP. XV.
POPE Leo the X. succeeding Julius not only in the Apostolic Chair, but also
in his good purpose, desired nothing more, the^ to yield to none in honoring
the sacred House of Loreto. And to manifest this his desire, God gave fit
occasion in the very beginning of his ^eigne. For at that time the fame of the
celebritie of the House of Loreto, coming to Naples, provoked the two Ioanes
of Aragon the elder, and the younger (by the commonaltie called the Queens of
Naples, because they were descended of the royal blood) to visit the Church,
which was glorified with so many miracles. Who with a great train passing
through good part of the Kingdom of Naples, and coming by Abruzzo into
Picene, were received of the people with great joy and preparation, which way
soever they went. At which time the munificence of Leo was very notable: for in
all the towns of the Popes dominions, through which they were to pass, he
commanded that these Queens should be received with princely entertainment;
not so much for their own honor, as for the celebritie of the House of
Loreto: and granted full remission of sins, not only to the Queens
themselves, but likewise to all that resorted to Loreto at their coming
thither, and rightly reverenced the sacred House of our B. Lady the same day.
The 14. year of this age, those Queens came to visit the House of Loreto: and
in Picene there is exta^t a famous monument thereof. For the report goes, that
by this occasion in the territory of Mo^te-Sancto (a town between Loreto and
Firmo) the fair beaten way was paued, which at this day is called the way of
the Queens, being so called in time past of these Queens, in whose honor it
was made.

Pope Leo the X. adorneth the Sacred House with ample Decrees. CHAP. XVI.
AFTERWARD Leo commanded, that all the Indusgences, Immunities, The benefits
of Leo the X.
and benefittes of Julius the second, and of the precedent Popes, granted to
the House of Loreto, should be ratified with an express Breue: which done, he
carefully added more to more, abundantly. For he made the Church of Loreto a
Collegiate Church, giving it the seal and other dignities of such Churches:
where he ordained 12. Chanons (out of which number the Archpriest, and the
keeper of the befoued House were to be chosen) as many resident Priests (called
Mansioners) and six clergy men to be adiutors in the Quyre, assigning to every
one his yearly pension, according to a rate. Moreover to the House of Loreto,
he granted all the Indulgences, which Rome enjoys in the Stations of the
Churches, that at the same time strangers might gain in one Church at Loreto,
which at Rome may be gained in many. We thought good to insert the worthy
Proeme of his Breue. Recalling to mind the great and almost the innumerable
cominuall benefittes, The testimony of Leo the X.
which by the intercession of the most glorious Virgin, her only be^gotte^ the
Almighty, works at the Church of Loreto, to many of Christ's, faithful, in
what place soever they are afflicted, with misfortunes and griefs, flying unto
the said Church of Loreto, with good disposition only of mind: we hold it just
and due, to maintain and preserve the aforesaid Church of Loreto unblemished,
not only in the ancient graces of former grants, but also daily to adorn her
with new gifts, liberalities, and bounties of prerogatives. Then abrogating
the summer fayers of Ancona, of Pisaurus, and of other bordering towns, he
commanded that at Recanati only, in the month of September, (to honor the day
of our B. Ladies birth) the mart should be celebrated and kept. News of the
fair of Recanati, and of her immunities being sent round about, not only to
Christian, but also to barbarous nations to allure people from all places unto
it, provoked the merchants of all nations and trades, to flock to Recanati, to
the denounced mart; as the Italians, Dalmatians, Germans, Flemings, Grecians,
Armenians, Jews and Turks, lately expelled out of Spain. Whereby it is
evident that many merchants of every sort, either upon devotion, or else for
the wonders of the place, (whereunto the neernes invited the^) came to visit the
House of Loreto. Neither were any prohibited to come unto it, saving Turks and
Jews obstinate in their ancient superstition, to the end, Margarites should
not be cast before swine. Truly we understood, that the Grecians and Armenians
(though most of them were Schismatiks) striued with the Latins in devotion
toward the B. Virgin; for in the very entrance of the Church, many pulling of
their shoes, and listing up both hands and eyes to heaven, approached in that
manner to the most sacred House. Whither as soon as they came, they fell down
at the threshold most religiously; then prostrating their bodies on the ground,
they adored God and his B. Mother, and to the presence of the B. Virgin and of
the Altar, crept on their knees, earnestly inuocating the names of Jesus and
Mary. And this celebritie of the mart of Recanati, commenced under Leo,
continued afterward many years, with great increase of glory to Loreto. But
because he would omit no occasion whereby he might seem to honor the House of
Loreto, at last he ordained that vows made to visit our B. Lady of Loreto,
by any means should not be changed into other works of piety; whereby this
vow was added, to those five, commonly known to be exempted. An other
testimony of Leo the X.
And the Breue is graced with a worthy Proeme, which because it is to the
excellent praise of the B. Virgin of Loreto, we thought good to relate, As it
is lawful for none, to be silent in the praises of the most glorious Virgin
Mary the mother of God; so to declare them, we think none sufficient. For
seeing there is found no surer a refuge, for the wretched, nor more effectual
for sinners in the sight of God, worthily and with all the affections of soul
and mind devoutly acknowledging, that she is first to be worshipped in heaven,
then to be reverenced every where on earth: we think it sit that the places
dedicated to her name, should be adorned with all care, but those chiefly,
which the B. Virgin herself, accompanied with Quires of Angels, has chosen
to herself, and daily in the same, works almost innumerable miracles, for
the help and succor of Christ's faithful. Among which, by the consent,
testimony, and devotion of all, her seat of Loreto, celebrated with fame, and
most honored with the concourse of devout people, is worthily esteemed the
first. For when the most B. Virgin, by the appointment of Almighty God (as
credible persons have delivered) translated her Image and her Chamber, from
Nazareth, that she might place it, first at Flumen, a town of Dalmatia, then
in the territory of Recanati, in a wooddte place, and again in a certain
hill in the same territory, belonging to particular persons; last of all in
the high way (where now it remains) she chose herself a seat, placing it
there by the hands of Angels, where the highest works innumerable miracles
by her merits. For which cause many of the Roman Bishops, our Predecessors,
but chiefly Paul the second, Xystus the fourth, and Julius the second, of
happy memory, having great reason to be exceedingly devoted to the sacred
Virgin, to make the Christian people more acceptable to Almighty God and his
B. Mother, adorned with diverse, but chiefly with spiritual gifts, the Church
of Loreto, which has increased by so great a miracle, and daily does increase.
And the rest that follows.

The sacred House is adorned with worthy ornaments and Donaries. CHAP. XVII.
LEO the Pope would not have the House of Loreto to be more adorned with
Apostolical letters, The ornaments of Leo the X.
then with Po^tificall riches: for in this mean time he speedily forwarded
the building of the Church and of the sacred House of Loreto: adorned two
Oratories of the Church with turrets, which he caused to be garnished about
with checker work, and applied his mind to adorn the most sacred Cell it
self: yet he thought it not good to beautify the sacred walls on the inside,
that there might be no other ornature in them, besides the very walls, which
the habitatio^ and touchings of Christ and the B. Virgin did enough and
abundantly adorn. Endeavoring therefore to adorn the most sacred Chapel
magnificently on the outside (and the stuff lately prepared by Julius for that
purpose provoking him on) he conceived in his mind so sumptuous an ornament, as
might well beseem the B. Virigin Mother of God, the Roman Bishop the vicar of
Christ, and the majesty and religion of the place it self, as far forth as
the imbecility and weakness of man could attain unto. Whereupon he committed
the drawing of the model of this work to Sansouino a notable Architect and
Statuarie of those times, co^ma^ding him to deliver his own opinion thereof,
for that he purposed to go about such a piece of work, as in a small subject
he might happily excel all the magnificence of his time. The industry of the
wise Architect, did not fail the Princely mind of the Pope, for he drew such a
form, as was answerable to Leo his wishes, who was as diligent to finish the
work it self, as to desire and approve the model. But because there was not
enough of the richest marble, and the form described required great pieces of
the same, he commanded that they should be fetched from Carrara (which is a
quarrey of white marble of most estimation in all Liguria) and not regarding
the charges, he took order that Ligurian marble should be laid into vessels,
to be brought about a long circuit (for it must needs be conveyed by the
Inferu^, and Superum seas, almost all the coast of Italy, as long as it is)
which at last being unladen either at Ancona, or else at the haven of Recanati,
were carried to Loreto in carts, where they were polished with the antique
work of the Greeks and Romans, by the rarest workmen of that age, hired with
great expenses. Mean while Leo bestowed no small benefit on the Church of
Loreto, The gift of Leo the X.
to increase the majesty and religion of the place. For to make the
representatio^ of the Seat of Loreto more maiesticall, God. Laur.
he made Peter Antonie Perotto the Governor, when he celebrated Mass, the
more venerable not only with Episcopal, but also with other ornature and
attire: and granted unto him, when he said Mass, to bless the people with
Episcopal authority and privilege. Neither was Leo more careful to adorn
the Prelate of Loreto, then the Altar with Pontifical gifts. Four silver
Candlesticks of a cubite and a half, parcel guilt, and ingraue^ with curious
work, about 50. pound weight, and a square Canopy, were the worthy Donaries of
Leo. About the same time the House of Loreto was honored with other gifts of
most noble persons. Of Antonie Leiua and others.
Antonie Leiua, General of the Spanish Army, sent for a gift, a vestment of
damask for the Priest, curiously wrought with curled gold. The Queen of
Hungary, her own Image of silver, as if she were praying, of XXX. pound
weight. The Marquess of Mantua, vestme^ts for the Priest and Ministers
sacrificing with solemnity, made of silver and gold. And others presented
other Donaries; who although they were noble personages: yet they desired to
have their names concealed in their gi ts, of which these be the chiefest. A
silver statua of the B. Virgin, with the Image of the most sweet child JESUS,
holding a globe in his hand, of 8. pound weight. To this was added an other of
equal weight and like fashion, differing only in this, that Christ the little
Child does sit in his mothers lap, holding a pear in his right hand.
Besides there is an other Image of our B. Lady pourtraited in silver of XI.
pound weight. And also an other of like weight, with the ensigns of the
Imperial Eagle, that it may not obscurely appear whence it was sent.

A Dalmatian Priest comes to Loreto, carrying up, with his hand, his bowels
pulled out of his belly. CHAP. XVIII.
MVCH about the same time, a wonderful thing and more credible for the
infinite power of God, then for the strangenes of the fact, made the House of
Loreto much more illustrious in all the whole world. A Dalmatian Priest, a man
of true simplicity, and of great devotion to the B. Virgin of Loreto, being
taken by chance by the Turks, and by all subtle means urged to renounce his
religion, would in no wise admit such wicked persuasions, neither into ear
nor mind; but greatly disdained those importunate wretches, and the more to
offend them, freely called on Christ and likewise on Marie: which they
stomaking, and demanding why he repeated those names so often; he answered,
because they be fixed in my bowels. Whereupon the Turks threatened, that they
would pull forth his very bowels, unless in continent he would abjure Christ
and Marie, You are deceived, said he, my bowels indeed you may take from me,
but Christ and Marie you cannot take from me. Then in great rage, they
assaulted the Priest with a drawn sword, who calling on the B. Virgin of
Loreto, made a vow unto her, that with the first opportunity, he would go to
Loreto, to visit her, if life would give him leave. Which speech did more
enkindle the enraged Turks: for compassing him about, and cutting and opening
his breast, they drew out his bowels, tearing them from the uppermost parts,
and delivered them to him self now half dead, and by and by, as they
supposed, ready to fall down, scorning him in this manner. Go, make haste, and
carry thy bowels in which thou say Marie of Loreto does adhere, unto her,
as thou have vowed. And albeit it exceed all credit, which we are now to
deliver: yet neither the power nor the goodness of Almighty God. For the Priest
who was ready to die (God prolonging death and giving him sufficient strength)
began to set forward, and speedily dispatching a journey of many days, came
to Loreto, carrying his bowels in his hand. Which way soever he went, great
resort was made unto him, with desire to see and to know the matter. Whereupon
the Priest (but chiefly to the ministers of the Church of Loreto) showing his
open and empty breast, and his bowels, which he held up with his hand,
declared briefly the whole matter, leaving them all amazed, with the admiration
of so great a thing. And when he had given hearty thanks to the B. Virgin, and
armed himself with the comfortable succors of Confession, and of the holy
Eucharist, in the sight and imbracements of the Mother of God (as we may
believe) he yielded up his soul. The very bowels of the Dalmatian Priest,
were hong up hard by the most sacred Cell for strangers to behold, and as soon
as they were consumed with corruption, counterfaite bowels made of wood, and
affiged in the same place, remained there many years for a monument of that
miracle. But because the rude people, which came to the Church of Loreto,
busied their minds in such spectacles, and reverenced the mother of God with
less care, the^ they ought to have done, they were at last removed thence.
Yet in time of Pope Paul the III. by occasion of strengthening the pillars
which support the thole, the rafter on which they did hang, being by chance
cast down, it was decreed, that a Priest holding up his bowels with his hand,
and a short narration of the whole matter, should be expressed in a table, to
preserve the memory of so great a miracle to posterity, and set up in the
Church for all to behold, which at this day is there to be seen. And the
miracle it self is so witnessed, that it is wickedness to doubt thereof. For
many do yet live, who affirm that the^ selves have seen the bowels, which
were made of wood, and have heard many of the Inhabitants report, that they had
seen the very bowels of the Dalmatian Priest, when they were fresh and in
their natural state.

Diverse assaults of the Turks are repelled from the House of Loreto by divine
power. CHAP. XIX.
ABOUT the same time, the B. Virgin showed by undoubted means, how pleasing
the House of Loreto was unto her. Annal. Laur. Rier.
Selime the Turkish Emperor, and the Nephew of Mahomet, coming to spoil the
euer-vnuiolated treasures of the Cell of Loreto, attempted so great a
wickedness, with no better success, then did Mohomet his uncle long before. For
being puffed up with his own, and with the victories of his ancestors, he had
almost all the seas pestered with his nauies, purposing to subdue all Europe,
and the fardest parts of the West, unto his Empire. Whereupon through his
command, a great navy of Pirates arrived in Italy, and after they had ransackt
the shores of Dalmatia and Apulia, they sailed into Picene, hoping to get the
spoil of Loreto; where landing their men, and taking the Castle of the haue^
of Recanati, they desired and defaced the houses with slaughter and with fire,
and seeing that none did bear arms against them, the miscreants made have to
Loreto it self. But they quickly perceived that the Sacred House (forsaken of
mortal aid) was protected and guarded with heavenly defe^dants: for the very
sight of the House of Loreto, stroke so great dread into them, that out of hand
forgoing their attempt, they retired back unto their navy, nothing at all
doubting, but that very House, dear to heaven it self, was defended by the
celestial power. And Sclime the author of this attempted mischeise, not long
after perished of the canker, miserably consumed by the wrath of God, with a
most filthy and loathsome disease. Yet this misfortunate end of Sclime, did not
repress the boldness of others: for afterward certain that had been
Captives in Turkey, escaping by flight, and coming to Loreto to perform their
vows to the B. Virgin, reported that the Archpyrats whom themselves had
served, sundry times set forth toward Loreto with a furnished navy, intending
to rob and to spoil the Church. But as soon as they came in sight of the
most sacred House, they were brought into such sudden fear by miracle, that
they were compelled to retire, confessing indeed, that there was some secret
divine power: whereby audacity turned to veneratio^. For when this wonder was
diuulgated and known among the Barbarians, from that time the skulking Pirates
which robbed on the shores of Picene, durst scarce attempt any hostility, in
sight of the House of Loreto, much less approach to ransacke the House it
self. Once only two Turkish Galleys presuming to take a prey out of the
territories of Loreto, presently perceived, that the B. Virgin Mother of God
did revenge her own goods. For the same day being taken by Canaletto Captain
of the Venetian fleet, they were hanged: all the prey recovered: and the good
of Loreto established by the death of those barbarous people.

It deceyueth the avarice of the Christian army. CHAP. XX
ABOUT the same time by the protection of Almighty God the House of Loreto
remained untouched, not only from the power of the Barbarians, but also from
the covetousness of Christian soldiers. Francis Maria Duke of Vrbine, Annal.
Laur. Rier.
being lately deprived of his Signiorie by Leo the X. and afterward recovering
it again by arms, voluntarily ouerranne the Country of Picene, with great
spoil, to revenge, as he gave out, the wrong the Pope had done him. His army
was levied of the risfraffe of many nations, among whom there was neither
manners, nor common language, and a prey was more esteemed then religion; so
that by the Dukes own commandment, it could neither be well governed, nor by
any means persuaded from committing of sacrilege. For many of the Captains
and Centurions having long and vehemently desired the sacred treasures of
Loreto, dealt by messengers secretly among the^ serves to take them by
violence, and of purpose stayed all night at Monte-Faltrano not far from
Loreto, purposing to ransacke the House of Loreto destitute of defense, as
soon as the day appeared. The wicked designment of the army was not unknown
to the Duke, both godly and wise. For which cause he labored hard by
interpreters to auert the desperate Captains of those barbarous people from
their wicked determination, and forced to hinder their lewd purpose by his
Italian companies: he did all that he could, he labored to his uttermost, to
turn their inflamed desire of robbing rather an other way. But the ears of
all being dease and stopped with avarice, the greater part (as many times it
happens) overcame the better, and sending before their scoutes, they them
selves began to march forward before it was clear day. The Duke dissuaded them
again, and intermingling threats with fair speeches, requested them to
desist from that sacrilegious journey: when nothing prevailed, he besought them
(if they were resolved to go to Lore^o) to change their minds to the contrary,
and to go to the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin mother of God for devotion
sake, as all others did: If they did otherwise, he did not only threaten them
with his, but also with the wrath of God, setting before them the late examples
of the Turks. But having their minds filled with fury and covetousness, and
rejecting all good Counsel, they went forward, vehemently desiring to lay
hands on the spoil, which already (in hope and opinion) they had wholly
devoured. The Duke followed the Army, which he could not rule, to mitigate the
sacrilege that he could not hinder. But the protection of the B. Virgin was
not wanting to her most sacred Cell. For the scoutes who were sent before,
approaching near to Loreto, and vaunting for joy to see that all was clear,
suddenly a multitude of fierce wolves (that savage beasts might repress the
savageness of men) rushed forth of the next wood, and as it were in battle
order gave an assault on the forerunners; devoured and tore in pieces most of
them, frighted out of their wits with the sudden terror; and made the rest
to fly, more desirous to save them selves, then to seek after the prey which
they went about. Who as soon as they came to the first squadron, half dead
with fear, with running, and with wearisomnes and recovering some sparkle of
life, after so great fear, they opened to the fellows of their wickedness, the
cause of their desperate flight and terror; advised them again and again, to
beware what they did: that God was the Protector and the revenger of the
sacred House of Loreto, that so great an army of wolves, and such huge shapes
of savage beasts, came not out of that wood, but by miracle were let loose on
the robbers of that holy House: neither were they to fight so much with the
army of those beasts, as with God and his Saints. But the furious guiders of
the Army, scoffing with soldier-like terms at the terror of the scoutes, as
vain, made haste to lay hands on their intended prey. But in very deed
as soon as the sacred House showed it self, suddenly great fear, came on
all the army, and like distracted people all began to tremble, with the dread
that God stroke into their hearts. Whereby their fury was so appeased, that the
authors of the wickedness remembered them selves. and either the wrath of God,
or else the religion of the Church so affrighted them, that at one instant they
desisted from their premeditated theft. But lest they might return again to
execute their intended purpose, a new miracle happened to them, before this
astonishment was gone. For when much of the day (as it is said) was spent, a
cloud fell suddenly from heaven, which by little and little thickening about
the Church, took away the sight thereof, when notwithstanding all the places
therabout, were bright with the sunshine: which once being cast before the
soldiers eyes, made their minds immooucable, and filled them with so great
dread that they fell down on their knees, and turning presumption into piety,
intended to go to Loreto to pacify the wrath of God, and his B. mother.
Whither as soon as they came, all (and chiefly the Captains of the Companies)
with great devotion went into the sacred House of Loreto, and kneeling down
besought pardon of their intended wickedness. Besides they honored the B.
Virgin with gifts, whom they purposed to have robbed: so that they began
their journey with a mad attempt, but concluded it with a happy ending. The
Duke of Vrbine being exceeding glad at the unexpected issue of their wickedness,
gave hearty thanks to God and the B. Virgin for the auerted sacrilege; and
forth with in the first entrance of the most maiesticall Cell, hu^g up his
armor, in memory of so great a miracle, and vowed to withdraw his forces out
of the territory of Picene. Neither did he fail therein. For in continent the
terrible army was with drawn, whereby both the House of Loreto, and the
Country of Picene, were delivered from fear of ransacking and spoiling by a
worthy miracle.

The town of Loreto is walled about by Pope Leo the X. and the worthy work of
the caruing, is hastened on. CHAP. XXI.
THE rumor of the manifold dangers of Loreto, and of the heavenly protection
of the B. Virgin, excited Pope Leo to provide, that hereafter the like dangers
might be withstood and resisted by the endeavors of man, especially because
the^ enterprise of the Popes Palace, intended for a fortification of the
sacred House, was so great a work, that the continual labor of many years,
could hardly finish it. Therefore misliking a thing of so long expectation, and
the better to resist the sudden incurfio^s of the enemies, he compassed
Loreto about with ditches, rampires, bulwarks, and walls, the XX, year of this
age: and planted there many brazen pieces for defense of the town, and to
keep of the enemy. So the Church of Loreto being compassed about with the
fortifications of the town, by surderance of a little hill, even a far of,
has the true form of a fortified Castle. The fame whereof did not only allure
Pilgrims to visit it, but also the borderers to inhabit it, and quailed the
Barbarians and others, from attempting any mischeife hereafter against it. In
this mean season Cardinal Roboreo Patron of Loreto departing this life,
Cardinal Bibiana ^ made Patron of Loreto.
Bernard Cardinal Bibiana was made Patron of Loreto, whose substitute the Pope
appointed Iulianus Rodulphus, the Prior of Capua; who at Leo his command
(because lodging for the Nobles was already prepared) forthwith bulltan
Hospital for the poor Pilgrims. And when the fortifications of Loreto were
finished, the Pope caused a bell of huge bigness to be cast, to wit of twenty
thousad pound weight, and called it Loreto, by the name of the town. And being
always very mindful of the worthy ornament, which he endeavored to leave
about the most sacred Chapel, he was most careful to solicit Sansouino, and
the rest of the Artificers with letters, rewards, and promises, to finish so
famous a work whiles he lived. The letter which Leo sent to Sansouino
concerning that matter is yet extant, The third restimony of Leo X.
the beginning whereof, because it makes to the worthy praise of the House of
Loreto, we thought good to relate in this place. Thus it is. For the immensiue
and infinite benefits, bestowed on mankind, and cheisly on us our self, by
the immaculate Mother of the high God our Redeemer, we devoutly and piously
believe, that the most sacred Church of Loreto (venerable throughout the whole
world) was the little Cell of the B. Virgin, whiles she carried the burden of
our flesh, and the place of the message of the Angelical salutation, and of
her conceiving of the divine issue, which she was to bring into this world,
and in which the B. Virgin does daily show her selse a very bountisull giver of
graces, speedily condescending to the vows of all says sull people: and the
rest that follows: the sum whereof is this. The most sacred Cell of the B.
Virgin, is worthy indeed to be had in great honor; therefore with speed and
might, we must endeavor to dispatch her ornament with all expedition.
Notwithstanding whiles Leo lived, the finishing of that work could not be
accomplished: for truly the kind of the embosment, and the abundance of those
most excellent statuaes, required more then one Popes reign. After Leo, Adrian
the VI. was chosen, a man otherwise godly and learned, but either the troubles
of the time, or else the shortness of his reign (for it was scarce a year) was
the cause, that he lest almost no sign of his devotion toward the House of
Loreto; specially because he was wholly employed in building of a su^ptuous and
a stately Church at Rome, for the Flemings, (of which nation he was) dedicated
to our B. Lady surnamed Dell' Anima. But how propense his good will toward
the House of Loreto was likely to have been, if life had permitted him, his
letters written to the Governor of Loreto, do plainly show, and the benefits,
immunities and Indulgences of the precedent Popes which he confirmed. And
although I find but few particulars of the donaries which were given to Loreto
at this time, because they were negligently recorded, yet they were not
altogether wanting. For there is extant a memorial of Donaries, albeit the
names of them that gave them are not set down, because (as I believe) they
them selves would have them suppressed, that they might be more grateful to
God and his B. Mother. Notwithstanding I find the particular monuments of some.
John Baptista Caraffa of Naples, John Caponaccia of Padua, Philip Barbo of
Venice, Laurence an Hungarian, Duke of Vilaco, and Vrsino Vrsinio a Roman,
dedicated every one his own silver Image to our B. Lady of Loreto, and the
Marquess of Mantua brought worthy ornaments of gold and silver for the Priest
and ministers, celebrating with sole^nitie.

Pope Clement the seventh, does adorn the House of Loreto with Decrees, and
continues the adorning of the most sacred Cell. CHAP. XXII.
AFTER Adrian, Clement the VII. Cosin-german to Leo the X. was created Pope,
whose Pope dome, being disquieted with domestical and foreign wars, not only
the ransacking of the City of Rome, but also his devotion toward the House
of Loreto, made very famous. For in the beginning of his reign he esteemed
nothing more, then to adorn the House of Loreto with Pontifical Decrees,
wherein he might both confirm the ancient, and also bestow new benefitts. In
this place I cannot omit the beginning of a certain Breue of his, very
honorable to the B. Virgin of Loreto, which is thus. Seeing diverse of the Roman
Bishops, but specially Pope Leo X. of happy memory our Predecessor, and
Cosin-german according to the flesh, beholding the mani^old and great miracles,
which the highest works daily in our Church of our B. Lady of Loreto, and
moved with singular devotion and piety at d^uers times, granted very many
pri^iledges, immunities, and grates to the Church it self, and to the Chapter,
Chanons, and other persons of the said House: the who have always been
singularly devoted toward the B. Virgin (under whose Patronage the said Church
was built) and having special care that whatsoever has been granted in
favor of the said Church, should be sasely preserved. And the rest that
follows. Among the benefits of Clement one was, to take from the people of
Recanati all jurisdiction over Loreto, if they had any remaining. Also it was
no small benefit of his, to promote John Matthew Gibert of Verona, a man famous
for learning and virtue, to the Patronship of Loreto, by whom the House of
Loreto was furnished and adorned with sacred ornature; with choice Chanons, and
solemn Ceremonies. The porch of the Bishops Palace was vaulted: the well
which (as we said before Cardinal Roboreo caused to be made in the Cloister)
was covered with a roose to the great good both of the inhabitants and of
strangers. But above all things Clement was most solicitous and careful to
finish the notable ornament of the most maiesticall chapel, with like
magnifice^ce as Leo had begun it. Whereunto he was incensed either with the
piety, or else with the honor of his house, that the same family, which had
the reputation for undertaking the carved work of the House of Loreto, might
also have it for finishing he same. Therefore with great expenses he hired
Antonie Sangall, Raphaell Baccio, Nicolas Tribulo, and other most famous
Statuaries of that time, and commanded that Raynerio Nerusio of Pisa should be
ouerseer of the building of Loreto, but specially of that worthy work, that it
might be curiously finished, according to the dignity thereof. When the rich
marble was for the most part carved and polished, and the rest in hand, Nerusio
beat down the brick walls, which were built for a prop to the sacred Cell,
and by miracle put of and removed from the same (as we said before) and laid
them aside for the people to behold. Then leaving like space between, to be
monument of the old miracle, they thought it best to inuiron the sacred House
with new walls and to cover the^ with the carved marble, that they might not
only adorn the sacred Chapel on the outside, but also support the new vaute
to be built thereupon, when the old vaute and roose was removed and taken
down. It pleased the Pope, that the sacred House should be vauted with stone,
fearing if that the old arched roof, subject to many lights continually
burning should once be fired, it might bring utter destruction to the most
sacred Cell. Therefore art required, that deeper foundations and more firm
ground-workes should be laid to make that worthy and precious work secure on
every side from earthquakes. Wherefore lest the sacred house should receive any
alteration or detriment, by taking the earth from underneath, in opening the
foundatio^s of the new walls, it was bound about with Carpets and ropes, as the
use is, and lifted up with strong cables, that it might hang in the air by
engines, until the trenches were filled up, and the new foundations raised. At
which time it is evident (for the thing was witnessed by the eyes of many) that
whiles the earth for these new foundations was dug from under the bottom of
the old walls, Hier. Trad. Laur.
the dustie and the beaten ground, and the hedge of the next close trodden
down, and other signs of the high way, where the sacred House did seat it
self, were found, as new monuments of the old miracle. Which many noting and
observing, Hierome Angelita him self about the same time, set them down in
writing in his History of the B. Virgin of Loreto.

The Architect presuming to work through the sacred walls, by miracle fell
down as dead. CHAP. XXIII.
AT that time the celebrity of the Church of Loreto beginning to increase, they
thought it behoouefull that the most sacred House it self, should have more
doors; for the^ there was but one (as we showed before) almost in midst of the
wall that stands toward the north: by which only, all comers and goers had
entrance and regresse. Therefore in so great a multitude and concourse of
strangers, one pressing an other, diverse were stifled by thronging and pressing
of people, because the last gave no place unto the first, as many times it
happens. It was thought good therefore (which many long ago did ernestly
wish, and Leo the X. had so appointed it, in the model of the outward
ornament) that the sacred Cell should be made a through-fare, by opening of two
doors at the angles of two walls. But as soon as the advice of the Architect
was noised abroad, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
in very deed it seemed wickedness, not only to the inhabitants, but even to
the Pilgrims them selves, to defile those walls with iron, which the divine
providence had preserved safe and untouched for so many ages together.
Whereupon many openly pronounced and said, that whosoever would adventure it,
would not truly escape unpunished; therefore the fear of Gods wrath deterred
the masons from undertaking the work; and the event showed that it was no
vain imagination. For to Nerusio the Architect himself (going about the same)
there happened a thing wonderful to be spoken and seen. For when the masons
refused to do it, he himself went to dig through the sacred wall, with
greater confidence in his art, then reverence to the place. But as soon as he
had forced his hammer against the sacred wall, suddenly his hand became nummed,
an unwonted trembling invaded the rest of his body, the^ his countenance waxed
pale, as a messenger of great evil, and shortly his heart fainting, they that
were present, supported him falling down, and carried him home in their arms,
like to one giving up the ghost, and void of all sense. He lay almost 8. hours
without life, until his wife a godly woman, and much devoted to our B. Lady of
Loreto, with prayers and vows had pacified the wrath of allmighty God and his
B. Mother in behalf of her husband: whereby the vital heat having almost
forsaken all the body, was at last restored to the joints, and breath began to
pass more freely: so that Nerusio lifting up his eyes, and life returning unto
him by degrees, knew the standers about, and coming to himself accused his
own rashness and asked help and pardon of our B. Lady. Neither in vain. For
his sin being forgiven him and taken away by devotion, did also take away the
sickness of the body, that the care might demo^strate the cause of the disease.
As Soon as he recovered, he advertised the Pope of the whole matter, and asked
his advise what was best to be done: who being well assured that the said evil
happened unto him more through to much confidence in him self, then the
indignation of the B. Virgin (tempering his command with godly admonitions)
persuaded Nerusio, that under the authority of the Vicar of God, and without
any fear at all, he should go forward with the work which he had begun, and
seriously admonished him, to dig through the sacred walls, not so much with
his hammer and boldness, as armed with fasting and veneration toward the B.
Virgin, so at last the thing would succeed according to desire. For it is not
to be feared, that the B. Virgin Mother of God, will not have her House to
become a through-fare, who will have it open to Pilgrims, not only without
their danger, but also for their good. But the Popes authority it self could
not enforce Nerusio, much frighted already with the late evil of his
presumption, to experience that again, which he assayed a little before, with
so great danger to him self. At last because the Popes command did urge, and
the delay of opening these doors hindered the building of the work; there was
a young man, who seemed nothing fearful to do it, who relying on the Popes
authority, and much entreated by his friends, would adventure the thing. He
was one of the Clergy of the Church of Loreto, and was called Ventura Perino;
who arming him self with three days fast, came with his hammer very
reverently to the sacred wall. About whom there flocked a multitude of
strangers and of the Clergy, these solicitous of the young man's confidence,
those in suspense with the expectation of the thing. But with humble
supplication, Perino is said to have spoken thus. Sacred House of the B.
Virgin, pardon Innocence, for I do not dig thee through with this hammer,
but Clement the Vicar of God, desirous of thy ornament: he coueteth to have
thee adorned, he, to have thee a through-fare: Therefore let it please the
Mother of God, which pleases the Vicar of God. Having prayed thus, he dug
through the designed place of the wall without any punishment at all. And
afterward the Masons (prepared with like fasting and reverence) followed him,
iterating his blows with safety, and opened three doors, whereof two give free
entrance and regresse to the people, and the third makes way for the Priests
to the holier part of the sacred Chapel, where the Image of the B. Virgin is
reverenced near at hand. At the same time the little window, being alone in
the fore wall, right almost against the Image, was made wider to receive the
light, and strenghned with brazen bars, beautifully guilt. And when the
rubbish was taken out, the old door being to big and open in the midst of
the sacred wall, was also mured up. And then the new walls began to be raised,
to be covered, and vested with the notable Crust of the carved work.

Pope Clement being helped by the aid of the B. Virgin of Loreto, does adorn
her with great care. CHAP. XXIIII
ABOUT that time Clement using all diligence to adorn the House of Loreto,
eschewed great danger by the protection of the B. Virgin Mother of God. For the
City of Rome being taken by fraud and guile of the enemy, he retired
himself into the Castle of Adrians Forte; where the Imperialls besieging him,
till he was able to withstand their forces no longer, he implored the help of
the B. Virgin of Loreto, not only by vow, but also by letters. Which was to
good effect: for not long after, he escaped from amidst the enemies bullets
with safety; and being in great want, was relieved with three thousand Crowns
of the gold and silver of Loreto. Bern. Cyril.
So that by double benefit of the B. Virgin of Loreto, Clement escaped present
danger and necessity, and at last dashing the imminent storm of war, brought
peace and repose to his people. Being delivered from danger of life, and from
fear of war, he thought good, not only to give thanks to the B. Virgin of
Loreto, but also (as much as lay in man's power) to requite it. Having therefore
invested Charles the V. with the Imperial Crown at Bologna, and returning
back again to Rome, he came to the House of Loreto, to salute his Patroness
and deliueresse: and performing his vow to God and the B. Virgin with hearty
thanks (that the grace of so many merits toward him might not be forgotten) he
resolved with himself by all means to hasten on the building of Loreto, and
to solicit the Architect and masons thereunto, having a special desire to
bring the Church at least unto the top. To dispatch these works, he repayed
the money which he received in loan from the B. Virgin, whereby in his
Popedom, both the Bishops Palace at Loreto was speedily forewarded, and also
a roof put on the Church with the admirable thole, which is as high from the
roof, as the roof from the ground. Meanewhile it was not Clements least care
to finish that worthy Crust of the carved work, which (as the beginnings made
show) was not unlikely to be the most curious work of the whole world.

Loreto is made more healthful by cutting down the woods and drying up the
lakes. CHAP. XXV.
WHILES the House of Loreto was daily more and more adorned with excellent
works, by cutting down the woods, and drying up the waters near unto it, the
town it self was made more healthful. Bern. Cyril.
For at that season the air was generally misliked, by reason of the diseases
and death of the Inhabitants: because (for the most part) being marish and
unwholesome, it caused such distemperature in their bodies, that a good part of
the year, the inhabitants: were all rhewmatike and full of fleame: were weak
and diseased, and children chiefly were taken away with untimely death, who for
the weakness of their bodies could hardly brook the vnwholsomnes of the next
lake, and the gross air of the place it self. And albeit Loreto is seated on
a little hill which looks toward the South, and the sunnerising; yet on the
West and the North being enclosed with woody fenns, and interposed hills, all
the wholesome air was taken from it, and contrary, being on the other part
open, it admitted the unhealthful and grossest winds. Not far of, there was a
plain, allwaies foggie, by reason of the fennes, which came by the
ouer-flowing of the river Musion, and also slymie with the winter fludds, which
by little and little gathering together, for want of motion became noisome. You
may believe that this unwholesome seat was pleasing to the Mother of God, that
the wholsomnes of her help might more appear in an vnhealthful place. But at
last news came to the Pope, how in the town of Loreto, many infants and
children perishing with the foggie air before they came to man's estate, by
little and little the town it self would become desolate, if that the
inhabitants (as they intended) departed thence to other places, for want of
posterity. Therefore thinking it to the glory of the B. Virgin of Loreto, to
have the town most frequented, and the place very healthful, by advise of the
Architects, he thought it most convenient, to dry up the lakes adjoining, to
cut down the woods, to level the hills which ouer-looked the Church (by the
inhabitants called Monte Regal and Montinorum) that by taking away the orige^
of the mistes, and making the heavens discouerable, the clear and open wind
might blow into the town with many wholesome blasts, to make the place more
healthful. Whereupon he wrote to John Antonie a Statis Governor of Loreto, and
to Antonie Sansouino the Architect in manner following. Understanding that the
air in those parts (but specially in the summertime) is very unhealthful,
partly for that a certain hill ouerlooking the said Chapel and Church
excludes the vplandish winds, healthful to the place, partly also because
in a plain near to the said church for five miles together, many lakes and
woods almost allwaies slymie, breed much vnhealthfulnes: and desiring to make
that Church (famons throughout the whole world for the merits of the most
glorious Virgin Marie, and the multitude of people reso^ing thither) healthful
by taking away the asoresaid causes; we have now ordained, that the high hill
which ouer-looketh the Church shall be plained, the lakes dried up by ditches,
and the woods cut down. Whereupon the Governor of Loreto (even with greater
care then he was commanded) beginning so healthful a work, the 33. year of
this age, and speedily hyring a great number of workmen by the Architect (and
also entreating poor Pilgrims to set to their helping hands) made haste to
cut down the wood next unto the town, to draine the lakes by ditches into
the river running by, or into the next part of the sea, to level the hill that
ouerlooked the town, which because it was a long and almost an infinite work
was then rather begun then finished: but that very beginning brought some
better health to the inhabitants for the present, and also much hope in time to
come, as the work proceeded on.

Pope Clement sends 3. of his Chamber into Dalmatia and Galiley, to seek out
the remoueall of the house of Loreto. CHAP. XXVI.
WHEN the dwelling of Loreto was made more healthful, the History of the
House of Loreto was made more manifest. Hierome Angelita, a Cittize^ of
Recanati an honor to his family many ways, not only for the nobility of his
pare^tage, but also for the integrity of his life. Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur.
Rier.
Who at that time dedicated to Clement the Pope, the History of the B. Virgin
of Loreto which him self composed. The cause whereof was this: Because about
that time, as before has been said, out of the Chronicles of Flumen, certain
Dalmatians brought to the Citizens of Recanati, the relation of the
transportation of the sacred House, from Galiley into Dalmatia, and from thence
into Picene. Therefore either by reading the history of Angelita, or at the
request of his friends or rather being moved by heavenly inspiration, Clement
had a vehement desire, to seek out the remoouall of the sacred House in
Galiley it self. And albeit he was not ignorant that, that very thing was made
evident enough, both by the Dalmatians ( Frangipane being the author thereof)
as also by the common consent of Picene, at the suite of the Cittize^s of
Recanati; yet he held it to be the special office of the Pope himself, last
of all by special men to seek out the certainty of so unusual and almost so
incredible a thing, that the authority of the Pontifical Sea, might confirm
other folks endeavors, utterly to take away all doubt out of the hearts of
men, if percha^ce any should remain. Whereupon out of the number of his
family, he chose three of his Chamber of approved religion and credit, whom
he commanded to set forward, as soon as he had given them notice what they
must do, and abundantly furnished them with all things necessary for them,
wishing them a happy journey. Who going to Loreto, and viewing and measuring
the sacred House with diligent care, shipped them selves for Sclauonie. As Soon
as they came thither, they found a little ancient house like to that of Loreto,
famous with the monumentes of miracles; on a wall whereof was written, that in
times past the House of Loreto had been seated there. These things the
inhabitants them selves did show them, and that they reported no untruth, their
true tears trickling down abundantly of zeal was no small assurance.
Whereupon the Legates laying to their measures, and finding all things exactly
to agree, continued on their journey, and ariuing in Galiley, came to Nazareth:
where the inhabitants showed them the foundations of the sacred House, which
viewing and measuring round about, they found all things to accord. Among these
Ambassadors, there was one John N. of Sienna, who thinking to confirm the
truth of the old miracle with some new sign brought thence two of the stones
whereof the houses of Nazareth are commonly built: which by his natural form
is like to slate (such as in some places is dug out of quarries easy to be
hewed) but marked and distinguished with yellow veins. And John returning to
the House of Loreto with his fellow-Legates, compared tho^^ stones of Nazareth
with the stones of the sacred house and found them to be of the same kind and
very like: which also did increase the certainty of the miracle, seeing it is
evident that no such quarrie of stones is in Picene, where all buildings
(though very ancient) for want of stuff and such stones are known to be made
of brick. Wherefore being very glad of their good success, they made haste to
Rome, and after long expectation they came at last unto the Pope, and related
unto him all that they had found. More-ouer John showed him the stones of
Nazareth, very like to them of Loreto, as witnesses of so great a miracle:
which was embraced with exceeding joy of the Pope, and with special applause
of his retinew.

Three worthy men are delivered from danger of death. CHAP. XXVII
ABOUT the same time, the House of Loreto was ennobled with most worthy
miracles. Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. Iulianus Caesarin us is cured of a
very dangerous disease.
Iulianus Caesarinus one of the Peers of the City of Rome, being brought to
the last cast with a grievous sickness at Bologna, the 33. year of this age,
and being also given over by the Physicians, perceived death to be at hand, but
imploring the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, he suddenly recovered thereof.
The same year the Vayoud of Transiluania being overcome and taken in battle
by Abrahim the Kings Lieuetenant of Turkey (whom they call the Bassa) by
commandment of the wrathful Co^querour, was to be cast headlong from a very
high cliffe: but calling on B. Marie of Loreto he eschewed not only present
death, but also servitude it self. For by chance discoursing with the Bassa of
religion, he so mitigated his outrageous mind by heavenly help, that the
Barbarian turning hatred into love, dismissed him with all the Transiluania^
capitues without any ransom at all. And at this day there is extant at Loreto,
a great Tablet, curiously painted, and garnished with gold, where this very
thing is not only expressed in colors, but also in writing. The fall and gift
of Ferdinando Gonzaga.
About the same time, a young noble man called Ferdinando Gonzaga, managing a
very fierce horse at Mantua, by his forcible stirring, was thrown against the
iro^ grates of a Church which was hard by, but imploring the help of our B.
Lady of Loreto (a maruailous thing to be spoken) he had no harm at all in so
grievous and so dangerous a fall: and being very mindful of his vow, he
himself brought to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, the silver Statua of a
horsman, and afterward as long as he lived did co^tinnally wear about his
neck a silver Image of the said B. Virgin, either for a monument of that
miracle, or else as a protection unto him in the perils of this mortal life.
Neither in vain: for in great dangers in time of the battle, the soldierlike
man allwaies experienced and felt the favorable help of the B. Virgin Mother
of God. Wherefore the Pope being exceeding glad, with the news of these
miracles, and also with the certainty of the remoouall of the House of Loreto,
from Galiley and Dalmatia, began earnestly to solicit Nerusio, to finish the
most worthy ornament of the sacred Cell with all speed. But it seemed otherwise
to God, who giving Clement the reputation for desiring to effect so notable a
work, reserved the honor for finishing and ending it to an other. In setting
up so famous an orname^t, and in bringing it to perfection (as much as lay in
him) not only his diligence, but also his magnifice^ce was so remarkable, that
not unworthily fame does report him the author of it. And albeit the arms and
ensigns of Leo are inserted in many places of the work it self; yet Clement
put there no monument at all of himself; truly a rare example, and pleasing
to God, that doubtless by his providence, the glory of so excellent a work
fled from him that desired it, and followed him that fled from it. When they
came to the back of the work, which stands to the sunne-rising, Clement
being asked of the Citizens of Recanati, whether he would have the History of
Loreto written on that part, he answered, it seemed better to have it likewise
carved in marble, as the rest of the works of the B. Virgin were, both because
the History would be sufficiently known and manifest of it self, as also,
because the caruing thereof would satisfy as well the learned as the unlearned.
But it pleased Clement the VIII. and Card. Gallo Patron of Loreto, to have the
sum of the history of Loreto, written in a marble table, which was under the
carved work, that the monument of so great and so unusual a thing, might be
more famous and more known to posterity.

The testimony of Friar Leander Albertus, of the house of Loreto. CHAP. XXVIII.
ABOUT that time, a new testimony of no mean Historiographer graced the house
of Loreto. Leander Albertus a learned and a godly man of the family of S.
Dominicke, in the book which he set forth of the description of Italy,
describing Picene, makes worthy mention of the house of Loreto, which place
we have turned out of Italian into latin, almost word for word: so therefore he
writes. Betwixt Recanati and the Adriaticke sea, not far from the River
Musion, on a little hill is seated the Church of B. Mary of Loreto, most famous
throughout the whole world, which together with the town is fenced with
strong walls: where there be many inhabitants, to intertaine the Pilgrims with
hospitality, who out of all parts of Europe, resort thither to perform their
vows at all times of the year, but specially in the spring, and in the
Autumn. And being to speak of so great a Church, whence I shall begin I
know not: For on the one part the exceeding religion of the place, and on the
other the great wealth of the Church does present it self unto my mind; so
that in very deed my forces do fail me, endeavoring to speak of that most
holy and most religious chamber, where the Queen of Heaven, a perpetual
Virgin, and Mary the mother of God, and a mediatrice unto her son for
wretched mortal men, was borne, and brought up. Where by fortelling of
Gabriell the Archangell, she was made and called the mother of God, where god
himself putt on humane nature, to deliver us out of the jaws of the infernal
dragon, and to set open the entrance of the heavenly kingdom, shut so
many ages by the default of the parents of mankind. And (as I have said)
whence I shall begin the description of such a place, I am ignorant: But to
satisfy the godly and the curious reader, I will say something. Therefore
first of all it is not to be doubted, but that this is the very chamber, where
the Queen of Heaven was brought into this world: For besides most certain
monuments of writing, which witness it to be the chamber of the B. Virgin mother
of God, translated hither by Angels, there is none so barbarous and obdurate,
none defiled with so many and so great offenses and crimes, that in the very
entrance of this sacred house (being as it were replenished with the present
religion of the divine majesty) feels not his heart to be so mollified, that
with all devotion does not implore the help of B. Mary, and by her suppliantlie
entreat pardon of his sins from Christ; and truly me thinks the power of
God does enforce them to this very thing. To these are added the signs and
miracles wrought there by heavenly virtue, and the benefits bestowed on them,
which humbly recurre to the mother of God for help, which not only monuments
of writing do testify to be true, but also golden, silver and waxen Images,
and votiue tablets, which (for the space of many years and ages also) have
been gathered and heaped together. I should be long, if by number, I should
rehearse, the heavenly wonders and benefits imparted there to mortal men,
which truly are so many and so great, that they may seem incredible to
them, who are not easily brought to believe that God does hear his mothers
prayers: and truly Leander has not desiuered these things with more eloquence
than truth.

The House of Loreto is honored with many worthy Donaries. CHAP. XXIX.
NEVER before was the House of Loreto more honored with votiue gifts. For I
find in the books of the House of Loreto, that at these times in their
supplications, almost all the Picene people were wont yearlie to bring many
silver Crownets to the B. Virgin, Cod. Laur.
sometimes one, sometimes two, sometimes three, and sometimes no less than
seven, Many Donaries of diverse kinds.
either upon vow or devotion. And because there were now Crownets good store
(for they amounted to 70.) they borrowed the^ of the Keepers of the sacred
house, for which they gave a reward. Also many Castles, towns and Cities of
Picene, in there supplications presented the silver purtraicte of their town,
whereby at that time, of Cities, towns, and Castles, there were Images of
silver, to the number of eighteen: among which the purtraicte of Firmo, of
almost twenty pound weight, for fashion and value did excel. And these also,
the keepers of the sacred house did lend to other people that wanted
goldsmiths, to be carried in solemn processio^, who gave money for their lone.
And either custom (towit) of Crownets, or of Images of this sort has so
prevailed, that now it is chiefelie used. Neither did this godly use contain
it self in the bounds of Picene: for at the same time the people of Pisaurus,
sent a silver purtraicte of their town of curious workmanship. But that the
piety of Cities and Contreys might not be greater then that of Citizens and
moble men; Ascanius Columna famous among the Peers of Rome for parentage and
wealth, brought for a gift to the B. Virgin, a silver Image of S. Rock, of one
pound weight, and a vestment of cloth of silver for the priest, celebrating
with sole^nitie. The Cardinal of the Foure-Crowned-Martyrs, a head of silver,
of four pound weight. The Earl Rangonto of Modena, and John Francis Bossius
of Milan, each of them a silver thigh, of one pound weight. Pyrrhus Gonzaga a
foot of the same matter and weight. Pardus Pappacoda a Neapolita^, his own
Image of silver, of double weight to the other. Alexander Calgagnino his own
Image of silver engraven, of three pound weight. The Marquis Tripaldo, a silver
lamp of like weight. The great Prior of the knights of Rhodes an other lamp
of the same substance, but in weight some thing greater. Vincent Alsano o
Perugia, his own Image of silver, of XV. pound weight. There were also
sixteen Images of silver presented by others, (whose names are not known) of
77. pound weight. But much before all the Donaries of this time, was the silver
Image of Jews Gisilardo a Citizen of Bologna, of more than fifty pound
weight: Then also was the sacred furniture increased. Cardinal Montino (who
afterward was Pope by the name of Julius the third) presented for a gift, a
curious vestment for the priest, of tissue-cloth of gold. Card. Palmerio
ornature for the Altar and the priest of cloth of gold. The duke of Maestricht
vestments of blew velvet, adorned with gold, for the priest and ministers
celebrating with sole^nitie. Oliver Fagnano of Milan ornature for the Altar,
and the priest of the same stuff. The Marquis Bitonta a vestment of Damask
with works of gold. And others either brought or sent to the B. Virgin mother
of God other ornature, for the Altar and the Priests, as Crownets of silver,
chalices and other such like, which to rehearse were long. But this praise was
not due only to men. A crownet of gold of one pound weight, her own Image
of silver, praying to the B. Virgin, of one pound weight and a half, a silver
foot of one pound weight, a Casket of the same substance and weight curiously
wrought, two cruets of gold of fourteen ounces, and golden bracelets of
antique work, were the gifts of Isabell Cardona the Vice-royes wife of
Naples. The Marquess of Guasto a silver Image of the B. Virgin, holding the
sweet child Jesus in her lap, of four pound weight. And also the Turks sent
gifts to our B. Lady. For it is well known, that the XXIX. year of this age,
a Bassa of the Turks (his name and the cause is not delivered) sent a silver
suite, beset and garnished with pearl, to adorn the Altar of the B. Virgin of
Loreto, Clement the VII. being Pope; that we may understand that the B. Virgin
of Loreto, is the general Patroness of all nations, which desire to use her
Patronage.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF LORE TO: Collected by the Reverend F.
HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Society of JESUS.
POPE PAVL THE THIRD adorneth the Sacred House with benefittes and Decrees. CHA
AFTERWARD Paul the III. succeeded in the Pontifical Sea, who in adorning and
amplifying the state of the House of Loreto, contended even with Clement
himself: and in the beginning of his Popedom bestowed many Indulgences and
benefits on the same. For thinking it an unseemly thing, that the officers of
the sacred House should hardly provide salt for money for their necessary
uses, he gave them yearly twenty sacks of salt out of Ceruia, a benefit truly
not to be contemned, whether you consider the perpetuity of the gift, or the
necessity of the receivers, or else the mind of the giver, which does well
appear in the beginning of a certain Breue, which we thought good to annexe.
When our Predecessor Pope Xystus the fourth of happy memory, among other
things of his mere motion had made honor able mention of the Church of B.
Mary of Loreto, long agone miraculoufly founded in honor of the B. Virgin her
selse, in which through the marvelous clemency of God, was placed (as
credible persons have declared) the glorious Image of the B. Virgin accompanied
with a multitude of Angels, and to the which for the manifold and wonderful
miracles, which by the merits and intercession of the said glorious Virgin, the
higehst daily works in that place, out of diverse, even the remotest parts of
the world, does daily resort a great multitude of people, receiving cure and
help, by the favor of the aforesaid glorious Virgin etc. And a little after:
Our Predecessor Pope Julius the Second of happy memory considering that in
the said Church of Loreto, there was not only the true Image of the B. Virgin
Marie; but (as it is piouslie believed, and the report goes) the Cell or the
Chamber, where most B. Marie was conceived and brought up; and where also she
herself conceived the Savior of the world, when she was saluted by the Angel
etc. And he also relates other things, which Julius the second set down in
his decrees.

Loreto is committed to the protection of the people of Recanati. CHAP. II.
BUT Paul the Pope well knowing, how much good there is in a good President,
had allwaies special care to provide good governors for Loreto, the greatest
gift perchance of all. Whereupon making Alexander Argolus Bishop of Terracina
Patron of Loreto, he notably ordered and advanced the state of the sacred 08
seat, placed many learned and grave men in the College of the Chanons,
performed the Ceremonies of divine prayer with solemn and Pontifical pomp,
and finally for four years together, fullfilled his office in all things,
belonging either to divine or humane service, with great praise of religion and
benignity. After whom succeeded Gaspar Contareno the Cardinal, Card.
Contareno Patron of Loreto.
a man famous for learning and pregnancie of wit, and also a very good Patron
of Loreto, but of short continuance by reason of death. For whiles he worthily
governed the state of Loreto by Galeatius Floremonius (who afterward was Bishop
of Aquino) with great expectation of his virtue, he departed this life. In
whose place the Pope appointed Rodulphus Pius the Cardinal of Carpa, Card. of
Carpa Patron of Loreto
a good Patron, and of long continuance, who truly for his worthy piety,
would have gained to himself the surname of Pius, though he had not receined it
from his ancestors. For there was never any more careful to adorn the
sacred house; as in the Church of Loreto, and in the adjoined houses may well
appear, where at this day are extant many and worthy monuments of his. This
mean while, news of the Turkish war being more and more spread abroad, which
Selime the Turkish Emperor threatened toward Italy, as soon as he subdued
the kingdom of Tunis, by Ariadenus Enobarbus, Paul the Pope joined straight in
league with Charles the Christian Emperor, and with the Venetians, and bent
all his care and forces against the Turks, first of all intending to provide
for the Church of Loreto: but because his treasure was wasted with preparation
for the war, and scarcity of money hindered his godly purpose, he suffered not
an occasion offered by chance, to pass vnaccepted. For at that time the
Ambassadors of Recanati came to Rome to the Pope, The Embassage of the people
of Recanati to Pope Paul the 3.
to complain that Loreto their ancient possession was taken from them by
Julius his Predecessor with great damage, but with greater disgrace to their
City. For who would have thought, that without a grievous crime, the Prince
of Bishops, and the Vicar of Christ, would have taken from the people of
Recanati their most ancient possession of Loreto against their wills? and for
what desert of theirs, should so shameful a spot of infamy be laid on their
well deserving City? Whether because from the beginning, she carefully
maynteined, reverenced with gists, adorned with a Church, graced with
buildings, for almost two hundred and fifty years, justly and holily
governed the seat of the B. Virgin of Loreto? When at any time did the
Magistrates of Recanati govern it with avarice or pride? When was the
protection of the Church, of the Inhabitants, or Pilgrims neglected? How often
have the ways, which were pestered with thieves, and the audacitie of
way-laiers been repressed? And how often also has the sacred house it self,
been defended from hoflilitie with great forces of armed men? Behold why the
people of Recanati should willingly recount these things: For the B. Virgin
mother of God, transferring her native house into Italy, chose her self a
seat, specially in our wood: and changing the same three times within sew
months, departed not out of our territories, but made three places of our
liberties, famous with her footsteps. We therefore bestowed on her, sufficient
space for a Church: we built the Church and the town about her, and we gave to
the Inhabitants both Magistrates and Laws. Which truly are of such
importance, and avail so much, that they may seem to possess that place by
good right, seeing they were deprived of their ancient possession without
trial of their cause. But if it may be thought fit, that the Vicar of God
should restore to the people of Recanati, the gift which God and his B. Mother
bestowed upon them, indeed they will do their endeavor, that neither the Pope
nor they of Loreto shall repent them of the protection and government of the
City of Recanati. And that both parties may remain satisfied, the people of
Recanati will refuse no condition, that the most just Pope shall impose upon
them. when Paul had graciously heard the Ambassadors, he followed a certain
mean, both to restore to the people of Recanati their right, Loreto is
restored to the Government of the people of Recanati.
and notwithstanding to preserve the benefits of former Popes, granted in
favor of the House of Loreto. Whereupon with these conditions, he restored to
the Citizens of Recanati, their town of Loreto, (exempting only the Church
and the Governors jurisdiction over townes-folkes and strangers) to defend the
sacred House of Loreto, against the Turks, with a strong garrison; to repair
the walls and fortifications as need required; to make the ways secure from
thieves, in favor of the Pilgrims that came up and down. Besides to repay
into the Popes treasury, to the use of the Turkish war, eight thousand Crowns
which Leo the tenth had spent in fortifying of Loreto. So Loreto returned to
the Jurisdiction and Government of Recanati, the 35. year of this age, and
about 20. years after it was made free by Julius the second. But as soon as
Paul the Pope saw himself delivered from the fear of this new war, he thought
good to enrich the House of Loreto with lands, being now well defended with
fortifications. Whereupon by his command, of the Magistrates Duumuiri of
Castro-Ficardo, were purchased the woods near to Loreto, with the vineyards,
meadows and Oliueries adjoining, for which purchase he gave six thousand
Crowns out of his own treasury: and also purchased other lands near to the
River Musion, and gave them to the B. Virgin of Loreto.

A Fraternity of Children is instituted, to sing solemn praise and laud, to
the B. Virgin of Loreto. CHAP. III.
AT that time the House of Loreto was not only enriched with wealth, but also
with Ministers. For Paul the Pope, very well considering that the prayers of
persect purity were most acceptable to God and his B. Mother, instituted a
College of twelve children, where he appointed that the choicest and wittiest
children of all Picene, should be instructed to sing service with solemnity in
honor of our B. Lady of Loreto. In choosing of whom, he commanded that
regard should be had to the integrity both of body and mind, and great
diligence of the best masters to instruct them. Special care was used, that
they might incline the most holy Virgin, no less with the chastity of their
manners, then with the sweetness of their voices. Who by the Popes appointment
being brought up and taught in a convenient place, (called the Chanonry) daily
at certain hours song hymns to our B. Lady in her sacred Chapel,
beseeching peace and pardon of God and his B. Mother, and entreating help and
favor for Italy against the fury of the Turks. The Childrens piety deceived
not the Pope, nor the B. Virgin failed not the Childrens prayers. For although
the discord of the leaders, made the navy of the confederate Princes
unprofitable, notwithstanding the B. Virgin herfelf brought peace to Italy,
and vanquished the audacitie of the Turks. For shortly after, all
controversies between the Emperor and the King of France, were so luckily
concluded, that of sorrowful war, joyful peace came by and by to Italy.
Paul. Iou. lib. 41. Annal. Laur. Rier.
And in the month of August, under the conduct of Ariadenus Enobardus, a great
and strong navy of Turks threatening utter overthrow to Italy, was beaten
against the rocks of Acroceraunion and suffered shipwreck, almost in sight of
the House of Loreto it self. By which shipwreck it is very evident, that the
greatest part of their navy was lost, twenty thousand of the Barbarians
swallowed up in the sea, and almost all the Adriaticke shore covered with the
carcasses of their enemies, with weapons, with bordes, with munition, and other
signs of shipwreck. Whose armor sloting up toward Loreto, and being known
on the shore, almost before news thereof could be brought, made the overthrow
of the enemies very notorious. Whereupon the people of Loreto and strangers
rejoiced, that Almighty God and his B. Mother had heard the prayers of the
children and of the godly; and that Almighty God himself revenging their
wickedness, had also at last opened the eyes of their filthy pride. For which
cause, they exhorted one an other, to reverence such a Patroness with special
honor, by whose protection they saw all that coast of Italy, delivered from
the present fear of the Turks.

The Hospital, and the Spittle, to receive Pilgrims, are opened: the sacred
House is adorned with buildings. CHAP. IIII.
AND the Pope himself being most glad of such news, and not to be more
bountiful to the Inahbitants than to strangers, The Hospital and the Spitle.
opened the Hospital of Loreto (finished much about this time) chiefly for
the cure of diseased Pilgrims, and appointed an other place without the walls,
for scabbed and leaprous people, lest their infection might hurt the
healthful. Then from the sick, turning his care to the sound, he erected an
Hospital for poor Pilgrims, The Hospitality of the house of Loreto.
where they were well relieved, for the space of three days; and at their
departure were furnished with bread, wine, shoes, and money. It is wonderful
how much this fame of Hospitality and Christian Charity, increased the
devotion of strangers, and the wealth of the Church of Loreto; all foreign
nations almost recompensing the benignity, which Loreto bestowed on their
Pilgrims: whereby we may see that true liberality toward the poor, does
rather increase wealth than diminish it. For lest the fountain of their
bounty should be wasted, Almighty God does make it to abound with riches, and
does graciously bestow greater wealth on bountiful giuers, that they may
eftsoons the better give unto the needy. Whiles these offices of Christian
Charity were fervent, the works of Loreto which Clement had begun, were not
altogether omitted. For by commandment of Paul the Pope, the hurtful woods
were cut down, the mystie lakes were dried up, the hills offensive to the
Sacred Seat were thrown down to the ground. At the same time, the Bishops
Palace was forewarded; the porch was built; the thole of the Church was
covered with sheets of lead; that magnifice^t carved Crust of the most Sacred
House (which was not far from finishing) was chiefelie solicited. And now at
this time, by the Popes authority the Architect pulled down the old smoakie
beam and the roof; and (because the vauting of the sacred Chapel so
required it) he also beat down the uppermost part of the walls, adorned with
semicircles and painted potts, together with the tops of the bell-turret, and
of the chymnie, and built a solid vaut thereon, supported more with the new
then the old walls; which at that time was bright and beautiful, but now by
reason of the abundance of lights, black and smoakie. And lest the negligence
of men should leese those things, which necessity had caused to be parted and
taken from the maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, the sacred beams, the
rafters, tiles, and boardes, and what else soever belonged to the roof of the
most sacred House, was buried under the paueme^t of the same House, and
reserved there with record thereof, that being removed out of their due place,
they might change their place as little as might be.

The Relics of the Chapel of Loreto, are honored with miracles: and
propagate the religion of the Sacred House. CHAP. V.
THE earthen vessels and certain Pieces of the vauted roof being reserved
for Sacred Relics, as they were, partly ministered occasion of miracles, and
partly also carried the religion of the House of Loreto far and near. The
ancient opinion is, that those earthen Vessels were found long agone by the
Apostles, in the Armorie of the B. Virgin, and therefore when they consecrated
her native House they commanded that they should be put in the top of the
walls of that Chapel, not so much to adorn her sacred House, as to preserve
a religious memory of those things. No light conjectures do confirm this
opinion, which seem, to make it credible to many, that those earthe^ Vessels
were of the household stuff of the Mother of God. For (as we may conjecture by
them which at this day are extant) they do not much differ from the mean
sort, and such as are commonly used: and in bigness there is great
inequality among them, whereas indeed the ornature of the Sacred House, and
the compass of the semicircles, required them to be of like equality; that we
may understand, they were not so much provided for the ornature of the sacred
Chapel, as the ornament it self accommodated to them. But whether they were
of our B. Ladies household stuff, or else were provided of purpose for the
ornature of her sacred Cell only, being dedicated together with her
fortunate House, with great reason they were ever religiously esteemed. Yet
now I find many of them to have perished, pilfered away (as I imagine) to
propagate the Religion of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Whereupon diverse of them
which were left, were placed in the wall of the Church of Loreto, by the door
which is in the side, where at this day they remanie to be seen. Few of the^
are reserved without some miracle or other. For I am sure that a Priest of
Loreto of my acquaintance, being much troubled with the headache, was presently
cured by applying a sacred pot unto his head. And an other Priest tormented
with a grievous fever, and drinking cold water in the same, by and by had his
sickness taken away. But the relics of the sacred boardes, carried the
religion of the House of Loreto almost throughout the whole world. For being
dispersed abroad and distributed from one to another, they came almost into all
Countries, who esteeming them for sacred relics, as reason required, they
exceedingly increased the reverence of the B. Virgin of Loreto, with whose
religion (as it may well be supposed) they were, after a certain sort, endued.
And it is very likely that by this occasion Oratories were erected in honor
of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in diverse parts of the world, either as monuments
to their people of her singular protection, or else as solaces to them, whom
sickness, business, or other impediments hindered from going to Loreto. For it is
well known (but at this time specially) not in Picene and Italy only; but
also beyond the Alps, and in far remote Countries, many Chappells were erected
to the B. Virgin of Loreto. To the builders whereof, what could be more wished
to increase the religion of those sacred places, then to have some relics of
the House of Loreto? What could be more desired, when religion forbad to take
thence the sacred stones, than to entreat a particle of the roof, which the
keepers of their liberality would not unwillingly bestow? Truly much about
this time, I find that many Sacred Houses were dedicated to the B. Mother of
Loreto in all places of the world, which in very deed, I put not among the
least of the B. Virgin of Loreto her praises, her memory to have been so
gratesull and dear unto strangers, that they would have a perpetual monument
and an Image of her, at home in their own country. And to say nothing of
Picene, whereof there is no City, Churches built to our B. Lady of Loreto.
nor town almost, where there is not some Church in memory of the B. Virgin
of Loreto, the noblest Cities of Italy have erected no ordinary Churches in
honor of our B. Lady of Loreto. At Rome there is a magnifice^t Church of the
B. Virgin of Loreto, At Rome.
and worthy the Roman munificence, the model whereof, as the report goes, was
plotted and drawn by Michaell Archangell Bonaroto, a most notable Architect.
At Neples*
And Naples also has no mean Church of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and graced
with an hospital of poor Orphans. Besides (as now I vndersta^^ for certain)
in the two noblest Cit^^^^^ Sicilie (at Palermo I say and at Messina) there is
a most holy memory of the B. Virgin of Loreto. At Palermo and Messina.
And in Palermo, the Church which is dedicated to her name, is within the
City, but at Messina in the Suburbs. Neither did this devotion toward the
sacred House of Loreto, contain it self in the bounds of Italy, but
speedily passed beyond the Alps. For Friar Vincent a good and a godly man,
and a devout Priest of the Order of the Franciscans, returning from Loreto into
France, In France at Laual.
in the Suburbs of Laual (a town of the diocese of Mayin) built a little House
like to the Chapel of Loreto, and called it the B. Virgin of Loreto, which at
this day is exceedingly reverenced, both of the inhabitants and strangers. And
albeit Portugal be endued with most famous and religious Houses of the B.
Virgin mother of God; notwithstanding it imitated this devotion toward the
House of Loreto. In Portugal at Conymbria.
For the Citizens of Conymbria not far from their City (to wit in a most
pleasant place of the Suburbs) dedicated a Church in honor of the B. Virgin of
Loreto, which is celebrated with great concourse of the adjoining people. At
Compostella. At Lisbone.
At Compostella there is an other, and a third at Lisbone, most maiesticall:
which abeit it were built and magnifice^tlie adorned by the Italians,
notwithstanding the inahbitants themselves do religiously frequent it. Besides,
I find by approved authors that many years agone, two Churches were erected
to our B. Lady of Loreto in the Kingdom of Scotland; In Scotland At Saint
John's. At Edenburrovv.
the one in the town Perth, otherwise called S. John's, the other by the high
way that goes to Missilburrow, not far from Edenburrow, the chief city of
Scotland. In both places, the B. Virgin of Loreto was most religiously
reverenced; and that in the Suburbs of Missilburrow was most famous for the
resort and concourse of Pilgrims, and the miracles of our B. Lady, as long as
the Catholic Religion remained in Scotland. But after Caluins pestiferous
doctrine began to rage and reign in that Kingdom (heretofore most religious)
those furies destroyed that sacred House of our B. Lady, but so
notwithstanding, that the ruins thereof might remain, both as tokens of their
madness, and also as manifest signs of the ancient religion of the Scottish
people. And this (as we understand) was the beginning of the Chapel of
Missiburrow. Many years agone, in the attire and habit of a Pilgrim, a
Scottish Eremite came to Loreto to salute the B. Virgin, who at his departure
carried with him into his Country, a small part of the sacred roof, and
begging money of godly men, not far from the town of Missilburrow, erected a
little Church some thing like to the sacred House of Loreto: which was very
famous, as well for reverence of the sacred relics, which were placed there,
as also for the devotion of the people to the B. Virgin herself (whose name was
illustrious among them) until, as we said before, the mad fury of Heretics
threw it down.

The description of the carued-worke, wherewith the most sacred House is adorned
round about. CHAP. VI.
AT that time, the reverence of the House of Loreto, was propagated abroad, and
increased at home. The 38. year of this age, Paul the Pope opened that most
famous monument of Po^tificall magnificence, designed by Julius, begun by
Leo, effected by Clement, but not wholly perfected (for many of the Statuaes,
and all the brazen leaves of the doors were wanting) yet was it brought to that
pass, that it might seem as finished. Truly a work so excellent, and so
admirable, that the new and most magnificent workmanship thereof, was yet never
equalled in like quantity, for it does very well appear by the books of
account, that the said work, stood in two and twenty thousand Crowns, besides
twenty Statuaes, lively wrought, and four brazen leaves curiously engraven,
which cost almost as much. The most worthy ornament which does inuiron the
sacred Cell of the B. Virgin is foure-square, almost all of white solid marble,
and carved with admirable art; in length about 50. foot, in breadth about 30.
and the height almost equal to the breadth. The whole work is made of Carrara
marble, of great beauty, and notably graced with striged Pillars, of Corinth
work, whereof six adorn the larger sides, and four the lesser. A fascia of
Lucullan marble, about a foot broad, is curiously wrought about the lowest
part of this ornament, in steed of the groundworke. Then arise the Cornisht
Pedestalls, which fitly distinguish and adorn the spaces. And in the spaces
and Pedestalls themselves, are placed, either the arms of Descent or Acquist
of Pope Leo, or else memories of his virtues, in carved scutchions, some of a
foot, some of a cubite, set forth with great art and skill. Upon the Pedestalls
are placed two Pillars at every corner, but in the longer sides two also in
the middle, that is to say by the two doors, with equal distance from each
other. In the compartments between the Pillars are two ranks of Imagerie,
enclosed within their Nicets, incrusted in Porphyry-tables of excellent
workmanship; the one beneath at the bases of the holy Prophets, the other
above at the Architrane, of the Sybills, who prophesied of the birth of Christ,
and of the B. Virgin Mother of God. In the wider spaces, between the bodies of
the Pillars, are great tables of white marble, solid and whole, where the
notable works of our B. Lady, are so admirablie carved in embossed Images,
almost of natural stature, that all do greatly admire them. Moreover a double
Cornish does adorn the Architrane of these Pillars, excellently graced with
Cornish work; the under spaces whereof, two Eagles holding in their beackes,
branches of fruit-workes, as stalks of apples and other fruits of admirable
workmanship (with Lions faces placed here and there between) do not alittle
adorn. In brief, on the top of this worthy orname^t, does stand a beautiful
rank of little Pillars cornished, fitly and orderly distinguished, with the
figures or Angels embossed, which go about the whole work, instead of a
garland: and the orname^t it self has a free walk round about, to hang up
such votiue gifts, as herafter were to be brought to the B. Virgin. I think
it not a thing worth the labor, to describe it with more words, seeing it may
be seen. A work verily worth the beholding, whose exceeding beauty none ca^
conceive in mind, that has not seen it before with his eyes. Wherefore as soon
as it was spread abroad, that the most admirable orname^t of the sacred Cell
was opened, forthwith great co^course of Inahbitants and strangers, was made to
Loreto. For of purpose the workmen did use all diligence, to keep close the
frame of that curious ornament with couerings until it was finished, that
people might behold it with greater admiration and majesty, when the fresh and
entire beauty of the finished work should come newly to their eyes. And with
this incomparable sight, and most excellent for proportion and curiosity, all
men did earnestly delight, both eyes and mind.

The Thole of the Church beginning to cleave, is strengthened. CHAP. VII.
AS the Inhabitants were solacing and taking great delight in so worthy a
sight, they were brought into a sudden fear, lest in a moment, they should
be deprived of that which they beheld with so great admiration and pleasure,
and (which was worse) even of the thing it self whereof that was but the
ornament. The vaute of the Church (in the middle whereof, as we said before, was
placed the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin) stood supported on eight columns of
brick: but either with the height of the walls built thereon, or else with too
great weight of lead ouerburdening, suddenly it began to yield to the burden,
and to cleave, threatening utter ruin not only to the new ornament of the
sacred Cell, but also to the Cell it self over which it stood. Therefore the
Pope being moved with so dreadful a message, forthwith commanded Antonie
Sangall his Architect to hasten to Loreto, and by all means to prevent that so
great an inconvenience, lest the labor of so many years, and of so many
Popes, in a moment should be brought to nothing, and also lest the sudden
fall of the Church, should destroy the two chiefest wonders of the world; the
one of divine power, the other of humane art. Sangall being styrred with this
fearful charge, made have to Loreto, and conferring the matter with Nerusio
the Architect, forthwith by common advice he went about to fortify and
strengthen the Columns insufficient to sustain so great a burden. Wereuppon
in contine^t he underpropped the vaut with strong supporters, and speedily
digging up the foundations round about it, he covered the colu^nes with square
stones, and stre^gthened them with four little arches, framed between every
other Pillar, that they might be able to support the burden laid upon them. And
lest any fortification, not only necessary, but also convenient should be
omitted, the Columes and the walls were so fastened together with great bars
of iron, that the bars themselves do never, or not vndece^tlie appear. Other
things were so perfected, that you would have thought they had not provided for
the strength, but for the ornament of the Church. And to dispatch this work
with greater speed, the diligence of the Pilgrims did not a little forward the
endeavor of the masons, and of the Architects. For a great multitude of them,
to prevent the imminent danger, wherein they saw the Sacred House of Loreto,
striuinglie carried stones, brought burdens, and help about the engines, glad
to bestow their endeavor and travel, on the B. Virgin of Loreto, the holiest
Cell of the world, and the refuge of all people and nations. Whereby the whole
work was finished sooner the^ any would have thought, and the imminent danger
of the Sacred House was taken away, no less by good providence, then speed.

The House of Loreto is enriched with new Donaries. CHAP. VIII.
ABOUT that time, Cod. Lau.
a great multitude of Donaries were given by Noble men and Noble women. The
gift of the Duke of Milan and of diverse others.
Francis Sforza the la^^ Duke of Milan, sent worthy ornature of cloth of gold,
flourished with costly works, for the Priest and Ministers celebrating divine
service with so emnitie. Sigismund of Est, a silver Image of his son Hercules
of 4. pound, and an other of himself of the same substance, but of double
weight to the other. Bassanus of Mantua, his own Image also of silver, of more
than 8. pound weight. Honorius Sabellus a silver Crownet, of three pound
weight: Octauius Farnesius a golden Cross hanging in a chain of gold.
Bonisacius Cetanus Duke of Sermoneta, a silver Image of the B. Virgin of
Loreto, and an other of his son, of no mean weight. Hercules Maria Sforza,
two Images of silver, both of eight pound weight Bernardine Sanquinius of
Naples two carved Images of Silver, of four pound weighte. Leonard Bona-fide,
Bishop of Cortona, his own Image of silver of 4. pound weight. Julius Monaldus
of Mantua, such an other Image of like matter and weight. But among all the
Images of this time, the solid Image of silver of a Captain, all in armor,
and polished very curiously, from Pompilius a certain person of Bologna,
more known to God than to men, (for his surname is not delivered) does far
excel. Antony Pignatellus of Naples a chain of gold: also an other from
Lewis Earl of Vmbria. Leonard Venerius a Senator of Venice, a silver chalice,
notable for workmanship and weight. Neither were the gifts of Noble women, of
small value. For Marie of Austria the Emperors daughter, presented a silver
heart of two pound weight. Constantia Duchess of Amalpha her own Image of
silver of five pound weight. The Viceroyes wife of Abruzzo golden bracelets of
notable fashion. The Princess of Bisinia, a golden head of two pound weight.
Portia the Countess of Populo, an other head of the same substance and weight.
Marie of Aragon, Marquess of Guasto, the silver Image of a young man, of three
pound weight, wherein the cause is written in manner following.

MARIE OF ARAGON MARQVESSE OF GVASTO, SENT IT, IN PERFORMANCE OF AVOVV, FOR
RESTORING OF HEALTH, TO ANTONIE, A YOUNG MAN, MY BROTHERS SON.

Iulia Verona Duchess of Vrbine, a golden heart, o^ no small weight. Neither
did Cities and Towns fail to send their Donaries. A silver Image of the
town Vico Varone, of three pound weight. An Image of Sarnano of the same
substance, but of thrice double weight: and a Crowner of silver of excellent
workmanship from Macerata, were all at this time presented to the B. Virgin of
Loreto. Moreover other gifts of no small value, were given by unknown persons.
Six silver Statuaes of S. Rock, of no mean weight. Forty Crowners of silver,
whereof the greatest part was of one pound weight, many of two and diverse of
three, for the most part from Cittes and Towns. Votiue Images of silver, above
threescore; whereof many were of one, many of two, and three pound weight. Few
less of Chalices of silver, and many ornaments for the Altars and Priests, not
only of silk, but also of silver and gold. Truly great humility appeared
in diverse of the giuers. For many gifts (as appears in the book of Donaries)
were put secretly on the Altar, The humility of many which presented
vvorthie gifts.
or else delivered by the giuers themselves, who would not by any means have
their names set down in record. And many also suppressing their surnames,
instead thereof set down the names of their Country: which sincerity is
likewise seen, in the title of many Donaries, that it may sufficiently
appear, they were unwilling (which Christ forbad) to have the Trumpet to sound
before them, that they might not receive the glory and reward of their piety
from men, but expect it from God, who, sees it in secret.

The Captain of a Band of hors-men is carried away headlong by the force of a
River, and delivered from evident danger of life. CHAP. IX.
IN the territory of Reate (said to be the Nauill of Italy) there is a great
Lake, caused by the River Velinus, whereof it takes the name: which running
again out of the said Lake, for a little way, does flow gently and pleasantly,
but afterward shooting down from a high Cliffe by rocks and stones, it
falls on a rock beneath, with great hurrying and noise of the waters,
commonly called The ruins of Pedilucus. Not far from the rock, of which I
have spoken, by chance passed a band of hors-men, of Peter Aloysius Farnesius,
who at that time was Duke of Castro, the Captain whereof being called the
Marshall, was Peter Terenatico of Sienna, who had a great desire to behold the
River falling from above. Therefore taking with him two horsemen, he went unto
the place, from whence Velinus falls, with desire to see it. But his horse
entering into the River to drink, and going on by little and little, carried
him unawares into the maine screame. Without delay Terenatico perceauing
himself to be carried by force of the water, into the dangerous place which he
came to behold, and which is worse, being also cast from his horse by violence
of the stream and in great danger of drowning, with pitiful moan he called
on the B. Virgin o^ Loreto. He prayed not to them that were dea^e. For in the
very fall of the River, the B. Virgin did protect the party in hazard, and
reaching forth her right hand, sustained him, as he tumbled down among the
waves and rocks, and desended him until he came to the bottom: a wonder ull
thing to be said, that a rock should receive him safe, and preserve him
unhurt, when he was cast headlong from the high Cliffe above. Whereupon, coming
presently to Loreto to perform his vow to the mother of God, and desiring to
have a votiue table to witness so great: miracle, he caused the whole matter to
be set down in order, which at this day is to be seen on a Pillar, on the
right hand of the most sacred Chapel, wherein was written this which
follows. I Peter Terenatico Knight, and Marshall of the hors-men, of the Duke
of Castro, and the rest of the hors-men going out of Picene to Vico Varone, and
coming to the lake Velinus on the Ides of march, the year 1543. I and two
other Soldiers, Tiberius de Grau^sco, and Antonie Cortona, departed from the
rest of the hors-men, to see that place, from whence Velinus does fall into
Nar. And watering my horse not far from thence, I and my horse fell into
certain straites of the River; from which falling headlong a wonderful way,
to wit above a hundred Cubits, a certain rock received me with safety, as I
implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto the mother of God, much wondering,
and amazed in my self at the thing: wherefore estsoones I performed my vow, to
the most B. Virgin, whom at that time I experienced, to be present, and
merciful, as two Centurions and eyewitnesses thereof, Chiniacius Vrbiuetanus
and Raymund, with the whole wing of hors-men can testify. This inscription we
have inserted word for word, that it may the better appear, how witnessed and
certain this miracle is.

Pope Paul the third, does twice visit the House of Loreto, and hasteneth on
the work of the Popes Palace. CHAP. X.
MEANE-WHILE Paul the Pope having adorned the House of Loreto with worthy
works, Annal. Laur. Raph. Rier.
did also honor the great solemnity of the same with his presence, thinking
to make himself an example to principal men, not only to beautify, but also
to frequent the native Cell of the B. Virgin. For within three years he twice
visited the sacred House of the B. Virgin of Loreto. First the one and fortith
year of that ^ge, when from the City of Luca (after he had saluted the
Emperor, and also done his endeavor to dissuade the expeditio^ to Algell) he
returned unto the City by Aemilia and Flaminia. Again almost three years
after, when after the misfortune of Algell, he went to meet the Emperor at
Bologna, making have to the wars in Flanders. For then the Pope passing
speedily through his own State, that he might meet him in convenient time,
came to Loreto, and at either time, took exceeding joy, to see the sacred
House of the B. Virgin, The gift of Paul the 3.
and brought with him worthy Donaries: Golden Vestments for the Bishop,
Priest, and A tars, in token o^ his devotion and munificence. Also he took no
small contentment to see the ^ruit of his liberality, as well in his other
works, as chiefelie in the incomparable form and beauty of the most
magnificent work, wherewith the sacred Chapel is inu^roned on the outside. At
which time beholding the difficulty of leuelling a hill, that stood against
it, on the west side, and thinking it to be a work, not only of great charge,
but also of infinite labor, and the profit nothing answerable unto the labor,
he is reported to have said. We must des^st from a vain work, and employ our
selves in more profitable and certainer commodities of the House of Loreto
which may correspond to the expectation of men. So from leuelling the hill, he
bent his care and industry to build the Popes Palace, appointed for the
intertaynment of Noble men. Whereupon in short time great part thereof was
finished, polished, and furnished so magnificently, that in the same, Kings and
Popes themselves might lodge most honorably. Of three parts thereof, one was
then finished, which being seated on the right hand of the Church, is directly
extended from the setting of the sun, which in length is an hundred Cubits,
in breadth four and twenty, and five and twenty in height; besides the
great ground-works added on the North side, to make the building equal. And
this part of the Palace has a double Porch of great State, which does consist
of 15. Arches, and almost as many great Columns, of large compass, as well
above, as below. Truly a notable work, and very excellent, both for sight and
use.

The House of Loreto is adorned with Chapels, and Heavenly Signs. CHAP. XI.
THIS part of the building of Loreto, was not who^^e finished by the Pope, when
principal Men began to adorn the Chappells of the Church. The chiefest in
that work, was Rodulphus Pius the Cardinal of Carpa, who (as we said before)
succeeded Card Contareno in the Patronship of the House of Loreto: and being a
very godly and virtuous man, he adorned the Chapel, which was designed to
keep, and Minister the most holy body of Christ, The Chapel of the Prince
of Bisinia. Of the Archb. of Altouico. Of the Card. of Trent. Of the Card. of
Augusta.
with excellent pictures of marble work, guilt: whose example stirred other
great Men to imitate that ornament of piety. The Prince of Bisinia adorned the
Chapel of S. Anne: the Bishop of Al^o-Vico the Chapel of the B. Virgin,
visiting S. Elizabeth: the Cardinal of Trent the Chapel of the Rosarie: the
Cardinal of Augusta the Chapel of S. John Baptist, some with pictures, and
others with pictures and implastered works. Of the Duke of Vrbine.
But of all in this kind, the munificence of the Duke of Vrbine did far
excel, who adorned his Chapel; not only with white marble, carved with
maruailous art, but also with most beautiful pictures, made by Bacorio, and
Zuchero two notable Painters. Whiles the Church was adorned of mortal men with
striving emulation, it altogether wanted not immortal ornaments. For at that
time I find that the old wonder, of the flames of Loreto, was renewed after a
new manner. In the night time, a fiery Pillar (as it were) shyning with great
brightness, was seen to stand over the Church of Loreto: Annal. Laur. Rier.
from whence by little and little, it went toward Macerata, a famous town of
Picene, 14. miles from Loreto, and at last rested over the Church of S. Marie
surnamed of the Virgins, in the Suburbs of Macerata, which wonder the
Fra^ciscan Capuchines (whose Monastery was in the Suburbs) very carefully and
often observing, after the morning office of divine service, when before day
(as their manner was) they retired themselves into the next wood to serve God,
they gave it out, that, to their thinking, our B. Lady did descend from heaven
in likeness of a heavenly flame, upon her Native House, and from thence went
unto another Church which was dedicated to her name, by that means to make it
known to mortal me^, that, that Church was also dear unto her. And the
wonderful multitude of miracles, which shortly after were wrought in the same
place, seem most manifest proofs of the heavenly sign, which did illustrate
that year, which was memorable for the departure of Paul the third, who
publishing the celebritie of the Iubiley, against the 50. year, put of
mortality, and passed to an immortal life, leaving the care, and the praise
of the Iubiley to his Successor.

Pope Julius the III. instituteth a College of the Society of JESUS at Loreto.
CHAP. XII.
JULIUS the third, according to the use of former Popes, with his authority
confirmed the Indulgences, Immunities, Annal. Laur. Rier.
and Benefits of the House of Loreto. And calling to mind that divine saying,
The benefits of Julius the 3.
Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, by laws which he caused to be set down
by the Cardinal of Carpa, excited the Clergy and People of Loreto to greater
perfection of life. Then from the discipline of the Inhabitants, turning his
care to the ornature of the place it self, he also caused the sacred furniture
to be well increased; the marble stairs in the Church Porch to be laid; the
entry to be paued with brick, for seemlinesse of the place; diverse private
houses to be built over against the Porch, whereof we have spoken; either to
grace the street, or else for benifitt of the Inhabitants. At last the
uppermost rooms, and next to the Bishops lodging, before rude and inhabitable
were well fitted to dwell in, and assigned to the Society of Jesus. For the
Pope well knowing, that the amendment of corrupt manners by mean of a well
ordered Confession, is the greatest fruit of holy Pilgrimage, decreed to
provide fit Penitentiaries for the Church of Loreto, most famous with the
Pilgrimages of all Nations. And albeit there wanted not holy and godly
Priests; yet their scarcity, or vnskillfulnes in strange languages, made less
profit, than indeed was requisite. Therefore the Pope considering all things,
through the exhortation of the Cardinal of Carpa, thought it for the best, to
admit the Fathers of the Society of Jesus to help the Priests of Loreto: that
there might be some, who with their knowledge of languages, might inuit the
Pilgrims to the expiation o^ their sins, and might also employ continual and
diligent labor, in hearing the Confessions of strangers. Twelve Fathers were
chosen for that purpose; for whose mayntena^ce, allowance sufficient was made,
out of the revenues of the House of Loreto. Their dwelling was in the
uppermost part of the buildings (which at that time were void) assigned them
the 54. year of this age. This was the beginning of the College of the
Society of Jesus at Loreto: small truly, but to no small good of the
Inhabitants and Pilgrims. For the greatest care of the Fathers, was to purge
the souls of the Pilgrims and them that dwelt beyond the Alps, by
confession; to instruct all such rude people as were ignorant of the mysteries
of Christian belief, and to excite every one to the zeal of a godly and
Christianlike life. And how fruitful and profitable their labor was, both to
the Inhabitants and strangers, is more fitting to leave it for others to
conjecture, than for me to write. But that this College of the Fathers was not
only pleasing to mortal men, but even to our B. Lady her self, the daily
increase and greater progress thereof, does playnlie show.

The wonder of the heavenly flames is renewed at Loreto. CHAP. XIII.
NOt long after, heaue^lie signs drew a far greater multitude of people to
Loreto the^ was wont, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
and brought them to the Fathers to be confessed and instructed. Before the
year was expired, night-fiers like unto Stars, were seen to break out of
the Thole of the Church of Loreto, and as it were in one stream to go
sensibly toward Monte-Filatrano, the village next to Loreto: where moving up
and down a little while in a round, over an ancient House of our B. Lady,
they retired straight to the House of Loreto, from whence they came. This
wonder was first observed by the sheepheards which dwelled hard by that
Village, by whose showing, it was afterward noted of the Inhabitants, and of
all the people, with so great admiration, that a certain astonishment seized
all their hearts. Neither was the spectacle short, or of small continuance, but
durable and almost as long as the night it self: For from the second vigill of
the night, it continued till the break of day. Whereupon many coveting to see
the thing near at hand, ran to the place, which seemed to shine with
heavenly flames: but when they came thither, by and by that admirable
spectacle beheld a far of, vanished out of their sight, that desired to see it
near at hand: when nevertheless at the same time, it showed it self to the
lookers on a far of News of these heavenly lights, being speedily diuulgated
over all Picene, enkindled a desire in the bordering people to see so grateful
a sight, who lodging abroad all night, in such places as they might
conveniently behold them, saw the heavenly flames shine out of the House of
Loreto, and pass over their heads, with no less admiration than joy. That
they were no vain sightes, the Miracles presently ensuing did evidently
show. For it is constantly reported, that many which came to visit that little
House, by gift of God, and his B. Mother, returned home to their own houses,
cured of many diseases, whereof there were lame, deaf, ruptured, and possessed
people. You may think that these excursions of the light of Loreto to other
Churches of our B. Lady, signified to mortal men, that the House of Loreto,
far excelled the rest, both in state and dignity: sithence our B. Lady seemed
to stay with them only in passage: but here, in a sort, to dwell.

Heavenly flames are seen in the Church of Loreto it self. CHAP. XIIII.
NOT only abroad, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
but also within the Church it self, hauenly flames have sometimes been
seen. The year that next ensued, which was 1555. when one of the Fathers of
the Society of Jesus, was preaching unto the people in the Church of Loreto
(as their custom is) in the clear daylight, certain bright fires, salling
down from heaven rested over the most sacred Chapel in the presence of many
people: which by and by spreding more and more abroad, went about the assembled
multitude, and then presently into heaven again, with great admiration and
wonder of all the audience. It is scarce credible, what devotion and joy this
celestial sight enkindled in the hearts of the beholders. Raphaell Riera a
learned and a godly Priest of the Society of Jesus by chance being present
among the multitude, afterward set down in writing this very thing, and also
many others pertaining to the history of Loreto, and was so astonished at the
wonder and strangenes of the thing, that presently he fell down on the ground
for reverence sake; and rendering due thanks to God and his B. mother, who
vouchsafed to make him partaker of that heavenly sight, he affirms that he
felt such abundance of heavenly joy at that present, that it continued with
him many days, his heart being once inflamed with the charity of God, and
devotion toward our B. Lady. Neither did this wonder (as he delivers)
happen to him alone, but also to many others, who after the Sermon, both with
their speeches, gestures, and tears, witnessed that the same happened likewise
unto them: such was the unwonted joy and sacred dread, which appeared in the
countenance, eyes and gestures of them all. That it was no vain sight, the
iteration of the same miracle does testify. For two years after, when one of
the same Fathers, according to their custom, was preaching to the Chanons, and
the assembled multitude, and some hearing the Confessions of Pilgrims, others
praying to Almighty God in the most maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin,
suddenly in the top of the thole, a heavenly flame (like unto a Comet or
blazing star) was perceived to glitter and shine, which falling down upon the
sacred Chapel, stood there a little while: then going toward the multitude,
made a grateful show to all the audience, much admiring so great a miracle and
wonder: but by and by turning his course an other way (to wit, toward the
place appointed to hear Confessions, called the Penitentiarie) moved up and
down over the heads of the Priests and them that confessed their sins: And
finally resting a while over the Image of Christ Crucified (which is
religiously reverenced in the most Sacred Chapel) it mounted again on high,
replenishing their hearts with devotion and zeal, who had seen that heavenly
vision with their eyes.

Two Capuchines are delivered from the raging sea. CHAP. XV.
THERE wanted not other miracles at that time, Trad. Laur. Annal. Rier.
whereof we will relate the most famous, according to our purpose. About the
year 1553. two Franciscan Capuchines, having saluted the B. Virgin of Loreto,
set out of Ancona to sail into Dalmatia, but in the middle of their voyage a
foul storm arising, threatened destruction to all the company. Therefore the
Master prouyding to disburde^ the ship of her weight, and casting the
baggage and merch and ize into the sea, the Franciscans began to pacify the
wrath of God by prayer, in an angle of the ship. But the Merchants being mad,
either with the grief of their loss, or else stirred with devilish fury,
turned their range on the Franciscans, secure from danger, as they thought,
saying unto them: Seeing the storm arose by your default, by your destruction
it shall be assuaged. Exclayming in this manner, they flew upon the^, and
assaulting the Innocents, apprehended them, and cast them into the sea. But the
Franciscans calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, (whom they inuocated when the
storm began) ceased not to cry unto her among the waves. A wonderful thing
to be spoken and seen: For by the great goodness of God, they were holden up so
high, that their breasts did appear all above the water: and singing praises to
God and his B. Mother, and also lifting up their hands toward heaven, they
were very quietly carried amidst the violence of the outrageous sea. Whereby
in short time by the guiding and direction of Almighty God, they arrived both
together at the haven of Ancona; and in their wet garments, as they were,
returning speedily to Loreto to render due thanks to our B. Lady, they
prostrated their bodies on the ground before her Sacred Image; and with
trickling tears gave hearty thanks to God and his B. Mother for their
delivery. Among the Guardians of Loreto, there was one Bernardine Galiard, a
man of good credit, and of long time host to the Capuchines, with whom they
lodged both before they went to Ancona, and after they returned to Loreto. Who
intertayning these Francisca^s (of whom I have spoken) all wet with the sea,
and demanding the cause thereof, at last they opened it unto him, with this
condition, that he should co^ceale their names. Wheruppon Galiard suppressing
their names, related it to others, as he received it from them.

A young man is delivered from the whirle-poole of a River. CHAP. XVI.
BY the favor of the B. Virgin of Loreto, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
an other eschewed nolesse danger in a River, than the Franciscans did in the
sea. Angelus Autanus, a yo^g man in the Territory of Salerno, of great toward
lines and piety, went into the River Vulturnus, which passes by Capua, to
wash his body, with a fellow and companion of his. But his fellow going
forward without regard, and falling into the unknown whirl-pooles of the
River, was in great danger of drowning. Whereupon Autanus making have to aid
his co^panio^ in hazard, fell himself into the same danger, out of which he
labored in vain to deliver the other. For he himself being swallowed up among
the whirl-pooles of the swift stream, but after some time cast up again from
the bottom, in the conflict of death called on our B. Lady of Loreto, as well
as he could: and the B. Virgin whom he inuocated was presently at hand, who
taking the young man out of the whirle-poole, when he was almost dead, received
him into her lap, and carrying him over the river for the space of a mile, set
him down in a convenient shore. Who remained long amazed, with dread of the
danger and of the miracle. But as soon as he came to himself, he acknowleged
the heavenly benefit, fell down on his knees, and carefully saluting our B.
Lady his deliueresse, with thankfullnes extolled her worthy praise, and out
of hand went to Loreto, to worship the moher of God, and to publish the miracle.

A maid of Loreto is delivered out of a well: a Citizen of Caieta out of
prison. CHAP. XVII.
NEither did Loreto it self want the held of her Patroness, Trad. Laur. Annal.
Laur. Rier.
in like danger of her people. A young maid coming to draw water at a well in
the Governors House of Loreto, as she was accustomed, let down her bucket
tied fast unto a rope, and carelessly pulling it up again full of water, with
the weigh to the bucket tu^bled headlong into the well, calling on our B. Lady
of Loreto. By chance, one of the chief Ministers of the sacred House, standing
in a window, and seeing the maid fall into the well, implored the help of the
B. Virgin in her behalf, and forth with, with the rest of his household, ran
unto the well it self. A wonder to be spoken. When they saw that she was in no
danger at all, but sat on the water, with joyful countenance, in continent
they let down a great bucket fastened to a strong rope, and warning the maid
what she must do, without delay endeauored to draw her up: who sitting in the
bucket, and holding the rope in her hands, was a length brought to the top of
the well; but among so many hands, uncertain what to do, and rashly letting
go the rope, before any had hold of her, she tumbled down the same way
again. Whereupon all that were present inuocating the Mother of God in her
behalf, the maid was conveyed down again to the water without any harm at
all, though many sherds of broken potts were underneath. For which cause
letting down ladders, they got her out a slower, but a safer way: and
presently the maid her self told them, how a Lady of great beauty, did
protect her as she fell into the well, in whose hands she swomme on the water,
without any danger or grieuance at all. The same also happened unto her, as she
fell down the second time, for our B. Lady receiving her with her hands, made
her to sit in her lap upon the water, until ladders were sought out and
fastened together, to be let down into the well, that she might be preserved
by this double miracle, to be no small document, of the B. Virgin of Loreto's
protection. But a man was as infallible an argument of her help at Rome, as the
maid was at Loreto. A certain Citizen of Caeta, borne of honest parentage,
but of little courage and m^^^nimity, and of a tender disposition by nature and
education, being accused of murder by false witnesses, was so frighted at the
unwonted sight of the torments, that he had rather, as often it chances,
suffer execution by confessing that which was false, than avoid the same by
denying it in torture. Being condemned to die, he washed away the blemishes of
his soul, by sacred Confession, and by exhortation of the Priest committed his
cause to the heavenly Judge, entreating the assistance of the B. Virgin of
Loreto. His prayers were heard. For within a while being overtaken with a
sweet sleep, he seemed to see the B. Virgin of Loreto, who bidding him be of
good comfort, put him in hope of life and liberty. Whereupon the innocence of
the man was presently known by miracle, and the authors of that wickedness, and
the workers of the false crime convicted, who suffered the same death, which
they prepared for the innocent.

A Bassa of the Turks, being cured by the B. Virgin of Loreto, does honor her
with gifts. CHAP. XVIII.
Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
NEITHER were the Barbarians deuoid of the help of Loreto, Corcutus a President
of the Turks (whom they call the Bassa) being at Constantinople the year
1552. was brought into evident danger of death by a grievous and a secret
impostume of the breast. A certain honest and godly Christian, served him as a
slave, who thinking the danger of his master the occasion of his liberty, went
unto the President ready to dye, and certifying him of the admirable power of
the B. Virgin of Loreto, in curing all manner of diseases, put him in good hope
of recovery; and without great difficulty, persuaded him, to call on the B.
Virgin of Loreto with him, and to make this vow: If she took away his disease,
for her sake he would give him liberty, and release him from bondage. Neither
did the slave deceive his master, nor Marie her godly Client. For within a
while the impostume brake, and the President was cured, who giving good
testimony thereof, set his slave at liberty, and sent him to the B. Virgin of
Loreto with letters and gifts. The gifts were, a mantle of notable workmanship,
great wax candles, no small store of silver, a bow and an excellent quiver of
arrows, not so grateful and acceptable for value, as because the gifts were
rare and the giver himself to be admired. At that time Gaspar Doctus a
Venetian was Governor of Loreto, who putting the other Donaries on the Altar,
commanded that the bow and the quiver of arrows, should be set up over the
door of the most Sacred Cell, for a monument of the miracle to posterity.
Also the party of whom I have spoken, being set at liberty by the Bassa,
brought with him the handwriting of his Patron, for a testimony of the
miracle, which Gaspar translating out of Arabian into the vulgar tongue, would
have preserved for an everlasting memorial thereof. and the same turned into
latin, is this. That which the great and merciful Lord of the world would have
to happen unto us. A certain thing chauncing to me my self from above, I
Corcutte the Bassa (not to fail in my duty, and to have some monument of so
great a wonder to be extant to posterity) will relate the whole matter in
order. A great impostume growing in our breast, and certain death being at
hand (and also despayring of health by means of Physicians) my slave came unto
me, and with great confidence uttered these words unto me. If you will promise
me liberty, I will pray to the Mother of my God, to restore you your former
health. Out of hand, sending for the notarie, I secured him liberty, if he
performed his promise. Whereupon my slave kneeling down presently on the
ground, and making certain signs on himselse with his hand, requested me to
say after him, repeating these words before me, I implore the help of our B.
Lady of Loreto. Saying after, through the goodness of God, I recovered. For
which cause manumitting my slave, I gave him this testimony, with votiue
gifts, for a monument of my Reverence, and grateful mind toward B. Marie, the
mother of God the Almighty, who has made us whole.

The House of Loreto is enriched with the Donaries of Noble men. CHAP. XIX.
THE House of Loreto was not more graced with miracles, tha^ with gifts in time
of Julius the third. The Cardinal of Augusta brought to the B. Virgin of
Loreto for a gift, The gift of the Card. of Augusta, and of many others.
a vestment of gold of curious work; a neck-lace of a 150. orient pearls,
notably graced with golden stones of equal distance, and a coin of gold
ha^ging, beautified with gemmes and precious stones. Cardinal Cesius, silver
ornature for the Altar. The Cardinal of Carpa costly furniture, of cloth of
gold for the Bishop, celebrating divine service with solemnity, and an other
of cloth of silver, wrought with curled gold. Cardinal Medices (who afterward
was created Pope by the name of Pius the 4.) a suite for the Altar, of cloth of
gold. Bernardine San-Seuerino Prince of Bisinia, his own Image of silver to
the breast, of no small weight; and ornature of crimson velvet, for the Priest
and the Altar. Hercules Duke of Ferrara goodly ornature of damask, wrought
with great flowers of gold, for the Altar, Priest, and Ministers, celebrating
divine service with solemnity. Vidobaldus Duke of Vrbine, a suite for the
Altar and the Priest, of cloth of gold. The Duke of Grauine, ornature for the
Priest, of the same stuff. The Viceroy of Naples, golden vestments imbrodered,
for the Priest and ministers to use in time of solemn service. The Marquis of
Mantua vestments of silver for the same, to use in like solemnity. Portia
Cesia a golden Cope. The Countess of Palena in Abruzzo, a necklace of gold
and precious stones. Constantia Leiua a Spaniard, a Crownet of gold of one
pound weight. There was also a worthy gift sent out of Germany; from
Ferdinand king of the Romans; that is to say, a silver Image of the B. Virgin
of a foot and a half, of 31. pound weight, at whose feet does lie prostrate
Anne the Queen of Bohemia pourtured in silver: which has a double inscription
in the base. The one before.

FERDINAND THE MIGHTY AND POTENT KING OF THE ROMANS, OF HVNGARIE AND BOHEMIA,
ARCHDVKE OF AUSTRIA. etc.

SENT THIS SILVER IMAGE TO BE OFFERED, TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO, THE YEAR M.
D. LII. IN THE MONTH OF MAY.

The other behind.

FERDINAND KING OF THE ROMANS, OF HVNGARIE, AND BOHEMIA, ARCHDVKE OF AUSTRIA
etc.

IN MEMORY OF ANNE HIS BELOVED WIFE, DEDICATED AND CONSECRATED THIS HER IMAGE
OF SILVER, TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO, IN PERFORMANCE OF A VOVV WHICH WAS
MADE FOR HER RECOVERIE.

Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinal knows by revelation in the sacred Chapel,
that he should be Pope. CHAP. XX.
IN this mean while Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinal (a man famous for
learning and sanctity) had made his dwelling in a town near to the House of
Loreto, Annal. Laur. Rier.
The piet^e and devotion of Card. Cerninus.
called Monte-fano, which he accounted his native soil, choosing indeed a very
convenient place to visit the native Cell of the B. Virgin; from whence he came
to Loreto with great zeal and devotion, to say mass in the most Maiesticall
Chapel of the whole world. After the decease of Julius the third, there
happeneda certain thing (in sight and event most marvelous) to Marcellus
Ceruinus the Cardinal celebrating divine service at Loreto, as he was
accustomed. A very white and a beautiful dove, flying peaceably up and down
over his head, in the presence of many people, sometimes rested on the hands of
the Sacrificant, sometimes on the Missal it self; which filled them that were
present* with great admiration and wonder. The Priest, who (as the use is)
assisted the Card. in time of the dreadful Sacrifice, thinking it to be some
ordinary dove come thither by chance, assaied to drive her away. But the
Cardinal well remembering that here to sore in former ages, sometimes Bishops
had been designed from above, by the manifestation and showing of a white
dove, forbad him to disquiet her. Whereupon he permitted the heavenly dove to
rest, till the Sacrifice being ended, she flew away of her own accord.
Shortly after, a heavenly vision confirmed the truth hereof unto him. For
Marcellus being called to Rome by a messenger of the Popes death, would not
commit himself to his journey, and to the election of the new Pope, until he
had saluted the B. Virgin of Loreto, according to his custom. And the sacred
day of the B. Virgins Annunciation being at hand, did more inuit his godly
mind. Therefore coming to Loreto the day before, and shutting out the rude
people on the Festival day, he began to say mass with great attention in the
most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin. And in time of the dreadful Sacrifice,
a little after the beginning of the Canon, remembering the Church deprived of her
Pastor, and recommending her most effectually to God and the B. Virgin, our B.
Lady accompanied with many heavenly spirits, The revelation which was shevved
to Card Ceruinus in the House of Loreto.
appeared unto him in celestial brightness, as he was earnest in prayer, and
replenishing his soul with divine light and sweetness, told him he should be
Pope, forthwith vanishing out of the sight of his astonished mind. So
admirable and so strange a thing happening to Marcellus on the sudden, stroke
him into such a fear, that trembling at the Altar, he could scarce stand on
his feet. Whereupon the Priest who assisted him in time of the dreadful
Sacrifice, perceived that something was revealed to the Cardinal from above:
specially because his face seemed to shine with a certain unwonted brightness,
and also, all his body to be environed with a new light: which with great
familiarity he reported to many others, and also to Raphael Riera, who set it
down in writing. Yea and the Card. himself being importuned with the entreaty
of his friends, who were present at that heavenly vision, told the whole
matter, as it happened; adding withal that so great an office, as that of the
high Bishop, was far beyond his desert; and therefore peradventure Almighty God
would provide an other Vicar for himself. But if it were the will of God, to
have such a Vicar on earth, truly the first thing that he would do, should be
to preserve the Christian Commonwealth in good state, and to propagate the
reverence of the House of Loreto far and near. Whereupon returning to
Monte-Fano, and sending for the notarie, he commanded to be set down in
public record, what he was determined to do, in honor of our B. Lady of
Loreto; to the end the public records might bind him to perform his promise
to the Mother of God; and that the same (if percha^ce death prevented him, as
it happened) might witness his propensiue good will toward her. The records of
Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinal are yet extant in the town, which I have
mentioned, whereby it does well appear, that he purposed with himself, to
increase the number of the Chanons, of the Singers, of the Ministers, and also
the Priests of the Society of Jesus, that the sacred House might be reuere^ced
with greater devotion and zeal of the Pilgrims, which came to visit it.
Moreover he purposed to enlarge the circuit of Loreto, and to raise walls and
fortresses about it: to build a new town and a new City: to grace it with a
Bishops Sea, and with absolute and mixed government: and also to make eight
bordering Towns tributary unto it. And to build this City, he invented this
easy and expedite way, that is to say, to inuit the poorest families of all
the Popes dominions, to inhabit the new Town, partly with hope of reward,
partly also with the devotion of our B. Lady of Loreto: to divide in common to
the new Inhabitants, the next wood purchased with the Common treasure, that
they might cut down the trees, and destroy the copses, for their greater
commodity and better tilling of their land: So in short time the new City
would be well provided of fruit, wine and oil enough: neither would Merchants
(allured with hope of gain) fail to be there: by reason that great resort
would be unto the place; whereby in time exceeding honor and reverence would
be done to the B. Virgin of Loreto. But it seemed otherwise to God, whose
judgments are inscrutable: for it was his holy will, that he should rather set
down, in writing, his worthy purposes toward the House of Loreto, than
perform the^ indeed. Yet as soon as Marcellus came to Rome that was easily
effected, which Almighty God would have to come to pass, to wit that he should
be created Pope; where by the promise of the B. Virgin was performed, but the
Popes could not be; because within xxij days, having scarce begun his
Popedom, he departed this life. A Bishop more memorable for his worthy
determinations, than his deeds; for diverse Popes imitating his godly purpose
adorned the Church and the sacred House of Ioreto, with many goodly
fortifications and gifts.

The College of the Jesuits is enlarged by Pope Paul the IV. also the
celebrity and wealth of Loreto is increased. CHAP. XXI.
PAVL the fourth was of the number of them, who succeding Marcellus and
following his good determinations, did not only begin to reform the decayed
discipline and manners of the Church; but also firmly purposed to amplify the
state of the House of Loreto. Therefore in the beginning of his Popedom, he
confirmed the ancient benefits of other Popes with a new Breue: diligently
forewarded the building: increased the number of the Ministers: and finally
omitted nothing, which he thought might pertain, to increase the religion of
the place it self. But this was his chiefest care, grounded on the
determinatio^s of Marcellus, to enlarge the College of the Society of Jesus.
For although those Fathers, which were then at Loreto, bestowed greater labor
on the Pilgrims, then was convenient for so small a number: yet so few were
not able to deal with such a multitude of strangers, as daily increased,
specially when out of remote Contreys, many of different language resorted more
and more unto it, whereof diverse could not be confessed, for want of Priests to
understand them. The Fathers of the Society, were as sorrowful as themselves,
that they should return home again, frustrated of their hope and vow, which
provoked the Cardinal of Carpa, to think how he might increase the number of
those Fathers. For being very glad that the College which he had procured to
be planted in the soil of Loreto (albeit yet slender and new) partly brought
forth, and partly made show of much spiritual fruit; he healt earnestly with
the Pope to enlarge it, supposing that, that would happen, which came to pass,
to wit, that it would bring forth a most fruitful and plentiful harvest,
when the fruits themselves were fully increased and ripe. Wherefore the 55
year of this age, by the Popes approbation and allowance, he effected, that
thirty lacking two, should be added to the former number, that forty of the
Society of JESUS might be mayntained at Loreto. And the Society deceived not
the hope of the Cardinal nor of the Pope. For their College being thus
increased with Priests expert in foreign tongues, was a great increase to the
devotion of Pilgrims, and no small benefit to the House of Loreto it self.
Because from that time, the Pilgrims of most Nations, fynding Priests of their
own Country, with whom they might freely deal without an interpreter, by
their help returned home again, not only purged of their sins, but also
instructed with Christian institutions and precepts. Likewise the Religion, and
wealth of the House of Loreto increased in such abounda^t manner, that it does
well appear, the access of strangers, and the multitude of Donaries to be far
greater than ever was wo^t. For the multitude of Pilgrims increased so much,
that every way people resorted to Loreto in great troops. So that oftentimes
ten thousand, now and then twenty, and sometimes also more then thirty
thousand Pilgrims, came to Loreto, about the Natiultie of the B. Virgin, whereof
many getting no repose, neither in the Church nor Town, filled the fields and
woods round about.

The House of Loreto is enriched with new Donaries. CHAP. XXII.
AND with this multitude of strangers, the wealth of the House of Loreto was
not a little increased; For it is very well known, that from this time
forward, ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen, and sometimes also twenty thousand
Crowns, were given yearly to the treasury of the House of Loreto. Neither
did any Pope ever apply any of the said treasure to his own use, and
accounting the end wherefore it was given, so holy as it was. Two times only,
Ber. Ciril.
certain money came so from thence unto the Popes, that within a while after,
they repayed it thither again. For to repress the spoils of Francis Maria
Duke of Vrbine, the Capitaines of Leo the X. took six thousand Crowns out of
the Sacred Arcke, to pay their soldiers. But when the Pope had notice thereof,
forthwith he took order with the Treasurer of Picene, to repay that sum to
the B. Virgin. Afterward Clement the VII. being in great want of money at the
ransacke of the City (as we showed before) received three thousand Crowns in
loan from the B. Virgin of Loreto; which after the danger escaped, he
carefully repaied unto her again: Whereby all the money, which was put into
the Sacred Arcke, was employed on the building of Loreto, and on other uses of
the Sacred House it self. But in time of Paul the 4. other Donaries were given
with that money which appertained to the Sacred Ornature. A silver Image of
reasonable bigness of Christ our Savior Crucified upon mount Caluary, The gift
of the Card. of Carpa, and of others.
with the Image of the B. Virgin and S. John expressed in silver; two silver
Candlestickes a Cubit long, a silver boole of two pound weight curiously
wrought; worthy ornature for the Bishop of cloth of gold, the chiefest grace
whereof was a golden butto^ of good bigness, besett with three degrees of pearl,
commonly used by Cardinals and Bishops, and a picture representing the birth of
Christ, made of silk and gold, with admirable art and skill, were the Donaries
of the Cardinal of Carpa. The Duke of Vrbine, golden vestme^ts for the Priest
and Ministers. The Duke of Albania gave the like gift, and also the Duke of
Mantua; saving that these were made of gold and silver. The Duke of Bouino a
costly Pix of silver, for the most holy Eucharist, standing on the figures of
Angels, a foot long. Honoratus Caietan Duke of Sermoneta, a golden vestment
for the Priest, and ornature for the Altar, of cloth of gold. Augustine Auria,
a silver head and two vestments for the Priest of cloth of gold. Margaret of
Austria the daughter of Charles the V. a rich suite for the Altar and the
Priest, of siluer-cloth of tissue. The Marquess of Guasto a golden Casket of
excellent workmanship of two pound weight: and an other from the Duchess of
Ariano, adorned with pillars of silver, guilt. The Duchess of Mantua or nature
of silver for the Priest and ministers celebrating with solemnity. Finally a
worthy vestment of gold for the Priest, adorned with gold and precious
jewels, and also with a fair picture of the B. Virgin, compassed about with
the sun, on the back of the vestment was the gift of the Queen of Hungary.

The House of Loreto is honored of the French Army, with the salvation of
many soldiers CHAP. XXIII.
ABOUT that time war beginning between the King of Spain and the Pope, Trad.
Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
the new tempest of war which troubled Italy, did not a little grace the House
of Loreto, The Duke of Guise being called in by the Pope, with consent of the
French King, brought with him into Italy great forces of the French, to defend
the Pope, and to recover the Kingdom of Naples. At which time, the religion of
the House of Loreto, and the divine providence toward her, greatly
flourished. For when great Companies of soldiers gathered out of diverse
Nations, wandered freely up and down all Picene, this sacred House of Loreto
(famous for her wealth) permitted not any one of all those Companies to covet
her inestimable treasure; such, and so great devotion toward her sacred
House, did the B. Virgin imprint in the hearts of all these soldiers, in time
of this tumultuous war. And as long as Guise made his station in Picene, the
Companies of so great an army, were rather a spectacle than any damage at all
to the people of Loreto, by favor of the Mother of God, who did not only
protect and defend her own state, but also her Clients. For although many of
this army were infected with Caluins heresy; yet there was no Band, nor any
Company at all, which at the very first sight of the Church of Loreto (stirred
as it were with devotion toward her) came not straight to visit and reverence
her, made not vows, presented not gifts. Whereby the Captains of these
Companies and Bands, came unto the sacred House one after another, with great
quietness of their soldiers, and departed more peaceably than they came,
promising or performing their vows before the Altar of the B. Virgin. Besides
in honor of our B. Lady, they did skirmish in warlike fashion with their
weapons and furniture, before her sacred House. But shortly after, the devotion
and piety of the soldiers made a more grateful spectacle in the sight of
god, and is holy Mother. For many washing away their sins by sacred
Confession, rested in peace, having before received the most holy ba^quet of
the Eucharist. And certain of the heretics, reduced to the way of truth, and
abiuring their errors, were reconciled to the Catholic Church, and also
purified with the Sacraments of Confession, and of the Eucharist, by favor of
the Mother of God, who turns the perfidiousnes of the impious, to the worship
and piety of Almighty God.

By making a vow to our B. Lady of Loreto, the City of Vtina is preserved from
the sickness, increasing round about. CHAP. XXIIII.
AT that time, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
the House of Loreto was innobled with many and sundry miracles. Vtina, a City
of Carinthia, for greatness and worth, second only to Aquileia, eschewed great
danger of sickness by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto. The year 1555. a
terrible plague spreading abroad in the Territories of Venice and Carinthia,
made every where great immortality among the Inhabitants. And the Magistrates
of the City of Vtina, seeing the sickness creep on, and daily approach unto
them, entered into Counsel of necessity, and resolving to make a public Vow,
inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto, committing their City to her protection
and patronage: who frustrated not the supplication and prayer of her Clients.
Because for space of two years (all which time the plague was very hot, and
wasted all the towns thereabout) the protection of our B. Lady was so present
unto them, that only Vtina remained free from the common evil. Wherefore the
City of Vtina not more religious in making, than in performing her vow, set
forward a solemn supplication to the House of Loreto. Three hundred gentlemen,
before whom was carried a most curious Image of Christ Crucified, came all in
white garments, and regardable in one livery, to present either public or
private Donaries to the B. Virgin of Loreto. Who at their entering into the
Church, with much emulation began to cast their bodies on the ground, and with
weeping eyes to give manifold thanks to God and his Mother, not only in the
name of their whole City, but every one also for his own particular. Then
rising up, and embracing each other with brotherly affection, they renewed their
weeping, and bedewed themselves with mutual tears. And so notable a wayling
springing from piety, caused the like in them that were standers by, none
almost of the beholders forbearing tears in the pious lamentation of such men.
Which done, going into the most sacred Cell, and most devoutly saluting the B.
Virgin Mother of God, they set down their gifts before her, among which there
was a votiue Table, curiously painted with this inscription.

THE CONFRATERNITY OF THE MOST HOLY CRVCIFIX, BROVGHT, AND DEDICATED IT TO THE
MOST GLORIOUS VIRGIN OF LORETO, FOR PRESERVING THE CITY OF VTINA, AND HER
TERRITORIES, FROM THE PLAGVE; THE YEAR OF MAN'S SALVATION M. D. LVI.

Sight is restored to two that were blind. CHAP. XXV.
THREE years after, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
the B. Virgin of Loreto showed a more admirable spectacle, both to the
inhabitants and Pilgrims. A young maid of Sienna, waiting on no mean Matron of
Venice, had her sight so decayed in the service of her Mistress, that at last
she saw nothing at all, and there appeared signs in her eyes, which gave
evident testimony thereof. When she had assaied the help of Physicians in
vain, by commandment of her Mistress, she was brought to Loreto by two women,
not doubting, but that her sight would be restored unto her, by the help and
prayer of our B. Lady. The young maid being brought into the most Maiesticall
Cell of the B. Virgin between those two women, eft-soones kneeled down, and
with many tears, ernestly began to call on the Mother of God. The Chapel was
full of Inhabitants and strangers, who likewise prayed to the B. Virgin, either
moved with pity of the maid, or else in suspense with the expection of the
thing: And behold, as she was praying to our B. Lady with fervent devotion and
trickling tears, upon the sudden she was so comforted, that she cried out;
Now I see some light: And withal earnestly entreated the^ that were present,
to assist her with their devout and godly prayers. All being fervent in prayer
to Almighty God for her, within a while the maid (joyful at the success)
cried out again; Now I see the burning torthes and lamps before the B.
Virgin: which did so vehemently inflame the burning zeal of the suppliants,
that it caused tears of joy to issue out of all their eyes. And at length the
maid herself uttered these words with thankfullnes. Now I see the Image of
our B. Lady; Now I see the Donaries which are about her. O clemency of God,
and his B. Mother! O divine and memorable benefit of them both! As she repeated
these and such like words, with tears of joy in her tha^ksgiuing, all began to
weep in toke^ of tha^ksgiuing to god and the B. Virgin which continued half an
hour. And the same remaining with many of the^ after their departure out of
the sacred Chapel, filled the hearts of them which came thither with like
feeling and admiratlo^: specially when those, who a little before saw that the
young maid was blind, now perceived that her sight was clear and perfect.
There was scarce any thing of like quality, do^ne in a greater assembly of
people. For this wonder happened at the feast of Easter, at which time the
House of Loreto is usually frequented with great concourse of people. Raphaell
Riera: who committed it to writing, delivers, that himself was present at
the miracle; and I my self received it of others of undoubted credit, who said
that they were also present, to wit, the 59. year of this age, Gaspar Doctus
being Couernour of Loreto, who commanded that so evident a miracle should be
set down in public record. But the thing was done with true simplicity:
For the names of the maid, and of her Mistress were omitted, as though they
nothing at all pertayned to give credit unto the miracle. I believe they saw
the Evangelists do the like in evident miracles. Less famous, but no less
admirable is that, which is rehearsed of Thomas of Parma, who being quite
blind with a grievous infirmity of his eyes, and a certain night much
molested with bitter pain thereof, erected himself on the bed where he lay, and
kneeling down, implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto with many tears;
adding this vow unto his prayer, if he recovered his sight, he would go to the
House of Loreto to give her thanks: and so reposed again, putting great
confidence in the B. Virgin. His hope deceived him not. For in the morning when
he awaked, he saw the light with sound and perfect eyes, and giving due thanks
to the Mother of God, went to Loreto and performed his vow.

A Shipmaister of Genua is delivered from double danger. CHAP. XXVI.
AT that time another came to Loreto bound by double vow, Annal. Laur. Rier.
and favored with a double miracle. Paul a famous Pilot of Genua, returning
from Gasconie in France to Genua, was suddenly brought into great fear of
shipwreck by a raging tempest, which enforced him to cast all the merchandise
into the sea. And the storm beginning to force the ship more vehemently, all
conceived so great fear therewith, that the Passengers and Mariners forsaking
the vessel to save themselves by swimming, he alone remained in his ship,
desiring to preserve it in as great safety as himself, being indeed the
chiefest part of all his wealth. When he saw his vessel full of water, he
trusted wholly in his vow, and inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto for himself
and his ship. Not in vain: For that invocation gave him such strength and
courage, that he alone (assaying it with great force,) hoised up the sail, and
hoping that his prayers were heard, endeavored to pumpe the water out of the
ship. Mean while the tempest was assuaged, and the ship, with the wind and
our B. Lady guiding her, came to the haven of Genua, with no less admiration
of himself, them of others, to see a great ship half full of water, arrive
safe at the harbor, guided by the Pilot alone, executing the office of all the
Mariners. But Paul having obtained his vow, was slower in performing it then
was fitting, either expecting a more convenient time afterward, or else thinking
to prefer other things before that business. But his delay was not long
unpunished. For when the year came about, the very same day, as he sailed in
the same ship (that the time might put him in mind both of the benefitt and
also of the offense) he suffered shipwreck again with his little son.
Whereupon presently the memory of the danger which he lately avoided by the
help of the B. Virgin, and of his negligence in performing his votiue
pilgrimage pricking his guilty conscience, with abounda^t tears he asked
pardon of God, and entreated the experie^ced help of the B. Virgin of Loreto,
for himself and his son, binding the promise of the old, with a new vow. His
prayer deceived him not. For seeking his little son among the waves, he found
him without any harm at all, and taking him up on his shoulders, carried him
safe to land, swymming a great way along the furious sea, all the rest of the
Passengers and Mariners being overwhelmed and drowned, that the destruction of
others might make the heavenly gift, more notable. As Soon as he came to the
shore, not more ioying his own, then the safety of his little son in the
midst of such imminent danger, he fell down on his knees, co^ma^ding his son
to do the same: and lifting up his hands toward heaven, with flowing tears of
joy gave hearty thanks (next after God) to the B. Marie, that she did not
frustrate the vow of an ungrateful man, that failed in his. And because
doubtless the delay of performing his devotion, caused him this new danger, he
promised that no negligent stay, should now hinder him. Wherefore fearing if
that he went unto his own house, some domestical care might also defer his
pilgrimage, and the better to recompense the great negligence which he
committed in performing his former vow, he set forward toward Loreto, omitting
to visit his House and Country: and entreating and begging victuals to
sustain himself and his litler son, he came to the sacred House, deserving
to be remembered, not only for recovering of his shipp in his first danger,
but afterward for loosing it, and finding and saving of his son; and now
also as much co^mendatio^ for performing his vow with devotion, as blame at
first for neglecting it.

A young man is delivered out of prison: another twice hanged is delivered from
death and punishment. CHAP. XXVII.
ABOUT that time the B. Virgin of Loreto showed her self as admirable in
delivering men from punishment, Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
as in calming the sea. Augustine of Rocca Valdonia (a town of the territory
of Sienna) was accused of a salfe crime and committed to prison where the
innocent man suffering much torture, called on the B. Virgin of Loreto to whom
he was exceedingly devoted. Neither in vain. For awaking out of his sleep in
the quiet night, he saw the iron manacles wher-with he was fettered, fall from
his hands of themselves, and in contine^t our B. Lady giving him advice and
strength to fly, himself indeuouring to dig through the wall of the prison,
pulled out certain mortar with his hand, and opened a hole which gave him
means to escape. But two doors remained that hindered his flight, which by
chance finding miraculously open and unguarded, he escaped with safety, not
only finding free egresse, but also secure defense, by gift of our B. Lady.
But this man was delivered from immine^t, another from present death. Francis
of Ferrara, a simple but a devout man, travailing through Picene the 56. year
of this age, fell into the forces of the Duke of Guise, who waged war for Paul
the 4. against Philip King of Spain, of whom being demanded the cause of traue
I and courteously entertained, he sent him to the General of the Popes Army,
with the letters of the French Captain and certain Characters (whereof they
were agreed between themselves) sowed in his doublet, altogether ignorant
thereof. But being intercepted and searched by the watch of the adverse Army, he
was brought to Marcus Antonius Columna at Anagnia a City of Campania, who by
the letters and characters of the enemy found in his doublet, thinking him
verily to be a spy, forthwith commanded the simple Contrey-man to be hanged.
And albeit he was presently led unto the place of execution, with a great
troop of soldiers, and Citizens of Anagnia following him; yet he did not
despair of himself. For having leave to say a few prayers, he fell down on
his knees, and first asking pardon for his sins, and then calling on our B.
Lady of Loreto. It is not unknown to thee B. Virgin Mother of God (says he)
that I dye guiltless, and in no wise privy to these letters. Therefore I pray
and beseech thee, to make thy son merciful unto me, that of his great
clemency forgiving me my other offenses (whereby I confess to have deserved
greater punishment) by some sign or other he may vouchsafe to declare my
innocence. Having spoken thus in a loud voice, he went to dye with a
confident mind, Whereupon the hangma^ tying him to the gallows, cast him of
the ladder, pressing his shoulders with his feet, that he might leave him for
dead. A wonderful thing to be spoken and seen: For the seely man had hung
but a while, but the rope brake of it selt, and he fell down to the ground,
seeming to be safe and sound. But the miracle was esteemed a chance, that it
might be more notable. For the hangman tying a stronger rope about his neck,
present^^e^ed the poor wretch to the gallows again, and cast him of the
ladder, wresting his neck more forciblie them before. But behold, by the
pouidence of God and his B. Mother, the rope burst again, and Francis falling
down to the ground, and breaking his head with the fall, lay as it were
without life, Whereupon the miserable sight of the poor Countreyman moved
the multitude there-about, and the strong rope breaking of it self, brought
them into such admiration, that all recalled to mind his prayer and invocation
of the B. Virgin of Loreto, when he went to suffer. For which cause many
entreating pardon for the innocent young man, and the beloved of our B Lady,
thought it wickedness to have him made away by mortal men, who was twice
preserved by the goodness of God. And Marcus Antonius of his own natural
disposition, and exceeding devotion toward the B. Virgin of Loreto, pardoned
him more willingly the^ he was requested. Also the City Anagnia rightly
setting down a testimony of the miracle, as it happened, delivered it to
Ferrara himself, which he, coming to Loreto to give thanks to the B. Virgin,
left there with her, for a perpetual monument thereof to posterity.

A woman of Sicilie having her throat cut, is cured. CHAP. XXVIII.
IT is nothing leffe, Annal. Laur. Rier.
but peradventure more admirable, which now is delivered of a woman. A young
maid of Sicilie of more beauty then honesty, (whose name we thought good to
suppress to save her credit) being brought from Sicilie to Venice, and there
many years together making gain of her dishonest body, and heaping up good
store of wealth, at last had a desire to see her Country and return home
again. Therefore turning all her wealth into money, with a familiar mate of
hers she went toward Loreto, intending to wash away the filth of her former
life by Co^feslio^, and to salute the B. Virgin of Loreto, that then she might
go more joyfully into Sicilie. But as soon as they came to the wood of
Rauenna, that good companion seeing all round about secure, and the hope of the
prey greatly provoking him, set on her unawares with a drawn sword; upon with
a deadly weapon, inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto. But the thief (our B.
Lady deferring her help to have it more notable) cast her from the horse
whereon she rode with the wound of the sword, pursued her when she was down,
and gave her many blows earnestly imploring the help of our B. Lady. At
length lest any hope of life should remain, the cruel wretch cut her throat,
when she was half dead, and taking away her gold and jewels, and leaving her
miserably wounded, departed from her. Who tumbling in her own blood even
ready to yield up the ghost, recommended her agonizing soul to the B. Virgin;
and in that very instant was made partaker of the undoubted help of her
Patroness. For presently with great glory of heavenly brightness, our B.
Lady appeared unto her in a white garment, and bidding her be of good comfort,
gently embraced her, cherished her in her lap in this her extremity, healed
the wounds of her body with her touch, replenished her sorrowful heart with
heavenly joy, and then admonishing her to lead a chaste life, vanished out of
her sight. Wherewith the woman awaking, as it were out of a heavy sleep, and
viewing her body all over, saw that the scarres of her late wounds were closed
up: and feeling with her hand perceived also that the deadly wou^d of her
throat was perfectly cured. Wherefore with exceeding joy, she fell down on her
knees, and next after God, gave manifold thanks to her most assured Patroness
for so worthy a benefit. Yet one thing did disturb her great joy, which was,
to be left in the wood by the thief in her bloody and torn smock. But the
B. Virgin Mother of God, was as careful to provide for the naked shamefastnes
of the woman, as she had been to prevent the immine^t danger of death. For
behold, as she was giving thanks to our B. Lady with great devotion,
certain Mulatiers passed that way by chance, who taking compassion to see a
young woman without clothes, and imbrued with blood, and also pilgrimaging to
Loreto (as by herself they understood) forth with clothed her with a couerlet,
and putting her on a mule carried her to Ancona, in token of their devotion to
the B. Virgin of Loreto. Whereuppo^ as soon as she had begged some mean
apparel, she went rejoicing to Loreto, to wash away the blemishes of her life
by sacred Confession, and to perform her vow to our B. Lady; every where
intending to publish her singular help, by whose benefit without all doubt
(next after God) she was preserved alive, and restored to perfect health, when
she was at the point of death it self. To confirm the truth of this miracle,
she showed the new sign of the deadly wou^d in her throat, and by the
providence of God, there appeared no obscure token of so great a wonder. For
about her neck did glitter a golden scarre, in manner of a chain, that you
may playnlie understand, that her deadly wound was touched and cured by the
heavenly hand of our B. Lady. Which truly to all that beheld it (whereof
Raphaell Riera, who set it down in writing, was one) was not only a great
monument of the miracle, but even a miracle of it self. And the woman being
either allured with the sweetness of the House of Loreto, or else desiring to
render due thanks to the Mother of God so well deserving of her, preferred
Loreto before her Country; where she lived many years so devoutly, that she
would receive the holy mysteries very often, and then also reuisit the B.
Virgin of Loreto, to excite the Inhabitants to the service of God and his B.
Mother, with singular example of innocence and piety.

A certain man of Genua doubting of the House of Loreto, being well punished,
repents. CHAP. XXIX.
ABOUT that time Almighty God established the religion of the Cell of Loreto
with a famous miracle, Annal. Laur. Rier.
lest any hereafter should doubt thereof. The year 1557. a certain Genuese
(whose name we conceal to save his credit) borne of no mean parentage, but
more curious then godly, went on horsbacke from Genua to Loreto. Who in the
way, by instinct doubtless of the devil, first began to suspect, then also to
believe, that the House of Loreto was no ancient monument of our B. Lady, but
a new muention or superstition and avarice. But the wicked cogitation of the
mad man was not long vnpun shed. For the very same day, the horse on which he
rode fell down upon him, and oppressed him so greatly with the weight of all
his body, that the miserable man lay bruized and half dead under his horse in
the high way, without any hope of help, because he had none in his company,
to do any thing for him. His misery gave him understanding. Whereupon turning
rashues into devotion, he called on our B. Lady of Loreto Neither in vain.
For being presently desiuered of the horse, he rose up safe and sound. But the
present clemency of God, did not expel the conceived frenzy of the mad man;
who within a while returning to his wicked conceit again, made the miracle
more notable. For having gone but a little way, and the devil tempting him
more vehemently then before, he thought with himself, that the wonders which
were reported of the House of Loreto, were altogether false. But not without
punishment. For the House of Loreto being now in sight, the blindenes of his
mind brake out into the body, by a dymnesse which took away his sight, and
presently strength began to fail him, not well in his wits. Therefore
trembling for fear, and seeming like to one dismayed, and not able to guide
his horse, by the horse himself he was brought to Loreto, which stood still at
the next Inn, where almost faynting and ready to fall down, he was supported
by the host, who taking him by the hand, lead him into a chamber, and laid him
in a bed: where carefully recalling to mind the manifest wrath of Almighty
God twice experienced in the same journey; and also fearing greater punishment
by the present loss of his sight, he began to weep bitterly. This fear was
his health. For being assisted by the grace of God, he repented, and hoping
that a penitent might have safe reguge, by the favor and clemency of the B.
Virgin, he besought pardon of God and his B. Mother: promised and vowed, that
he would never after, otherwise believe of the Cell of Loreto, the^ the
Christian world believed. A wonder to be spoken: The sight of his eyes came
unto him with the light of his mind. Whereupon going to the House of Loreto, and
wyping away the blemishes of his life by sacred Confession, he entered into the
most Maiesticall Cell, and devoutly saluted the B. Virgin, rejoicing to see her
with those eyes, which of late he lost by offending her, and now by pleasing
her, received again.

The Violatours of the most sacred Chapel are punished by miracle for their
rashness. CHAP. XXX.
SHORTLY after Almighty God did evidently punish the Violatours of the most
sacred House. Annal. Laur. Rier.
For about the 58. year of this age a certain Noble and a wealthy person of a
chief City of Italy (the name of the man and his country is passed in
silence, because he himself would have it concealed) came to visit the House of
Loreto, and to be a document, that the rashness of them which adventure the
like, is not vnounished. Who at the same time taking a little stone out of the
most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, reserved it at his House, with all honor
and reverence: Yet that reverence mitigated not the wrath of God. For Almighty
God rustly revenging the injury of his B. Mother, that miserable man paid for
his sacrilege, with the depriueme^t of his children, and the loss of all his
goods, and also began to be troubled and vexed with a disease more continual
then dangerous. Therefore being a man otherwise prudent and grave, at last he
opened his eyes, and perceived that Almighty God did punish him for some
wickedness, which he had committed. And though he saw all things happen unto
him, in such sort, as they might plainly set before him the wrath of Almighty
God; yet by what default of his it came, he saw not. Therefore being much
disquieted with heaviness both of body and mind, he endeavored to mitigate the
wrath of God with all his might. But the occasion thereof, remaining with him,
albeit ignorant thereof, made all in vain. The^ an other hope (this proving of
no ^orce) came unto his mind: which was the B. Virgin of Loreto, to whom he
was meruailously addicted, whose advice and he^pe, he devoutly implored.
Without delay, by our B. Lady herself he was certified, that the stone which he
had taken out of the House of Loreto, was the cause of the heavenly wrath,
which in no wise could be pacified, but by restoring the sacred stone thither
again. Then with flowing tears, the poor man besought pardon of God and his
B. Mother, for his religious boldness, as he thought, and desired himself to
bring back to Loreto, that which he had taken thence. His prayers were to good
effect: For this also the Mother of God forgave him, as soon as he
acknowledged his fault, whereby the disease was taken away, and he going
cheerfully to Loreto, restored the stone, and performed his vow. At that time
there happened another, not much unlike to this. A woman of the Territory of
Picene, being long married and having no children, was greatly troubled in
mind, how she might seek every where for remedy against her barennesse.
Therefore, I know not who said unto her, to gain the woman's favor, there was
no presenter remedy against sterility, then the relics of the House of
Loreto, preserved with pious and Religious respect: if she took never so
little thence, she was promised to be a Mother in short time; which was as
foolishly believed as promised. But by the manifest wrath of God, revenging her
bold act, she carried home the stone which she had taken thence, with an ague
on her. And the sickness of the body did molest and trouble her mind so much,
that she was not more tormented with the burning of the fever, then of her
Conscience. Neither was she delivered from that disquiet, until she sent to
Loreto for a Priest, powering out many tears, in token of true repentance,
restored the stone which she had taken from the sacred House: whereby she
obtained not only pardon, but also perfect health. The like boldness cost the
Sclauonian Merchants deerly, who buying corn in Picene, privily hid in
their ship, a stone which they had stolen out of the sacred Cell of the
Mother of God. But albeit they deceived men; yet they could not deceive God,
the revenger of their sacrilege. For as soon as they were gone out of the
haven, a foul storm of tempestuous weather by and by arising, brought them
into so great fear, that with trembling it enforced them to cast their
Merchandise into the sea: and when they saw themselves in danger of drowning,
at last they preceiued that Almighty God did punish them for his B. Mothers
sake. Then weeping and holding up their hands toward heaven, all at once
began to entreat and crave pardon of God. And the wrath of God being mitigated
with their prayers and tears, did also assuage and calm the sea. Whereupon
as soon as they were delivered out of this danger, they returned back to
Loreto, to restore the sacred stone to the B. Virgin, and then sailed into
Dalmatia with good success. Sickness also (as if it were the executioner of
Gods justice) chastised diverse of the Pilgrims, who at their departure had
taken with them some particle of the sacred stones, or of the mortar of the
beloved House, which left them not, until they returned back again, and with
tears confessing their temerity and rashness, restored to the Mother of God,
that which they had stolen and taken from her.

The robbers of the Sacred Chapel are apprehended by miracle, and put to
death. CHAP. XXXI.
BUT the Justice of Almighty God showed it self more gentle to those whom
some color of religion deceived, and more grievously punished the boldness of
others, whom avarice provoked to commit a most wicked act. About that time
certain Officers of the House of Loreto, of purpose conveyed away the sacred
treasures, which they ought to have defended from such as went about to steal
them. But Almighty God speedily chastised their heinous sacrilege, with
deserved punishment. For as soon as they had hid all that they had stolen, in a
ship which was in the harbor, they made have to steal away. But as they
sailed along the shore of Picene, foul weather brought them back to the place,
where they shipped themselves: whereby falling into the hands of the Officers of
Recanati, they were apprehended in their manifest theft: and for examples sake
(lest others should adventure the like) were presently hanged before the House
of Loreto, paying for their wicked sacrilege, with that ignominious death. But
others hoping to escape shortly after, were provoked and tempted to assay the
like mischief. For a certain forlorn wretch having a great desire to rob the
most sacred Chapel, and getting a fit companion for his sacrilegious attempt,
prepared engines to open the locks of the doors, and of the chest where the
money is kept: and when he had provided all things for that purpose, craftily
hid himself in the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin. Whereupon going about to
execute his sacrilegious desire in the dead of the night, he gathered the
sacred Donaries of gold and silver into one place; And when he had opened the
Arcke and the doors of the sacred Chapel, he also assayed to burst open the
leaves of the Church-doore it self: which as soon as he had broken open, he
began to look about to seek the complice of his wickedness; who at that very
hour (for so they had agreed) was to be in readiness in the Church porch, to
hide the sacred gifts, and the money in an appointed place. But behold whiles
he intentiuely looked about, he saw a company of armed people at hand (a
multitude of heavenly spirits, as it was supposed) watching the House of the B.
Virgin, whose unexpected presence stroke him into so great fear, that he
speedily shut to the doors, and hid himself, thinking they sought his life.
But the unhappy man having escaped that danger (as he thought) and avarice
egging him on, began to adventure the thing again. Wheruppon opening the doors
of the Church again, and the third time, to seek out the complice of his
mischief, allwaies that heavenly company met him in arms, and with all speed
forced him to fly again into the Church. Having thus spent the night between
hope and fear, at last he was more sollicitous of his life, then of the prey,
and determined to depart without his purpose. For the morning being ready to
approach, he assayed to get away by a back door of the Church; but still being
frighted with the encounter of that heavenly watch, which we have mentioned, he
fled back again into the most sacred Cell, where remained manifest signs of
his attempted sacrilege, that, the place which was the witness of his
wickedness, might also manifestly declare the same. And the keepers of the most
sacred Chapel, coming upon him unawares, and finding the doors broken open,
and the sacred Donaries gathered into one place, began easily to suspect his
intent and purpose. And the lewd fellow himself tre^bling with a guilty
conscience, seeming to discover his intended wickedness, was straight
apprehended: and being examined, confessed the whole matter. Wherefore with the
partner of his filthy sacrilege, he suffered deserved punishment, to be no
small document of the providence of Almighty God, toward the welfare and
good of the sacred House of Loreto.

Two young men are delivered from the servitude of the Devil. CHAP. XXXII.
MOREOVER other wicked, and almost forlorn men, were reduced to an honest
life, and to the way of salvation, by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto.
There was a certain young man, as notorious for his birth, as for his wicked
life; who in a quarrel received a grievous wound in his knee, for offending
Alm. God; for which cause he could not cure the wound, until he began to
mitigate the wrath of God. For having wasted good part of his substance in
physic and surgerie, the cure was more likely to bring him into fear of
greater inconvenience, the^ any good hope of recovery, Annal. Laur. Rier.
whereby he mightily feared speedy death, or at least perpetual lamenesse.
For which cause rejecting help of Surgeons, he put all his hope and trust in
the B. Virgin of Loreto, and repenting with tears (the truest signs of
penance) began to pacify the wrath of God, and to implore the help of his B.
Mother, making this vow unto her, if he escaped this danger, he would go to the
House of Loreto with gifts, to give her thanks. A wonderful thing to be said.
Speaking these words with great repentance of mind, the wound was presently
cured, and he recovered perfect health of body. But health restored to an
ungrateful and dissolute man, was almost his destruction: who quite forgetting
so great a benefit, thought it not enough to neglect his vow, unless he also
abused the benefit of his recovery, with the licenciousnes of his former life.
For being inclined to worser things, at last he came to that pass, by giving
himself wholly to lust, that he had scarce the grace to repent: So much were his
later works, worse than his former. He had been undone, if Alm. God had not
looked on the outcast man, and by heavenly favor brought him again into the
way of salvation. For shortly after, he seemed to hear a silent voice,
bidding him go to Loreto, and speedily perform the vow, which he had made:
and then (lo) he obeyed, and went to Loreto, to worship the Mother of God with
gifts. But no small thing to be spoken of, prevented the fruit of his votiue
pilgrimage. For lust had so thralled him unto her, that still sticking in the
same filth, he refused to go to Confession, though Alm. God reached forth his
helping hand. Yet because his conscience pricked him, and permitted him to have
no rest, first he began to go round about the sacred House of the B. Virgin,
and the place appointed to hear Confessions; then leasurelie to view the form
of the Church, and the votiue tables hanging about the walls: within a while
by impulsion of the wicked devil he also departed out the Church it self, but
presently by heavenly grace returned thither again. You would have thought he
had been mad, and distracted in mind, so far did it repent him, sometimes of
his purpose, sometimes of his pe^nance. And being scarce well in his wits, he
was so disquieted in mind and in body, that he could neither abide the sight
of the Priests, nor the remorse of his own conscience. And also being in great
perplexity, and doubtful what to do, he remained three days in these
cogitations: But at last through the goodness of God and his B. Mother, new
zeal of salvation was enkindled in him. For by chance being present at divine
service, he seemed to hear a voice from heaven blaming his delay, and
commanding him to go to one of the Priests there prepared, and to disburden his
soul of his offenses with purpose of better life. That voice pierced and bowed
his obstinate mind, and so at last being overcome, or rather ouerco^ming all
impediments, he peesentlie changed his minde^, and did as he was commanded.
Whereby getting happily out of the sink of lust, he washed away all the
blemishes of his life with great abounda^ce of tears, and rejoicing with
heavenly joy, as men are wont to do, gave manifold thanks to God and his B.
Mother, that he was twice delivered from imminent danger of body and soul, by
her protection and favor. There was the like condition of an other young man,
and the eue^t not unlike, who being wholly given to lust, and those things that
follow it, in short time spent all his Fathers substance in wickedness and
filthiness of life: and whiles he striued to bring himself to all naughtines and
dishonestie, at last the matter came to that pass, that he was a scorn, not
only to mortal men, but even to the mo^sters of hell. For the devils
appearing unto him in horrible shapes, and co^te^ptuously beating him with
stripes as their slave, did not only insult over the body, but also over the
soul of the unhappy yo^g man, threatening to lay upon him more grievous and
horrible punishment (I believe) to the end he might despair with the
grieuousnes of his torments; so cruel and incessant is the government of the
devil over wicked men. And the wretch being thus oppressed with misery on
every side, was even now almost overcome with desperation. But as he was thus
tormented in himself, and looking to and fro, a light appearing suddenly unto
him, put him in hope of salvation, and brought him in mind of the B. Virgin of
Loreto, of whose power and benignity, he had heard many wonderful things.
Whereby his guilty soul being truly penitent for the impuritie of his former
life, with flowing tears he began to invoke the Mother of God, that by her
favor he might pacify Almighty God, and turn from him his heaue^lie wrath.
But forthwith that infernal company resisted him, going about to embrace this
wholesome determination; who turning contempt into hatred, and mingling threats
with stripes, indeauoured to frighten and withdraw the poor man from his good
purpose. But at last Christian constancy overcame the importunity of the
devils, and by the favor and protection of the Mother of God, the young man
determined to persevere in his purpose well begun. Therefore prostrating his
body and mind before his most benign Patroness, with all hope and confidence
he implored her aid against those infernal furies; beseeching her to take
from his neck, the yoke of that most miserable bondage, that being once
delivered and freed thereof, he might go joyfully to Loreto, to purify his
soul from sin, and to give due thanks to her his Deliueresse. His hope and
prayer was not in vain. For out of hand Alm. God gave him great hope of
heavenly help, and replenished him with no small joy, driving those
troublesome tormentors far away, whose noise and roaring was so easily
perceived, that they confessed (though with much unwillingness) that they could
do nothing against Marie. Wheruppo^ scarce his own man for joy, he went
presently to Loreto as he vowed, and washing away all the blemishes of his
life in the Sacrament of Confession, gave hearty thanks to God and the B.
Virgin; and to certain Priests (whereof Raphaell Riera was one, desirous of
such news in few) he joyfully declared the heavenly benefit, which he had
received by the favor of the B. Virgin of Loreto.

She also delivers a young man whom the devil had brought into bondage, by
restoring unto him a writing of his own hand. CHAP. XXXIII.
MOREOVER the Patronage of the B. Virgin of Loreto saved another young man,
Annal. Laur. Rier.
whom raging lust drew headlong to utter perdition, For being of desperate
affection, desire and audacitie; he gave himself wholly to forbidden pleasures;
and ouercomming many matrons with his dishonestie, he burned with the excessive
love of a certain woman, whom seeing he could gain, neither by increatie,
nor money, nor force, nor deceit, he determined to experience the most
desperate course of all. Making means therefore to the devil by Art-magicke,
he reouested to be made partaker of his desire, shew^ng himself ready to
condescend to all, to enjoy that which he so ernestly sought. Wheruppon by
co^mandme^t of the devil, he forsook Christ, and gave and delivered himself
wholly to him, and which is more, did also swear unto him by prescript words,
and bound himself unto it by handwriting: so far does the love of pleasure
blind impure minds. But when he had obtained his desire, satietie (as it
happens) bred loath somnes, and by the goodness and grace of god, he weighed
the greatness of his offense with mature consideration. And being truly
penitent for his wicked sin, and conceiving some hope of pardon, he began to
seek for heavenly help, and to call on Almighty God, and his B. Mother, Mean
time the B. Virgin of Loreto, and the Priests of the sacred House (endued with
most ample faculty to release sins) coming to his mind, without delay made
him to go to Loreto A mighty God being the author and guide of his journey; not
doubting but there to find remedy against so many evils. His hope deceived him
not. For as soon as he came thither, making means to confer with a discreet
Priest, he declared unto him his mournful state, and asked him, whether he
might have any hope to be saved. And first the Priest remained somewhat am^zed
at the grieuousnes of the offense, but the^ declaring unto him the greatness
thereof; he put him in hope of salvation, if by prayer, fasting and voluntary
punishment of his body, he would wholly give himself to pacify Almighty God.
When he refused no punishment at all, the Priest promised him, if he did what
he was commanded, he would willingly hear him, and by the grace of God, would
also take away so great an offense. At parting he exhorted him, to punish his
body with fasting, with hair-cloth and stripes, for the space of three days,
to implore the help of the B. Virgin, and by her, to ask humble pardon of
Almighty God for his grievous sin; and he also promised to say Mass for his
salvation all that time; whereby there was good confidence on either side. The
three days being so spent, before he gave him absolution, the Priest thought
good to wrest his ha^d-writing from the devil, that he might have no right nor
interest at all in him. Therefore he exhorted the Penitent to retire himself
into the most Maiesticall Chapel, and ernestly to importune the Mother of God
with prayer and tears, until he got his handwriting, out of the devils
hands. He obeyed, very desirous of salvation and security, with undoubted hope
to obtain it by the intercession of the B. Virgin Mother of God. Wheruppon
prostrating his body before the B. Virgin, with flowing tears he earnestly
besought her, that she would vouchsafe to get him his wicked handwriting, and
to work his salvation and health. By a great Miracle he had his desire. For as
he repeated these verses with all devotion, A Mother show thy self,
He take our plaints by the,
That being for us borne,
Vouchsaft thy Son to be.
He saw the handwriting fall suddenly into his hands, and scarce crediting
himself for the unexpected joy thereof, with new tears he gave manifold thanks
to the B. Virgin. Wheruppo^ departing presently out of the sacred Chapel, he
went joyfully unto the Priest, and showed him his handwriting gotten again by
the benefit of the Mother of God, which was stuffed with so many horrible
execrations and curses against Christ, and himself that wrote it, that it may
easily appear to be dictated by the everlasting enemy of mankind.
Notwithstanding the power of God, more pote^t than all diabolical deceit,
loosed so great a band, whereby that sinful soul given by vow to hell it
self, by favor of the Mother of God, was set in the liberty of the children of
God, that no wicked nor desperate man should despair of salvation (if he
himself will not perish) nor doubt of the clemency of God, who has freely
given his B. Mother, a Patroness to offenders for their salvation.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reverend F.
HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Society of JESUS.
The care of Pope Pius IIII. and of the Cardinal of Vrbine, in adorning the
House of Loreto. CHAP. I.
THIS mean while Pius succeeded Paul the IV. whose Popedom, Trad. Laur.
Annal. Laur. Rier.
as it was more joyful to Italy by reason of peace, so was it more notable in
adorning the House of Lerote. For Pius built most of the higher porch of the
Bishops Palace; The benefits and gifts of Pius the 4.
made the old hospital more convenient and commodious, by adding new building
unto it: and exempting the House of Loreto out of the Jurisdiction of the
people of Recanati, made it a free State, the 65. year of this age. The cause
whereof was, for that they were accused to be negligent in execution of Justice,
and suffering the walls to decay in many places. Wheruppon the town of Loreto,
was restored to her former liberty by Pius the IIII. about 30. years after
Paul the III. had committed it to the Government of the City of Recanati; who
also commanded the Governor of Loreto, to repay eight thousand Crowns to the
Citizens of Recanati, albeit they should refuse it. But the piety of the good
Pope, was not more notable in augmenting the State of Loreto, then in adorning
the B. Virgin herself. For he supplied the number of the Chanons, and of the
Officers not a little diminished; with his Pontifical Breue established the
College of the Society of JESUS, which Paul had enlarged, and also increased
it with revenues. About which time, the Cardinal of Carpa departing this
mortal life, he gave the Patronship of Loreto to the Cardinal of Vrbine who
in piety and care toward the B. Virgin of Loreto was inferior to none of the
former Patrons. For first he committed the Government of the House of Loreto to
Pompeius Pallanterius; by whose direction he caused the Thole of the Church to
be adorned on the inside with costly marble work. Also at the foot of a hill
which is near to Loreto, and in the high way that goes to the haven of
Recanati, he made a commodious and well adorned fountain for Pilgrims, and
afterward by other Governors, did many more notable things as in due place
shall be said.

The care of the Picentians in defending the House of Loreto against the
Turks: and the protection of the B. Virgin toward her own House. CHAP. II.
AT that time the terror of the Turkish navy coming to Loreto, Annal. Laur.
Rier.
did manifestly show the devotion of the Picentians to our B. Lady, and
likewise the benevolence of our B. Lady toward the Picentians. Word was
brought by the Scoutes, that a great navy of Turks (in which were a hundred
and fifty galleys) had set out of Epyrus, intending to assault Ancona as soon
as they had spoiled the Church of Loreto. And within few days, a speech of
their navy being seen upon the coast of Italy, caused the Picentians to
assemble themselves with great strength. Among the first multitude, the flower
of Recanati flocked to Loreto, to defend the Sacred House with fortifications
and arms, who (neglecting their Country and friends) fortified Loreto with
rampires and bulwarks. And other people of Picene, filling all the shores
round about with armed men, hasted thither with no less emulation, chiefly to
defend the Sacred House of Loreto, with all their might, against the
Barbarians: for with all willingness they desired (if necessity required) to dye
a glorious death for her, and in her sight. To these forces of armed men, were
conjoined cruel weapons against the outrageous Barbarians, to wit, the
continual prayers of the godly. For all the Priests and devout people of
Loreto, and of the bordering towns round about, ceased not to pacify Almighty
God by prayer, and by supplication to invoke the B. Virgin, that she her self
would vouchsafe to defend her own House and Clients. Their prayer and vow had
effect. For the B. Virgin mother of God, did not only keep the force of the
Barbarians from her native House, but also from the Territory of Picene it
self. Because the Captains of the Turkish navy suddenly changed their
determination of attempting Ancona, and turned their fury on the maritime
people of Abruzzo; where setting their men a land, and taking Ortona, Guasto,
Francauilla, and other no mean towns of Abruzzo by force, they destroyed them
with fire and sword. Having for the most part ransackt Abruzzo, yet they durst
not touch the bordering Country, wholly exposed to their prey; even so present
was the protection of the B. Virgin of Loreto unto her own people. Whereupon
the Pope himself, being most glad, that the House of Loreto, was delivered out
of such imminent danger by heavenly protection, thought it also his duty to
provide, that hereafter it might not only be far from danger; but even from
any fear thereof. For which cause by advise of the Architects, he determined to
fortify the hills near to the town (whence the enemy might easily assault
the sacred House) with walls, fortresses, ditches, and rampires; to the end
that it might not only be able to withstand their sudden incursions, but
also notably sustain a siege. But one care after another put of this holy
determination of the Pope; and finally, untimely death wholly dissolved his
holy and godly purpose.

The Bishop of Conymbria, being taught by his own harm, restores a stone
which he procured to be taken out of the House of Loreto. CHAP. III.
THIS time was not without miracles and Donaries. Annal. Laur. Rier.
For never before in so few years, did there happen a greater number better
witnessed, and more known among all people, whereof this was most famous in all
the Christian world. The 61. year of this age, John Suarez Bishop of Conymbria
(a man famous for learning and piety) going to the Counsel of Trent su^moned
by Pius the IIII. came out of his way to go to Loreto, about the Nativity of
the B. Virgin: where dutifullie making his prayer and performing his vow, he
had a great desire to build in his Bishopric, a little House like to that of
Loreto, for which purpose he desired to take some one stone out of the House of
Loreto it self. But the Governor of the place, and the Patron withstood it,
menacing him with the Popes inhibition: Yet Suarez, making honorable show to
propagate the reverence of the B. Virgin of Loreto in Portugal, obtained his
desire of the Pope by an Authentical Breue, which by Francis Stella his
Chapline (for he himself was gone to Trent) he sent to the Governor of Loreto,
who at that time was Pompeius Pallanterius. But as soon as it was reported
abroad, that a Priest of the Bishop of Conymbria was come, authorized with the
Popes Breue, to diminish the wall of the most Maiesticall Cell, in very deed
the thing seemed very unfitting, not only to the Governor and Chanons, but
also to townesfolkes and strangers, and no less pernicious, for the present
damage, then for future example. Whereupon every one pronounced, that there
would be an end of the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin: For if once they
began to take away the stones of the sacred House, in short time not so much as
one would be left. Notwithstanding because the Popes authority did urge, after
divine service and a solemn procession, the Chanons and the Priests of Loreto
assembled themselves into the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, rather to suffer,
then to do that which was commanded. For all resolutelie refusing such a
service, with a fit instrument, Stella himself pulled and took the stone out
of the wall, all the keepers of the sacred House saying confidently unto him,
that it would be but short joy unto his Bishop, that the Minister of sacrilege
might take that from God and his B. Mother, which doubtless by the manifest
indignation of them both, he would shortly bring back again. It was a
Prophecy. For these words seeming to come from heaven, pierced the breast of
the audacious man, and filled it with anxious cares. Whereupon uncertain what
to do (albeit the command of his Bishop did urge) he stayed eight whole days
at Loreto, and spent all that time in vain to pacific Almighty God. For how
could he assuage the heavenly wrath, who suffered the cause thereof to remain
about him? At last on the Calendes of December he began his journey, much
troubled in mind with a certain religious dread and solicitude. And coming
to Anconae without any inconvenience, and holding on his journey without fear
of ill success, he presently perceived that Almighty God did punish him for
his rashness. Because from that time he was always so molested with rain and
tempestuous weather (yet perseuering still to go whither he intended) that
every moment he escaped many and great dangers of life. For most of the ways
were almost impassable by reason of lakes and streams which hindered him. Also
furious waters encountering, threatened him destruction. Likewise the horse on
which he rode being not able to stand, fell down; and he himself tumbling
after, was so moiled in the lakes, that he was enforced to change his horses,
but he had no better success with any. And thus diverse accidents hindering his
unlucky journey, he came at length to Trent, in the end of the month of
December (having passed many inconveniences and dangers) and delivered the
sacred stone unto the Bishop, telling him how deerlie he had bought it. But the
Bishop being made nothing more circumspect thereby (having space strangely
given him to repent) nor willing to learn by an others peril, was taught by
his own. For about the end of February, enclosing the sacred stone in a
silver case and preparing to send it into Portugal, he was suddenly taken
with an extreme burning fever, and began to be miserably anguished and
molested therewith; which brought with it a more grievous and cruel disease, to
wit most bitter pain of the groine, which permitted him to take no rest at
all. Forthwith Physicians are set aworke, who applying all things in vain
(because his sickness coming to him as a punishment from God, the cure thereof
might very well surpass their skill) they constantly pronounced, that the
force and cause of his grief, seemed not to them any humane thing. Therefore
it was best for him to consider, whether peradventure Almighty God might not
inflict that horrible punishment upon him, for offending him: And so fearing
unfortunate event of the cure, they departed, despairing of his recovery.
Wheruppon the Bishop was very sollicitous and much perplexed in himself,
whether for any secret offense, Alm. God had inflicted such horrible punishment
on him. And being thus forsaken of the Physicians, he began to be tormented
more in mind then in body, to look diligently into himself. And because he
was troubled with a scruple about the stone which he procured from Loreto, he
ceased not to mitigate the wrath of God by all the means he could, and with
sighs and fervent prayer, to ask pardon of the B. Virgin of Loreto, if
perchance he had offended, by violating her sacred House, and to confess that
he was ready to co^descend to all to make satisfaction. His prayer was not
unheard, as soon as in some sort he acknowledged and detested his fault. For
within a while, he seemed to hear a silent voice (as it were from heaven)
commanding him to restore the stone which he had taken from the B. Virgin of
Loreto. But fearing lest it might be the vain immagination of a weak mind,
both because he had gotten it by the Popes authority, and also for that he
would not defraud Portugal of so great a good, now obtained for her; he
remained doubtful what to do. In this mean while some weeks were spent.
Wheruppon by commandment of his Lord, at last Stella carefully recommended the
Bishop very dangerously sick, to two holy monasteries of sacred Virgins in
the City of Trent. And within two days, one of the chief of either
Monastery brought answer, if that the Bishop would be cured, he must restore
that which he had taken from the B. Virgin of Loreto. when Stella heard what
they said, he was amazed, admiring how Virgins shutt up in their Cloisters,
could know of the stone of Loreto, which truly at Trent besides himself and the
Bishop none knew, because he commanded the thing to be concealed with all care,
Not doubting therefore, but that the whole matter was showed unto them by a
heavenly sign, he told his Lord what he had heard. Whereat the Bishop
remained like one astonished; and wounded with remorse, gave many sighs. And
by and by with his elbow lifting himself up upon the bed where he lay, and
holding up both hands and eyes to heaven, with trickling tears, he ernestly
entreated pardon of the Mother of God. That the merciful Mother would
vouchsafe to pardon his pious error: that she would forgive him, acknowledging
his fault. For he would keep nothing of the House of Loreto, against her will;
he was resolved and determined forthwith to restore that, which he had received
thence, and mistrusted not but to recover health by her means, as soon as he
had restored the sacred stone unto her; that she would therefore help him, who
had given him this hope. He failed not in his promise, nor the B. Virgin his
hope. For presently Suarez commanded Stella himself (who brought it) to recarry
it back to Loreto, with all the speed he could. Neither in vain. For he was
scarce gone out of the gate of the City on a horse of good speed, but the
Bishop began to feel himself better, and out of hand sent after him, another
Post, to charge Stella to make as much have as might be. Wheruppon taking fresh
horses, and little regarding his own rest, he posted speedily day and night,
making have to come to Loreto. A wonder to be spoken. The nearer he came to
Loreto (as afterward by conferring together the times was understood) the
b^tter the Bishop felt himself: So that at the self same time, the sacred stone
was restored to the B. Virgin, and health to the Bishop. This seemed not to be
without miracle, that Stella in taking away the sacred stone, had no harder and
troublesome a journey, than facile and expedite, when he brought it back
again. For it is evident, that he posted from Trent to Ancona (which is but
xv. miles from Loreto) within four days; so much did not the speed of horses,
as a certain providence of Almighty God forward his return. And all this,
even as I have related it, Stella himself reported to Raphaell Riera, who was
then at Loreto. And in good sooth for the evidence of the miracle, all men do
speak of it.

The Sacred stone is put into his place, and reverenced with great solemnity
and concourse of people. CHAP. IV.
STELLA coming to Loreto, Annal. Laur. Rier.
in the beginning of April, forthwith related the whole matter to the
Governor, and with the letter of his Bishop, delivered the sacred stone, in
the Silver case, as it was: whereof as soon as the Priests of Loreto had
understanding (who foretold ill hap to them that would adventure such a thing)
every one pronounced, that the B. Virgin of Loreto, justly revenging him for
his rashness toward her native House, at last had made him to see his own
folly; and lest others should adventure the like, had given a worthy example to
mortal men. As Soon as it was published abroad, that the sacred stone was
brought back by an evident miracle; all the townes-folkes and strangers made
have to the gate of the town to see it, whither coming in solemn procession,
the letter of the Bishop of Conymbria (which declared all the matter in order)
was openly read, and the sacred stone (graced with this worthy miracle) was put
into a gorgeous tabernacle, and by the Governor, Chanons, and Priests, was
carried about with as great pomp as might be, and put into his own place,
with more than two thousand people following it. Whereunto was added a double
hold of iron, to be a monument to posterity, that it was taken thence by the
rashness of men, and restored again by the providence of God. And the letter of
the Bishop was sent to Pius the Pope, in token of the miracle, which at this
day is reserved at Rome in the Castle of S. Angelo with other letters of the
Popes, whence we had a copy, which we thought good to insert in this place.
And the letter translated word for word into latin, is thus. To the Governor
of Loreto, John Bishop of Conymbria S. D. (that is to say) sends greeting. By
reason of my devotion to the B. Virgin of Loreto, with all diligence and
travel, laboring to get a stone of that sacred house (as it is not unknown
to you) at last I obtained of the high Bishop, to be free from the Censure of
the Pontifical inhibition, the Cardinal of Carpa, Patron of Loreto not
unwilling thereof. But God and his B. Mother showed me by manifest signs, that
I should send back to Loreto, the stone which I had taken thence. For both an
unusual disease, did by miracle disquiet my prosperous health, and also by the
admonition of holy men, acceptable to Almighty God, I perceived that this was
the cause of my sickness. Therefore without delay, entreating pardon and peace
of God and his most holy Mother, I commanded that the most sacred stone should
be brought back by the same Francis Stella of Arezzo my Chaplin, who took it
thence. I request and beseech you, to receive the sacred stone which is sent
unto you, with such devotion and solemnity as is fitting, and to put it into
his own place, together with the mortar, which likewise is sent back unto you.
One thing I entreat you, to keep the silver case wherein it is enclosed, as
witness of the miracle for everlasting memory to posterity. You shall also do a
thing very grateful unto me, if you certify the Cardinal Patron, and the
Pope himself of the whole matter, that they may ratify and confirm the
Ecclesiastical Ce^sures against the Violatours of the sacred House of Loreto,
least hereafter any part thereof should be taken thence. Also with all the
devout Priests of that sacred House, I request you to pray to the B. Virgin of
Loreto, that whether this offense be of error or default, that she would
mercifully vouchsafe to pardon me. Dated at Trent, the VI. of the Ides of
April, the year. M.D.LXII. The fame of so certain and so witnessed a miracle
being presently diuulged in Picene, and in all Italy, greatly increased the
Religion and reverence of the sacred place, and from all parts provoked a great
multitude of Pilgrims, to come to visit and reverence the House of Loreto with
Donaries. For it is well known, that within the space of one month, above
fifty thousand strangers came to Loreto, to see and to kiss this famous sacred
stone, at which time, there was nothing more spoken of among devout people.

Many are delivered from very great danger. CHAP. V.
AT that time the B. Virgin Mother of God, Annal. Laur. Rier.
showed by evident tokens, that she did no less respect the health and safety
of mortal men, than the good of her own House. Troylus Ribera a Gentleman,
coming to Loreto upon vow, traveled on horsbacke among broken rocks (called
the Cripts) not far from the maritime Castle of Picene; where his horse
stumbling, Ribera himself tumbled down from the steep rocks on horsbacke, to
the shore of the dangerous sea below; often calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto:
And heavenly help did not fail him. A wonderful thing to be spoken and seen.
For the horse and the man who were thrown down from the Cliffe, stuck fast
in the way by the sea side, and albeit he had his sword and dagger buckled
about him, notwithstanding he escaped safe, and hurt in no part at all: and so
went to Loreto joyful and glad, to perform his double vow. Such, and the like
danger, by help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, eschewed Sal^stius the Captain of
a Band of horsemen, or Pius IIII. who as he traveled over a high Cliffe of
Vmbria, fell down headlong likewise on hors-backe. But the B. Virgin of Loreto
(whom heretofore he had visited) coming to his mind in this imminent danger,
with flowing tears he called on her, who doubtless was with him in his fall,
speedily bringing him desired help. For although he tumbled down to the
bottom of the hill it self; yet he escaped without any harm at all. And the
height of the Cliffe whence he fell, was almost a hundred Cubits, least any
should exempt it from miracle. Joseph of Monte-Feltrio found the like favor,
by the help of the B. Virgin in like danger, who climing up to a high Tower, to
settle there a piece of timber, fell down headlong mistaking of his footing;
but calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, forth with he seemed to himself to be
sustained by a certain heavenly virtue, seeming, as it were, a hand, and by
little and little to be let down without any grieuance or danger, so that he
came to the ground, not only sound in body, but also in senses, This is more
admirable. Augustine of Cremona was at Catara a City of Dalmatia, the year
1563. in the beginning of June; at which time a great earthquake swallowed and
overthrew good part of the City, oppressing Francis Priulus the Governor,
and his whole family, with a destruction altogether as miserable, as any wise
memorable. Whereby Augustine being partaker of the common danger, implored the
help of our B. Lady of Loreto. Neither in vain. For although he was beaten
down with the sudden fall of a wall, yet his clothes only were torn, and
his skin some thing bruized. Wheruppon all thinking him to be dead, by and
by, by the protection of our B. Lady, he was safe and sound; whose
preservation, the foul and miserable death of others, who were in like danger,
made more notable.

A Sailer loosing his ship, is saved by the help of the B. Virgin. CHAP. VI.
THE power of the B. Virgin of Loreto was as notable in calming the sea, Annal.
Laur. Rier.
as in delivering men from the earthquake. A certain man of Sardinia a
skillfull and discreet Pilot, bringing a ship laden with wares from
Constantinople, the 60. year of this age, in the Vigill of S. Andrew the
Apostle; and being in sight of Miletus a City of Asia minor, the vessel was
suddenly tossed with so vehement a tempest, and beaten so furiously with
waves, that she began to leake. There was no hope of recovering harbor: and
when the Pilot and Mariners saw that the keele it self began to cleave more and
more, and to let in water abundantly, they despaired of humane help, and
suppliantlie inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto. They prayed not to them that
were deaf. For although the ship began to sink by little and little, till she
was ready to be swallowed up in the sea; yet suddenly in the darkness of the
night, a heavenly light shined to the sailers and passengers, craving pardon
of God and striuinglie imploring the help of his B. Mother, which gave both
courage, and showed the way of health to them in horrible fear. For seeing a
boat stand almost immovable amidst the waves, provided, as it were, by miracle
for their safety, all speedily went into it, and followed the heavenly light
going before them, as the guide of their way, thinking it to be the B. Virgin
of Loreto. And having sailed but a little way, they looked back to see what
was become of the ship which they had forsaken, which by and by they saw
swallowed up in the sea. Wheruppon all the company doubling thanks and lauds
to God and his B. Mother, by conduct of the heavenly light, came safely
sailing into the Adriaticke sea; and speedily sailing along the coast of
Italy arrived at the haven of Ancona, the very festival day of S. Andrew the
Apostle. When they came to land, the speed of their journey was held for no
less a miracle, then the benignity of their guide. For it is evident, that
within the space of a few hours, the boat sailed more then a thousand miles.
Wherefore out of hand going to Loreto, and rightly purifying their souls with
the sacred mysteries, they performed their Vow to the B. Virgin Mother of God,
and declared and published this worthy miracle.

Two men are delivered from lightening: Also two barren women are made
fruitful. CHAP. VII.
THE protection of our B. Lady of Loreto, Annal. Laur. Rier.
was as powerable against lightening, as against the raging sea. Antony de
San-Stephano of Castello in the Territory of Luca, in time of a horrible
tempest, went up to the steeple to ring the bell, as the custom is: but behold
lightning falling suddenly from heaven, overthrew the Tower together with
Antony, who being blasted with the lightening, and beaten down with the fall
of the steeple, lay four hours without life, covered in a great heap of
stones. But at that time his kinsfolks and friends made many vows to the B.
Virgin of Loreto, for his preservation and safety, which proved not in vain.
For when the heap of stones was removed, Antonie was found alive and well,
who, in short time recovering strength, came to Loreto the year 1565. to
perform his vow to the Mother of God, and most willing to publish her singular
favor toward him. And about the same time there happened an other like unto
this. Marcus Antonius Fecinus of Monte-Feltrio, Curate of the Parish Carpenia,
going up to the bell-fray to ring the bell to Mass, was suddenly stricken
with lightening, but calling on the B Virgin of Loreto, with a little scorching
of his shoulder, and burning of his clothes, he escaped safe by the undoubted
help of our B. Lady, and out of hand making have to Loreto to perform his vow
to the Mother of God, he left behind him a fair votiue table to witness the
miracle to posterity, And at the same time also, two noble women getting help
for their sterilitie, did as much illustrate the B. Virgin of Loreto, as the
former did. Iulia Roborea wife of Alfonsus of Est, having lived many years
with her husband in wedlock without issue, determined to reject all physical
remedy, and to turn herself to heavenly aid. Wheruppon coming to Loreto,
and rightly purifying her soul, she besought the B. Virgin, to obtain for
her, issue male; making this vow with her prayer, if she had a son, she
promised to return to the House of Loreto with gifts, unless she were hindered
by some mischance, which notwithstanding she would perform by godly men,
whom she would send in her room with the Donaries. When she had made her Vow,
she returned home, and conceived issue; and being happily delivered, brought
forth a goodly child. And not to be unmindful of her Vow, out of hand she
sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, the Image of the infant curiously
wrought in a plate of silver, of eight pound weight: Whereunto was added this
inscription in token of the benefit received.

ALFONSVS OF EST, THE SON OF ALFONSVS, NEPHEW OF ALFONSVS DVKE OF FERRARA,
BORNE THE IDES OF NOVEMBER THE YEAR OF OUR LORD M.D.LX.

Such another confirmed the certainty of this miracle. Bernardine San-Seuerino
Prince of Bisinia (the Father of him that now is) living many years with his
wife, had no children by her. And being long frustrated by the hope of
Physicians and physic, he was grieved not only for want, but also because
he had no hope of issue, whom he might leave heir of so great a Signiory. At
last that which nature denied, he thought good to beg of God and his B. Mother
by prayer. Wheruppon making a vow, he and his wife came to Loreto, where both
prayed devoutly to our B. Lady, entreating desired issue. The B. Virgin did
not long prolong their hope. For before the Prince departed from Loreto, by
manifest signs he perceived his wife to be with child: and in short time it
appeared, that she conceived this issue, when she made her vow at home. But I
know not by what chance that benefit was short, and of small continuance. For
within few years after he became a Father, the Prince was deprived of his
only Son: yet the B. Virgin did not frustrate his hope and vow. For within
a while he had another son, who suruyuing his Father, now governs the
Signiory of Bisinia.

Many despayring of their recovery are cured by miracle. CHAP. VIII.
Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
ABOUT that time, health was restored to many by miracle, the Phisitia^s
despairing thereof. Cardinal Morono being molested with a dangerous sickness,
suddenly recovered by calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, and forth with came
thither to give due thanks to our B. Lady, and to perform his vow, greatly
desiring to have a monument of the heavenly benefit to remain there:
Wheruppon he left behind him, a votiue table with this inscription.

JOHN CARDINAL MORONO BISHOP OF PORT; The vovv of Card. Morono.
BEING MOLESTED WITH A MOST GRIEVOVS INFIRMITY, WAS DELIVERED THEREOF BY THE
INTERCESSION OF B. MARIE, ALVVAIES A VIRGIN, AND CAME TO PERFORM HIS VOVV THE
YEAR OF OUR SALVATION. M. D. LXV.

Another more admirable, Iulianus Cesarinus is delivered from danger of death.
but a little more ancient. Iulianus Cesarinus one of the Peers of Rome (of
whom we spoke before, the 60. year of this age) lay pining away with a
dangerous and a long bloody flux, whose strength being taken away with voiding
of blood, not only the Physicians, but even his domesticalls and friends,
believed that he could not possibly escape. But Iulianus well remembering what
favor and help, he had found heretofore at Loreto, called on the Mother of
God, and forthwith was delivered out of danger, leaving all amazed at the
wonder of so great a thing. For the nearer he was to his death, the more
evident was the miracle. Here follows an other unlike in kind, but like in
certainty. John Baptista Asculanus was troubled many years so grievously with
the gout, that he was not able to go alone. Therefore having no hope to recover
by physic, he implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and without delay
came to Loreto on horsbacke. As Soon as he came thither, he was carried into
the most Maiesticall Cell by two of his servants, where as he was praying
devoutly to our B. Lady, he presently recovered his former health, in such
sort, that by himself alone he went on foot to the Inn, whence, immediately
before, it was well known that he was carried into the most sacred Cell, lame
of the gout.

Two possessed persons are delivered from the tormenting Devils. CHAP. IX.
OUR B. Lady was as favorable in expelling of Devils, as in curing of
diseases. Soon after Paula a Sclauonian woman being long and much vexed with a
company of wicked devils, wherewith she was possessed, was the occasion of a
marvelous and frequent spectacle, both to the Inhabitants and Pilgrims of
Loreto, For having assaied to small effect, other humane and divine remedies,
she determined to come to the B. Virgin of Loreto, the most certain refuge of
all that be in misery. But the Devils hindered her wholesome determination and
journey with all their might: and first with roaring and horrible noise,
endeavored to make her to desist from the journey which she had undertaken to
Loreto: Then seeing that she would go forward, they cast her on the ground with
a kind of obstinacy: and othertimes incensed her so fiercely against them which
went with her, that by striking and biting, she might fright them all our of
her company. But at last either the piety of men, or else the goodness of God,
overcame the Devils devices. For (albe it with much resistance) a strong and
courageous company of men brought her by force into the sacred Cell of the B.
Virgin, and provided for her a godly and a discreet Priest in such affairs, by
whom, the Devils being commanded to depart by the Word made flesh in that
most holy place, at last they went their ways, leaving her without sense. But
when she had recovered strength, and given due thanks to our B. Lady, they
assalted her again not far from Loreto, as she returned home. Wheruppon being
haled back to the House of the B. Virgin, she began to utter certain wonders,
to divine, to disclose the secrets of many hearts, and to speak in strange
tongues. They that were present first wo^dered at the sudden alteration, but
presently turning admiration into compassion, with many tears they implored
the B. Virgin in her behalf; who speedily expelled the wicked Devils wherewith
she was tormented. Yet as soon as the woman set her foot out of the gate of
Loreto, by and by those troublesome fiends were at hand, who entered into her
again, as into their ancient possession. Which when it happened the second and
third time, at last the woman perceiving that out of Loreto, she could not be
safe and secure from those monsters, resolved with her self to lead her life at
Loreto, that she might hide herself under the shadow and protection of the B.
Virgin, and dedicate herself wholly to her service; where spending some years
in such things, she accomplished her last day with a happy end. About the same
time, there happened an other not unlike to this. Alexander Galiardino of
Bologna an Inne-keeper of no small account, had his dearest daughter miserably
vexed with four terrible devils. Therefore with great hope and confidence, he
recommended her to the fidelity and protection of the B. Virgin of Loreto.
Neither in vain. For within a while, those troublesome tormentors were cast
forth, and he received his daughter free and in good health. Having obtained
his vow he brought her to Loreto, to give due thanks to the B. Virgin Mother
of God, and to witness the help, which she received from our B. Lady of Loreto.

Sight is restored to two blind-men. CHAP. X.
AT the same time sight was restored to blind-men. Annal. Laur. Rier.
Peter Romanius a young man of Fauen^ia, being deprived of both his eyes, and
many years leading a sorrowful life in perpetual darkness, at la^^ by news
of the miracles of the B. Virgin of Loreto coming to Fauentia, he conceived
some hope of recovery. Wheruppon with much confidence he implored the B. Virgin
of Loreto. A wonderful thing to be said. As he was praying to our B. Lady with
great hope, the darkness was suddenly taken away, and he recovered his desired
sight. The thing is well witnessed. For he came to Loreto the year 1564. and
brought with him the letters of Annibal Cassalius the Protonotary Apostolical
and Vicar of Fauentia, in witness of the miracle.

The B. Virgin cures two that were dumb, restoring to the one, the use of his
tongue, and to the other, his tongue when it was cut out CHAP. XI.
THE B. Virgin was not more bountiful to the blind, Annal. Laur. Rier.
then to the dumb. A little boy of John Vbaldus of Padua, a famous Captain in
the war, was so troubled with the falling sickness, that it took from him the
use of his tongue. And having layne three years both dumb and sick, the
father of the child despayring of help by means of Physicians, implored the
help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in behalf of his son: and his prayer was
heard. For in continent the child did not only recover his former speech, but
also health of body by miracle. Whereupon his father brought him to Loreto, the
year 1563. that both might give due thanks to the B. Virgin Mother of God,
and perform their vow; who related the whole matter to the Governor of
Loreto, and to many others. But this is most admirable. The president of
Abruzzo coming to Loreto, went out of his way to go to Cluitella, where he
apprehended a wicked man using now and then to utter impious speeches, against
Alm. God, and the B. Virgin of Loreto. Wherewith the President being incensed
to great wrath, for example sake, presently revenged his filthy ^a^guage, by
cutting out his sacrilegious tongue. And not contenting himself with this, he
delivered him over to prison, commanding him to be carefully kept, until he
returned from Loreto, that then he might determine, whether he deserved to be
punished with greater torment. But the poor wretch being in great pain with
the inflicted punishment, and also solicitous for that which was past, at last
repented, and turning wickedness into reverence, used all diligence both day and
night to mitigate the B. Virgin of Loreto, by silent prayer, and vow,
beseeching her to assuage the Viceroyes anger against him, and to give him
means to cleanse his soul of sin by sacred Confession. The prayer of the
wicked man repe^ting and detesting his fault, did not mislike the B. Virgin of
Loreto. For within a while the Mother of God appeared unto him in his sleep,
bidding him be of god comfort; for in short time he should be delivered out of
prison, that he might go to the House of Loreto, and there confess his sins
by means of a new tongue. The event approved the prediction. When he awaked, a
certain tongue (as it may seem) began to grow again, by which he uttered the
conceit of his mind, without any difficulty at all. And the Viceroy returning
from Loreto, and understanding of the matter, thought good to pardon him, whom
the B. Virgin herself had pardoned. Therefore in co^tinent he set him at
liberty, hereafter aduising him to be wiser by his own peril, and giving him
letters to the Penitentiaries, in token of the miracle, he sent him to Loreto
to perform his vow. When he came thither, not only the Viceroyes letter, but
also the thing it self witnessed the miracle to all. For when he opened his
mouth (a wonderful thing to be seen) they saw that his tongue was cut out,
and that a certain little tongue did grow underneath in place of the other,
wherewith when he himself would (albeit with stammering) they heard him speak.
This was not all. For returning home and receiving the sacred mysteries twice
or thrice, a new tongue increased by a new miracle, to the just bigness.
Wheruppon coming again to Loreto, to give due thanks to the Mother of God;
to the very same, who a little before had seen his tongue cut out (whereof
Raphaell Riera, who set it down in writing, was one) he showed it grown out
again by the immortal gift of our B. Lady to the admiration and wonder of
all, extolling the B. Virgin for so notable, and so worthy a miracle.

A Jew is delivered out of prison by the B. Virgin, and baptized at Loreto.
CHAP. XII.
THE B. Virgin of Loreto did not only make the Christians, Annal. Laur. Rier.
but also the Jews partakers of her benignity and help. A certain Hebrew of
Nazareth (a man in other respects grave and wise) dwelled at Nazareth in the
ver^e street where (as we said before) the impressions of the House of Loreto,
were yet in the ground to be seen: who by neernes of the place (of which by
report he had heard many admirable things, had gotten some sparkle of religion.
For knowing that the Christians did reverence Mary his Citizen with great
devotion and respect, he also began to honor her, and for the same cause, was
not far from believing in Christ himself. But, as they are a kind of people
hard and perverse, he continued in the old superstition wherein he was inured
from his Childhood by continual use. But at last extreme misery bowed his
obstinate mind. For at 60. years of age, he being apprehended by the Turks
(for what wickedness I know not) and condemned to perpetual imprisonment, he
pined away with misery, and despayring of bodily health, began to think of
his soul. And having a great care and zeal of salvation inspired into him
from above, he prayed suppliantlie for pardon, to God the Cre^tour of the
world, whereby obstinacy was overcome by myserie, and heavenly light shined to
his blinded mind. Therefore with great devotion he called on Jesus the Messiah
of the Christians, and on Marie the Mother of the Messiah. When he had
sollicitouslie do^ne so, he went to bed full of hope and confidence: and his
hope was not in vain. For the same night Christ appearing unto him in his
sleep, and the Nazaren knowing him by the similitude in which the Christians
did worship him, he confessed him to be the true God and the Messiah of the
world, and suppliantlie adored him in his sleep. And presently the likeness of
a Virgin of exceeding beauty and majesty was also represented unto him, by
whose command, an other Virgin her companion, unloosed him out of the irons,
wherewith he was fettered; and opening the doors of the prison brought him to
the haven, yet fast asleep, but seeing in his dream what was done in very
deed. Then the more powerful Virgin seeming to be the others Mistress, showed
him a boat in readiness, and said unto him: Now thou art free, therefore be
mindful of thy Deliuerefle, for behold I have prepared thee a mean to
escape; neither will I fail to help thee, as thou fliest away. ^or thy part
go to Loreto, which is a Town of Picene in the Province of Italy, there
receive Christian Baptism, and offer up thy self at the Altar of Mary, with
purpose of better life. And the Jew giving thanks to both, but chiefly to
her, who seemed the worthier, prayed his deliueresse, to vouchsafe to tell her
name. And when she had said, that she was Mary of Loreto, and her companion
Lucie, presently with her Companion she withdrew herself out of his sight.
Wheruppon the Hebrew a waking, perceived that the representation of the thing
showed him in his sleep was true, and much admiring so great a wonder, and
making no end of thanksgiving to the B. Virgin of Loreto, the boat into which
he entered by persuasion of our B. Lady, of it self sailed along the seas with
wonderful speed; and so by heavenly conduct and aid, he arrived at Ancona
within two days. When the miracle was published abroad, he was courteously
entertained by the chiefest of the City, who urging him to be baptized there:
Nay, said he, Marie the Mother of Christ commanded me to be baptized at Loreto.
Wheruppon the Governor of Ancona dismissed him with letters of commendation,
and sent him straight to Loreto, where being sufficiently instructed in the
mysteries of Christian religion, he was baptized to his own great joy, and
also others, the 60. year of this age, declaring the whole matter to Riera.
and to many others by an Interpreter.

The chiefest gifts brought or sent to Loreto, Pius the IV. being Pope. CHAP.
XIII.
THis time which was so graced with miracles, Cod. Laur.
was not without Donaries. The Card. of S. Praxedes presented his own Image of
silver to the breast, The gift of the Card. of S. Praxedes, and of others.
of five pound weight. Francis Caietan a noble man of Rome, golden ornature for
the Altar. Cardinal Arigonio another of silver imbrodered, and besett with
pearl. Others of less account, brought to the B. Virgin, other meaner gifts,
not needful to be rehearsed. Also the piety of noble women was not of small
regard. For Iulia Roborea presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a
vestment for the Priest of cloth of silver, magnificentlie imbrodered. The
Duchess of Grauine ornature for the Altar, of tissue-cloth of gold. The
Duchess of Mont-Alto, a Cope of cloth of gold. Clelia Farnesia, another of
satin, garnished with golden lyllies. Happily at no time before in so few
years, were worthier gifts presented from Cities and Towns. Spello a Town
of Vmbria, sent a silver Image of three pound weight. Another from Sarnano in
Picene of ten pound weight. Another from Arezzo in Tuscany of eight pound
weight. Also an other silver Image, from the City of Firmo of xxij. pound
weight, for about 30. years before, she had sent another, whereunto now at
this very time, she adjoined a third, notable for bigness and weight, to wit of
xxxiij. pound weight, the inscription whereof does make the votiue gift more
gracious; thus. IN PERFORMANCE OF A PVBLICKE VOVV THE CITY OF FIRMO

DEDICATED THIS SILVER IMAGE TO OUR B. LADY OF LORETO, FOR THE RECOVERY OF HER
COMMON WEALTH.

And these be the chiefest miracles and Donaries of the Chapel of Loreto,
which I find set down in writing, whiles Pius the IIII. was Pope.

The testimony of Pius V. of the House of Loreto: and the works of Robert
Saxatellus, whiles he was Pope. CHAP. XIIII.
AFTERWARD Pius V. was advanced to the Apostolic Chair, Annal. Laur. Rier.
whose singular piety in all things, concerning the honor of our B. Lady of
Loreto, was very notable. For desiring nothing more then to grace the sacred
Cell with some special gift, in the very beginning of his Reign, he gave
worthy testimony of the House of Loreto in a monument of his. Who being to
consecrate Agnus Dei (as the manner is) commanded that the figure of the House
of Loreto, The testimony of Pius V.
supported on the shoulders of Angels, should be imprinted in many of them,
with this poesy: THE TRVE FLOVRISHING HOUSE, WHICH WAS IN NAZARETH. Which
testimony of such and so great a Pope, is to be esteemed so much the more, for
that it was carried into most parts of the Christian world, with the figures
of those sacred Agnus Dei. And not contenting himself with this, he carefully
committed the protection of the House of Loreto to the Cardinal of Vrbine,
seriously exhorting him to omit nothing, which he thought might adorn and
grace the same. And the good Cardinal being prone thereunto of his own
disposition, by instigation of the Pope, wholly employed himself in that care.
For when John Baptista Maremontius, the successor of Pallanterius, had been
Governor of Loreto six months; and after him, Vbaldus Venturellus (who also
after a few months departed this life) the Cardinal of Vrbine, performing the
command of Pius the Pope with like greatness and piety of mind, appointed
Robert Saxatellus, Robert Saxatellus.
an active and a wise man, to govern Loreto with great authority. Whose
worthy industry deceived, neither the Cardinal nor the Pope. For he made a
special choice of Priests and Chanons, to increase the Majesty of the Church
of Loreto, and every where sought out the chiefest Quiristers with great
expenses, that he might have a Quire of Music inferior to none. Also with
the sacred ornature, with tables curiously painted, and with the tapestry which
he bought, Majesty to the Altar; beauty was added to the Church. And these were
the chiefest ornaments of the most Maiesticall Cell. Twelve Images of the
Sybils.
Twelve images of the Sybills of Ligurian Marble of costly work, placed in
their Nicets: four brazen leaves distended on the doors, Four brazen leaves
for the doors of the Church
engraven with admirable art, by Hierome Lombardo, a notable Statuary and
Caruer of that age: two Images of the Princes of the Apostles of silver, of a
cubit and a half, Two Images of the Apostles.
of rare work, to be an ornament for the Altar on high festival days.
Moreover to carry the most holy Eucharist honorably and reverently to the
sick, to bury the dead with solemnity, to maintain due devotion to the Names
of JESUS and MARIE, he instituted four Sodalities, to wit, of Corpus Christi,
of Mercy, of The name of JESUS, and of the Rosarie of our B. Lady; appointing
to every one their proper Chapel, their sacred ornature, their place of
meeting, and their special laws: by which Sodalities, great good came to the
people of Loreto, and honor to the Church. But the care of Saxatellus did not
contain it self within the limits of the Church. For he furnished a common
Library with all sorts of books, cut down the hurtful woods which remained,
wholly dried up the lakes therabout; and turning the channel of the River
Musion (running under the walls) another way, made the dwelling at Loreto far
more healthful. Then, to make free and expedite access for the Pilgrims which
came to visit the sacred House of Loreto, he repaired all the ways that were
worn out, or much decayed with long use, partly with brick, and partly with
gravel. But albeit most of these works were begun under Pius V. yet they
were finished under Gregory the xiij. And last of all Saxatellus made a goodly
Bark to fetch great pieces of stone out of Dalmatia for the building of
Loreto, and procured great store thereof to be brought thither, with which the
notable forefront of the Church of Loreto began to be covered with antique
work, by John Baccalino a famous Architect of those days.

The Hospitality and Alms of the House of Loreto. CHAP. XV.
SAXATELLVS using all diligence to adorn the Church, The Hospitality of the
House of Loreto.
the town, and the ways of Loreto, omitted not the offices of charity and
Christian benignity. For first he daily relicued an hundred, then two hundred,
and sometimes also more then three hundred poor Pilgrims, intertaining them
with good Hospitality. And because the old Hospital was assigned for men, and
the multitude also of women daily increased, he built and furnished a new
Hospital for the^. The honester sort of poor Pilgrims, whom sha^fastnes did
let to ask alms openly, he relieved by secret means. Principal me^ he
entertained courteously and very bou^tifully, that you might think the B.
Virgin of Loreto was the receiver of all Nations, and almost of all sorts of
people. Happily at no time before, did Allmighty God more concur in helping
the benignity of men: for there was such abundance of alms and votiue money,
that they did not only suffice so many and so great offices of piety and
Christian benignity, but also far exceeded them. Whereby we see that wealth
bestowed for Gods cause, by his goodness does return more abundantly. Therefore
Saxatellus the only Steward wholly bent to increase the State of Loreto, with
the money which auaunced (that the fountain of this benignity might be
perpetual) purchased goodly and fruitful grounds. Of the Earl Bonarello in
the Territory of Recanati, he bought the Mount-Vrsus for ten thousand Crowns:
for as much more, Tuscion in Osimo, and also other lands in Castro-Ficardo, a
notable piece of ground (called Aqua-viua) for two thousand and two hundred
Crowns, and the vineyards for three thousand. And lest the meadows and woody
grounds should be void and unoccupied, he filled them with herds of Oxen,
Mares, Buflers, flocks of sheep, goats, and other cattle. Out of which,
as well other commodities, as an yearly reuenew of almost three thousand
crowns, came to the House of Loreto, to be no small furderance to her bounty,
and the service of Almighty God. And most of these things were purchased with
the money, which auaunced whiles Pius V. was Bishop. For truly that which was
bountifully given unto the poor, was restored with so great increase, that you
would think God striued with men in liberality. Moreover, as much as lay in
him, Pius the Vicar of God, The Decree of Pius V.
did also further this providence of Allmighty God. For neither the love, nor
the entreaty of any, could ever move him, to turn any thing falling to the
profit of the House of Loreto, into other works of piety: so resolute was he,
that vows made to our B. Lady should be performed where they that made them
received benefit by them; specially seeing that their votiue gifts could no
where be better employed, then in the ornaments and Hosspitality of the House
of Loreto it self.

The Donaries of Pius V. and of other Princes. CHAP. XVI.
AND Pius the Popereceiued no small grace and reward of his merit toward our
B. Lady of Loreto. Annal. Laur. Rier.
For bewailing Michaell Bonello the Cardinal of Alexandria, The vovv and gift
of Pius V. and of others.
his sisters son, brought to the point of death with a grievous and dangerous
sickness, he made a Vow to the B. Virgin of Loreto in his behalf. Neither in
vain. For presently the prayer of the godly Pope was heard, health was
restored to the Cardinal ready to die; and Pius obtaining this vow and favor
of our B. Lady, was correspondent to the speedines of the heavenly benefit,
with like speed of devotion. For which cause as soon as Michaell was able to
perform that journey by reason of his weakness, he sent him to the B. Virgin of
Loreto with a votiue gift, that he himself might witness his miraculous
recovery. The Donary was an excellent suite of silver cloth of tissue, for the
Altar, and the Priest; the worthier, for that it was sent for the health of a
worthy Cardinal, and from Pius. V. the Pope. Neither at any time heretofore in
so few years, did the rest of the Cardinals send more gifts to the sacred
House of Loreto. The Cardinal of Mantua presented ornature for the Altar of
cloth of gold. The Cardinal of S. George a Vestment for the Priest of the same
stuff. Cardinal Montino a suite for the Altar of cloth of gold, double
curled. Cardinal Riario ornature for the Altar and the Priest of Damask, with
an Image of Christ, and silver Candlestickes, a Cubit long, of very costly
work. Cardinal Mont-Alto (who afterward was Pope by the name of Xystus V.)
double ornature for the Altar, and single for the Priest and Ministers
celebrating with solemnity, of Damask beautified and finely flourished with
great golden flowers. Cardinal Sittico ab-Altempts, a Vestment for the Priest
wrought with gold and silver, like net-worke, imbrodered. Cardinal Perusino
furniture for the Priest well imbrodered: another almost like to this of the
same stuff and work from Cardinal Paceco. Finally Cardinal Vinerio gave a
worthy Cope, and golden Vestments, for the Priest and Ministers celebrating
divine service with solemnity, garnished with great flowers, curled gold and
imbroderie. Neither wanted there gifts from Cities and Towns. The people of
Camerino brought to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a Cope of cloth of
gold. The people of Fabriano a silver Chalice, notable for bigness and weight.
The people of Viterbo ornature for the Altar made of gold and silver. With
these also came other Donaries from worthy, but from unknown persons, whose
memory has perished I know not by what mischance. There is a Statua almost a
Cubit long of solid gold, representing a naked Child, wrought with marvelous
art, the giver whereof and the cause is not expressed. Diverse deliver it in
diverse manners. The more common report is, that it was a votiue gift of the
Prince Asculano, one of the Peers of the kingdom of Naples: who having a
son to succeed in the State of his Ancestors, was deformed with contraction
of hands and feet. But his parents inuocating the B. Virgin of Loreto, and
making a vow for the recovery of their Child, the use of his feeble members was
restored unto him by miracle: and truly the shape and fashion of the Statua it
self does favor this report. Besides there are other such like gifts, whereof
there is no memory in the monuments of Record, for ought that I know. For the
book of the Donaries of this time, comprehending almost ten years, either
perished or else came not to my hands. Therefore of those gifts, which were
given in the end of Pius V. and in the beginning of Gregory the xiij. I can
make no mention, because I never received any memory of them, but the rest I
have delivered with fidelity, as I received them out of their monuments of
Record. Therefore now at this time, as I imagine, the silver Images of Ascolo,
Recanati, Monte-Santo, Bologna, Milan, and others (at this day to be seen in
the Vestries) were dedicated to the B. Virgin of Loreto.

Some are delivered from the inundation of a River: others from tempest of the
sea, and from thieves. CHAP. XVII.
MANY miracles of this time are delivered. Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.
Dominicke a Castro-Florentino a Contrey-man, dwelt in a cottage not far from
the River Elsa, with two companions of his. Which on a certain night breaking
over the banks with great abundance of rain, began to ouer-flow the next
fields far and wide; and flowing thence with great violence, carried away
floting with it, whatsoever it met. Wheruppon Dominicke awaking out of his
sleep with the noise of the raging stream, and putting his head out of his
cottage, beheld the fields round about, overflowed with water, and the flood
ready to come upon him. So fearing lest the present deluge would make an end of
him, forthwith he and his fellows climbed up to the top of the Cottage, and
there remained, the danger still increasing, often calling on the B. Virgin of
Loreto. The cottage was built of wattles and straw, and ^^ood on posts not
very deep in the ground, which the swift water raising up from thence,
carried clean away, with those three sitting on the top of it. And the
implored help of our B. Lady did not fail them. For the cottage running to and
fro, with force of the wandering stream, for the space of two mile, came at
last to a great tree, which they esteeming a heavenly benefit, let go the
cottage, climbed into the tree with speed, and stayed there until the violence
of the water ceasing, and the flood it self decreasing, returned into the
channel again: Whereby they were all saved, not so much by help of the tree,
as by the B. Virgin, next after God. Furthermore by double benefit of the B.
Virgin of Loreto, others were delivered from imminent danger of Pirates, and
from a great tempest. A ship of Ancona laden with merchandise of Alexandria,
being espied by many Pyraticall Pinnaces, as she returned to Italy, was
presently beset round about, and cruelly assaulted with Ordinance and weapons.
And albeit the Christians were much unequal in number and strength; yet they
sustained the assault of the Barbarians in hope of heavenly alde. Mean while
by mutual exhortation, all at once called on the B. Virgin of Loreto, and made
their prayer more effectual with a vow. A maruailous thing to be spoken.
Forthwith such courage and strength was given to al their company, that
renewing the fight, they notably resisted the force of their enemies, and by
savor of the B. Virgin were delivered out of present danger. But having
escaped this danger of the Pirates, and sailing along with a prosperous wind,
without any fear at all, suddenly by change of weather, they were brought
into greater danger by the sea it self. For not far from the town Aulon,
situated by the Acroceraunion Rocks (which, by corruption, the Inhabitants call
Velona) a foul tempest threatened them present destruction, and made them all
so fearful, that they made a vow to our B. Lady of Loreto, and resolved to
go thither in pilgrimage, as sailors are wont to do. Whereby the tempest was
presently assuaged, and the ship returning to her course came to Ancona
without any harm at all; the speed whereof was such, that within the space of
six hours, she sailed from Aulon to Ancona. Wherefore all the Passengers and
mariners came cheerfully to Loreto to perform their Vow, and to diuulgate
and witness this double miracle.

Many are delivered from the Captivity of the Turks. CHAP. XVIII.
THESE were delivered from the danger of the Turks, Annal. Laur. Rier.
but others from their captivity. Michaell Boleta no mean Citizen of Catara,
being taken by the Turks in the town Cabala, remained captive not far from
Galipolis, and when he had served five years, he was so wearied with
captivity, that he began to long for liberty, and with two fellow-Captiues
consulted about their flight: who finding an empty vessel in the harbor
without a keeper, went into it as they had agreed, and speedily thrust it from
the shore. But their flight was not unknown to the Turks, who out of hand
with two swist and well furnished Pirates barks, made have to pursue their
slaves flying away; and there wanted not much, that Michaell and his fellows
had not been taken and brought back again by the Barbarians, to be punished
with great torture and pain. Wheruppon by his persuasion, all besought pardon
and help of God and his glorious Mother, the B. Virgin of Loreto. A strange
thing to be spoken and seen: For by and by a foul tempest so enraged the sea
and the wind, that it drove the Barbarians ships far away. And the thing it
self well showed that it was sent on the enemies by miracle. For at the self
same time, and in the same course of the sea, the Turks were tossed with the
furious waves, and the Christians sailed on with great quietness of the sea, and
with a prosperous gale: Who looking back to see how far of the Barbarians were,
as by the Turbants of their heads (which the Turks use in steed of hattes)
which sometimes seeing to be tossed up, then to fall down again, they
perceived that their enemies were tumbled with the furious waves, and striued
with the adverse weather, not so sollicitous for the flight of others, as for
their own safety, so greatly did the terror which Almighty God cast into them
by miracle, auert their minds from pursuing others, to care how they might
escape with their own lives. Whereby not only with the wind, but also with
the help of our B. Lady, the Christians came to Catara with incredible speed;
and being very mindful of their vow, and of the heavenly benefit, went
spedily to Loreto, where righty receiving the Christian mysteries, they gave
manifold thanks to the B. Virgin, and recounted her exceeding benefit.

A man who was hanged is delivered from death. CHAP. XIX.
EVEN life it self was restored to others, Annal. Laur. Rier.
when they suffered capital punishment. Thomas a Venetian, being Captain of a
Band of soldiers in the garrison of Zebenico, was not able to order the rude
soldiers; who being frighted with news of the Turkish navy coming to
assault that fortification, ran all away, and Thomas seeing the garrison
forsaken, out of hand with one soldier his companion (which only remained)
went to Iadera, commonly called Zara, to declare to the General of the
Venetian Fleet the escape of the soldiers, and the danger of Zebenico,
thinking nothing of his own peril. But the General being provoked to anger
by such a message, forthwith commanded that Thomas and his companion should be
hanged; yet giving time to provide for their souls, as the manner is.
Wheruppon Thomas having rightly purified his soul by sacred Confession,
inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto, and making a vow, put his neck into the
halter, with undoubted hope of heavenly help. The rope was fastened to the end
of the yard of a ship, and the yard was lifted up with Thomas hanging thero^,
having great weight of iron tied to his feet. Wheruppon the hangman hoysing up
the vard, and suddenly letting it fall again of purpose three or four times,
squatted the body of him whom he was executing: whereby all thinking him to be
dead, (for he had hung four hours) he was taken down from the torture to be
buried. But albeit this which we are now to deliver may seem to surpass all
credit; yet truly neither the power of God, nor his B. Mother. For he who was
thought to be dead, was found alive and lusty, when the soldier who was his
companion in punishment and used in like manner of torture, had given up the
ghost. Thomas therefore leaving all astonished with the admiration of so great
a wonder, went forthwith to Loreto, to give due thanks to God and the B.
Virgin, by whose immortal benefit, he was preserved in this mortal life. And
the thing remains well witnessed among the Priests of Loreto. Knowing many
more not unlike to this, I pass them over, because they seem not so well
witnessed, as to be delivered to memory by him, who will set down nothing
without good ground.

Two are delivered from very great danger of death. CHAP. XX.
BUT this is well known and witnessed, Annal. Laur. Rier.
though seldom heard of from the time of the Apostles, that the old example of
Peter the Apostle delivered out of prison by miracle, in a sort should be
renewed in our time. The year after Christ's Nativity 1570. a certain person,
Noble both by blood and deeds (Authors deliver not his name, I think that
himself would have it suppressed) was detayned in irons, by one of the chiefest
Peers of Italy, and charged with false crimes before a wicked and a wrathful
Judge. Therefore without doubt thinking that he should be put to death, he
called on the B. Virgin of Loreto, beseeching her that before he departed this
life, he might have opportunity to visit the Cell of Loreto. And the godly
prayers of the innocent, were pleasing to the Mother of God. For in the night,
sound sleep came upon his body oppressed with anxiety of mind, and in his
sleep a beautiful shape of our B. Lady of Loreto was presented unto him, who
mollified his mournful heart with great joy, and presently breaking of his
fetters, and opening the doors of the prison by miracle (and that which was
done out of sleep, was showed to him that was a sleep) compelled him to go
out of the prison, admiring the wonder of so great a thing; and after he was
set at liberty, brought him to the next street of the City, yet fast a sleep,
and then in continent vanished out of his sight. Wherewith the man awaking, and
seeing himself delivered out of irons and prison it self, perceived that no
vain imagination was showed him in his rest. Therefore giving hearty thanks to
the B. Virgin, and exulting with joy after so great sorrow, he adventured to go
unto his own House. But knowing that he should be sought with great diligence
by the Officers of the Prince, to be punished more cruelly as a fugit^ue,
calling again on the B. Virgin of Loreto, he did a memorable act. Betimes in
the morning (having before armed himself with heavenly confidence) of his own
accord he went unto the enraged Prince, who was greatly astonished to see him,
and related unto him the whole matter in order as it happened. Neither did the
B. Virgin fail to help her Client in so great danger. For the Prince thought
it sacrilege to hurt him, whom the Mother of God would have to be saved;
supposing that it was no small token of his innocence, and being assisted with
heavenly grace: Seeing, says he, the B. Virgin of Loreto has delivered thee
by so great a miracle, I also by my sentence do deliver thee: Go therefore, and
make have to that most maiesticall Cell, as thou have vowed, and remember to
make the Mother of God favorable unto us. The innocent man being bound by
double vow, came to Loreto, to wash away his offenses by Confession, where he
joyfully performed his vows to our B. Lady, and related so worthy a miracle to
Riera the Penitentiary, who delivered it to writing for everlasting memory to
posterity. At that time a Gentleman of Spain (whose name we suppress to save
his credit) being condemned to die for a wicked fact, whereof he was guilty, was
kept in prison, hourly expecting execution. In the mean time, the B. Virgin of
Loreto coming to his mind (of whose wonderful virtue, he had heard much
talk long since in Italy, by report of others) made him to conceive good hope
of life and liberty, and to beseech pardon of God and his B. Mother, and to
entreat mercy and help of both; making this vow with his prayer, as soon as
possibly he might, out of Spain (where then he was) he would go a foot to the
House of Loreto, and live by alms like a poor Pilgrim. An incredibile thing
to be said: within three hours, the judges being reconciled to the delinquent
by miracle, revoked and disanulled the sentence, and delivered the offender
from punishment and prison. But having made this vow in his fear, in his
security he was so unmindful thereof, that he had almost forgotten so great a
benefit with long delay, had not Allmighty God, justly revenging him for his
irreuerence, punished his delay and his forgetfullnes. For as he was shooting
of an hargabuse, the iron barrel breaking in his hands without any harm at
al, put him in mind both of the present peril avoided by heavenly protection,
and also of the old benefit and vow. Whereupon in continent true devotion, and
the dread of God offended with him, entering into his heart, without further delay
made him to set forward toward Loreto as he had promised, to perform his Vow
to the Mother of God, where he himself declared the whole matter to the said
Riera, even as I have related it.

The manifold help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in the victory gotten of the
Turks by sea. CHAP. XXI.
AT those times in the extreme danger of the Christian State, the power and
help of the B. Virgin of Loreto was most notable. For when Selime the Turkish
Emperor had taken Cyprus by force of arms, he threatened destruction to the
rest of the State of Veni^e, and of the Christian world. Therefore Pius V.
thinking to withstand the common danger with common forces, joined with the
Venetians, and with the King of Spain against the Turkish war, and began to
make great preparation for it. Duke Marcus Antonius Columna most illustrious
among the Romans for parentage and fame, being General of the Popes Navy, was
commanded to set forward against the Turks with all speed. Whose wife, Felix
Vrsina, a woman of like Nobility, fearing that she might be deprived of husband
and children, thought it her safest course to recurre to the B. Virgin of
Loreto, in so many adventures of war by sea. Whereupon she came to Loreto with
an honorable train, not doubting but by the intercession of the Mother of
God, the King of Heaven would be merciful to her husband. After she had
received the sacred mysteries, she remained devoutly all night in the most
sacred Cell, humbly beseeching pardon and help of God and his B. Mother for her
self and her husband. And as soon as she had reuere^ced the B. Virgin with
fervent devotion and votiue gifts, in honor of our B. Lady, she was God-mother
at Baptism to a young man of the Hebrew nation, on whom bestowing a chain of
gold, she received him into her family. Neither was her supplication and favor
unrewarded. For within a short time, she obtained her vow, and received her
husband not only safely returned from so cruel a battle with victory, but
also with great joy, beheld him triumphing with notable pomp in the City of
Rome, after the ancient manner of the Romans. But in the same war, Pius the
Pope received as certain help from the B. Virgin of Loreto, in behalf of the
public cause, as she did in the private matter. For he commanded the
Christian navy to be in readiness, and very careful about the battle,
knowing very well that the Christian State did depend thereof. Mean time Pius
V. the Pope (pious indeed) used all diligence to pacify Almighty God both by
public and private prayer: specially in the most maiesticall Cell of Loreto
he commanded that continual prayer should be made unto the Mother of God, that
in the extreme danger of their State, the godly Mother would vouchsafe to
assist and aid the Christians. The hope of Pius the Pope, and of Godly men
deceived them not. For when the battle at sea was begun, a thing not so
much of humane, as of heavenly virtue and favor was seen. For the wind
turning for the Christians (which before the battle was against them) and
beating the smoke of the ordinance, and the muskets of the enemies on their
own heads, a most famous victory was gotten of Barbarians: most of the
enemies were slain, their ships sunk or taken, a great prey, a multitude of
Captives, above ten thousand Christians were delivered from their servitude,
whereof truly the far greater part, came afterward to Loreto to perform their
vows. And it is certain, that the very day of the fight, before the trumpets
sounded, the Christian slaves whom the Turks had condemned to the oar, made
vows to our B. Lady of Loreto for their liberty; and the like also did many
Captains and soldiers of the Christian Navy for life and victory, that none
may doubt, but next after God, so worthy a victory was due to the Mother of
God. Wherefore not only the slaves of the Turks which rowed, but also many
soldiers and Christian Captains came to Loreto to give due thanks to God
and our B. Lady, and to perform their vows. And both the one and the other
would have monuments of the heavenly benefit to remain there. Annal. Laur.
Rier.
For some left with their Deliueresse, the chains wherewith they were fettered
to the oars; and others dedicated unto her, as author of the victory, the
spoil which they got from the enemy. And this was the last, and I know not,
whether the greatest of all the humane works of Pius Quintus.

The sacred House is adorned by Gregory the xiij. with Indulgences and notable
ways. CHAP. XXII.
GREGORY the xiij. succeeded Pius: Annal. Laur. Rier.
who as in the longnesse of his reign; so in devotion toward the B. Virgin of
Loreto, and in greatness of mind, he passed the former Popes. For he had
nothing in greater estimation, then most munificently to adorn the most famous
Church of the whole world, not only in confirming the Indulgences of former
Popes by his authority, but also by his wisdom augmenting them, and giving
remission of sins to all that rightly visited the sacred House of Loreto.
Moreover he increased the authority of the Penitentiaries, and gave them
faculty to absolve all religious persons from reserved sins. This truly was a
worthy favor of Gregory, who publishing the celebrity of the Iubiley, for the
75. year of this age, and suspe^ding all the Indulgences of the whole world in
favor of the City, as the manner is, thought it good to exempt this one
House of Loreto, which, no less then in other years, he would have to enjoy
all her Privileges this holy year of the Roman celebrity, lest the frequencie
to Rome should diminish peoples devotion and reverence to our B. Lady of
Loreto. Also when the year of Iubiley was ended, he granted that very
Indulgence, which was at Rome to the Church of Loreto, which many gayning at
Rome, might get again at Loreto, if they performed the conditions. And
shortly after, Gregory began a magnificent work worthy such a Pope, and the
Majesty of Loreto it self. For well knowing that even in many places of the
Popes Dominions, the ways which went to Loreto were so difficult and strait,
that they scarce affoarded free passage to horse or man, and thinking it would
be glorious to B. Mary of Loreto, to have them so broad and so repaired, that
it might easily and securely be gone unto with coaches; he opened and playned
the chiefest ways through Rocks and Cliffes, with such Princely cost, that
they may be compared to any munificent works of the ancient Romans in this
kind. For in the very top of the Apennines, the way is so broad, that wagons
meeting together, may pass without any danger at all. Whereby the Pope
effected (which unless we saw done, none would believe could be done) that
with Chariots and Coaches here might be free passage over the Apennine
Mountains from the City, not only into Picene, but also into Aemilia,
Lo^bardy, Polony, and Germany it self. So that now out of the remotest parts
of the Christian world, many come in wagons and Coaches, to visit the sacred
House of Loreto, the commodity of the way inuiting those, whom before the
difficulty thereof did hinder. Meantime by the cheifest ways about Loreto
(already covered with gravel or stone) Saxatellus made goodly fountains, to
be no small ornament to the Pilgrimage of Loreto, and comfort to the Pilgrims
themselves.

The celebrity of Loreto in the year of Iubiley CHAP. XXIII.
IN the mean time, whiles these ways were in hand the year 1576. which was
remarkable for the celebrity of the Iubiley, without the City, such a
multitude of people resorted to Loreto, as the like was never remembered. In
very deed the pomp was so notable, that it will be memorable to all posterity.
Every day, seven, eight, and sometimes ten Cities, little Towns and
Villages, came in several Companies to Loreto, bringing to our B. Lady silver
Crownets, great torches of wax covered with silver and golden coin, sacred
vestments, Chalices, and other gifts. And the order and ornature of them that
came with this solemnity, betokened great piety and religion. For the holy
Sodalities themselves, were graced with several Companies and Ensigns, and
every company adorned their Society, not only with notable Crosses glittering
with gold and silver, but also with curious Banners, and with Images of Angels
and Saints. Likewise in all the said Companies there were some that went
barefooted, others that with disciplines did beat their naked and bloody backs,
and others that song devout hymns and prayers to God and our B. Lady with
great solemnity. But among all, the Sodalities of Picene did excel; who
represented the sacred Histories both of ancient and later times, by special
persons, orderly placed here and there amongst them, and with great grace of
the Actors, showed most grateful spectacles, to heaven and earth, in the
Cloister of the Church of Loreto. There is a town in Picene of no small
reputation and fame, which has chosen S. Genesius (of a stage-plaier a Martyr)
for her Patron, whose name she bears. Who with godly zeal and religious
emulation imitating the ancient praise of her Patron, deserved the chiefest
commendation, for holy spectacles and sacred pomp, of all the Sodalities that
came to the House of Loreto. For about a thousand people of this town (besides
women and the disordered multitude) coming to the sacred House of Loreto with
singular devotion, were, as it were, a wonder to them that met them. Their
solemnity was this. Many went before in the habit of Penitents, carrying the
figures of the torments and death of Christ our Lord, who attiring themselves
in sackcloath, went in a long and a well disposed company, sprinckling their
heads with ashes, barefooted, and beating their backs with continual stripes.
After whom followed three most adorned Sodalities, garnished with diverse
liueries and colors, and every company was graced with Crosses and Banners,
which glittered with gold and silver. All the Companies a like did shine with
the burning torches of their fellows, and sounded far and near with worthy
Quires of music. Next went, as it were, three Bands of men. The first carried
the ancient figures and mysteries of the sacred History which they
represented: Annal. Laur. Rier.
the other, worthy docume^ts of virtue, out of the Gospel, and
Ecclesiastical Histories: the third, the glory of the Martyrs and of the
milita^t Church, and the noble victories, which they got of their persecutours.
The Image of the persons and thing represented, were expressed so lively, that
they seemed not to be showed, but to be done and acted, so in very deed, that
you would think that those spectacles had not been fained for the present,
but that they had been true indeed, and done in their very times. A pageant
of the triumphant Church set forth with Ensigns and ornaments of every kind,
and with marvelous variety of the things and persons represented, did conclude
the last Company. Christ our Savior rising from death to life, was
represented with great Majesty in a triumphall Chariot; who sitting over the
globe of the world, shyned on every side with glorious brightness, and lifting
up his right hand, seemed to bless the people that met him. About whom,
little children with instruments, representing the countenances of Angels,
delighted all with their most sweet and pleasant melody. And a great multitude
of Martyrs, and Saints of every order and kind, of men, of women, of Virgins,
followed the Chariot in Crowns of glory and with Ensigns of victory,
inuiting the multitude of the beholders, to the like glory by their happy
example. Truly all the action was not only a spectacle, but a great instigation
to piety and devotion.

The notable piety of Don John de Austria in visiting the House of Loreto.
CHAP. XXIIII.
Annal. Laur. Rier.
THE House of Loreto was not more reverenced with these spectacles of the
people, than with the presence of Princes. Don John de Austria, a man most
worthily deserving so noble a Father as Charles the Emperor (though not more
famous by his Fathers glory, than his own virtue) by reason of a vow came this
year to visit the House of Loreto; The piety and devotion of Don John de
Austria and his gifts.
who five years before being to fight against the Turks in a battle by sea,
had made a vow to the B. Virgin to visit her sacred House, if he were living,
when the victory was gotten of the Barbarians. But having obtained this vow,
public affairs one after an other hindered him, that until this time he
could not perform his promise. Now therefore being at Naples with a little more
quietness and freedom of mind, neither the horror of the sharp winter, nor
the care of public and private business, nor the entreaty of the Nobility and
people, could make him to give over this journey to the House of Loreto in the
depth of winter, when the ways were covered with ice and snow, and rivers for
the most part, overflowed. And foul tempestuous weather, made the piety of the
good Prince more notable. For passing on horsbacke by the Port of Recanati, and
beholding the House of Loreto a far of, with great devotion, he put of his hat,
to salute and reverence the B. Virgin Mother of God: and setting aside all care
toward himself, he turned it to the veneration of the heavenly Queen. For
neither the rain, nor the sharpnes of the weather, could once move him to
cover his head, so greatly had he devoted himself, and his head to the B.
Virgin, by whose protection (as he believed) he was preserved alive and well.
As Soon as he came to the sacred House, he washed away all the sins of his
former life by Confession, and gave manifold thanks to our B. Lady, offering a
great sum of money when he performed his vow, and both by word and example
stirred his companions to like devotion. And after he had dutifully performed
this vow, he returned to Naples, carryng with him great love and affection to
the B. Virgin of Loreto.

The singular piety and munificence of Ioane de Austria the great Duchess of
Tuscanie. CHAP. XXV.
AT that time most Noble Women did not yield to Princes in piety and devotion
toward the B. Virgin of Loreto. Four years before (for it behooves him that
follows the course of things and persons, some times to neglect the order of
the times) in the entrance and beginning of the Popedom of Gregory the xiij.
Ioane de Austria the daughter of Ferdina^d the Emperor, and wife of Francis
the Great Duke of Tuscany, came to Loreto, intending to satisfy her long desire
of seeing the B. Virgin. Wheruppo^ by the Popes commandment, she was received
with Princely intertainme^t in all his Dominions, by Paul Odescalco Bishop of
Atria and Pena; who for that purpose was sent from the City by the Pope
himself, that he might accompany her to the most desired House of the B.
Virgin. Under the walls of Recanati, the godly woman beholding the House of
Loreto a far of, forthwith came out of her Coach, and kneeling down,
reverently saluted the Mother of God: from whence performing the rest of that
journey on foot, all her train followed the example of their Lady, who came
into Loreto in a white and a plain garment, showing thereby the great purity of
her mind. Her modesty was also very singular. For being brought into the most
sacred House of the B. Virgin by two Bishops, without regard of Cushins or
Tapestry, she fell down on her knees on the bare floor; devoutly worshipped
the King and the Queen of heaven, in time past the Inhabitants, but now the
Governors of that House: with flowing tears besought pardon for herself and
her hu^band, and by prayer entreated peaceable wedlock and issue-male. Soon
after devoutly receiving the sacred Mysteries, she spent all the night
following in prayer, with humble supplication before the B. Virgin, doing also
the like the two days and nights that followed: such strength did her fervent
devotion and piety bring unto her. And at her departure, The worthy gifts or
the great Duchess of Tuscany.
she hung up two hearts of gold in golden chains, to be a monument, that she
was either most dear to her and her husband, or else that the B. Virgin, the
author of concord, would make her nusbands heart such a one unto her, as she
knew hers to be unto him. And not cote^ting herself with these Donaries, she
departed fully determined to honor the B. Virgin of Loreto with some yearly
gift, which as long as she lived, she did more carefully the^ she purposed. A
worthy Image of silver of Christ Crucified, with a great Cross of Ebony, four
curious Candlestickes of silver, of a cubite and a half, ornaments for the
Bishop, Priest, Ministers, and the Altar, made of gold and silver, double
curled and imbrodered, a golden garment for the B. Virgin made with marvelous
art; also other furniture for the Altar and the holy Chalices, beautified with
imbrodery, jewels, gold, and silver, were the worthiest gifts of Ioane de
Austria: whose prayer and Donaries obtained her desire. For soon after this
Pilgrimage to Loreto, she had issue-male by her husband, a pattern of his
Mothers piety, borne in expectance of his Fathers, and almost of a Kingly
State; who a while suruiuing his Mother, erected the minds of his people to
the hope of undoubted felicity. But afterward the Mother dying, and by the
secret judgment of God, the young child also following his Mother, filled
Tuscany with sorrow and lamentation. And Ioane de Austria did not only adorn
the House of Loreto with her act, but also with her example. For not long after
Margaret de Austria (that out of the same family examples may be showed, not
only of virtue in men, but also of piety in women) the daughter of Charles the
V. and wife of Octauius Farnesius Duke of Parma, came to Loreto with a great
company of Noble me^: where rightly receiving the mysteries of Confession and
the most holy Eucharist, for the space of three days, she was allwaies present
in the Church at divine service, and in the most Maiesticall Chapel it self
prayed to God and his B. Mother, not so long, The gift of Margaret de Austria.
as devoutly: and last of all putting a great quantity of gold into the arc,
honored the B. Virgin with gifts worthy such a woman.

The Duchess of Loraine being brought to Loreto sick of the Palsy, is cured
by Miracle. CHAP. XXVI.
THIS praise was not proper to the women of Austria and Italy. Annal. Laur.
Rier. Victo. Brigant.
Christerne or Christine the daughter of the King of Denmark, and of the
Emperors sister, Charles the V. being Duchess of Loraine, and a woman of
manlike valor, exceeding piety, great age, and much hindered with age and the
palsy determined to come to Loreto to perform her vow: who at the entreaty of
her friends, would never give consent that the Pope himself should exchange
that vow into other works of piety; so fervent was her desire to see the B.
Virgin of Loreto. Therefore as soon as she and her most Princely train came
into Italy (but specially into Picene) she made have to the place, whether she
was bound, well hoping to recover perfect health, by the help of our B. Lady.
Wheruppon in the very entrance of the most sacred House, her soul was not only
replenished with heavenly joy, but also her body restored to perfect health.
And perceiving that the use and strength of those members (wherein she was
molested) was restored unto her by miracle, first beyond her custom she stood
on her feet by her self alone, to make trial of her strength: then seeing the
thing succeeded well, without any help at all, she went joyfully about the most
sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, all her familiar friends admiring the miracle,
and greatly extolling the worthy benefit of God and his B. Mother. But
Christine, whom that thing did most concern, entering again into the most
Maiesticall Chapel, with flowing tears of joy, fell down before the Queen
of heaven; made no end of praising the divine benefit, no end of thanksgiving;
and dedicated her self and all hers to God and his B. Mother. And afterward
that a monument of so great a benefit might ever remain at Loreto, in sight of
the B. Virgin, she hung up in a chain of gold, a great heart crowned with solid
gold, which for that purpose she brought with her from home: which done, she
laid out Princely gifts, a Crownet of unions and orient pearls, a Carkanet of
precious stones, silver vestments of very curious damaske-worke for the Altar,
Priest and Ministers sacrificing with solemnity: and last of all, she increased
these Princely gifts with a great sum of money. Neither did she depart thence
unrewarded. For Pope Gregory the xiij. sent unto her from the City a most
ample Iubiley, which she with her whole train (in which were almost five
hundred people) rightly received. But the sorrowful message of the death of
Sebastian, King of Portugal (her sisters son) did not a little trouble her
heart being made most joyful with these heavenly gifts: yet in so great and
sudden a grief, the worthy virtue of the courageous and godly woman was not
a little manifested: because from mourning for the King her Cousin, she
employed her self to help his soul, and celebrated his funerals with the
greatest pomp that might be; but so, that in the House of Loreto it self she
procured very many masses to be said for him. And finally being inflamed with
Christian charity, she her self did twice visit the hospital of Loreto,
bestowing on every sick body two Crowns in gold, with no less praise of
humanity then liberality.

Two, thrown very dangerously from their horses, are delivered from death.
CHAP. XXVII.
IT is less admirable if you consider the persons, Annal. Laur. Rier.
but if the things themselves, more marvelous, which happened few years
before. The Lady Susan Thainonio is delivered from death
The Lady Susan wife of James Thainonio a worthy Knight of Cordauella, being
thrown to the ground by the horse whereon she rode, came to exceeding danger by
so great a fall: For she lost all sense, by the breaking or disioynting of her
bones, and by little and little the vital heat forsaking all the body, the
skillfullest Physicians despaired of her life. Wheruppon the Priest
recommending her (as the use is) to God and his Saints, and now and then
sprikling her with holy water, provided for the salvation of her soul, being
ready to depart. Meanwhile James much grieuing the misfortune of his most dear
wife, entered into the next Church, where kneeling down, and lifting up both
eyes and hands to heaven with many tears he devoutly inuocated the B. Virgin
of Loreto, promising and vowing to go to the House of Loreto, if she preserved
her by her help, whom no humane help could save. His vow had good effect.
For he had scarce made this promise, but the woman began to be better, and in
short time recovered, having her bones and lymmes cured by miracle. And because
the Knight would in no wise neglect his vow, he and his wife came to Loreto the
year 1576. (famous and memorable for the Iubiley) and brought to the Mother of
God for a votiue gift, a silver plate, with the Image of the B. Virgin of
Loreto, by which on the one side, the Image of the man, on the other the Image
of the woman prayin devoutly: And the plate it self has a short inscription
which does briefly relate the miracle, for a monument thereof to posterity.
About the same time there happened such an other. Nicolas Pauonius is also
delivered from death
Nicolas Pauonius a worthy Citizen of Catana, managing his horse among his
companions, was cast headlong on the ground by the horse falling in his swift
course; where he lay without life with the bruize of his body, and the bursting
of his arm all to pieces. Forthwith his servants took him up like to one
giving up the ghost, and carried him home, having little use of reason, and
also sent presently for Surgeons, who being overcome with the greatness of his
danger, pronounced that there was no way but one. Wheruppon by persuasion of
his friends, Pauonius called on our B. Lady of Loreto, with this vow, if he
recovered his health, he promised to go to the House of Loreto, to give her
thanks. And soon after, a most pleasant sleep came upon him, in which a
glorious form of the B. Virgin of Loreto was presented unto him, who with the
touch of her hand presently cured his grieved members. And the event showed
that it was no deceitful dream. For Nicolas awaking out of his sleep, and
fynding that his lymmes were cured by miracle, lept joyfully out of his bed,
made have to Loreto and performed his vow.

A certain person, who was taken out of the hands of his enemies, when he had
received twelve deadly wounds, is cured by miracle. CHAP. XXVIII.
HERE follows another in another kind, Annal. Laur. Rier.
of special admiration. John Philip Ambrose, a Neapolita^, a man of small
substance, but greatly devoted to the B. Virgin of Loreto, the 79. year of
this age, going unarmed amongst his armed enemies, was most tumultuously
circumuented and wounded to death. For being thrust in with many wounds, how
could he be far from his end, when he had none in his company to aid him? and
they were so enraged, that they would not cease to wound him, until they saw
him thoroughly dead. Wheruppon Ambrose being at the point of death, devoutly
called on the B. Virgin of Loreto; and his prayer was to good effect. For he
was presently taken out of the hands of these furious men, and by heavenly
protection escaped present death. He himself (as afterward he reported)
perceived that he was carried miraculously from thence about an arrows flight,
The present help of our B. Lady at the hour of death.
where his friends receiving him, conveyed him hom languishing and half dead.
But for all that he had not escaped the danger of death, unless he had gotten
new help from our B. Lady in the said peril. For his enemies had given him no
less then twelve wounds, whereof many were deadly, which the Physicians
beholding, utterly despaired of his life. But the sick man calling to mind the
heavenly help, which he had lately obtained of our B. Lady, believed that so
great a miracle, was to some great purpose. Therefore whence he received help
against the weapons of his enemies, thence he began to hope for cure of his
wounds. And behold a new miracle. For presently the B. Virgin, whom he
devoutly inuocated, making heavenly salve for his sores, made him who was held
for a dead man to arise out of his bed safe and sound, and to go in continent
to Loreto, to perform his vow, and to be a worthy document of the help which
he had received from Loreto: For twice at the same time, he was delivered from
death it self, and by known and unknown, was no more called John Philip, but
Lazarus revived.

The Mother and the Daughter are delivered from death, others from other
diseases. CHAP. XXIX.
Annal. Laur. Rier.
ABOUT the same time the B. Virgin of Loreto was as favorable in curing of
diseases as wounds. There was one Melido a Citizen of Guasto in Abruzzo, whose
wife and daughter were afflicted with so grievous and long a fever, that being
in great extremity, and having hallowed Candles burning at their heads (as the
use is) both at once were upon departing. But Melido, who loved them both
entirely, purposing to try the last refuge of all, with great sorrow sell
down on his knees, and with gushing tears implored the help of the (...)
Virgin of Loreto, making a vow with his pra^er, and putting great confidence in
her benignity and help. His hope deceived him not. A marvelous thing.
Suddenly his wife and his daughter were delivered out of danger, and in few
days perfect well; and being brought to Loreto by Melido himself, the year
1579. they performed to the B. Virgin Mother of God, the vow which he made for
their recovery. The year following John Peter of Florence having a daughter
by Anne. Bassa of Verselli, his wife, blind in both her eyes, as soon as she
was rightly baptized, Anne her Mother devoutly inuocated the B. Virgin of
Loreto with this vow; If sight of one eye only were given unto her child, she
promised to bring her to Loreto with the first conueniencie. It appeared
straight that her vow was pleasing to our B. Lady. For by and by, without the
help of man, A blind infant is restored unto her eight.
the blind infant began to see with one eye. And the Mother being very careful
of her vow went spedily to Loreto, carrying her one eyed daughter in her lap,
to be an occasion of a new miracle, and not only a witness of the old. For the
nearer she came to the House of Loreto, the better the girl saw, so that when
she entered into the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, to give her due thanks
(which was on the 3. of the Nones of May the 80. year of this age) the child
saw perfectly with the right eye, and instantly also began to see with the
left; so much does God and his B. Mother surpass the vows of godly people.
Here follows another in a different kind, but peradventure no less a
miracle. Angelus Bernardinus, A child does get up a bone that stuck
ouerthvvart in his throat.
of Aemilia, had a little son, who as he was eating, had a bone (of meat, as
I imagine, for it is not related) stuck overthwart in his throat: so that by
no humane help it could be pulled forth. And the swelling of his throat,
bringing with it an ague, tormented the child so pitifully, that he lived in
little hope of amendment. But the Father beholding his most dear son at the
point of death, with flowing tears suppliantly implored the B. Virgin of
Loreto for his recovery. And without delay, the child coughing up the bone, was
delivered from the imminent danger by miracle, and out of hand was brought to
Loreto by his Father, and presented before our B. Lady; where, as he was
performing his vow, the ague which came with the other grief was also taken
away, that the benefit might be doubled. There is another more usual, but yet
not to be omitted. Peter Maria of Florence pyning away with long pain of the
gout, The gout is cured.
was so taken in his feet, that without the help of crutches, he was not able
to go: who at last rejecting the help of Physicians, earnestly inuocated the
B. Virgin of Loreto. His prayer had effect. Forth with the disease was
miraculously taken away, and he recovering the use of his feet, went to Loreto
to give hearty thanks to the B. Virgin, and in token of the Miracle, before her
most sacred Chapel, hung up the very Crutches whereon he was accustomed to
layne, when he was sick.

Three Cities are delivered from the plague. CHAP. XXX.
Annal. Laur. Rier.
AT those times the B. Virgin of Loreto did not only impart present help to
particular Citizens, but even to whole Cities, in time of their distress. A
great sickness spreading much abroad the 77. year of this age, and going almost
over all Sicily, wasted her most noble Cities with continual funerals, to
show dreadful spectacles to them that remained alive. Palermo is delivered
from the plague.
Whereupon the City of Palermo seeing the sickness still increase, and doing
what she could to appease the wrath of Almighty God, by vow and invocation of
the B. Virgin of Loreto happily escaped that danger, and faithfully performed
her vow. At this day there is extant a great silver plate of 9. pound weight,
wherein is expressed the purtraite of our B. The gift of the Citizens of
Palermo
Lady of Loreto, sitting on a House: under which is a worthy figure of the
City Palermo, with this inscription, in token that she was delivered from the
sickness by heavenly protection.

THE HAPPY CITY OF PALERMO METROPOLITAN OF TRINACRIA, DEDICATED IT TO THE B.
VIRGIN OF LORETO FORESCAPING THE PLAGVE, BY HER PROTECTION, THE YEAR OF OUR
SALVATION M.D.LXXVII.

Almost two years after, Puy no mean City of France, distant three days
journey from Lions, was made partaker of the like help of the B. Virgin of
Loreto in greater danger. For being wasted of her inhabitants and Citizens
with a long and a vehement plague, she seemed not far from utter desolation.
Therefore the Citizens (whom the sickness had spared) being frighted with so
cruel and desperate and evil, thought it most convenient, to pacity the wrath
of Alm. God by the intercession of his most B. Mother. Wheruppon by common
consent, making a solemn vow to the B. Virgin of Loreto, and prostrating
themselves every where in their Churches, by humble prayer they entreated
pardon of their sins, and an end of that sickness. Neither in vain. For
as soon as they had made this vow, their City was delivered and restored to
her former state. Whereupon certain men brought votiue gifts to Loreto, The
gift of the City of Puy.
with public testimony, to be a monument of the vow of the Citizens of Puy,
and of their delivery from the sickness, by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto.
Lions a chief and a noble City of France, The City of Lions is delivered
from the plague.
was neither free from the common calamity, nor deuoid of the protection of
Loreto. A great plague consuming householders, rich and poor, made the
Magistrates (void of humane help) to turn peoples hearts and vows to God and
his B. Mother. So by a public vow, which they made for deliverance of their
City, they implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto: whose prayer was
presently heard, the infected cured, and the plague taken away. The gift of the
City of Lios.
Whereupon the 81. of this age, the grateful City sent a votiue gift to the
B. Virgin, neither unbeseeming the devotion of the Cittize^s, nor the
magnificence of the City it self; to wit: a Chalice of silver, engraven and
guilt, excelling others, as well for workmanship as greatness, and other gifts of
no small price, in token of the help which they received from Loreto, and of
their devotion to the B. Virgin herself. In the mean season, Robert Saxatellus
being created Bishop of Pisaurus, Julius Amicus was elected Governor of
Loreto, who albeit he had no joyful times by reason of the plague of Lombardy;
yet in his time the sacred House it self, was not only well adorned, but also
the sacred furniture and ornaments thereof had good increase. The Princess of
Venusia preseted certain eyes of gold, and a Crownet of silver. The donaries
of others.
Sforza Pallauicino a silver Galley of 5. pound weight. Card. Sittico
Ab-Alte^ps for health restored to a child his near kinsma^, his Image of
silver, of ten pound weight. Delia Sanseuerina Countess of Briatico, a worthy
lamp of silver hanging, of xxij. pound weight. The Cardinal of Est, a golden
heart. The Marquess of Guasto a Casket of silver, about xvj. pound weight. The
Princess of Sulmo, a silver basin and ewer, of no mean workmanship and
weight. Card. Riario, a golden Cross, notable for fashion and value. All the
lesser I omit, as a thing not worth the labor to recount.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reverend F. HORATIVS
TVRSELLINVS Of the Society of IESYS.
The gifts of the Cardinal of Vrbine, and of other Princes. CHAP. I.
THE death and piety of the Patron, Cod. Laur. Vict. Brig.
augmented the wealth of the House of Loreto. For the Cardinal of Vrbine (to
be no less liberal to the B. Virgin of Loreto at his death, The gift of the
Card. of Vrbine.
than he had been in his life) giving most of the sacred ornature of his
Chapel, which was very rich and costly, to our B. Lady by his will; his
Executors sent a goodly Cross of silver, two Candlesticks of notable
workmanship, two Pontifical vestments of cloth of gold, as many for the Altar
and the Priest of cloth of gold, linen for Altars, veiles and holy Chalices,
wrought with gold and silver; a moveable Altar, (called the Altar-stone) well
set with pre^^ons stones, certain Chalices of gold, two Cruets of silver with
their ewer, richly engraven, and other such like, in token of the Roborean
munificence. And to the Cardinal of Vrbine in the Patronship of Loreto,
succeeded Card. Morono, who appointed Vi^uent Casale (a man of approved piety
and e^^^^t) to govern the State of Loreto. In those times, the ornaments and
furniture thereof had no small increase. A curious lamp of silver, with the
bowl of the same substance, of xv. pound weight, and a silver Censer for
perfumes, were the gifts of the Marquess of the Holy Cross. A piece of gold
from Charles the Archduke of Austria, with his name written therein.
Maximiliana daughter to the Duke of Bauaria, a Crownet of rich amber* adorned
with gold and precious stones, used rather in banketting than in devotion, a
golden Cross garnished with pearl and works engraven, and besides those,
other jewels. Albertus Marquis of Aquauiua his own Image of silver, as if he
were praying, of ten pound weight. Albertus Duke of Bauaria a great Cross of
^meralds, garnished with gold and Carbuncles, and set as it were in a mountain
of Crystal, which, as they say, is thought to be worth twelve thousand
Crowns. And this notable gift, the co^ueyance of the giver made more notable.
For it is very evident, that this Princely gift was wrapped in ordinary linne^,
and brought to Loreto, by an obscure man, who by no means would tell who sent
it; whereby the giver of so worthy a gift, was a long time unknown to mortal
men. But by the providence of Almighty God (to whom not only so worthy a
gift, but also the singular disposition of him that gave it, was very
acceptable) the giver himself was at last disclosed, with no less praise of
Christian modesty, then of Princely munificence. Amadeus a Noble man (son of
Emanuell Philibertus the Duke) his own Image in plate of silver, set in gold
and precious stones. Virginia Sabellia Vi^ellia, a votiue Image a plate of
gold, enclosed in Ebony, and covered on the inside with velvet. Constantia
Caretta a golden Crown, adorned with precious stones and orient pearls.
Cardinal Madruzzo a great golden button (such as Cardinals and Bishops are
wont to use in their Pontifical robes) beautified with three ranks of pearl
in knotts. The Cardinal of Austria a Cross of gold, standing in a golden
mountain, adorned with most precious jewels. And these were the worthy gifts
of Noble men and Noble women. Other ordinary donaries were sent from meaner
men, which is not our intent to rehearse. Notwithstanding I can not conceal
one of this kind, not so much worth for the value, as for the prayer of the
giver. A gold ring enriched with a fair Emeralde, being the gift of a man
unknown to mortal men, though well known to heaven, was found in a Chalice,
with these words written in a schedle.

O Peerles Virgin make us meek and chaste
O love which still do burn and never wast,
Inflame my frozen heart; accept of me
Thy servant, though I much unworthy be.
The solemnity of the Church of Loreto is more graced CHAP. II.
MEAN time according to his office, Annal. Laur. Rier.
Casale the Governor burning with zeal of the dignity of Loreto, used all
diligence to enkindle the devotion and endeavors of the Chanons, and of all the
Clergy. For sometimes by exhortation and entreaty, he excited each in
particular, then all in general to perform their Offices and duty with
diligence and care; who not only with words, but also (which is the
effectuallest kind of persuasion) with deed and example, moved them to employ
their diligent travel in that most maiesticall Cell, in behalf of God and his
B. Mother. For when the Governor himself was the first, that performed all the
offices of the Chanons, either in singing of divine prayer, or else in hearing
of Confessio^s, shame did not a little excite the Chano^s and others to do the
like. And albeit their labor was doubled, yet all did willingly imitate his
virtuous example, none withdrawing himself from that work, which he
undertook. Wheruppon Casale using the opportunity of their diligent and
faithful travel, dealt and effected with the Patron and with the Pope
himself, seeing the the labors of the Clergy of Loreto were increased, that
their pensions might likewise be amended; which made them all more diligent and
careful. Having provoked the Chanons to mayntaine the solemnity of the Church
with hope of this new liberality, he adorned the Penitentiaries with surplisses
and silk labells (called stoles) whereby as great grace was done to the Church
it self, as to them that used them. The^ to twelve boys, which himself had
instituted to help at Mass, he gave for habit the red garment. And because
the old Quyre was too straight for the Priests and Quyristers not a little
increased, The Prince of Bysinia does garnish and adorn the Quire
he made and adorned a new one far more large and commodious at the cost of the
Prince of Bisinia: which being beautifully vauted and adorned with curious
pictures drawn in tables, and with seats, is now used. Moreover for solemn
ornature of the Altar, he made the silver Image of the twelve Apostles of a
Cubit and a half, of excellent workmanship; which (as it is said) were all made
of the votiue Images of silver, defaced and spoiled with antiquity, being every
one about 60. pound in weight. Whereby we may conjecture, what plenty there was
of such Images in those days, which made the sum of seven hundred and
twenty pound weight; and also what abundance and multitude there is at this
present of such kind of gifts. This doubtless was a worthy and a frutifull
invention of Casale, Vict. Brigant.
that the strangers of all nations might have means to know the history of
Loreto, the sum whereof being long agone set out by Tereman the Governor, The
history of the house of Loreto is s^t forth in the Church in 8. languages.
he procured to be translated into the eight chiefest languages, to wit,
Greek, Arabicke, Spanish, French, Dutch, Sclauonian, Latin, Italian and
causing the same to be curiously set forth, in as many great tables, he placed
them in the midst of the Church, thinking it no less decorum to our B. Lady of
Loreto, to have her History published in all languages, then her House honored
of all nations.

A College of Sclauonians is instituted: and Pilgrims (specially of the better
sort) are bountifully entertained. CHAP. III.
BUT Pope Gregory not forgetting that which he determined in the beginning of
his Popedom, that is to say, to amplify the State of the House of Loreto, and
of the Christian world, as at Rome, and else where, of diverse Nations: so at
last he determined at Loreto to institute a College of Sclauonians, that it
might be a great solace and aid to that afflicted Nation. Wheruppon he gave
commaundment that three hundred young men should be instructed there in learning
and good manners, not only to be a glory to the Sclauonian people, but also an
ornament to the House of Loreto it self. To whom he allowed sufficient
mayntenance out of the treasury of Loreto, and certain houses, where the
hospital was before, building a new hospital in an other place. These
Sclauonian students were appointed to be present in the Church, on festival
days in their surplisses, to assist and serve at high Mass: and to be
instructed and taught, were committed to the Fathers of the Society of Jesus.
Mean while the Pope using all diligence to increase and beautify the sacred
ornature of the Church, set up an other pair of Organes, of great variety and
curiosity, garnished with gold and paynting. From which time the Church of
Loreto has had two notable pair of Organes, to wit, them of Julius, and of
Gregory, that great variety of music might grace the solemn service.
Cardinal Morono departing this life, the Pope preferred Cardinal
Vastauillanus, his sisters son, to that dignity, Vitalis Leonorius Governor
of Loreto.
who as soon as Vincent Casale was elected Bishop of Massa, appointed Vitalis
Leonorius (a man not to be misliked) to govern Loreto; who, being a very
industrious man, with careful manuring of the ground, increased the revenues
of the House of Loreto, and nothing at all diminishing her benignity to poor
Pilgrims, The hospitalyty of the House of Loreto.
provided to intertaine Noble men very liberally and bountifully. For which
purpose he magnificently adorned the new and goodly parlour, lately built in
the Popes Palace, where he entertained principal men very carefully,
providing for them whatsoever belonged to good hospitality. Wheruppon all
returned home full of joy and comfort, reporting that they were very liberally
used and entreated at Loreto; which was as profitable to the sacred House, as
honorable to our B. Lady.

The piety and munificence of Duke Ioyeuse, and of the King of France. CHAP.
IIII.
NEVER before did more Peers of diverse Nations honor the House of Loreto,
Vict Brigant.
with their presence and gifts, as witnesses Victor Brigantius (who being a
godly Priest and Resident at Loreto, wrote an Appe^dix of the History of
Loreto) affirming that now at this time many principal men came to visit the
sacred House of Loreto, and to present most worthy gifts. Duke Ioyeuse coming
out of France to Loreto to salute the Mother of God, and showing no less
singes of devotion then of liberality, spent eight whole days in the service
of our B. Lady, and in admiration of the House of Loreto, within which time he
thrice received the heavenly banquet in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B.
Virgin, and at his departure put four thousand Crowns into the arc with
memorable munificence. But not contenting himself with this gift, as he
returned by Florence from Rome from reuerencing the Pope in dutiful sort, he
sent the like sum of gold to the B. Virgin for a gift, adding thereunto two
silver lamps of great weight, which burn continually before the B. Virgin, in
token of the notable and almost Princely munificence of Duke Ioyeuse. This
money built good part of the lodgings which were appointed to intertaine
principal men, to wit, those which at this day do stand right against the
Church of Loreto: which albeit they were quickly brought unto their full
height; notwithstanding they remain rude and imperfect. Neither did the King
of France himself yield unto the Princely munifice^ce of a Duke of France. A
vvorrhy gift of the King of France.
For when by reason of public affairs, Henry the iij. could not himself
visit and honor the B. Virgin of Loreto with gifts, in his place he sent unto
her a Princely gift by a Portugese, one of the chief Peers of France, the
year 1584. which was a worthy Cup, to obtain by the intercession of the B.
Virgin, issue male for the King and his Kingdom; a gift for substance and
work most excellent. For the Cup it self is of a hollowed gemme, at this day
called the Azure-stone, ancient writers call it a Sapphire (as some think.) It
is also very big and intermingled with golden veins, the cover whereof is of
turned Crystal set in gold, and adorned with many excellentiewells. In the
top of the cover an Angel of gold does hold in his hand a lilly of
Diamo^des, the arms of the Kingdom of France; which lilly does consist of
three Diamondes joined together in the gold with admirable art. The foot of
the Cup being Emerald is bound about and supported with gold, which is
notably adorned with precious stones and rich orie^t pearls. In the bottom of
the Emerald foot, which we said to be of gold, the giver, and the cause of his
gift, is engraven in manner following.

O Queen, who by thy worthy Son,
Did joyful blessing bring
To all the world, bless with a Son
The Kingdom and the King.
HENRY THE III. KING OF FRANCE AND POLONY,
THE YEAR OF OUR SALVATION M.D.LXXXIV.
But by the secret judgment of God, sometimes that effect is not given to our
prayers, as we wish, that they may be heard for our good: The gift was
accepted, but the vow not obtained.

Other gifts of the Nobility of France. CHAP. V.
AFTERWARD the Duke D'Oaumale one of the chief Princes of France, Vict.
Brigant.
came to visit the House of Loreto, where rightly receiving the sacred
mysteries, he spent almost four days in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B.
Virgin very devoutly in prayer, and at his departure henoured the Mother of God
with gifts. Shortly after, a worthy gift of the Duke of Espernon was brought to
Loreto, The fall of the Duke of Espernon.
graced with a notable miracle. The Duke of Espernon going from Gascony to
Lions, to Henry King of France, in the way met the Duke of Ioyeuse traualling
to the same place. Who after mutual salutations, began to travel together,
and coming to a narrow way among steepy hills, the horse of Espernon began to
fling, which turned to the danger of his Master. For as he ernestly
endeavored, to stop his horse from yearking and plunging, he was cast
headlong from a high rock, where his servants taking him up for dead, carried
him speedily to the village next unto Lions. Of all others, Espernon was most
dear to the King, and the King himself being moved with this dreadful
message, made haft unto him, and there passed all the night, procuring remedies
to be applied to his most dear friend with all diligence. For whom also
Ioyeuse being very solicitous, made a vow to the B. Virgin of Loreto, for his
recovery, and to good effect. For within few hours, breath beginning to pass
more freely, Espernon lifted up his eyes, and by little and little coming to
himself, knew his friends about him. Wheruppon Ioyeuse seeing him of
understanding (for the vehemence of his pain was something abated) and
perceiving that he felt the greatness of his danger, he came unto him, and
bydding him be of good comfort, persuaded him to have great confidence, that
our B. Lady of Loreto would help him, to whom a little before, he had made a
vow in his behalf, asking him whether he would ratify it; which seeing he
could not confirm by words, he signified by the beck of his head. An
admirable thing to be said: within few hours he received all his senses, to
geather with his voice, and in few days arose out of his bed in perfect
health. Wherefore being very mindful of so great a benefit, he sent a certain
man to Loreto, to perform the said vow with reverence. The gift of the Duke of
Espernon.
By whom he dedicated two Angels of a Cubit, of solid silver, which shine
continually with burning lights on either side the feet of our B. Lady, to be
a monument to posterity, that the use of that light was restored unto him, by
the intercession of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Claudia of Turnon imitating this
piety of the French Princes, sent a silver figure of the Castle of Turnon,
either as a votiue gift, for the preserving of her Castle, or else as a
voluntary, to obtain the protection of the B. Virgin for the same: wherein was
written. THIS IS THE FIGVRE OF THE CASTLE OF TVRNON.

The worthy gifts and piety of William Duke of Bauaria, and of other Princes of
Germany. CHAP. VI.
AS SOON as the constant fame of so evident a miracle in a most noble Prince,
Vict. Brig.
was published and known in Germany, many of the Nobility were stirred to
visit and reverence the House of Loreto with gifts. Of whom William Duke of
Bauaria deserved the first praise and commendation, a man for wealth and piety,
without controversy the chiefest of the German Nation; who taking no small joy
for the recovery of the Marquis of Baden his kinsman, and also well remembering
his Fathers munificence to the B. Virgin of Loreto, sent and brought to Loreto,
donaries of Princely munificence. Among the gifts which he sent were a most
excellent horse; a plate of silver enclosed in Ebony, which does represent our
B. Lady carrying the sweet child JESUS in her lap, with S. Joseph, the
companion of her slight into Egypt; a silver Candlestick hanging, very notable
for weight and workmanship. For the weight is eighty pound, and the work such,
that four and twenty branches, as it may seem, shoot out of the same ste^me,
all so exquisitly and orderly disposed, that they may distinctly hold so many
wax candles; which does hang continually in the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin
before her glorious Image, as a very worthy gift of the Duke of Bauaria. But in
this it is more notable, that he has also endued it with a yearly pension. For
by name of a dowry, the Duke sent with it a perpetual stipend, that every
year upon forty festival and solemn days, the same might burn before the
B. Virgin, with four and twenty white Candles of wax. Soon after the Duke
himself followed his gifts, and four only accompanying him to Loreto, with
fresh horses he posted thither unknown, the year 1585. The exceeding modesty
of so great a Prince, made his piety the more notable. For contemning humane
delicacies, that he might taste the divine more abundantly, he esteemed the
public and magnificent lodgings assigned for the intertaynment of Princes,
less then a private and mean hospital. For instead of the trouble and state
of a Princely Court, desiring to give himself to religious quietness, he went
very familiarily to the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, of which order he has
deserved great honor, and lodged with them certain days, being very well
contented with ordinary fare and intertaynment. But so great virtue could not
long be kept secret. For the Governor of Loreto, understanding of the coming
of the Duke of Bauaria, came presently unto him, and very courteously invited,
requested, urged, importuned to give him intertaynme^t; but at last seeing that
he refused it with a most resolute mind, he departed frustrated of his desire.
And the modesty of the Duke was as notable in the Church as in his lodging. For
a footstool to kneel upon, and a chair to sit in, being prepared for him
with Princely state, he so contemned them, that he did not so much as look at
them, because he came not to seek sumptuousnes, but piety and devotion in the
House of our B. Lady of Loreto. Further in the most maiesticall Cell of the B.
Virgin, his christian humility and piety was so notable, that others may admire
it. For he prayed among the multitude, with such submission of mind and body,
as that you would have taken him for one of the people: because he did often
(as I believe) recall to mind the humility of the Son of God, who when he was
in the form of God, there exinanited himself, taking the form of a servant.
He was so long in prayer, that he might seem to dwell in the sacred House of
the B. Virgin, and at his departure left behind him, as notable signs of his
munificence, as of his piety and devotion. The worthy gift of the Duke of
Bauaria.
His chiefest gift was a little book of solid gold, which being divided three
manner of ways, in four leaves, seems to contain beautiful pictures and
Images wrought in precious stone. The cover whereof is made of gold, orient
pearl and rich jewels, with admirable art, and hangs by three chains of
gold, coming through a gold ring to be fastened in a great Sapphire. This gift
is said to be worth eight thousand Crowns: and there is scarce an other to be
found among all the donaries and Treasure of the House of Loreto, which
strangers behold with more delight, and desire; so greatly does the ornature,
and the exceeding beauty of the inward pictures and Images themselves, delight
the eyes of the beholders, art seeming to contend with the value of the thing
it self. He also gave a golden Image of Christ our Lord, representing his
glorious Resurrection and his coming out of the Sepulcher, which does glitter
with diamondes and Carbuncles. This exceeding piety of the Duke of Bauaria, was
an example to many great men of Germany, to salute and reverence the B. Virgin
of Loreto with gifts, whose coming happened afterward, in the Popedom of
Xystus. V. Notwithstanding the Duchess of Brunswicke brought silver attire for
the B. Virgin imbrodered with gold, The gift of the Duchess of Bru^svvick.
and goodly furniture for the Altar, shyning with pearl, diamond, and
Carbuncle, Gregory the xiij. being Pope. Also after his Embassage to Rodulph
the Emperor, Cardinal Madruzzo presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a
gift, The gift of Cardinal, Madruzzo.
a silver Cross (being the ensign of such Legates) in token of his Legacy
happily performed by her protection and help.

The piety and gifts of the Princes of Italy. CHAP. VII.
AT that time the piety and liberality of the Nobility of Italy was very
notable. Vict Brigant.
John Piccolhomini sent a silver plate representing two mules carrying a
horslitter, The gift of John Picolhomini and of many others.
whereof the one does strike with his heels a man lying on the ground, no
doubtful argument of danger eschewed by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto.
John Baptista Duara Gonzaga silver fetters, instead of the yron-ones, wherewith
he was fettered, in token that he got his liberty by the favor of our B. Lady
of Loreto. Lewis Martinengo of Bressa, four Chalices of silver, guilt. The
Marquess of Est, her own, and the Image of her son praying to our B. Lady
in plate of silver, of 14. pound weight. The Duke of Atria, two Images of
Angels, of a Cubit and a half, of excellent work, of xxxvj. pound weight,
which are placed before the B. Virgin on the Altar, and present continually
burning lights, which the inscription engraven in the base, does show to be
votiue gifts. The Duke of Terra-Noua, a silver lamp hanging, of xxij. pound,
very notable both for workmanship and weight. Emanuell Philibertus Duke of
Sauoy his own Image, adorned with a Crown and a scepter, made all of pure
gold in manner of a suppliant, of ten pound weight. Cardinal Columna the
Legate of Picene, a silver Cup of excellent work, of no small weight.
Cardinal Arigonio a golden Chalice of great price, by reason of jewels and
pearls; a Crystal Cross with the Image of Christ of gold, and four silver
Candlesticks of great beauty. Cardinal Riario ornature of damask for the
Altar and the Priest. Augustine Cusano (who afterward was admitted into the
College of the Cardinals) furniture for the Priest and the Altar of gold and
silver; And Pope Gregory himself much rejoicing, that the sacred House of
Loreto was thus reverenced and adorned with gifts, desired to have a special
gift of his own, to remain there for ever. The fourth Sunday of Lent (called
Dominica Laetare, of the Introite of the Mass) of an ancient and solemn
custom, the Roman Bishops do consecrate a golden Rose: The stem or plant
whereof is of flourishing roses of gold, which being put into a golden Cup,
and standing on a triple foot of gold, is more the^ a Cubit and half in
height, said to be worth a thousand Crowns. And this Pontifical gift, wont
(for the most part) to be presented to Queens, Gregory sent to the B. Virgin
of Loreto, as Queen of Heaven and earth. And in the middle of the Cup, there
is a godly inscription, for a remembrance of him that gave it. About the same
time Nicolas Caietan, the Cardinal of Sermoneta, honored the House of Loreto
with a new kind of gift: who either for the general devotion of his family
(for he was of the House of Boniface the eight, whose Popedom the coming of
the most sacred Cell into Italy made very famous) or else of a certain private
affection, was wholly devoted to the B. Virgin of Loreto. For being well and in
good heath, he chose a place for his sepulcher in the Church of Loreto, not far
from the Cell of the Mother of God, and caused it to be beautified with
magnificent work. The form whereof is very notable and large, adorned with
sundry sorts of marble, and graced with a brazen Image of Nicolas the Cardinal
of great curiosity and beauty. The marble stone underneath has this Epitaph.

NICOLAS CAIETAN THE CARDINAL OF SERMONETA, OF THE FAMILY OF POPE BONIFACIVS
THE 8. CALLING TO MIND THAT THIS MOST SACRED HOUSE WAS SEATED HERE BY THE
HAND-VVORKE OF GOD, ABOUT THE TIME THAT HE ENTERED INTO HIS POPEDOM, AND THAT
HIMSELF HAS OBTAINED MANY THINGS OF ALMIGHTY GOD, BY THE PRAYER OF THE B.
VIRGIN THE MOTHER OF GOD, AND ALSO HOPING THAT HER HELP VVIL NOT FAIL HIM AT
HIS DEATH: ALIVVE, AND IN GOOD HEALTH, HAS PROCVRED THIS MONVMENT OF MARBLE TO
BE MADE FOR HIM; THAT HIS BODY MAY BE BVRIED IN IT, WHEN HE SHALL DEPART THIS
MORTAL LIFE: BEING NOW 54. YEARS OF AGE. HE DIED ALMOST AT THREESCORE, THE
YEAR OF OUR SALVATION M.D.LXXXV. IN THE MONTH OF MAY.

And Nicolas departing this life, was brought from Rome to Loreto, where his
funerals were made with great honor and solemnity; and the Sepulcher being
finished long ago, his body was laid into it, and a stone put over it with
this title.

HERE I VVIL DVVELL, BECAUSE I HAVE CHOSEN IT

At this day in the Church of Loreto, there is a great Hearse of cloth of gold,
bordered about with a great border of black Velvet, in some places
magnificently adorned with the arms of the Caietan family, and in other, with
golden Crosses, in token of his stately funerals.

The rashness of those, which took away small pieces of the stones, and the
mortar of the most sacred House, is punished from heaven. CHAP. VIII.
THE same year, to wit 1585. by a new Miracle, Almighty God showed what care
he has of the sacred House of Loreto. For a particle of one of the sacred
stones was brought back out of Sicily, long after the fault was committed and
punishment suffered therefore. Above twenty years, a Citizen of Palermo
coming to Loreto, and secretly taking a little stone out of the sacred Cell of
the Mother of God, by no show of piety in that rash deed, nor the ignorance of
the Pontifical inhibition, by any means could be delivered from the wrath of
God. For as soon as he returned home, forthwith he was troubled with a grievous
sickness. And lest the cause of his sudden grief might be doubtful, yearly
about the same time, that he committed the fault, he suffered punishment for
it. Wheruppon strength suddenly failing him, in the month of September or
October, he was molested with a grievous fever, and by judgment of the
Physicians, there could be no natural cause thereof; and he acknowledged not
his fault, colored under the name of piety. But it continued 20. years. all
which time there was neither cause nor end of his incurable disease. And at
last, when no other cause of the sickness (still returning by course) could be
found, Religion entered into his heavy mind, and being much tormented with a
guilty conscience, he opened the wound unto a Priest; who told him that the
cause of his sickness, was his rash piety, earnestly exhorting him to restore
the sacred stone, if he would make sure way for his health. It was spoken to no
deaf ears. For the sick man being commanded as it were by a heavenly voice,
delivered him the sacred stone, to be sent back to the place from whence he
had taken it long ago. As Soon as it was restored, he recovered his former
health. The thing is well witnessed. John Baptista Carminata, Superior of the
Society of JESUS in the Province of Sicily, sent the sacred stone, with letters
declaring the whole matter, to Rome, to Cardinal Vastauillano Patron of
Loreto, who sent it straight to Leonorius Governor of Loreto, with the letter
which he received out of Sicily, comma^ding that it should be carefully put
into the place where it was before. Wheruppon as soon as it came to Loreto,
Leonorius commanding a solemn procession, and going to the gate to meet it,
recarried it to the most sacred House, with the greatest pomp that might be. A
marvelous thing to be spoken and seen. It was scant brought unto the
fortunate House of our B. Lady; when by and by (as if God had showed it) the
void place appeared, whence it was evident, that fragment was taken twenty
years agone; and as soon as it was put into his own place again, a
remembrance was made in token of the miracle, to repress the boldness of other
Pilgrims. About the same time, the new rashness of mortal men, gave God
occasion to show new example, in the lesser pieces of stones. I find many
examples of many, who adue^turing the same, quickly smarted for their folly,
until they had learned by their own harm, to restore that which they had
taken from thence. But we will omit them, lest many things of one kind should
breed tediousnes. Neither did Almighty God seem to be more careful to
preserve the sacred stones, tha^ the mortar, wherewith the stones themselves are
joined together. Alexandria is no mean City of Lombardy, built and so called
by the Confederate Cities, in favor of Pope Alexander the third. A Cittize^
of which place coming to visit the House of Loreto, stole a little mortar out
of the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, and returning home bruized it, and
put it into a silver case, together with an AGNVS DEI. But his foolish piety
was nothing pleasing to God and his B. Mother. For as soon as he hung that case
about his wives neck (for what cause it is uncertain) the Prince of Devils
entered into her, with no small company of his attendants: wherewith the unhappy
woman being miserably vexed for the space of nine years, to her husbands great
grief, at last, God of his goodness sent her remedy. John Baptista Vauninus a
Priest of the Society of JESUS, preached at that time to the people of
Alexandria, as the manner is. Who understanding of the matter by her husband
(the author of so wicked a thing) forthwith exhorted him to restore the sacred
dust; if he did, no doubt, but in short time his wife would be delivered from
devils wherewith she was tormented. He was easily persuaded. For taking the
sacred mortar out of the silver case, he himself delivered it to Vauninus,
beseeching him to send it to Loreto with all speed. Their hope deceived them
not. For within few days, three of the tormenting devils, were expelled out
of the body of the possessed woman, not so much by virtue of the Exorcismes, as
by the prayer of our B. Lady. Wheruppon Vauninus putting the said mortar into a
case, sent it presently to Loreto, to the Rector of the Society of JESUS,
entreating him by letter, with all speed to restore it, to the sacred House of
our B. Lady, whence it was taken, and to entreat peace and pardon of the B.
Virgin for that miserable woman, that by expelling the rest of the torme^ting
devils, she would vouchsafe to restore unto her, her former health; which
afterward was found to have happened as he desired. And as soon as the mortar
was brought back to Loreto, it was reserved in a convenient place, to be a
document to mortal men, not to adventure the like. Also the letter of Vauninus
dated on the third of the Ides of November, the year of our Redemption 1579.
is preserved likewise there in token of the miracle.

A ship of Epidaurus is delivered out of the hands of Pirates by a worthy
Miracle. CHAP. IX.
WITH a notable and a famous Miracle, we will conclude the most worthy and most
illustrious Popedom of Gregory. About that time a ship of Epidaurus being
laden with rich merchandise of Constantinople returned to Epidaurus, by the
Commonalty called Ragusa. Which in the midway, suddenly sustained such
quietness and calm of sea, that for want of wind she could not move out of the
place. Whereby many sculking Pirates were presently at hand, who spreading round
about, began to assault the destitute ship withal their force. And albeit the
Christians were fewer in number; yet at first they notably withstood the
assault of the Barbarians; but at last being overcome with labor and wounds,
they failed, as equal unto them, neither in courage nor strength. Wheruppon
being in great danger of taking by the Barbarians, and devoutly calling to mind
the manifold favors of our B* Lady of Loreto, all called on her with humble
supplication, and vowed, if she delivered them out of that imminent danger,
they would carry a goodly Chalice to the House of Loreto for a gift, and
withal would there wash away the blemishes of their sins by sacred
Confession. Their prayer and vow proved not in vain. For by and by a thick
mist arising, so obscured the light with her darkness, that it took from the
Pirates (greedily desiring so wealthy a prey) the sight of the ship of
Epidaurus. For which cause the Christians acknowledged the help of the Mother
of God, and exulting with joy amidst their fear, gave devout thanks to God
and his B. Mother. Contrarily the Barbarians raging and grieuing to see the
prey taken out of their hands, endeavored what they could, to recover the ship
which they had lost. But in vain. For a certain night, as it were, hanging
over the sea, took from the^ the sight of the vessel which they pursued, and
they themselves wandered even as men in darkness. Meanwhile a prosperous wind
blowing in the cloud, carried the ship along, which escaping all danger by
favor of our B. Lady, arrived safe at Epidaurus, whence the Mariners and
Passengers came to Loreto, to perform their vow. And this was almost all that
happened at Loreto, whiles Gregory was Pope.

Loreto is made a City by Xistus V. and adorned with a Bishops Sea. CHAP. X.
AS Xystus V. the emulator of Gregory, would not seem his inferior in other
things; so would he be accounted more forward and diligent in augmenting the
state of the House of Loreto. For being borne in Picene, he thought good to
adorn the chief Patroness of the Picentians with all care. Therefore as it
were to execute the determination of Pope Marcellus the second, he gave Loreto
the title of a City, adorning her with a Bishops Sea, and assigning certain
towns there about to her Jurisdiction. The first Bishop of Loreto was Francis
Cantucius a Citizen of Perugia, famous for learning and sanctimony: who endued
that new feate with worthy institutions and examples. But that Loreto might not
have the name of a City in vain or impertinently, Xystus bought the hill next
to Loreto (by the inhabitants called Monte-Regal) and purposed to level it,
that he might make more space on that side, to enlarge the new City. And for
furnishing the same with building, he gave commandment to all the Cities of
Picene, that every one should build there, their several houses, which they
willingly obeyed. Mean time, not only with force but also with money and good
policy, the Pope pacified Picene, and the rest of his own dominions infested
with thieves. For incensing the thieves themselves, and the banished men
against their fellows, with hope of impunity and reward, he procured the
Captains to be slain, and many of their followers, to be either killed by
their own fellows, or else reduced, by reason that their associats were
destroyed and made away. For which cause the Cities of Picene erected a worthy
Statua of brass of a Picene Pope, well deserving of their people, and of the
House of Loreto. At which time, the sacred house of our B. Lady wanted not her
ornaments. For the Pillars, which (instead of Columns) support the vauted
roof, and the vaut it self of the Church, was adorned with marble work, at
the charge of Cantucius the Bishop. One of the bigger Chappells was adorned by
Cardinal Arigonio, The chapel of Cardinal Arigonio
with notable pictures, expressing the worthy deeds of S. Thomas of Aquine, in
pariecting and guilding. And the greatest of all the Chappells (desired by the
Dukes of Tuscany and Bauaria) to take away contention was adorned by the
Co^monalty of Picene, The chapel of the Co^monalty of Picene.
with curious works both of paynting and plaistering, and also garnished with
much gold. This mean while Leonorius the Governor, using all diligence to
adorn and augment the State of Loreto, by means of Lactantius Ventura a
notable Architect, brought the forefront of the Church almost unto the top (a
work for the most part finished by Gregory) and built good part of the Bishops
palace over against the Church. The gift of the Archduke of Austria.
Also Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, having understanding of the building of
Loreto by the Duke of Bauaria, by his persuasion gave great store of timber out
of his woods, to the B. Virgin of Loreto; which being put into a vessel, and
sent by the Adriaticke sea, by favor of our B. Lady, came safe to Loreto,
among which was such abundance of huge beams and boardes, as were thought to
be well worth three thousand Crowns.

Cardinal Ioyeuse recommendeth his Protection of France, to the B. Virgin of
Loreto. CHAP. XI.
ABOUT seven Months after Cantucius the first Bishop of Loreto entered into
his Bishopric, Vict. Brigant.
he departed this life, leaving behind him great love of all toward him,
specially of the poor, whose Father he was accounted. So great fame of
sanctimony is related of him, that it may easily appear to be true, which is
holden for a Proverb, that the first Bishop of every City must be a Saint.
After Cantucius Rutilius Benzonius a Citizen of Rome (famous for learning and
zeal of Ecclesiastical dignity) was elected Bishop of Loreto; Rutitius
^enzonius Bishop of Loreto.
who graced the house so notably with holy sermons, and worthy institutions,
that now for sacred pomp and Majesty, she is inferior to none of the holiest
Churches. About that time, Cardinal Ioyeuse the new Protector of France,
coming out of France to Rome, and turning to Loreto with a train of Noble
men, was brought to the most sacred House by Mattheucius Archbishop of Ragusa
and Governor of Ancona, by Octanio Bandino President of Picene, and by
Rutilius Benzonius Bishop of Loreto, who went to meet the Cardinal, as he was
coming thither. And when Ioyeuse had said Mass very devoutly in the sacred
Cell of the B. Virgin, he said that he seriously determined, to recommend his
Protection of France, to the most certain Patroness of mortal men. For which
cause he procured the solemn prayer of the Forty Hours: whose godly endeavor
the Bishop of Loreto did not only approve by his authority, but also with a
worthy Sermon, After the Sermon, a solemn procession was performed with great
zeal of all the people, as well of the Clergy and townesfolkes of Loreto, as
of a good company of Capuchines, which Ioyeuse had brought with him for that
purpose. And the Cardinal yielding to none, in that whereof himself was the
Author, was an example of piety and modesty, to his, and all the rest.

The worthy endeavors of Cardinal Gallo Patron of Loreto, toward the B.
Virgin. CHAP. XII.
BUT this year was not so famous, as lamentable for the affairs of Loreto.
Vict. Brigant.
Two days after the public prayer, Leonorius the Governor of Loreto, then
the Cardinal Patron Vastau^^lano himself, died one after an other, of a
pestiferous disease. Card. Gallo Patron of Loreto. Francis Gallo Governor of
Loreto.
Wheruppon the Patronship of Loreto was given to Antonio Maria Gallo, the
Cardinal, then Bishop of Perugia (now of Auximo) who preferred John Francis
Gallo his Uncle, to the Government of Loreto. And shortly after by the Popes
commandment, Cardinal Gallo the new Patron coming to Loreto, and being
received with great joy and gratulation of all sorts, set down Laws and
Decrees to the City of Loreto, for creating of magistrates, they year of our
Redemption 1587. Also this very year the brazen Statua of Xystus V. the Pope,
made most curiously by Bernardine, was set up on the stairs of the Church,
with great gladness of the people of Loreto, and of all the Picentians; and also
with great concourse of borderers and strangers And whiles John Francis Gallo
was Governor of Loreto, The forefro^t of the Church of Loroto.
the forefront of the Church was at last finished, to be a most notable
ornament to the sacred House of our B. Lady. For it was magnificently set forth
and curiously ended, and all made of Istrian stone, exactly squared, (which
being brought from Istria, does seem like to that of Tybur, in old time, and
also at this day much used by the Romans) and also finished with such art,
that you would say so great a work, were almost all one stone. In the midst of
this forefront, the great Gate (being as it were the mouth thereof) is adorned
with striged Pillars of marble, and with an arched Coron. Also the sides have
two lesser doors, with Pedestalls and Pillars, called Ionickes, on which the
forefront it self does stand. Over the great Gates, was set up a brazen Image
of our B. Lady embracing her little son, polished most curiously by Lombardo
the Statuary. Under the roof of the forefront a great window (being as it were
the eye of the work) adorned with striged Pillars and works engraven, does
give light unto the Church. Over the window, the Title of the House of Loreto
is engraven in Lucullan Marble with golden letters, THE HOUSE OF THE MOTHER OF
GOD, WHERE THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH. Meaner windows were made to the lesser
doors, to give light to the wing of the Church. And above both these windows,
there is a particular inscription, engraven also with golden letters, in such
kind of marble. The one is, XYSTVS V. THE POPE, A PICENTIAN, OF A COLLEGIATE,
MADE THIS A CATHEDRAL CHVRCH, ON THE XVI. OF THE CALENDS OF APRIL, THE YEAR OF
OUR REDEMPTION M.D.LXXXVI.

THE FIRST YEAR OF HIS POPEDOM The other, XYSTVS V. THE POPE BEING BORNE IN
PICENE, AND ADORNING THE HOUSE OF LORETO WITH EPISCOPAL DIGNITY, MADE IT A
CITY THE YEAR M.D.LXXXVI. THE FIRST YEAR OF HIS POPEDOM.

The work was all finished, but that there wanted stairs to ascend into the
Church. wheruppon with great magnificence and compastle enough, Hierom Gabutio
the successor of John Francis Gallo, did finish the new stairs, which he had
begun with Istrian stone, and put an excellent lantern on the hemisphere of
the Church, made also of the same stone, and of pillars of eight or nine foot
of Ionicke work. The spaces whereof have eight arched windows, above which are
8. more equal in breadth, but less in height. And over the said windows is a
Corone, which does support the uppermost work, divided, as it were, into eight
quarters, which together with ^^e hemisphere of the Church, being covered with
sheets of lead, is seen far and near. And his own piety and devotion
moving him thereunto, as soon as Card. Gallo had adorned the sacred House of
Loreto, he provided to relieve the poor. For with a great sum of money which
he collected, he made a Bank of piety at Loreto, whence he appointed that
money should be lent to the town gratis, lest they should be enforced to be at
the mercy of Usurers. But this was a most memorable gift of Xystus V. the Pope
(others attribute it to Gregory the xiij.) to procure the brazen leaves of the
Church of Loreto, to be engraue^ for forty thousand Crowns. For the leaves of
the three doors shall be of brass, where a representation of all the sacred
History is to be engraven with admirable art: verily a great work, and of many
years, and (as by the beginuings it may be coniectured) very notable and
admirable, so indeed, as they who have seen both, may worthily compare them to
the most excellent leaves of the Church of S. John Baptist at Florence which
all do hold for a wonder. Truly it will be a worthy ornament to the Church of
Loreto, and a most pleasing spectacle to Pilgrims.

Donaries brought or sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto. CHAP. XIII.
MEAN time, Cod. Laur.
the House of Loreto providing for the welfare of the poor Inhabitants,
wanted not the gifts of Pilgrims. The gift of the Sodality of the Smiths of
Bologna
The Sodality of the Black-smiths of Bologna, for their Donary, brought a great
Ca^dlesticke of copper, very notable both for workmanship, and also for the
unusual greatness and weight. Catherine Medices Queen of France, and Mother of
Kings, The gift of the Queen of France and of others.
sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto, a silver lamp, notable for weight and
workmanship, with a pension to have it burn continually. The Duchess of
Cleeue golden attire for the B. Virgin, imbrodered with silver, and her own
Image in a silver plate praying to our B. Lady of Loreto; but this later is an
ordinary Donary of many. A daughter of the Duke of Parma two; Frederick
Tomacellus, and Antony Spinellus Neapolitans; Alfonsus Vice-count a Milanese;
the Marquis Carpucius, and the Bishop of Eugubine, every one his own Image,
supplia^twise in a plate of silver, of four pound weight. Also at the same
time the Marquis of Guasto presented his own Image in a golden globe, shyning
round about with little diamondes and Carbuncles. And that many of them were
votiue gifts, the title of the plate of Eugubine does show, THY PRAYER IS
HEARD. But these sent their own, others presented the votiue Images of their
friends. The Prince of Stiliano dedicated to the Mother of God a silver Image
of his son, as if he were praying. Liuia Pignatella a Neapolitan the Image of
her husband offering to our B. Lady a little child purtured in silver, of four
pound weight. The Prince of Amalpha an infant of silver in his swathbands, in
weight, half as much more. Philibertus Emanuell Duke of Sauoy the worthiest
gift in this kind, to wit, the golden Image of an infant of just stature, wrapped
in his swath-bands, for a son borne of late wedlock, by the intercession of
our B. Lady. The City Corneta, the purtraiture of her City, in a plate of
silver enclosed in Ebony, with a worthy title below, CORNETA THY FAITHFVLL
CITY. Also others presented goodly ornature for the Church and the Altar.
William Duke of Mantua sent to the B. Virgin, two Candlesticks of silver, of a
Cubit and a half, and a worthy Image of gold, on a golden Cross, representing
the Crucifying of our Savior, all made with admirable workmanship and art. Not
long after, the Prince of Mantua, emulating his Fathers piety, brought votiue
gifts for receiving of issue by the favor of our B. Lady, furniture of silver
for the Altar, Priest, and Ministers sacrificing with solemnity, adorned with
imbrodery, precious stones and gold. Ferdinand Cardona, a silver Chalice
curiously wrought. John Spinota, Hippolitus Bensinotus, and Octauius Peregrinus
a Neapolitan, besides every one his Chalice of silver, brought also two crewers
with little ewers of the same substance. Peter Demetrius Prince of Valachia a
golden Chalice and a Paten. And Auria Marquis of the Empire, for his singular
devotion to the B. Virgin of Loreto, to his golden Chalice, added a triple
lamp of silver, notable for weight and workmanship, which he endued with a
certain stipend, that it might burn in the midst of the sacred Chapel, on
chief festival days. Here also hangs an other silver lamp of excellent
work, beautified with three divisions, said to be the votiue gift of Marquis
Lippeo of Milan. The Earl Oliuarus (Ambassador for the Catholic King with
the Pope) coming with his wife to Loreto, presented to our B. Lady for a gift,
a silver lamp and ornature for the Altar and the Priest, glittering with gold
and silver, of curious Portugal work; which Donaries he increased with a
great sum of money. The Viceroies wife of Naples a casket of silner guilt,
and engraven with very curious work. Portia Vitelia a golden Image of Christ
Crucified, enclosed in Ebony. The Cardinal of Austria, two Candlestickes of
solid Ebony, adorned with precious stone and gold. Hierome Grimaldus of Genua
as many Candlesticks of silver, a Cubit high, of xv-pound weight. And many
silver lamps of no small weight and workmanship, were presented by such as
were unwilling to have their names known. One of gold in steed of many, is the
gift of Francis Maria Duke of Vrbine, not only notable for substance and
beauty; but also for workmanship. For the lamp it self is supported on the
shoulders of three Angels, holding in their hands, boughs of an oak (the
arms of the Roborean family) all made of solid gold with admirable art,
thought to be about ten pound weight, and therefore chief place is assigned
unto it, for the special worth thereof, hanging in a golden chain amidst the
silver lamps, that it may allwaies burn before the face of our B. Lady.
Marquis Roboreo, Benedict Card. Justinian, and Camilla Peretta sister to Xystus
V. gave every one a single suite of gold for the Altar, and Camilla also
brought worthy attire for our B. Lady, wrought with gold and work imbrodered.
The Duchess of Bouine, an honorable Lady, sent other ornature of violet
satin, adorned with margarites and pearls, after a Princely munificence, but
for the shortness thereof. Also Iustus Iusteius Earl of Verona consecrated to
our B. Lady (as author of the victory) an ornature of cloth of gold, faced with
precious skins, being the prize of the Tilters, gotten at the games of
Florence. Others also sent other Donaries to our B. Lady, the most part from
women. The Duchess of Cleeue, a woman of great piety, presented to the B.
Virgin for a gift, a chain of gold, notable for weight and workmanship; golden
bracelets beset with Carbuncles and diamonds, and a gold ring of great worth by
reason of a notable jewel. Vidobonus the knight and Steward of the Duke of
Bauaria, in his own name and his wives, two gold rings joined in one, adorned
with diamond and Carbuncle, wherein is written, WHICH GOD HAS JOINED, LET NOT
MAN SEPARATE. Lewis George of Papia, a chain of gold made of curious work, of
one pound weight. Marchius Antonius Blanchettus of Bologna, a Crownet of
precious stones featly fastened in gold. The Princess of Castel-uetrano a
round piece of gold, like unto a great coin, glittering with diamond, Emerald
and pearl. But this following is not only memorable for value; but also for
the order and manner how it was presented. Antony Martinengo the Earl, having
contended many years with a daughter of Marquis Carata, about a Cross of
precious stones of small quantity but of great value, and seeing no end thereof
could be had by law, they agreed between themselves, that the Cross in
controversy, should be adjudged to the B. Virgin of Loreto. And the event
showed that their gift was grateful to the Mother of God. Hieronyma Columna
Duchess of Monte-Leone had that Cross in her custody: And by a certain
providence of Allmighty God it chanced, that Martinengo coming to the sacred
House of our B. Lady upon devotion, in the beginning of May, at the same time
and on that very day, Hieronyma also came, altogether ignorant of the coming
of Martinengo. Therefore seeing him on the sudden at Loreto, at first she was
arnazed thereat; but then saluting each other, she said unto him: In very good
time I have brought with me the Cross adindged to our B. Lady; for the solemn
day of the invention of the Cross of Christ is now at hand. Wherefore admiring
the wonder of the thing ordered from above, they went both together to the most
sacred Cell, and dedicated this Cross of Jewels to the B. Virgin, on the
festival day of the holy Cross: that you may say, she required her depositum
in due time. At this day, the said Cross does hang at the girdle of rewells of
the B. Virgin, as a chiese grace of her worthy ornament: for it is made of nine
fair diamonds beautified with three orie^t pearls, as big as cherries, valued
at four thousand Crowns.

An Irish Bishop does twice escape the hands of Heretical Pirates: A young man
is delivered from present shipwreck. CHAP. XIV.
AT that time the House of Loreto as not only honored with gifts but also
miracles. For Edmund an Irishman, Bishop of Ardach, came to Loreto, to
perform his double vow. The cause whereof was this. Being driven into
banishment for religion, by Elizabeth Queen of England, he fled into Scotland
with certain trusty servants. But where he sought succor, was his danger.
For at the entreaty of the Queen of England, the Nobility of Scotland
commanded that he should be cast into prison. But Edmund understanding of the
matter, secretly shipped himself, and very prudently eschewed the snares of the
Queen. Whereby escaping that manifest peril, soon after he fell into an other
hidden danger, which was not casual, but by sufferance from above, as doubtless
both the time of the danger, and the heavenly help sent the^ in due time did
manifestly show. For as Edmund sailed toward France, he fell into the hands of
one Drake an Archpirate of England, the day before the Nativity of our B. Lady,
which the Bishop and his servants kept with great reverence and devotion. And a
vision showed to one of his company in his sleep, put them all in good hope of
security. For the night before they met their enemies, as he was asleep, one of
his servants seemed to fight naked with heretics in a great assembly of men:
and being ashamed of his nakedness, a Lady of great beauty came unto him in a
white garment, whom he earnestly entreating to cover his nakedness, courteously
and willingly she covered him with her cloak. When he related this vision unto
the Bishop, with common consent they agreed, that the Virgin whom he saw in
his sleep, was the Mother of God, by whose protection they should be all
defended. Wheruppon as soon as the navy of the enemies approached, Edmund and
his servants seeing no humane means to escape, implored our B. Lady of Loreto,
whose Native day put them all in good hope of safety, making this vow with
their petition: If they eschewed the hands of their enemies, they would go to
the House of Loreto, and there for the space of three days, would give
themselves to prayer. Their prayer and vow had effect. For the Master of the
ship, wherein they sailed, albeit in show an Heretic; yet at that instant
showed himself a favorer of Catholics. For seeing the English navy at hand,
and supposing (as it was) that the Catholics whom he transported, were
sought, for their destruction, he hid the Bishop and his servants, in a most
obscure place of the pumpe, and far out of sight. The ship was taken by the
English, and brought in to England, and the servants of God lay close eight
days in the pumpe, the Master secretly conueying them victuals once a day;
all which time the English Pirates did not negligently search the vessel which
they had taken. For every day with great rage, they searched every corner,
hoping to find out the Bishop and his company, of whose flight and escape they
had notice. So at last reuiewing all places carefully with lights, they
happened on the pumpe, and came to the secret place. But the more present that
their danger was, the more evident was the help of the Mother of God. For
apprehending the Priest, who had seen the aforesaid vision in his sleep, they
drew him unto the next deck to seek out the rest, but even at that very
instant they perceived, that Almighty God did protect the Catholics with
heavenly help. For the Priest (of whom we speak) escaping out of their hands
by miracle, was never after to be found. Therefore having searched eight whole
days, till they were weary, at last they gave over to seek after the
Bishop, and dismissed the ship, that she might return unto her course. But
behold one danger after an other. In the same voyage to France, an other Navy
of Pirates met them, more cruel then the former, who by the instigation of
Queen Elizabeth, sought Edmund the Bishop for his destruction: and out of hand
taking the ship wherein he sailed, they boarded her, ouerturned all the
Merchandise, and with lights searched all places with diligent care: whereby
they came to the secret place, and at last apprehended the Bishop himself. They
had prevailed, if the present protection of our B. Lady had not quailed the
rage of their enemies. For behold as they were about to draw forth their
prisoner, they were stricken with sudden blindness, and began to wander like
blind men. Wheruppon being frighted with the undoubted wrath of God punishing
their wickedness, they let go the vessel which they had taken, and she holding
on her course, by favor of our B. Lady arrived at the desired harbor, having
twice in few days escaped these exceeding dangers. For which cause the Bishop
and his retinew, being very mindful of their vow, forthwith from the place
where they landed, came to Loreto on foot, the year 1586. where the Bishop
rightly performing his vow, left the whole matter set down in writing in the
House of Loreto, in token of the double help of our B. Lady in his double
danger. The year ensuing, the B. Virgin of Loreto, by as great a miracle
delivered another from the raging sea, as she had done these from the wicked
Pirates. John Baptista Capra a Monte-Albodo (the name of a town in Picene) a
good and a godly young man, sailing in a Galcot toward the coast of Calabria,
and coming in sight of the Island Vulcana (which lies over against the Ila^d
of Si^ilie) was brought into imminent danger, by a sudden tempest. For the
oars were broken, the sail was lost, and the little vessel being tossed to
and fro with the waves, was in great danger of drowning. But he conceiving good
hope of safe deliverance, and inuocating the B. Virgin of Loreto, cried unto
her: As the Angels brought thy House into Picene, where at this present it
remains; so thou B. Virgin Mother of God, bring this little vessel to the
harbor. A marvelous thing. The tempest ceased as if it had been controulled
or bridled by his prayer, and presently a prosperous wind beginning to blow,
made the Galcot ariue with safety, that you may think the B. Virgin favored
her Client, and the report of the transportation of her sacred House, by the
hand-worke of Angels.

Two Priests having stolen a little mortar out of the House of Loreto, by their
own harm, are taught to restore it thither again. CHAP. XV.
Vict. Brigant.
THE report of the History of Loreto is confirmed by the former miracle, but the
religion of the most sacred House is established with this. The same year, two
Priests of Placentia took alittle mortar out of the sacred walls, with intent
to carry it about them, as a monument of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and as a
defense unto them in the perils of this mortal life. But protection sought
against the will of God, turned to their danger. For as soon as they returned
into their Country, they were punished with a terrible and a cruel fever,
wherewith being much vexed for the space of three months, at last they
repented. And calling to mind the late example of the Bishop of Portugal, who
albeit by the Popes permission had taken a stone out of the House of Loreto;
yet God was so offended therewith, that he was punished with a cruel sickness,
and recovered not, until he restored the sacred stone to the B. Virgin.
Therefore with common consent, both determined to restore to our B. Lady, that
which they had taken from her, earnestly requesting her to pardon their folly,
and to restore them their former health, when she received her own again.
Wheruppon presently putting the mortar into a silk purse, and witnessing the
miracle by their letters, they delivered it to the Pilgrims, which came to
Loreto, and so recovered their health. And the mortar remaining in the silk
purse (as it was) was brought to Loreto by the Pilgrims of Placentia to
Rutilius Benzonius the Bishop, who as soon as he read their letter, gave credit
to the miracle, and published it abroad; to repress the boldness of others by
their example.

Our B. Lady appearing to two, in the same form wherein she is reuere^ced at
Loreto, restores them their health despaired of by Physicians. CHAP. XVI.
Vict. Brigant.
ABOUT that time the B. Virgin did show by evident tokens, that her Image in the
House of Loreto, was as dear unto her, as her native House it self- Tiberius
Delphinus a servant of the Duke of Mantua, being dear unto him many ways, and
consuming with a grievous and a long ague, by vehmency of the sickness was upon
departing. Wheruppon as the Priest was carefully reco^mending his soul (armed
with christian mysteries) to the protection of God and his Saints, the House of
Loreto innobled with many famous miracles, came to the mind of him that lay a
dying, which whiles he was in health, he could not visit by reason of business.
And soon after a representation of the same House, and of the B. Virgin
appearing unto him in his rest, stirred him to make a vow to the Mother of God,
and to hope well of himself: which was to good effect. For he, who even now lay
void of all sense, beginning to revive, and opening his eyes, spoke more
cheerfully to them that were present, and told them how he had made a vow to
visit the B. Virgin of Loreto, leaving them all dismayed at the wonder of the
thing. Within few days he thoroughly recovered, and as soon as by any means
health permitted him to perform the journey of his votiue Pilgrimage, he went
to Loreto before he had gotten sufficient strength, so fervent was his desire
to be free from the vow which he had made. And as soon as he came thither, with
hearty thanks to God and his B. Mother, he performed his vow, and nigh at hand
beholding the most religious Image of our B. Lady with dilligent care: Truly
(said he) in this very likeness and similitude, I saw our B. Lady in my sleep
when I was at the point of death: that it may plainly appear the Image at
Loreto to be most like, or else most dear unto her. Soon after, this miracle
was confirmed by an other of the same kind. John Raffrede a young man of
Lasturo, a Village of the State of Venice, lay sick not far from Bergamo of an
incurable disease: and the anguish of his infirmity, wherewith he was most
miserably vexed, brought with it cruel, and almost perpetual pain in all his
members. Therefore despayring of help by Physicians, he inuocated the B. Virgin
of Loreto, giving himself wholly unto her by vow: which if he obtained, he
promised to perform with all speed. His vow had effect. Being given over by
the Physicians, he did not so much wrestle with the disease, as with death it
self. But suddenly in the very agony he had present help. For our B. Lady (as
it were unlooked for) appearing unto him in the same shape, wherein she is
reverenced at Loreto, which before that time he never saw so much as in
picture, and bidding him be of good comfort, replenished him with great joy and
comfort. Wheruppon out of hand for devotion sake, the sick man endeavored to
kneel down on his bed as well as he could, and with great confidence in this
exceeding danger of death, began to implore the assistance of the Mother of
God. And she, with a meek and a motherly countenance, said unto him: Son,
put away fear, thou shall not die of this sickness; be thankful and mindful of
thy Vow. For which cause calling to his household, that they might hasten
thither, to reverence the Queen of Heaven with due devotion, our B. Lady went
suddenly out of his sight. And the promise was performed on both sides. For
the sick man recovering a little after, came to Loreto to perform his vow, the
90. year of this age; where leasurely viewing the Image of the Mother of God,
he affirmed to those, to whom he related this miracle, that the B. Virgin
appeared unto him in his sleep, in that very form and attire: that you may
think that shape and habit was pleasing to our B. Lady.

A Knight of Flanders being delivered from his enemies by an evident miracle,
dedicateth a wax-candle of huge bigness, to our B. Lady of Loreto. CHAP. XVII.
Vict. Brig.
ABOUT the same time a Knight of Flanders presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto.
For a gift, a votiue candle of huge bigness, to wit of 300. pound weight, in
token of a miracle almost incredible. The cause of his vow and gift was this.
The said Knight (his name is not set down, for he himself would have it
concealed) escaped manifest peril of life in Flanders by help of our B. Lady:
who by commandment of the Prince of Parma going on improuidently with eight
horsemen to view the coast, fell into the ambush of the enemy. The enemies were
about eight hundred, some horsemen some footmen, who quickly spreading
themselves abroad took from the^ all hope of escape. Notwithstanding the
Fleming wanted not courage. For inuocating our B. Lady of Loreto, and animating
his fellows theru^to, they valiantly fought with them, their confidence in the
B. Virgin prevailing so much with them, that it easily put away the cogitation
of so great danger: Such was the courage and strength which was given to that
small company, by the virtue of the heavenly help which they besought, not
failing them in their fight. For when on every side they were assaulted with so
many hands and weapons of sundry sorts, by the protection of the Mother of
God, they sustained the violence of their enemies and the multitude of their
weapons so long, till the Spanish forces came to rescue them, and then the
danger turned on their enemies themselves, whereof many were slain or taken.
And that there may be no doubt at all of the virtue of the heavenly help,
neither the Knight himself, nor any of his fellows, nor yet any of their
horses were hurt the least jot in so cruel a fight, which held for the space
of two hours; that you may think they fought under the protection of God, who
fighting for them made them to overcome. In regard whereof the Knight desiring
to have a perpetual monument of so worthy a miracle to remain at Loreto, sent
the wax-candle of huge bigness, whereof I have spoken, with intent, that on
certain festival days it should burn before the Maiesticall House of the B.
Virgin. And it is said, that he also gave a certain stipend, that when the
same was consumed, an other candle of like bigness should be put in his place,
for everlasting memory to posterity.

A deafe-man recouereth his hearing. CHAP. XVIII.
THIS which I am to relate is not so marvelous, Annal. Laur. Rier. Vict. Brig.
but better witnessed. Erasmus Deane of the Cathedral Church of Cracouia in
Polonia, being deaf in either ear, heard almost nothing at all, so that they
must deal with him not so much by words as by signs. But before his hearing
was taken from him, by report he had heard many admirable things of the B.
Virgin of Loreto: and seeing he could get no help by means of physic, and
that the heavenly virtue of the House of Loreto came often to his mind, much
grieved and perplexed with the infirmity; it stirred him to come to the sacred
House of our B. Lady, that with great confidence he might say Mass in the most
Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, and implore her help, where he found most
present remedy for his grief. For as soon as he had ended Mass, he perceived
that his left ear was opened and cured; and the next day saying Mass in the
same place, he likewise recovered the use of his right: Whereby he, who came to
the most sacred House half deaf, or rather deaf indeed, within two days
departed thence full glad to have recovered the perfect use of hearing. Andrew
Be^tiuoglio Governor of Loreto.
He himself told the whole matter with tears of joy to Rutilius Benzonius the
Bishop, and to Andrew Bentiuoglio Governor of Loreto, on the Nones of April,
the year of our Redemption 1590. At which time the new City of Loreto being
built with great speed on the enlarged space, was suddenly interrupted by the
untimely death of Xystus, assaied also by other Popes to small purpose. For
Monte-Regal was pared about and left half plained: the new Houses which were
crected without the old circuit, be now instead of Suburbs, whereof many
remain unfinished, that you may think, the renown of a City was not
pleasing to our B. Lady of Loreto, who chose her self a seat in a desert
place, lest the fame of the City, rather then the Religion of the place,
should inuit the Pilgrims to visit her. About that time, Andrew Bentiuoglio
departing this life, Fuluius Paulucius Governor of Loreto.
Fuluius Paulucius the Protonotary Apostolical succeeded in the Government of
Loreto, whose virtue, troublesome times did both exercise and illustrate.

Donaries brought or sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto, in the troublesome time
of Gregory the XIIII. CHAP. XIX.
SHORTLY after in the same year of our Redemption, to wit, 1590. in the
month of September, Vrbane the vij. was created Pope, who was as memorable for
the shortness of his Popedom as the love of all men toward him. Gregory the
14. a good and a godly man was chosen after Vrbane, but being weak and sickly
most of his reign, he sat but twelve months. This time was most miserable
and wicked, and no kind of mischief was wanting. For the Bandites which
revolted in the later time of Xystus, ranged freely up and down in troops,
much infesting the ways of the Popes dominions with arms. Besides there was a
penury with great dearth. Above all, a grievous mortality, the companion of
extreme famine, spread almost over all Italy, among all degrees and ages.
Neither was this year only, but also the next as fatal to Italy, wherewith
the fields were almost deprived of husbandme^, the Cities of Citizens, and
towns and villages of inhabitants, not so much with sickness, as (which is most
miserable) with hunger and famine. Whereby there came fewer Pilgrims and
Donaries to Loreto, then were wont, but more vows to visit and adorn the
House of Loreto, as the years ensuing did well declare. Yet notwithstanding
this very time, which wasted so many Cities of their Citizens, and towns and
villages of their Inhabitants, did not wholly deprive the House of Loreto of
gifts. The gift of Lelius Pignatellus and of others.
Lelius Pignatellus of Naples dedicated to the B. Virgin a silver lamp of two
pound weight. Cardinal Sfondrato nephew to Gregory the 14. the Image of our B.
Lady of Loreto, purtured in a plate of silver, of three pound weight. Hercules
Sfondrato the Earl such an other silver Image of our B. Lady of ten pound
weight, with a silver plate of like work, but of different weight, and two
Crewets of silver. Alfonsus Coroneus a goblet of jewels of great price, which
being turned of one entire hollowed gemme, seems to be a kind of Achates,
commonly called an Agat. Dionyse Delphinus a Venetian, worthy ornature of cloth
of silver, for the Priest when he sacrifices. N. Pernestaina sister to the
Viceroies wife of Boeme, a golden Pall, curiously and richly adorned with
silver flowers, like unto stars, which made goodly ornature for the Bishop.
This gift is most memorable, as well for profit as bounty. Peter Tyrannus
Calliensis, The inheritance of Peter Tyrannus.
a very rich and a wealthy man, by his will made the B. Virgin of Loreto the
sole heir of his patrimony. The chiefest of his inheritance was Falconaria a
rich Farm, which being very fruitful both for corn and wine, is situated
most conveniently, to wit, not far from Ancona and the sea, that from thence
the commodities and fruits may be conveyed to Loreto by boat. The whole
inheritance, is thought to be worth about three score thousand Crowns, which
must needs be a very great furderance to supply all the necessities of the
House of Loreto, either present or to come. And truly the great dearth and
scarcity, which at that time afflicted Italy, exceedingly increased the huge
expenses of the House of Loreto, and for the most part hindered the commodity
of her Alms and donaries. For besides 800. Crowns, which the Treasury of
Loreto pays yearly to the Bishop, she disburseth six thousand Crowns to
twelve Chanons, to twelve mansionary Priests (as they call them) to six Clergy
men, Coadiutors of the Quyre, to diverse Quyristers, and many other Officers of
the Church, besides provision of wax, oil, and other necessaries for the
sacred House it self. Also it mayntaineth all the company of the Governor of
Loreto, a great family of Artificers, of husbandmen and sheepheards: whereunto
are added two Colleges, the one of the Society of Jesus, the other of
Sclauonians, which when the times were better, received almost fiuethousand
Crowns out of the reuenewe^ of the House of Loreto. In the hospital and
spittle, many Pilgrims both sick and poor are cherished; to religious men ad
Priests, diet is given for three days: to other poor strangers, bread is
publickely distributed. Bishops, Cardinals. and other principal men, are
courteously and bountifully intertayned; and the sumptuous and honorable
building of our B. Lady, is never almost intermitted. Whereby these so great
and huge yearly expenses are said to exceed twenty thousand crowns, which
seeing the wealth of Loreto did with difficulty discharge in the abounda^ce and
plenty of things, at those times the expenses must needs be much increased.
And the scarcity of victuals continued almost four years; all which time the
revenues of the Land, and of the Treasury, were double or triple less then
was wont; and yet the charges were almost doubled. Wherefore the inheritance of
Calliensis did relieve the necessities of Loreto in very fit opportunity, but
not more for the present, then for the time to come. Shortly after a small
thing to be spoken of, did not a little illustrate the religion of the House of
Loreto. Marcus Sara a famous Captain of the Bandites infesting the popes
dominions with arms, What respect Marcus Sara used to the most Sacred House
and coming into Picene with a great company of wicked confederates, was even
overcome by the respect which all do commonly bear to the B. Virgin of Loreto.
For passing by Loreto, and coming to a convenient place, he saluted our B.
Lady with a joyful peale of shot of all his companies, and was so far from
violating the treasures of Loreto, as that he reverenced the sacred House with
gifts. Being kept our of the Church and the City it self, he sent a certain
man to Loreto with a gift, that money might be liberally given to the Mother of
God by them, who by violence and murder are accustomed to get it: God of his
godnes mitigating such stony hearts in favor of his B. Mother. Meane-while
albeit there was great dearth and scarcity of corn, nevertheless Paulucius
the Governor daily distributed great quantity of bread to the poor Pilgrims;
a gift most grateful unto them, because the famine which they sustained was
very great.

The chiefest Indulgence of Clement the VIII. CHAP. XX.
INNOCENTIVS the ix. sitting about two months, succeeded after the one years
reign of Gregory the xiiij. who having done many worthy things in the
beginning of his reign, frustrated the notable hope of all good men, being
quickly taken away by sudden death. After whom Clement the viij. succeeding,
deserved worthy remembrance for his Fatherly providence and solicitude. For in
the beginning of his Popedom with all diligence he lessened the dearth of
corn, increased by the wickedness of men, and putting the thieves to flight,
opened the ways which they had besieged, with great good of the pilgrimage of
Loreto. Who by reason of his exceeding piety to the B. Virgin Mother of God,
graced the House of Loreto with so worthy a gift of Indulgences, that now
nothing may seem to be added thereunto. For knowing very well that many
Pilgrims did resort to the sacred House of Loreto at all times of the year;
and also considering that the Indulgences of former Popes were restrained to
certain times, he thought it an indignity, that so many devout people
ouercomming great labors and perils of travel, even in the winter time,
should depart from the B. Virgin of Loreto, without the benefit of Indulgences:
specially being a known custom, that nothing is more used in the Pilgrimage
of Loreto, then carefully to purify their souls by sacred Confession, and
afterward to lead a new life. Therefore Clement the Pope thinking it for the
best, and for the honor of our B. Lady to have none to depart sorrowful from
her, most bountifuly granted remission of sins to all that rightly visited the
Cell of the B. Virgin of Loreto at all times of the year: And also commanded
that the day of the Transportation of the sacred House into Picene, should
yearly be celebrated on the 4. of the Ides of December. In the mean time,
multitudes of strangers resorting thither from all places, the ancient grace
and beauty of the Majesty of Loreto began to be renewed, not only by zeal of
peoples hearts, but also by votaries and gifts increasing in these difficult
times. Cardinal Sfondrato Legate to Bologna, coming to Loreto and devoutly
saluting the Mother of God, The gift of Card. Sfondrato and of others.
had a great desire to behold the Image of Loreto near at hand. Wheruppon
setting to a ladder, and going up with great deuouotion, after he had well
viewed the proportion of the B. Virgin, he privately took of a ring of great
worth (the ensign of his Cardinalty) and at his coming down dedicated it to
our B. Lady, either as a pledge of his devotion toward her, or else as a token
of her Patronage toward him. The ring is of gold, enriched with a precious
diamond, estimated at five hundred Crowns. But this is the chiefest praise of
Cardinal Sfondrato, who in the compass of two years visited the B. Virgin of
Loreto three times, and reverenced her with three excellent gifts; such
sweetness did his soul find in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin. The
same year returning from Bologna to Rome, and coming to Loreto to salute his
Patroness, he would not show himself in her sight without a donary. For he
dedicated to the B. Virgin a Cross of gold, adorned with beautiful Emeralds,
said to be worth four thousand Crowns: which hangs at the most rich chain
of precious stones of our B. Lady, as a notable ornament thereof. The next year
after, Cardinal Sfondrato going to Milan, reuisited the B. Virgin of Loreto
again, and for a gift gave her a gold ring with a rare diamond. The diamond is
bigger than the nail of a man's hand, which being put on the finger of the
sweet child JESUS, with the reflection of the lights, does shine like unto a
star, a gift so much the more to be esteemed, because it is well known that he
bought it for that purpose, for two thousand Crowns. Antony Pallauicino of
Cremona brought an other diamond in a gold ring, with peradventure the like
mind, but not of like price, for it is worth but a hundred Crowns. Also the
Cardinal of LORAINE sent diverse gifts of Princely munificence by certain men:
A crystal Cross with the Image of Christ of gold, a golden Chalice standing
on a foot of crystal, two Candlestickes and two Crewets with their ewer, a
Cup and a sprinkle for holy water, a Pix and a Pax, all of excellent crystal,
gold, and amber, esteemed at two or three thousand Crowns. The heirs of
Cardinal Caesius an Image most excellently wrought, representing the B. Virgin
of Loreto, sitting on a House with many Angels attending round about her. The
work it self is most notable, all wouen with silk and gold, every way almost
three Cubits broad: and the Images of the Mother of God and of the Angels, are
made with so great are, as they seem to have life. Cardinal RVSTICVCIO,
furniture of silver for the Altar and the Priest, beautified with an Image of
the B. Virgin of Loreto, and the arms of his family. VICTORIVS LABDAMARVS
LAVDENSIS Worthy ornature for the Altar, of siluer-cloth of tissue, garnished
with great flowers. The Prince Venusinus other ornature for the Altar, of
tissue-cloth of gold. Jason Villanus a Citizen of Bologna, a Vestment for the
Priest of tissue-cloth of gold; adorned with the arms of his family. Bernard
Strozzio a Florentine, double furniture for the Altar, and as much for the
Priest, glittering with gold and silver. Marquis Riano silver vestments for the
Priest and Ministers celebrating with solemnity, set forth with silk flowers
of equal distance; and ornature for the Bishop of the same stuff and work.
Luke Turregianus of Florence furniture for the Altar and the Priest of cloth of
silver, flourished with great golden flowers of curled work. Ferdinando
Gonzaga an ornament of gold for the Altar imbrodered and beset with pearl.
Scipio Spinelli Duke of Seminario two standing pots of silver a Cubit long,
wrought and engraven with rare art, and adorned with Images and acts of our B.
Lady: whereof the one does hold a great lilly of silver, the other a golden
bough of flourishing roses, placed on each side the feet of the B. Virgin.
Marcus Germanus Baron of Valcassano, a Crownet of pearl and jewels, seeming
like unto Roses, featly fastened in gold. John Baptista Cigola of Bressa, a
silver plate with his own Image as if he were praying. Maximilian Archduke of
Austria his own Image of the same fashion and substance, but of far greater
beauty. The Duke of Terra-Noua a Prelate praying to our B. Lady, engraven in a
golden plate, and a Chalice and Paten of gold. The wife of Virginius Vrsinius
of Nomentana the silver Image of a supplia^t, about two pound weight. Luke
Turregianus of Florence a silver Image of himself and his wife in manner of
suppliants of no small weight. Finally others dedicated other Images purtured
in plates of silver, of two and three pound weight, whereof this is the
worthiest. Peter Lomellinus of Genua presented a silver infant of natural
stature wrapped in his swath-ba^ds, said to be about ten pound weight, which we
may easily conjecture to be a votiue gift. But these without doubt were
votiues. A man's head of gold of reasonable bigness and weight, from John Jacob
Grimano. A iaw with teeth of silver, adorned with two diamonds and three
Carbuncles from Francis Deitristan, nearest to Clement the Pope in his Chamber.
And many silver lamps were presented, notable for workmanship and weight, But
one does excel among them all. The gift of John Charles Imperialis of Genua,
adorned, as it were, with three arms of Imagery, giving light in each thereof,
being about thirty pound in weight. There is also an other worthy gift in
another kind from Ferdinando Medices Great Duke of Tuscany; to wit, a silver
Galley two Cubits high, furnished and set forth with oars, and all manner of
tackling, about 40. pound weight: which the words engraven in either side of
the oar declare to be a votiue gift.

FERDINAND MEDICES GREAT DVKE OF TVSCANY, DEDICATED IT TO THE B. VIRGIN MOTHER
OF GOD, FOR PRESERVING HIS GALLEYS FROM THE PLAGVE, THE YEAR M.D.XCIII.

And the gift of Cardinal Mont-alto was notable for value and weight, who
dedicated to the B. Virgin of Loreto, a silver Image of himself and his brother
of great beauty, and of a hundred and fifty pound weight, with this devour
inscription.

ALEXANDER PERETTO CARD. MONTALTO VICECHANCELLOVR OF THE HOLY ROMAN CHVRCH, THE
NEPHEW OF XYSTVS V. BEING MINDFVLL AND GRATEFVLL TO OUR B. LADY OF LORETO, FOR
PRESERVING HIM AND MICHAEL HIS BROTHER, GAVE IT FOR DEVOTION SAKE, THE YEAR
M.D.XCIV.

The work is said to have stood in more than two thousand Crowns.

The gifts of Noble women. CHAP. XXI.
The gift of the Viceroyes wife of Boemia and of other Noble women.
AT that time the liberality of noble women was very notable. Polixena
Pernestaina the Viceroies wife of Boemia, presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto
for a gift, the head of S. Gerio^, Captain of the Thebeans, enclosed in a
worthy case, which being parcel guilt and curiously wrought, from the breast
represents S. Gerio^ in armor. The armor it self is adorned with gold and
silver, and on the Martyrs head does stand a Crown of precious stones, under
which a base of Ebony and silver shows the relics of the Thebean Martyrs
enclosed in crystal: which Polixena sent as a votiue gift to our B. Lady, for
restoring of health unto her husband. The Princess of Vastalla dedicated to
the B. Virgin two golden Images, the one of her self, the other of her husband,
with two hearts of gold, the whole of six pound weight. Mary Boadilia, a Galley
in a plate of silver, with a high Image of our B. Lady of Loreto. The Princess
of Castro-uetrano a Cross of gold, little truly for quantity, but notable for
substance, for it is adorned with six diamonds, set in gold. The Duchess of
Niuers presented by her husband two silver Candlesticks of costly work, of
eight pound weight. Hieronyma Spinula ornature for the Altar of violet damask,
wrought with gold, and two Crewets of silver with their ewer curiously and
richly engraven. Violanta Farnesia two silver Candle sticks of good work.
Salustia Crescentia a Roman, silver attire for the B. Virgin flourished with
golden stars. The Princess of Bisinia, a golden Dragon beautified with
jewels, valewed at 700. Crowns. Iustina Vice-Count ornature of needle-worke,
of gold, silver, and silk, flourished with admirable and new work. For the
work it self being laid on no ground nor direction, is wrought with the
needle, with continued and intermingled threeds of gold, silver, and silk of
diverse colors, void spaces left between, commonly called A point in the air.
A work of secret skill, and almost of infinite labor. For the ornature whereof
we speak, being made for the Altar, and also of the said work, contains the
xv. Mysteries of the Rosary of our B. Lady, very curiously expressed within
square spaces; whereof every other is adorned with great flowers, as it were of
Checker-worke, and that these void spaces might not be vnfilled, all the
ornature is stitched with twisted silver: which truly (if we believe the
report) was not only the gift of Vicecount, a most worthy Matron, but also her
own work; which may very well be, considering that there are many gifts of
other noble women, which themselves did also work, specially veiles for
Chalices, and attire for our B. Lady. Isabell Cosen-German to the Duke of
Sauoy, and wife of the Lord Siluester N. sent a worthy gift, wrought (as they
say) with her own hands, to wit, ornature for the Altar, Priest and Ministers,
celebrating with solemnity, made of silk and gold, with new and admirable
work. Iacoba Duchess of Cleeue sister to the Marquis of Saltzthurg a chain
of gold, adorned with a hanging globe of carbuncle and diamond.

The coming, and gift of Christine wife to the Great Duke of Tuscany. CHAP.
XXII.
THE coming of Christine wife to the Great Duke of Tuscany, was very
memorable, for many tokens of piety and munificence: who setting forth toward
Loreto with a most Princely train, brought with her great gifts: and not
forgetting Christian modesty and holy S. Francis, put on a plain garment of
ash color, and laid aside gold and jewels, that in such simple attire, she
might delight the eyes of the heavenly Queen, whom she knew allwaies to love
poverty. And the example of the devout Lady, prevailed so much with her maids,
matrons, servants, and the guard of her person, that all that did accompany her
in this pilgrimage did imitate her modesty and attire. Neither did Clement the
Pope fail to forward her worthy piety. For as she passed through the towns of
the Popes Dominions, which way soever she went, intertaynment was given her
after a Princely sort, when not only the playnesse of her attire was holde^
for a wonder, but also her exceeding piety for an example, specialy after she
approached near to Loreto. For as soon as she came out of Recanaty, and beheld
the Church of Loreto a far of, forth with she made have out of the horslitter
wherein she rode, fell down on her knees, and in the very way saluted the B.
Virgin, none of her train refusing to do that work of piety, which their Lady
performed. Going thence afoote to Loreto with certain Bishops, and the rest of
her retinew, she went straight to the House of our B. Lady, and contemning
cushions and all other Princely furniture, kneeled down very devoutly in the
Porch of the most sacred House. But the Bishops and Card. Gallo himself
ernestly persuading her to come into the sacred Cell of the Mother of God, she
answered, that it did not beseem her to pass that most Maiesticall threshold,
and to present herself before the most holy Virgin, until she had cleansed
her sins by sacred Confession. Neither could their entreaties make her to
alter her determination; such singular devotion did her devout soul show,
toward the B. Virgin of Loreto: Wherefore at last having rightly purified her
soul, and received the heavenly banquet, she entered into the most sacred Cell,
the fervor of her piety (as it happens) much increasing by delay: For this
mean while having a more fervent desire to see and reverence our B. Lady, she
kneeled down very reverently, and spent many hours devoutly in prayer: which
she did not once only, but three days together for so long she remained at
Loreto. All which time she was so conversant in the Church, and attentive to
divine prayer, that you would have thought, she had dwelt in the Church. Like
magnificence corresponded to these tokens of piety. For at her departure, she
sent children into the Church with gifts of Princely munifice^ce: Among which
were ornaments for the Altar, Priest and Ministers, celebrating with solemnity
curled three manner of ways with gold and silver, of admirable workmanship and
art: Lynnen for the Altar of most excellent stuff, and work: For it is
wrought all-ouer with excellent pictures of the Prophets, Sybills, Apostles
and Evangelists, curiously inserted among boughs and flowers with such
admirable needle-worke, that I dare affirm, scarce any thing in this kind,
ever to have been more curious, more precious, more admirable. For it well
appears by her own handwriting, that the price amounted to eight thousand
Crowns. Notable veiles for holy Chalices, and other such like, were also
presented with her other gifts.

The testimony and gift of a Spanish Priest, honored with a miracle. CHAP.
XXIII.
ABOUT that time, Alfonsus Sancius a Spanish Priest both learned and godly,
having lately returned from the East, and the Islands of China called the
Philippines, came to visit the House of Loreto. And before he departed thence,
I my self found him admiring the religion of the place, and familiarly asking
the cause of his wonder, he answered me with admiration. O good God! what
manner of thing is this! Truly I never felt the like unto this; nor never found
God more present in all my life; so does a certain heavenly sweetness flow into
my soul, in this most sacred House. He also recounted unto me, how he had
been at Vadalupe, Monte-Seratto, and other notable Houses of the B. Virgin in
Spain, but never felt the grace of God so present; for there seems to be the
bark, but here indeed the marrow it self. And obtaining of the Governor of
Loreto by means of Cardinal Caietan, in whose company he came, to remain all
night in the holier part of the sacred Cell, he passed the same in watching and
prayer, and afterward reported to his familiar friends, that in all his life he
never spent a more pleasant and more blessed night. In regard whereof he
desired to grace the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin with some gift of
his: and having brought with him (even from China it self) a white damask
vestment, with this he determined to beautify the Nicet of the B. Virgin Mother
of God, and the Image of Christ Crucified, which came with the sacred house. A
taylour therefore was sent for, who spreading abroad and measuring the damask,
first denied that there was stuff enough for both those purposes. But Sancius
urging him to measure it again with more diligent care, he stayed a while; and
when he had often turned it to and fro, he began to affirm, that at last he
had found a means to effect that which he desired, but so, that those
ornaments would be something shorter, then was fitting. Go to therefore, said
Sancius, and follow this course, if any thing, be wanting, our B. Lady her self
will supply it. He obeyed, and lest there might be any suspicion of error, he
had the old ornature of the Nicet at hand, according to which he determined to
make the form of the new, and so cut it out, Sancius himself looking on, and
took it with him to his shop. But the next day as soon as it was light, the
tailour came unto him crying out like one dismayed: Without doubt our B. Lady
has wrought a miracle in her ornament. For the new furniture of her Nicet,
which yesterday was too short, is now longer by a handful. Sancius followed
the man into his shop, to believe his own eyes and not his words, and found
that he reported no untruth, neither could he devise any thing to hinder it
from a miracle. For he saw that the veil of the Crucifix (which he caused to
be made) was just and nothing at all diminished: and the damask was made of a
certain strange work, that the deceit of adding such as ours is, could not
deceive one skillful in such things: albeit in such things, no fear is to be
had of adding, but rather of diminishing. Sancius himself, with many others,
stood by the taylour when he measured, and cut out the vestment, that it may be
evident no error was committed by improuidence: wherefore by him and others it
was holden for a Miracle: but we will leave the thing indifferent.

Bracelets which were offered to the B. Virgin, do fasten themselves on the
hands of Christ her little Child. CHAP. XXIV.
BUT this is not so marvelous for the gift it self, as for the event thereof.
Beatrice Gazea a Matron of great delicacie and riches, was married to a most
worthy Citizen of Rome; who for devotion coming to Loreto in the month of
May, the 93. year of this age, forthwith went into the inward part of the
sacred Cell, where the most religious Image of the B. Virgin of Loreto, holding
the sweet child JESUS in her lap, is scene and reverenced near at hand; which
is adorned with a most precious garment, and decked in magnificent sort.
Praying there with fervor to Christ and his B. Mother, Gazea had a great
desire to behold the countenance and ornature of the B. Virgin with more
attention: And blaming the imperfection of her sight, requested the keeper (who
at that time was Papyrius N.) to show her the Image of the Mother of God, more
exquisitly with the light of a torch. He willingly condescended unto it. For
with a burning torch, he showed her the B. Virgin, and at her entreaty told
also who gave all the donaries that were about her. Among the rest, there was a
fro^tlet of orie^t pearl of good bigness and beauty, dedicated to the B. Virgin
by a Matron of Rome, who being given to many delights and pleasures, lately
departed this life, albeit of a cruel kind of death, yet very Christianlike
and godly. Beatrice hearing this woman named, and knowing her familiarly,
forthwith burst into admiration. Behold the cause, why she by the grace of the
B. Virgin, had so godly an end of her delicate life! Then turning to the
keeper: And I (said she) would willingly dedicate these bracelets (then the
which I esteem nothing more) to Christ and his B. Mother, if I thought that
the gift of a wicked woman, would not be ungrateful unto them. The keeper
animated the woman seeming too fearful, saying that Christ was the Savior,
and Marie the Patroness of the wicked. Wheruppon in continent she pulled of
her bracelets made of antique work, of jewels and gold, and gave them to the
keeper to be offered to Jesus and his B. mother. And presently the Keeper took
a little forke prepared for such uses, and put thereon both the bracelets, to
direct them to the most sacred Statua, intending to hang them on the erected
singers of the right hand of the sweet child Christ Jesus, for at that present
there was no fitter a place. But as he was drawing back the stick, he
observed that one of the bracelets remained on the forke, and that the other
having passed the singers of the sweet child Jesus, was fastened on his hand,
so fitly, that fitter it could not be. A marvelous thing. Though the Keeper
saw it, yet he thought it might be done by chance. But afterward putting the
stick thither again nothing moved out of his place. To hang there also the
other bracelet, there happened another undoubted miracle. For by little and
little drawing the forke toward him, thinking that the gift remained on the
same hand of Christ, on which he left it, suddenly he saw the bracelett
removed from the right to the left hand (the golden globe which he held in
that hand, laid down in the B. Virgins lap) and the said bracelet fastened
thereon so fitly and so elegantly, that by setting of ladders, with leisure and
of purpose, it could not be done more aptly and seemly. Whereupon the Keeper
being suddenly stricken with a certain sacred dread at the admiration of the
thing, said to the woman: And Christ himself does show, that thy gift is very
grateful unto him; for he has put both thy bracelets on his own hands,
whiles I was doing another thing. Wherewith the woman (heavenly grace assisting
her) sighed; and whether for the riot of her former life, or else for the late
token of the divine beneuole^ce, in her sighing powered forth such abundance of
tears, that the sighs and sobs of her weeping, were heard of them that prayed
in the other part of the sacred Chamber. Which moving diverse of the company,
they came straight to the holier part of the sacred Chamber, to see the woman
overcome with tears and devotion, and the Keeper himself admiring the wonder
of so great a thing: Who afterward with many others told me this very thing as
it happened, which seemed wonderful to all that considered the order and event
thereof; and was much spoken of both by word and writing of many. Also at this
day the sweet Child JESUS does wear the said bracelets on his hands, for a
monument of the Miracle.

Two are delivered from danger of death. CHAP. XXV.
BUT to many, peradventure, this may rather seem a wonder then a miracle, but
it is an evident miracle. The same year Bartholomew Meliorinus, no mean
Citizen of Genua, being at Placemia, from altercation (as it happens) fell
to blows. He was alone. The contention began in the House of a Merchant of
Florence, with the master of the House himself. Wheruppon the household running
at the first noise thereof, laid hands on their weapons to help their Master.
In the fray Meliorinus received a grievous wound in the shoulder; and to make
it more grieous, the dagger being thrust in with great force, brake in the
midst. At the entreaty of others the quarrel was ended. Meliorinus was carried
home dangerously wounded. Forthwith Surgeons are sent for, who wyping the wound
looked on it, and found that the dagger being thrust deep into the bone stuck
so fast, that it could not otherwise be gotten out, then by launcing and making
the wound greater, that they might have means to come unto the broken weapon.
When they had cut the flesh four ways about the wound in manner of a Cross,
they assaied to pull out the piece of the dagger with pinchers. When that
prevailed not, they invented a new and a paynfull remedy to bring it forth, by
beating of his breast on the contrary side, which did much increase the most
bitter pain of the wou^d it self. After the dagger was both beaten and drawn
with the pinchers, and moved nothing at all, they constantly pronounced that
he could not live, unless God took mercy on him. Wheruppon news of his death
coming to Genua, his friends lamented him as dead. But he thinking to add
divine to humane help, implored the aid of the B. Virgin of Loreto. A
wonderful thing to be spoken and seen. The dagger moved so easily out of the
place to follow the pinchers, that you may plainly perceive it came not out so
much by the endeavor of man, as the goodness of God. And the sick man
obtaining his vow, and recovering of that wound, came to Loreto this very year
1594. even as we were committing these things to writing; and giving manifold
thanks to the B. Virgin, left with her the piece of the dagger, in token of so
great a benefit. About the same time John Baptista Iudex, a young man of the
same City, noble for descent and wealth, came to Loreto in performance of a
Vow. Who being at Venice the year before, and falling into a grievous and
troublesome ague, was so cruelly afflicted therewith, that it brought him to the
last cast, and being forsaken by the Physicians, he had no hope at all of
recovering his health. But being very much devoted to the B. Virgin of Loreto,
he confidently implored the help of his patroness in this extremity. His
trust deceived him not. For though the Physicians despaired of the sick-mans
amendment, and thought verily that he could not live; yet being called unto him
again by his household, to feel his pulse, they were presently put in so good
comfort by signs of health, that they conceived great hope of his recovery,
and delivered the like to the sick-man and his friends. Their hope deceived them
not. Because from that time, he began to be better every hour, and almost
every moment, until the ague quite forsook him, that in few days he
thoroughly recovered, and the year after came to Loreto to perform his vow,
where as I was committing these things to writing, he himself told me the
whole matter, as I have related it.

A notorious wicked man was miraculously debarred from coming into the most
sacred Cell, before he had made his Confession. CHAP. XXVI.
ALSO at this very time Almighty God showed by new miracles, what care he has
of the sanctity of the House of Loreto. A certain Pilgrim came to Loreto
laden with all kind of wickedness, and exceedingly given to an ungodly and a
desperate life. Before whom, as he presumed to pass the threshold of this
most sacred Cell, in the very entrance was presented a certain ghost of
horrible shape, which deterred the desperate bold wretch, and drove him back
again with exceeding fear. Wheruppo^ being touched with remorse for his
sins, he went unto the Priest to purge his soul. But to remember the sins
of so many years, much time was requisite, and great feeling of repentance.
For he came to Confession nothing prepared, nor thinking thereof. Wherefore the
Priest persuaded him, to retire him self into the most sacred Chapel, to
implore the help of God and his B. Mother, to look diligently into his former
life, and then to come to Confession better prepared. When the Priest had
dismissed him, he went about that which he was commanded, but wicked custom
did prolong true penance, and sorrow of his shame, rather then of his sins,
did molest and trouble his mind. For which cause the said ghost, appearing unto
him, as he went back to the sacred Chamber of the B. Virgin, forbad him
entrance again: which made him exceeding sorrowful, to be twice kept out of
the most maiesticall Cell and sight of the Mother of God, as a most wicked and
defiled fellow. Whereby true grief and sorrow for offending God was given unto
him, as soon as he was truly compunct for the loathsomnes of his wicked and
filthy life. Wherefore after diligent examination of his conscience, he returned
unto the Priest with weeping eyes to wash away his sins as well with tears,
as by Confession: and at last having rightly purified his soul, he went to the
Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, shamefastly and fearfully. A wonder to be
spoken. The entrance which was shut unto his impudency, was opened to his
shamefastnes.

A certain man intending to commit murder in the House of Loreto, by miracle
is changed to the contrary. CHAP. XXVII.
ABOUT the same time there happened an other not unlike to this. An honest and
a rich Citizen of Ascolo, having a son, the seventh month of his new
marriage, committed him to a Nourse to be brought up; and because he was his
only child, and borne before the time, he did often visit him with great
solicitude and care. But it chanced that sudden death took away the weak
child without the Nourses fault. Who well knowing what danger she was likely to
incur by the father of the Child, a man of fierce disposition, forthwith fled
secretly to Loreto, putting great confidence in the Mother of God. Her hope
deceived her not. For when he saw his only child dead, he was so enraged with
grief and wrath, that he began to blaspheme God and his Saints, and to seek
the Nourses death. But when she appeared not, he turned his wrath on her
husband, whom he left for dead, having given him many dangerous wounds.
Neither did his fury, being once imbrued in blood, stay it self here. For
knowing of the Nourses flight, forthwith he took his weapons, made have to
Loreto, and rusht into the Church, with intent to kill the Nourse, even in the
most sacred Cell it self, before the B. Virgins face. When he had searched
every corner of the Church in vain, he came to the Cell of the Mother of God,
where a little before, the Nourse having washed away the blemishes of her
soul, very devoutly implored the assistance of our B. Lady, hyding her self
under her protection and shadow. But this cogitation came into the mind of
this furious man, wholly bent to do murder. If that he entered into the sacred
Chapel, without doubt his heart would be so mollified therewith, that he
should think no more of revenge. Therefore turning an other way, he began to
seek all the corners of the Church. But behold as he went to and fro like one
distracted, unawares he passed by the Altar famous for the title of the
Annunciation of our B. Lady, which is without the most sacred Chapel under
the window whereat Gabriell the Archangell is said to have entered. And by chance
seeing the lights through the window (whereof many burn continually before the
B. Virgin) he was so moved with the present religion of the place, that he
fell down on his knees. A marvelous thing to be said. The fierce and hardened
man was presently so mollified that he changed his mind to the contrary, went
unto one of the Priests, laid aside his weapon, fell down at his feet, and
told him how he desired to turn a journey which he had undertaken for the
destruction of others to his own salvation. And in this the protection of the
Mother of God was very apparent, that he went unto the same Priest, to whom
the nourse had gone a little before. Whereby the Priest having sufficient notice
of the whole success of the matter, as soon as he had heard the Confession of
the Citizen of Ascolo, easily persuaded him, being now well pacified, to
pardon the innocent woman, and made him faithfully to promise, and to show,
that in good sooth he was friends with her. His deeds were more bountiful
than his words. For as soon as the woman returned home, he preferred her to
govern his household, and her husband (whom he charitably cured) over his
husbandry: whereby the danger turned to their good, by the help of the Mother of
God. About the same time it was determined to remove the Sclauonian College
to Rome, that the students might more diligently be instructed in good
disciplyne. Wherefore by commandment of Pope Clement the eight, the Collegialls
being called to Rome, and put into the Roman Seminary, in their part do
mayntaine the right and title of the Sclauonian College. This remoouall
happened the year 1594. which is the last of our History, that it may
comprehend the full three hundred years of the House of Loreto. And these we
have chosen among many, and almost innumerable things, to commit to writing,
being content to admonish the Reader, that the abundance of the matter and
miracles of Loreto is so great, that so many and so great can be related by
none, but many more and greater may remain to be rehearsed.

The Celebrity and Majesty of the House of Loreto. CHAP. XXVIII.
TRVELY I think I may do a thing worth my labor, to conclude this History of
Loreto with a short rehearsal of the incredibile Celebrity and Majesty of the
House of Loreto it self. There passes no time of the year, no month, no day,
in which the Cell of the most B. Virgin is not reuere^ced of many strangers.
This commendation of piety, is not proper to the Pice^tians and Italians, but
common to the Tra^salpines, and the^ that dwell beyond the seas, specially to
Sclauonians, French and Flemings. Neither do Spaniards, Portugals, Polonians,
or Germans fail therein. Notwithstanding two times of the year are of
special respect, for the confluence and celebrity of all people and nations,
the Spring, and the Autumn; whereof to the one, the sacred Conception of God,
to the other, the Birth of the B. Virgin Mother of God, do give beginning to
the solemnity. And each does continue three months; all which time the House of
Loreto is almost daily honored with great concourse of people. For there is no
City, no Town, no Village, nor no Street of the Territory of Picene, which
does not yearly in troops and multitudes, visit the B. Virgin of Loreto. Whose
example does inuit the borderers therabout, to wit, of Abruzzo, Vmbria,
Flaminia, Aemilia, and the rest of Italy to deserve the like praise of piety.
Their manner of coming, for the most part, is thus. The Sodalities go before,
every one both beautified and distinguished with their special Ensigns and
Banners: Whereof diverse (besides the Image of Christ Crucified) do carry before
them the Image of the Mother of God, and of other Saints excellently
represented. The moderators of these Sodalities, and the Priests, with the
music of each company, be the last of the assembly. Then follow their
Donaries, silver Crownets, Chalices, Ca^dles beset with money, rich clothing,
silver Images of Cities and towns and votiue tables betokening the divine
benefitts, which they have obtained by the intercession of our B. Lady. Many
times men like unto Angels, and sometimes also like to the Prophets and
Sybills, prophesying of the B. Virgin, are graciously placed among them, with
other persons singular for the presentation of their attire. And last of all
the disordered and confused multitude of the people, does many times follow
this solemnity. In the way, they sing solemn praise to God, to his B. Mother,
and to the Saints by turns; and when they pass by any City, they excite the
Inhabitants thereof, to the religion and reverence of the B. Virgin of Loreto,
by the virtuous example of their piety. But as soon as they behold the House of
Loreto (which is seen a far of being seated on a hill) forthwith all prostrate
their bodies, and with flowing tears of joy, salute the Mother of God. Then
ordering themselves and going in disposed Companies, they sing Lytanies and
Hymns. Neither are they without some, who spedily put of their clothes, to put
on sackcloth prepared for that purpose, and follow their fellows disciplining
their naked backs. The Priests of Loreto go in surplisses to the gate of the
Town, to meet these Sodalities of the Pilgrims, and bring the^ into the
Church with ringing of bells, and Music. When they come to the Porch of the
sacred House, with prostrate bodies all the Pilgrims salute the B. Virgin,
with so great fervor and compunction of heart, that they who are present, are
so mollified with their devotion, that they are compelled to weep for company.
But as soon as they come into the sacred Cell of the Mother of God shyning with
torches and lamps, and begin to behold and view the Image of our B. Lady, it
is incredible to say, what plaints, what sighs, what tears, are every where
heard. You would easily believe, that Almighty God himself were present among
them. Further, many are replenished with such heavenly dread and unwonted joy
and do so adhere to those sacred walls, that they can scarce be pulled and
drawn for thence. And whiles with great devotion they behold the Altar of the
Apostles, the sacred Armory, the door mured up, and the chymney, whiles the B.
Virgin, doing any thing in these places, does occur to the minds of the^
that do meditate, they would make no end of beholding, nor no end of kissing
those sacred things, if the fervor of many coveting to do the same, did not
hinder the^. This in effect is the manner of the bordering people. But the
Pilgrims of foreign Nations, come thither in great troops, some on foot,
some on horsbacke, or else in Coaches, most of the^ remarkable in the habit and
signs of Pilgrims: Yet notwithstanding their different habit, the reverence
which they use to the House of Loreto, is the self same to the^ all. This is
almost common to all, to be fed at the Heavenly Table, after the expiation of
their sins: whereof many do enrich the Altar of the B. Virgin with money and
precious Donaries. Howbeit the worthiest gifts are usually delivered to the
Keepers of the sacred Chapel, that they may be recorded in the books of
Loreto, that memory, both of them, and of the giuers may be known to
posterity. The Altar of the Apostles, but specially the Image of the Mother of
God, is allwaies magnifice^tly adorned with jewels and other gifts according to
the variety of the time. And the sacred Chapel it self does always shine with
white wax-candles, and many silver lamps; and for the most part sounds
continually with Music and instruments. And (which is chief of all) does
allwaies abound with the present grace of Almighty God, which flows into the
hearts of the Pilgrims, that come to visit it: In such sort truly, as it
replenisheth the goldy with a certain unwonted joy, the wicked with horror,
to the sick it gives remedy, comfort to the sorrowful, spirit to theslow,
aid to the distressed, health to the forlorn. But the greatest concourse to
the Chapel of Loreto is about Easter, Whitsontide, and the Nativity of the B.
Virgin. For besides others innumerable, which come to Loreto, about Easter on
foot, on horsbacke, or in Coaches, out of Lo^bardy, Venice, and Dalmatia, many
come in great multitudes to Ancona by shipping, whence (for the most part) all
go afoot to the sacred House of Loreto. And the day after Easter (in which is
read the Gospel of the Pilgrims going to Emmaus) most of them attire
themselves in the habit of Pilgrims, and after the Benediction of their
Prelates, begin to set forward by the direction of their Priests, the Keepers
of Innocence: of which Pilgrims there is such a multitude, as they may happily
exceed twelve thousand: who receive an incredible concourse of people from the
adjoining Villages, Towns, and Cities, and oftentimes many and great
companies of harvest folks and mowers. But specially the Nativity of our B.
Lady is illustrated with far greater multitude of strangers; almost all Picene
(to say nothing of other Countries) resorting to Loreto. For it is well known,
that in those two days, above two hundred thousand people came of late to the
House of Loreto: and therefore necessity does enforce the keepers of the most
sacred Chapel, at that time to compass the inward part thereof on the outside
with railes, that they may easily admit, or exclude whom they will, and keep
of the multitude. Likewise at all times of the year, Bands of soldiers and
Troops of Horsemen going to the war, come to Loreto, and when they have
received the holy Mysteries, they honor the B. Virgin with sporting-shewes in
warlike fashion. And this incredible confluence of strangers has made the
ways which go to Loreto to be most frequented with Innes, the opportunity
whereof (joined to the commodity of the ways themselves) yields no difficult
Pilgrimage to footmen, howbeit delicate and feeble. Moreover the said ways are
so much frequented, that diverse troops of Pilgrims do every where meet: which
is so great an instigation to piety, and ease of travel, that Marcus Antonius
Columna himself (to say nothing of others) a man famous for riches and warlike
affairs, was able to perform his votiue Pilgrimage to Loreto on foot. And in
very deed when at length they come thither, and behold and see the Mother of
God, all receive so great comfort of heavenly joy (Alm. God replenishing their
godly hearts therewith) that they confess they have received a very great
reward, though their Pilgrimage were difficult and paynefull unto the^. What
should I here relate how many make vows to the B. Virgin? How many perform
them? How many come out of the sink of wickedness? How many free their souls
from the inexplicable snares of incestuous delectations? How many forget old
enmities, and long continued hatreds? How many despairing of salvation, and
making league with Hell, are pulled out of the jaws of Hell it self? For by
how much the souls are worthier than the bodies; by so much, more and greater
miracles of the B. Virgin of Loreto are manifestly seen, in curing the souls
rather than the bodies of men. But because it is the endeavor of man, to
explicate by words, these and other things which we have recounted, seeming to
measure the manifold favors of Alim. God (which do very specially appear at
his beloved Loreto) by humane imbecility; therefore I think it fitter to yield
to the burden, than to go about to say more of those things, which I should
but impair and lessen by my discourse. But this I dare boldly affirm, that
the Celebrity and Majesty of Loreto is so great, as they, who have not seen it
with their eyes, can not conceive it in their minds: so that, if hereafter you
confer that which you have heard, with these things which we have rehearsed,
you shall find the fame to be much less, than the thing it self. So much by
her incredible Majesty and dignity, does one Loreto on earth, not only surpass
all credit, but even very fame it self, which is wont to declare and explicate
all things to the uttermost.

To the greater glory of God, and of our B. Lady of Loreto.

A TABLE OF THE PARTICVLAR CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THIS History of LORETO.
In the first Book.
1 THe House of our B. Lady is reverenced with great honor in Galiley. Chap.
I. 2 Having lost that reverence, it is miraculously transported into Dalmatia.
Chap. II. 3 By revelation of our B. Lady her House is known, and honored with
a Miracle. Chap. III. 4 The miracle is diligently sought out by certain men
sent into Galiley. Chap. IIII. 5 It departs out of Selauony, with great
lamentation of the Dalmatians. Chap. V. 6 Being brought into Picene, it is
seated in a wood of Recanati. Chap. VI. 7 It is removed out of the wood unto
the Hill of the two Brothers. Chap. VII. 8 It forsakes the Hill of the two
Brothers by reason of their discord. Chap. VIII. 9 The impressions of the
places where the sacred House has stood. Chap. IX. 10 The chief place and the
admirable situation of the House of Loreto. Chap. X. 11 By manifestation of the
Dalmatians, the Picentians know it. Chap. XI. 12 An Eremite provoke the
Picentians to in quire diligently of the matter. Chap. XII. 13 The miracle is
sought out by certain men sent into Galiley. Chap. XIII. 14 The Picentians
choose our B. Lady for their Patroness. Chap. XIIII. 15 Heavenly signs make
the sacred House more illustrious and more known. Chap. XV. 16 The walls
adjoined to the sacred House for a support, give back a certain distance.
Chap. XVI. 17 Heavenly lights make the day of the B. Virgins Nativity, more
solemnized in her native House. Chap. XVII. 18 The Citizens of Recanati
inuirone the sacred House within a Church. Chap. XVIII. 19 The sacred House is
adorned with Indulgences by Pope Benedict the xij. Chap. XIX. 20 The State of
the House of Loreto, whiles the Popes sat at Auignon in France. Chap. XX. 21
The continuance of Schism was no small hindera^ce to the ornaments of the
House of Loreto. Cha. XXI 22 Pope Martin the V. adorneth the sacred House with
Indulgences and Faires. Chap. XXII. 23 The wealth of the Church of Loreto
whiles Eugenius the IIII. was Pope. Chap. XXIII. 24 The House of Loreto is
graced with Indulgences by Pope Nicolas the V. Chap. XXIIII. 25 Pope Callistus
the third fortifying the sacred House against the Turks, puts the
Barbarians to flight, much frighted with a great overthrow. Chap. XXV. 26 By
restoring of health to Pope Pius the second it began to be far more famous and
illustrious. Chap. XXVI. 27 The Bishop of Recanati does enrich it with worthy
possessions. Chap. XXVII. 28 The sum of the History of Loreto is set up in
the Church by Tereman the Governor. Cha. XXVIII.
In the second Book.
1 POpe Paul the second being cured of the plague, goes about to beautify the
sacred House of Loreto with a new Church, and to adorn it with his decrees.
Chap. I. 2 James a Franciscan is delivered from an incurable disease, and from
the assault of Devils. Chap. II. 3 The ancient Decrees are graced with new, by
Pope Xystus the IV. Chap. III. 4 A great Army of Turks ready to spoil the
wealth of Loreto, is put to flight by miracle. Chap. IIII. 5 Pope Innocentius
the VIII. does reverence it with gifts, and does also commit it to the
Government of the Carmelites. Chap. V. 6 The testimony of Baptista Mantuanus of
the said House of Loreto. Chap. VI. 7 A Noble woman of France being possessed
with seaue^ Devils is delivered. Chap. VII. 8 The gift of the City of Recanati
for her deliverance from the plague. Chap. VIII. 9 The Decrees of Pope Julius
the second his works in the new Church; and the gifts of Noble men. Chap. IX.
10 A Noble woman of France is cured of the palsy. Chap. X. 11 Pope Julius the
second finisheth and fortifieth the Church of Loreto. Chap. XI. 12 Pope Julius
being defended from a great shot, does beautify the House of Loreto with gifts.
Cha. XII. 13 A girl of seven years of age is brought to Loreto, by the B,
Virgin her self. Chap. XIII. 14 Near unto the Porch of the Church of Loreto
the Popes Palace is begun by Julius the second. Chap. XIIII. 15 The Queens
of Naples visit the House of Loreto. Chap. XV. 16 Pope Leo the X. does adorn
it with most worthy Decrees. Chap. XVI. 17 The sacred House is adorned with
Princely ornaments and Donaries. Chap. XVII. 18 A Dalmatian Priest comes to
Loreto, carrying up his bowels with his hand. Chap. XVIII. 19 Diverse assaults
of the Turks are repulsed by Miracle. Chap. XIX. 20 It deceives the avarice of
the Christian army. Chap. XXI. 21 It is walled about by Pope Leo the X. Also
the notable work of the caruing is forwarded, Chap. XXI. 22 Pope Clement the
VII. does beautify the sacred House with Decrees and other things. Chap. XXII.
23 The Architect presuming to dig through the sacred walls, is stricken
senseless, Chap. XXIII. 24 Pope Clement being protected by the help of the B.
Virgin of Loreto, does adorn her with special care. Chap. XXIV. 25 Loreto is
made more healthful by cutting down the woods. Chap. XXV. 26 Pope Clement
sends three of his Chamber into Dalmatia and Galiley, to inquire of the
remouall of the sacred House. Chap. XXVI. 27 Three Noblemen are delivered from
danger of death. Cha. XXVII. 28 The testimony of Friar Leander of the House of
Loreto. Chap. XXVIII. 29 The House of Loreto is enriched and honored with many
gifts. Chap. XXIX.
In the third Book.
1 POpe Paul the third adorneth the sacred House with benefits and Decrees,
Chap. I. 2 Loreto is committed to the Protection of the people of Recanati.
Chap. II. 3 A Fraternity of Children is instituted to sing solemn praise to
the B. Virgin of Loreto. Chap. III. 4 The new Hospital and the Spittle are
opened in favor of the Pilgrims, Chap. IIII. 5 The Relics of the House of
Loreto propagate her Religion. Chap. V. 6 The description of the carued-worke
wherewith the sacred House is environed. Chap. VI. 7 The Thole of the Church
beginning to cleave is strengthened. Chap. VII. 8 The House of Loreto is
enriched with new gifts. Chap. VIII. 9 The Captain of a Band of Horsemen, is
delivered from manifest danger of a River. Chap. IX. 10 Pope Paul the third
does twice visit the sacred House of Loreto. Chap. X. 11 The House of Loreto is
adorned with Chapels and heavenly signs. Chap. XI. 12 Pope Julius the third
instituteth a College of the Society of JESUS at Loreto. Chap. XII. 13 The
wonder of the heavenly flames is renewed at Loreto. Chap. XIII. 14 Heavenly
flames are seen in the Church it self. Chap. XIIII. 15 Two Capuchines are
delivered from the raging sea, Chap. XV. 16 A young man is saved from the
whirl-pooles of a River. Chap. XVI. 17 A young maid of Loreto is delivered out
of a well: A Citizen of Caieta out of prison. Chap. XVII. 18 A Bassa of the
Turks is cured by the B. Virgin of Loreto, and does honor her with gifts.
Chap. XVIII. 19 The House of Loreto is enriched with the gifts of Noble men.
Chap. XIX. 20 By Revelation of our B. Lady of Loreto, Marcellus Ceruinus the
Cardinal does know that he shall be Pope. Chap. XX. 21 The Religion of the
sacred House is increased by enlarging the Jesuits College. Chap. XXI. 22 The
House of Loreto is enriched with gifts. Chap. XXII. 23 The French Army does
honor the sacred House, whereby many of those soldiers are reduced to the way
of salvation. Chap. XXIII. 24 The City of Vtina preserved from the plague.
Chap. XXIIII. 25 Sight is restored to two that were blind. Chap. XXV. 26 A
Pilot of Genua is delivered twice from shipwreck. Chap. XXVI. 27 An innocent
young man is delivered out of prison: Also an other twice hanged is preserved
from death. Chap. XXVII. 28 A woman of Sicily having her throat cut, is cured.
Chap. XXVIII. 29 A Genuese doubting of the House of Loreto, is punished, and
repents. Chap. XXIX. 30 The violatours of the sacred House are punished by
Miracle. Chap. XXX. 31 The robbers of the sacred Cell are apprehended by
Miracle, and put to death. Chap. XXXI. 32 Two young men are delivered from the
servitude of the Devil. Chap. XXXII. 33 A young man whom the Devil had
brought into bondage, is delivered and freed thereof. Cha. XXXIII.
In the fourth Book.
1 THe care of Pius IV. and of the Cardinal of Vrbine, in adorning the House
of Loreto. Chap. I. 2 The care of the Picentians, and the Protection of the B.
Virgin toward her own House. Cha. II. 3 The Bishop of Conymbria being taught
by his own harm, restores a stone, which he procured to be taken out of the
sacred House. Chap. III. 4 The same stone is brought back again to Loreto,
and reverenced with great preparation and concourse of people. Chap. IIII. 5
Many are delivered from manifest danger. Chap. V. 6 A Mariner loosing his ship
is saved by the help of our B. Lady of Loreto. Chap. VI. 7 Two men are
delivered from lightening: Two barren women are made fruitful. Chap. VII. 8
Many despayring of their recovery, are cured by Miracle. Chap. VIII. 9 Two
possessed persons are delivered from the tormenting Devils. Chap. IX. 10 Sight
is restored to two blind-men. Chap. X. 11 The B. Virgin of Loreto does cure two
that were dumb, and does also restore unto one of them his tongue, when it was
cut out. Chap. XI. 12 A Jew is delivered out of prison, and baptized at Loreto.
Chap. XII. 13 The chiefest gifts brought or sent to Loreto whiles Pius the
IIII. was Pope. Chap. XIII. 14 The testimony of Pius V. of the House of Loreto.
Chap. XIIII. 15 The Hospitality and alms of the House of Loreto. Chap. XV. 16
The gifts of Pope Pius V. and of other Princes. Chap. XVI. 17 Some are
delivered from the inu^dation of a River; others from a great tempest of the
Sea and from Pirates. Chap. XVII. 18 Many are delivered from the servitude of
the Turks. Chap. XVIII. 19 One hanged on the gallows is delivered. Chap. XX.
20 Two are preserved from capital punishment. Chap. XX. 21 The help of the B.
Virgin of Loreto in the Victory gotten of the Turks by sea. Chap. XXI. 22 Pope
Gregory the XIII. adorneth the sacred House with Indulgences and ways. Chap.
XXII. 23 The celebrity of Loreto in the year of Iubiley. Chap. XXIII. 24 The
piety of Don John de Austria in visiting the House of Loreto. Chap. XXIIII. 25
The piety and munificence of Ioane de Austria the Great Duchess of Tuscany.
Chap. XXV. 26 The Duchess of Loraine is cured of the palsy at Loreto. Chap.
XXVI. 27 Two thrown from their horses are delivered from death. Chap. XXVII.
28 A certain man receiving twelve deadly wounds is cured. Chap. XXVIII. 29 The
Mother and the daughter are delivered from death, others from other diseases.
Chap. XXIX. 30 Three Cities are delivered from the plague. Chap XXX.
In the fifth Book.
1 THe gifts of the Cardinal of Vrbine and of other Princes. Chap. I. 2 The
celebrity of the Church of Loreto is increased. Chap. II. 3 A College of
Sclauonians is instituted at Loreto. Chap. III. 4 The munificence of Duke
Ioyeuse and of the King of France. Chap. IIII. 5 Other gifts of the Nobility of
France. Chap. V. 6 The Donaries of the Duke of Bauaria, and of other Princes of
Germany. Chap. VI. 7 The gifts of the Princes of Italy. Chap. VII. 8 The
Violatours of the sacred House are punished from heaven. Chap. VIII. 9 A Ship
of Epidaurus is delivered out of the hands of Pirates. Chap. IX. 10 Loreto is
graced with the title of a City, and with a Bishops Sea. Chap. X. 11 Cardinal
Ioyeuse recommendeth his protection of France, to the B. Virgin. Chap. XI. 12
The worthy endeavors of Card. Gallus toward the B. Virgin of Loreto. Chap.
XII. 13 Donaries brought or sent to Loreto whiles Xystus V. was Pope. Chap.
XIII. 14 An Irish Bishop does twice escape the hands of Heretics. Chap. XIIII.
15 Two Priests are enforced to send back the mortar of the sacred House. Chap.
XV. 16 Our B. Lady appears to two in the same form in which she is
reverenced at Loreto. Chap. XVI. 17 A Knight of Flanders is delivered from his
enemies by a worthy Miracle. Chap. XVII. 18 A deaf-man recouereth his hearing.
Chap. XVIII. 19 Gifts brought or sent to the B. Virgin, Gregory the XIIII.
being Pope. Chap. XIX. 20 The Indulgences of Pope Clement the VIII. and the
gifts of Noble men. Chap. XX. 21 The Donaries of Noble women. Chap. XXI. 22 The
gifts of Christine the Great Duchess of Tuscany. Chap. XXII. 23 The gift of a
Spanish Priest is honored with a Miracle. Chap. XXIII. 24 Bracelets offered to
the B. Virgin of Loreto, do fasten themselves on the hands of Christ her little
Child. Chap. XXIIII. 25 Two are delivered from danger of death. Chap. XXV. 26
Anotorious wicked man is miraculously debarred from coming into the most
Sacred House. Chap. XXVI. 27 A certain man is preserved from committing of
murder. Chap. XXVII. 28 The Celebritie and Majesty of the House of Loreto.
Chap. XXVIII.
AN OTHER TABLE OR INDEX OF THE WORTHIEST THINGS, THAT HAVE BEEN BESTOWED upon
our B. Lady, and her sacred House of LORETO.
The Donaries and Benefits of Popes.
OF Clement the vij. Of Clement the viij. Of Gregory the xiij. Of innocentius
the viij. Of Julius the second. Of Leo the x. Of Martin the v. Of Paul the
second. Of Paul the third. Of Pius the second. Of Pius the fourth. Of Pius
Quintus. Of Xystus the fourth. Of Xystus Quintus.
The Donaries of Cities and Towns.
Of Puy a City of France. Of Arezzo. Of Ascolo. Of Bologna. Of Camerino. Of
Corneta. Of Fabriano. Of Firmo. Of Lions. Of Macerata. Of Milan. Of
Monte-Santo. Of Palermo. Of Pisaurus. Of Recanati. Of Spello. Of Vico-Varone.
Of Viterbo. Of Vtina.
The Donaries of Cardinals and Bishops.
Of Cardinal Ab-Altemps. Of Card. Alexandrino. Of Card Arigonio. Of the Card.
of Augusta. Of the Card. of Austria. Of Card. Casio. Of the Card. of Carpa. Of
Card. Columna. Of Card. Cusano. Of the Card. of Est. Of Card. Caietan. Of the
Card. of Loraine. Of Card. Madruzzo. Of the Card. of Mantua. Of Card. Medices.
Of Card. Momino. Of Card. Mont-alto. Of Card. Paceco. Of Card. Palmerio. Of
Card. Perusino. Of Card. Riario. Of Card. Rusticucio. Of the Card. of S.
George. Of the Card. of S. Praxedes. Of the Card. of the four Crowned Martyrs.
Of Card Ssondrato. Of Card. Tranensis. Of the Card. of Trent. Of Card. Vinerio.
Of the Card. of Vrbine. Of the Archbishop of Alto-uico. Of the Bishop of
Cortona. Of the Bishop of Eugubino. Of the Bishop of Recanati.
The Donaries of Princes and Noble men.
Of the Archduke of Austria. Of Ascanius Columna. Of Amadeus a noble man of
Sauoy. Of the Baron of Valcassano. Of a Bassa of the Tuakes. Of the Earl
Iustus. Of the Earl Martinengo. Of the Earl Oliuario. Of the Earl Rangono.
Of the Earl Sfondrato. Of the Duke of Atria. Of the Duke of Bauaria. Of the
Duke of Albania. Of the Duke of Ferrara. Of Duke Ioyeuse. Of the Duke of
Grauine. Of the Duke of d'Oumale. Of the Duke of Mantua. Of the Duke of Milan.
Of the Duke of Espernon. Of the Duke of Maestricht Of the Duke of Terranoua. Of
the Duke of Sauoy. Of the Duke of Sermoneta. Of the Duke of Seminario. Of the
Duke of Vrbine. Of Don John de Austria. Of Laurence Medices. Of the great
Prior of Malta. Of the great Duke of Tuscany. Of the Marquis of Aquauiua. Of
the Marquis of Bitonta. Of the Marquis Capursio. Of the Marquis of the Empire.
Of the Marquis of Ma^tua. Of Marquis Lippeo. Of Marquis Riano. Of Marquis
Roboreo. Of the Marquis of Tripaldo. Of the Marquis of Guasto. Of Nicolas
Frangipane. Of the Prince of Bisinia. Of the Prince Stiliano. Of the Prince of
Mantua. Of the Prince of Transiluania. Of the Prince of Venusino. Of the
Viceroy of Naples. Of the King of France.
The Donaries of Noble Women and Ge^tlewomen.
Of Camilla Peretta. Of Clelia Farnesia. Of Constantia Caretta. Of Constantia
Leiua. Of the Countess of Briatico. Of the Countess of Palena. Of the
Countess of Populo. Of the Duchess of Amalpha. Of the Duchess of Brunswicke.
Of the Duchess of Cleeue. Of the Duchess of Loraine. Of the Duchess of
Ma^tua. Of the Duchess Mo^t-alto. Of the Duchess of Niuers. Of the Great
Duchess of Tuscany. Of the Duchess of Parma. Of Hieronyma Spinula. Of Isabell
of Sauoy. Of Liuia Pignatella. Of the Marquess of Est. Of the Marquess of
Ma^tuae Of the Marquess of the Holy Cross. Of the Marquess of Guasto. Of
Margaret of Austria. Of Marie Boadilia. Of the Princess of Bisinia. Of the
Princess of Casteluetrano. Of the Princess of Sulmo. Of the Princess of
Vastalla. Of Portia Vitelliae. Of Portia Cesia. Of the Viceroyes wise of Boeme.
Of the Viceroyes wife of Naples. Of the Viceroyes wife of Abruzzo. Of the
Queen of France. Of the Queen of Hungary. Of Salustia Crescentia. Of
Violanta Farnesia.
The Donaries of Gentlemen and other Worthy-men.
Of Alsonso Coroneo. Of Alsonso Vice-counte. Of Antonie Perotto. Of Antonie
Lieua. Of Antonie Pallauicino Of Antonie Pignatello. Of Antonie Spinelli. Of
Augustine Aurea. Of Bassanus of Mantua. Of Bernardine Strozzio. Of Bernardine
Sanquinio. Of Dionise Delphino. Of Vedebono the Knight. Of a Knight of
Flanders. Of Faederick Tomacello. Of Ferdinando Gonzaga. Of Francis Deitristan.
Of Francis Caietan. Of George Monacho. Of Hercules Maria Ssorza. Of Hierome
Grimaldo. Of John Villano. Of John Piccolhomini. Of John Baptista Carafsa. Of
John Baptista Duara. Of John Charles Imperialis. Of John Francis Bossio. Of
John Jacob Grimano. Of Julius Monaldo. Of Lelius Pignatellus. Of Leonard
Vinerio. Of Luke Turregiano. Of Lewis George. Of Lewis Gisilardo. Of Lewis
Martinengo. Of Marquius Antonius Blanchettus. Of Oliver Fagnano. Of Pardo
Pappacodo. Of Peter Lomellino. Of Pompilius of Bologna. Of Pirrhus Gonzaga. Of
Sfortio Pallauicino Of Victor Labdamaro. Of Vincent Alfano. Of Virginio Vrsino
of Nomentana.
Indulgences of diverse Popes granted to the House of Loreto.
Of Benedict the xij. Of Vrbane the vi. Of Boniface the ix. Of Martin the v. Of
Nicolas the v. Of Paul the second. Of Xystus the fourth. Of Julius the second.
Of Gregory the xiij. Of Clement the viij.
The Patrons of Loreto.
Cardinal Roboreo. Card. Bibiana. The Prior of Capua. Card. Contareno. The
Card. of Carpa. The Card. of Vrbine. Card. Morono. Card. Vastauillano. Card.
Gallo.
Cities and Towns delivered from the plague.
Pny. Lions. Palermo. Recanati. Vtina.
The testimony of Diverse Popes of the House of Loreto.
Of Paul the second. Of Xystus the fourth. Of Julius the second. Of Leo the X.
Of Clement the vij. Of Paul the iij. Of Pius Quintus.
FINIS.

