A Funeral Poem. UPON THE DEATH OF THE MOST WORTHY AND TRVE SOVLDIER; Sir
Francis Vere, Knight. Captain of Portsmouth, etc. L. Governor of his
Majesty's Cautionarie Town of Briell in HOLLAND, etc.

LONDON Printed for Eleazar Edgar. 1609.

DEDICATED TO HIS LIVING MEMORY; WHICH ASCENDS TO THE INHERENT HONOR OF THE
HEROYQVE HOPE OF NOBILITY, THE EARL OF OXFORD, etc. FROM WHOSE NOBLE FAMILY,
THIS IMMORTAL WORTHY, HAS THE HONOR TO BE Descended.

A Funeral Poem. UPON THE DEATH O^ THE MOST WORTHY AND TRVE SOVLDIER; SIR
FRANCIS VERH, Knight; Captain of Portsmouth, etc. Lord Governor of his
Majesty's Cautionarie Town of Briell in HOLLAND, etc.
THy Earth's returned to Earth, from whence it came;
But from thy Spirit rizze thy worthy Fame,
Immortal Vere; and that shall never dye;
But with it live to all Posterity.
How can the Memory of such a Spirit,
Whose Actions even of Envy got his Merit
Acknowledgement, Subscription, Approbation;
And made it clearly shine through Emulation,
Which with Contracted Clouds did interpose,
Between the world and him, to darken those
^lustr^ous honors of his noble worth,
Which his eff^ntiall Souldiership brought forth;
^e ever ruined? Nor can Death or Fate,
Confine his Fame to an expiring date;
^ince all they can do, is to kill his Earth;
Whose Dust wiped of his Soul, a second Birth
Regenerates the honor of his Acts
unto Eternity. He that detracts
The dead Man's good, defames his own intent;
and makes obscured virtues, eminent.
^ut (Noble Vere) this Monument I raise,
With uncorrupted purpose to thy praise.
^ll that I speak, is vnexacted, true and free;
^rawne clearly from vnalter'd certaintee.
For here I do ingenuously profess,
^he nature of this Subject would oppress
and trouble my reposed state of Soul,
With contemplating that which should contruleo
Our Licenses of Conscience, if the due
Of this I attribute thee, were untrue.
And you the worthies of our present days,
those ludgements and experience knew his ways;
^nuersed with his Actions and Intents,
(...) private and in public managements;
^o your true understandings it is known,
that he might claim ^ese honors for his own.
His Mind was like an Empire, rich and strong,
In all defensive power against the wrong,
That civil tumult or inuasiue Hate
Might raise against the peace of her estate.
It was a plentiful and fertile ground,
Wherein all needful riches did abound.
Labor increased what natiuely was bred;
No part was bairen, or ill husbanded.
And with the pains of Industry and wit,
In little time, He made such Benefit
Of Conversation (the Commerce of Minds;)
That what his hable observation finds
In other knowledges of use, and good,
Which in his own was yet not understood;
Through this rich trade (whereby al good is known)
Conuerts them home, and plants them in his own.
Which was so sweet and temperate a seat,
Without th'extremities of cold or heat;
That it could easily it self apply
To every useful Nature, properly.
And so did yield such prosperous increase
Of virtues qualified for warreand peace;
That not a Mind wherewith He did confer,
Could utter speech of that particular,
Though in the ways which other men professed;
Where with his understanding was not blessed.
And whatsoever He delivered forth,
Inserious things, was of a Solid worth;
Commodiously material; Full of use;
And free from ostentation and abuse.
And as that Empire of his mind was good;
So was her state as strong wherein she stood.
Her situation most entirely lay
Within it self; admitting not a way,
Nor any open place, infirm or weak,
By which offensive purposes might break
Into her government; or have access
Thorough the most familiar passages
That led upon him, under fair pretense,
Without discovering they meant offense,
Before it was too late to give retreat
To their proceedings. Nor could any heat
Or violence of such invasion, make
His passions mutin'; or his powers forsake
Their proper places. Nothing could disband
The strength and order of his minds command.
For never mind her nature better knew;
Or could observe a discipline more due
To such a Nature; or was fortified
With works were more ingentously applied,
To answer all attempts and injuries,
In their own kind and seu'rall qualities.
And in that scope, (offenses to avoid)
The use of all those forces was employ'de.
Within his Natures lines it might be read;
He was a Soldier borne, as well as bred.
And out of his own moral Character,
He might have learned his Mystery of War.
War was the Sphere wherein his life did move;
And in that course, his actions did approve,
How well his worth did his employment fit;
Th'vnited provinces can witness it;
And will acknowledge gratefully, that Fate
Was graciously propicious to their state;
When their most happy Genius gauetheir voic
And did direct their wisdoms to make choice
Of one so hable and so fit in in all,
To be that worthy Nations General;
On the sufficiency of whose command,
The chiefest hopes of their Success did stand.
And Noble Willough by, thy ludgement knew,
And he has reallie confirmed it true;
That in his life, thy memory should live,
For the judicious favors thou did give
To his beginnings. Which did still produce
Some Action, promising of what high use
His generous courage, wit, and Industry,
Pract^z'd with Judgment and dexterity,
Should be unto that State. In whose brave War,
When he had brought his services so'farre,
That they deserved the chiefest English charge;
His spirit with his fortune did enlarge
It self, according to his place. For as
His former carriages did duly pass
Through those right ways by which he should obey;
Now, he did prove he knew as right a way
How to command. And suited all his Course,
With correspondent order; life, and force.
He put not on those popular aspects,
Which Greatness often obsequiously affectes,
To win the vulgar fancy. For he knew,
That bum our would distract him from the true
And faithful Course wherein he should attend
The public service; to a private end.
And with too easy and familiar sense
Make Favor apprehended. And dispense
With such neglect of duty as proceeds
From that presumption which remissnes breeds.
But gave himself unto the public cause;
And in the due performance of her Laws,
His favors had their constant residence;
To the end he might attract men's diligence
Directly to their duties; and advance
The Armies service. For his Countenance
Respected men with a Reservedness
Referred to that where with he did express
His exemplarie actions. So that none
Could gather from him any Sign whereon
To raise themselves a promise or a hope
Of their preferment, but within the scope
Of their peeuliar merits. And the ways
And manner by the which he used to raise
Deserving men, and did his favors spread;
Were with as much discretion managed:
And nourished industry no less. For when
He did bestow preferment on a man;
The gift descended from no second hand,
That might divide a general command;
But from himself, as a propriety
Reserved unto his own authority.
And often (unrequested) singled forth
Some private men, whom for desert and worth,
He did advance to some emploiment fit,
Before they sought it, or expected it.
Hence, did his troops not only understand
Their hopes to rise depended on his hand;
But that he carried an observing eye
That would inform him how deseruingly
They bore themselves: which did as well produce
Endeavor to do well, as curb abuse.
And made example, Emulation breed;
Which (leading unto generous ends) does feed
The active disposition of the spirit,
With a desire to go beyond in Merit.
In which pursuit, his Action still was wont
To lead the way to honor. And i'th'front
Of danger, where he did his deeds advance;
In all his gestures and his Countenance,
He did so pleasing a consent express
Of Noble Courage, and free Cherefulnesse;
That his assurance had the power to raise
The most dejected spirit into praise
And imitation of his worth. And thus,
By means Heroique and judicious,
He did incline his armies generous part
With love unto the practice of Desert.
And in that moving Orb of active war;
His high command was the transcendent Star,
Whose influence, for production of men's worthes,
Did govern at their military Birthes;
And made them fit for Arms. Witness the merits,
Even of the Chiefest ranckes of warlike Spirits,
Who for our Princes Service do survive;
Which from his virtues did their worthes derive.
Then; to reduce the affections of the rude
And ill dispo'sd licentious Multitude;
His wisdom like wise did as amply show.
Tradition and experience made him know,
That men in Armies, are more apt to offend;
And faults to greater danger do extend
There, then in civil governments; and are
More difficult to be suppressed in war
Then peace; and that there is nothing can restrain
Their dissolute affections, but the Reine
Of strict and exemplarie punishment.
Since of necessity, such government
Must be; his entrance (therefore) was severe:
Which did possess them with a timely Fear.
For when a Chief comes first into his place;
Then all men's eyes are bent upon the Face
Of his Behavior, with a fixed regard.
In which Attention, they are best prepared
To take impression what they ought to do,
That he would have them be accustomed too.
For as his manners, then, report him; So
The reputation of his Name will go.
And thus his name grew hable to suppress
The strong'st Commotions of licenciousnes,
Even in their first conceptions. Or if some
Were still so bold to undergo his Doom;
Yet in the terror of his very name
They were so long proiecting how to frame
And execute their practice safe and free,
Without the danger of seueritee;
That if their doubtfulnes did not divert
And utterly disanimate the heart
O their proceedings; yet their coldenesse brought
The Act so impotentlie from the thought;
And made their strong'st performances so lame,
That they were overtaken ere they came
To prejudice the public cause. And now;
When as the few complaints reported how
Effectually his labors prosper'd; and
His men grew well conformed to his command;
With their obedience, he did slack the bent
Of his severity in punishment.
Yet with so wise a moderation, that
His fame to be severe, continued at
The full opinion. For the pardons gained,
Seemed always difficult to be obtained;
As if they rather came through intercession,
Then from the purpose of his own remission.
And lenity, (which commonly incites
A boldenes in disordered Appetites,
To more offense,) thus wisely managed;
Offensive minds were more discouraged
By Mercy, then by Justice. For when they
That stood to die, by some unlooked for way
Were pardoned, when they did despair to live;
Th'obseruing Soldiers, instantly, did give
Themselves persuasion, that undoubtedly
The next offendour should be sure to die.
And that opinion, like a Centinell
Held watch upon their Actions; did repel
Th'extrauagant eruptions of offense;
Enlarged the scope of care and diligence;
And did not only hold a regular
And orderly obedience to the war;
But likewise did as happily prevent
The just necessity of punishment
On many lives, which under a milder course
Presumption would incur; and law (of force,
To cut off ways to dangerous consequence)
Must execute. Thus, that which in the sense
Of vulgar apprehension, seemed to be
A disposition unto cruelty;
Appeared a work that wisdom did project
With purpose to a contrary effect.
That which malignant Censure would suggest
To be a humor cruelly expressed;
That did men's lives regardlesly deprive;
Was of men's lives the best preservative.
But to disprooue that idle imputation,
(that made it seem a vicious inclination,
Inherent with his nature) and augment
The sorce of his true honors Argument;
Offenses done against his own estate,
(Which always does more strongly aggrauate
The weight of injury to private sense,
Then public apprehension of offense;
And stirs men's passions more;) have oftentimes
Subduc'd the Malefactors for those crimes,
Into the hands of lustice: where he might
With approbation and consent of right,
Have satisfied that Nature to the full;
As Well in punishments that justly pull
On Death, as other grievous penalties.
And yet his hurt that from those faults did rise,
And nearely touched him, never did incense
Or move his mind, (Since with no reference
They did engage him to the public cause;)
To prosecute the rigor of the laws.
But held himself sufficiently content,
To learn by one, another to prevent.
Nor need I from his martial scope, digress;
T'approove that, by his moral cari'ges:
Since if we do proceed to note his course,
We shall observe; where Mildnes was of force
To propagate the Armies service, more
Then stern-nes; with conformity he bore
Himself. As in the exercise of Arms;
(Where terror always generally harms;
And dulles the apprehension and conceit;)
He hated roughnes, violence and heat;
And with a most vnweari'd patientnes,
Would labor to insinuate and impresse
His demonstrations. Hence it might appear;
He had a mind so temperatelie clear
And free from passion, that he could apply
His Method to his subjects property.
And both approve, that his severity
Was dedicated to utility.
Wherein his Nature did it self express,
Adapted unto public bus'nesses;
That had the strength of patience to despise
The bitter censures of malignancies,
In managements so subject to construction;
And fix himself upon the right conduction
Of his affairs, to public use dessign'd;
Nor given, nor forced, to any other end.
He was not of that soft and servile mould,
That all impressions takes, and none does hold;
But his own Reason in himself did reign;
What she inspired, he firmly did retain.
He could not flatter Greatness; Zanie humors;
Or be obsequious to aswage the Tumors
That in corrupted minds did rise and swell
Against him: But did residently dwell
Upon the purpose of a true intent;
In whose successes he was confident.
And as his word was, all his deeds were so;
-- Veritate, non obsequio.
Thus did his Army in obedience stand,
Under the Countenance of a brave Command.
Which from the force his wisdom did apply,
Received more strength then from's Authority.
And as the disposition of the Mind,
Was by his government well disciplined;
So was the Body by his exercise:
Practiced, and perfect in th'actiuities
And postures, on the which consist the right
Ways of Agilitie and skill to fight
In Arms, and Armies. Where, his hand did show
As much as Reason and Experience know,
How they should Marshall them. How to compose,
Divide, transpose, convert, open or close;
Parts, bodies, figures, aspects, distances;
^n quarter, march, attempts, resistances;
According as the grounds capacity,
Or the condition of an enemy
Requires or admits the fittest course
Of form or change; with order, speed, and force;
And best assurance from defensive art,
To The most advantage in th'offensiue part.
And all those other parts, whereof consist
The general worth of such a Martialist;
In him united their habilities;
And made him complete. All his industries,
(as well in actiues, as contemplatiues;)
Were such as those whence providence deriues
Apt instruments to stand in present stead,
According to the occasion offered;
Which either on the principal dessigne,
Or some adherent interests that entwine
And sway the principal; may fasten on
An answerable disposition:
And so work way to prosperous events;
As Well in unexpected accidents,
As things proiected and premeditate.
In Council; he was of so temperate
And free a Mind, that Reason in his Soul,
Like an imperial presence, did control
And scilence all those passions that have force
To interrupt the passage of discourse.
While to the clear and vneclipsed eye,
Of his strong intellectual faculty,
His well informed knowledge did present
The state and Nature of the Argument:
The parts; th'entire; and every circumstance
That was contingent, or had reference
Material to the thing consulted on.
Which when his free discourse had passed upon;
His judgment in conclusion, did lay open
The ways, the means, the reasons, and the scope,
What, how, whereby, and when, and where to do;
And every due respect annexed unto,
With such demonstratiue and pregnant force;
That, practice without speculatiue discourse;
Nor speculation without practice tried;
Nor both, without great prudence amplified,
To know their uses and apply them well;
To his advise, could make a Parallel.
Nor did his knowledge and experience stand
Upon that only limit of command,
That Marshalleth an army fit to fight;
But had as perfect and profound a sight
Into the judgment how it should be led,
And with the most advantage managed,
As Well through all the Body of a war;
As in performance of particular
Dependent services. As They may note,
Who have perused how his Pen did quote
The margent of our Ages great dessignes,
With his observing and judicious lines.
And in those objects of the judgments eye,
(As if he kept a key of Mystery,)
His understanding had so deep a sight,
That in dessignes which were without the light
Of practice or example, he has found
(Often times) a way, which when he did propound,
Was of so difficult and high a strain,
That even experienced sense could hardl'attaine
To find it probable or fit; unless
Approou'd by demonstration and success.
Yet (of true judgment constant in pursuit,)
When Action did his Counsel execute,
The progress and event subscribed in Act,
His way for largest use, was most exact.
Nor was his judgment, only so mature
In purposes, whose distance could endure
Deliberate advise; but did express
It self, as fully ripe, with readiness
And order, where the cause would not admit
The Action any time to study it.
And had so present a conce^pt, (that did
Attend occasion as it offered;)
That when the thunder of a hot Alarm
Has called him suddenly from sleep to arm;
Upon the instant of his waking, he
Did with such life, and quick dexterity,
His troops direct; the service execute;
As practiced Printers, Set and Distribute
Their Letters: And more perfectly effected;
For what he did, was not to be corrected.
And as his Counsels showed his Judgments merit;
So did his deeds as infinite a Spirit.
In Action, both ( contracted) did embrace;
What one performed, was to the others grace.
There, wisdom did his Fortitude direct;
And Fortitude his wisdom did protect.
For in the Heart of active services,
Where sudden dangers with a fierce access,
Have made surprise upon him; vnremoov'd
His Judgment stood; and there,, was most approou'd
His understandings greatness did appear
In perturbations, least disturbed, most clear;
And then gave amplest witness of her worth.
All the directions he delivered forth,
Were then, most orderly, assured and sound.
The sense of terror never could confound
His Judgment. Reason did such freedom find,
Within the generous greatness of his Mind;
And was so guarded by his Fortitude
From every violence that would intrude.
Which, in such dangers, does precisely try
The true and native Magnanimity.
For nothing does the Judgment more torment
With rude confusion and astonishment,
Then Fear; which by contraction of the heart,
Does force the power's of soul from every part,
Out of their proper seats and offices,
Into a narrow lymitt; where the press
And vndistinguish'd croude of faculties,
Does interrupt the passage of advise.
Hence, not improperly, the word might rise,
That terms them little minds, which Cowardice
Possesses. Where, when fear of death does start
The spirits, and makes them fly unto the heart,
They want that competent required space,
For every power in a distinguished place,
To work in order. Consequently thence,
It may be taken in as apt a sense;
Courage is termed greatness of the mind,
Where Reason with her faculties does find
Sufficient room, wherein she may dilate
Their seu'rall properties, with ordinate
Distinction; (when inuasiue terrors rise
Upon th'exteriour senses, to surprise
Those passages;) by making good their grounds,
Unto the largenes of their proper bounds.
Yet may we not deservedly repute
That nature worthy this great attribute,
Where boundless Choler does predominate.
For that extention's rather vast, then great;
And by extreamnes in another kind,
As dang'r ously disturbes the powers of mind.
As Fear contrudes; so choler does disperce.
But Fortitude, nor violently fierce;
Nor coldly dull; as prudence does require,
Holds them distinguished, mutual, and entire,
For that which is a virtue, will admit
All virtue free society with it.
And this was that true valor which the spirit
Of this Heroique Worthy did inherit.
Now if malignant Censure quarrels it,
And say it was a Habit, he did get
By custom with such danger; rather than
The native virtue of a valiant Man:
Let enuie' please to turn her clearer eye
On his Beginnings. They will satisfy;
Or prove her false. For when he first bore Arms;
Among the first that pressed to front Alarmes;
His Sword thrust foremost. And his chief desire
From the beginning, labored to aspire
Through enterprise and danger. When the face
Of bloody handed war, in it is own place
Did first encounter him; and did appear
In shapes of terror to impresse a Fear:
He met it smiling. And did make it yield,
That he brought Courage with him to the field.
And when but in a private ranque he served;
That virtue made him publicly observed.
And was the effectual Cause that did advance
His fortunes to a higher countenance.
The first examples of his worth in Act;
Were like to that whose valor did attract
Th'impartiall Eye of valiant Williams; And
In honor of him published with his hand,
In a discourse now extant, then put forth;
Where he to his effect, reports his worth.
Brave Vere was by his Scarlet Cassock known;
Who at the assaults both of the Fort and Town,
Stood always in the Head of the Armed Men.
Where, having twice been hurt and wounded, when
My self (with other of his friends desire)
Requested him that then he would retire;
His answer was, that He had rather die
Ten times upon a breach; then once to lie
Under the hand of death within a House. etc.
Thus at the first, his undertaking shows
It self; and no occasion does omit,
That might give witness of his worth in it.
And as his Courage, then, was true to'^h ways
Through which he did's deserved fortunes raise;
To his particular and private good:
So for the public service when he stood,
It ever was so faithful to the laws
Of that integrity he ought the cause
He served; that when occasion did present
His observation with some accident
Within the enemy, that did inuit
The side he served in, to attempt a fight;
With promise of good service to the state;
Though dangers might make it unfortunate
To his particular; and did object
Their terrors to disanimate the effect.
And though the presence of superior place,
Did show no disposition to embrace
The enterprise. When nothing did enforce
His Courage, but his voluntary course;
If promise of good sernice did inuit;
Through dangers he exposed himself to fight,
Against all difficulties that withstood;
And won his bonour, with his loss of blood.
And what his sword could not directly hit;
He circumuented by the power of wit.
Using that license (only) which in war
Has just allowance, though irregular.
Where he showed all wherewith wit can assist
The workings of a Stratagematist;
Without conducting them to their success,
Through any passage of perfidiousnes.
And th'vndertakings of his indvstrie
Were carried with such dext'rous secrecy;
That while the Breath of his divulged pretense,
Suited with fit ostentiall instruments,
Transported expectation to that face;
And made him looked for in another place;
His expedition ere it was suspected,
Set forth, ariu'd, attempted, and effected.
And where his purposes required no name;
His Actions euermarch'd before their fame.
And (for a cloze) to crown his worth; Blessed Fate
Did render all his Actions fortunate.
Witness the best performances of war;
Whereby th'vnited Netherlanders, are
Entirely of their own provinces possessed:
With aduantageous footing on the rest.
Among which atchieuements, Nieuport and Ostend
(those famous services) do comprehend
Large interest in the deserts, whereby
They have attained to that prosperity.
And of those Actions, (They themselves consesse)
He was an instrument to the success;
Elected by Heavens high Omnipotence,
To manifest his gracious providence,
In favor of their cause. Nor did he less,
In any of his other services.
And when the GLORY of the War did cease;
Retired with Honor. And expired in peace.
Leaving his deathlesse memory and Fame,
To be an honor to that Noble Name
And family, from whence he had descent:
Which by his luster's made more eminent.
And now, Great Britain, though thou do possess
The SOVEREIGN Joy of Peace and happiness;
And feel'st no Reason why thou should disperse
Or spend a tear upon a Soldiers Hearse;
Yet for the sake even of thy blessed Peace,
Thou may lament this worthy Man's decease.
For Warre's a subject, that may comprehend
The greatest wisdom, Nature can extend
Unto; to manage it. Whose Noblest ways,
Proou'd Him a Worthy; Hero of his days.
His praise may justly (then) extend thus far;
He was a Man, fit both for Peace and War.
Whose Monument, while History does last;
Shall never be forgotten or defaced.
Cyril Tourneur.


