THE BOOK OF PRAISES, CALLED THE PSALMS. The KEYS and Holly Things of DAVID.
Translated out of the Hebrew, According to the Letter, and the Mystery of
them. AND According to the rule and Method of the Compile-er. Opened in Proper
Arguments upon every PSALM, following the same.

BY ALEXANDER TOP ESQVIER.

AMSTELREDAM. Printed by Ian Fredericksz Stam. M. DC. XXIX.

To the High and mighty Prince: CHARLES: By the grace of God, KING of England,
Scotland, France, and Irland: Defendour of the faith, etc. All Grace, peace and
felicity Everlasting.
MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN:
Because the children of God be peaceable, and the Kingdom of heaven belongs
to the poor in spirit, and contention is a hinderance of understanding, and
Skorners are far from it: because wisdom is the true happiness, and stops the
mouth of iniquity: because the lion and the serpent is vanquished, and Justice
reigns, and the Turtle dove is com and heard in our land: because the glory of
the law and the strength thereof shines in your Majesty's heart, by cleernes of
judgment and golden verity: because your Majesty is the Prince of peace; and an
endless gouvernment is laid upon you; and none else is fit to sit upon the
Throne of David: I humbly present unto your Majestyes hands, this Scepter of
the Psalms of David, his service and my pains to your Majestyes service; as
fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor, and Scepters to whom Scepters
belong, being an instrument full of eyes, sharp and provident and fit for
gouvernment, made of Moses and the Prophets, and has Christ and his Apostles
looking on it. That your Majesty may never be weary of beholding it: when your
Majesty shall perceive how potentiall it is made for the Church: by sweet
invitation of skorners, by revelation to the Ignorant, and resolution to the
straitened. How thereby, the wisdom of the Ministry of that great congregation
and Allowance of the Temple of Jerusalem, and their blessing of the poor, with
instruction, and crowning of them that keep the law and reprobation of the
contentious, to answer all reprochers: the most heavenly perfection of the
church, that bears all peace and beatitude, is brought to light. By dividing
the waters of the Scriptures and making a clear passage through the depth
thereof. The rod of government that cease all contention in them, and melts
the hard rocks and brings liquor of life out of the same. Considering the
height of the style, and depth of the invention; the reach of the work, and
largenes of Matter, because the world (I suppose) have no more such piles: I
make your Majesty the Pillar and stay of all. And as the deliverance is upon
the knees of your Majestyes Dominion: that your Majesty may live in them, and
they be sustained by your Majesty, that your Majesty my live eternally with
them, and they with your Majesty, that your Majesty be ever blessed by them,
and they by your Majesty, that your Majesty may sanctify them, and they may
sanctify your Majesty. That your Majestyes name may be their sanctuary, and
they the Ministers to extol the same, as long as the sunn and moon lasts.
That by the light in the night of them, and the clowdynes in the day time: they
may, and the Church may, and all the Godly may, walk safe and untouched of the
Enemy, and live and Conquer for ever. Seeing all kind of rule and art and
government and regularity is contained in them, that nothing is wanting. That
your Majesty like David may lead yours with a skillfull hand, and feed them
heartily. And thus have your Majesty a most glorious entrance into the strong
and invincible city of David, the fort of Sion. Where all the blind and lame
are smitten, and a most heavenly pile of cleernes and uprightnes and Kingdom of
knowledge is erected. By Principles in the tongue, and in religion, and in
divinity, by letter and figure, till it come to a perfection of strength and
glory for the defendour, and such was the occasion of this work. The work is so
well knitt together from Psalm, to Psalm, and one matter to another, and one
thing with another: that they are not to be sundred for the strength thereof.
And that your Majesty may say the same: and perceive, how the style is lifted
from the ground, and how the heavenly understanding is overcovered with
clouds: I here present a revelation thereof, by natural Arguments rising from
them, for your Majesty to lean on, while your Majesty ministers just
judgment, and gives the strength of the Law to your people, to feed on. And
that your Majestyes ends may be ever blessed: that the wicked be Cut off,
and the just may ever possess the land and peace enough to delight them. And
now the vail of all is drawn and the light is manifest: I most humblely
submit all to your Majesty, the Shield of Truth, and end with Job. No man can
be silent for want of knowledge. I therefore repent; and give over, pray your
Majestyes pardon, and conclude with prayer for your Majestyes days and reign,
as the days of heaven with all happynes.

Your Majestyes most humble subject, ALEXANDER TOP.

To the Reader.
COnsider, Gentle Reader, that all Knowledge and Learning is descended from
rudenes, and inclines to return unto it. With much pain it was brought forth:
so with might and main it must be held up, lest all runn into confusion again.
And this is the work of the Prophet. All piles incline to confusion the^for he
seeks to save the Law. Because in language there be many kinds. weigh his
rule, he writeeth upon the five books, five books: under the five beginnings
out of the five books; to wit, the first words of every book. That he so
purposed: the ends and the beginnings, do thoroughly prove. They make every one
a perfect conclusion, and beginn directly upon the first words of the same
book in the Law. Though the books be precisely five: yet the number of the
psalm continues through all, which cannot but intend mystery. This way is not
strange to Poets, to descant upon words by allegorical discourse. by this, he
travaileth only upon the mysteryes, and doubtfullnes of the Law, or the terms
of it, in the prophetical or heavenly style, taking his frame from the
Prophets. And this shall suffice to make the psalms to argue the Law. Every
glory has his covering: Is. 4. so the psalms are a brief copy of the Law. They
treat of the Law and of the King, as every Law must have a King. as it is a
kingdom. The Law is made out of the virtues, and the psalms ext^ll it much out
of the names of God. The psalms do carry a fair outward style, but their
treasure is within them; and that is their holiness. They are indeed the
revelation of the Law and the Prophets. His way is all upon A. B. C. defect,
abounding, or disordered, because the Letters be so significant. This is no
strange lerning, for most of the other books of ^he bible play the like. By any
strangenes in the constructio^, you shall find the mystery. he works every psalm
to agree with the number of it, by the signification of the letters: because the
letters in the tongue be so significant, that it were absurd to neglect the^,
of frowardnes to thwart the allusion, or to cross them. Under such a cloud he
passes, and with such a vail he reveals. The curiosity is not to be
wondered at, if you consider the diligence of the Masorites, and Rabbis, and
their thirteen rules for the study of the Law. He draws all to the immortal
life of the Law, and the kingdom of God, and the power and glory thereof, the
way of Godliness, and commendation thereof, for his title PRAISES. if this be
his way, I have set your feet therein, and I rejoice. As for my way: first I
have not versed the Psalms, because they can carry no mystery with us, and
because the coherence is scattered, by the curiosity of the work, that it is
like a latin verse, with great distance between the Concords, neither can a
psalm be construed but with relation from end to end. I have cut them into
three parts, so much the better to conclude them: by how much the greater the
sections are, for the gathering of the more sens before the pause. The business
of every psalm being threefold: the section naturally agrees. As a
Proposition, Example, and Conclusion. Mark the first psalm. Such a one is
happy. How? Like a tree etc. And why? Because. or for, etc. So most commonly
the division will answer to these questions, what, how, and why, though the
psalm cannot be cut precisely at the question. My Quotations are ordered in
three Columns, unversed, for the multiplicity of them. The first of Psalms,
the next of the Law and first Prophets, to wit, all the books to Isaiah. The
last, all from Isaiah and likewise the new testament. They are of as many
kinds as there can be questions: sometimes for the language, sometimes for sens,
sometimes for matter, sometimes for form, sometimes for phrase, sometime for
words, and sometime for construction, quality, time or place, etc. by the
points they are to be applied. You shall know them by their fruit, and shall
soon see by the recommendation of places in the psalms: what profit will com
of the rest of all the books, if they were requoted accordingly. for so the
verse may well be spared. For variation of the letter both in word and Clause:
it manifests, how the Construction goes, and accenteth the matter and sense
of every Psalm; and that in many respects. The Capitals are for Generals, to
which all parts have relation. And they are usually doubled and multiplied:
that they may be noted. The change in the Clause, is a satisfaction to all
question, according as the style declineth: often doubled and multiplied also.
My arguments are of this sort; first, a representing of the psalm, in proper
or figurative language. Secondly, a Construction which applies it self wholely
to the letters and exposition of them. And thirdly, how every psalm has
dependence from the first words of his proper book of the law. And all is to
revive the Prophet, and bring his glory to light, for a light unto all nations,
and a glory to our own. God give Light, and also Grace. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord. A. T

PRAISES.
HAPPY is he that follows not wicked counsel nor continues in a sinful
way,


nor can abide mockers: a m 40:112:119 111:101:119.
but delights in the doctrine of the ETERNAL and thinks upon his lessons,
day and night.




For he shall be like a tree planted by the water-brookes, that gives his fruit
in his season,,



whose leaves never wither,

and that brings all that ever it does, to good.

The wicked shall not be so;


but as the chaff which the wind drives away, therefore the wicked shall not
endure in time of judgment nor Sinners among the Righteous:
for the ETERNAL will make the way of the Righteous plain,


but the way of the wicked shall perish.

II.
WHY do the nations keep such stir, and the people TALK so idley?


the Kings and Princes of the earth oppose themselves and join together
against the ETERNALL'S Anointed?


Let us break their bands, and cast away their cords; The LORD in heaven
does but laugh at them.


And he made them sore afraid,

when he told them in his kindled anger,
I have appointed my King over Sion, my holy Hill; I will show the Decree of
the ETERNAL,

that says of me, Thou art my Son, this Day I begat thee;

Ask me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
worlds end for thy Posession;

thou shall rull them with an iron rodd,

and beat them in pieces as a Potter his potts.



And now ye Kings and Judges of the earth, beware and take heed, serve the
Eternal gladly, with fear and trembling,


make much of the child, least he be angry, and ye perish quite away,
if his anger be but a little kindled: Happy are all they that put their trust
in him.





III. A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom, his Son.


O ETERNAL how many are mine afflictors! how many rise against me! how many
say of me!

God has no salvation for him surely.
Yet thou o Eternal art a Buckler about me,

my glory and holder up of my head.

I complain to the Eternal, and he hears me from his holy Hill; Surely I
ly down and sleep,
and wake again for the Eternal susteineth me.


I fear not,

if ten thousand people set upon me, and besiege me round about: up o
Eternal,

and save me, o God, smite my wicked enemies on the cheek,
and break their teeth. Salvation is with the ETERNAL,
and thy blessing upon thy people,
surely.




IV. For the Master in Musicque, A Psalm of David.


O God, my RIGHTEOUSNESS, hear me when I cry,

and widden to me, in my destresse,
have pity on me, and hear my Prayer.
Men how long in reproach of my Glory, will ye love vanity and invent falsehood,

surely?



And be sure the ETERNAL severeth the Gracious one to himself,
and the ETERNAL will hear me when I cry unto him.
Therefore sin not in your murmuring;


bethink you in your minds,
and imagine quietly on your bed, surely.
Sacrifice sacrifices of RIGHTEOUSNESS, P. 141.118.

and trust in the ETERNAL.

Many desire to see some good, do thou, o ETERNAL,
open upon us the light of thy countenance,

thou shall make me merier in heart then they are at the great increase of
their corn and wine; and besides,




I shall ly down and sleep in quiet for thou only,

o ETERNAL, makeest me abide in safety.

V. For the Master upon the wind Musicque, A Psalm of David.
O ETERNAL, mark my words,
understand my MEDITATION, hearken to my complaint (my KING and GOD) when I
pray unto thee, o Eternal,

S^: 12, 1 Cro: 29,
M^: (6) L: (11)
betimes in the morning, hear my voice, as soon as I awake, and frame it to
thee.
Le: 1.6.
Mic: 7.
Ie^: 9,
Because thou art not a God delighted in wickedness, neither does any evil
inhabit thee,
Le: 17 Nu: 14* Iol: 4;
Ap: 22.
I^: 1.
there stand no vain boasters in thy sight; thou hate all vvrong dooers, thou
destroyest Liars,
bloody and deceitful men the Eternal abhors.


Therefore I in thy great Kindness come into thine house,
and in thy fear worship at thy holy Temple, lead me, o Eternal,
by thy RIGHTEOUSNESS, Is: 33,
and make thy vvayes plain before me,
because of mine Enemies, for there is no firm thing in their mouths, they are
smoothe tonged,
Job: 6. Ex: 12.
To: 3, Ier: 5.
and they have throats like open Graves, Lu: 11,
and thoughts full of corruption.

Make them desolate, o God,
Job: 1^.
let them fall by their counsels, Mic: 6,
Am: 5.
beat them down with their mighty trespasses,
Nu: 20, D^: 21, 2 Re: 15,, 1, Ez 9, 1 Sa: 15.
for rebelling against thee, that all that trust in thee, and love thy Name,
may be glad and rejoice in thee, Ha: 3.
and triumph in thy Protection for ever,
how thou blessest the Righteous, o Eternal, and guardest him with a
gracious shield.
Sa: 23.
Ephesians: 6,




VI. For the Master in Song Musicque, upon the Octava, A Psalm of David.



O ETERNAL, rebuke me not in thine anger, nor correct me in thy choler; have
pity on me o ETERNAL,
for my bones be astonished,


and my mind much troubled,
because thou art so long.




Come o ETERNAL, release my life, and save me for thy Mercies sake, for in
death there is no thinking on thee,
and in the grave who shall thank thee?
I am weary of my gronings,

every night I wet my bed and make my pallet flow with tears.

s. 119,, 25,,
Mine eyesight is decayed with grief, my color is gone by mine enemies
means;

away from me all ye molesters, the ETERNAL has heard my weeping, has
heard my supplication;
the ETERNAL accepts my prayer. Ashame and great astonishment be on all mine
Enemies:


let them all come to sudden shame.




VII. David's Song of Error, which he sang concerning Cush the Ieminite.
O ETERNAL, o my God, save me that put my trust in thee,

and deliver me from all my pursuers,
least they tear me, and devour me like Lions,
and I have no deliverer. o ETERNAL my God,
if I have don any such injury:
if my hands have don any such wrong as this:

if I have rewarded him that paid m^e ill, and requited him that tormented me
for nothing:

then surely, let the Enemy pursue me and overtake me, and lay mine honor in
the dust; and tred my life on the ground.

ts. 119.

Up o Eternal in thine anger, advance thy self for my tormentors,

and let me have the judgment,

which thou have ordained, yea, get thee up on high,
with a number of people about thee,
the Eternal that judges the folk, judge me o ETERNAL, according to my
RIGHTEOUSNESS,


and perfection which is on me. O God, thou JUST one; and examiner of the heart
and reins:


Let the malice of the wicked have an end;
and set thou fast the Just.
My defense is upon God that saves the UPRIGHT in heart.

God is a just Judge and a severe God always, if a man return not, he whets
his sword,



and bends his bow and makes it ready, and prepares him deadly weapons,

and makes his arrows for persecutors.
Lo he that conceiueth pain and is great with sorrow, and brings forth
falsehood:

deggeth a pit and undermines it, and falls into it,
when he has made it, His mischeeff comes upon his own head, and his
cruelty lights on his own crown. I thank the Eternal for his JUSTICE,


and praise his most high Name.

VIII. A Psalm of David: for the Master upon the Gitt.



O ETERNAL our God, M. 5. (96.)


how noble art thou in all the earth,
and worshipful above the heavens! thou have made sucking children (in respect
of thine Afflictors) able with their mouths,
to put to silence the most spiteful Enemy.

When I look upon the hevens of thy fingers making,


and the Moon and the stars of thine appointment: I wonder thou have such a
mind to a wreched creature;
and look so well unto man. Thou have made him want little of God, thou have
crowned him with Glory and worship.

Thou make him ruller over thy work,
and put all under him, all sheep and oxen,
and beasts, and foul, and fish, travailing the paths of the seas. o Eternal
our God,


how noble art thou in all the earth!


IX. For the Master of Musicque upon the Death of the Son.


I Thank the o ETERNAL with all my heart, and set forth all thy wonders, thou
madeest me exceeding glad, and to chaunt out thy Name, o Moste-highe, for
turning mine enemies back, which fell and perished before thee:

for thou have given forth my judgment and sentence like a righteous Judge,
thou have chid the Heathen and destroyed the wicked, and wipeed out their name
for ever and all. Thou have broken down their Cities,


they be consumed and ly waste, and their memory is perished for ever.




The ETERNAL sits ever ready for judgment,
to judge the world righteously, and sentence the people justly; and to be a
refuge for the oppressed,
a refuge at times of destresse: and let them that know thy name,
trust in thee; for thou forsakest none that seek thee, o ETERNAL.
Chaunt ye to the ETERNAL in Sion,


tell the people his excellent acts; How he that finds out blood,
will remember them, and not forget the cry of the poor. Have pity on me, o
ETERNAL, behold my oppression by them that hate me,
o thou that takeest me up from deaths door.



That I may show all thy PRAISES in the gates of Sion,
being glad of thy salvation. The Heathen are sunk into the pit which they
made themselves,

and are caught in a nett of their own laying. gn. 76.94

Surely the SENTENCE of the ETERNAL,
that does judgment, is manifest: The wicked is snareed by the work of his
own hands and thought also.
The wicked shall go to Hell,
and all Nations that forget God: but the poor shall not still be forgotten,

nor the hope of the afflicted perish for ever.
Up o Eternal, let not woeful men prevail,
let the Heathen be judged in thy sight, teach the Heathen to know, they are
but woeful men,

surely.

X.
O ETERNAL, why art thou strange, and hideest out of sight at times of
destresse?


the wicked have a pride in dogging the poor. Let them be caught in their
own meaning.

For the wicked boast eth of his own hearts desire;
and the Eternal that blesses him in his desires: he blasphemeth. When the
wicked is up,

on High, he has no mind of God at all; neither will he, once seek his
face.

His ways always prosper,
that he cannot perceive thy Judgments;


and makes a puff at all his besiegers.

He thinks he shall never be moved,

because he is in no ill, there is nothing in his mouth but cursing and
swering,

deceit and guile: and nothing in his tongue but molestation and greeff. He
lies in wait in his closters and privy courts, to slay the Innocent;

His eyes level at the Harmless, he lurketh close,
like a Lion in his den, to catch the poor,
and catches him by drawing him into his nett, and by his sorces, beats down
the harmless ones,

and says in his mind:
The Almighty will forget it, he will hide his face and never see it.

Up, o Eternal, lift up thy hand,

o thou Mighty one, and forget not the meek ones; wherefore should the wicked
Blaspheme God,

sayeing in his heart; Thou examinest not? Thou know,

thou beholdest all molestation and vexation, and have it in thine own hands;
The destitute leaves himself upon thee, thou art he that helps the
Fatherless: break the wickeds arm,

search out all his wicked naughtines as long as thou can find any.



O ETERNAL the everlasting and perpetual King, that the Heathen do perish
out of his land:
Hear thou the desire of the meek, thou that preparest their heart; listen with
thine ears,

to defend the Fatherless that the man of the earth tirannize no more.



XI. For the cheef Musician, by David.



IN the ETERNAL do I rely, how say you then to my person, fly birds to your
Hills, for lo;
The wicked bend their bows and have their arrows on the string, privily to
shoot at the upright, and to destroy the ground work that the Just has wrought?



The ETERNAL, whose Hollynes is in his Temple,

and his throne in Heaven: his eyes behold it, his eye lides try all human men;
the ETERNAL approves the just,
but the wicked and injurious man he heartily detesteth.


He will rain upon the wicked, snares and fire and brimstone storms,
the portion of their cup; ts.
but the Just Eternal loves justice, and his countenance regards the
upright.



XII. For the cheef upon the Octava, A Psalm of David.


HELP thou, o ETERNAL, for there is not a sincere or faithful man left of all
human men; but are all at an end and dispersed: they talk all counterfetly one
with another,

with smooth lips and hollow hearts.
The ETERNAL cut of all flattering lips, and proud-speaking tongs, that say:
With our tongs we will confirm our talk,

our lips are ours, who is master over us?




For the spoil of the meek and cry of the poor, I will up says the ETERNAL,
and set him in safety that is conspired against.



The Sayings of the Eternal are pure sayings, like tried silver, P
silver cleansed seven times over, in a fine erthen vessel: keep them o
Eternal, and preserve him from the wordly generation,


the wicked that walk all about,
when the vile sort of men is exalted.


XIII. For the Cheeff Musician, A Psalm of David.
HOW long will thou still forget me,


o ETERNAL? How long will thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take
thought in my mind, and sorrow in my heart daily?

How long shall mine Enemies be exalted over me? n? 41?


Look upon me and consider me,


o ETERNAL my God, and lighten mine eyes that deathsleep take me not, and
mine Enemy say, I have gotten Dominion over him: and my beseegers rejoice at my
fall, when I am gone.

And I, that trust in thy loving kindenes,
with a glad heart for thy salvation: may sing unto the Eternal what he has
done for me.

XIV. Of the Cheeff Musician, of David.
THE foolish man thinks there is no God,


and they do all manner of wicked,
and abominable corrupt work, and none does good.
The ETERNAL looks out of Heaven upon all human men, to see if there were
any that would consider, and seek after God;
and all were gone away, and all become stinking reprobates together: none
doing good, no not one.

Do not all the workers of greeff know,

they eat up my people like meat when they call not on the ETERNAL?
where they are afraid that God is in the generation of the JUST: S. 31.



ye make the poor abashed of their conceit, of relying on the Eternal.

God grant that Jacob may be once glad,
and Israel rejoice from Tzion,
the salvation of Israel:
when the Eternal shall bring again the captivity of his people.

XV. A Psalm of David.



O ETERNAL, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and inhabit still in thy holly
Hill? A. 17, 101.

He that walks perfect, works Justice; and in his conscience speaks the
truth. He that hinders not his friend with his tongue, and hurts him not; and
raises no reproach against his neighbor.



He that despises the reprobate, and much esteems them that fear the
ETERNAL;
he that swears to his friend and changes not.



He that lends his money freely and not for gain,
and takes no reward against the Innocent:
he that does thus, shall never be moved.


Ier: 2. 1 Co^: 14.
XVI. A Mictam, or Illustration of David.



KEEP me, o thou Mighty one, for I rely upon thee.
o my Wealth, say thou to the ETERNAL, I am not for thee; I am for the famous
Saints of the earth,
which are my whole delight:
Great be their sorrows that runn to any other.
I will offer none of their bloody offerings, nor take their names once in my
lips.

ch, 142 104.


The ETERNAL maintain my LOT, He is my portion, my part and my cup. My
measures light in pleasant places,
and a goodly HERITAGE is fallen to me. I thank the ETERNAL:
He counsels me, and my reins teach me by night, I set the ETERNAL
always by me at my right hand that I slip not.





Therefore my heart is glad, my body rejoices,
and my flesh dwells assured: that thou will not leave me at Hell; nor let
thy sacred one see the pit below; but wilt show me the path of life, the
fullnes of joys that are before thee,

and pleasures at thy right hand for ever.

XVII. A Prayer of David.

O ETERNAL,
Cro: 6.20. 2 K: 17. 1 K: 22. Job: 32 Pro: 17; 1 Cro: 29. Nu: 14, 24, 1 Sa:
16.15. Ios: 14, 7, 2 Sa: 24 1 K: 7. Ios: 22.
mark well my righteous cry, Col: 3 Mt: 6, Lu: 12 Isa: 65, Ier: 11, La: 2, 1
Th: 2, La: 2 Ier: 12.3. Col: 3. Is: 35: Mr: 7: Ex: 18:7;
and hear my prayer with vndeceitfull lips. I will be judged by thee, thine
eyes behold the right, which proovest and see my heart in the night, and
tryest me to the uttermost. I mean not to overshoot with my mouth,
by the word of thy lips I take heed to the works and paths of the ROBBER:
keep my steps in thy high ways, that my feet slip not.

When I call thee, De: 9.22.28.
Dan: 11,
answer me o thou Mighty one, turn thine ear to me, and hear my Saying:
Thou that savest by thy right hand them that rely thereon: K: 11.
Ie: 14.
conceal me by thy Kindenesses, from them that rise up against me.
Pro: 7; De: 13.32. 1 Sa: 24: Job: 19.
Keep me as the aple of thine eye; La: 23
hide me in the shaddovv of thy wings from my wicked Enemies,
Job: 15.
Is: 33. Jude.
that in mind cast about to destroy me: with their mouths, they speak
swelling words which are closed up with their fatt.

Now they go round about me,
and vvach to lay mine upright steps an the ground; like Lions grady of prey,
Job: 38.
Is: 4.
and Lions vvhelps lying close in their dens. Up o ETERNAL and stand before
him, make him crouch,
and by thy svvord reskue my life from the Wicked, by thy hand, o Eternal,
Job: 15, 21.
reskue me from vvorldly men, that have their part in this life, and have
their bellies full of thy store,
Ie: 1^.
To: 16, Phi: 3. Lu: 12,
and their Children have enough,
Ex: 20.
and leave their residue for their babes after them, for when I awake and
behold in RIGHTEOUSNESS the Image of thy countenance, I am satisfied.
Nu: 1^.
Cor: 4, Mt: 6.18, Lu: 12. To: 6.



Cro: 29. 2 Sa: 12.22. 1 Sa: 6. Ios: 1. Ez: 8.
Eze: 8.
XVIII. By the Cheeff, by David cheeff Servant of the ETERNAL, who uttered to
the ETERNAL the words of this Song, when the ETERNAL delivered him from the
gripeing of all his enimyes, and from the hands of Saul, and said:


I yield thee mercy, o ETERNAL my fortification;
the ETERNAL that is my Rock and my Fortress, my Reskuer, my Might and
Safeguard,
my Defense, my Releeff and Horn of Salvation, m, 145, 48.77.116; 106 55.


in whom I relied: I called on the ETERNAL,

(who is to be praised) and I was saved from mine Enemies. Deadly sorrows
compassed me,
whole floodes of the wicked frighted me; the very cords of Hell were round
about me,

and snares of death before me. In my destresse I called on the ETERNAL,
who hard my voice in his Temple, and my shoute (before him) came into his
ears.
And the earth quaked and gave a crack, the foundations of the Hills stirred,
and they quaked, for it kindled him,


his anger smoked and wax^ a fire out of his mouth and devoured,
and the coals burnt by it.
He bowed the Heavens and came down with mirknesse under his feet,

rideing and flying upon Cherub,
and spread upon the wings of the wind, hideing himself in darkness,
and covering himself all about with the thick watery clouds of the sky.
At his brightness his clouds went hail stones and coals of fire,
S^: 7, Est: 9. De: 2, 7,
and the Eternal thundered in heaven, and the High-one gave his clap, and sent
abroad all his arrows,
and disturbed them with hail stones, and coals of fire and great lightnings.
At thy rebuke, o Eternal, at the blasting breath of thine Anger, the water
channels were seen dry;
and the foundations of the world were revealed. Who sent from an high and
took me,


and drew me out of the great waters, and delivered me from my mighty
Enemies, and foes that were to strong for me, and had advantage over me in my
calamity. But the Eternal was the staff I leaned on, N. V. 41.
and he brought me forth into a large place, and released me,
because he delighted in me.

The Eternal restored me according to my RIGHTEOUSNESS,


and rewarded me according to the cleanes of my hands, because I keep the
ways of my God the ETERNAL, and have not wickedly-swarved from him;


for all his Judgments are by me, and I cast not his prescriptions from me;
and I am whole with him, and keep me from mine iniquity:


and the ETERNAL has rewarded me according to my righteousness and pureness of
my hands before him. Thou with the kind,


art most kind; with the entire, most entire; with the pure, most pure;
with the froward, most perverse,

because thou savest the opp^essed people and humblest the proud looks,
because thou lightedst my candle,

and my God the ETERNAL cleared my darkness. For by thee, my God, I runn
leaping on the garreson wall.


The way of the Almighty is perfect, ts 7; 17:
and the Saying of the ETERNAL, a tried saying: He is a DEFENDOVR of all that
rely on him.
For what God, or what safeguard is there beside^ our God, the ETERNAL? The
Almighty,

that girded me with valor,
and made my way perfect, making my feet like hindes feet, A. 40.
to stand upon my high places, that teaches my hands for bataile,

and mine arms to break a bow of steel. S. 28, 33.8 45.

For thou gave me the shield of thy Salvation,
and heldest me up with thy right hand, and with thy lowlines have made me
great.

Thou made broad my footsteps under me,

and my ancles reeld not. I pursued mine Enemies, and overtook them; and turned
not again till I had made an end of them, I wounded them that they cold not
stand,


but fell under my feet:
for thou girdedst me with valor for battle; thou have bowed down under
me them, that rose up against me:
thou gave me the neck of mine Enemies, and them that hatched me, and I
dissolved them. They shouted and there was no Savior, R.
upon the ETERNAL,
but he answered them not, I laid them like durte in the street; and beat them
as small as dust before the wind,
thou savedst me from the contendings of people;

Thou set me cheeff among the Hethen;
a people that I knew not served me,

as soon as they heard of me they obeyed me: Strangers revolted to me, the
foreign fadeed away,

and shrunk from their holds. Let the ETERNAL live, and blessed be my
Defendour,
and the God of my Salvation be exalted.
The God that gives me revenge, and commands nations under me;
that reskeweth me from mine Enemies; yea thou take me up from mine
Insurrectours, and deliuerest me from the injurious man. Therefore I will
thank the,
o ETERNAL, and sing praise unto thy Name among the Hethen.

The ETERNAL that gives his King so great salvation,
and shows such kindenes to his anointed, to David and his seed for ever.

XIX. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of David.



THE Hevens declare the glory of God; and the FIRMAMENT sets out his handy
work. Day upon day, and night upon night it utters speech, and manifests
knowledge, and in all languages their tongue is understood. N,
For their Rulles go over all the earth, and their words are heard in the
farthest part of the world.
In them has he made a dwelling for the SVNN that rises like a Bridegroom
coming out of his Bride Chamber;
cheerful like a strong man to runn a race. The end of all the Hevens is his
going out;
and his compass toward the ends thereof; that nothing can be hid from the
heat thereof.

The LAW of the ETERNAL is most perfect, a. ts. 9^: 116.


and converteth the mind; his Testimony is faithful to advise the simple.

The Statutes of the ETERNAL are plain, and cheer the heart.

The Commandment of the ETERNAL is pure, and lighteneth the eyes, the fear
of the ETERNAL continues ever clear;

the Judgments of the ETERNAL are true and Just. gn. m. th. 81.112.

They are better to me then gold, yea then much fine gold; and sweeter then
honny, and the dropping of the honny combs.

Yea by them is thy Servant warned,
and for keeping of them I have good reward. p. Sh, 90;

There is no man that understands all his own faults;

wherefo^e cleanse me from my hidden ones;
and restrain thy Servant from proud presumptions, that they do not overcome
me. That I may be perfect, P. 145.31.44 49.71.139.

and clear of much transgression, and all my words and thoughts be in
acceptance before thee, o ETERNAL, my Creator and Redeemer.

XX. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of David. S^: 1 2 Cr^: 6.

THE ETERNAL hear thee in thy destresse,


the CALLING upon the God of Jacob, fortify thee, and send the help from his
Holy place, and support from Sion; and think upon thy meat offerings, and
fatten thy burnt offerings surely; and give the thy hearts desire, and fulfill
thy mind.

That we may sing out, upon thy salvation,
and in the NAME of our God; put up our colors.


Now I know the Eternal saveeth his anointed by the virtuous salvation of his
right hand, and hears him from the heavens of his Sanctuary.

Some set their minds on chariots, S^: 10, De: 20, 32, Ios: 11.17, Iud: 4. 2
Sa: 14.
and some on horses,

but we make always mention of the NAME, of our God the Eternal. They have
crouched and are fallen, but we stand up, and are yet remaining. The ETERNAL
save the King, and hear us when we call.

XXI. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of David.
O ETERNAL, let the King rejoice in thy STRENGTH,

and be very glad, for thy Salvation.
Thou have given him what his heart could wish, and denied him nothing that his
lips requested, Surely. Thou have set before him many blessings,


and have put a crown of fine gold upon his head, and thou have given him the
life he asked of thee: long days, everlasting and perpetual.



Great is his glory by thy Salvation, worship and honor thou have laid upon
him:
because thou put upon him blessings perpetually,
and make him cheerful before thee, and seeing the King trusts in the
ETERNAL; I; 125; 12 84.112.119 N.


by the Grace of the most High he shall not be moved. Let thy hand find
out all thine Enemies: and thy right hand, them that hate thee. Set them as a
fiery oven at the time of thy presence;


K Is: 30. He: 12.
that the ETERNAL in his anger may devour them,
and his fire consume them.



Destroy their fruit, and let their seed fade away from among men, for intending
evil against thee, and imagining mische^ff beyond their might. Set them as a
butt, and upon thy string,

make ready against their facees. Be thou exalted, o ETERNAL, in thy STRENGTH:
that we may sing out thy power;
and chaunt thy worthynes.




P^o: 5. Job: 7.8. Ge: 19.
Ap: 22
XXII. For the Cheeff upon Ajeleth Hashahar, A Psalm of David.
MY God, my mighty God, why have thou left me,


and art far from my Salvation, considering my roaring? My God, I cry all
day, and thou answerest not, and all night, and have no attendance: and thou
the Holy one that inhabitest all the PRAISES of Israel;

In thee our Fathers trusted, and thou reskuedst them, to thee they cried and
were delivered,

g. Is: 41,
in thee they trusted and were never abashed.
But I am as a worm and not a man; the skorn of men and the basest of all the
people; every one that sees me, mocketh me;

and they let pass with their lips, wagging their heads:

He trusted in the ETERNAL, let him reskew him,
let him deliver him, because he has delight in him.
Because thou wast my creeping out of the belly, and my trust upon my mothers
breast,

upon thee was I cast from the bearing, and thou have been my MIGHTY God from
my Mothers womb:
o be not thou far from me when my destresse is at hand, and there is none
to help me.

Many mighty bulls of Bashan inviron me about,


they com with open mouths upon me, like roaring and preying Lions;

My bones are fallen out of joint, Sa: 17. De: 33. Nu: 23.24,
my heart is like molten wax in the middle of my bowels, and I am powered out
like water, my virtue is as dry as a sheard, and my tongue steeks to my jaws;

and thou put me even in the dead dust. For a company of malicious dogs
are come about me, and like Lions tear me hand and foot.
They stand looking on me,


while I tell all my bones, they divide my clothes among them, and cast lotts
for my garments; but thou, o ETERNAL, be not far from me,
make haste to help me, o my MIGHTY-ONE: Deliver my life from the sword, and
my solitary soul from the dogs, save me from the Lions denn,


and from the Unicorns horns receive me; I may declare thy Name to my
Brethren;
and in the middle of the congregation praise thee.

All ye that fear the ETERNAL praise, ye him, ye that are of Jacobs SEED,


glorify him,
and all ye the SEED of Israel stand in aw of him. For he does not despise,
nor disdain the MISERY of the afflicted, nor hideeth his face from him,


but hears him when he cries unto him. From thee,

shall be my Praise in the great Congregation,
and I will pay my vows before them that fear him;


that the lowly ones may eat their fill, and they that seek him, praise the
ETERNAL, that your hearts may be refreshed perpetually.


Let all the ends of the earth have mind to com to the ETERNAL,
and all families of the Hethen worship before thee.


For all KINGDOM is the ETERNALLS, and he rulleth the Nations. Let all the
ashes of the earth worship and eat,

and all that are going to dust, and they whose lives have no refreshing,


let them bow before him. The SEED that serves him, shall be reconed the
Generation of the LORD,

which shall com and tell of his RIGHTEOUSNESS, and show to a people unborn,
what he has don.

XXIII. A Psalm of David.



THE ETERNAL is my sheaperd, I shall not want, he will fold me upon the green
gresse,
and lead me by the quiet waters, He will convert my mind,
and guide me in the tracks of RIGHTEOUSNESS,

for his Names sake.

Yea when I go in the dim and dusky valley, I fear no ill,


because thou art with me, and thy very rodd and thy leaning staff,


thy comfort me.




Hard by my tormenters thou furnishest a table before me. Thou anointest my head
with oil,
and fillest my Cupp brim full, for goodness and KINDENES have followed me all
days of my life,


and I will contynwe in the House of the ETERNAL to my lives end.

XXIV. A Psalm of David.



THE earth is the ETERNALLS and all the implements thereof, the World and all
that dwell therein are his, for the founded it upon the Sea,

and set it sure upon the Ryvers, and who may come up unto his Hill or stand in
his Holy place?


only Innocent hands and pure hearts,

and such as do not set their minds upon vanity,
nor swear deceitfu^ly.

Such a on shall come,

and receive the blessing of RIGHTEOUSNESS from the ETERNAL, the God of their
Salvation;



this is the Generation that looks after him, p 100.7.94.10.


Jacob is he that seeks thy face surely. Therefore open your cheeff gates,
and set up your mighty doors, that the KING of GLORY may com in.

Who is the KING of GLORY?


even the ETERNAL that is strong and valiant, the ETERNAL the valiant
warrier, open your cheeff gates, set up your everlasting doors, that the KING
of GLORY may com in.
Who is this, that is KING of GLORY? even the warlik ETER: he is KING of GLORY
surely.



XXV. Of David.
O My God ETERNAL, S. 143, 22, 129;

upon thee do I set my mind, and in thee do I trust,
let me not be abashed,

and mine Enemies vaunt over me, nor let any, that wait on thee, be abashed,
but let them be abashed that revolt without cause. d r. 27.86, 35, 38,


Wise me thy ways o ETERNAL, and teach me thy paths,
train me and instruct me in thy truth, for thou art the GOD of my salvation,
u. 37.24, 68, 18, 27, 118, 1^6, 119 p q.

and I wait all ways on thee. Remember thy wonted Mercies,
and loving-kindenesses which have ever been,


remember not my youthful sins and transgressions, but remember me
according to thy LOVING-KINDENES, and for thy Goodness sake, o ETERNAL.



The ETERNAL is very upright, and will teach Sinners the way,
he will direct the Humble right,


and make the Meek ones perfect in his way.
All the WAYS of the ETERNAL are true LOVING KINDNESS and FAITHFVLNES, r, a.
Ge: 47 1 S^: 15. Io^: 2.

for them that keep his Covenant and Testimonies,
therefore o ETER: for thy NAMES sake,

pardon mine Iniquity that is so great, who so fears the Eter:
him will he teach what way to choose, that his mind may rest well at ease,

and his seed inherit the land: the Etern: will tell his mind to them that
fear him,
for his covenant is to teach them.

Mine eyes are always toward the ETERNAL, that he would take my feet out
of the Net,


o look upon me, and have Pity on me, for I am very miserable and desolat,
bring me out of my Destresses and Torments of my mind,
which they have enlarged. Behold my Misery and Greeff,


and forgive me all my sins, see how many mine Enemies are, and what cruel
hatred they have to me, o keep my life and deliver me,

let me not be abashed because I rely on thee,
let SOVNDNES and VPRIGHTENES preserve me, th. 26.


because I wait ernestly on thee,

o God deliver Israel from all his destresses.

XXVI. Of David.


IVDGE me, o ETERNAL, for I walk in mine INTEGRITY,
and trust in the ETERNAL that I reel not; Examine me, o ETERNAL, and prove
me, try my very reins and my heart, for thy Loving Kindenes, is before me,

and I walk in thy TRVTH, I cannot abide vain men,
and com not with dissembling Hypocrites.


s 5.
I hate the Assembly of Naughty persons, I sit not with the Wicked, but wash
clean my hands,

and am present about thine Altar, o ETERNAL,

with a thankful voice, to ring out and declare thy wondrous work. o
ETERNAL, I love thy House of Habitation,

and Dwelling place of thy Glory.


Reckon not my person among the Sinners, nor count thou my life among the lives
of Bloody-men,
in whose hands is Fornication, and whose right-hands are full of whoorish
rewards.



And I, that walk in mine INTEGRITY,
have pity on me and redeem me, that my feet may stand in plain ground,

and I may bless
the ETERNAL in the Synagogues.

XXVII. Of David.
THE ETERNAL is my LIGHT and my salvation, I fear no body;


the ETERNAL is the Stay of my life,
who should frighten me? when naughty men came against me to devour me, and
my sore Enemies to eat me up: they stumbled and fell.

If a camp of men pitch against me,

my HEART shall not faint, if ware rise against me, yet will I trust.
Only ONE THING I ask of the ETERNAL,

which I heartily desire, That I might bide all my life in the House of the
ETERNAL,

to behold the sweet delights of the ETERNAL, and contemplate in his Temple.


That he will keep me close in his Tabernacle in the evil time, and hide
me safe in his Tent,


and in the Rock take me up,
and now advaunce me over all mine Enimyes that are round about me,




that I may sacrifice sacrifices of Triumph in his Tabernacle, and sing and
PRAISE the ETERNAL. Hear, o ETERNAL,
my CRY I make unto thee, and consider me,

and pity me. Thine (o ETERN:


) my Mind says, Seek ye my face, thy face, o ETERN: b,
will I seek, hide not thy face from me,

turn not away thy Servant, nor be angry with me,
for thou art mine only help,

thou art the GOD of my Salvation, do not leave me,
nor forsake me.

And though my Father and Mother forsake me: let the ETERN: take me up.

Teach me thy WAYS, o ETERN:
and lead me a right course, because of mine Extortors,
let me not be in the will of mine Oppressors,

when false witnesses rise against me; and violence breaths out.

Certainly I trust to see the GOODNESS of the ETERN: before I dye;
Therefore wait thou on the ETERN:


wait valiantly on the ETERNAL, and he will strengthen your heart.



XXVIII. Of David.

TO thee, o ETERNAL, did I CRY: Hear the voice of my SVPPLICATION, Co^: 10,
o my ROCK, when I shout unto thee,
K: 6, 8, 1 S^: 7,
Mt: 16, 7,
La: 3* n.
and hold up my hands at thy holly Oracle, Act: 7.
and not be deaff toward me; less at thy Silence, I be like one going to
his Grave. I cried, dravv me not with wicked and mischeevous men,
Ge: 37.
that speak peaceably and freendly with their Neighbors, and have malice in
their hearts. Ier: 9,



Ex: 6. Ge: 15, Ne: 9
I CRIED, Give such according to their Labors, Ap: 11.18.
and according to their Wicked inventions, give them according to their own
hand works,
De: 28,
La: 3, ^. Mt: 19. Io: 5:3:8:6: To: 10. Eze. 30: Ie^: 24.31.33.42.45.
and cast them a full Revvard. And seeing they understand not the DEEDS of the
ETERN:
De: 32, 4: Ex: 18:
nor the WORK of his hands: let him destroy them wholy and not build them
up.
Job: 12.22.
Bl^ssed be the ETERNAL, Cor: 10.13.
he has hard the VOICE of my SVPPLICATION.

The ETERNAL my Strength and my Defense,
Job: 24,
Io: 6, 21, 4, Mt: 27.
in whom my heart trusts, and I am helped, and my heart is cheered, and with my
song will I praise him; S^: 12
Lu: 1
the ETER: that is the Strength of his people, De: 8. 1 S^: 10. E^: 16.
and strong Salvation of his Anointed: M^: 15. Mr: 8 L^: 9^ 1 Cor: 10.
o Save thy people, and bless thine Inheritance, and feed them, and succor
them for ever.

XXIX. A Psalm of David.

K: 24, Pro: 32, Ge: 6, Ex: 15, De: 33.
Is: 34, 57,
Yield unto the ETE: ye GODLY-ONES, yield unto the ETERN: Eze: 17.32.
all GLORY and STRENGTH.
Za: 11.
Yield GLORY unto the Name of the ETERN: Sa: 11. 1 Cro: 16. 2 Cro: 20,
and worship him with holly Decency. Is: 2. Da: 4, Eze: 1, 43, Apo: 16, 11, 19,
The VOICE of the ETER: is on the waters, De: 4 Job: 37, 38, 40 1 Sa: 7.
the God of GLORY thund^eth on the great waters, his VOICE is with MIGHT and
MAJESTY.

The VOICE of the ETERNAL breaks the Ceders, Eze: 17, 32, Ie: 123,
the ETERNAL shivereth the Ceders of Libanon,
Ex: 9,
and makes them dance like a Calf, and all Libanon and Shirion like a
Unicorns colt, the VOICE of the ETERNAL cutteth,
De: 3, 9, 1, 4, 5, 10, 33, Ex: 3, Job: 38,
Hab: 3, ^s: 33, 66, 30, He: 12, Ie: 21, 22, Joel: 2, Mt: 3, Lu: 3,
with fiery flames, the VOICE of the ETERN: punishes the Wilderness, E^: 17.3
19. Nu: 20 33 34, I^s: 10.14. De: 1.2.5. G^: 14.
the VOICE of the ETERNAL punishes the great Desert of Cadesh.

The VOICE of the ETERNAL makeeth the Forests bare, and tormenteth the deer,
K: 10, Job: ^9,
Ier: 14, Ie^: 6.8.
and all that ever be says in his Temple is GLORYOVS.
The ETERNAL sits on the flood,
Ge: 6 P^o: 30. De: 39.
Eze: 2.6. Mt: 14. Ap: 15 19.
the ETERNAL abides KING for ever, the ETE: gives his People STRENGTH and
blesses them with PEACE.

XXX. A Psalm Song of the Didication of the House of David.


I Will Extol thee, o ETERNAL, d. 13.25, 41,


for thou have raised me, and have not suffered my foes to triumph at me; o
ETERNAL my God, t.
I shouted unto thee for help, and thou did heal me. o ETERNAL,
thou have taken me out of the Skull, thou have revived me,
that I should not go down to the Pit. n.
Chaunt to the ETERN: o ye his Saints, and Celebrate his Holly REMEMBRANCE.
For he is but a moument in his anger,


and in his loving favor, is LIFE.

At night he will suffer weeping, but on the Morrow they shall sing out for
joy.


As I thought when I was at ease, I should never be moved, o ETERNAL in thy
Goodwill had settled my hill so fast:


thou turnedst away thy face, and I was stricken amazed.

Then I CRIED unto the, o ETERN: h.

and besought the ETERNAL, what avails my blood if I go down into the
Pit.




Shall the dust confess thee? shall the dust declare thy TRVTHE? hear me, o
ETERNAL,
and have pity on me, and be thou my helper, turn my mourning to daunceing,


take of my sack cloth, and gird Gladness about me,
that GLORY may chaunt thee out and never cease,

and I may thank thee, o ETERNAL my God for ever.

XXXI. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of David.

ON thee, o ETERNAL, do I rely, let me never be abashed,


rescue me by thy RIGHTEOUSNESS, harken to me, and deliver me with speed,

be thou my Strong-hold, and house of Munitions to save me, because thou art
my ROCK and GVARISON,


also for thy NAMES sake lead me and guide me, bring me out of the Net,
which they have privily laid to catch me,
because thou art my Strength.
I put my life in thy hands, redeem thou me,

o ETERNAL, ransom me, o God of TRVTH. I hate all such as observe
false-vanities,

I trust only in the ETERN: I rejoice mightily of thy LOVEING KINDENES,
because thou have seen my Misery,
and known my Destresses; and have not shut me up in mine Enimyes hands,

but have set my feet at liberty.

Have pity on me, o ETER: for I am in great DETRESS,

mine eyes are decayed, my very soul and my bowels within me,
are consumed,

with Greeff, for my life is spent in Sorrovv, and my years in Sighing, my
Bones are consumed,

and all my Strength is gone through mine Iniquity, I am revileed of my
Besiegers,

and my next Neighbors skorn me out of measure, mine Acquaintance are afraid
of me, and when they see me in the Street; fly from me,
I am clean out of their mind, and quite forgotten, like a dead man,
and like a broken vessel good for Nothing.


For I hear a horrible report of many,
and of their Plotting together against me, and how they devise to take away
my life, but I put my trust upon thee, o ETERN:
I say still, thou art my GOD,

my time is in thy hand, deliver me from mine Enimyes and Persecutors,

show thy Countenance upon thy Servant, and save me with thy LOVEING KINDENES.

O ETERN:

let me not be abashed of calling upon thee, let the Wicked be abashed, and
hold their tongues in the ground, and all false lips that speak arrogantly,

proudly and spitefully against the JUST: be made dumb.

Wonderful great (in the sight of men) is thy Goodness,


which thou layest up for them that fear thee, and do for them that put
their trust in thee;
Thou hideest them in the secret Chamber of thy Presence from Combrous men,

and keep them close in thy Tabernacle from quarellings tongues.

Blessed be the ETERNAL, for he has showed me wonderful KINDENES in a
strict City,



when I foolishly thought I was clean cut off from thy sight:

yet thou hardest the voice of my Supplication, as I shouted unto thee.
Love ye the ETERNAL all his Holly-ones,
for the ETERN: preserves the FAITHFVLL, and rewards the proud doer in
abundance.
Therefore, all ye that wait for the ETERN:

be of good cheer, and he will strengthen your hearts.

XXXII. A Mascil or Verse of David.


HAPPY is the man whose Trespass is forgiven,
and his Sin concealed,

whom the ETERNAL charge not with Iniquity, and in whose mind is no deceit,
I CRIED daily,

till I was hoarse and my bones Withered,


for thy hand was heavy upon me, and my Moisture is overthrouwn as with a
great Summers drought surely.






I showed thee my Sins and concealed not mine Iniquities,
I meant to confess my Sins unto the ETERNAL,


and thou forgavest the Iniquity, and my Sin surely. Therefore, let every
Godly-One pray unto thee,
when thou may be found;


less when Trobles arise, they cannot com at him.
o thou, that art my Skonse and Hideing-place, preserve me from Destresse,


rescue them that CRY and guard me su^ely.

I will wise thee, and teach thee what WAY to go,


and will tend on thee with mine eyes,

if ye be not like a Horse and Ass void of all understanding,
to be tied with bitts in their mouths, and bridles on their heads to keep
them from thee. For the Sorrows of the Wi^ked are great and many,


but he that TRVSTETH in the ETERNAL, GRACE and LOVEING-KINDENES shall environ
him.

Now rejoice and be glad in the ETERNAL, ye IVST-ONES, and T^iumph all ye
that be of an upright mind.


XXXIII.



TRIVMPH in the ETERNAL all ye that be JUST for the PRAISE of Upright men is
goodly,


sing to the ETERNAL with the Harp,

play unto him with ten-stringed Viols,
sing a New song unto him, and play your loudest Musicque. For the WORD of the
ETERNAL is most certain, and all his WORKS are sure.
The ETERNAL loves JUSTICE,
and RIGHT: and all the earth is full of his GRACIOUS GOODNESS. ^h.

By the WORD of the ETERNAL the Heavens were made, and by his Breath,

all their Host,


he heaped up the waters of the Sea, and laid up the bottomless Deeps in
Treasures.

Stand in aw of the ETERNAL,

and fear him all people of the world,
for what he says, that shall be, and what soever he Appoints, that shall
stand.
The ETERNAL frustrateth the counsel of the Hethen,

and brings the peoples devises to nothing.

But the Counsel of the ETERNAL stande^h for ever, and his Devises endure
still;
from one age to another,

and happy is the Nation that has the ETERNAL their GOD, and the People whom
he chuse^h for his Inheritance.

The ETERNAL LOOKS out of Heaven from his dwe^ling Seat,


upon all the Children of men that dwell in the world, he that both formed
their hearts,


and is cunning in all their WORKS: and Lo,

A King is not saved by the greatness of his Army,
nor a Strong-man delivered by his great strength.

A Horse is a vain thing for Salvation,


and cannot free for all his great Might.
But the EYE of the ETERNAL is upon them that fear him,


and vvait for his LOVING-KINDENES:
To deliver them from Death and releeve them in Famine. Our Soul waits for
^he ETERN:


he is our Help and Shield of Defense,

and because our Heart is delighted in him, and our whole TRUST is in his holly
NAME: let thy mercy, o ETERNAL, be upon us as our hope is in thee.

XXXIV. A Psalm of David, th.

upon his changing of his Behavior, before Abimelek (or Achish) King of Gath,
then when he banished him and he went his way.
I Will ever thank the ETERN: and allways PRAIS him with my mouth,
I my self will glory in him,
that the Lowly may be glad to hear it,
come magnify the ETERN: with me, let us extol his NAME together, for I
sought out for the ETERN: and he answered me, and delivered me from all my
Terrors. Therefore let them look cheerfully upon him, a.


and not be ashamed, for this poor oppressed one in his affliction CRIED:
and the ETERN: hard him, and saved him out of all his Destresses. The Angel of
the ETERN:
will pitch about them that FEAR him,


and release them. Now consider and mark how GOOD the ETERNAL is,

and how HAPPY is the MAN that relyeth on him. a m. 2.103.


Fear the ETERNAL all his Saints, For they shall want nothing that FEAR
him,



the Lions vvhelps shall go lean for want of meat,
and pine away for hunger: but they that SEEK the ETERN:
shall not want any thing that is good. Com then my Children,


and harken to me, and let me TEACH you the FEAR of the ETERNAL.
If you love to live long, and love to see many days:

Keep your Tongues from ill communication,

and your lips from speaking Deceit, meddle with nothing that is ill, m. 11,
66,


but do that which is good, seek after Peace and pursue it. For the ETERN:
looks tenderly to the JUST,
and has a tender ear to their shouting.



When they Cry: he heereth them, and delivers them from all their
Destresses. But he will look angry toward them that do ill;

p.
and will cut off their Remembrance out of the Earth.
The ETERN: is near to them that be broken-harted,
and will save them of oppressed minds,

for many are the Woes of the IVST-ONE,
but the ETER: will deliver him from them all,

and will keep him that not a bone of him shall be broken.

Some Mischeeff shall make an end of the Wicked and slay him, and they that hate
the JUST shall waste away,
but the ETERNAL will redeem his Servants life,
and none that rely on him shall be waste-ed

XXXV. Of DAVID.
DO thou maintain my Quarrel, r. 9, 56, 64.6,


o ETERNAL, and fight thou my Battle, o take up thy Shield and Buckler, and
com and help me, draw out thy Spear and arm thee to meet my Pursuers. Say to
my life,


I will be thy SALVATION.
Let them be ashamed that seek my life; and retire with sharp reproach, that
think me ill, and be like dust before the wind, and the Angel of the ETERN:
driveing them,


let their WAY be in dark and slippery Place-es,


and the Angel of the ETERN:
to pursue them at the heels. k, 7, 9,
Because they have hid a Net in the Pit for me, undeserved,
and undermined for my Life without a Cause:

Bring a RVINE on them that they be not ware of, and let their own Net,
that they have laid; take themselves, and by it let them fall into the same
Ruin.
So my Soul shall be glad and rejoice in the SALVATION of the ETERNAL.


All my bones shall confess,


There is none like thee, o ETERNAL, which deliverest the oppressed from him
that is to strong for him, and the Poor Afflicted vvrech from him that would
spoil him.
Sa: 25,, Pro: 17.19.

False Witnesses arose, such as I knew not, saluteed me, to requite me Evil
for Good, and take away my life. When they were sick, I wore fackcloth,
and punished my body with fasting,

but my Prayers returned again upon mine own bossome, I was as sorry for them,
as for my friend, or my Brother, I went wailing for them,


and mourned as for my Mother, yet they are merry together at my halting.


The vile people are gathered against me er I am ware, and never rest tearing
of me,
while the Slaves derideing me gnash their teeth upon me,

o LORD, thou markest it well,
p. M^: 10,
deliver my Dear Soul out of their Dangers,
and save me from those Lions whelps,


and I will thank thee in the great Congregation and Praise thee among a number
of people.



Let not them that are mine Enemies for nothing,


and hate me without a cause: LAVGH and WINK at me, for they desire no peace
with any quiet people in their talk,
but still devise Coussening talk and deceiptfull words against them.
They com against me with wide mouths SAYEING,
p.
Oh, Oh, ah Sirr ho, we saw it.


Thou see, o ETERN: and be not thou silent,
nor be away from me, o my Lord. Awake and arise,

o my LORD GOD, to IVDGE my Quarrel, and Judge me according to thy JUSTICE, o
ETERN: my GOD, and let them not rejoice and LAVGH at me,
let them not SAY in their minds,

Ho we have our desire, b
we have devoured him. But let them be ashamed, and confounded that are glad of
my hurt,

and wear shame and Ignominy for ever that rear themselves against me,
and let them be merry and Triumph for ay that wish my RIGHTEOUSNESS,


and always SAY: The ETERNAL be magnified for delighting in the Peace of his
Servant.



And my Tongue shall tell out thy JUSTICE, and thy PRAISE for ever.



XXXVI. For the Cheeff: Of DAVID the Servant of the ETERNAL.



IN my mind, the TRESPASS of the Wicked does show,
there is no fear of GOD before him.
Because he thinks to make light unto him,
Da: 11, Ez: 12, Ie.: 48,
his most heinous iniquity, for all his words are Greeff and Deceit,
D^n: 11, Eze: 11, Ier: 48,
and he has left lerning to do well,
he devises Greeff upon his Bed, Ier: 1, 2.3, 4, 13 Is: 1, Mic: 2, Gal: 6.
I^: 65, 2 ^h: 3. Eze: 36,
he persisteth upon the WAY that is not good,
De: 30,
and will not leave that which is evil. Job: 42,


O ETERNAL,
Ez^: 9,
Io: 1
great is thy LOVEING-KINDENES in the Heavens, and thy TRVTHE even to the
Clouds,
thine upright IVSTISE is of a mighty highth, G^: 7,
To: 11.
and thy IVDGEMENTS a^e of a great Depth.
For thou, o ETERNAL, Ie: 27, Mt: 10,
sauest both man and beast.
De: 32.
O GOD how Precious is thy LOVING-KINDENES, when all human men are safe under
the Shadovv of thy vvings?


Which are refreshed with the fat of thy House,
Ge: 2,
L^: 3, h. I^^: 31, E^: 47,,, Za: 14, Ap 7, 8.21, 22, Io: 4.17,
and of the water thou give them of thy Pleasant River. For with thee, Job:
29, 37, Pr^: 16, 6.13.14.
there is a quick wellspring of life, and by thy LIGHT do we see Light.
Ier: 31.36. Is: 60. Act. ^2.
o Draw up KINDENES for them that know thee, and RIGHTE-DIRECTION for them that
are of an VPRIGHTE MIND.

P^o: 16.
Ie: 13,
Let not the Foot of Pride carry me away, nor the wicked Hand lead me
astray: vvher the WORKERS of Greeff do fall and are down,
Pro: 24.
Am: 8.5.
and cannot rise no more.

XXXVII. By DAVID.
CHAFE thou not at Naughty men, s. 125, 90.103.129, 147.

and spite not WRONG-DOERS,
for they shall be soon cut off like Grass,
and wither like a green blade. Feed thou upon the TRVTH, do Good, a,, 139,
40, 28, 22, 15, 36, 86, 2^, 21, 2^, 5^,
and TRUST in the ETERN:
and inhabit the earth. Set thy whole delight upon the ET:
and he will give thee thy hearts desire, committ thy course upon the ET: and
trust wholely upon him, and he will bring it to pass, n.

and bring thee forth thy righteous Judgment, as clear as the light at none.
Therefore RELY thou on the ETERNAL, and have Patience in him,


and chafe not when the MISCHEVOVS man does prosper in his course,


but forbear from Anger, and forgo thy Choler.
Chafe not when he thriveth only by doing of Evil,

for NAVGHTY men shall be cut off,
and they that WAIT for the ETERNAL, shall Inherit the Earth, and have their
room.

For after a little while, the WICKED will be gone, and his place to seeking,
and the Poor Meek people shall have the Inheritance of the Land, sh.

and peace enough to delight them. The WICKED man inventeth MISCHEEFF against
the JUST,

and skrasheth his teeth upon him for malice,

but the LORD LAVGHETH at him,

for he see-eth his Time is come.


The WICKED dravv their Swords,
and bend their bovves to kill an slay the Poor, and all them of an vprighte
Course. But their Swords shall peerce their own hearts, and their bows be
broken in pieces.


A little of the IVST-Mans is better, then the Abundance of wealth of many
wicked men,
for the Arms of the WICKED shall be broken, s.a.
but the ETERNAL will hold up the JUST.

The ETERNAL will teach the days of PERFECT MEN,


and that their Inheritance shall last for ever. They shall not be abashed in
any hard time,

and in Time of dearth they shall have enough.


But the WICKED shall perish,


and the UNGODLY (for all their Honor and Advauncement) shall vanish, s) 102,
(109,) (68)
and all consume as in smoke. The WICKED will borrow,

and not pay again, but the JUST man has Pity and bestows,

for the BLESSED of the ETERNAL shall inioye the Land,

and the CVRSED shall be cut off. All man's Proceedings are from the ETERNAL,

and they are sure, if he delighteeth in them.
For he will not let them fall, but the ETERNAL will stay them up in his
hand. s. 109,,

I have been young, and now am gone an old man, yet in all my Time,


I never saw the JUST MAN destitute, with his seed begging bread, but always
merciful and lending,

and his children blessed. Therefore shunn EVIL,
and do that which is GOOD,

and you shall ABIDE for ever, for the ETERNAL loves RIGHT, and his Saints
he will not forsake.

They shall ever be preserved, but,
The Children of the WICKED shall be cut off. The JUST shall INHERIT the
Earth,
and DWELL everlastingly upon it, for the JUST man will talk wisely, and speak
that which is Right,


and have the LAW of GOD in his mind, that his steps slip not.


The WICKED watches and seeks to kill the JUST,

but the ETERNAL will not leave him in his hand,
nor condemn him when he is to be JVDGED.
If thou will Wait upon the ETERNAL,
and observe his WAY, he will exalt the to the Inheritance of the Land,
and thou shall see the WICKED cut off. I have seen the WICKED lusty,

and shooting up like a green graff: but Lo,
he is passed by and gone,
and if I seek him he is not to be found. MARK and consider the PLAIN and
VPRIGHTE MAN'S end is Peace,

and the Posterity of the WICKED is cut off,

and also the TRESPASSERS they themselves are destroyed. The SALVATION of the
JUST is from the ETERNAL,

l. Lu: 1, 2.
that is their whole CONFIDENCE in Time of Destresse, and the ETER:
will rescue them, he will rescue them from the WICKED, and will SAVE them,
because they rely up on him.

XXXVIII. A Psalm of DAVID for a Memorial.



O ETERN: reproove me not in thy chafe,
Job: 9.33 6,, Pro: 3.6,
Jude. La: 3,, d. Is: 66, Ez: 5, Ie: 10,
nor CORRECT me in thy Choler, for thine Atrowes are lighted on me, and thy
hand lies upon me.
Job: 33,
Mt: Mr: Lu: 9.2.5. Ie: 23,
I have no health in my flesh, nor any ease in my bones, thou rage-est so for my
SIN.
For mine Iniquities are gone upon my head, Ez^: 9,
like a hevy burden, more then I can carry,
Ge: 4,,
Pro: 20,, Ge: 34, Leu: 7, 3, 4, Job. 15, 30,,
Zach: 14,, Is: 1,
my blows are putrified, and my Stripes stink for my folly, I stoop and go
vvonderfull crooked,
Ez^ 3. Ier: 40. To: 2.
I go all day mourning, my Loins are full of Burning,
Sa: 18, Pro: 12,
and I have ^oe health in my flesh.


I am much bruseed and weakened, I roar with the vvorying of my heart,
Job: 3,
Ier: 48,,
O LORD thou know my Desire, To: 8,,
and my sighings are before thee,
my heart is in Pain, my Strength is gone, De: 34.
mine eyes are spent, and mine eyesighte gone from me.

Can: 6. Job: 6, Ge: 21. Nu: 2, Ex: 4,, Job: 19.25,, 1 K: 19,,
Mt: 26. I^:: 8. Io: 30.
My Lovers and my Friends will not com nigh my Plague,
and my Kinsmen stand a far off. While they that seek my life,
Pet: 2, Ap: 14,
and search my hurt, speak corrupt words to entrap me, Sa: 28,
and talk nothing but Deceit all the Day, Is: 53.
and I like a dumb body that could not speak,
Job: 13, 33.
so was I like a man that hears not, Eze: 3.
and like one that could not rebuke.


Ge: 41,,
Mt: Mr: Lu: 10.13.12.
Thou shall CONSIDER and ANSWER for me, o LORD my GOD, for I WAIT for thee, o
ETERN: less they LAVGH at me for what I say,
and MAGNIFY themselves over me,
when my foot slippeth. For I was ready to halt, He: 12.
and my greeff is ever before me. When I show mine Iniquity,
Sa: 12.
and am sorry for my Sin. For they that are Enemies of my Life, are mighty and
many,
Ge: 40 Job:
and they that hate me wrongfully are wonderfully increased.
To: 12. Io: 10.
They are against me, because I follow that which is God,
Ge: 41,
paying me EVIL for GOOD. Forsake me not,
K. 8.
o ETER: be not far from me, o my GOD my LORD and my SALVATION, make haste
to help me.


XXXIX. For the Cheeff, for Ieduthun: A Psalm of DAVID.
C^o: 16,, 25,, 6,, 2 Cro. 5, 29,

I Thought, I would look to my WAY, for Sinning with my tongue,
Pro: 1^.
and to bridle my Mouth before the WICKED. Therefore I became stark Dumb,
I^b: 32, 33, 6.
Ez: 3,
and forbore from speaking that which was GOOD, and that greeved me more. And
I CHAFED in my mind, Ie^^ 30.
and my Thoughts wear on fire, so I SPOKE and SAID, o ETERNAL,
Job: 15.
show me when my end shall be, and the MESVRE of my DAYS, I may know, how
long I shall stay. I know thou have made all my days but a HANDFVLL,
E^: 37, 1 K: 7,
Ez: 40,
and my whole Age is Nothing before thee, I^b: 7. Ge: 4 1 K: 4.
for Surely every man's ABIDEING is nothing, but Mere Vanity.

Every man is much troubled,
De: 2 Eccl: 2,
Ier: 34,
and carried away with a vain Fansy, to beap up; and knows not who shall Spend
it: Joel: ^: To: 8. I^: 64.
but my only HOPE and WAITING is for thee, O LORD.
Deliver me from all my Trespasses, and make me not wear the Reproach of the
Filthy-fooles,
Ez: 3,
for I was still Silent, and held my Tongue because it was thy Doing. Sa: 16.
O take away thy SCOVRGE from my back,
De: 2, Job: 19;, 13,, 2 K: 14, 15, 2 Cro: 25
H^: 1^,
I am quite consumed with the Tentation of thy hand.

When thou CORRECTEST a man with Rebukes for Iniquity,
Job: 13.
Isa: 50.51. To: ^. 2 ^o^. 54.
thou meltest away his Lovelynes like a Moth,
Lev: 17,,
for Surely every man is frail VANITY.
Job: 7,
Hear my PRAYER, o ETERNAL, and my Shouteing unto thee,
hearken unto my tears and be not deaff,
Ex: ^,, 12 ^eu: 25,. 1 Cro: 29, 15, 16, G^: 20,, 23, 47.
He: 11, Act: 7. 1 Pet: ^. Is^: 6, 2 Cor: 5.
for J am a STRANGER with thee,
and a So JOURNER as my Fathers were. o Spare me, and deal gentlely with
me, J may be somvvhat refreshed before J go hence quite,
Ioh: 9, 10.15.
and com no more.

XL. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of David.

Ge: 1,
I Continued my WAITING on the ETER: and at last he turned to me, and hard my
SOVTEING. And took me out of a horrible Pit,
G^; 37,, Ex: 12,,
Is: 6,, 66,,
out of Dirt and mire, and gave me sure footing, Mt: 7: La: 6, 16:
and set my feet on a Rock, and put a NEW SONG in my mouth: Ap: 14.
A PRAISE to our GOD, Ex: 14
many savv it and FEARED,
Ie: 15.
and TRVSTED in the ETERNAL.
HAPPY is the man that makeeth the ETERNAL his TRUST,
and carreeth not for Mockers,
Can: 6: Job: 5* 9, 10,
Is: 3,
nor such as dravv to Falsehood. Thy mervilous FEASTS,
o my GOD ETER: which thou have don for us are many,
and no man can reckon them unto thee, Leu: ^
if I should assay to declare them:
they are to many to tell.


Heb: 10 Mt: 9, 11.13. Ier: 6, 8, To: 10 Gal: 3 He: 14, Ap: 12, 2, Hos: 6,
Sacrificees and Meat offerings thou carest not for, S^: (15) (28) 7. Ge: 50,
Eccl: 4, Leu: 4.23. Hest: 1,
(THOU HAVE MADE ME EARS TO HEAR.) Neither burnt offerings nor Sin
offerings requireest thou. Then SAID I,
Lo, here I am, in the open book, Ezr: 6,
Ier: 36, 15, Job: 5,,, Ez: 2, 2 Pe: 2. To: 10, Mt: 4^
plainly, it is WRITTEN of me, for I have pleasure to do thy will, o my
GOD,
De: 30.8, Ge: 6. 1, N^h 7,
and in my Belly is thy LAW, J PREACH RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Great Congregation,
Ie: 31, 23. Mic: 6,
and J shut not my Lips, o ETERN: Act: 20,
thou know. I conceal not thy RIGHTEOUSNESS in my mind, Job: 6,
Ioh: 17, Mt: 10,
J declare thy FAITHFVLLNES and Thy SALVATION,
I hide not thy Lo-KINDNES, Neh: 7, Ge: 1,
Heb: 2,
I declare thy TRVTH to the Great Congregation. Therefore,
Mt: 9, 10, 12,
O ETERNAL, shut not thou thy mercyes from me,
but let thy LOVEING KINDNESS and thy TRVTHE always preserve me,
De: 8,
Io: 1, Mt: 14, 10,
for Innumerable Evils are come upon me,

Mr: 6. Lep: 3.
and mine Iniquityes have overtaken me, and I cannot SEE,
they are more then the Hairs of my Head, and my Heart fails.

Be so GOOD as to deliver me, Est: 8.9.
O ETERNAL, O ETERNAL, help me with Speed,
and let them be ashamed and confounded, La: 3.2. gh De: 3^.
that go about to Shorten my Life,
and be turned back with Reproach, that would hurt me, Ios: 8. De: 7,, 8,,
let them be Stund with their Shame that SAY, o Sir, o Sir.

That all that SEEK thee, and Love thy SALVATION; may be glad, and rejoice in
thee, Est: 8.9.
Mal: 1,,
and SAY always: Great be the ETERNAL.
Act: 19
O my LORD,
think on me that am vvreched and Needy, Da: 9,
thou that art my help and Rescuer, and tarry not, O my GOD.

XLI. For the Cheeff: A Psalm of DAVID.

HAPPY is he that well considers the Poor and Empty man,
1 Sa: 18. Pr^: 19.14. Eccl: 11,


The ETERNAL will dravv him out, in Time of Evil, the ETERNAL will keep
him,
and refresh him, and he shall be BLESSED in all the Land*

thou vvilt not put him in his Enimyes will;

the ETERNAL will Souccour him,
when he is vveak and feeble on his bed, and thou vvilt make his Lodgeing in
his Sickness. I SAY, o ETERNAL,


have thou Pity on me, and heal my Soul, for I have Sinned against thee.

Mine Enimyes, when I am ill, SAY, when will he dye, and his Name perish? and
if he comes to see me,

all his TALK is COVNTERFET;
for in his heart he thinks to molest him, and as soon as he is gone out, he
tells it abroad,
besides; all my Haters WHISPER against me,
and DEVISE against me, while I am in Misery: Some discommodity oppress him,
that he may never rise again, when he is down.

Yea my Peaceable FRIEND that I trusted, and that eat of my meat,


Kicked at me. But o ETERNAL, have thou Pity on me, and RAISE me again, d.
and I shall acquit them. Hereby I KNOW,

thou have pleasure in me, For mine Enimyes do not Triumph over me,

1 Cro: 29 Neh: 5,, 8,, 9,, Ezr: 7 1 C^o: 16. 2 1^: 1. 1 K: 8; 1. 2 K: 10. Ge:
42.

thou mainteinest me in mine VPRIGHTENES,
and set me before thee for ever.
Blessed be the ETERNAL the GOD of Israel,
from Everlasting to Everlasting; indeed and indeed.

THE SECOND BOOK.
XLII. For the Cheeff: A Mascil of the Sons of Corah.


AS the hunted Deer does LONG for water-streames:

so does my Soul long for thee, o GOD. My Soul is a thirst for GOD,
to com to the LIVING GOD,
and appeer before GOD.
My Tears are all my Meat day and night, while they SAY still unto me,

Where is thy GOD? When I think on these things,
I even power out my SOVLE for greeff for me;
Seeing I went out with them, and conveyed them, and protected them,
even to the house of GOD, with great Triumph and Thanksgiving, and a solemn
feast.

Be not abase-ed and troubled for me,

o my SOVLE, wait thou on GOD,
for I will yet confess the SALVATION of his presence. o GOD, my SOVLE is
abased for me, wherefor I think on thee from thee Hills of Hermon,

and from the Hill Mizaar in the Land of Iarden.
Thy Chanells call all the Deeps together,

all thy Breaches and Waves go over me. Let the ETERN: send his LOVE:-KINDNESS
by day,
and in the night,


let his SONG be with me A PRAYER to the GOD of my Life.

I SAY to the Almighty, my Rock:

z^sh 1 Cor: 10,,
Why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning by the oppression of the
Enimye?
With a Slaughter in my bones do my Besiegers reproach me, while thy SAY
still,


Where is thy GOD?
Be not abaseed and troubled for me, o my Soul,
wait thou on GOD, for I will yet confess him,
1 K: 6,
my present SALVATION and my GOD.

XLIII.

Ge: 15, I^d: 6, 5. P^: 13 2^, De 3, I^: 9. 1 S^: 4, 2 Sa: 1^, Job: 6? E^: 3?
Ie: 51, 50, La: 3. r.
PLEAD thou my Quarrel, o God, and Shift me from an unkind Nation, rescue me
from deceiptfull and unjust men. o GOD of my Strength,
Lu: 1, Io^: 2, Is: 26.
put not thou me back, why go I mourning by the oppression of the Enemy?



Ex: 13, 26, 36, Ie: 23.34. Na: 29. De: 16.
Io: 2,
Send thy LIGHT and thy TRVTHE to Guide and Lead me, Io: 1; 7.
and bring me to thy Holly Hill,
and into thy Tabernacles; and that I may com to the Altar of GOD;
to GOD the Joy of my Mirth,
and Thank thee upon the Harp, o GOD, my GOD.


Ex: 20, De: 5,
Ie^: 31, 5, Ez: 8, Io: 12. La: 3. z.
Be not abased and troubled for me, o my SOVLE, wait thou on GOD, for I will
yet confess him on my present SALVATION and my GOD.


XLIV. For the Cheeff of the Sons of Corah: A Mascil.


O GOD, our Eeares have hard it, and our Fathers have told us,
of the WORKS thou wroughtest in their days,
and in the days before. Thou, with thy hand did dispossess the Heathen
and plantedst THEM;




and did deal hardly with the Nations, and did setle THEM. For not by
their own svvord,
did they possess the Land, neither did their own Arm save them:
but thy Right hand and thine Arm, and the LIGHT of thy COVNTENANCE,


did it; because thou did accept of them.


O thou the same GOD, my KING, send JACOB deliverances, that by thee we may
push down our Besiegers,
and by thy NAME trample upon our Insurrectors (for I trust not in mine own
bow,

and mine own sword, that they should save me) that when thou have saved us
from our Besiegers, and abashed our foes:

We may Glorifye GOD daily, and set out thy NAME for ever surely.

Yea, thou drawest back and refuseest to go forth with our Armies, and
shamest us,

thou make-est us turn back from the Besieger,
so that our foes suppress them,

thou have skatered us among the Hethen, and given us among them, like sheep
for their meat, g h,


thou have sold thy people, and have noe wealth for them,
d.
and art never the richer for their price.

Thou have set us a Reproach to our Neighbors, z, 69,
and a Derision and a Mocking-stock to them round about us,
thou fettest us a Byword among the Hethen, and a Beckoning among the Nations,
my Shame is daily before me,

and Bashfullnes all over my face,

for the VOICE of the Reprochefull and Revileing spiteful Enimye:
Yet for all this, we have not forgotten thee,

nor been false in thy Covenant.

For all thou have beaten us down into the place of Dragons,


and heiled us over in Obscurity: our Mind is not gone back, nor our Steps
turned out of thy paths.

If we have forgotten the NAME of our GOD,

and spread our palms unto a strange GOD: will not GOD find it out,


seeing he knows the secrets of the heart? for, for thee are, we daily
killed, and counted as slain sheep. Awake and arise, o LORD,
do not sleep and draw back continually: o do not hide thy face, forget not
our misery and oppression,

when our Soul is humbled to the dust, d 42, 35.63, 102.103.
and our Belly cleevs to the ground. Stand up a HELP for us, and redeem us for
thy LOVEING KINDENES fake.

XLV. For the Cheeff, upon the Lillyes, or Lira, of the Sons of Corah: A
Mascil, A Loue-song.




MY Heart abounds with a good matter, and I will tell my WORK of the King,
Job: 32.
and my tongue shall be as swift as the Pen of any Scribe. Thou art fayrer then
any Human vvight, Ezr: 7.
Can: 4,, 7,,
Col: 3,, 4,,
thy Lipes are povvred full of Grace, therefore thy GOD has blessed thee for
ever. Gird on thy Svvord upon thy thigh like a valiant man,
Can: 3,,
Da: 4,
gird on thy Worship and thine Honor.
Mt: 21, 22, Ephesians: 1, Za: 9. Zep: 2, Ap: 19.
Ride thou upon the Word of Truth and meek Justice, and increase thine honor:
and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
For by thy sharp Arrovvs in the heart of the Kings Enimyes, the people shall
fall down under thee.



Reg: 1,
Heb: 1,, Da: 7, To: 6.14. Hab: 1. Ap: 22. Mt: 23, 22,
Evermore thy THRONE is GOD, and the Septer of VPRIGHTNES, is the Septer of thy
KINGDOM. Thou love RIGHTEOUSNESS, and hate-est WICKEDNESS, therefore thine own
GOD has anointed thee with the Oil of Joy above thy fellows.
Can: 3, 4.
Is: 61. Lu: 4; Ez: 41, 46,
The edges of all thy Garments, don with Myrrh and Aloes,
Ex: 26,
out of the Ivory closets of Minni do delighte thee. Re: 22. 6, Iud 11,
Am: 3, Ier: 51, Io: l: 3, Ez: 27.
Kings Daughters are in thy dignityes,
and at thy right hand does stand thy Bedfellow, Ne: 2. 1 Reg: 9, 10, Ge: 2.10
8. 1 Cro: 1, 2 Cro: 8, 2 Sa: 15. 1 K: 3, 7.9, 11 Nu: 1, Iud: 14, Ge: 2, 3, (18)
1 K: 1. P^: 19: Job: 11, 2 Cro: 33^ 1 K: 13. 2 K: 13. Ex: 28.
Za: 14,, Is: 13.
all in fine gold of Ophir. O Daughter hearken well, consider and turn thine
Ear, and forget thy Nation and thy Fathers House: and the King shall be in
Love with thy Bewty. La: 3.
and be thou Lowly to him (for he is thy Lord) and the rich men of Tire shall
entreat thee with Presents.
Pe: (3.) Z^: 8.9.7. D^: 9.


The Kings Daughter is most Glorious within: K: 7.
Ez: 23,
with her clothes of golden Imbrodery of Needlevvork, Ez: 16, 27,
shall she be brought to the King, Ap: 21.
after her, the virgins that be her companions shall be brought unto thee; with
joy and Mirth shall they be brought flowing into the Kings Court.
Cro: 8.
Lu: 1.
In steed of thy Fathers thou shall have sons, to set Princees in all
Countries. Therefore I will make thy Name a Memorial in all Generations,
for the people to Publish and confess thee for evermore.

XLVI. A Song for the Cheeff of the Sons of Corah, upon Alamoth. Cro: 15. 2
Cro: 20.
Ier: 33,

GOD is our strong RELY and ready Help in distresses: Therefore we fear not,

at the CHANGE of the earth:
Job: 9;
Joel: 4,,
At the mooveing of Mountains into the middle of the Sea, Lu: 17, Mt: 17 Apo:
6, Ie^: 5. Jude. Is: 57,
at the Rorering and boiling of the Waters,
nor at the Shakeing of Mountains with the Pride thereof Surely.
Ez: 47.
Isa:, 12, Ap: 21.22. Io: 7.
His holly chanells do cheer the City of GOD, and delighterh the Dwellings of
the HIGH.

GOD is in the midst of it,
Ex: 24,
Ze: 3, Ap: ^2, 7
it can not be stirred, GOD will help it betimes, before the morninge springs.
The Hethen raged,
Judge: 9. De: 23.
and the Kingdoms wear in a commotion:
He uttered his VOICE and the Earth melted. The warlike ET: is with us,
Iud: 6, 2 S^: 5, 1 K: 8,
Is: 7, 8, Mt: 1, ^m: 8, To: 8, Lu: 20, Ap: 6.
the GOD of Jacob is our RELEEF surely. Com and behold the miraculous ACTS of
the ETERN: what Desolations he has made in the earth.
Is: 6.


Ceasing tho wars unto the end of the earth that Shivereth the bows, and
cutteth the spears in pieces,
Ios: 11, 14,, De: 32,
Is: 14. Za: 9.
and burns the chariots in the fire. Hold your hands and know,
that I am GOD and will be exalted in all Nations of the world: Sa: 24,
The warlike ETERNAL is with us,
K: 8,
Is: 7, 8, To: 8. Mt: 1. Lu: 20. Am: 8.
the GOD of Jacob is our RELEEFF surely.

XLVII. A Psalm for the Cheeff, of the Sons of Corah. C^o: 20.

ALL people, clap your hands,

triumph unto GOD with a loud voice, for the ETERN:
is a dread SOVEREIGN,

and a great KING over all the earth.
He has subdued Diverse people under us, and Nations under our feet,

and chose us our INHERITANCE the very Pride of Jacob surely.


GOD the ET:


is gone up with the shrill sound of the Trumpet. o sing Psalms to GOD, o sing
Psalms to our KING, because GOD is KING of all the Earth; sing a MASCIL Palm.


GOD SITS upon his holly Throne,


and Raigneeth over the Heathen, the Principal people are gathered together,


but because the DEFENSES of the earth are GODS:

The People of Abraham's GOD is much preferred.


Cro: 20.
XLVIII. A Psalm-Song by the Sons of Corah.


GREAT is the ETERNAL in the CITY of our GOD,


and his Holly HILL very renowned, Mount Sion, the City of the great KING,
on the North side, standing fair and lofty, s.

the Joy of all the earth. GOD is certainly her DEFENSE in her Battelments.

For, behold, When Kings were assembled,

b. Isa: 23, Ioe^: 4, Isa: 3^, 2, Act: 11 2.22.7
they passed by at once, when they Savv,
they mervilled, they were terrifyed and astonished,
there a trembling took them, and a Pain as of a woman in travail of child,
with an East vvinde thou brakest the Ships of TarShish.




According as, we have heard and SEEN in the City of our GOD the warlike
ETERNAL, GOD will establish it for ever surely: We think thy LOVEING KINDNESS
is with in thy Temple.


o GOD thy NAME and thy PRAISE is over the ends of the world,


for thy Right hand is full of JUSTICE.
Let Mount Sion rejoice, and all the Towns of Judah be glad for thy
JVDGEMENTS.



Go round about Sion, and compass it, and tell her Towers,

think upon her Trenches, consider her Platformes,

that you may tell it to another Generation, for this shall be our ONLY GOD
for evermore,

He has brought us over Death.


Cro: 20.
XLIX. For the Cheeff: of the Sons of Corah, A Psalm.
HEARKEN hither, all ye Nations, and hear this, Job: 11,
Ier: 2:
all ye that inhabit the Continent, Every Human wighte as well rich as poor:
my mouth shall speak WISDOM, and my heart think of UNDERSTANDING,
Mt: 13,,
I will turn mine ears to a PARABLE,
and open my RIDLE upon the Harp.
Job: 5, 18, 13, 14: Pro: 5:
Why should I FEAR in days of Misery,
when the Iniquity of my heels is round about me? Men trust in their wealth,
Lu: 16?
and glory in their great riches.
Leu: 27?
no man shall redeem his Brother, nor give a price to God for him, K: 12, Ex:
13, 21 30, Nu: (3) (18,) 2 K: 1,
Mt: 10, M^: 8,
(the Redemption of their lives is so deer) that he should stay for ever, Is:
17,
and live continually and and not see the Pit. He see-eth,
Job: 9:4 36, E^cl: 2:3:
Za: 1:
that Wise Men dye, and that Bruteish Sots do perish together: and leave their
wealth to others.


They think their Houses shall endure for ever,
Job: 21.
and their Dvvellings for all Generations, Ies: 14: De: 3: Ge: 4, 17, Job:
36:14:, 18,
Mr: 12:
and call them by their Names upon their Lands: Lu: 12:
but Man lodge-eth not in Honor, and is ouercom like unto Dumb Beasts.
Cor: 15. Hos: 4.13.
This their WAY is a Sottery to them, and they that com after them will
vvellcom it with their mouths Surely.
K: 16.
Cor: 15.
They shall lie like Sheep in the Pit, I^b: 17. Pro: 16.
To: 6.2.
Death shall devour them, and straightvvay they shall have Dominion over them:
And the Pit shall wear out their shape as soon as they be from their
dwelling house, in it. K: 8, 18. 1 Cro: 17. 2 Cro: 6,
Is: 25.63.
But GOD will redeem my life from the Brinck of hell, because he has
accepted me surely.
Job: 19.33. De: 30. Oc: 5.
Hos: 13, 14. 2 Cro: 6.


FEAR not, when a man goes rich,
Job: 27.^1.
and the Glory of his house grows great; for he shall take nothing in his
death; Eccl: 5:6: De: 29.
nor shall his Glory descend after him. Lu: 6.16. Ap: 18. Ie^: 22.
Because he made much of himself in his Life; and men did set thee out,
because it went well with thee:
Leu: 22: Job: 34:27.
Is: 14, 5,
thou shallt enter into the Generation of his Fathers, Ap: 18,
that Never shall see Light more, till Everlasting. Men in Honor without
UNDERSTANDING:
perish like unto dumb Beasts, and there is noe talk of them. Job: 35.
Hos: 4. Is: 15,


Cro: 25.16.15.
L. A Psalm of Asaph.

THE most mighty GOD, the ETERNAL has SPOKEN and called, De: 4,
Ez: 27, 28,
the world from the East even to the West,
from most fair Sion he has made to SHINE that our GOD will com and not
linger,
Ex: 19, 24, De: 4, 9,, 33, I^b: 20,
La: 2, d L^: 3. Mt: 24, 1 Timothy: 4, 1 Cor: 15, Heb: 12, Is: 30, 66, Ie^: 23,
Joel: 2, Obad: Da: 2. Ier: 21. Heb: 10,
with a consumeing Fire before him, and a horrible Scorching round about him.
He will CALL unto the Heaven above, and the Earth to IVDGE his People.
D^: 31, 32, 30,
Gather to me, o my Saints, doing my Covenant with Sacrifice, To: 2,
for surely GOD himself is IVDGE,
Heb: 18.
and the Heavens shall tell his JUSTICE.


Hear, o my People Israel, and I thy very GOD will SPEAK and protest of thee,
Sa: 8,, De: 4,, 30,, 31
Act: 17,
I approove thee not for thy Sacrifices,
Leu: 6,
Ier: 6, A^: 5,
nor thy burnt offerings which are perpetually before me, Is: 1, 56,
I will none of the Bullocks of thy House,
nor of the Male goats of thy Folds, for every Forest of Catell is mine,
Job: 38, 39, Nu: 2.
and all the Beasts in a thousand Hills. M^l: ^1.
I know all the Foul of the Hills, and the vvilde Beasts of the Feeld are
with me. Ex: 9, 19, D^: 10, 19,
If I be hungry I will not tell thee, for the whole Chaos is mine,
Ios: 3, Io^: 20.38.41.
Cor: 10.
and all the Implements thereof. What? Do I eat Bulls flesh or drink the
blood of Hee-goates? Leu: 7^
He: 13,
Sacrifice to GOD Thanksgiveing,

Job: 22,
Mt: 9,
and to the most High Sovereign pay thy Vows, Ec^l: 5,
if thou CALL upon me, J release thee in time of Distress,
Ioh: 12, 13.
and thou shall glorify me. Sa: 2.


And to the Wicked GOD SAID, What have thou to do,
Heb: 9,.
to declare mine ordinance, taking my Covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate-est correction,
Ne: 9? Ex: 20? P^o: 1?
Za: 5?
and castest my COMMANDMENTS behind thee? If thou see-est a Theeff and
runnest with him, Job: 24.
and have thy Part with Adulterers, thou set thy mouth on Evil, Pro: 16,
Co^: 6, Ephesians: ^, Ap: 21 1 T^: 1,
and with thy Tongue do plot Deceit,
thou sit and speak against thy Brother, Heb: 13,,
and slaunderest thine own Mothers son? These things thou do,
Mt: 15?
and because I hold my peace,
thou imaginest that I am as thou art, I will reproove thee, and reckon with
thee to thy face. I pray understand THIS,
Job: 23.
These: 1.
all ye that think not on GOD:
Hos: 5.
Lest J consume you, and there be none to deliver you. Leu: 7,,
M^: 9,
He that sacrificeeth Thanksgiving,

Io: 12, 13, 17,.
does Glorify me, and J will putt him in the WAY,
and show him the SALVATION of GOD. A^^: 6, Act: 16. Lu: 5.


LI. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of David: When Nathan the Prophet came to him, as
he went in unto Bath Shebah. S^: 12:

HAVE pity on me, o GOD, according to thy LOVEING KINDENES,


and according to thy great MERCYES wipe away my Trespasses, wash me well from
mine iniquity, and make me clean from all my Sin,

for I know my Trespasses, b.


and my Sins are ever before me. Toward thee only have I sinned,


and thee only have I displeaseed that all that thou SPEAKE-EST and JVDGE-EST
may be right and clear. Behold,

in Iniquity was J born, and in Sin,
my Mother conceived me. Lo, s.
thou delightest in the TRVTHE of the Loins,
therefore teach me the WISDOM that is most inward.

Purge me with Isop that I may be clean,

wash me that I may be whiteer then Snow,
b.
let me hear some joy and gladness, that the bones that thou have broke-en,
may rejoice. o hide thy face from my Sins, and wipe away all mine Iniquityes,
make me a clean Heart, o GOD,

and renew a perfect Mind within me. o cast me not away from thy Presence,
nor take thou thy holly Spirit from me.
Bring me the Joy of thy SALVATION, And with thy free Spirit uphold me: that
I may teach Trespassers thy WAYS,


and Sinners how to com unto thee.


O GOD, O GOD of my SALVATION, deliver me from blood, that my Tongue may sound
out thy RIGHTEOUSNESS.
o LORD open my Lips,
that my Mouth may tell out thy PRAISE.
For thou have noe Delighte in Sacrifice,
and Offering thou will none if I would give it.

The SACRIFICES of GOD are a Contrite Spirit, GOD sets by a broken and an
afflicted heart.
o mend up Sion in thy favor,

and build up the Walls of Jerusalem,
that then they may offer up Bullocks upon thine Altar,
and thou may delighte in right Sacrifices,
and in perfect offerings.


Sa: 21.22.24.26.27. 1 Cro: 24.
LII. For the Cheeff: A Mascil of David: How Doeg the Edomite told Saul, and
said to him, David is com to Abimeleks House.
WHY do thou always glory in MISCHEEFF,


and in the DBTESTATION of the Almigthy,
o Stout-man? Thou vvorkeest Greeff with thy tongue, like a keen rasor,
doing Deceit. Thou love Naughtynes better then Goodness,

to speak false, rather then right Surely.




Thou love all devouring talk, O deceiptfull Tongue.

Even so, GOD shall throw thee down for ever,
prostrate thee, and pull thee out of thy Tent,

and root thee out of the world for ever Surely;
and the RIGHTEOUS shall see it and Fear,
and LAVGHE upon him. I.




Lo this is the Stout man that put not GOD his Confidence,
and trusted in his great Riches, and had confidence in his Substance.

But I like a green olive tree in the House of GOD,
will trust in the LOVEING KINDENES of GOD evermore.
I will thank thee for ever, for that thou have don, and because thy NAME is
good:
I will tarry in presence of thy Saints for ever.

LIII. For the Cheeff over the Chore: A Mascil of DAVID.
THE Ignorant fool THINKS in his mind there is no GOD:
Job: 30, Iud: 19, 20, 1 S^: 25, Leu: 18, 20, Pro: 30, 2 Cro: 1, Ge: 6,
Is: 31,
They do all manner of abominable filthly vvrong, Ze: 3, To: 3,
and none does good.
Ier: 5.,
GOD looked out of Heaven upon all Human men, to see whether there were any
DISCREET man seeking after GOD: and all were gone back,
Job: 35, Ez: 14,
Cor: ^.
and all become stinking Reprobats together, none doing good, noe not one.

Do not the workers of Greeff know,
De: 7,
Me: 3, Ier: 10, 1 Pet: 3
they eat up my People like meat,
when they CALL not upon GOD?
Where they fear a FEAR, there is no fear,
Ez: 37, Is: 29,
because GOD has dispersed the bones of thy besieger;
Pro: 28,,
thou make-est them abashed, as if GOD had cast them off.

GOD grant that Jacob may be once glad,
Ez^: 3,
Zep: ^, ^s: 52. Ier: 32.33.46.
and Israel REJOICE out of Sion the SALVATION of Israel, D^: 30.
when GOD shall bring again the captivity of his People.

LIVE. For the Cheeff in Song, A Mascil of David. When the Zipps SAID to Saul:
David is hid with us. Cro: 6. 1 Sa: 23, 26. Ios: 15. 1 Cro: 2.4.

SAVE me and Clear me, o GOD,
Job: 36, 1 S^: 18, 2 K: 13,
Act: 3, 4,
by thy victorious NAME, o GOD, hear my PRAYER,
and hearken to the WORDS of my Mouth,
Ez: 28, Is: 29,
for cruel Enimyes are risen against me, and seek my life, that put not GOD
before them surely.

Behold,
Cro: 12.
Tim: 4^
let my LORD GOD that is my HELPER, and is with them that uphold my Life:
bring the Evil to my Tormentors, and by thy TRVTHE dissolve them. Job: 6.



Leu: 7, Ex: 33.
Phil: 2,* 2 Co^: 12.
That I may freely Sacrifice unto thee, and set out the GOODNESS of thy NAME, o
ETERNAL, that has delivered me out of all DISTRESS: that mine eyes may look
upon mine Enimyes.




LV. For the Cheeff in Song Musicque, A Mascil of DAVID.


HEAR my PRAYER, o GOD, and conceal not thy self from my pitiful
SVPPLICATION,
listen to me and consider me, that am settled in my Complainte and CRY out,
Ge: 27,
Iam: 3,*
for the vrgeing Talk of the wicked Enimye,
which Attempt to Anger, Ge: 49, Job: 16.30.
Hab: 3. M^^: 5.
and Greeve me. My Heart is in pain within me,
La: 3, 8.
the Threatenings of death are fa^len upon me,
fear, and Trembling is within me, and Terror does overhelle me.
Job: 21.
Is: 21.
And I SAID: J would J had wings like a Dove,
Cro: 17.
Ap: 12,
that I might fly and have Rest; behold, I would remoove far off, and Lodge
in the Wilderness,
Surely. J would soon escape from the Tempestuous Whirlewinde.
Ge: 10...
Mt: 10,,, 12,,, Lu: 12...
O LORD, divide their Tongues, Nu: 16,,
and Devour them for the INIVRY and CONTENTION which I see in the City.
Job: 19.




Ier: 6..
Day and Night they go about it upon the Wales thereof, and Sorrovv and
PAIN is within it, There is a miserable CALAMITY with in it:
Ex: 33. Iud: 6.
Na: 3. Ze: 1.
DECEIT and GVILE dravve not out of the streets. For, it was not an Enimye
that defameed me, that J should bear it, nor my Foe that hated me, Ze: 2,,
that made Much a do against me, Ex: 40:,,
that J might be hid from him: but thou, a wrech of mine own Rank,
Mt: 26: Lu: 21 Mic: 7.*
my wonted Companion and my familiar Acquaintance; K: 10* P^o: 16*
we went in Company into the House of GOD,
and took sweet Counsel together.
Job: ^., 10.,
Let Him put Death upon them, and let them go down to Hell alive,
Nu: 16.
for MICHEEFFS are in the middle of their Dwelling Houses.
De: 31.

Cro: 13. 2 Sa: 24.
I CALL unto GOD the ETERNAL to SAVE me.

Evening and Morning, Cro: 1, 3.
and at Noon do I Complain and Cry out,
that he will hear my VOICE, S^: 4.
Lu: 2, I^: 16.
and by PEACE ransom my Life from the war, which J have with many that are
with me.
The ALMIGHTY GOD hear and answer them,
and He that Jnhabiteth their presence Surely. They have noe Changes,
Job: 10, 14, 17; De: ^1,
and they Fear not GOD. He gives his hand with his Friend in League,
Sa: 18.
To: 1, 2 ^^: 3, Is: 19. M^: 7.
and breaks his covenant, the words of his Mouth are smoother then Butter,
his Heart being all war,
they are Softer then Oil, yet, are they naked Swords.
Cast thy Providence upon the ETERN: and he will content thee. Heb: 23, 1 Pe:
5. Mt: 6, Lu: 10.1^. 1 Co^: 7. Phi: 4,
And I do TRUST in thee. O GOD,
Ge: 45.
bring THEM down to the Pit of Corruption, and let not Murderers,
Cro: 12. Job: 21.
Is: 30.
and Treacherours men atteine to half their Time.

LVI. For the Cheeff upon Ionath-elem, of the Foreiners: A Mictam of David:
When the Phelistines had hold on him in Gath.


HAVE Pity on me, o GOD, Is. 27, 109.

for Man devoureth me,
daily fighteing to oppress me: my Tormentors gape daily,
they being exceeding many, that fight against me. When I was afraid, I put my
TRUST in thee:
in -- GOD (I praise his WORD) in GOD I put my TRUST,



I fear not what flesh shall do unto me. They are much moved daily,

because of me, for me, all their DEVISES are for MICHEEFF.
sh.




They lie in wait and lurk in secret, and observe my steps,

as looking for my Life. O GOD, put them,
to flight for their MOLESTATION, and in thine Anger overthrow the Nations.
Count my REMOOVINGS,

o GOD, and put my TEARS in they Botle, ^. 48.114.
Be they not in thy reckoning? THEN, when mine Enimyes turn back when I call,
then, this I know that GOD is with me.

In GOD (I PRAISE his WORD) in the ETERNAL ( J PRAISE his WORD) in GOD I put
my TRUST,



I fear not what man shall do unto me.
I will pay thee Thanke-Offrings, o GOD, and thy Vows that I have made thee,

because thou have delivered my person from Death, and my feet from scatering,
to walk before GOD in the LIVEING LIGHT. n.




r 105.242.16 56, 58, 59, 60.
Sa: 21.22, 24.26. 2 Sa: 23, 1 Cro: 11.12. 2 Cro: 35.

LVII. For the Cheeff: DESTROY NOT: A MICTAM, of David, upon his flyeing from
Saul into the Cave.
HAVE Pity on me, o GOD, for on thee does my SOVLE rely,
and in the shadow of thy wings,
I wholely RELY till CALAMITY be past,

I CALL unto GOD my SOVEREIGN, the ALMIGHTY that does all for me.
Sa: 15,

That he would send his LOVEING KINDENES and his TRVTHE from Heaven, and save
me from the Reproach of my Devourer Surely. p.






My Soul is among Lions, I lie among inflamed Lions,
men whose teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongues sharp swords.

O GOD, be thou extolled above the Heavens, and thy GLORY over all the Earth.
When they set Nets for my feet, he clipped my SOVLE,
they have dug Pittes before me,

and they are fallen in the middle of them Surely.

My Heart is ready, o GOD,


my Heart is ready to SING PSALMS,

I will up betime with my GLORY, my Lute, and my Harp*
and thank thee, o LORD, among the people, and LAVDE thee among the Nations.
For the GREATNESS of thy LOVING-KINDENES to the Heavens, and thy TRVTHE even to
the clouds.


Be thou extolled, O GOD,
above the Heavens, and thy GLORY over all the Earth.


LVIII. For the Cheeff: DESTROY not, A Mictam of DAVID.



WHAT indeed,


will ye never speak the TRVTHE?
will ye never IVDGE RIGHT, o Human men? and will you still in your hearts
work wrong, and in the world,


weigh INIVSTICE with your hands? The WICKED stray, even from the bearing,
and ERR as son as they be out of the womb, Speakeing FALSELY.


Their Burning is like the Stinging of a Serpent,


like the Stinging of a deaff Adder,

that has his ears stopped, and cannot be charmed by the wiseest Coniurer. O
GOD,

break their Teeth in their mouths,
and dash the laws of the Lions whelps in pecce-es, o ETERNAL,

that the Arrows that he draws may be shunned, that they may go like water
and be broke-en.


Let him go like a melting Snaile, like the falling of a Woman,

let them never see the Sun. Before your pots feel the Briars:
let his own Choler burn him like raw flesh.

That the JUST MAN may REJOICE,


because he has seen a revenge,


and washed his feet in the blood of the WICKED.
And that men may SAY; Certainly there is fruit of JUSTICE,

certainly there are Gods Judgeing in the Earth.



LIX. For the Cheeff: DESTROY not, a Mictam of David: When Saul sent and
wached the House, to kill him.




DELIVER me, o GOD, from mine Enimyes, and FREE me from mine Insurrectours,

deliver me from MOLESTORS, and save me from BLOODY men. For lo, Mighty ones
lie in wait for my Life,


and Lurk for me, without any Trespass or Offense of mine, o ETERNAL, for
noe Iniquity they runn and Prepare them selves against me. o, UP at my Calling
and Behold, and thou, o ETERNAL, GOD of the Hosts of Israel, AWAKE to com
visit all the Paganes.

And have Pity on none that revolue sorrow and MOLESTATION surely.



Let them go yelling, at night like Doges about the City,
behold, Swords are within their Lips,
and they utter with their mouths, as if none does hear them.
And thou, o ETERN: LAVGHEST at all the Paganes and deride-est them.


because GOD has been my RELEEFF, I will keep them whose STRENTH is in thee,

a
that my people forget not, O kill them not. let the GOD of my LOV-KINDENES set
me present, and let GOD make me look upon my TORMENTOVRS.

o LORD, our DEFENSE, shake them by thy POWER and debase them, and let them be
taken in all their PRIDE,
The Sinful WORDS of their Lips,


and of their Mouths.

They SPEAK nothing but Oaths and Falsehood,
destroy the^ with their CHAFEING, make an end of them,
that they never be no more, that they may KNOW that GOD ruleeth in Jacob,


and to the Ends of the Earth Surely. And let them go yelling at Night, like
Doges about the City,
let them go up and down for meat,
Ex: 16,
and go murmuring to their Lodgeing for want of their FILL:
and I will SING and sound out thy STRENGTH, and thy LOVING KINDENES betimes in
the morning,


for being mine RELEEFF and REFVGE in time of my Destresse.
o my STRENGTH, to thee will I SING Psalms, because the GOD of my LO: KINDENES
has been mine RELEEFF.


LX. For the Master upon SHVSHAN EDHVTH, A learned Mictam of David, upon his
Skirmish with Aaram Naharim, and Aram Zobah: When Ioab returned, and slew
tvvelv thousand Edomites in the Valley of Melach.






O GOD, thou that have been angry, and broke-en us, and given us REPVLSE;

turn again unto us. Thou that have made the Earth to quake and gape; that it
foundereth and slippeth:


o heal the Breaches thereof. Thou that have showed thy People Hardness,
and given us drink, of wine of Astonishment:

and have made them that fear thee, remoove their Standard and fly, because of
thy TRVTHE, surely:
o consider me and help with thy Right hand, that thy Beloved ones may be
released.

GOD SPOKE in his Sanctuary (I was glad) I will divide Shechem,



and meat out the vale of Succoth, Giliad shall be mine,
and Manasse shall be mine,

Ephraim shall be my Cheeff Confirmation, Judah shall be my Lavvier, and Moab
my washing pot,
upon Edom will I cast off my Shoes,

o thou Phelistia triumph for me.

Who conducted me to the City Mazor?
Who brought me to the strong City Edom?

Did not thou, o GOD,
that do give us REPVLSE? and go not forth with our Armies? O give us
HELP in Distress,
for vain is the help of men.


Through GOD we shall do prosperously, and he will trede down our
Besiegers.

LXI. For the Cheeff over the Song Musicque, of DAVID.

Sa: 15,, ^^,, 1 K: 8. Ge: 47,,
Ier: 10,, 12, 51
HEAR, o GOD, my Shout, and conceive my Prayer,
Is: 5, 13.42.43. Dan: 1,
when at the Extremity of the world I Cry unto thee,
Ios: 15. Ex: 16, 2 Sa: 21, 2^.
when my heart faints. guide thou me by the Rock that is above me:
Ier: 23, 1 ^or: 10. Heb: 10, Mt: 16, 7. L^: 16, Is: 45. Da: 9. Mt: 23.
That I may Soiourne everlastingly in thy Tabernacle, Ex: 17,
and rely on the hideing of thy Wings.


Pro: 18.
Because thou art my RELY, and strong TOVVER, for the Enimye. o thou, o GOD,
De: 2,
Is: 19,
that hear my vows and vvishes, and grauntest to them their REQVEST,
that Fear thee: Pro: 10:
o double the KINGS days,
and make his years as many Generations.


Leu: 7.
Mr: 4, 9, 6, 1 Co^: 10,
That he may ever dvvell before GOD, and that LOVING-KINDENES and TRVTHE, De:
8, Pro: 20, 29,
I^: 1.14, Mt: 6,
his Portion, may ever preserve him, that J may perpetually chaunt out thy
NAME, S^: 15. Nu: 30.
Is: 19. Ion: 2.
by my payeing my Vows every day.




LXII. For the Cheeff, by Ieduthun, A Psalm of DAVID.



SVRELY upon GOD my SOVLE does rest, from him is my SALVATION. Surely he is my
ROOK and my SALVATION,
he is my STAY that I Slip not over much. Why do ye Devise against a man?
that ye may all slay him like a ruinous wall,


and like a broke-en and destroyed hedge.

Surely they CONSVLT to beat down his honor to the ground. a
They love FALSEHOOD, they make much of one with their mouths, but in their
hearts despise him Surely.

Surely upon GOD rest thou my Soul, for,


from him is all my waiteing. Sure he is my ROCK and my SALVATION, he is my
STAY that I slip not. Upon GOD my SALVATION,
and my GLORY, in GOD my strong ROCK is my RELY. Trust in him always ye
people,

power out your hearts before him and SAY,

GOD is our whole RELY Surely.

Surely the sons of Adam are Vain,
and the children of Men are false,
and to be weighed together they are lighter then Vanity. Put not vain
confidence in Deceit, and Robbery,


if your wealth increase,
set not your hearts upon them,
once or twice has GOD SPOKEN it and I have hard it:


That all STRENGTH is GODS, and KINDENES thine, O LORD, because thou payest
every man according to his WORK. Sa: 22.


LXIII. A Psalm of David: When he was in the Wilderness of Judah.


O Thou, my Mighty GOD,

I earnestly desire thee, my SOVLE thirsts for thee,

and my FLESH longs for thee,
in a Dry and thirsty land without water:

that I may even behold thee in thy Sanctuary,


and to see thy STRENGTH and thy GLORY,
and to commend thee with my lips,

for thy LOVING-KINDENES that is better then Life.


That I may ever hold up my hands, u 20.36, 107,
and bless thee in my life, and my mouth may PRAISE thee with triumphing
lips, when my SOVLE is satisfyd, as with fat,

and thicknes; and triumph in the Shadow of thy wings, zq 95, 149,

when I remember and think on thee upon my bed, in the Waches,

how thou have been my HELP.

My SOVLE cleeveth after thee, d 64.35, 139.


thy right hand holds me, while they that seek my LIFE, are under the
Earth, and are shaken, and com to nothing,
they that provoke the KING by the sword,
c h. Zep: 1., Is: 19, 41, 45, 48, 65, Ier: 4.5.12. Mic: 7. Rom: 3.
are become meat for foxes, and let the KING rejoice in GOD,

and every Devout man glory in him,
because the mouth of them that speak Treason is stopped.

LXIV. For the Cheeff, A Psalm of DAVID.
Am: 4.
O GOD, in my Complaining hear my VOICE.
Job: 5, 15,
Is: 24, Ier: 6, 20, 48, Lam: 3, chapter p. Act: 13.
Preserve my Life from Dread of the Enimyes, G^: 49.,
hide me from the secret counsel of Naughty men,
and from the Convent of them that be workers of Greeff,
which whet their Tongues like Swords,
Ier: 9.
and dravve their Arrows,
BITTER words, privily to hit the PERFECT man,
they shoot at him on a Sudden and fear not.

Which comfort themselves in an ill matter,
De: 17, Eccl: 8,
which reckon to hide Snares, and SAY, Noe man shall see them.
K: 6,, 4,,
Is: 29. Ier: 18, 23,
they make a vvonderfull search to find out VVronges, and the Inward
Thoughts of a Man,
Nu: 17, Pro: 20, 25, 28, 30, Ge: 44.
Lam: 3, Zeph: 1, Ier: 16.17.
and the Bottom of his Heart: and so let GOD shoot them, E^cl: 7:
and Soudain Arrows be their strokes.

And let their own Tongues that offend him,
Ex: 16.
fall upon themselves, that all may start that look upon them, and all men be
afraid, and declare GODS WORK, Nah: 3.
and consider and Learn his DOING.
That the JUST man may REJOICE in the ETERNAL,
relyeing in him, and they Glory that are of an upright mind.

LXV. A Psalm for the Cheeff: A Song of David.
FOR thee, o GOD,
Is^* 56.
abides PRAISE in Sion, to thee be all Vows performed, o thou that hear
PRAYER, even to thee let all flesh com,
Job: 33. Ex: 29,, 30,, Leu: 16,, Ge: 7.
Ap: 15.
for thou reconcile-est our Trespasses, Ez: 49,
and pardonest the Iniquityes that overcame me. HAPPY is he whom thou
chuse-est,
De: 10, Ge: 7,
and entertainest, to dwell in thy Courts, to satisfye us with the GOODNESS of
thy House, and Closet, O Holly one.
Ex: 33, 1 K: 6,,, Ge: 6:
Fearful things should thou Answer us in JUSTICE,
Job: 26.
Ion: 2.
O GOD of our SALVATION: the TRUST of all the ends, and Longinquityes of Land
and Sea.

With the Girdle of his Power,
Ge: 8,
Hos: 10,
and EXCELLENCE, which fasteneth the Hills,
and stilleth the proud waves of the Seas, Mt: M^: Lu: 8.4.8. Is: 51, Lu: 1, 4,
and Roaring of the Nations; and the Inhabitants, of the Ends and Issues of
Morning and Evening,
which are afraid of thy Signs, thou make-est to Triumph:
Ge: 1.
Da: 2,. 4,. 7*
Thou look on the Earth, and make it runn full of water,
O GOD, thou greatly inrichest it with Rivers, thou prepare-est their corn,
Ioh: 7. Is: 12: Ez: 47.
for to that end thou ordeynedst it.

O wet her furrows, break her clodes,
Ge: 7, 2. De: 11.
Hos: 10,, Is: 61, Lu: 4.
and dissolv it with Showers, bless her Chisming,
crown the year with thy GOODNESS, that thy cart routes may flow with fatnes,
and drop Dwellings in the Wilderness, and the Hills gird on Gladness,
Ge: 8, 9.
Is: 35; Mt: Mr: Lu: 3, 1, 3.
and the Plains put on sheep,
and the Vales be clad with corn, that they may triumph and Sing.


LXVI. For the Cheeff, A Psalm Song.
SHOVT unto GOD all the Eearth, Number: 10, Ios: 6*
SING PSALMS of his Glorious NAME,
set out his Glorious PRAISE, SAY unto GOD: How fearful is thy doing?
Ex. 15. De: 33,, 2 SA, 22.
by thy great STRENGTH are thine Enimyes subdued unto thee, all the earth do
worship thee, Mal: 1,,
and make Hymns unto thee, they chaunt out thy NAME surely. Com and behold
the WORKS of GOD, he has terrible INVENTION for the Children of men:
Ex: 14, 17. Ios: 3. Nu: ^1.
he turns the Sea into Dry Land, that they went over the River on foot,
Cor: 10.
where we rejoiced in him. Heb: 11,
He rulle-eth the World by his EXELLENCE, his Eyes wach over the People, and
let not the Rebellious exalt themselue Surely.


Bless our GOD, ye People, Sound out the VOICE of his PRAYS, that has put
our Souls in LIFE,
and not suffered our feet to slipp. Nu: 10.
For thou have prooved us, o GOD,

Za: 13,,
and tried us like Silver, thou have brought us into the Toil, and pressed our
Loins, thou have made men ride over our Heads,
we have gone through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out to a
REFRESHING:
De: 4,
Mt: Mr: Lu: 3, 9, 3, 12, 1 Pet: 4, Is: 43, 51,
and I will go into thy House with OFFERINGS,
Nu: 10.30. 2 Cro: 6.
I will pay the my Vows,
De: 23. Eccl: 5.
which my Lips opened, and my mouth SPOKE in my Distress.



Le: 6, 7, 4.
I will offer Offerings of Rams fat, and Incense unto thee, and I will
Sacrifice Bullocks and Buck-Goates surely. Com hearken all ye that fear GOD,
and I will TELL you what he has don for me.
Ge: 4,
Ma: 2^ Mt: 5. Lu: 12. Mt: 6.
I Cried unto him with my Mouth, and he was much exalted under my tongue,
Nu: 23.
If I see any molestation in my heart:
Can: 4. Job: 11:. 31.
the LORD hear me not. J assure you, GOD hearkened to me, and hard the VOICE
of my PRAYER. Blessed be GOD, which put not away my PRAYER,
Pro: 15.
Mt: 9.10.12.
nor has taken away his KINDENES from me.


LXVII. For the Cheeff in Song Musicque, A Psalm Song.


GOD be gracious unto us, and bless us, and LIGHTEN us with his COVNTENANCE
surely,

that they may know the WAY

of SALVATION among all Nations of the world, that the People may confess
thee,
O GOD, that all People may confess thee.



That all Nations may Rejoice and Triumph,
that thou Iudgest the People, and leadest the folk rightely and discreetly
surely. That the People may confess thee, o GOD,

that all People may confess thee.

Our own GOD bless us,


that the Earth may give her Abundance of increase,
GOD bless us,
that all out-coastes of the Earth may fear him.

LXVIII. For the Cheeff, of DAVID, A Psalm Song.

LET GOD arise,
Number: 10,
Z^: 13,
and let his Enimyes be skatered, and they that hate him flee before him. Drive
them away like smoke, and as wax melts before the fire:
Mic: 1:
so let the WICKED perish before GOD.
That the RIGHTEOUS may rejoice, that they may leap before GOD, and REJOICE
with joy. Leu: 23,
Mt: Mr: Lu: 3, 1, 3, 1, Mt: Mr: L^: 21.11.19.12.
o SING unto GOD, CHAVNT out his NAME,
strew unto him that ride-eth in the Deserts, Nu: 36, De: 1, 12, Ex: 15. 2 Sa:
6.
and in his NAME ETERNAL,
Hos: 14. Ia: 1.
vawnt and skip before him. A father of the fatherles,
S^: 24. De: 10.33.
and a Husband of the Widows,
Ier: 25. 1 Ti: 5. Act: 16.
is GOD in his holly MANSION, he teaches to keep house alone, he brings
out the Restrained in to commodious places,

but the wayward ones abide still in Droughth. O GOD,
Iud* 5,. Ex: 19, 2 Sa: 6,
when thou wentest out before thy People, when thou marchedst in the Wilderness
surely: the Earth shook in Sinai,
Ge: 7: De: 1:. 33. Ex. 19.
Heb: 12,
and the Heavens dropped from the very GOD of Israel, thou droppedst liberal
showers, o GOD, Ex: 16,, 19, Nu: 11, 2 Cro: 31, 2 Sa: 23. Nu: 10.
thou confirmedst thine Inheritance,
Mr: 6.8, 4, Mt: 14, 15, Ioh: 9.6.
when it was weery, thy Congregation dwelt there, o GOD, and thou did PROVIDE
for the Oppressed. My LORD gave his word,
K: 4.
Is: 40, 14,
and there was a Great ARMY of MESSENGERS, De: 33,
and warly Kings fled, they fled, Ioh: 6,
and the Good wife of the House divided the spoil. Iud: 4.5.


Ge: 49,
Ez: 46.
Will you lie in your Cotes with your silver and gold plate-ed feathers, ye
Culver-winges? while the ALSVFFICIENT snoweth Kings in Salmon and spreds them
on it?
Iud: 9? Number: 33? Ex: 3, 4, De: 33, Ios: 9, 10.11, 12, 13, Iud: 5. De: 11,
Hos: 11?
the HILL of GOD, Ez: 28,
the HILL Bashan, the HILL Bashan MOUNT GABHNVNIM?
why urge ye the HILLS GABHNVNIM, a Hill that GOD lists to have for his
Seat,
Yea the ETERNAL will abide there for ever? Nu: 10, De: 33. Ez: 5,
Da: 7,, M^: 26, Jude, Ez: 5,
The Chariots of GOD are twenty Millions of Soldiers,
and my LORD in the mids of them in the Sanctuary of Sinai. Ex: 25.
Thou surmountest to the High-est, thou take captive,
Iud: 5, Nu: 21,
Ephesians: 4, Hos: 12, Is: 14, Ier: 41, Ioh: 14,
and receivest Ransomes for men, and also the Wayward ones are to abide still,
O GOD ETERNAL,
blessed be my LORD the GOD of my SALVATION, when we are burdned surely.
De: 33.
Am: 2. Is: 46. Ez: 48. Mt: 10.
Our GOD is the GOD of SALVATION, and the ISSVES of Death are my LORD the
ETERNALLS:

Pro: 4. Ge: 3. De: 33.
but GOD will wound the head of his Enimyes, and the hairy crown of him that
walks in his Crimes. My LORD SAID, I will bring the^ again from BASHAN,
Ge: 15.
I will bring them again from the Bottom of the Deep Sea. Nu: 13, 32, De: 3,
Nah: 1,
Is: 33. Ez: 27.
That thou may blood thy feet,
and wet the tongues of thy Doges in the blood of thine Enimyes.

Ex: 25., 26,, Job: 6, 2 Sa: 6, 1 K: 11.
They savv thy GOINGS, o GOD, and How my GOD and KING marched in his SANCTVARY,
Singers go before,
and Minstrels follovv, and in the middle, are maids tabouring with Tabors, in
the Congregations they blessed GOD, they blessed the LORD from the Fountain of
Israel.
Ex: 29. 1 K: 4. Iud: 5, 7, 2 Sa: 2, 1 Cro: 12.
Za: 13. Ie^: 2.
There is little Benjamin their Commander, with the Princes of Judah, the
Prince-es of Zabulon,
and Prince-es of Neph Taly their band. Thy GOD, send thy STRENGTH (The
strength,
De: 32. Ex. 15. 2 Sa: 22.
o GOD, which thou have wrought for us) out of thy Temple upon Jerusalem,
that KINGS may vvaft gifts unto thee.
Cro: 32. 2 Sa: 23, 1 Sa: 10, 12, 13, 14, De: 32, Job: 38. Ge: 15, 49. Iud: 3,
5. Pro: 6, Ge: 3. 2 K: 18.
Is: 18.60.14. Ez: 20, Is: 36, 43.46, 11, 42. Mr: 12. Am: 4, Ie^: 34, 46, 50,
CHASTISE thou the beasts with the reed, and the herd of the mighty bulls
with the Calves of the People, that creep for pieces of money.
Let him scatter the Nations that delight in wars, that Prince-es may com from
Egypt,
Is: 18.19.
and Ethopia send her hand Post unto GOD: Ge: 10: 2 Cro: 30.
Ma: 4. Is: 11:20:44:55:66. Ze: 3.
Ye KINGDOMS of the Earth SING unto GOD, and CHAVNT out my LORD surely. SING
to him that ride-eth in the Ancient Heavens, behold with his VOICE, he gave
a mighty VOICE.
Ex: 15. 2 Sa: 22,
Am: 1, 3, Is: 30*
O give STRENGTH unto GOD for Israel his highth: and his STRENGTH in the
Skies.
My GOD terrible out of thy SANCTVARYES: the Might of Israel, that Gives
STRENGTH and FORTITVDE to his People, Blessed be GOD.


LXIX. For the Cheeff upon Shoshamin, of David.

O Save me, o GOD,
Ion: 2.
the waters are come even to my SOVLE, I steek fast in the deep mire, and there
is no Standing,
Ge: 37,
Ier: 38.12, Ez: 27,
I am come into the deep Waters, I^d: 12,
and the Currents drown me, I am weery of CALLING my throat is hoarse,
Ioh: 15*
mine Eyes are spent with waiting for my GOD, my Haters for nothing,
are more then the Hairs of my Head, and my Traytorous Enimyes exceed my
Locks, Can: 4. Iud: 16,.
that I restored that which I stole not. O GOD, thou know my Folly,
and my faults be not hid from thee. o my LORD, let the^ not be abashed of me
that wait for thee. o warlike ETER: GOD of the Hosts of Israel:
Let not them that seek thee be reproched by me, I^b: 39.
seeing I bear reproach for thee, and my face is covered with shame,
Obad?
I am a strange-er to my Brethren,
Ge: 45. Pro: 19.
Act: 7.
and unknown to my Mothers children, Ioh: 2. 2 Cor: 2, To: 15. Ier: 15.
for the Zeal of thy House devoured me, the Reproche-es of thy Reproaches
falling upon me.

Ge: 37. 1 K: 20, 2 K: 19, Job: 30:
Is: 61. Ier: 3, Lam: 3: h. Is: 28:
My body fasted, and I wept, and that was a reproach to me, I put on
Sackcloth, and they flouted me, they sit in their Doors and talk of me,
and the Ale-drinkers rhyme upon me. And I with my PRAYER to the ETERNAL, De:
28.
La: ^. 1.
o GOD,
when it pleases thee for thy great KINDENES, and TRVTHE of thy SALVATION.
Hear me.

O Deliver me out of the Dirt, and let me not steek fast, let me be
delivered from my Hate-ers, Ier: 12,
and from the vvater-vvhirle-pooles, let not the Currents overflovv me, and
let not the Deep swallow me,
Iud: 12,
let not the Pit close her mouth upon me.
Consider me, o ETERNAL, of thy bountiful KINDENES, Sa: 24, De: 31, 32,
and of thy great Mercyes look upon me,
Cor: 16.
and hide not thy face from thy Servant, when I am in Distress; hye and
Consider me. Com near unto my SOVLE and ransom it,
Sa: 4.
La: 3. q
com near because of mine Enimyes, and redeem me. Thou know my
Reproche-es, my Bashfullnes and Shame: all my vvrongers are before thee,
Reproach and Greeff has broken my Heart. I looked for escapeing,
Job: 2, 42, Eccl: 4,
Ier: 17.
and there was none, I looked for Comforters,
and I find none, but they put Gall in my feeding,
Cro: 19,
Lam: 1. g. Nah: 3.
and give me viniger to Drink for my thirst. Mt: M^: Lu: 27, 15.23, 19, Ier:
23.
O let their tables before them be a Trap, and their freendly Truce-es a tileed
Snare,
Ios: 23, De: 7. Ex: 23, De: 29.
Mt: Mr: Lu: 1, 26, 14, 22, 13 Obad:
let their Eyes be dark from seeing it, and make their Loins always tumble,
Leu: 7.10,
power upon them thy wrath,
Job: 19.
A^: 16.
let the Kindling of thy COVNTENANCE overtake them.

Let their Tyrets be waste,
Can: 8,
A^t: 1. To: 11.
and noe man dvvell in their Tents; and because they pursue him whom thou have
strooken, Job: 19,
and reckoned to greev thy Slain: Is: 50:53:
Put thou VVRONG upon their VVRONG, Z^: ^. Ie^: 17.
and let them never com into thy RIGHT.
Ex: 32,
Phi^ 4. Apo: ^1. Ez: 13,
Let them be vvipe-ed out of the Book of Life, and with the JUST let them
never be written, and I being in Misery and Greeff,
Leu: 7, ^ ^. ^2.
Lu: 5.
that thy SALVATION may relieve me, that I may PRAISE and Magnify the NAME of
GOD, with Songs of THANKSGIVING, and it shall please the ETERNAL better,
Leu: 4, 10, 11, 22, N^: 17, D^: 14.
then a young horned cloven footed ox bullock.
Ez: 43.
That the LOWLY may see it and rejoice, and ye that seek GOD,
it may revive your hearts, Nu: 1. Job: 22.
Is: 60.12.
that the ETERNAL hearkeneth to the Poor, and despises not his Prisoners.
That the Heavens and Earth,
and Sea, and all that creeps in them, may Praise him: for GOD will save
Sion, Sa: 7.
and build the Cittyes of Judah,
that they may dvvell there and possess it, and that the SEED of his Servants
that Love his NAME; may inherit it,

Is: 1, 61. Mal: 2, R^: 9.
and abide in it for ever.

LXX. For the Cheeff, of David, for Remembrance.


O GOD ETERNAL,

make haste to deliver me, and help me, that they may be abashed, and
confounded that seek my Life, and be turned back with Reproach that would hurt
me.

Let them return with shame that SAY, o Sir,

o Sir, that all that seek thee and love thy SALVATION,

may be glad and rejoice in thee,
and all way SAY: GOD be great.

And I being wreched and needdy; o GOD, haste-en to me,
and thou my HELP and RESCVER,
o ETERNAL, make noe tarying.

LXXI.
IN thee, o ETERNAL, do I RELY, let me never be abashed,
by thy RIGHTEOUSNESS, deliver me and RESCVE me, turn thine Ear to me, and
SAVE me. Be thou my strong Hold,
S^: 23, 2 S^: 22,

to receive me always, and being my ROCK and GARRISON,
send out to save me. Rescue me, o GOD, from the hand of the WICKED,

and from the gripes of the levened WRANGLER. For thou art my HOPE and TRUST,
o my LORD ETERNAL, from my youth. Upon thee was I laid from my Mothers
belly,
and thou wast my TAKER from her Bowels, and my PRAISE shall always be of
thee.


I am a Wonder to many that thou art my strong RELY,
and that my mouth is daily full of thy PRAISE and DECENCYE.
o cast me not off in time of old age, 1 K: 1,

nor forsake me as my strength fails.
Because mine Enimyes SAY of me,
and the Observers of my Life are consulted together,

SAYING: GOD has forsaken him,


Pursue him, take him, for there is none to deliver him. o GOD, be not far from
me,
o my GOD, make haste to my HELP,
that they may be quite abashed, and they that are against my Life; and they
that seek my hurt:
may put on REPROACH and SHAME: And I will always WAIT,
and put more continually to all thy PRAISES,
my Mouth shall daily declare thy RIGHTEOUSNESS, and thy SALVATION: For I know
noe Number of them.
I will come with all my MIGHT, and make Mention of thy singular JUSTICE, O my
LORD ETERNAL.

O GOD,

thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto, to set forth thy mervillous
WORKS, and also,

at my old age forsake me not,
till I TELL of thy MIGHTY ARM to all Generations to come: and thy
RIGHTEOUSNESS, O GOD,
to the Highest. What great things thou have don,

O GOD, that there is none like thee. Which have shevven me many Distresses,
and EVILS, and come again and reviue-ed me, and come and took me up out of
the Deepth of the Earth.
Thou have turned about, and comforted me,
and increased my GREATNESS manifold: And I will set out also, upon my VIOL
Instrument, thy TRVTHE, o my GOD,
and will SING PSALMS unto thee on my Harp, o Holly ONE of Israel.
My Lips shall triumph,
when I SING unto thee,
and my SOVLE that thou have redeemed, and my TONGUE shall daily talk of thy
RIGHTEOUSNESS, Seeing that they are abashed,
and confounded that sought my Hurt.

LXXII. For SOLOMON.
O GOD, give thy IVDGEMENTS,
and RIGHTEOUSNESS to the Kings son,
that he may SENTENCE the Lowly people with Right Judgment, gh. 82.

that the Mountains and Hills by JUSTICE may bear PEACE for the people,
1 K: 4.

that he may quite the Lowly people, and save the Children of the Poor, n.

and beat down the Oppressor, that with the Sun and Moon a Generation of
Generations may fear thee.

That it may com down like Rain upon the Aftermath, and dropping Showers on
the Land. That in his days the RIGHTEOUS may flowrish,

and much PEACE, as long as the Moon lasts. And that he may RVLLE from Sea
to Sea,

and from the River to the vtmust Land.


1 K: 4.20. Ge: 10. Job: 6. 1 K: 10, 1 C^o: 1,

That the Savages may bow, and his Enimyes lick the Dust, the Kings of Tarshish,
and of the Islands render Presents,
the Kings of Sheba and Seba offer Rewards, and that all Kings of all
Nations,
may worship him, and serve him:
because he delivers the Poor when he shouteth,

and the Oppressed, when he has no Helper, because he ha^h pity upon the
Empty and Poor man, and saves the Lives of the Poor, and Ransometh their
SOVLES from GVILE and INIVRY (their blood being deer in his Eyes) That he may
daily BLESS him,



and always Pray for his Life, and give him of the Gold of Sheba.



That the fruit of a little feeld of Corn on the hill TOP,
may shake like Libanon: and that they may flowerish out of the City like the
grass of the Earth. n.

That his NAME may be in the Sunn, and spring for ever. That all Nations may
BLESS themselves in him,

and call him HAPPY. Blessed be GOD ETERNAL,
the GOD of Israel, that only does MERVILLOVS things, and Blessed be his
GLORIOUS NAME, for ever, and let his GLORY be plentiful in all the Earth,

INDEED and INDEED.

The Prayer of David, the Son of ISHA are ended.
THE THIRD BOOK.
LXXIII. A Psalm of ASAPH. Cro: 29.

TRVELY GOD is good to Jsrael,

he is good to the pure mindeed,

for I freated exceedingly at the vain glorious fools, when I savv the Peace
of the wicked,
and my feet vvear allmoste gone,
and my footings even quite confounded, because their death has noe
co^streints, and it is free from bands;

they are not Plagued with the pains of vvreched men: therefore Pride inuirons
them,
and the very habit of Injury does cover them.
Their eyes are even out with fatt,
and they have vailes over their hearts,


they speak putrifyed speeches of the naughtines of their misdealing, they
speak a high, gh 94.105, 12.
1 S^: 2. Ge: ^^,
and set their mouths in the heaven, and their tongues go in all the earth,
and they say:

How does GOD know, or is there any knowledge in the Sovereign?

Therefore let his people come hither:


and plenty of water shall be wrong unto them, behold, these wicked men get
all the prosperity in the world.

Truly in vain do I clear my heart, and wash my hands in harmlesnes,

and am daily plagued, and have Correction every morning. If I say, I will
Speak like them; Behold,

I do renounce the generation of thy children, and I made reckoning to know
this,
and it seemed pain unto me, until I came into the Sanctuary of the
Almighty, 1. De: 32,

and understood their later END.
Certainly thou put them in slippery place-es,

thou make-est them fall into Trains, How are they (as in a moment) wasted;
spent and fearfully consumed?

Like a dream of one when he avvaketh, o my LORD,

thou marrest their Image in the riseing.

And I was with thee like a brute beast with a sower heart,
and my reins pricking and knew nothing, and I being continually with thee;
thou heldest me by my right hand, n.


and ledest me by thy counsel, and after entertainedst me with GLORY. Who
have I in heaven but thee?


and in the earth I have none with thee to delight in: all my residue is don,
and GOD is my heart,
my very ha^t pinn and portion for ever. And I, because lo thy far-absenters
perish, and thou destroyest every one that whooreth from thee: h.


I like the neernes of GOD,
and put my whole Rely in my LORD the ETERNAL,

that I may declare all thy messages.


LXXIV. A Mascil of ASAPH.



WHY drawest thou back still, O GOD, that thine angry countenance smokes
against the sheep of thy Pasture? remember thine Assembly, which thou
purchasedst long ago, and the shaft of thine Inheritance, which thou
redeemedst,

this Hill of Sion where thou dwell.

o deliver thy footsteps at perpetual DESOLATIONS.
The Enimye spoyleth all in the Sanctuary,


thy Besiegers roar in the middle of thy Synagogue,


and make their monstrous Signs, it was known,
at the bringing to perfection, the Axes wear in the thick woods,

and now the graven work and all, they knock down with bietles and Hammers,


they cast thy Sanctuary into the fire,
they break down the Tabernacle of thy Name to the ground.
They say in their minds,
and their Offspring also, Burn all the Synagogues of GOD in the Land.

We see not our Signs, we have no more Prophets,

there is none with us can tell how long.

How long, o GOD,

shall the Besiege-er revile?

shall the Enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever? why returnest thou thy hand, eve^
thy right hand, to be noe more out of thy bosom?

and GOD my King of old, the worker of SALVATION in the middle of the Earth? Thou
diuide-edst the Sea by thy strength,

thou brake-est the heads of the great Dragons by the waters, thou crushedst
the heads of the Leuiathan in pieces,




and gave him to the Ilanders to eat, thou did cleave up the flowing
springes, and dryedst up mighty rivers.

The day and night are thine,

thou ordeinedst the light of the Sunn,

thou Set all the bounds of the Earth, yea Summer and VVinter,
them thou formedst.

Remember this, o ETERNAL,


the Enemy reproche-eth, and the vile people blaspheme thy Name,

give not the life of thy Turtle Dove to the Beasts,

and forget not thy gentle Congregation for ever. Look to thy COVENANT,

how the rude-ignorant people of the world fill their houses with Injury, let
not the contrite,
the poor and wreched ones that Praise thy Name, go away with reproach. Up, O
GOD, maintain thy quarrel,


remember thy Reproach from the vile ones daily. Forget not the voice of thy
Besiegers, and the Pride of thine Insurrectors, which continually increases.

LXXV. For the Cheeff, Al tashcheth, A Psalm: A Song of ASAPH.



WE THANK thee, O God,
De: 30, Eccl: 8, 3, Ex: 9.29, 30. Job: 9,. Ex: 15.
we THANK thee that thy Name is nighe, Pro: 21. 1 S^: 2.14. De: 30.
and that they declare thy vvonderfull works. That I have opportunity, that I
JVDGE vprighte,
Ios: 2, Ge: 19,
Is: 40, Lu: 17. Ez: 18, 45,
I measure the molten Pillars of the Earth, and all her Inhabitants Surely.


Job: 4,
Za: 2. Da: 2; 8;
I SAY to the Vain glorious fools, Boast you not,
and to the Wicked; Hold not up your horns, hold not up your horns a high,
and speak not with a stiffneck,
for neither from East nor West,
Sa: 2,
De: 30:
Is: 2: Ez: 21: Mt: 23. Lu: 13.18.
nor Wilderness is Advancement:
Iud: 11. Ge: 18.
but GOD is he that Iudge-eth, he humbles and he aduaunceeth.


Ex: 29; 30,
Is: 5, 51, Ier: 25, Apo: 13. Dan: 5. Ioh: 2. Hab: 2. Is: 25. 2 Cor: 12, La: 2.
For the Cup is in the hand of the ETERNAL, and a vessel of Seething wine
full of Liquor, and he draws out of it, but all the Wicked of the earth
shall wring out, Job: 21.
and drink up the dregs thereof.
And I will tell and sing Psalms unto the GOD of Jacob.
Ge: 1.
That I may cut off the Horns of the Wicked, and that the Horns of the Just
may be exalted.



LXXVI. For the Cheeff in Song Musicque, A Psalm of ASAPH.

11.

GODS Name is greatly known in Judah and Israel, having his dwelling
Tabernacle in Shalem and Sion, where he brake the flightes and shieldes and
swords of battle surely.




Thou appeerest greater then the devouring MOVNTAINES. The Stout hearted wear
bereft, and slept their sleep, and the valiant men found not their hands. At
the Rebuke (O GOD of Jacob) both Chariot and Horses were in a swefen. Thou art
very terrible,

and who can stand before thee, when thou art angry? When GOD arose to
Judgment, to save the Lowely ones of the Earth:

Thou vtteredst thy Sentence from Heaven, and the Earth feared,

and was at quiet Surely.



Seeing the Chafe of men does make thee famous; gird on the rest of thy
Chafeings. Pay you your Vows to the ETERNAL your GOD, all ye that be about
him,

and waft gifts to your Dred,


that crops the spirit of PRINCE-ES, and is ter^ible to the KINGS of the Earth.

LXXVII. For the Cheeff over Ieduthum, A Psalm of ASAPH.
Cro: 5. 1 Cro: 16.25.

I Cried with my voice to GOD, unto GOD I cried with my Voice,
that he would hearken to me; in the day of my destresse I sought the LORD,
Ex: 17,
La: 1.
my hand was streched out by night, and is not weery, Ge: 30,, 37,,
Mr: 2,,
and my soul refuseed comfort. I remembered GOD and cried out,
La: 2. Act: 16,
that my spirit fainted surely. Thou hold mine Eye-waches, De: 3^,
and I was strooken that I spoke not, I thought upon the days of old,
Ge: 15.
and the years of many worlds. I remember my LEDEN in the night, which I
uttered with my heart, and my Spirit invented.
Job: 33.35.
Ier: 3?
Will the LORD ever be averse, and never be pleased more?

Js his Loueing Kindenes ceased for ever,
Ge: 47, Ex: 5?
and his Promiss at an end for all Generations? has GOD forgotten to be
gracious, or has he stopped up his mercyes with anger, Surely?
La: 3?
And I said that which I will sing is the YEARS of the RIGHT HAND of the Most
High. De: 32, Leu: 21,
I will remember the Excellent WORKS of the ETERNAL,
Act: 7.
remembering thy Miracles of old, and meditat upon all thy WORKS, and SPEAK of
thy most Excellent ACTS: O GOD, thy way is in thy Sanctuary,
what MIGHT is so great as GOD?
Job: 37?
Is: 44? 45?


Thou art the Mighty one that have don vvonderfull things,
and manifested thy Power among the Nations, with thine Arm thou ransomedst
thy People. Is: 52, 53.
The Children of Jacob and Joseph surely.
Ex: 11.14. Ios: 3, 4.
As Soon as the waters savv thee, O GOD,
when they Savv thee, they Trembled, yea the Deepes wear stirred. The clouds
showred down waters,
Ge: 9.
H^b: 3,
the Skies gave a Clap, yea thine Arrows went every way, thy Thunder claps were
in the round Orbs,
Mt: 24.
thy Lightings Lightened the whole World,

the Earth stirred and quaked. Thy way being in the Sea, and thy Paths in the
Great Waters,

and thy footsteps unknown; thou leddest thy People like Sheep by the hands of
Moses and Aaron.




LXXVIII. A Mascil of ASAPH.

HEAR, o my People, my DOCTRINE, and hearken to the WORDS of my mouth; I will
open my mouth in PARABLES, and utter ancient ridles,


which we have heard and known,
and our fathers have told us. that we should recount the PRAISES of the
ETERNAL to another Generation,

and not conceal from their children his power, and his mervillous WORKS which
he has don. He set a TESTAMENT in Jacob,


and put a LAW in Israel, which he commanded our fathers to acquaint their
Children with,
that an other Generation might know it, and children unborn might up, and
tell it to their Children, that they might put their TRUST in GOD, and not
forget the Excellent DEEDS of the ALMIGHTY,

and observe his COMMAVNDEMENTS. And not be like their Fathers, a froward and
rebellious Generation,
a Generation that had noe steadfast heart nor faithful mind with GOD:


The Children of Ephraim, that turned aside like Warping bows in the day of
Battle,
and kept not the COVENANT of GOD, Ex: 15.

and refuse-ed to walk in his LAW, and forgot his Excellent ACTS, and
wonderful WORKS which he showed them. The WONDERS he did in the feelds of
(the City) ZOAN in the Land of Egypt,

he claue the Sea a sunder,
and conveyed them over, and made the Waters stand like a heap,

he lad them by a cloud in the day, and all the night by fire-light. He clave
the rocks in the wilderness, and gave drink as with store of Deepes.
he brought floods out of the cliftes, and made them run down like rivers of
water, and yet they sinned again toward him,
vexing the most High in the Desert, and tempted GOD in their minds, asking
food for their bodies,


and spoke against GOD, and SAID:
Can GOD furnish a Table in the Wilderness?

Behold he smote the Rock and Rivers of water issued out abundantly,


can he also give bread and provide meat for his People?


and therefore the Everlasting when he hard it was enrage-ed, and fire
kindle-ed in Jacob,
and also anger grevv great in Jsrael, because they believed not in GOD, and
TRVSTED not in his SALVATION.
And he commanded the Skies above, and the doors of Heaven to open,


and rained upon them MANNA to eat, and gave them wheat from Heaven.


Me^ eat bread of Strength,


he sent the^ victual enough, he removed the East wind in Heaven, and by
his strength brought in the South,

and rained upon them flesh like dust, and winged foul like the Sand of the
Sea,
and made it light within his camp,
and round about all his dwellings, they did eat and wear well satisfied, and
he brought them their own longing.

they forsook nor their lustings while they wear yet eating, and the meat in
their mouths,
and the anger of GOD increased among them,
and he slew of the fattest of their men,

and bowed down the choice men of Israel. For all this, they sinned again and
believed not in his wonderful Works,
and he ended their days in vanity,

and their years in terror. Did they seek him when he slew them,

did they turn and inquire after the Almighty? and did they remember that GOD
was their safe Rock, and the most High their Redeemer?


THE HALF BOOK.

Yea they deceived him with their mouths, and lied unto him with their tongues;
and their heart was not firm with him, Iud: 16, 2 Cro: 20,
Is. 16. Mr: 7,
neither wear they faithful in his COVENANT; yet he being merciful;
Ex: 32,
Dan: 9,
reconciled for the Iniquity, and destroyed not, and many times he refrained
his Anger, and would not rouse up all his Heat, remembering, that they wear
flesh, and a wind that passes,
Ge: 6, Job: 7.
Mic: 2, Iam: 4, Ier: 22.
and comes not again. How often did they vex, and greev him in the wilderness
and solitary Deserts; Ez: 20:
and went and tempted the ALL MIGHTY,
Ex: 17, 2,
and limited the Holly one of Israel? not remembering his hand in the day he
redeemed them from the Enemy, what Signs and WONDERS he left in the Country
of (the City) ZOAN in EGYPT?
Ne: 13.
Apo: 11? Is: 19? 30?
how he turned their rivers into blood, and their brooks that they could not
drink. He sent flies to devour them, Ex: 7, 8, 9, 10,
Apo: 21,
and frogs to destroy them, he gave their increase to the Caterpiller, and
their Toil to the Grass-hopper. De: 28.
He beat their vines with Hail, and their Figtrees with Hailstones,
Job: 1,
and shut up their Bease unto the Hail,
and their Cattle to Flames of fire.

He sent among them a Message of evil Angels,
Gal: 5. Ze: 2.
his hot Anger, his Wrath and his tormenting Severity of Affliction. Mt: 8.
He pondered a fit way for his Anger, he kept not their own Persons back
from death, and their herds of Cattle,
he shut up to the Pestilence, Ex: 9, Ge: 9.14.
he Smote the firstborn in Egypt, and the prime of their strength in the
Tabernacles of Ham.
Nu: 33, Ex: 11, 15,
And removed away his people, and lad them like a flock in the Wilderness,
he conducted them safly, without fear, and the Sea overwhelmed their
Enimyes, and he brought them to his holly borders,
Act: 13,
this Hill, which his Right Hand conquered, and drove out Nations before them,
Nu: 21,, 26,,
and he made them fall an Inheritance by Lot, Ios: 12,, 23,,
Ez: 47,.48..
and the Tribes of Israel to dvvell in their Tabernacles. And they tempted and
angered GOD the most HIGH, Iud: 1, 3,
and kept not his TESTIMONIES,
and turned back and revolted like their Fathers,
Ex: 15,
Is: 7.9,
they turned aside, like a vvarped bovv, K: 3, 2 Cro: ^8, De: 32, 4.
Hos: 7.11.
and they vexed him with their high places,
and tinned him with their graue-en Images. GOD heard it, and was enrage-ed,
K: 2,, Ios: 8, 16, 1 Sa: 4.5. E^: 25. Ge: 15, 49, 1 Sa: 1.2, Iud: 21,
Ier: 7, 26,
and greatly reproved Jsrael, Act: 7:
and he forsook his Habitation in Shilo, and his Tabernacle which he
place-ed in Adam,
Ios: 18, 21.3, 22. 1 Sa: 3, 4, 1 K: 4, 7, 1 Cro: 2. De: 12.14.16.
Is: 3.
and gave his STRENGH to captivity, and his GLORY into the hand of the Enemy,
Ez: 36.
and he shut up his People to the Svvord, and was inrageed against his
Inheritance. The fire consumeed his young men, and his maids were not
commended, La: 5.
his Priests fell by the Svvord,
Job: 27,
Za: 12,
and there was noe weeping of his VVidovvs. Ge: 9,
Act: 9. Ier: 9.23. Joel: 1, Is: 28.
And the LORD avvaked with a noys like a strong-man asleep with Wine,
Sa: 5. De: 28, Ex: 9.
and smote the hinder part of his Enimyes, and gave them an Everlasting
reproach. And he refuse-ed the Tabernacle of Joseph,
Ge: 49, 1 Cro: 5, 7. 1 Sa: 15,
Ier: 7. Hos: 18.
and the Tribe of Ephraim he liked not, and he chose the Tribe of Judah Mount
Sion, which he loved,
De: 1^. ^ Sa: 6.7. Nu: 24, 1 C^o: 28, Ecc: 1.
and he built his Church most high, and founded it like the Earth for
everlasting.

And he chose his Servant David, and took him from the Sheepfolds, Sa: 16, ^
Sa: 3, 5, 7,
Am: 7. Ez: ^4. Mt: 2,
he took him from follovving the yevves with Lamb,
to feed his People in Jacob, and his INHERITANCE in Israel,
I^h: 21. I^r: 3.23.
and he fed them with his whole heart, and lad the^ with all the skill of
his hands.

LXXIX. A Psalm of ASAPH.
O GOD, the Hethen are come into thine INHERITANCE,


and have defileed thy holly Temple,

and brought Jerusalem to confusion. They have made the carcases of thy
Servants, meat for the fowls of Heaven, and the flesh of thy Gracious ones;
food for the beasts of the earth.


They have shed their blood like water round about Jerusalem,

and there is none that buiryeth them;
and we are a Reproach, a Laughing stock, and a Mocking stock to all our
Neighbors round about us.








O ETERNAL, where to will thou be angry for ever? and how long shall thy Ialousy
burn like fire?

o power out thy hot Wrath upon the Hethen which know thee not,
and upon the Kingdoms that call not upon thy NAME.
Because it has eaten up Jacob,
and they have made his goodly dwelling desolate.
Remember not our former Iniquityes, but set thy mercyes quickly before us,
for we are greatly waste-ed. Help us,
o GOD, for the GLORY of thy NAME;

and deliver us, and make reconciliation for our sins for thy Names sake.





Why shall the Hethen SAY, Where is their GOD? Let him be known manifestly among
the Hethen, before our eyes; a Revenge of the blood of his Servantes that is
shed.

Let the Prisoners groneing come before thee, and according to the greatness of
thine ARM,

restore thou them that are condemned to dye.


And to our Neighbors, turn into their bosoms, seven times, o Lord, their
Reproach which they have reproched thee,


and we thy People and the sheep of thy pasture; will publish, and tell out
thy PRAISE for ever, yea for all Generations.



LXXX. For the Cheeff upon Shoshannim: Edbuth, A Psalm of ASAPH*


O Sheephard of Israel, hear us;


thou that conductest Joseph like a flock of sheep; and Inhabitest the Cherubs:
SHINE out. Rouse up thy STRENGTH before Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasses, and
come and help us. Guide us,
O GOD, by the Shineing of thy COVNTENANCE we may be safe. O ETERNAL,

GOD of hosts;

How long will thou FVME against the PRAYERS of thy People? thou feedest them
with bred of weeping,
and make-est them drink with abundance of Tears?

Thou set us a Taunt for our Neighbors,


and our Enimyes make a Mock at them.
O GOD of Hosts, Conduct us by the Shineing of thy COVNTENANCE we may be
safe.
Thou remoovedst a VINE out of Egypt,

and expelledst the Hethen, and plantedst it;
thou made a clean riddance before it, and made her roots take root and
fill the Land,
and the hills wear covered with her Shadow, her branches being like mighty
Ceders;


her short bows and sucking shoots she reached out to the Sea, and to the
Rivers.

Why have thou broke-en down her hedgees that all Travailers do curss her?

The Savage Swine out of the wood,

and the wild beestes of the feeld waste it and devour it? o GOD of War, com
look upon, I pray thee,
Sa: 14.

out of Heaven, and behold, and visit this Vine, and the Stock which thy right
hand has planted;


and upon the SON which thou have confirmed to thy self, which are burnt with
fire as of a purgeing,

and perish with thy chideing Countenance. Let thy Hand be upon all human men
of thy Right hand,

which thou have confirmed unto thee,
that we may not slip back from thee, quicken us to call upon thy NAME, o
ETERNAL, GOD of Hosts,
and Guide us with the Shineing of thy COVNTENANCE that we may be safe.



LXXXI. For the Cheeff upon the Git Instrument, A Psalm of ASAPH.



SOVND out to our MIGHTY GOD of STRENGTH. Sing aloud to the GOD of Jacob, take
up the Psaltery, and take the taber,

the sweet harp and the Viol, and at our feast-dayes, in the new-moones
appointed; blow the Trumpet: for that was a prescribe-ed custom of the GOD of
Jacob unto Israel, he set it a TESTIMONY in Joseph, of his going out against
the Land of Egypt.





I heard Lips that I knew not, he whose shoulders I took from the burden, and
his hands went from the basket, in distress thou did call, and J released
thee; I answered thee in secret thunder,


and tried thee at the waters of Meribah surely: Hear,

O thou my People of Israel, and I will protest of thee, if thou will hear me;
that there be no strange GOD within thee,

neither wilt fall down to worship any forain GOD: I the ETERNAL, thy GOD
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt;


open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.


But my People Israel, would not hearken to my VOICE,

nor consent unto me; and I let them go in the torment of their minds, and
walk in their own counsels. If Israel had hearkened to me,

and had walked in my ways: J would had soon abased their Enimyes,

and laid my hand on their foes. The Haters of the ETERNAL had been devoteed
to him;

and their time should had lasted for Ever,


and he would had fed him with wheaten flower, and I would had satisfied thee
from the Honey rock.


LXXXII. A Psalm of ASAPH.



GOD stands cheeff, in the Assembly of GOD, and is IVDGE among the Gods
themselves.


Why will you do wrong JVDGEMENT,
and accept the face of the wicked ones Surely?

Judge ye the Empty and the fatherless,


the oppressed and poor-man with Just IVDGEMENT: Free and deliver the Empty,

and Needy out of the hands of the Wicked. But they know nothing,


nor understand any thing, they walk in darkness, that all the foundations of
the Earth are moved.

I said, Ye are Gods,


and I call ye all the Children of the Most High; but like men shall ye dye,
and fall like any one of the Prince-es. Up thou, O GOD, and Judge the Earth,
for thou have inheritance in all Nations.

LXXXIII. A Psalm Song of ASAPH.

O GOD, be not thou silent; hold not thy peace, nor sit thou still,


o ALLMIGHTY one. For, behold, thine ENIMYES that hate thee, make a noise and
hold up the head: they take crafty counsel against thy People,


and consult against thy Preserved. They say, Come let us cut them off, from a
Nation,


that the NAME of Israel be never remembered more,

for they consult in their minds together, and make a Covenant against thee.

The Tabernacles of Edom and Moab,
Sa: 12, Iu^: 11.12. Nu: 24, De: 25. Ex: 17.

and the Ismaelites, and them of Hagar, Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, and
Phelistia with the Inhabitants of Tire,

yea Assure also is joined with them, and wear a helping Arm to the Children of
Lot surely.


Do thou to them as thou did to Midian: as thou did to Sisera and Iabin at
the River Qishon, that wear smitten in Endor, and became dong for the Land;
make their Prince-es like Oreb and Zeeb,

and all their Elect like Zebah and Zalmunah.




Which said, Let us get us the possession of GODS fair Habitation. O GOD, make
them like dust,


and like chaff before the wind; as fire-y flames burn and inflame the Hills
and the Forest:
so pursue thou them with thy Tempest, and with thy Whirlwinde make them sore
afraid. Fill their face-es with scorching, when men seek thy NAME,


o ETERNAL; let them be terribly abashed and utterly confounded,
and perish for ever more. That they may know that thy NAME only, o ETERNAL,


is the Sovereign NAME over all the Earth.



LXXXIV. For the cheeff upon the Git, A Psalm of the Sons of Corah.


O Warlike ETERNAL, how lovely are thy dwellings? yea my soul is spent with
longing for the courts of the ETERNAL,
my heart and my flesh, to sound out to my living GOD.
Both the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest (thine Altars)
for her to lay her young ones.


O warlike ETERNAL, and my King and GOD. Happy are those that dwell in thy
house;

that they may ever praise thee surely.

Happy are the men that have their STRENGTH in thee,


and thy plain Ways in their hearts. They that travailed in the Vale of Baca,
made a fountain of it;
yea the rain covered it with blessings.
They went stronger and stronger, when they appeered before GOD being present
in Sion.

O thou ETERNAL, o thou GOD of War, hear my Prayer, hear me, o thou GOD of
Jacob Surely.

O GOD our Shield, see and behold the face of thine Anointed; s. 120.109, 10,


for a day one spends in thy Courts and in the House of my GOD, I choose
better then a thousand days continuance in wicked Tabernacles.


For the ETERNAL as a Sunn and Shield, the ETER: will give grace and glory,

and lessen noe good thing to them that walk uprightly.

o warlike ETER: happy is the Man that trusts in thee.



LXXXV. For the Cheeff of the Sons of Corah, A Psalm.



O ETERNAL, that did like thy Country,
and broughtest again the captivity of Jacob; and forgavest the iniquity of
thy People,
and coveredst their sins surely, and contractedst all thy rage, and made-est
it turn again from the kindling of thine Anger: o GOD, our salvation; bring us
again,

and break off thine angry indignation with us. Will thou be for ever angry
with us, and will thou prolong thine Anger dureing all generations?

Will thou not come and revive us again?


that thy People may rejoice in thee? o thou ETERNAL,


show us thy Kindenes and grant us thy Salvation. o let me hear, what the
Allmighty GOD, the ETERNAL will speak, that he will speak peace unto his
People,

and to his Gracious ones,
and let them never return to crookednes again.

That his Salvation may be near unto them that fear him,


that GLORY may dwell in our Land, that KINDENES and TRVTH and JUSTICE and
PEACE may meet,


and kiss each other, that TRVTH may bud out of the earth,
and RIGHTEOUSNESS look down out of Heaven,
yea, that the ETERNAL may give bounty,

and our Land yield her abundance of increase,
that RIGHTEOUSNESS may go before him,

and he may put his feet in the Way.

LXXXVI. A Prayer, of David.

O ETERNAL, incline thine ear and consider me, for J am miserable and needy,
preserve my life, for I am pitiful; save thy Servant, o GOD, that puts
his trust in thee. O ETER: pity me, because I call daily upon thee. Cheer the
soul of thy Servant,
for unto thee J open my mind. Because thou, O ETERN: art very full of pardon,
and of great Kindenes to them that call upon thee: O ETERN: hear my Prayer,
and hearken upon the Voice of my Request.


In the day of my distress, when J call thee, O consider and hear me.

Among the Gods, there is none like thee;

nor any Deeds like thine, o LORD. All Nations shall come and Worship before
thee,

o LORD, and glorify the NAME which have don it, for thou art great, and thou
only, O GOD, do Wonderful things. Teach me thy WAY, b. 25.; 27.:

O ETERNAL, that I may walk in thy TRVTHE, and unite my heart to the fear of
thy NAME.
That I may publish thee, o LORD GOD, with all my heart, and Glorify the NAME
for ever.



Because thy KINDENES is great upon me, and thou have delivered me from Hel^
below, O GOD,
when the proud, and a company of Tyrants rose against me, and fought my life;
that set not GOD before them.
Thou being, o LORD, a Merciful and a Gracious GOD, delaying Anger,

Long-suffering and of very great Kindenes: O look upon me and pity me, give
thy Servant strength and save the SON of thine Hand-mayd.

Show me a Sign, of Good, that they has hate me may see it, and be
abashed, that thou, o ETERNAL, do help and Comfort me.


LXXXVII. Of the Sons of Corah, A Psalm Song.
THE ETERNAL loue-eth the gates of Sion,


whose foundation is in the Holly Hills: above all the Dwellings in Jacob; the
moste-vnspeakable ones in thee,

o City of GOD Surely.

Lo, when I mention Rahab and Babel to mine Acquaintance (lo) Palestina and
Cush,


This man was born there: also of Sion it shall be said,

This man was born in her, and He, in that, which the Most High established.

The ETERNAL, when he wrighteth up his People,
will Recko^, This man was born thear surely,
and all my wells of Singers, and fountains of Musicians are in thee.

LXXXVIII. A Psalm Song for the Chorites: for the Cheeff over the Chore, to
Sing: A Mascil by Heman the Ezrahite.
Cro: 2.6.25. 2 C^o: 24. 1 Cro: 15. De: 8. P^o: 17. Ios: 7.

O ETERNAL the GOD of my Salvation,
when I cry for thee in the night, let my PRAYER come before thee, Ge: 2,
and turn thine ear to my loud SONET.
My Soul is full of evils, and my life even touches hell, J am counted with
them that are going to the pit, and am like a man without any might,
absolute among the dead, as those that are slain and lie in the grave,

Is: 2^.
whom thou rememberest no more, and are cut off by thy hand. Job: 7.


Thou have put me in the deep and dark pit below, thy Chafeing is sunk upon
me,

and thou oppressest me with all thy Breaches surely.
Thou have far absented my familiar Acquaintance from me, Nu: 19, 31,
thou have made me an abomination to them, I am close-ed up, and can not get
out, mine eyes are even consumed, and driven out by oppression, and I CALL on
thee daily, o ETERNAL,

K: 8.
and spread my palms unto thee,
Is: 26? 38? Ap: 9? 1^?
Will thou do a wonder upon the Dead, shall the deceased rise again and
confess thee surely?

Shall thy LOV:
KINDENES be told in the grave, Ap: 9? 11?
and thy FAYTHFVLLNES in the place of destruction? shall thy Miracles be
manifested in the dark, and thy wonderful JUSTICE in the land of
forgetfullnes? that I, when I shoute unto thee,
De: 32?
and my PRAYER come early before thee; why do thou reject me, De: 31? 32?
and hide thy face from me? J being afflicted and yielding up the Ghost with
trouble,
Is: 33.
with bearing thy Terrors am amaseed:
thy sore Kindlings are upon me, thy terrible Passions press me. They
compass about me daily like water,
and go all-about over me together. Thou estrangest my Loueing friends from
me,
Job: 12, 19, 2 Cro: 15,
and my familiar Acquaintance, with obscurity.

K: 2.4. Ios: 8.7. 1 Sa: 6:
LXXXIX. A Mascil, of Ethan the Ezrachite.


I Will ever SING the KINDENESSES of the ETERNAL, and to all Generatio^s make
known thy FAITHFVLLNES with my mouth. l.
To wit, The Kindenes that the world was built by,
and thy Faythfullnes which thou have CONFIRMED in the Heavens, I have made a
Covenant and sworn to my servant David:



I will establish thy seed for ever, and build up thy throne for all
generatio^s surely.
And let the Heaven confess thy wonderfullnes, O ETERNAL, yea thy
FAYTHFVLLNES in the Congregation of the Holly ones; For who among the children
of the GODS in the cloudy skies,

equalleth or may compare with the ETERNAL? a terrible GOD in the counsel of
the Holly ones,
and dreadful over all that be about him?
O ETERNAL, GOD of War, who is so mighty a GOD as thou art,

and thy FAYTHFVLLNES about thee? Thou rullest over the pride of the Sea,

and allayest the waves thereof, when they rise, the maine Ocean thou beatest
down like a slain man,


and with thy strong Arm scatterest thine Enimyes. the Heavens are thine, yea
the Earth is thine, the whole world, and all the Implements thereof,
for thou foundedst them; the North and the South, thou have created them,
Tabor and Hermon to resound out thy Name.


Thou have a conquering Arm, and thy Right hand does highly prevail,
the firm Base of thy Throne is Justice and Judgment,

and Kindenes and Faythfullnes stand before thy face.
Happy are the People that know Triumphing,
and walk, o ETER: in the Light of thy Countenance,
and are daily meery with thy NAME, and Exalted with thy JUSTICE.

Because thou art the Ornament of their Strength,

and by thy good will is our Horn Exalted.

For our DEFENDOVR is the ETERNALLS, and our KING the Holly ones of Israel,
when as thou spakest in a VISION to thy GRACIOUS ONE and SAYEDST;
J have leuyed and raised and Aid, d,

and a Chose-en one out of the People above a WORTHY. J have found my Servant
David and Anointed him with my holly oil,
Sa: 15, 16, 17, 2 Sa 7, 3, Ex: 29.
with whom my hand shall firmly be,
and mine ARM shall strengthen him. No Enimye or Injurious child shall
intercept him, or oppress him.


J will beat down his foes, and them that hate him, flat before him, and my
FAYTHFVLLNES and LOV: KINDENES shall be with him, I.
and in my NAME shall his Horn be exalted, and upon the Sea and upon the
Rivers will J make his Right hand to be. He shall CALL me, O my Father,

my GOD and Rock of my SALVATION, and I will make him my ELDEST-SONNE,

and the SOVEREIGN of all the Kings of the Earth, J will make his seed,

and his Throne to be for Everlasting like the days of heaven,
and if his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my JVDGEMENTS, if they
violate my PRESCRIPTIONS, and keep not my Commandments:
a 2 Co^: 11. Ie^: 30.46. Is: 27.
I will visit their Transgressions with Rods, l,
and their Jniquity with Scourges; but my Lov:


Kindenes will I not break off from him, neither deal falsely in my
Faythfullnes.

J will not violate my Covenant, nor change the thing that is gone out of my
Lips.


I have once SWORN in my HOLLYNES,
and shall J lie unto David? His Seed shall be for ever and his Throne as the
Sun before me,



he shall be established as firm as the Moon,

a faithful witness in the SKY for ever surely.
And thou lothe-est and drawest back,
and art angry with thine ANOINTED. Thou avoydest the COVENANT of thy Servant,

and defile-est his Garland one the ground; thou have broke-en down all his
walls,
and made a ruin of all his Fortifications,

all Travailers by the way trample on him,
he is a Reproach unto his Neighbors. Thou hold up the Right hand of his
Foes,
and make-est all his Enimyes glad, yea thou turnest the edge of his sword, and
make-est it not to stand in the Battle, thou make-est it rest from his
brightness, and have pulled down his Throne to the Ground. Thou have shortened
the days of his youth, and covered him over with Bashfullnes surely.
How long will thou continue hid;

and shall thy hot Anger burn like fire? o Remember thou of what continuance I
am,
wherefore in vain have thou create-ed all Human men?

what strong man is there that shall not see death, or his life shall escape
from the hand of hell, surely?
Where are thy first KINDENESSES, o Lord, which thou SWAREST to David, in thy
FAYTHFVLLNES? Remember, O LORD, the Reproach of thy Servants,
which I put up in my bosom, of all the great ones of the Nations where with
thine Enimyes have reproched,


o ETERNAL,
where with thine Enimyes have reproched the Steps of thine Anointed.
Blessed be the ETERNAL for ever. Again and Again.


THE FOWRTH BOOK.
XC. A Prayer of Moses, the Man of GOD.

O LORD,


thou have been an Habitation for us in all ages, before the Hills wear
brought forth, and the Earth and whole Confusion had travailed in pain of
birth, and from one generation to another thou have been our GOD.

Thou bring miserable man to a fragment, and SAY,

Com again ye Children of men. For a thousand years in thy sight,
is as yeesterday that is past, and as a watch in the night. Thou rainest them
down,
and they are like a sleep, and in the morning he is fresh like grass,

that in the morning florisheth fresh, and at evening is cut down and withered;
for in thine Anger,
and thy Heat we are terribly consume-ed.

Thou set our iniquityes before thee,
and our youthfullnes in the light of thy presence;


for all our DAYS glaunce by in thy wrath,
and we spend our years like a thought. The Days of our years, there are in
them seventy years,
and if by surmounting eighty years:

their advantage is but pain and greeff; for it is soon cut off and fled away,


and who knows the fearfullnes of thy wrath, what it is? Make us so know how
to Number our days,
that we may bring our Hearts unto wisdom.

Return, O ETERN: quickly,


and be comfortable to thy Servantes, satisfy us betime with thy LOV:
KINDENES, that we may chaunt out meryly all our days.
r.


Cheer us according to the days thou have afflicted us, and the years that
we have seen evil,

that thy WORK may Appear unto thy Servants, and thy MAGNIFICENCE be seen
by their Children.
And that the PLEASANTNES of the ETERNAL our GOD,
may be upon us: Confirm thou upon us the work of our hands,
yea confirm the very work of our hands.

XCI.


HE which dwells in the covert of the most HIGH,
and lodges in the shadow of the ALL SVFFICIENT;

J SAY, upon the ETERNAL my RELY and FORTRESS, n 61, 64, 92.

and in my GOD will J trust;

For he will deliver thee from the snare,
z
and miserable Plague of the fowler; He will cover thee with his feathers,

and thou shall hive under his Wings, the Shield and Buckler of his TRVTH, thou
shall not be afraid of the Plague of FEAR that walks in the night; r,


nor of the stinging SHOT that flies and slays at the Noonday.

At thy side, and at thy Rightehand shall fall a thousand,
and ten thousand, and it shall not come at thee; but with thine eyes thou
shall beehold;


and see the payment of the wicked. Because thou, O ETERNAL, art my RELY; and
thou have made the MOST HIGH thy HABITATION:



noe Evil shall happen unto thee, nor any Scourge come within thy TABERNACLE.



For he will give his Angels CHARGE over thee,
to KEEP thee in all thy Ways.

sh.


That they take thee up in their hands: lest thou hit thy foot upon a stone.
Thou shall trample upon the fierce Lion,


and tred upon the venomous Dragon.
Because he has imbrased me,
and knows my NAME: I will releeve him and rescue him,


if he call me in Distress; I will hear him: I will release him and gloryfy
him;

I will suffice him with length of days,
and make him see my SALVATION.


XCII. A Psalm Song, for the Sabath-day.
Nu: 4.
Col: 2.

IT is a GOOD thing to worship the ETERNAL,

and to chaunt out thy most Sovereign NAME; Ge: 2; Job: 38;
Ier: 17. Mt: Mr: Lu: 12; 2; 6;
to tell of thy LOVEING KINDENES in the morning,
and thy FAYTHFVLLNES in the night season: upon the ten-stringed Violl,
K: 10.
Ap: 5,
and upon the Musicque on the Harp. Because thou have made me glad by thy
WORKS: of thy HAND DEEDS will I SOVND out, O ETERNAL.
How great are thy DEEDS, O ETERNAL!
thy JNVENTIONS are exceeding deep.
Ex: 31.


The Bruteish man knows not, and the froward sot understands not THJS.
Pro: 24,
When the WICKED spring like a green herb, and the workers of Greeff do
flourish,
Job: 20.
Mt: I: 15.15.
that they shall be rooted out, even for everlasting, and thou suruiuest for
ever,
Iud:
O ETERNAL; (for behold, thine Enimyes,
O ETERN: for behold, thine Enimyes shall perish, and all the workers of
Greeff be disseuered) And thou hold up my Horn like an Unicorn,
Job:(4)
Sa: 2. De: 33.
and with fresh oil J am all perfused.


Mine ears shall hear when naughty men arise against me,
Mt: 13.
and mine eyes shall look upon my Tormentors.
Ge: 3.18.
The Just man shall be green like a Palm tree,
Can: 5.
Is: 51.60.61.40.66. Lu: 23. Ez: 28.
and grow like a Cedar in Libanon. They shall spring, planted in the house and
Courts of the ETER: our GOD,

Ge: 2.
Ex: 28,
Heb: 12. Ap: 2.7, 14, 21, 22.
while they are propagated,
in gray old age they shall be still fatt,
and fresh to Declare the Vprightnes of the ETER: my ROCK,
a.
Pro: 16,
Job: 36.33. 2 Cor: 19.
Is: 65.
Ier: 2, 3^. Ze: 3. Ioh: 1.7.
and that there is noe VVRONG in him.

XCIII.

THE ETERNAL REIGNS endued with MAJESTY,


the ETERNAL is endued, with MAJESTY, and girt with STRENGTH,

yea the whole world is firmly established, and not to be moved, Thy THRONE
is firm,


ever since thou have been from Everlasting.


The Rivers lift up, o ETERNAL, the Rivers lift up their voice on high,
they lift up their beating,

the great Waters with voice-es, the billows of the Sea are exceeding lofty,
but the the ETERNAL highely excels.



Thy TESTJMONYES are very Faithful,


and the HOLLYNES of thy House much to be desired, O ETERNAL, as long as days
do last.

XCIV.
O ETERNAL, O GOD of Revenge, O GOD of revenge shine out,


up o IVDGE of the Earth, s.g.


and return reward upon the Proud. How long, O ETERNAL, how long shall the
Wicked insult? the WORKERS of GREEFF vaunt them selves,

and buble out words of Arrogance,

and beat down thy People, o ETERNAL, and oppress thine INHERITANCE? slay the
Widow and the Stranger,


and murder the fatherles ones?
SAYJNG, Thou examinest not neither does the GOD of Jacob understand?
Understand,
ye most brute People, and ye froward fools when will ye lern? He that
planteth the ear,

shall He not hear? and He that forms the Eye,
shall not He see?




He that corrects the Hethen and teaches men Knowledge, shall not He
reprove? The ETERNAL knows that men's thoughts are vain.

Happy is the man, whom thou teach with thy Law:

to give him rest from evil days, till a pit be dug for the Wicked. For,
the ETERN:

will not leave his People, nor forsake his INHERITANCE: because IVDGEMENT
returns unto JUSTICE,
and all Upright minde-ed after it.

Who is to assist me with Naughty men,
with the workers of GREEFF who will stand to me?

Except the ETERNAL had been my help,


my Person had even inhabited Silence. If I SAID, My foot slippeth; thy LOV:
KINDENES, O ETERN:
held me up, among the multitude of my thoughts within me.

Thy CONSOLATIONS do delight my Soul. Shall the THRONE of corruption have
fellowship with thee?


and he that forms MISCHEEFF by decree?

that troop against the JUST person,
and condemn the innocent blood? And the ETERNAL being my Fortification, and
my GOD, the ROCK of my RELY, let him render upon them their GREEFF,
and in their own MISCHEEFF let the ETERNAL our GOD, destroy them.


XCV.
O Come,
let us sound out TRIVMPHS to the ETERNAL, the ROCK of our SALVATION, let us
come before him,

and triumph to him with PSALMS of Thanks-offering. For he is the gratest GOD,


and a great King over all Gods. Who has the discoueryes of the Earth in his
hand,
and the Excellencyes of the Hills are his. Who owes the Sea for he made
it,
and the Dry-land which his hands formed.

O come,

let us bow down and prostrat our selves, and kneel before the ETERNAL,
that has made us, for he is our GOD,

and we the PEOPLE and SHEEP of his own hand feeding.


To day when you hear his VOICE harden not your hearts,
as in the PROVOCATION,

and as in the day of TEMPTATION in the Wilderness.




Which your Fathers tempted me, and tried me, though they savv my WORKS.
Forty years was I vexed with a Generation,



which I SAID, were a people that erred in their heart, and knew not my WAYS.
Which, in my Anger, I swore, should not enter into my REST.



XCVI.

Cro: 16.
Ap: 14. I^: 12. Mt: 6, Da: 2,
O SING ye to the ETERNAL a NEW SONG. Sing ye to the ETERN: all the Earth.
Sing ye to the ETERN: and bless his NAME, and Preach his SALVATION from day
to day. Tell out his GLORY among the Hethen,
Mal: 1.
and his Wonde^full WORKS among all people. Because the ETERN: is great, and
very much to be PRAISED,
and to be Reverenced above all GODS.
For all the GODS of the Nations are Idle-Idoles,
Ier: 1^, Is: 51, 1 Cor: 8.10. Ier: 10. A^^: 19
but the ETERN: Made the Heavens.
Sa: 6. Le^: 19. 1 Cr^: 16. Ge: 1.


Worship and Honor is in his Presence, and in his Sanctuary STRENGTH and
MAJESTY.
Leu: 23.
Ie^: 48.
Yield unto the ETERNAL ye Nation-familyes, yield unto the ETERNAL GLORY and
STRENGTH, yield GLORY unto the NAME of the ETERNAL. Sa: 6.
Ie^: 13.
Take up Presents and com into his Courts,
Le: 6.
Mt: 6? Da^: 2; Mt: 2, 11:1.
prostrate your selves to the ETERNAL in his stately Sanctuary, and tremble at
his Presence all the Earth.


Cro: 16.
Is: 52. Act: 11.14.16.19.
TELL among the Heathen; The ETERNAL REIGNS KING,
(and the whole world shall be established, and not be moved) that SENTENCETH
Nations vprightely. Ex: 20. Ge: 1.
Let the Heavens rejoice, and the Earth be glad, the Sea and his fullnes roar,
the field leap and all that is in it,
and the Trees of the wood TRIVMPH and SING,
Is: 4^.
when he comes, when he comes to IVDGE the Earth: that with RIGHTEOUSNESS
Judges the World;
and with his FAYTHFVLLNES the Nations thereof.

XCVII.
THE ETERNAL REIGNS KING (let the Earth be glad and the multitude of Islands
rejoice) with a dark cloud round about him,


RIGHTEOUS IVDGEMENT being the Firmnes of his Throne: fire shall go before
him,



and shall flame round about his foes. His Lightenings lighten the world,


that the Earth trembles to see it.
Mountains melt like wax at PRESENCE of the ETERN:

before the LORD of the whole Earth.


The Heavens set forth his JUSTICE,
that all Nations may see his GLORY; let all them, that serve Sculptures,


and glory in Idle-Idoles be abashed; bow your selves down to him all ye
GODS. That Sion, when she hears it may rejoice, and all the Towns of Judah
be glad; because of the IVDGEMENT of the ETER:

Because thou, o ETERNAL, art SOVEREIGN over all the Kings of the Earth:
and greatly surmountest overall GODS. Ye,
that love the ETERN: m.
that keeps the lives of his GRACIOUS ones, and delivers them from the hand
of the Wicked: hate evil. There is sown,

to the JUST, and VPRIGHTE minded man,


a JOYFVLL LIGHT; o ye JUST ONES rejoice in the ETERNAL,

and celebrate his holly Remembrance.

XCVIII. A PSALM.
O Sing ye to the ETERNAL a NEW SONG,

for that he has don Wonderful Works.
He whom his RIGHT HAND and HOLLY ARM has helped. The ETER:

that has made his SALVATION known,
and revealed his RIGHTEOUSNESS in the sight of the Heathen.
That has remembered his Lov: Kindenes, and Faythfullnes to the House of
Jsrael, chapter
that all the Ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of our GOD.





TRIVMPH to the ETERNAL, break out aloud, and chaunt out Psalms, play unto
the ETERNAL on the Harp?

upon the Harp with an inchaunting voice. With the shrill soundes of the
Trumpet, Triumph to the KING ETERNAL.

Let the Sea and his fullnes roar, and the WORLD,


and all that dwell therein, make anoyse,
and Rivers clap their hands, and Hills also sound out Triumphs before the
ETERNAL,
when he comes to Judge the Earth; That Judges the world Justly,

and the Nations uprightly.

XCIX.



THE ETERNAL REIGNS KING inhabiting the Cherubs;


Let the Nations and the Earth tremble and stoop. The ETERNAL that is great in
Sion, and that is high above all Nations;


let them celebrate his great and reverend NAME which is holly. Because thou
the KING that loves JVDGEMENT and STRENGTH:

confirmest Right: and do Just JVDGMENT in Jacob.
l,




Exalt ye the ETERNAL our GOD, and prostrate your selves at his Holly
footstool. Moses and Aaron,


and Samuel, among his Priests, and them that call upon his NAME: called upon
the ETERNAL, and he Answered them.



He spoke unto them in a CLOVDY STYLE, and they kept his TESTIMONIES and
PRESCRIPTS which he gave them,
Thou O ETERNAL, our GOD, did answer them; and wast a GOD of Pardon to them,
being about to revenge their Heinous works.

Exalt the ETERNAL our GOD,
and prostrate your selves at his holly Hill,
For the ETERNAL our GOD is holly.



C. A Psalm of Thanksgiving.
Leu: 7. Ios: 7. Ne: 12.

SING ye Triumphs to the ETERNAL,
all the Earth, serve the ETERNAL with REIOYCEING,
and com before him with a cheerful SONET.

Know ye,
K: 18,
the ETERNAL is GOD, and He that has made us,


and we are his; his PEOPLE, and Sheep of his PASTVRE.

Com within his Gates with THANKS,
and into his Courts with PRAISE,

and SET FORTH and BLESS his NAME; because the LOV:
KINDENES of the ETERNAL is bountiful for ever; and his FAYTHFVLLNES until
all Generations.

CI. Of DAVID, A Psalm.
I Will sing a Psalm of KINDENES and IVDGEMENT unto thee, o ETERNAL, q,



that when thou shall come unto me;

I may instruct in the perfect WAY; and walk in the soundnes of my heart, with
in my House. I will have noe naughty thing in my sight,


to make declineings I hate, and with me it shall not steek.

A froward heart shall depart from me;
and an evil heart I will not know.
He that accuses his neighbor privily,

him will I put away; who is of high looks,


and wide of heart; him I cannot abide. Mine eyes are upon the FAYTHFVLL of the
Earth, to dvvell with me:
a,


and he that walks in a perfect Way; he shall serve me.

He that works deceit shall not within my House, and he that speaks
falsehoods, shall not be established in my sight.
I will soon dissolve all WICKED ones of the earth, s. 54., 104.
when I shall cut off from the City of the ETERNAL all Workers of Greeff.



CII. A Prayer of the Poor, when he fainted, and powered out his Complaint
before the ETERNAL.


O ETERNAL, hear my PRAYER, and let my SHOVTING come unto thee. Hide not thy
FACE from me, when I am in Distress; turn thine ear unto me, and hear me
quickly;
when I CALL. Because my days are consumed in smoke; k.
and my bones on fire like a brand,

my heart is strooken and withered like an Herb, that I forget the eating of my
meat.

By my loud sighing my bones ste^k unto my skinn. q.
I am like an OWL of the Wilderness,

and a skrich- OWL of Waste place-es. I am like a folitary bird, watching upon
the House top. All the day, do mine ENIMYES revile me,
and my DEFAMERS conjure against me.
That I eat Ashes like bread, and mingle my drink with Tears;
because of thy fomeing Indignaton:
for thou have cast me away.




My days are like a declineing shadow, and I am withered like an herb;
and thou, o ETERNAL, remainest for ever, and thy REMEMBRANCE for all
Generations: r. 123.

o up, and have MERCY upon Sion, for the SETTIME is come to have COMPASSION on
it; because thy Servantes like the stones thereof,
and hold the dust thereof gracious. That the Heathen and all Kingdoms of the
earth may fear thy GLORYOVS NAME,

o ETERN: o let the ETER: that has built Sion, appear in his GLORY: and
regard the PRAYER of the SHAKEEN,


and not despise their Prayer. That this may be written for an other
generation, and that the People to be borne hearafter,
may praise the ETERN:

O let the ETERNAL look out of Heaven his holly HIGHTH,
and look down upon the Earth: To hear the Prisoners groneing,
and to let a broad the CONDEMNED;
to tell out the NAME of the ETERN: in SION, and thy PRAISE in JERUSALEM;


when the Nations and Kingdoms are gathered together, to Serve the ETER:
He that beat down my Strength in the way, and shortened my days; J SAY, O
my ALLMIGHTY GOD,
take me not away in the midst of my days; and thy years dureing all
Generations. O thou,
that vvast before the Earth was founded,
and the Heavens the work of thy Hands;
which shall perish, and thou shallt remain; and they all shall go old like
a Garment,
and thou shallt shift them,

and they shall be put off like clothes, and thy years are never consumeed:

let the Children of thy Servants abide still before thee, and their Seed be
established in thy PRESENCE.

CIII. Of DAVID.
BLESS the ETERNAL, o my SOUL, and all my FORCES bless his holly NAME, o
BLESS the ETERN: o my SOVLE,
and forget not his GOOD DEEDS.
Nu: 14,
Act: 5, Ier: 14, 16, Da: 4, Mt: Mr: Lu; 9, 2, 5.
That Pardons and heals all thy greevous Iniquity, that Redeemeth thy life
from the Pit,
and Gardeth thee with KINDENES and MERCY, that Supplyeth thy youth with the
Goodness of thine ORNAMENTS, as an Egle renews her self.
Job 10; 29; 42; Ex: 33.
Ap: 21; Ier: 16; 2 Co^: 4, Is: 40.
The ETERNAL that does Just IVDGEMENT to all the oppressed:
and makes his Ways known to Moses, and his Excellent WORKS to the Children
of Israel. Ap: 1.3.



Ex: 34, Nu: 14, Ne: 9,
Ion: 4,
The ETERNAL is merciful and gracious, and patient and of great KINDENES; Ge:
6; Leu: 19;
Is: 57: Na: 1: Ier: 3; Coll: 3; 4; Ia: 5; Mic: 7;
he will not strive perpetually, nor keep contention for ever:
he has not don unto us according to our sins; nor bestovved upon us
according to our Jniquityes:
Ezr: 9;
but as the Heavens are high above the Earth: so excels his KINDENES over
them that fear him. As far as the East is from the West: so far has he put
away our Transgression from him. As a Father has Mercy upon his Children:
Heb: 12;
so has the ETERNAL mercy upon them that fear him.
De: 32.
Cor: 5. 1 Pet: 4.
Because he Knovveth our CREATION,
Ge: 1, 2.5.
Is: 29.43.49.51.60.66.
and is mindful that we are but Dust.


Job: 7.; 14,,
Pet: 1,;
A Sorrovvfull Man's days are like grass, and as a flovver of the Feeld;
Ia: 1, Is: 40;
so he florisheth: but the VVinde passes over it, and neither he,
Ap: 20.
nor his Place is any more to be discerned. But the LOVING KINDENES of the
ETERNAL is from age to age upon them that fear him;
De: 5; 7;
La: 3. chapter
and his RIGHTEOUSNESS to their childrens children: Ex: 20; 34; De: 11;
Io: 3.
to them that keep his COVENANT,
and remember to do his VISITATIONS.
The ETERNAL that has confirmed his THRONE in Heaven,
Mt: 6, Mr: 9; 11; Heb: 12; Ap: 4; 1 Th: 4. 2 Th: 1, Ez: 40.44. Joel: 2,
and his KINGDOM in all Domination: Bless the ETERNAL ye his ANGELS,
that have mightey Power to do his COMMANDMENTS,
and to hearken upon the VOICE of his WORD. Cro: 24, 25, 26,
Bless the ETERNAL, all his EXCERCISE-ERS, and MINISTERS that do his will.
Nu: 4. Ex: 7, 12,
Is: 44, 19.
Bless the ETERNAL all his WORKS in all places of his Dominion: Ap: 19.
BLESS the ETERNAL, o my SOVLE.

CIV.
BLESS the ETERNAL, o my SOUL,
Ge: 1.^,
Ad Romans
o ETERN: my GOD, thou art exceeding great, and CLOTHED with REVEREND MAJESTY:
Sa: 28, Job: 36, 9.
Is: 42, 44.45, Za: 12,
Putting on the LIGHT as a Garment, and spreading the HEAVENS as a Couertain.
Ioh: 1, Act: 17,
That makes his CHAMBER FLOORES upon the waters, and his RIDEING upon the
Clouds, Is: 19, Heb: 1.
and goes upon the WINGS of the vvinde making the VVINDES his MESSENGERS,
and Flameing fire his MJNISTERS.
Th: 4. 2 Th: 1.

Ex: 9, 31, Eccl: 1,
That founded the Earth upon her stays,
that it can not be moved world without end. WHOM the Deep covers like a
Garment, and the Waters that did stand above the Hills; but at the chideing
VOJCE of thy THVNDER they make haste to fly (the Hills ascending, and the
Beaches descending) to the Place which thou have founded for them,
De: 8.
Job: 38,
and have set a bound that they shall not pass, nor return again to cover the
Earth. That sends the Springs into the Brooks, running betvveen the Hills:
De: 8.
Is: 41,
that water all the beasts of the feeld,
Nu: 23,
and the vvilde beasts break their thirst, by which the birds of Heaven have
their dwelling, Da: 4,
and charm out of the thick boughs.

That from his CHAMBER FLOORES vvatereth the Hills, that with the fruit of
thy WORKS the Earth may be satisfied. Is: 19,
That make-eth grass to spring for bease, and herbs, for the service of Men,
De: 11, 2 K: 19. Ge: 9,, 2,
Da: 4. Is: 37,,
that he may bring forth bread out of the Earth, and wine to cheer a
Sorrovvfull-mans heart,
Ge: 9, Deu: 8. Eccl: 1^, Iud: 19, 9,
Ez: 24,
to make a gladsom Countenance with oil, and bread to sustein a
sorrovvfull-mans heart, that they may be satisfied with the Ceders of Libanon,
Ge: 2; 9:
the Trees of the ETERNAL, which he has planted. VVher the birds do make
their nestes; Nu: 24,
Ez: 31.
and the Firr Trees are the House of the Stork: Can: 1.
the high Hills are for the Roe-deer, and Rocks a succor for the Cunnys.
Is: 60. Ap: 8.20, 21.22.
He made the Moon for Seasons,
and the Sunn to know his going down; thou put forth Darkness and it is
Night.
VVherin, all vvilde-beasts creep abroad (the young Lions roaring for Prey) to
seek their meat from the Almighty: Ge: 1.2.
When the Sunn rises they are couched together in their dens: Job: 37; 38;
Ioh: 9,
that man may go forth to his work, and to his Husbandry till the Evening.
Ge: 12.
How many are thy WORKS, o ETERN:
Pro: 8*
all that thou have don by WISDOM? the Earth is full of thy Endeavor.

The great and vvide reaching SEA, vvher are creeping living Creatures small
and great,
Iud: 18. Job: 11. Ne: 7.9. 1 Cro: 4.
Is: 22, 33, Ap: 8,
without number. VVher Ships do go, and LEVIATHAN that thou have formed to
sport therein.
Job: 3.26.
Is: 27.
which all do hope upon thee, Lu: 12.
to give the^ their meat in his time. Thou openest thy hand and giue-est them:
and they gather and are well Satisfied. Mr: 6.8.
Thou hide-est thy FACE,
and they are astonyed, thou take-est away their breath, and they yield up the
Ghost, Job: 34.
and turn again to their Dust. Thou sendest out thy SPIRIT and they are CREATED
again,
Nu: ^20. Ge: 1.2.5. De: 32.
Is: 29.43.49.50.51.60.66.65. 2 Pet: 3. Ap: 21. 2 Cor: 5. Rom: 8.
and thou Renewest the face of the Earth. That the GLORY of the ETER: may be
for ever, and the ETER: REJOICE in his WORKS,
Ap: 3. Ioh: 1. Heb: 12,, Is: 19, 29,
which looks upon the EARTH and it trembles,
Ex: 19,,
and touches the MOVNTAINES and they Smoke:
J will sing Psalms unto the ETERN: my GOD,
as long as I live; and because my SPEECH of him is sweet; I will REJOICE in
the ETERN:
Can: 2;
Mal: 3;
That Wicked Sinners be consumed out of the Earth, and be no more therein.
BLESS the ETERN: o my SOVLE, the ETERNAL be PRAISED.

CV.
WORSHIP ye the ETERNAL,

CALL upon his NAME, make KNOWN his EXCELLENT ACTS among the Nations,
sing Psalms unto him, and speak of all his Wondrous Works; Boast ye in his
holly NAME.
Let their heart be meery that seek the ETER: Inquire for the STRENGTH of the
ETERN:
and evermore seek his FACE. Remember the WONDERFVLL MIRACLES which he has
don, and the STATVTS of his mouth, b.

ye Seed of his Servant Abraham,

his chosen ye Children of Jacob. The very ETER: our GOD his STATVTES are in
all the Earth, The Word of his COVENANT which he REMEMBERED for ever,

and commanded to a thousand Generations, which he made with Abraham;
and his oath unto Isaac, and made it stand for a DECREE to Jacob,
and to Israel an Everlasting COVENANT. SAYING:


Unto thee will I give the Land of Canaan, the line of your Inheritance. When
they were small of Number,
and few, and Strangers in it. When they went from Nation to Nation, and from
one Kingdom to another People: He Suffered noe man to oppress them, gh.
and REPROVE-ED Kings for them:
Touch ye not mine ANOINTED,
do my PROPHETS no harm.

When he called a Famine upon the Land, and brake all the Stay of bred:

he sent one before them, eve^ Joseph that was sold for a slave, whose feet
they hurt in the Stocks, that the iron went to his Soul.
Till the time the WORD of the ETERNAL came,
and his SAYING tried him,

the King sent to loose him, and the Ruller of the People to enlarge him,
and made him Lord of his House,

and Ruller over all his Provision.
To instruct his Prince-es in his will, and to teach his Elders wisdon. When
Israel was com into Egypt,

and Jacob was a Strange-er in the Land of Ham, and his People were very
fruitful, and he had made them stronger then their Besiegers:
he had turned their hearts to hate his People, and to conspire against his
Servantes: He sent Moses his Servant and Aaron whom he chose;

that they might bring among them,
word of his Signs; and MJRACLES in the Land of Ham.
He sent darkness and made it dark,

and they disobeyed not his commandments, he turned their Waters in to blood,

m. Ap: 16.
and killed their fish, their Land crauled full of froges in their Kings
Chambers.

He commanded, and Swarms of Flies, and Lice came in all their borders,

he gave them showers of hail and flameing fire in their Land,


he smote their Vines, and their Fig Trees, and broke the Trees of their
borders.

He commanded, and there came Chafers and Caterpillars innumerable, and did eat
up all the green grass of their Land,
and devoured the fruit of their Ground. And smote all the first born of their
Land; the Prime of all their Strength,


and brought them forth with Silver and Gold,
and not one feeble Man was among their Tribes. Egypt was glad of their goeing
out,

because their Terror was fallen upon them. He spread a Cloud for a VAJLE,
and fire to give Light in the night.
They requested and he brought Quails;

and satisfied them with Bread of Heaven.

He opened the Rock, and the waters issued out,

and rann like a River in the Dry place-es, for he Remembered his Sacred WORD
with his Servant Abraham,
and brought forth his Chosen PEOPLE with Joy and TRIVMPH;

and Gave them the Countries of the Heathen,
and the pains of the Nations to possess.
That they may keep his PRESCRIPTS, and observe his LAW. The ETERNAL be
praised.

CVI.
PRAISE the ETERNAL GOD:
o Worship the ETERNAL, for his GOODNESS, and because his LOVEING-KINDENES is
for ever. Who is there,
th. Act: 20.
that can Particular out his VIRTVES, and sound out all his PRAISE?
HAPPY are they that observe RIGHT, gh.
and he that does JUSTICE at at all times. o ETERN: think upon me,
and visit me with the favorable SALVATION of thy People, that I may joyfully
look upon the JOY and WEALTH of thy chosen People,
and be come an Actor of thy PRAISES with thine INHERITANCE. We have Sinned
with our Fathers,

and don frovvardly and wickedly. Our Fathers considered not,
and thought not upon thy vvonderfull and great KINDENESSES in Egypt,
and they Rebelled at the Seaside,

by the Red Sea,
and for his NAMES sake he saved them, to make known his VIRTVE: he Rebuked
the Red Sea that it was dry as a wilderness, and lad them in the DEEPS.


And Saved them and quit them from the hands of their Heinous Enimyes, and the
waters ouervvelmed their Besiegers, that not one of them remained.
And they believed his WORD, and sung his PRAISE. They soon forgate his
DOINGS,
Job: 33. Nu: 11.,
and attended not to his COUNCIL, Cor: 10,.
and longed a longing, and tempted the ALMIGHTY GOD in the vvast Wilderness.
And he gave them their Request,
and he sent a REPJNEJNG in their minds, and they freated at Moses in the
Camp, and at Aaron the Holly one of the ETERNAL, Ex: 17. Nu: 14,,
that the Earth opened and svvallovved up Dathan,
Nu: 11, 16, De: 11, 4, 6,
and ouercouered the Assembly of Abiram, and fire kindled in their Assembly,
and the Flames burnt up the WICKED ONES.


Ex: 32,, Leu: 19,
Act: 7.
They made a Molten Calf in Horeb, and Worshipped it, and change-ed their GLORY
for the Feature of an Ox that eats grass.
Ne: 9,, De: 4.9.
Hos: 4. Ier: 2*
They forgot GOD their SAVIOVR, that did GREAT THJNGES in Egypt,
K: 8,
and WONDERFVLL THINGS in the Land of Ham, and TERRIBLE THJNGES at the RED SEA.
And he thought to smite them, but Moses his chosen, Ex: 32,.33,,
stood in the Breach before him, to turn again his Heat from destroying. Nu: 17.
Ez: 22.
And they Refused the DELIGHTFVLL Land,
De: 8. Ex: 33,
and believed not his WORD, Ier: 3.12. Ez: 20,,
and Murmured in their Tents,
De: 1,, Nu: 14,,
Za: 7,,
and hearkened not on the VOJCE of the ETERNAL, Job: 33, 36,
and he took up his Hand against them, to overthrow them in the Wilderness, and
to overthrow their Seed,
Le: 26.
Za: 7.
and Skater them among the Countries of the Heathen. And they wear yoked to
Baal-Peor, De: 4. Nu: 25. Ios: 22. Iu: 20,
Cor: 6. Hos: 5.9.
and did eat the Sacrifice-es of the Dead. And they VEXED with their DEVISES
that the Plague break out among them, Cro: 9. Nu: 20, 25.
Mal. 2,
and Phineas stood up and prayed, and the PLAGVE was restrained; and it was
counted RIGHTEOUSNESS to him for all Generations for ever.
Ge: 15.
Iam: 2. Rom: 4.

Ex: 17, Nu: 30, Ge: 12,
And they ANGERED at the Waters of Meribhah, that he punished MOSES for them.
When they VEXED his Mind, and he Muttered with his Lips. Leu: 5.


They smote not the Nations which the ETERNAL commanded them, Iud: 1, 2, De:
7,
and they were mingled among the Heathen,
Ez: 20,
and learned their WORKS, and served their Idols,
Ex: 10, 23, De: 12, 2 K: 16,, 23,, Leu: 17, 18, 19, 20.
and they vvear a SNARE unto them, Ier: 7, 19. 1 Cro: 10,
and they Sacrifice-ed their Sons and their Daughters to DESTROYERS, they
povvred out INNOCENT blood, De: 18, 19, 32, 2 Cro: 33,
Mt: 27, 12,
The blood of their Sons and Daughters,
which they Sacrifice-ed to the Idols of Canaan; That the Earth was covered
with Blood, and they were poluted with their WORKS going a vvhoreing in
their ENTERPRISE-ES. Mal: 2.
And the ANGER of the ETERNAL kindled against his People, and he abhorred his
INHERITANCE, Iud: 2, 3. Nu: ^5. Ex: 17, De: 15, Leu: 26,
and gave them into the hands of the Heathen, and they that hate-ed them,
vvear commanders over them, and their Enimyes oppressed them, Neh: 9.
and they vvear humbled under their hand. Sa: 4,
Many times he delivered them, when they had Vexed him with their COVNSELLS,
Ge: 2.
that they vvear brought lovv for their Jniquity, and considered when they
were in Distress, by his hearing their Cry,
and Remembered his Covenant to them,
Deu: 30..
and and vas Comfortable according to his great KINDENESSES, and took them to
MERCY before all their Captiuers.
Cro: 30. Ne: 1.
Save us,
Cro: 16;
Ez: 37; 39;
O ETERNAL our GOD, and gather us from among the Heathen to worship thy HOLLY
NAME; Ex: 5;
Da: 12;
to delighte our selves in thy PRAISE.
Blessed be the ETERNAL the GOD of Israel, from Everlasting and to
Everlasting, and let all the People say, Amen. The ETERNAL be praised. Apo: 9.


THE FIFTH BOOK.
CVII.
WORSHIP the ETERNAL for his GOODNESS,
Cor: 7.6. 1 K: 8.
La: 3, th. Act: 20.
and LOVEING KINDENES that is for ever.
Let the RANSOMED of the ETERNAL,

Iud: 10,
Is: 62, Ier: 29,,
whom he has ransomed from the hand of the Tormentor, and gathered from the
Countries, East, Mt: 24,.
West, North and South; Lu: 13,,
that vvandered in a Desolation, without a way, Infia:
Is: 54,
in the Wilderness, and found noe dwelling City,
Ex: 16, 17,
Heb: 11,
hungry and thirsty that their souls fainted in them, and they Cried to the
ETERNAL in their Distress,

Cro: 6, 7, 1 K: 8, Pro: 1,, Nu: 20,, Iu: 3,.
Apo: 5, Ier: 2.
and he delivered them out of their Streits,
and directed them a right way to go unto a dwelling City: SAY, Let men
confess the wonderful KINDENES of the ETERNAL to the children of men.
Because he satisfied the thirsty Soul,
Mt: Mr: 1: 1: 14.6.9.6.
and the hungry soul he well filled. Let THEM that dwelled in obscure Darkness,
PRISONERS, afflicted with iron,
Jude,
because they disobeyed the SAYINGS of the ALLMJGHTY, and set light by the
COVNSELLS of the most HIGH; That he brought down their hearts with Sorrovv:
and they fell and had noe Helper,
and they Cried unto the ETERNAL in their Distress,
Iud: 3.
Job: 15,
Is: 19,.
and he holp them out of their streit troubles, Cro: 20,
he brought them out of the obscure DARKNESS, and brake their BANDS:
CONFESS the wonderful KINDENES of the ETERNAL to the children of men.

Is: 45,
Because he brake the brazen doors, and cut off the bars of iron. FOOLS that
by means of their transgressions,
Pro: 19..
and Jniquityes are afflicted, Job: 33,,
Mt: 9.
that their souls abhor all meat,
and are even at deaths door, and they Cry unto the ETERNAL in their
DISTRESS,
and he helps them out of their streit troubles: That sends his WORD and
heals them,
Mt: Mr: Lu; 3:1:3:
and reskevveth them from their Destructions: Let THEM confess the wonderful
KINDENES of the ETERNAL to the children of men.
Le: 7. Ex: 5.
Mt:
Let them Sacrifice sacrifice-es of THANKS, and declare his WORKS with
TRIVMPH. They which go to Sea in Ships,
Is: 42; Ap: 18:
and do buissines in the Great Waters; They which see the Wonderful Works of
the ETERNAL in the Deep, How he commands a Stormvvinde to rise,
and it raises the waves thereof, that they mount up to Heaven, and descend
down to the Deeps, that their Souls do melt with Misery, they runn about
reeling like dronken men, and all their skill is spent, and they Cry unto the
ETERNAL in their Distress,
and he brings them out of their streit troubles.


Ier: 31,
He calmeth the Storm, and their waves are still, Mt: 8, M^: Lu: 4, 8,
and they rejoice when they are quiet, and he brings them to the Heaven
vvher they would be: Let THEM confess the wonderful KINDENES of the
ETERNAL to the children of men; And let them exalte him in the Congregation of
the commun People, Cro: ^.
and praise him in the Seats of the ELDERS.
That transposeth rivers to a Wilderness, and fountains of water to a
thirsty-place,
Deu: 8,
Is: 35, 41,
a fruitful Land to barennes, Ge: 13,, 19,.
for the Naughtines of them that dvvell in it;
that transposeth a Wilderness into vvater-pooles,
Ez: 34*
and a dry land into Fountains of water: and there he setleth the hungry,
and they build Cittyes of Habitation, and sovv fields and plant Vineyardes,
that may yield fruitful revenues, and blesses them, that they increase
exceedingly, and their beasts he make-eth not a few,
when they vvear fevv and oppressed with constreint and misery, and sorrovv:
Povvring contempt upon Princeces, Supra.
Ge: 1,
and made them wander in the rude Desert with out a way, and he relieved
the Needy out of Affliction,
Ez: 36,
and made them familyes like flocks of sheep,
Job: 22,, 5., 24.,
Mic: 2,. Ier: 9., Da: 12,, Hos: 14. Ap: 1^.12.13.17. Ioh: 6.,
Vprighte-men reioyceed to see it, and wrong dealing stopped her mouth, be
that is Wise, both will observe these things, and they will understand these
KINDENESES of the ETERNAL.


CVIII. A Psalm Song of DAVID.
MY heart is ready, o GOD,


I will sing Psalms, yea, my GLORY (up Lute and Harp) I will awake betime.
I will celebrate thee among the Nations, and chaunt thee out among the People,

because the greatness of thy KINDENES is above the Heavens, and thy
FAYTHFVLLNES is even to the clouds. Be thou exalted, O GOD, above the
Heavens,
Nu: 14.
Lu: 2.,
and thy GLORY over all the Earth. That thy beloved ones may be released, save
us with thy right hand and hear us.



GOD SPEAK in his Sanctuary (I was glad) I will divide Shechem,
and meat out the vale of Succoth,

Giliad shall be mine, and Manasses shall be mine, Ephraim shall be my Cheeff
strength,

Judah shall be my Lavvmaker,
Moah my washing pot, upon Edom will I cast off my shoes, sh
upon Palestina will I triumph.


Who conducted me to the City Mibhzar, who brought me to the strong City
Edom?
did not thou, o GOD, that do give us the back, and go not forth with
our Armies, O GOD?
o give us help in distress, for vain is the help of man. Through GOD we
shall do prosperously,

and he will tread down our Besiegers.

CIX. For the Cheeff, A PSALM of DAVID.

O GOD of my PRAISE be thou not Deaf, for the deceiptfull mouths of the Wicked
are opened upon me,
Rom: ^,
and with false tongs they talk with me,
and with hateful words go they about me, and oppugn me for nothing; for
my love they are against me, and I PRAY them, Da: 9., Ap: 5..
and they put upon me evil for good,
and hatred for my Love. Set over him a Wicked man,
Pro: 17.
Ap: 2. 1 Io: 3. Za: 3. Ioh: 17. Is: 54.,
and let the ADVERSARY stand at his right hand,
and when he is judged, let him go out a Wicked man, and his PRAYER be
sinful,
Pro: 28.
let his days be few, and another take his Oversight; De: 20,,
Act: ^,,
let his children be fatherles, and his wife a Widow,
Ez: 22,
Am: 8.
and let his Children go about asking and seeking,
Job: ^5.
from their desolate dwellings.


Is: 24.50,
Let the Creditor entangle all he has, and foreign Enimyes make a Prey of his
labors.
K: 4, De: 24, Ex: 22, Job: 1..
Hos: 8.
Let him have none to extend KINDNESS,
let there be none to pity his Fatherless ones,
let his Posterity be cut off,
and in another Generation, let their Name be clean blotted out,
K: 21,
Let the iniquity of his Forefathers be remembered with the ETERNAL, Ex:
20.34,
and his Mothers sin not blotted out, Ne: 3,, 4,,
Let them be always before the ETERNAL,
that he may cut off their Remembrance out of the Earth. Because he remembered
not to do KINDENES,
Sa: 9,,
Cro: 19^
and pursued the afflicted and needy one, to sley him of a contrite heart, and
loved cursing;
Let it com unto him, and had noe delight in blessing; De: 28; Ge: 3;
Iam: 3; Rom: 3; Ap: 12;
let it be far from him. And let him put on Cursing as his Robe, let it soke
into him like water,
and like oil into his bones, Nu: 5.,
let it be to him like a vvrapping weed, and for a girdle to gird it
always to him.
Ioh: 21.


Let this be the Revvard of them,
Ap: 2,
that STAND UP against me, from the ETERNAL, and speak ill against my
PERSON. And thou, o ETERNAL, o my LORD,
Ru^h: 1,, 1 Cro: 19,,
show me for thy Names sake thy Favor, and for thy Bountiful KINDENES
deliver me,
because J am miserably afflicted, and my heart is slain within me,
Job. 8,,
Ier: 6,
as a Shadovv at his declineing I am gone, I am driven away like locusts. Ex:
10. Job: 39.
my knees are feeble with fasting,
my flesh denies fatnes, and J, which am a skorn to them,
La: 2^
and they vvag their heads when they see me: o ETERNAL my GOD. Mt: 27: Ioh:
2: Mt: 15,,
Help me, and according to thy LOVING KJNDENES save me. That they may know,
that thou, O ETERNAL,
with thy hand have don this very thing. When they revile do thou bless, when
they rise up, Nu: 22,, Pro: 26. 2 Sa: 16,
let them be confounded, that thy Servant may rejoice; let them that stand up
against me, put on shame,
and wear their Confusion like an upper garment,
Job: 8,, 12,,
that with my mouth I may exceedingly set forth the ETERNAL,
and praise him in the midst of many.
Because he stands at the right hand of the Destitute man, to save him from
the Condemners of his life.
Ge: 3.
Ap: 12,


CX. Of DAVID, A Psalm.
THE ETERNAL SAYS to my LORD,

Sit thou at my right hand, until I set thine Enimyes thy foot stool.


The ETERNAL will send the rod of thy STRENGTH out of Sion,
and Rulle thou in the midst of thine Enimyes.




He will send thee thy PRINCIPAL People in the day of thy Battle,
the timelines of the Womb,
and dew of thy youth, in thy seemly Sanctuary. The ETERNAL has SWORN,

and will not repent, Thou shall be a Priest for ever like MELCHISEDEK.



By thy right hand the LORD will wound Kings,
when he is angry; he will Judge among the Hethen his fill of Bodies: He
will wound the Head over the Land of Rabbah. He drank of the river in the way,
therefore shall he hold up his head.

CXI.

PRAISE the ETERNAL in the Counsel and Assembly of UPRIGHT men, I will
worship the ETERNAL with all my heart.

Great are the WORKS of the ETERNAL,


and to be sought out with all their DELIGHTS.
WORSHIP and HONOR is his WORK,
and his RIGHTEOUSNESS that stands for ever.



He has made remembrance of his WONDERFVLL WORKS,

The ETERNAL being GRACIOUS and MERCIFVLL.

He gave food to them that fear him, and was ever mindful of his COVENANT.
He declare-ed the MIGHTYNES of his WORKS to his People,

to give them the JNHERITANCE of the Heathen.



The Works of his hands are Truth and Judgment,
and all his Precepts Faithful.

They are established for everlasting Eternity being made with TRVTH and
PLAYNENES. m. gh



He sent Redemption to his people, his Covenant, that he commanded for ever:

holly and reverend be his Name. The beginning of Wisdom is the Fear of the
ETERNAL, th;


and a good Understanding have all they that do them; His Praise to stand for
ever.

CXII.
PRAISE the ETERNAL: Happy is the man that Fears the ETERN:
and greatly delights in his Commandments;
K: 3;
his Seed shall be mighty in the Earth, and the Generation of Upright men shall
be blesse-ed.
Ge: 13.17, 18.15, 16, 6,
Rom: 4,
He shall have wealth and Riches in his house, Act: 20, Lu: 11, 12. Ap: 3, 5,
To: 11. Act: 9.10. 1 Timothy 6.
and his Righteousness shall endure for ever.
De: 28,


In darkness there arises Light for Upright men,
Ge: 18, 17* P^o: 4;
Is: 58, 60,
the Gracious the Merciful and Just man; that a good man being Pitiful and
lending, Mt: 4; Lu: 1. 2 Cor: 9. To: 2.
may maintain his Substance with Judgment,

K: 21.8, 2 K: 10.
because the Just shall never be moved,
Pro: 10.
he shall be had in perpetual Remembrance,
Nu: 13. Ge: 22.
He; 11.
of any ill Nevves he shall not be afraid, his heart is firm and confident
in the ETERNAL.

His heart is established, that he shall not be afraid,
Cor: 10. Lu: 14,, 18,, 19,. Mt: 19. Act: 20. Mr: 10. 2 Cor: 9.. Rom: 2,; Da:
4, Act: 9.10. To: 15, He: 13., Phil: 4. Ia: 2.
when he looks upon his Foes. He DISTRIBVTETH and GIVES to the Needy
ones,
and his Righteousness shall last for ever.
Iud: 5.
And his HORN shall be high in GLORY,

when the Wicked man sees it, he shall freat, and gnash his teeth,
Job: 8.1,
Mt: 8, Ap: 16. Ko: 13.
and melt, The Longing of Wicked men shall perish.
Pro: 10.


CXIII.
Sa: 2, 1,
Lu: 1,
PRAISE the ETERNAL, Praise ye, o Servantes of the ETERNAL, Ap: 19;
praise the NAME of the ETERNAL:
let the NAME of the ETERNAL be blessed from this time,
Job: 1.
Da: 2.
Mal: 1,.
till for ever, from the Riseing of the Sunn, to his Goeing down, let the NAME
of the ETERNAL be praised.


De: 26,
The ETERNAL that is high above all Nations, and his GLORY is above the
Heavens. Who is like the ETERNAL our GOD;
that has his Dwelling a high in the Heavens,
and humbles to look upon the Earth?

R^: 16, 1 Sa: 2.
Ez: 21, A^: 7, 21,
That raises the empty man out of the dust,
and sets up the Needy from the donghill,
to make him sit with Prince-es, and with the Principal of his People,
making the barren woman, Ge: 15,, Job: 24,.
Lu: 1.
to inhabit the House,
and to be a joyefull Mother of children, the ETERNAL be praised.

CXIV.

WHEN Israel came out of Egypt, and the House of Jacob from the Barbarous
People,
and Jury was his SANCTVARY, and Israel his DOMINION:

the Sea saw and fled, and Jordan turned back:


The Mountains DAVNCE-ED like Lambs, and the little Hills, like young Sheep:


What is the matter with thee, o Sea, that thou fledst, and thou Jordan, that
thou turnedst back?

ye Mountains that ye daunceed like Lambs,

and ye little Hills like young Sheep?

For the Presence of the LORD (tremble o Earth) for the Presence of the GOD of
Jacob:



that turns the hard-stony rock into springing water pooles.


CXV.
NOT unto us, o ETERNAL,
not vno us give GLORY,

but unto thy NAME, for thy LOVEING KINDENES and thy TRVTH. Wherefore should the
Hethen SAY, VVher (I pray you) is their GOD?

and our GOD is in Heaven,
and does whatsoever he pleases? Their Images of silver and gold, the work
of men's hands:


have mouths and speak not,
they have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not,
and noses and smell not, and wag not with their hands, nor walk with their
feet,
they have noe talk in their throats.

So be their makers and every one that trusts in them.


Israel trust thou in the ETERNAL, whose help and Defense he is. Thou House
of Aaron,
trust ye in the ETERNAL, whose help and Defense he is. Ye that fear the
ETERNAL,
trust ye in the ETERNAL, whose help and Defense he is. That the ETERNAL
that remembers us, may bless;

he may bless the House of Israel, and bless the House of Aaron, and bless
them that fear the ETERNAL,
small and great.

That the ETERNAL may ad abundantly upon you,

upon you and upon your Children; be ye the blessed of the ETERNAL maker of
Heaven and Earth.
Sa: 15.23, Neh: 9. 1 K: 8, 2 Cro: 6, Ge: 12; 15; Job: 71:. Pro: 15.2.
The Heavens of Heavens are the ETERNALLS,
and the Earth he has given to the Children of men:

the DEAD shall not praise the ETERNAL,
nor they that are gone into SILENCE. Therefore we will bless the ETERNAL from
this time and for ever.
The ETERNAL be praised.

CXVI.
I Love the ETERNAL, because he has hard my VOICE of my SVPPLICATIONS,


and because he has turned his ears unto me in the days of calling. The
snares of death had hold of me,

and the torments of Hell came upon me,
and I found greevous misery. And I CALLED upon the Name of the ETERNAL:
J beseech thee, o ETERNAL,

reskew my Life. And the ETERNAL that is GRACIOUS and JUST;




and our GOD that is most MERCIFVLL; the ETERNAL that preserves the simple
ones: When I was utterly spent,
help me.

Turn to thy REST, o my Soul, for The ETERNAL has don BOVNTIFVLLY for thee.


For thou have released my Person from death,
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from Scatering,
that J might walk before the ETER:

among the living. I believed, for I SPOKE when I was exceedingly afflicted,

and I SAID in my have, All men are liars.
What shall I RETVRNE to the ETERNAL for all his GOOD-TVRNES bestowed upon
me?
J will take the CVP of SALVATION,

and make Invocation upon the NAME of the ETERNAL.




I will pay my VOWS to the ETER: yea in the Sight of his People, the death
of his Saints being deer in the sight of the ETERNAL. O ETERN:


I BESEECH thee, because I am thy Servant*
I am thy Servant; and son of thy Handmayde: loose my bands,

that I may Sacrifice SACRIFICE-ES of Thanks-offering and make Invocation upon
the NAME of the ETERN:

and pay my Vows to the ETERN: in the sight (yea) of all his people, in the
Courts of the House of the ETERN: and in the mids of thee, O Jerusalem: praised
be the ETERNAL.

CXVII.
PRAISE the ETERNAL all ye Nations, sh. 18.29, 144


commend him all ye People;

for his passing LOVEING KINDENES upon us, and the TRVTH of the ETERN: that is
for ever. The ETERNAL be praised.

CXVIII.
WORSHIP the ETERNAL,

because he is GRACIOUS,

For his Loveing Kindenes is for ever. Let Israel SAY, that his Loveing
Kindenes is for ever. O let the House of Aaron SAY, that his Loveing Kindenes
is for ever. O let them that fear the ETER: SAY, that his Loving Kindenes is
for ever.

Out of my Affliction I Called upon the ETER: and the ETER: heard me at large.
The ETERN:


is with me, I am not afraid, what man shall do unto me. The ETERN:
is with me among my HELPERS,
and J do look upon my foes.

It is better to RELY on the ETERN: then to put any TRUST in man.
It is better to RELY on the ETERNAL,
then to put trust in Principal men. For all the People came about me,


and in the NAME of the ETERNAL J cut them off.

For when they compassed me, yea and had be set me round about: in the NAME
of the ETERNAL I cut them off. They came about me like bees,
but they went out like a thorn fire,
and in the NAME of the ETERNAL I cut them off. Thou have cast me sore down,
and I fell, and the ETERNAL has helped me.


My Confidence and Sonet shall be the ETERN:
that has been my SALVATION: a loud VOICE of SALVATION in the TABERNACLES of
the RIGHTEOUS.



The right hand of the ETERNAL has done valiantly,

the right hand of the ETERN: be exalted: the right hand of the ETERN: has
done valiantly, and while I live and am not dead;

I will DECLARE the DOINGS of the ETERNAL. The ETERN: corrected me sorely,

yet gave me not unto death;

open ye righteous gates I may enter in by them,


and worship the ETERNAL.
This is the Gate of the ETERNAL, by which the RIGHTEOUS ONES do enter.

That I may worship thee, for thou have Afflicted me,
and have been my SALVATION.

The stone that the builders refused;
is become the head corner stone. This is from the ETERNAL, and it is
Miraculous in our eyes.
This day has the ETERNAL brought,


that we may Triumph and Rejoice in it.
We beseech thee give Salvation, O ETERN: We beseech thee, O ETERN: give
prosperity. Blessed be he that comes in the NAME of the ETERN:



we bless you out of the House of the ETERN: And that the ALL MIGHTY GOD,


the ETERNAL, may Shine unto us; Tie your Festivals, with cords to the
horns of the Altar, that J may worship thee, o my ALMIGHTY, and extol the, o
my GOD. Worship the ETERNAL, because he is GRACIOUS,
and because his LOVEING KINDENES is for ever.

CXIX.
A. HAPPY are they that are of a PERFECT WAY:




that walk in the LAW of the ETERNAL. Happy are they that observe his
TESTIMONYS, B.


and seek him with the whole heart, and walk in his ways,

yea, and do noe wrong,


to observe dilligently thy VISITINGS which thou have commanded. I would to God
my Ways wear steadfast to keep thy PRESCRIPTIONS,
that then I might not be abashed, when I look upon thy COMMANDMENTS,

and I might worship thee with a right heart, when I have learned thy JVDGEMENTS.
o that I may keep thy PRECRIPTIONS, o leave me not utterly.

B. O how shall a young man keep clean his way: To observe it according to thy
Word!


A.
I seek thee with all my heart,
o let me not miss of thy COMMENDEMENTS.
I hide thy SAYINGS in my mind, that I may not sin against thee. o ETERNAL,
thou blessed one, teach me thy PRESCRIPTIONS.
I reckon with my lips all the SENTENCES of thy

mouth, J joy in the WAY of thy TESTIMONYS as above all wealth.
J talk of thy PRECEPTS,

and behold thy WAYS, J have Delight in thy STATVTES,
and forget not thy WORD.



G. O deal bountifully with thy Servant I may live, and that J may keep thy
WORD, unfold mine eyes,


that J may discern the secrets out of thy LAW.
J being a stranger in in the Earth,


o hide not thy COMMANDMENTS from me. My Soul is beaten out with continual
Appetite to thy JVDGEMENTS. Rebuke the cursed Proud,


that err from thy COMMANDMENTS, and turn from me Reproach and Contempt, for J
observe thy TESTIMONYS.
Yea, when Prince-es sit and speak against me: thy Servant communeth of thy
STATVTS. Yea thy TESTIMONIES are my Delights,

and my Counse^lers.



D. My soul cleeveth to the dust, o quicken me according to thy WORD.
I tell my WAYS and thou hear me: o teach me thy STATVTES.
Make me understand the WAY of thy PRECEPTS, that J may talk of thy WONDERS.


My soul droupeth for sorrow, O Raise me again according to thy WORD.
O take from me the WAY of falsehood, and grace me with thy LAW.
I choose the WAY of TRVTH,


I like thy IVDGEMENTS. J steek upon thy TESTIMONYS, T. 89.
O ETERNAL, make me not ashame-ed. o enlarge my heart, that J may runn the way
of thy COMMANDMENTS.






H. Teach me to observe the way of thy STATVTS to the end. give me
understanding to observe thy LAW, and to keep it with my whole heart.
Direct me in the PATH of thy COMMANDMENTS, because I have pleasure in it.


Turn my mind to thy TESTIMONIES,

and not unto GAIN.

Take away mine eyes from beholding falsehood, and revive me in thy WAY.
Establish thy SAYING to thy Servant,
which is according to thy FEAR. G.
Take away my reproach that I feared,
for thy IVDGEMENTS are pleasant. Behold, J have an Appetite to thy PRECEPTS,
o revive me with thy RIGHTEOUSNESS.

V. O let thy LOVING KINDENESES and thy SALVATION com unto me,


according to thy SAYING,


that I may answer my Reprocher the matter,

Because I trust in thy WORD.
and take not the WORD of TRVTH quite out of my mouth,
for I wait for thy IVDGEMENT. That I may keep thy LAW, always, for world
everlasting.


And I may walk at large, for I seek thy PRECEPTS. S.
that I may speak of thy TESTIMONYS before Kings, and not be abashed; and
delight my self in thy COMMANDMENTS,
which I love: and hold up my hands at thy COMMANDMENTS which I love, and
talk of thy STATVTS.

Z. Remember thy word to thy Servant,


which thou have made me wait for. In my Affliction, this is my comfort,

for thy SAYING reviveth me.
The Proud make a mocking stock of me, above measure,

but I decline not from thy Law.
I remember thy IVDGEMENTS of old, O ETERNAL, and am comforted. When a storm
of Wicked men seissed on me,
(such as forsake thy LAW) thy Statuts wear my SONETS in my dwelling House.
I remember thy NAME in the night, O ETERNAL, and keep thy LAW.

This happened to me for observing thy PRECEPTS.



Chapter o ETERN: my PORTION, I Said,


I would keep thy words.
I entreat thee with all my heart, pity me according to thy Saying. I recount
my ways, and bring again my feet unto thy TESTIMONIES. J make haste and delay
not to keep thy COMMANDMENTS. The snares of the wicked are about me,


but J forget not thy LAW: at midnight J rise to thank thee for thy righteous
JVDGEMENTS. h.


J am a companion of all them that fear thee,

and such as will keep thy PRECEPTS.
o ETERNAL, that the Earth is full of thy LOVEING KINDENES:
teach me thy STATVTES.

TH. Deal well with thy Servant, o ETERNAL,
Sa: 21, 25.

according to thy WORD. Lern me the Goodness of Understanding and Knowledge,
for J believe in thy COMMANDMENTS.


Before J was in misery J erred, and now J keep thy SAYING; o thou that art
good and perfect, lern me thy STATVTS. The Proud lay-falshood against me,
but J observe thy PRECEPTS with all the heart. Their heart is fat like tallow,

but J greatly respect thy LAW. It was good for me that I was afflicted, that
J might lern thy STATVTES.
I have more pleasure in the LAW of thy Mouth,
then in thousands of gold and silver. T.V. S.



I. Thou that thy hands have made me and prepare-ed me: L. 111.

o teach me UNDERSTANDING,
that I may lern thy COMMANDMENTS.
That they that fear thee may rejoice, when they see it, for I wait for thy
WORD. I know, o ETERNAL, that thy IVDGEMENTS be with JUSTICE,


and that thou have very FAYTHFVLLY afflicted me.
O let thy LOVING KINDENES be to comfort me,

according to thy SAYING to thy Servant. O let thy MERCYES com unto me that I
may live,

because my greatest Respects are thy LAW.
O let the Proud be abashed that wrongfully torment me, when I talk of thy
PRECEPTS.
Let such as fear thee and know thy TESTIMONIES, com unto me. Let my heart be
wholely in thy STATVTES,
that I may not be abashed.

TS.
K. My Soul is consumeed for thy SALVATION, J wait for thy WORD,


mine eyes are spent for thy SAYING, Saying,
when vvilt thou comfort me? Though J am like a botle in the smoke, yet I
forget not thy STATVTES.


How many are the days of thy Servant?
when will thou do Judgment against my Persecutors? The Proud dig pittes for
me,


which is not according to thy LAW; all thy COMMANDMENTS are TRVTH,
but they persecute me wrongfully; O help me.
Within a little, they had made an end of me in the Earth:

notwithstanding J forsake not thy PRECEPTS. O revive me according to thy LOV:
KINDENES: that J may keep the TESTIMONYS of thy mouth.

L. O ETERNAL,
that thy WORD abides in Heaven for ever,
and thy FAYTHFVLLNES stands for all generations,
as sure as thou have made the Earth; that they at this day do stand by thy
IVDGEMENTS:
for they are all thy Servants:
except thy LAW had been my respects, J had then even perished in mine
Affliction.
J shall never forget thy PRECEPTS, because by them thou have revived me. o
save me, for I am thine,
for J seek for thy STATVTES.
The Wicked lay wait for me to destroy me,
and I am lerning to understand thy TESTIMONIES.

I have seen an end of all Perfection, but thy COMMANDMENT is exceeding large.

M. Oh how I love thy LAW!


for it is my talk all the day.
By thy COMMANDMENTS thou have made me wiser then mine Enimyes; For it is for
ever with me.
J get more skill then all my Teachers, because thy TESTIMONIES are my
Meditations. J lern more understanding then the Age-ed, because I observe thy
PRECEPTS.

J refrain my feet from all ill ways, that I may keep thy Word.
I will not depart from thy IVDGEMENTS, because thou have taught me.
How sweet are they to my Palate?
thy SAYING is sweeter then honey to the Palate of my mouth,
by thy PRECEPTS J lern UNDERSTANDING,
therefore I hate all wrong ways.


Sa: 3, Ios: 24. Job: 12. Nu: 18.4.9. Ex: 21.

N. Thy WORD is a candle to my feet, and a light unto my foot path. I have
sworn and J will confirm it,
that I will keep thy righteous IVDGEMENTS.

I am extremely afflicted, o ETERNAL, revive me according to thy WORD.

o ETERNAL, accept (I pray thee) the voluntary Offerings of my mouth,
and teach me thy IVDGEMENTS.
My life is always in Danger,
but I forget not thy LAW. The Wicked set a snare for me, but I err not from
thy PRECEPTS.


I inherit thy TESTIMONIES for ever, because they are the joy of my heart.
And I bend my mind to do thy PRESCRIPTIONS to the worlds end.




S. I hate Scismes, and I love thy LAW. o thou my SHELTER and my SHIELD,

I wait for thy WORD.
Away from me, ye Naughty men,
I may observe the COMMANDMENTS of my GOD.
Support me according to thy SAYING,
that I may live, and make me not ashamed of my HOPE. stay me up, J may be
safe by looking always in thy PRESCRIPTIONS.

Thou ouerthrowest all them that err from thy PRESCRIPTS,
because their dissembling is falsehood.
Thou take away the Wicked ones of the Earth like a skum,
therefore J love thy TESTIMONYS. My flesh trembles for fear of thee,

and I am afraid because of thy IVDGEMENTS.

GH. I do righteous IVDGEMENT, o leave me not to mine Oppressors.

Guard well thy Servant,
and let not the Proud oppress me. Mine eyes are consume-ed for thy
SALVATION,

and for thy Righteous Saying. Deal with thy Servant according to thy LOVEING
KINDENES,
and teach me thy Prescripts. I am thy Servant, o lern me Understanding that
I may know thy TESTIMONIES.
When they should perform it to the ETERNAL,
they break thy LAW.

Therefore do I love thy COMMANDMENTS more then gold,
more then Paz gold. Therefore, because of all the PRECEPTS all which J allow:
all wrong ways do J hate.

P. Wonderful are thy Testimonies,


therefore my Soul observes them.

The opening of thy WORDS gives light, and makes the simple to be of
Understanding. I opened my mouth with Longing,

because I had Appetite to thy COMMANDMENTS.
O look upon me and pity me,
as thy Custom is to them that love thy NAME.
Set my feet firm in thy SAYINGS, and let noe sorrovv have Dominion over me.

Redeem me from the oppression of men,
that I may keep thy PRECEPTS.
Lighten thy FACE upon thy Servant, and learn me thy PRESCRIPTS. Rivers of
water runn down mine eyes,

because they keep not thy LAW.

TS. O ETERNAL,

that art JUST and RIGHT in thy IVDGEMENTS;
and with exceeding JUSTICE and TRVTH have commanded thy TESTIMONIES:
my zeal torments me, because my foes forget thy words.
Thy SAYING is an exceeding tried Saying, and thy Servant loves it,



shaken off and despised as J am, J forget not thy PRECEPTS. O thou,
that thy Righteousness and thy Law is with Justice and TRVTH for ever:
miserable torments have found me,
but my whole Respects are thy COMMANDMENTS. o thou,

that thy Testimonys are with Justice for ever: give me Understanding that J
may live.



Q. I Call with all my heart, O ETERN: answer me, J that observe thy
Prescripts. J CALL thee, o Save me,
and J keep thy TESTIMONIES;

J am present in the Twilight shouteing, because I wait for thy WORD.


Mine eyes prevent the Night waches, that J may muse upon thy SAYING. Hear my
voice, O ETERNAL, according to thine accustomed LOVEING KINDENES and revive
me.
When the followers of Mischeeff approached, which wear far from thy LAW.
o thou ETERNAL most nighe,

and all thy COMMANDMENTS are TRVTH:
by thy TESTIMONIES I knew before, because thou have founded them for ever.

R. O see mine Affliction and release me, because J forget not thy LAW.


Defend my quarrel and ransom me, and by thy SAYING revive me.


SALVATION is far from the Wicked, because they seek not thy PRESCRIPTS. o
ETERNAL, that thy MERCYES are great; after thy IVDGEMENTS revive me.


When my Persecutors and Afflictors are many;

I decline not from thy TESTIMONY. When I saw Transgressors,
which kept not thy Saying; I was exceedingly greeved. o mark how I love thy
PRECEPTS; and according to thy LOVEING KINDENES;


revive me. The beginning of thy WORD is TRVTH, and every one of thy JUST
DECREES is for ever.



SH. When Prince-es persecuted me for nothing, S. 68.

and my heart was afraid because of thy WORD: I ioyed concerning thy SAYING, as
a man that had found a great Booty.
I hate and abhore falsehood,
and I love thy LAW. Seven times a day I praise thee for thy RIGHTEOUS
IVDGEMENTS,
there is great PEACE to them that love thy LAW.
And there is nothing shall offend them. I hope for thy SALVATION, because J do
thy COMMANDMENTS.


My Soul keeps thy TESTIMONIES, and I love them exceedingly. I keep thy
COMMISSIONS and thy TESTIMONYS,
because all my ways are before thee.

T. O ETERNAL, let my SOVND com before thee,

and according to thy WORD, give me UNDERSTANDING, let my Request com before
thee,
and according to thy Saying, deliver me. And that my lips may utter Praise,

o teach me thy PRESCRIPTIONS, and my tongue report thy SAYING,
for all thy COMMANDMENTS are JUST.
Let thy hand be to help me,
for J make choice of thy PRECEPTS. J long for thy SALVATION,
O ETERNAL,
thy LAW being my cheeff Respect. That my Soul may PRAISE thee as long as it
lives, because thy IVDGEMENTS have helped me. J go astray like a lost sheep,


o seek out thy Servant, for J forget not thy COMMANDMENTS.

CXX. A Song of Gradations.
Ge: 7.22. De: 12. Ez: 4. I^d: 11,, Ge: 35.
Is: 25.28. 2 Cor: 4,

IN my Affliction,
Io: 1.
I CALLED unto the ETERNAL to hear me: o ETERNAL, deliver my Soul from false
Lips,
Pro: 25. Est: 9.
Ie: 33. Ia: 3. 2 Th: 2,
and a deceiptfull Tongue.

What shall it give unto thee,
Io: 7? 17? 2. Ier: 9?
and what shall it bring unto thee a deceiptfull Tongue?
Ge: 3.
sharp Arrows of a strong man, Io: 8.3. 1 Io: 3.
with hot Juniper coals.

VVoe is me that I have sojourned in Meshek,

Cro: 1, Job: 6,
Ap: 2, Ez: 32, 38.27.39. Ier: 12,, Is: 21.60, 7, Ez: 27. Hab: 3, Da: 11. Mt:
17, Mt: Mr: Lu: 10 6.19.10. Io: 18.
and dwelled with the Tents of Kedar, my Soul has dwelled her there to long,
Ca^: 1,, Ge: 10, 15, 25, 37. 1 K 8:, Est: 10,
with him that hate-eth PEACE: For when J speak of PEACE,
they are for war.

CXXI. A Song of Gradations.
Cro: 4. Gal: 5*

SHALL I lift up mine eyes to the Hills?
K: 6,? 1 K: 20,
I^r: 3?
from whence shall my HELP com? My Help is from the ETERNAL,
Cro: 2, 1 Sa: 2. Ge: 2.
Phil. 1. Mr: 11. Act: 4. M^: M^: Lu: 26.14.22,
maker of Heaven and Earth. O let him not suffer thy foot to slip, nor let him
slomber that keeps thee.

Behold he will neither slombe^ nor sleep that keeps Jsrael.
Na: 3.
The ETERNAL that keeps thee:
Ge: 31, 37.
will be a Shadovv at thy Right hand,
Job: 5.11. Ios: 10, De: 28.
Is: 25.49.28.30.4.60. Ha: 3. Ap: 7.12.
that the Sunn smite thee not by day, nor the moon by night.


Io: 17; Is: 7; 2 Th: 3.
The ETERNAL will Keep thee and preserve thy life from all evil; the ETERNAL
will preserve thy going out,
De: 31.
and thy coming in, from this time and for ever.

CXXII. A Song of Gradations, of DAVID.

Sa: 15.
Cor: 4, Ga: 5.
I Reioyce-ed, when they SAID to me, Let us go to the House of the ETERNAL,
Cro: 29, Iud: 17. De: 1^,,
Za: 8, 14, Is: 2. Mic: 4, Ier: 50. ^ Pe: 1.
and our feet shall stand in thy gates,
o Jerusalem. Jerusalem that is built like a City, well pack together with
it self.

Ap: 7.
Because thither go up the Tribes, the Tribes of the ETERN:
and the whole Testimony of Israel, Ioh: 4. 1 John. 5.
to worship the NAME of the Eternal. for there, Cro: 23, 1 K: 7.
Io: 13.15.3. Ez: 44.
they sit in Trones for Judgment, the THRONES of the House of David; wish
PEACE with Jerusalem, that they may prosper that love thee.


K: 21.
To: 9.10. 1 Cro: 13. 1 Pet: 1.
Let PEACE be in thy Trenches and Prosperity in thy Palaces: for my Brethren
and friends sakes,
Ge: 37,
Mr: 12. 1 ^im: 6:
I vvish PEACE in thee; for the House of the ETERNAL our GOD, Est: 10. De: 23.
Ne: 2.
his sake, J vvish thee well.

CXXIII. A Song of Gradations.


UNTO thee I lift up mine eyes, o thou Dweller in the Heavens.




Behold, as the eyes of men Servantes are to the hand of their masters; and as
the eyes of a maid to the hand of her Mistress: so are our eyes to the ETER:
our GOD; until he shall Pity us.

Pity us, pity us, O ETERN: for we are very full of Contempt;


our Soul is to full to it self, of the skornfull Contempt of Idle and haughty
men.


CXXIV. A Song of Gradations, of DAVID.
NOT for the ETERNAL that was with us, may Israel now SAY, L. 46, 94.118.119.
TH.
Ge: 31. 1 K: 8. 2 K: 3.
Is: 1, 43. To: 8.
not for the ETERNAL that was with us; when men rose up against us: even then,
they had swellowed us up alive;
Iud: 14; Pro: 1.
Ephesians: 5.6. 1 Pe: 5.
when their Anger burned against us.

Then the waters had overflowed us,
Ie: 12. Da: 9. Is: 43. Io: 2:
and the Current runn over our Souls; Ge: 1, 8.7.
then had a stream of swelling waters gone clean over our Souls. Tit: 4.
Blessed be the ETERNAL that has not given us a prey to their teeth.

Our Soul is escape-ed,
like a bird from the fowlers Snare. The Snare is broken; Act: 16,
and we are escape-ed. Our HELP is in the NAME of the ETERNAL,
the make-er of Heaven and Earth.

CXXV. A Song of Gradations.
THEY that trust in the ETERNAL,

are like Mount Sion that shall not be moved; but abide for ever.

The Hills are round about Jerusalem, and the ETERNAL is round about his
People, from this time and for ever.

For there shall noe wicked shaft rest by the Lot of the RIGHTEOUS,


Because the Righteous set not their hands to any wrong.

Be good, O ETERN:

to the good and upright in their hearts;
and they that turn their crooked ways: let the ETERN: make them walk, with
them that work the sorrow;
that Peace may be upon Israel.

CXXVI. A Song of Gradations.
WHEN the ETERN:

brought again the captivity of Sion:

we wear like men in a Dream. Then wear our mouths full of LAVGHTER, and our
tongs with SONETS.

Then SAID they among the Hethen:
The ETERN: has don much among these men.


The ETERNAL has don great things with us,
and we reioyce-ed; o ETERNAL, bring our captivity again like the Rivers in
the South.




That they that sow with tears, may reap with Songs; that he, that went out
weeping, bearing his seedleep;
may com again with SONETS, bringing his sheaves.

CXXVII. A Song of Gradations, of Solomon.


IF the ETERNAL build not the house, in vain do the builders thereof; labor
in it.
If the ETERNAL keep not the City, in vain do the Warders wach.


It is in vain to you, that ye rise up early and sit down late,

and eat your meat with cares: seeing he gives his BELOVED rest.

Behold, children and the fruit of the womb,
are an hereditary reward of the ETERNAL.


As arrows in a strongmans hand: so are the Children of youth. Happy is the
man that has his quiver full of them;
they shall not be abashed, when they talk with their enimyes in the gate.


CXXVIII. A Song of Gradations.

Mt: 5. Act: 2. Ph. 4. Is. 65. Ez: 28.
HAPPY is every man that fears the ETERNAL, and walks in his WAYS: for
he shall eat the labor of his own hands; De: 12.5.28.
thou shall be happy, and it shall be well with thee.

Ge: 49,
Is: 32, Tit: 2.
Thy wife shall be like a fruitful vine by thy House sides, and thy Children
like Olive plants about thy table, lo, because that thus shall the man be
blessed that Fears the ETERNAL.


Io: 14.
The ETERNAL shall bless thee out of Sion,
John. 2 Timothy: 2.3.
that thou may behold the wealth of Jerusalem all the days of thy life,
and see thy Childrens children, K: 20, 19.
Mt: 5.
and Peace upon Israel.

CXXIX. A Song of Gradations.
THEY have sore Afflicted me from my youth, may Israel well SAY;


they have sore Afflicted me ever since my youth;

yet they prevailed not over me. The plowmen have plowed upon my back,
and made their furrowers of a length.

O ETERNAL, that art Just;
that cutteth the cords of the Wicked:
let them all retire back with shame, that be hate-ers of Sion.

Let them be like the grass upon the house tops, that withers er it blows
out.


Whereof the reaper has not his handful,
nor the gripe-er his lapfull. And noe Travaillers SAY; GOD speed you,
we bless you in the NAME of the ETERNAL.


CXXX. A Song of Gradations.
OVT of the Deepes I call on thee, O ETERNAL; O LORD, hear my Voice,

and let thine ears be attent to the voice of my REQVESTS.



If the ETERNAL shall observe Iniquityes, O LORD, who shall stand? seeing
with thee is Pardon,
that thou should be feared.

I expect for the ETERN: my Soul expects,


and I wait for his WORD; my Soul expects for the LORD,


more then the Wachman for the Morning, the Wachman for the Morning.

Let Israel wait for the ETERN: seeing with the ETERN: is KINDENES, and with
him is great REDEMPTION:
that he will redeem Israel from all his Iniquityes.



CXXXI. A Song of Gradations, of DAVID.



O ETERNAL, I am not high minded, nor have J lofty looks, neither am I
buissied in great matters, and to hard for me.


Do I not equal and tame my Soul? as a vvainling is by his mother:
so is my Soul by me.


Let Jsrael wait for the ETERNAL, from this time and for ever.

CXXXII. A Song of Gradations.
O ETERNAL, remember David and his Afflictions, which he SWEAR and VOWED to
the ETERNAL, Ge: 49.
Act: 7.
the MIGETY ONE of Jacob. Pro: 14, Ios: 22, I^d: 4, 20, 1 Reg: 8,
I will not com within my Dwelling House, nor go upon my Made Bed, nor give
sleep to mine eyes, nor slomber to mine eyelids: until I find a place for
the ETERNAL, De: 1^.
and a dwelling for the MIGHTY ONE of Jacob. Behold, we heard of it in
Ephratah,
S^: 6.7. 1 Sa: 17. Ge: 35.48. Iud: 12. 2 S^: 18.
Mic: 5.2. Mt: 2.
and found it in the vvood country.


Is: 66.
Let us enter into his DWELLINGS and worship at his footstool. Ge: 2.
Arise O ETERN: to thy REST,
Nu: 10, 1 Reg: 8,
thou and the ARK of thy STRENGTH. Sa: 4, 2 Sa: 14. Ex: ^6,
Is: 3^, 2 Pe: 2.
Let thy Priests put on RIGHTEOUSNESS,
and thy SACRED ONES sound out aloud. Ge: 6. Job: 38.
For thy Servant Davides sake turn not again the FACE of thine Anoyinted.
John. 2.
The ETERNAL has SWORN to David, TRVTH, Ie: 4.. Acts: 2,
and will not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy Belly J will set upon the
Throne for thee.
Sa: 6.7, 1 Sa: 6,
Jf thy children keep my COVENANT and my Testimonies,
Ex: 26; 2 Cro: 1,
Ier: ^3*
which J teach them;
yea their Children shall be for Eternity, and sit upon thy Throne for thee.

Because the ETERNAL has chosen Sio^,
Cro: 12, 1 K: 14.
Pe: 3.
and desired it for a HABITATION for him. This is my Rest for evermore,
De: 12,, 1 Cro: 23,
Mt: 11. Ier: 6, Heb: 12. Is: 28,
here will I dwell, because I desired it. I will mightily bless hervictuall,
Sa: 11,
Mt: 4.14, 16.
and satisfy her poor with bread, and clothe her Priests with Salvation,
Job: 38.
Mt: 11. Lu: 9.1.
and her Gracious Ones shall sound out aloude. N.
There will I make to bud a Horn unto David, Sa: 3.
Ier: 33, 30. Ez: 29, M^: 5,
and prepare a Candle for mine Anointed,
K: 11, 15,
and I will clothe his Enimyes with bashfullnes,
Job: 8. Ex: 29.39.28.
while His Garland shall flourish upon him.

CXXXIII. A Song of Gradations, of DAVID.
BEHOLD,
Can: 1.. 1 Sa: 23. Job: 36. De: 12.36.
Acts. 4.
how Pleasant and Sweet is the Dwelling of Brethren with Unity.

It is like the precious oil upon the head, Can: 1, Eccl; 7. Le: 8, 21. Ex: 29.
Cor: 2.
running down upon the beard, upon Aarons beard; that runs down upon the
hemb of his garments.


It is like the Dew of Hermon that descends upon the Hills of Sion,
Can: 4, Ios: 11, 12, 18, 1 Cr^: 15, De: 3.33. 1 K: 17.
Da: 4. Am: 9,
vvher the ETERNAL sends his BLESSING;
De: 3, 4, 32,
To: 6*
EVERLASTING LIFE.

CXXXIV. A Song of Gradations.
BEHOLD, Bless ye the ETERNAL, ye SERVANTES of the ETERNAL,
Ge: ^.
Ap: 19, Is: 26.28.66.
which stand in the House of the ETERNAL in the Nights.

Lift up your holly hands, V.H. 141.
Ex: 20. De: 5. Job: 38.
Col: 2* 1. Tim: 2.
and bless the ETERNAL.

That the ETERN: may bless thee from Sion,
He: 7.
Which is Maker of Heaven and Earth. Ge: 2.


CXXXV.
PRAISE ye the ETERN: praise the NAME of the ETERN: Praise ye SERVANTS of the
ETERNAL,
Ap: 19.
which stand in the House of the ETERNAL, and in the Courts of the House of
our GOD. Praise the ETERNAL and sing Psalms to his NAME, Sa: 23.
because it is Pleasant and Sweet.
De: 7, 14, 26.27, 32, Eccl: 2.
Mal: 3, 1 Pe: 2,
Because he chose Jacob to himself,
and Israel for his Peculiar. For I Know that the ETERNAL is great, Mal: 1:
Mt: 6:, 10. Acts: 17:, Da: 4.
and our LORD is above all Gods.
Job: 23:,
Whatsoever he pleases, the ETERNAL does in Heaven and in Earth,
in the Seas and all deeps. Pro: 25,
Ier: 10., 51.,
Raiseing clouds in the ends of the Earth,
he makes Lightnings for Rain, bringing the wind out of his Tresures. Pro:
30.



Ex: 10, 11, 12,
Which smote the first born of Egypt from man to beast, Acts: 7.
and sent vvonderfull Signs in the mids of thee,
De: 13, 3,
o Egypt, upon Pharoh and all his Servants. Ne: 9.
Which smote many Nations,
Ios: 12, 22.5.9, Nu: 4, 21,
and slew mighty Kings; Sihon King of the Emorites,
and Og King of Bashan, and all the Kingdoms of Canaan.
Iud: 5,.
And gave their Land an INHERITANCE;
an Inheritance to his People Israel. Ios: 2.10, 12, 13.
O ETERNAL thy NAME be forever, De: 2., 3., 4,, 29., 31.,
and thy MEMORIAL for all Generations, because he defends his People, Z.
Lu: 8.
and has his comfort on his Servantes.

Ex: 20:
Acts. 17. Is: 37.
The Idols of the Hethen being Silver and Gold, the work of men's hands: have
mouths and speak not, verse. 14.115.121.118.
Ap: 9:
eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, Ie: 10.
yea, there is noe breath in their mouths; Hab: 2.
So be their makers, and every one that trusts in them. O House of Israel
bless the ETERNAL, o House of Aaron bless the ETERN:
o House of Levi bless the ETERNAL, ye that fear the ETERN: bless the
ETERNAL; blessed be the ETERNAL out of Zion,
o Jnhabitantes of Jerusalem; Praise the ETERNAL.

CXXXVI.
WORSHIP the ETERNAL,


for his GOODNESS and for his Everlasting Kindenes. Worship the GOD of GODS:

for his Everlasting Kindenes. Worship the LORD of LORDS,

for his EVERLASTING KINDENES.

The only DOER of Great and mervilouse things, for his Everlasting Kindenes.

That by his UNDERSTANDING made the Heavens: for his Everlasting Kindenes.



That streched out the Earth upon the waters:

for his Everlasting Kindenes. That made the great LIGHTS: for his Everlasting
Kindenes.
The Sunn to rule the day: for his Everlasting Kindenes. The Moon and the Stars
to rule in the Night: for his Everlasting Kindenes.

Him, that smote Egypt in their firstborn:

for his Everlasting Kindenes. And brought Israel out of the mids of them: for
his Everlasting Kindenes. With a stout hand and a streched out arm:
for his Everlasting Kindenes. Him, that cutteth the Suph-Sea in parts:
for his Everlasting Kindenes. And brought Israel over in the mids thereof: for
his Everlasting Kindenes. And overwhelmed Pharoh and his host in the Suph-Sea:
for his Everlasting Kindenes. Him, that led his People in the Wilderness: for
his Everlasting Kindenes.

Him, that smote great KINGS: for his Everlasting Kindenes. And slew famous
KINGS:

for his Everlasting Kindenes.
Sihon King of the Aemorites: for his Everlasting Kindenes.
And Og King of Bashan: for his Everlasting Kindenes.
And gave their Land an INHERITANCE:

for his Everlasting Kindenes. An Inheritance to Israel his Servant: for his
Everlasting Kndenes.

Which in our Low estate remembered us:

for his Everlasting Kindenes.

And free-ed us from our Tormentours: for his Everlasting Kindenes. Him, that
gives bread to all flesh: for his Everlasting Kindenes.

Worship the MIGHTY GOD of Heaven: for his Everlasting Kindenes.

CXXXVII.
BY the Rivers side of Babel,
Act: 7,
where we sat and wept, when we remembered Zion; and upon the Willowes, Job:
40,
Is: 53, 44.
in the mids of it, we had hanged up our Harpes: when as there, our Captivers
and Inthrallers Asked us some merry Songs, Sing us some songs of Zion: How
shall we sing a SONG of the ETER:
upon a forain soil? If J forget thee, Jerusalem, let my Right hand forget,
and my Tongue cleeue to the roof of my mouth.
Job: 29.
Ez: 3.
If J remember thee not, and advance not Jerusalem, Above my cheeffest mirth.

Cor: 28.
Obad. La: 4, Ie: 4.15, Da: 1, 5, 1 Pe: 4.
Remember, o ETERN: the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem, which SAID,
Down with it, down with it, to the ground with it. o Babel, town of
destruction, Reg: 24. 2 Cor: 36,
Is: 14.13.34. Ie: 51.50. La: 3. Joel: 3. Mic: 4.
happy is he, that repayeth thee, fully, as thou have dealt with us.

Reg: 8.
Is: 13. Na: 3. Hos: 14.
Happy is he that takes thy babes, and dasheth them against the stones.

CXXXVIII. Of DAVID.

I Will worship thee with all my heart, and set thee out with Psalms, before the
GODS. I will bow down at thy Holly Temple, and worship thy NAME,
for thy LOVEING KINDENES and thy TRVTH.
Because thou have made thy SAYING great above all thy NAME.



Because thou hardest me in the day I called,

and inlargedst me with Strength in my Mind.

Let all the Kings of the Earth worship thee,
O ETERNAL, when they hear the Sayings of thy mouth;
and sing of the VVayes of the ETERN: for the Glory of the ETERNAL is great.





Because the ETERN: is high and beholds the Lowly,
and being lofty kenneth a far: If J walk in the heart of Distress,

that thou revivest me,
and set thy hand upon the face of mine Enimyes,

and with thy Right hand savest me.
The ETERNAL that did all for me, o ETERNAL,

that thy KINDENES is for ever:
forsake not thou the Works of thy hands.

CXXXIX. For the Cheeff, of David, A Psalm.
O ETERNAL, thou serchest me,


and know. Thou know my sitting down, and my riseing up,

and understand my meaning a far. Thou go round about my paths and my
couching,
and art used to all my ways. (for behold, there is not a word in my tongue, but
thou, o ETERN:

know it all) thou besiegest me behind and before, and layest thy hand
upon me. To wonderful is the knowledge for me, and so high,


that I comprehend it not. Whether shall J go from thy Spirit, and whether
shall J fly from thy Presence? If J go up to Heaven,

thou art there; if J go down to Hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the
wings of the morning,


and dwell beyond the Sea; also, thither shall thy hand lead me, and thy right
hand seize upon me.

And if J SAY,


but Darkness shall comprehend me; the Night shall be Light about me: yea,
the Darkness shall not darken from thee, and the Night shall give light like the
day, as well the Darkness as the Light.

Thou obteinedst my Reins, and coveredst me in the belly of my mother. (I
thank thee) for because J am fearfully overheeled,
and wonderful are thy WORKS which my Soul knows right well. My FASTENING is
not hid from thee,

which am wrought in Secret, and stiched under the earth.
Thine Eyes see my WINDEING up, and they wear written upon thy book, the days
they wear formed, when there was not one among them.



And to me how deer are thy thoughts, o ALMIGHTY? how mighty are the Sums
of them? If J tell them, they are more then the sand of the Sea;

All while I am awake, I am with thee. VVilt thou kill the Wicked that is
idly carried away?
thy Enimyes that stir and vex thee with wicked Imaginatio^s?
Yea, ye bloody men, depart ye from me.

Do not J hate those that hate thee,

o ETERNAL, and vex my self with those that raise themselves up against thee?
I hate them with perfect hatred, and they are to me for Enimyes.
Search me, o ALMIGHTY, and try me,

and know the Thoughts of my Heart,
and see if there be any way of Impiety in me,

and lead me the way of Eternity.

CXL. By the Cheeff, A Psalm of DAVID.
RELEASE me, o ETERN: and preserve me from all Malicious and injurious men,
which devise Mischeeff in their heart,

and meditate wars continually.


Whose tongues are as sharp as a S^rpents,

with the poison of an Asp within his lips. O ETERN: keep me from the hands
of the Wicked man, and preserve me from all Injurious ones:

Which devise to destroy my steps surely.



The Haughty ones hide a trap and snares for me, they spread a net by the way,
and set Toils for me surely. I SAY to the ETER: o my ALLMIGTY GOD,
O ETER: hear the voice of my Supplications. O LORD,
the Strenghth of my Salvation, that coverest my head in the day of Battle:

Grant not the DESIRES of the Wicked,
and content not his mind, that they be exalted surely.

O thou, my Helmet,


let the PAYNS of their own lips ouerheel them, let it cast them in the fire;


and let coals be thrown upon them, in hot coals; that they never rise
again.
That noe foul tonged man be established in the earth,

and that the Malice of the Injurious man, hunt him to Destruction. I know,


the ETERN:

will do the right Sentence of the Afflicted and needy: seeing Just and
upright men shall sit and celebrate thy NAME, and remain before thee.



CXLI. A Psalm of DAVID.
O ETERNAL, I CALL on thee,
o hasten to me, o hear my Voice, when J call unto thee. Ex: 39, 28,
Ephesians: 6.
Let my PRAYER be made burnt JNCENSE before thee, Ap: 8.5.
and the lifting up of my hands, an Evening Offering. Set, N. 4.
o ETERNAL, a wach to my mouth, K: 16. Pro: 13, 21, 5.
Da: 9. Ia: 3. Mt: 2.
to ward at the Door of my Lips.

Incline not my mind to any bad matter, to enterprise enterprises wickedly
with Molesters:
De: 2^.
Ephesians: 6.
and let not me eat of their deinty meats; Pro: 27.5.6.7.9.
He: 11,,
let the Just man beat me in Kindenes, and reproove me;
and let not my head refuse precious oil; Ex: 29.30. Le: 8.
because while they are in their Miseryes;
Job: 23,, 2 K. 12,
Da: 2. Mt: 21, To: 9. Ap: 5. Is: 8. Ier: 23. Mal: 2.
also my PRAYER shall be. That their condemners be smitten by the Rock, and
that they hear my Sayings, being sweet.
Ex: 39.28.


As of a hevver or cleever on the earth, K: 4.
our bones are scatered at the pits mouth.
Ez: 37.
But tovvard thee, o ETERN: o LORD, Pro: 7.
are mine eyes, and in thee do I rely,
Oc: 24,
Ap: 3. Is: 5^, 19 Ez: 26,
o shake not off my life, keep me from the traps they tile for me, and the
snares of Molesting men. He: 1, Mt: 13.
Let the Wicked fall into the Meashes thereof, while I escape at once.


CXLII. A Maskil of DAVID.
A Prayer,
Sa: 22.24. 1 Cro: 11. 2 Sa: 23. Ge: 38.
when he was in the Cave.


WITH my Voice J cry unto the ETERN: with my Voice I make REQVEST to the ETERN:

I power out my Complaint before him, and tell my Distress before him. When my
spirit faints on me, and they hide snares in the way that I go,

and thou know my Paths.



Look upon my right hand and see, and J have noe acquaintance; all Refuge is
perished from me, and there is none that cares for my life.

I CRY unto thee, o ETERN: and Say, O thou my RELY and PORTION in the living
world,
hearken to my Loud PRAYER, because J am exceedingly spent.

O deliver me from my Pursuers, for they are to strong for me. o bring my
Life out of Hold to worship thy NAME,

with the Just ones about me;
for thy Bou^tifullnes upon me.

CXLIII. A Psalm, of DAVID.
O ETERNAL, hear my Prayer, and hearke^ to my Supplications. And in thine
own TRVTH and Righteousness consider me. And enter not into Judgment. Sa: 26.
Ex: 28.29. Le: 8. Eccl: 7.
Ephesians: 6.
With thy Servant; for noe living creature is Just before thee.
To: 3, Gal: 3, 2,
Because the Enemy pursues my Soul, and beats down my life to the ground,
and make-eth me dwell in obscurity like them that are dead for ever. And my
spirit faints on me, Sa: 26.
La: 3.,
and my heart is wasted within me.


I remember the days of old, and Meditate of all thy Work;
Ex: 28.
I talk of the Doing of thy hands. J spread my hands unto thee, V. 63.25.
and open my mind like a thirsty land unto thee surely. Make have and consider
me, O ETERNAL, and hide not thy Face from me,
for my Spirit is spent, and I am to be compared with them that are going to
the Pit. Betimes let me hear thy LOVEING KINDENES,
Is: 30.50.
because I trust in thee; and let me know the WAY that I should go, because I
open my mind unto thee.


Deliver me from mine Enimyes, o ETERNAL,
Job: 26, Ex: 17.
my concealing is with thee. Teach me to do thy will, o thou my GOD,
Mt: 6,
by thy good Spirit, lead me in plain Ground. For thy NAMES sake, o ETERNAL,
revive me; by thy Righteousness bring my Soul out of Distress.
Cro: 12.
and in thy LOVING KINDENES dissolve thou mine Enimyes,
and destroy all them that torment my Life; for I am thy Servant.

CXLIV. Of DAVID.
BLESSED be the ETERNAL my Rock,

that makes my hands cunning for war, and my fingers for the Battle;


my KINDENES, FORTRESS, RELEEFF and RESCVER, my DEFENSE that J rely on; that
brings in command my People under me. o ETERNAL, what is wreched man,

that thou take-est Notice of him,
and make-est reckning of him? man that is like unto Vanity, and his days like
a shadow that passes by?


O ETERNAL, bow the Heavens and com down,
touch the Mountains that they smoke.
Lighten with thy Lightning and scater them, send out thine Arrows and disturb
them.

Send thy hands from an high,
rid me and deliver me from great WATERS;

from the hands of Alians.
Whose mouth speaks falsehood, and whose right hand is a right hand of wrong.
o GOD,
that I may sing a NEW SONG unto thee, and a PSALM upon the ten-stringed Viol.
Which gives SALVATION to Kings, and rids his Servant David from the hurtful
sword.

o rid me and deliver me, from the hands of Alians,
whose mouth speaks falsehood, and whose right hand is a right hand of wrong.

That our Sons may be like Plants well grown in their youth, and our
Daughters like Buttresses well carved,

of the building of the Temple.
That our Buttryes be full, containing from Meal to Meal.
That our Sheep may be come many Thousands in our streets. That our cattle
may be well lode-en,

that there be noe Robery nor running out,


nor Outcry in our open streets. Happy is the people, that it is so with,
and happy is the people, whose GOD is the ETERNAL.




CXLV. A Praise, of DAVID.
Ap: 15.
I Will extol and bless thy NAME, o my GOD, o KING, for evermore; I will daily
bless and Praise thy NAME for evermore.
Sa: 19, Ge: 14.9.
Great is the ETERNAL,
and exceedingly to be praise-ed, and of his Greatness there is noe serching. K:
7. Job: 5.28. 1 Cro: 29.
Is: 40. Lu: 8.
Let one Generation commend thy Works to another,
Mt: 5.6.
and declare thy Excellent Acts. The Majesty of the Glory of thy Worship,
and thy Wonderful Acts, I will talk of. Let them tell thy Terrible Might;
Ex: 33, 28.
Mat: 5.
and I will reckon up thy Greatness. Let them buble out the Remembrance of thy
great GOODNESS,
and sound out thy JUSTICE.

Ex: 34, N^: 14,
Ne: 1. I^n: 4, Io^l: 2. Mic: 7,
The ETERN: is Gracious, and Merciful,
Pro: 25,
and Patient, and of Great Kindenes; the ETERN: Ap: 1, 13, 14,
that is Good to all, and has Mercy upon all his Works: To: 5; 2. Coll: 3,
Ier: 9. 1 Timothy: 6. 2 Timothy: 3; Ia: 3; 5; Mt: 6.9. Zep: 2. Mt: 5; 6, 7; Lu: 6: 2 Thessalonians: 1. 1 Thessalonians: 2. Mt: 16.5. Lu: 24, 8. Ioh: 2, 13, 18, Act: 14, 28, 19 1
Cor: 4, 15. 2 Cor: 1, 6, Ap: 1, 5.
let all thy Works set thee out, o ETERN: and thy Gracious Ones bless thee;
let them tell out the Glory of thy KINGDOM, Cro: 13.
and speak of thine Excellency.
To make his Excellent Acts known to the Sons of Adam;
and the seemly Glory of his KINGDOM. Thy KINGDOM, Cro: ^9. Ne: 5.
is a KINGDOM of all Age-es,
Ex: 40.
D^: 4.9, 6, 7. Mr: 9.11.
and thine EMPIRE is in every Generation.
Mt: 6, 11, 20. Lu: 1, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, To: 14. Ga: 5. Ephesians: 3.4.5.6.
The ETERN: is an vpholder of all that are falling,
Job: 4, 22, 19, 28. Ge: 6.
and a setter upright of all that are declineing.

The eyes of all wait upon thee,
Col: 1:2. He: 12. 2 Pe: 1.
and thou give them their meat in his Season; opening thy hand and satisfying
every Living Creature freely.


Da: 9.
The ETERNAL is Just in all his Ways, and Kind in all his Works. Q. 143.
Is: 55.; Ap: 5.;
The ETERNAL is Near to them that call on him; to all,
K: 12.20.
Act. 17.20.
that call upon him Faithfully. He will do the Will of them that fear him;
and hear their Shouting and save them. The ETERN: that keeps all that love
him,
De: 10.26.
and destroys all the wicked: let my mouth speak the PRAISE of the ETERNAL;
Ge: 9,
and all flesh bless his holly NAME forevermore.

CXLVI.
PRAISE ye the ETERNAL,
my SOUL praise thou the ETERN: I will praise the ETERN:
and sing Psalms to my GOD as long as J live. Trust ye not in Prince-es,

nor in any child of man, in whom there is noe Salvation;

whose breath goes out,

and he returns to his own earth, and in that day his thoughts perish.



Happy is he,
whose Help is the GOD of Jacob, and his Hope is upon the ETERN:
his GOD: the make-er of Heaven and Earth, S. 92.72, 102,
and the Sea, and all that is in them;
And that keeps Faythfullnes for ever.
That does right the oppressed, and give bread to the Hungry; The ETERN: that
loses them that are bound.

The ETERNAL that opens the eyes of the blind,


and sets upright them that are bowed down;
the ETERNAL that loves the Just.
The ETERNAL that keeps the Strangers,
and mainteineth the Fatherles and the Widow; and over^hroweth the way of the
Wicked: The ETERNAL thy GOD, S.
o Zion reign for ever, for all Generations. The ETERNAL be praised.

CXLVII.


PRAISE ye the ETERNAL, and chaunt thou out our GOD,
because he is good and pleasant, and his PRAISE is comely. The ETERNAL that
built Jerusalem, and gathered together the Scatered of Jsrael, that heals the
broken hearted,
and binds up their sores; that Tells the Number of the Stars,
and calls the Names to them all. Great is our LORD and of great Power,
and of his Understanding there is noe declareing.

The ETERNAL that advaunceth the Lowly,

and humbles the Wicked to the ground.



Sing ye Psalms of Thanks Offering to the ETERNAL our GOD,
upon the Harp. Which Covers the Heavens with clouds,


and prepare-eth rain for the Earth.
That make-eth the Hills to Spirt out grass,
and gives the bease their food, and the young Ravens which call. He has not
delight in the Valiantnes of a Horse,

nor has liking in the Legs of a man.
The ETERNAL like-eth them that fear him, and Wait for his Kindenes: o
Jerusalem commend the ETERN:

and praise thou thy GOD, o Zion.

Because he strengthens the bars of thy Gates,


and blesses thy children within thee. and sets Peace in thy borders, and
satisfyeth thee with vvheaten flovver.
that sends his Saying to the Earth,
and his Word runs most speedily.


That gives Snow like white wool,
and scatereth hore-frost like Ashes. That casts out his hard Ice like
morsells, and who can abide for the cold thereof?
he sends out his Word,
and Thavveth them; he makes his vvinde to turn, and they drop water.
That tells his Word to Jacob, and his Prescripts and Judgments to Israel.
He has not done so to any Nation,

that they should not know his Judgments. The ETERN: be praised.

CXLVIII.
PRAISE the ETERNAL, praise the ETERNAL out of the Heavens;
Praise him in the Highthes. Praise him all his Angels:

Praise him all his Hosts. Praise him Sunn and Moon;
praise him all Stars of Light.
Praise him ye Heavens of Heavens, and ye Waters which are above the Heavens.

Let them praise the NAME of the ETERN: for he commanded and they were created.


And he made them stand for an everlasting Statute;
he gave a Prescript which should not pass.

Praise the ETERN: Things of the EARTH;

Ye great Whales and all Deepthes. Fire and Hail, and Snow and Vapors,
and vvhirlvvinde that does his Command.
The Mountains and all Hills, Fruit Trees and all Ceders, Cattle and all
Bease, Creeping things and fethered foul.

Kings of the Earth and all Nations,
Prince-es and all Iudge-es of the Earth.

Yong-men and Maids, Oldmen and Children. Let them praise the Name of the
ETERN:


because his Name only is to be exalted; and his Worship both by the Earth and
the Heavens.

Which holds up the Horn of his People, the Praise of his Gracious Ones;
of the Children of Israel, his Proper People.
The ETERNAL be praised.

CXLIX.
PRAISE the ETERNAL, sing ye a NEW SONG to the ETERN: of his PRAISE;


in the Congregation of his GRATIOVS-ONES.
Let Israel rejoice in his MAKE-ER,

and the Children of Zion triumph in their KING.

Let them praise his NAME with Pipes,


and sing Psalms to him with Tabret and Harp.


Because the ETERNAL has alikeing to his People,
and glorifyeth the lowly with SALVATION. Let the Gracious Ones triumph
Gloriously,

and Sing aloud upon their beds;
with Exaltationes of the ALL MIGHTY in their Throats, and a two edged
svvord in their hands.




For working Revenge among the Heathen,

and Chastisment among the Nations. for bindeing their Kings in Manicles,

and their Noblemen in Iron-Chaines; for fullfilling among them the SENTENCE
that is written:


He is an ornament to all his Saints. The ETERNAL be praised.

CL
PRAISE the ETERNAL, praise the ALLMIGHTY in his Sanctuary.
Praise him in the Firmament of his Strength.

Praise him for his Valiant Acts;
praise him according to his Mighty Greatness.

Praise him with the sound of the Trumpet; Praise him with the Viol and Harp.

Praise him with Taber and Pipe;

praise him with Timbrels and Fife.


Praise him with Loud Bells; praise him with loud-sounding Cymballs.
Let every breath praise the ETERNAL. The ETERNAL be praised.

ARGVMENTS UPON THE PSALMS.
PSALM I.
AS the Law is the touchstone of the lives of men: so this work of Psalms is
to bring them to it, Psalm. 26, and this Psalm the foremost to show the way.
Here the judgment and justice thereof is laid to the rule and weighed. And
seeing all that men would have is but happiness of their lives, and Eternity:
he shows, by a short description, the way to it. To avoyde the Enimyes, and
all impediments thereof, the wicked counsel of transgressers; to leave the
known way of Sin, Psa. 36, and not to skorn instruction: And this person he
makes the proud and skornfull Enemy, the Hethe^. And to have a delighte in the
law, and to meditate, and muse, and talk of it always, both for his counsel,
and his way, and to be in love with the doctrine thereof, Psalm. 26. and this is
for the person of the church, Psalm. 112. So that if you will live long, with
much happiness: this summeth up the evil that is to be shunned, as Ps. 34, and
the great good to be done, and the great peace that insueth, and the Eternal
happiness that follows, Ps. 112. which two persons are but one, because the
avoiding of the one, does the other. Therefore was that tree of life, the Law,
made so inviolable that all was upon ha^ding of and forbeara^ce; and that for
the willfulnes of nature, Ps. 36, 58. and frowardnes of conceit, as Psalm. 51.
Then if a man will attein unto eternal life: he must keep the commandments,
Ps. 15, 26. which in this work, together with the^, the Creed, and Petition of
the Church, are most sweetly and harmoniously handled, Ps. 25, according to
God his promiss to the blessed, and the goeing out of the wicked. This is the
way of Mercy which God will make known, and judgment from Com: the second.
Exodus 20. God is familiar with righteous men and regards them: but casts
away the wicked out of his sight, and takes no notice of the^, nor has any
acquanitance with them. So the Godly shall remain immovable by any tempest of
the world, and continue firm, and do good, and prosper, by the mercyes and
love of God: and the ungodly, by unconstancey, fade away, and vanish by his
judgment. And this stands for the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111.112. where
the immortality and prosperity of this tree of life is fully set out. This book
is for Genesis, the Creation of mankind, and imports the principles, and the
Grammar of the lives of men. As for the first letter Aleph, which begins the
book, and is title of the Psalm, and is so often repeated: shows, that that
letter must rule the construction. It serves for the law, instruction, and
God; the ground of all salvation. The mystery is in the Doctrine of the
Eternal, opposed to the counsel of the wicked, showing, that doctrine and
counsel is one and the same thing, Psalm. 32. this word is twice together
uttered and harped upon, for being his daily study, and exercise, so Aleph for
beginning; and Aleph for lerning, and Aleph for teacheing, being the title and
number of the Psalm: shows wholely the way of construction thereof, the often
vseing the word, Way, shows a man's way and life is one thing, which is
termed a tree for the branches of instruction and carriage. This doctrine and
Law and word of God is the way of the righteous, opposed to the way of the
wicked. The one shall be for ever explaned, but the other extinguished. The way
of the righteous is the way of the eternal, as the gate of the eternal is the
gate of the righteous, Psalm. 118. and therefore it is manifest to him, there is a
tree of knowledge which makes not happy: but a good course or study or carriage
of life and good exercise, makes happy. And thus is the whole life of man
divided in this Psalm: com ye blessed, go ye cursed, by a flat opposition
throughout. From the tree of life Genesis 3. The Genesis of this Psalm is in Alep
hand Beth, so often repeated in the first and second verses for Ab, which is
the Active conjugation, which is the singularity of doctrine, father of all: as
there is but one father of all, as God is one and therefore singular.

PSALM II.
REbellion and transgression is a most wicked sin, and Idolatry and
disobedience a child of witchcraft, which he makes to be the opposition of
the trespassers, the proud and skornfull heathen, that will none of the law of
God, and consult to break the yoke of obedience and subjection to it, for the
terror of Gods promiss, Ps. 70.110. against them. They will not lern, nor be
advised, nor instructed, nor admonished by it, which being against the decree,
and being a ridiculous husbandry of theirs, in the sight of God: he
reprooveth them for stubborn-nes, and wills, considering the power, and force
of destruction of the wrath of God for disobedience, and the happynes of all
that love the church and Anointed, and rely in it, and are not offended at it:
that they serve it, and obey him (if they be wise) with all reverence and
willingness. Lest in his anger and furious time of judgment, they be like chaff
blown quite away and perish, and all their ways com to nothing. And seeing
all is for effect of the promiss. Psalm. 149. and performance of the Law: This
Psalm together with the former, contains the sum and argument of all the
rest. as from the first com: Exodus 20. The content of which two Psalms
furnishes the whole book with life, as the blood through the body. The
Coherencey and relation between them is as the father to the son. there is none
comes except the father draws: so as the church depends upon the
Doctrine, this Psalm also depends upon the former. and is full of the terms
of it, and concludes with it. The Child is the righteousness of the church,
Psalm. 24. Abraham was father Genesis 15. and the doctrine of the Law. the
conducter. Ioh. 6. Is. 54. as Ier. 31.

For Construction: Beth, the second, is a house. The Hethen are founded, which
is a house by synecdoche, the worldly prince-es reject the principles and will
none of the religion that God offers, the instruction and Edification of the
House and family of Jacob, from Jasar twice: by the multitude of Affixes,
Combination or building. God dwells in heaven, Tsion is his holy hill, and
the church shall hold the inheritance of all the world, and the whole work is
instruction or destruction, as of a house.

The Genesis or grammar, is signified by the word Son, twice vse-ed for Binjan
a conjugation, the Hethens cohering by the multitude of affixes for
combination. For the Active conjugation with the Hebrew, is called a father,
and the Passive is called a son. for hence, both Father and Son may well be
termed the word, and God, and everlasting Life, Ioh. 1. All kinds rise out of
propertyes: so rises a certain holiness out of the Letter, which make-eth this
kind of father and son out of the word.

PSALM. III.
AS greatness gets place: so here, David's greatest affliction being the
cross of his sonns rebellion, is put first, that when as his adversaryes were
many and his perplexity great by means of Saul, yet they never deemed him
helples and comfortless and in the way of desperation, till his own and his
only beloved son riseeth against him; and in this case they presumed there was
no salvation for him, and that he could not now be saved or any way escape,
seeing his Enimyes were so nigh him, but haueing his whole rely upon God, he
is not afraid of any multitude, nor the neernes of any danger. because he is
sure of the promiss, that God will bless his people, and save them, and beat
their Ennmyes on the cheek and smite out their backbiteing teeth, out of their
cheeks, while he takes his natural rest, so that no persecution can prevail
aginst the Godly, for their Salvation is out of sight of the wicked, upon which
word the whole Construction runs according to the number and signification
of the term Ghimel the Name of the third letter, which is Retribution, Benefit
or reward. Likewise all kind of safeguard is raised from hence, that he is
defended and Justified, upheld and maintained and glorified. he is heard and
accepted when he calls. And both up and down sleeping and wakeing he is
ever sustained. and his Enimyes are withstood, and are to be offended and
plagued for him. and this is the blessing that he is grace-ed withal, by his
prayer and request to God. the trebleing of the words show the intent.

The Genesis is the plural number in Grammar called in Hebrew leshon rabbim.
mentioned by treble admiration of the multitude of his Enimyes, and also his
defyance of them, though they far exceeded, and also his confidence in this
grace of God and blessing, which he finds all manner of security and all
kind of salvation from him, which is righteousness and everlasting life, ps.
24, 127, 133. etc. Genesis 15.

PSALM. IV.
Righteousness and Justice is his God, as Psa. 109, and his glory is his Law,
and his cheeff respect is the light thereof, Psalm 92, 93. from whence is all
his comfort, and deliverance, and joy of heart and peace and secureity. Ps. 21.
and from hence he looks for releeff in all distress, and is sure to be
heard, when he calls, as Ps: 50, 91. and concealed and glorified. therefore
he reprooveth their reprocheing of him with the superstitious vanities of
their religion and falls God-heads, willing them not to offend in any such
commotion against him, but to be contented, quietly upon their beds, heartily to
sacrifice, the Sacrifices of Righteousness unto God, and clear themselves before
him, as Ps: 84. and then to trust in him for salvation. seeing the resistance
heerof is reprobation, as in the diverse oblations of Cain and Abel. From the
one with a great deal of stir and fals-hood: from the other, quiet Innocencey
of Confession upon his bed, and uprightenes, as an evening offering without
sin, Ps, 141. being led by the law according to the words, most
conveniently agreeing. Genes: 4.

For Construction; according to the fowerth letter, which signifies a door,
he mentions all along many kinds and properties of doors: that he would
open the door of instruction, by the lifting up of the light of his
countenance* and keeping in security: that he will widen to him in distress:
the Lord will hear him: the wicked open their mouths to his reproach in lies
and vanities: the Lord will shut him within the veil to him self; he
commands them to their chambers, and to silence and to shut their mouths:
and that the Eternal keeps the house safe: and makes us sleep secure, and
he shuts the door. From Door the opening and shutting and keeping is the
Mystery. so righteousness is the door, ps: 118. and stands for all sacrifice,
as the door of Faith, and all sacrifice must be at the door, Genes: 3.

The Genesis is that part of Grammar called, biclam. to wit, four letters.
b.c.l.m. by which the gerunds are performed. being added to the Infinitive at
the beginning, intended in the words Chebhodhi le climmah in reproach of my
Glory, which was all the practice of the wicked: and his correction of them,
that they would be silent, and thinck nothing but right in their hearts upon
their beds, by the words, bilbhabhchem al mishcabhchem. where the letters biclam
are again repeated to assure you. The third Psalm showed all the kinds of
Salvation: so this psalm, the way.

PSALM. V.
IF any man seems religious and refraineth not his tongue but deceives his
heart: that man's religion is vain. The like may be said of other parts and
affections. Now because the wicked and mischeevous men have no dwellings nor
habitation with God, and are marked to be cast out of doors, as boasters,
molestors, and vexers; liars, murderers and deceivers: which can not inherit
the kingdom of God: he early, ernestly and duly seeks the same and the
righteousness thereof, for his Guide and protection and to explane his way, as an
Enemy to all transgression and hypocrisy; and prays, that (for dissembling)
his enimyes may be faulty, as Psalm. 109. and Ashamed in all their ways, and
fail of their purposes; for rebelling against God and their own hearts: and
that he and all that love his name, may triumph to see the righteous, how
graciously he is protected, blessed and defended for ever, and this according
to the Sin offering lyeing at the door, which is the resort of the Godly; for
a morning prayer, that as the last Psalm teaches how to go to bed: so this
same, how to rise, from Gen 4, also. The fifth, and the letter He, which is
behold as He Jedignah, and signified in words of all kind of beholding. Lead
me by thy righteousness, and direct me in thy ways: and in the negative or
contrary, he has no pleasure in the wicked; they shall not dwell with him,
they shall not be in his presence; he hates them and lotheth them, Ps. 101.
and loses and destroys them: forsakes them and scatters and destroys
them; the corrupt and hidden subtilty and rebellion against God can not be
seen, and for their flattery by Salomons rule, their childrens eyes should be
put out, to hearken, to look abroad, to com in his house; to do worship as his
servant in his Temple; Gods protection and covering of him, with a shield of
grace which is faith and is for the mystery of construction in direct and
opposite imagination. This for presence to behold and see, Ps. 101. for
presenting his oblation and morning prayer which he would have marked by the
letter and term He, to say lo, behold, and by the presence of God and
approaching of the Godly also.

The Genesis is he Iedignah a letter of denotation, whereby he prays for
right direction, and a plain way, because there is no certainty in his enimyes
mouths: that can not be known, by means of dessembling, making themselves
more then treaspassers, rebelling against all truth: also by the notable
triumphing for the wonderful favor, and admirable blessing and salvation upon
the righteous, for degrees of Joy, expressed in sundry words; and also of
grace.

PSALM VI.
THe whole tenor of his life being just, now the Prophet has made Justice his
God, Ps. 4. and righteousness his King and God, Ps. 5. for his whole trust and
comfort, safe conduct and protection: according to the honorable way propounded
in the argument, Ps. 1.2. which is a private way of salvation that the wicked
can not be ware of, nor acquainted with, Ps. 3. he means, well to show the
same, in making it the tenor and conclusion of all the book, and of every
Psalm contained in it, for a perpetual rule of necessity: the band of
construction, and the light of the mood and meaning. And according to the
definition of Justice, which is to give every man his due: to pay all men
according to their work and deserving, as Ps. 62. and to requite them with the
measure that proceeds from them: he now feeling the terror that is Enimyes
have caused: and the trouble in his mind, by their vexation: can well tell,
what to ask of God, justly to fall upon them. And as he feels the wrath of
hell, and snares of death, that draw men into their graves, Ps. 18.55. by a
wasteing consumption of the flesh; throughout, his body: he prays for his
own deliverance out of this burning choler, which he calls the wrath of God;
by his mercys in due time, Ps. 13.30. and that his enimyes may not see his
destruction, Ps 8.25. which they wish: And as it has been a long threatening of
death which he indure-ed: so that they themselves may be, thoroughly
terrifyed, and utterly confounded with horror, and suddenly ashamed and
astonyed, to see his acceptance and recovery, Ps. 41. And this from thanks and
peace offering and sacrifice of remembrance, Lev, 3.7. for Gods mercy upon true
penitencey and confession, which Death and the pit can not perform. But is
here expressed by this his terror and bashfulnes even to consumption. Like the
falling down of the countenance of Cain, by the words of terror and bashfulnes
repeared, which thing the very number of the Psalm, the letter Van does
signify; which also signifies a hook or crook. So, that he would not lay hold
on him, and seize on him in his anger, but pitifully, and gentle-ly; because
he is weak and so terrifyed soul and body, by his sore hand so long upon him:
and that therefore he would heal him of all, and releas him and let him go,
rather then destroy him; and save him from the grave, from whence, there is noe
redemption not fetching again. His sighs fetch tears, and his tears pull out
his eyes, by the provocation of his afflictors. Hearing and receiving, his
request, and prayer, and bashfulnes, and terror of the enemy to draw them back:
is all the mystery of the construction.

The Genesis is Vau hippuc in grammar, for changeing the times that make-eth
the time past, the time to come and also the contrary, being joined to the
one, it makes the other, and therefore is called Vau, the contrary, or Vau the
changeable or conversive. Gods angry correction by David his enemies, and his
terror and indignation has thoroughly translated him and changed him; therefore
he would an utter confusion and alteraion of their estate: which is seen, by
the coming of the same words on both sides, first on his part, and after for
his enimyes, and also doubled in either place, to make them markable; for such
passions turn men again, and changes and alters them, by a neat resemblance.

PSALM VII.
ALL a man's Glory is his life, and all his brightenes is the uprightnes thereof,
which was excellent in David, and heerby, he shine-ed before all men, as Ps.
132, Therefore he makes Justice his rule, and his rule, his sovereign lord;
and his King, his God and religion; by all allegiance. Heerin he trusts for
all his secureity (in his greatest affliction and persecution) for deliverance,
for the pureity and integrity of his mind, and syncerity of his heart; against
which, if he has varyed: he considers and craveth the judgment due
without favor, if he be guilty of the imputation, and wrong: as to repay his
foes or be revengefull upon his causeles enimyes, as in case of Saul and
Absalom impute-ed by Shemei: that his glory may cease, and his life be
abase-ed, and all his estimation com to nothing. Cruel and deadly weapons are
provide-ed for cruel persecutors, while they plott and conceive and work
destruction by subtle dissembling and fals-hood: their own plots and pitts
catch the^, and the cruel strokes of underminers bring the earth upon them.
And because such was the end and judgment of his enimyes, the wicked, that in
malice still work their own destruction: he thanketh God for his justice, and
commends the calling upon his name.

The Construction is in clearing himself of revenge, because it belongs to God
only, and of the sevenfold judgment of God, Genesis 4. according to the figure
of seven the number of the Psalm, the letter Zain, due upon persecutors, he
shows also the way of his judgment, as all Gods words are judgment, Deuteronomy.
33.

The Genesis is in Pagnal, a part of speech, which is to work: for all a man's
work brings judgment, Eccl. 11. which thing will plainly appeer, if the
words of persecution, deliverance, work and judgment be considered, with the
repetition and declination of them; for all is but the work of man and the work
of God, and the end of both.

PSALM VIII.
Because all Gods service is against his Enimyes, and all his Doctrine for the
Salvation of his people: which he has made, a statute for Jacob, and an
everlasting rule for Israel, Psalm. 80. to bind him by the law of Justice (as
in these former Psalms) which David makes his God, Psalm. 4. and that the very
name heerof is a deadly weapon against Satan and all afflictors, and the
calling upon God, the most sovereign safeguard of the church, as Ps. 7. which
so commends it: when he brings up his children in it, and teaches them
this rule in their ABCes, as in Ps. 25.34.37.111.112.119.145. and for the
letters, in the rest, even through the book: to show, that the workers of
wrong, work their own destruction, and this is the Grammatical lerning that
he has trained his church up, in, to make them skillfull in their war, and
their fingers cunning to the battle against his Enimyes. He speaks to the
former; by Admiration heerof, so keeping the story of the persecution, all
along with the means of deliverance; he steppeth from Psalm to Psalm. And
now, he admire-eth the noblenes of his Name, for the boldness of Gods children
by their faith and confidence, which he has founded upon the righteousness
thereof, as on a Rock: and the perfection of Infants in the law, and their
strength against their Enimyes, as was that of David in his youth, Ps. 119. M.
and the pre-eminence of wretched and sorrowful Man, and the great grace of God
upon him, above more bewtifull creatures, being preferred to the dominion and
most glorious Lordship of all the creation. Making him heerby next to God in
glory and worship, and able to assuage the mightyest Enimyes Ps. 11.16.25. By
walking the Sea, Ps. 65.77. From the calling upon God in the Days of Enosh
Genesis 4. Ps. 116.118. For the strength of Salvation. And this is the weapon
David uses against Goliath, when he plays upon that Instrument of Gath, the
great Goliath of Adversity, and Captivity of Phelistia.

The construction is in the term Heth, for the eigtth letter, and number of the
Psalm, which signifies subjection, and awe of all creatures unto Man, in
Shem, a nown, another part of speech in hebrew.

The Genesis is his Name, the Excellency whereof is pointed at, in the first and
last verses, also in the end of the 7. And beginning of the 9. For the nown and
name set upon all creatures, in heaven and earth. Gen: 2. and the strength of
lerning in the Elements, to command them.

PSALM IX.
POverty says Solomon in his Parables, comes like an armed man, and as it is
a terrible thing: so the affliction of the church and the defendour and their
greevous adversity, persecution and captivity, is well here resembled by the
story and person of Goliath, and his death. Who coming with all the odds in the
world for stature, years and weapons, whereby he seemed invincible, yea, even
as matchless as death it self, so that the state of the church, and David
himself, now being at deaths door with the terror of their own affliction:
and having noe other weapons then the Law, and five books of Moses, and their
confidence in the righteousness thereof, as their God: and the calling upon his
name for his defense: and the preaching thereof, as the five smooth stones out
of the river: which he had in the budget of his bosom, and slung out of his
mouth, as Ps. 40. and in the name of this God of hosts, of Israel, he sets
out against the Giant (there being no odds against God) and slew him, and
rather (as men say) slew the divill: for this victory he commends the
Justice of Gods Judgment, and chaunteth out of his invincible Name and service
of him, according to the former Psalm. The Justice heerof is, as they the
Phelistines pretended Terror: that they now meet with their match, and are
knocked in the head by the Prophet, that fears them by the word of God, as
Ps^ 56. that fears not the face of Man. And this is terror for terror, that
man should not presume, with might to oppress, seeing there is no prevailing
against God. And that the hethen and all earthly men should know, and feel
their own thraldom and wretchedness, by a work of their own hands. and this
for the person of Enosh, for a sorow-full time. Genesis 4. likewise a
Thanks-giveing, upon the death of that proud and mighty champion, and Gods
Judgment upon him.

The letter Tet does signifye filthy dirt and dust of the street or of the
floor: and Teta is also to sweep away. Heerto is resembled the corruption of
man's ways Gen; 6. and the sweeping them away by the deluge and by all manner of
sweeping and swift condemnation of the Law, wherein God does reign, and has
his Throne, Ps: 29. And such is the Judgment of God that teaches the wicked
their Lesson, and saves the Just, Genesis 6.7. the same word that drowneth the
one, is an Ark for the other.

The Genesis. is Millah, the other part of speech in hebrew, called the word,
or the particle, being neither nown nor Verb. And for to signyfye so much, he
brings all the Abce double, in two verses. in the words: the Hethen are
sunk, etc. which words beginn with Tet, because the letters are members of the
word, and of the Ark of Salvation called Tebhah. And thus is the wickeds
Judgment from God, most Just. They are drowned in their own corruption. Only
the letters Tsade and Aleph, which make Tse, exi, for exception or Tse:
excretum, are not at all mentioned among them. Because these letters make, go
out, of the Ark: they are left out of the Ark: that is the Abce. Genesis 8.

PSALM X.
EVery prevailing is a Giant, and every overcomming, a man of a great stature,
and every Captivity, a Goliath. When the wicked get the upper hand, and brag of
their wills and their hearts desire, and stand at defiance, like the Phelistins,
by the mouth of Goliath: then the world goes hard, and it is a sore and a
painful time, and the people of God are in a sorrowful case. So now, they
being wonderfully dejected terryfyed and daunted, and taking themselves
almost forsaken: call upon God (their fortress, as Ps. 9.) as if he were now
out of hearing, and out of sight also.

And because they need incouragemant out of the word; their request to God is,
that their Enimyes may be overreached, and taken in their own reaches, and
drawn with the nets of their wicked thoughts, seeing they have no thought of
God, but blaspheme all parts of his name; thinking to destroy the poor
unregarded, and to slay the innocent and harmless, in secret, and to draw them
by heaps, by their terror and deceit, against the Judgment and power of God.
For pride of their prosperity, they can not see God, nor his determination: so
that as he lies in secret; Gods purpose may be ever unknown to them; and
seeing wickedness, deceit and terror is all his power: that God would search it
all out, and break his malicious arm, and help the poor that rely on him. And
as God abides not the Hethen in his land: so that he would listen, and grant
the request of the meek, that they may enjoy their possession according to the
Promiss, and to make the^ stout and courageous; and to defend the poor and
co^trite Orphans, that the earthly men be no more a terror to the^. Prosperity
makes the^ proud, and pride makes them without judgment, and so, they
blaspheme that part of his Name. Besides, for Gods patience, they question his
power, and blaspheme an other part of his Name. And also thirdly, presume
against the everlasting Justice of God, that condemns all the hethen, and
expels them out of the inheritance of the Lords Dominions, as Ps. 2.114.
that here he would answer them with his word, and put a good courage in their
hearts, against all these; that no cowardice or terror assail them any more.

Construction. Iod, the tenth, is a hand. The hand of the wicked and the hand
of God contains all. The wickeds hand is mentioned in reckoning all kind of
corruption of man, Genesis 6. and excess of wickedness: in thought, in word, and in
their ways. Gods hand is an utter destruction of them, and a revenge of wrong,
and releeff of the oppressed, according to Ps. 9. There is nothing but ill in
the arm of the wicked: and his confidence is to remain still, because he is,
in no ill: he prays that God would break this Arm of his, by findeing out
the ill that is in him, to wit, rang in rashang, ill in the term of a wicked
man.

The Genesis, is in Iod Gentile, the nations feel the judgment of God, and
are wipe-ed clean out of his land for ever, according to the work of their own
hands, Ps. 9. For as the ninth handled the judge and judgment: so this Psalm
handles the Cause, coheering thereunto, and belonging to the same.

PSALM XI.
HVmility and innocence makes men bold, and this makes the poor to leave
themselves upon the providence of God in all distress, in the last Psalm. If
men be but a little tried, how happy are they if they trust in God, and rely on
him, Ps. 2. and what a defense is he to all that rely on him, as Ps. 18. And
this makes David a most resolute man, that how soever they seek to terrify
him, with the wicked against him, and preparation and readynes of expedition
and secrecy against upright me^, to destroy and overthrow all good indevours of
the^: and will have him to fly and secure him by the hills, as birds do, and
like unto Lot in distress, yet being sure, that the judge of all the world
will do right, his whole rely is on God; who in his holy temple and the Sacred
Scriptures, well sees the dealing, and has experience of all men. And because
he approoveth the just and detesteth the injurious; the wicked shall taste the
cup of his wrath, and the just God, that loves uprightnes, will regard him. He
thus relyeth upon his approbation by the word of God, and the condemnation of
his pursuers, by the Terms of just and wicked men; and will not hearken to
other refuge, as Ps. 75. after the Story of wicked Sodom and just Lot, Genesis 19.

Construction. Iadah, is to cast: or shoot, and Aleph is instruction, the
wicked shoots at all uprightnes and oppugneth learning, to destroy it, and
God casts snares and fire and brimstone at him, the wicked envyeth the just,
but God regards him, by Gods eyes and affection and action, is meant kinds
of casting.

The Genesis is the equal division of the 22 letters into radicalls and
servils, the radicalls are in these: Ch, t, S, ph, r, G, z, ng, Ts, d, q, which
are the groundwork and m, sh, h, u, C, l, b, A, I, th, n, in which are the
ferviles. These are allotted for slavery, captivity and storms of disturbance;
for desturbing, like the wicked and injurious: when God has the just always
in his eyes, which are the fundamental Radicals.

PSALM. XII.
THe true way of Godlynes is Grace and truth, kindenes and faythfullnes, faith
and love, as Ps. 25. which is the life of a just man, the Soul of the law and
foundation of the church; which flesh and blood can not reveal or make visible
to the eyes of man. Now in time of Lot, when in a city was not a just family;
no, not ten just persons could be found to redeem it, for the abundance of
iniquity and Dominion of Sin that reigned among them: he asscribe-eth it
wholely to base people in authority; that are full of flattery, bragging, pride
and dissembling, of willful riot and churlishnes, that will abide no
instruction, that have no gentleness or faythfullnes or honesty in them: and
this he makes also a sorrowful and a greevous time, and a most improsperous
season for good men: that he cries, God help, as if they were all gone, and
eaten out by devourers, Ps. 14. Now because God has promissed to save the
church from all kind of conspiracy, spoil and persecution, and to hear their
cry: and that his word is thoroughly tried and found never to fail, but is
above all his service, Ps 138. and whatsoever he says, that comes to pass,
and is made good and confirmed: he prays God to preserve the faithful and
the meek, from the children of this world. And for the pureness and approvednes
of this word, as Ps. 119. is: that he would cut of all flattering, and
dissembling-hollow-harted worldlings, and wicked men, that thus rise and
conspire against the meek.

Construction. The letters are to weep, or houl, and accordingly the time is
lamented and the poor cry: when nothing but cruelty and pride and falsehood
reigns.

The Genesis is Moshe ve Caleb, seven of the servile letters, when no such as
Moses for meeknes, nor Caleb for fidelity, can be found. But cruelty, and
pride, and falsehood is the property of slaves, especially in authority, being
weighed, numbered and divided.

PSALM XIII.
COuld ye not watch with me one hour? Me^ destitute of the Law and
understanding thereof, have cold and heavy hearts; and are so much troubled in
adversity, with fainting and drowzines: that they will not only forsake their
friends; but eve^ themselves also (if it were possible) without pursueing, in a
little extremity. David, by looseing the way of God, often loses his courage,
loses the feeld and flies, and is overcom and ashamed, and he is in great
sorrow and distress. God is angry with him, the Scriptures turn away their
face, they will not abide him, because he has neglected them, and cast his
words behind him, as Ps. 50. they think not on him, they care not for him,
they neither esteem him nor succor him. The waters thereof bear him not, but
he sinketh when he walks upon them. Now because this is a persecution of
ignorance, and a distreess of negligence, he prays for Gods loveing
countenance again toward him; his comfort and succor and repairer of him, as
Ps. 51. that as the eye is the light of the body, and the pureness of the
Commandment of God gives light to the eye, Ps. 19. so that God would instruct
him in the pureity, simplicity and singular cleernes of the Law, to save him.
Lest he should fall a sleep in sensuality, and dye in trouble, and perish
immortally by tentatio^. While his afflictors vaunt greatly and rejoice of
their prevailing; and his fall by them: that his heart may confidently rejoice
in the wonted way of his salvation, and he may sing of Gods grace and loveing
kindenes that has don so much for him. And so, as light delivers out of
Darkness, Ps. 97.36. So, out of his intolerable greeff, and sorrow; he calls
for the compassion of his God, the eternal, trusting wholely upon his grace
and loveing kindenes to revive him.

Construction. Jag, the letters 13. are to greeve, he complains of his
greeff in all kinds, and desires to be eased, that his enimyes may not
rejoice, and he may sing, for the goodness of God unto him.

The Genesis is Ethan, A, I, Th and N, the declineing of the future tens in the
beginning of the word, as in the first letters of the four first words, and
the four admirations together show. Ethan, signifies strong and hard, Ier. 5.
such as was the hand of his enimyes upon him.

PSALM. XIV.
THe hearts of men are full of evil and a general madness sweyes them, while
they live. By their works you shall know them. Lay them to the Law, Ps. 15.
and where is one good or kind or faithful man, Ps. 12? Bring them to the word,
Ioh. 1. and do they not all stink and favor of corruption, for ill dealing?
show them the Scriptures, and consider the body of them, and go they not clean
contrary, and turn quite an other way? do they not al rebel abominably in
willfullnes, as if there were neither God nor any opinion of goodness among them?
have they not vain imaginations? are not their foolish hearts full of darkness,
when they call not upon God, nor seek after him, nor any behavior of Godlynes?
Now how are the holy people of God spoiled, as Ps. 12? And the whole church
eaten out with profane-nes, devoured and consume-ed with idolatrous contempt
and reproach, by their captivers and molesters, Ps. 79? when the Fear that
they fear and the God that they reverence and worship; in the generation of the
Just: the poor is made to distrust, and to be abashed of their relying on him,
Ps. 1. for suffering of so great reproach? That a man would think, there were no
God that regarded them. So complaining of the general corruption of man, and of
the greevous calamity of the church, under the Hethen that profess not God, as
Ps. 74.79. for that it freats them to death, being almost in despair: he
prays for deliverance, and a return of them from captivity, to praise God and
rejoice, and be merry again in Sion; their glory, their secureity, confidence
and Salvation, Ps. 53.56.

Construction: Iad, the letters that signify a hand, are here taken for work
and also for counsel, which two kinds runn through the Psalm, to the handy
work of captivity. Leading away and bringing again, arguing still ab effectu:
denying God by their deeds, either idle or doing wrong.

The Genesis, is in the 4 quiescents and idle letters with the hebrews, called
E he vi, and Grammarians, the sonns of Noah, or children of rest, which because
they are the letters of the Name of God and are not pronownceed: they are said
not to call upon God, and to deny God: in the words Jehovah lo quaraow: as the
Athists, that will have none of his wisdom, nor any such understanding: mark
the four Jehovahs and the four Elohims, mark the four eins, for a quiescent
Iod. For being idle and doing no good, mark the verse. all are gone away, etc.
where al four are mentioned, mark fear, for one of the 4, Elohims, as Ps. 53.
and conclude that the mystery is in Jehovah, and so in Ehevi, as before.

PSALM XV.
THou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. How shall a yongman keep clean his way, Ps.
119. b? what way shall he take for eternal life? How shall he save himself
that he fall not, and that his enimyes prevail not over him, as Psalm. 13.
seeing the Godly are so few, and good men so rare, Psalm. 12.14? where is the
rout and assembly of the^? are they known by their dwelling or by their guests?
Surely the tabernacles of God are with men, and he suppeth, and dine-eth, and
sojourneth, and dwells with whom he like-eth, and so dwell they invisiblely
with him. And this tabernacle of God and Mount of holiness, is nothing but the
habitation of Godlynes in man, after they once receive him; they dwell with
God, who has him in their minds: and God dwells with the^ that love him and
keep his commandments, and their ways are unreproovable. And for this, he
wondereth that there is any way to it, or that any man can ascend to it, seeing
the way is so strait and strict that leads unto life, and the entrance
therinto so hard to find. What things are to be don, who is the child of
Godlynes, and who shall dwell with God and live perpetually, and what kind of
church shall never be moved. So he describe-eth the church of God by the
statutes thereof, with a promiss of eternity to the performers, Ps. 133. who
they are and the greatness of their glory, is expressed over and above in the 24
Psalm, by the royallty of their entertainment, and also as Psalm 101. The
door of righteousness, Ps. 118. and also by the fifteen Psalms of Ascensions
thither, Ps. 120, etc. called the Psalms of degrees. This is the way of God
and of the just, Ps. 25. which shall not perish, Ps. 1. and the wise man's
profound and sure building, upon a rock, that abides all wether against the
sandy shallownes of the wicked, in the former, Psalm 14.9. and 1. which the
flood comes and sweepeth clean away, Genesis 6.7. For the Ark and Noah's walking
with God, in thought, word, and deed: an upright man. This is, the work of
salvation which must be wrought for the inheritance of eternal life.

Construction: The letters Tau, that signify to spinn, as there is a thread of
life: do here import extortion, oppression and detraction. For these all be
proper, by wringing and wresting from his neighbor, to diminish him. Beside,
by the letters apart, Tet, is the conte^ptible dust of the floor, rejected of
all; and Vau is the love of the Godly, and hooking, by wrong giving and
receiving.

The Genesis is the tabernacle, which is the Ark, and that the word, that
rested upon the hills of Ararat, and he that shall abide in it, is Noah, to
wit, the quiescent or some letter of grammar; while he is just and upright,
Genesis 6. to his neighbor or next letter, for so long shall a letter abide as
his fellow can endure him, and if his behavior fail: he is either changed or
put clean out, but with some token of corruption and deficiencey; and this you
may well see in the two defective words, Natha^ and Laquah where, in declineing
neither N, nor L. can abide for offending. By 3 doings and 3 refreinings,
twice the like.

PSALM. XVI.
Where a man's treasure is there is his heart, and what is a man's God but his
cheeff delight, Ps. 4? And what pleasure is there like to salvation? and where
is the fullnes of Joy, but the redemption from Ignorance; the light and
knowledge and perfection in the Law of God? a way of a virtuous life without
corruption, Psalm. 14.15. a way of Immortality, a way not of the flesh, but of
the Spirit, a way, not of worldly walking, but of Godly Carriage, a liveing,
true and everlasting way, as ps: 1. a most pure and clean way, both for
reverence and performance ps: 19? This is inward and outward Justice,
consisting in says and love ps: 25; the Grace and Truth of the Gospel, for
charitablenes of intention and faythfullnes of performance in every work. Now
because this Righteousness is the Sacrifice that is to be sacrifice-ed, and the
Justification of a man that will be saved, Ps: 4; and not any outward oblation:
and because it can double the kings days, and preserve him that relyeth thereon,
as Psalm. 61. and that all David's nightly consultation, and his innermost Joy,
and even his reins delight in the Instruction of it: and that God is all his
good; his part, his share, his cup, his Lot and measures of Inheritance, and
all most goodly to him, in his leviticall blessing: and that all his birth,
and parentage, and beginning and end of days is the study of the word of God
(like Melchisedek) to keep him from falling as Ps. 15: and being sure by these
graces, he shall not dye till he be perfect in the way of life, and see the
full Joy and pleasures of the word, and sweet exposition thereof, by the
Ministry: the Kingdom of Heaven, a celestial government, and Joy of the holy
Ghost; ps. 49.27: he is made exceeding merry therewith; and accounting all
other invocation or rely intolerable: he will have all his wealth and good,
and delight, and pleasure whatsoever, to be nothing, in respect of God and this
his Name, and way of Salvation, Ps. 4. And because his whole relyeing is upon
God, and he is a Savior of all them that rely on him, Ps. 17. and this is
all his way of Salvation; and because he will have no other God, nor worship
nor esteem any thing in the world but him: he prays to be preserved by him.
And this from preserving the tree of Life Genesis 3. And so purgeing himself of
all idolatry, vain triumphing, pride, glory and reioyceing in worldly things,
and relying whole-ly upon God, and making divinity his portion, and is
counseled by his word, and prefers his Law, Ps. 127. he is greatly
cheered, and is thoroughly confident of all preservation, and of a long and
pleasant life, that is ever before God, propounded by his Ministry, called his
right hand, in his church. as Psalm 73.110.

Construction. The two letters pointeing at Jehovah, show absteining from all
strange Gods; and also his Joy in the Ministry. he takes Iad a hand, in all
his senses, for might wealth, Sorrow, place, lot or quarter of inheritance: to
counsel, teach and maintein; and the right hand for promotion. Vau is taken
privative, with negative signs, that though the signification be craveing as
is the term hook or crook: yet by construction, it is said as well to leave, and
let go, as to hold; as both are the propertyes of a hand also.

Genesis: The kinds of quiescents are many, as wealth, and pleasure, and
delight, and Joys, and counsel and instruction from God. They are for his
hearts ease, like a Marriage day: Gods word gives him all content by the
Ministry, his right hand, in which words the Name of the Eternal so sweetly
rests, and that without deficiencey. For he refuses all the contrary, with
note of deficients as Iod in Iissarowni and Nun thrice with bal. And thus by
avoiding of Defection he mainteineth the Quiescents.

PSALM XVII.
LAy up for your selves treasure in heaven, where neither moth nor canket??
corrupts, nor thieves break through and steal. David observes from Samuel,
that moth-eaten and rusty imagination of Saul; how he robs God of his honor
by his disobedience, and the worm of his corrupt conceit, that all together
neglect his commandment and break it, to have his own will and pleasure
fullfilled, for some respect that he graved to himself, and worshipped: by his
estimation of the goodly things of the world, Princees and fatlings. Which
because it is rebellious transgression, and a wilful offense against the Law
of God, not to obey the word of his mouth: but to be bewitched with his
pleasure, and to make an Idol of his will: and marking this well: he excuseeth
himself of counterfeiting in his prayer, or dissembling in his request unto
God, but that all is according to justice and equity; and that he will be
tried by God that sees all. Therefore he requesteth ernestly, that his steps
may be kept still in the Law of righteousness, Ps. 16. that his feet slip not
into the ways of them that fall, and that he follow not a king, or please a
multitude in doing of evil: and for this, he justly prays unto him that is
savior of all (by his ministry) that rely on him, Ps. 18. and he having
repose-ed all his treasure in God, and his undefiled way of righteousness, Ps.
16. that he will hide his grace-es and favors from them that rise against
him, and that he will keep him as watchfully, as the eyelid saves the sleepy
eye, Ps. 77. and protect him and save him, by his truth, called the shadow of
his wings, Ps. 91. from all his wicked enimyes that spoil him, Ps. 12. and his
ill wishers, that on every side lay siege for his life, that have greasy
thoughts and proud words: and watch as greedily and as privily to overthrow
him, as a lion for prey. Now, his life being in hazard thus among his
opposits, that have their bellyes full of the treasure and blessings of this
life; and spare for their children after them; that have their portion and
delight therein, that are their own carvers in this world, and worship the work
of their own hands, and their wicked inventions; because they be enimyes of
God; that with his sword and his power, he would stand before him, make them
stoop, beat him down, and deliver him; seeing when he awakes and beholdes in
righteousness, but the image of Gods Law, called his countenance, and has a
perfect understanding thereof: he has enough and is satisfied, and has all
he looks for, with full contentment.

Construction: It begins with the letter Zain, to hear, and therefore has all
the words of that sense coming together in diverse places. The other letter
Iod, or Iad, a hand reaches all over the Psalm, in the attributes, ways and
exploites of the wicked, and also salvation by Gods right hand, and by his
sword and his hand from all such, both the letters make Iez to sprinkle, for
the proud aspersion of the wicked.

Genesis. For defectives he shows his own syncerity that his mouth and his
heart agrees, and he abandoneth the way of ravenous incrocheing and defective
men; which he makes the most prosperous in this life, which does most spoil.
The token of deficients bal, thrice repeated, mortal men twice. They are
counted dead men and deficient that have their part only in this life. The
words of deficiency, that in mind cast about to destroy, etc. His
quiesciencey is in the image of God.

PSALM XVIII.
THe full assureance of understanding and the riches thereof, is to know the
Mystery of God the father and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Thou art my beloved son, in thee I am well pleased, in
the last Psalm 17. he prays heartily for the heavenly light and revelatio^
heerof, and in this Psalm he sees the effect of his prayer. The heavens
open, the spirit of meeknes descends after affliction, and he becomes
wise, Psalm. 119. th, after a sea of troubles, when he is baptized and have
passed through fire and water, and co^ to refreshing, Ps. 66. and seeing he is
saveed, for putting all manner of rely and confidence in God, and God heard
him, and is angry with his enimyes, and comes with a mighty rage and terror,
secrecy and swiftnes against them: and brings him out of affliction, and
releaseth him, to show his love unto him: and that he should not call upon God
in vain that keeps his ways: but that he should be rewarded according to
his righteousness, and his innocence before him; dealing still frowardly with
his enimyes, but kindly with his servant, by giveing grace and salvation to
the humble, and bringing down the proud looks. Now because there is no way of
salvation but Gods, and he lightens his candle of understanding, and makes his
darkness to shine, through which his way is perfect, for any breach or assalt,
for relyeing on him: that there is none but God that saves him, by strength in
his loins, perfection of his way, surenes of footing, advantage of the ground,
cunning of his hands, and strength of his arm: that sheilds him and saves
him, and that the lowlynes of God and his Ministry advanced him; and thus did
he beat down his enimyes and he was delivered, and they called in vain, for
there was none to save them, for they set light by his law, Psalm. 137.50. and
God had hid his favors from them, and favored the^ not, according to his
request, Ps. 17. and brought them low in subjectio^ and consumed them, Ps.
55.59. and made him a famous conqueror without strife. And for this, he
blesses the God of his salvation for all, for his revenge, for his comma^de,
for his escape, for his advancement among the Hethen, and deliverance from that
cruel one Saul, that was kind to cruel Amalek. Therefore he, will thank the
Name of the everlasting among the heathen, for so great kindenes and salvation
to him, and his seed for everlasting generations, Ps. 17.

Construction. Here there are many hands, and that of diverse sorts: the hand
of God, the hand of the enemy, and the hand of David himself, and the hand of
God has the way of salvation, and a way of punishment. He saves by light,
sure footing, broad feet and sharp like deer, because David is pure handed. He
punishes with an angry hand, inevitable storms of hail and fire, thunder and
lightning, to show subjection and Dominion deliverances and condemnation,
because the enimyes hand is snares and affliction, and invasion. He gives David
all virtue and skill to uphold him, and also force to prostrate his foes, and
destroy them, according to the letter heth, and also he useeth Iadah, for
thanking, that he is never out of some signification, of some kind of hand or
other.

Genesis: Gods name Jehovah is a rock, and everlasting, and his way perfect,
and David sticks close to it, for his sole rely and quiescencey, and is
rewarded. His enimyes are the sons of Belial full of defect, and therefore are
revenged. The deficients may appeer when they are made as small as dust in the
wind, and as inestimable as dust or dirt, and when they trust not to their
hands, but shrink from their holds, so the reward of the one is the defeat of
the other.

PSALM XIX.
WHen they professed themselves to be wise they became fools. Men thought to
describe the mystical image and glory of God, by rotten creatures of the
earth, when his eternal power and godhead is considered in his method and way
of creation, and redemption. Which, because it is a way, so wonderful, and so
miraculous, and his salvation so great, so remarkable, and notable, and
admirable, in the eyes of men, Ps. 118. for the infinite constancey of his word,
and everlasting love and righteousness of the Law, that it seems to shine
beyond all things in the world: It is called the glory of God, and that great,
Ps. 138. and he the king of glory, Ps. 24. For his blessing and beams of
righteousness upon the church. And this is the reformation, and the new creation
that the heavens and firmament show every day in the week, by renewing of
knowledge over all the world. 1. The Law of God is perfect because it has power
of conversion, by shineing of the light thereof round about us, 2. It is so
credible a testimony and so faithful as the heavens themselves, that the
simple can believe it, and be instructed. 3. The provisos and statutes thereof
are very upright and plain, and delightful for eminencey. 4. The commandment
is as pure as the Sunn, to make a man circumspect, and adds light to the
sight, and is good for the eyes. 5. The Fear and honor of God is a clean
carriage of a man, by an undefiled religion, that remains for ever. 6. And all
his work is don by true and right-judgement, that makes his sentencees most
sweet and delightful to a reformed creature, and to have domination and
approbation over all. Thus by imprinting the manifest justice of the Law,
called the glory of God, in the certainty of the heavens and their courses, to
all countries intelligible, Ps. 119.??is. And compareing the Law and the
visitation thereof to the Sunn in all propertyes for his locks of heavenly
knowledge, with a high estimation thereof, for showing him his way, Ps. 119. h,
149. and the knowledge of infinite transgressions: David prays for forgiveness
of all sorts of them, that in word and thought he may be uprighte with the
eternal, and walk with God and keep an entire rest, in true holiness before
him, and pleas him. From the creation, Genesis 1. And thus in six days, God has
made heaven and earth, etc. by illumination and confirmation of men in the true
knowledge of him by his word, and bringing them to believe. And heerby he
becomes their father, their life and creator, their savior and redeemer,
that they may both know him and also the way to him: even Jesus Christ the true
and liveing way, even the very way of life, Ps. 16. Every day is a degree of
knowledge till we com to a perfection and rest in the light and judgment of
the Law: the true light and perfection, the Sabbath. when sin reigns not
over us, but our Conscience is clear and our words and thoughts pleas God.

Construction. The letters make Iet, of Natah, to spread, Ps. 104. and to
decline. and incline, and a place of lyeing down, a chamber etc. and it has
the spreading of the heavens for his handy work, Ps. 104. For the Name of God,
here being might, imports hand. The heavens are full of variation, and yield
continual knowledge, all the world over, where the Sunn has his chamber,
Solisque cubilia Gades etc. his riseing and inclineing and declination and
operation: so he declineth the Law, and defines the same; and his own errors
are for declinations.

Genesis. In the Definition is all quiescencey: great riches, great sweetness,
great reward, great wisdom, great joy, great knowledge, and great purity, great
warning: from which, considering his declineings, and diverse defects: He would
be purged of all; that he might rest in the favor of God, his rock and stay,
redemption, sole quiescency and rely, Ps. 18. and that the quiescence is in
this word. Mark, that Iehova is seven times repeated, to stay you thereupon, and
upon the law; as the defection is in the declineing from it, and this is for a
beginning also.

PSALM XX.
LEt your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven. He that honors father and mother
more then me, is not worthy of me; and the honor of Parents is the
fulfilling of the Law and Commandments of God, Which is here don by praying
for the king: the preserver and defender thereof. And this makes the womb happy
for bearing, and the paps for giving suck. He that in his distress calls
upon God; does glorify God, and he it is that shall be set in the way of
Salvation, Ps. 50.91. and see his fill of days, with all contentment Ps. 21.
And therefore, because the King is father and mother in this sens, for fostering
and mainteyning, as well as God and his Law, for creating: it may well be said,
fear God and honor the King; for fear God and keep his Commandment, and
honor thy father and mother, and hurt not thy neighbor, for an only religious
and a devout man. Now with great devotion he cries, God save the king, and
prays for him. That God would honor him with all salvation, and give him all
his requests (he glorifyeth God by calling upon him in distress) and that the
Kings religious service of God may comfort and succor him in all distresses;
that the whole church may sing, and display their colors for his salvation.
With this conjecture and note of assureance thereof, that the calling upon God
stands in more steed, and is more victorious to prolong his life and
maintain his inheritance, then Chariots and horses; as is seen. For the
service of God is the honoring of father and mother, and the calling upon him,
the only help to prolong their days. And for this they bless the King, and
pray for him; for the mainteining of a right ministry.

Construction. The name of the letter being Caph, a hand; he works upon all
the propertyes: from holding, apprehending, or conceiving. The word Iagnan is
made to hear, and this goes through the Psalm, thrice used. Fortification,
help, and upholding giveing, offering, and erecting, filling, all work of the
hand; and the right hand for the Ministry. caph, also is to crouch.

Genesis. The Quiescency, the staff, and stay, and salvation of the King is in
the calling upon God, and remembering of his Name, as Psalm 18. therefore is Name
so often repeated also. Whereby they hold, abide, and stand upright, and have
their fill of hearts ease, and rest, consultation and request fullfilled, with
all contentment. The word salvation 4. times repeated, Which is a royal
quiescencey, when the contrary trust, and all vain confidence shall always
crouch, and have defeat. So as the King stands by the Ministry: his salvation
and safe standing, is in the perfection thereof. The crouching which is another
sens, of Caph and falling, is the sign of Deficiencey. the Vowells by the
Grammarians, Elias and others: are called Kings; which may be said, to call
upon the letters Iehova, for to them, the quiescents have relation and respect
also, and are for a recreation or restoration of mankind.

PSALM XXI.
THe strongest hold lasts longest, so the Kings days and inheritance is made
everlasting, for sticking to the strength of the Ark of God, Ps. 68.59. and the
life and righteousness of the law that is in it. From whence he has his
Dominion, and crown of Glory, and honor and worship, and all blessings that
his heart or lips can desire, as Ps. 8.3. and is chee^ed, and whet on, with the
joy of his countenance, Ps. 4.41. That for his faith and love to God; Gods
loveing kindedenes shall lengthen his days a thousand generations, against all
reproach, ps. 4. Highth and depth is not discerned a far; no more is the heart
of a king, by his people, that they should be angry with him. And because fools
bolts are soon shot, and easyly slay with reproach, Ps. 14.15. and put out his
light, and extinguish his glory by Ignominy: Ps. 4. The Church wills the King
to be glad, and rejoice in God, and to be thankful to the power of his Law
and Love, for his Salvation. They pray, that Gods power, and his Ministry,
called his right hand, may ever find out all his Enimyes and them that hate
him, by his Iealousy, and burn them with his firey presence, like a furnace.
Ps. 58.83. and anger them with the opening of the word; and consume and devour
them, by laying the Scriptures before them, and making them as a butt to shoot
at. And that God would bend the Scriptures at them, and aim at their face-es,
to destroy them, to the third and fowerth Generation, for angring of him and
his Anointed: for endeavoring and attempting evil against him, and diviseing
mischeeff that they could never atchive; an Imagination impossible, to Kill
him. That Gods strength may be extolled, and his excellent power and virtue
be sung out in Psalms, and commended. Thus he thanketh God, for his mighty
and unspeakable blessings upon the King; with a presumption that he shall
never be stirred, because he trusts in the Eternal; who of his loveing
kindenes defends them that trust in him, Ps. 18. and finds out all his
enimyes, and destroys them; that the church may have matter to sing Praises
and commendations of him; when the King is safe, and they are poseed or
oppose-ed by the word of God, and as it wear, slain by Objection.

Construction. The letters are interpreted Caah or cavah to be obscure and
dark, and troubled. First in the contrary sense, as of his countenance, that it
be lightsom and to be in sight, thou have set before him etc. make him
cheerful before thee etc. at the time of thy presence, etc. a but etc. bend
against their faces etc. Cavah to burn. To make them black with wrath as a
firey oven, and put them out of the sight of men and of the world by
destruction, and obscure them. Such is the repetition of the sense and words
also to make it clear.

Genesis. His Glory, and honor and worship, and prosperity, and length of
days; being all that he can desire, is. The Kings quiescency, Joy and
delight is in the Confidence and preservation of the Eternal without defect,
let the King rejoice in thy strength, etc. And seeing he trusts in the
Eternal, etc. Be thou exalted in thy Strength, O Eternal etc: and for
Constancey: put them as a crown etc. thou put upon him etc. Set them as a
firey Oven etc: Set them as a butt which is to plant fast, and so often repeated.
that whether for the quiescent or Defective it be firm. The constancey of the
Letters of Jehova or Ehevi the letters of the quiescents, is great delight and
ornament to vowels that call on them.

PSALM XXII.
IN the last Ps. 21. the King by trusting confidently in the eternal and the
supremacey of godliness and excellencey of the promiss, Ps. 138. And sovereignty
and way of love; is sure of salvation. And this is his sign, his keeping
himself undefile-ed in religion. His keeping of Gods word and not denyeing his
name, and holding his faith. Now Solomon says the way of God is strength to
the upright man, like a Ps. 18. and so may the King well delight in his
salvation, Ps. 24. he that loses his fay^h loses his strength. And this
strength, in this Psalm is called the morning strength, or strength of youth,
the strength of the Law of God and way of godlynes. Which as the adulterers
bestow the same upon the harlot and strange woman: so they that revolt from it,
are called adulterers, and make the members of righteousness the members of an
harlot, Ps. 73. and this is the matter of David's complaint in this Psalm. That
God has left off saveing of him, cry he never so sore, and his strength
fails, Psalm. 71. and why he should not be saved by his faith, as well as the
fathers of the church before him, like Hebr. 11. seeing his trust was upon God
from his mothers breast, and had no other succor, but was wholeley cast upon
him all his life. And why he receives all reproach in the world, while they
are highly commended: that his trust was so notable, that he suffered all
kind of floutes, and mocks, and skorn for the same. His adversity is: the
terriblest enimyes set upon him in the terriblest manner, and he is as a man
without any strength, and like a dead man, Psalm. 88.71. with neither courage
nor strength to save himself, or face to look upon them. But is like water
spilt on the ground, of no strength, quite lost and undon, his bones hang not
together, his heart is molten, his marrow is dried, and his tongue cleaves to his
Jaws, and that God has even turned him to dust. They tear him in pieces and
quarter him, like dogs and lions, that he may see his bones in their mouths,
by their looks upon him, and his clothes divide-ed among them. Now that he
has made himself so strengthless, so helpless, so vile in Name, and so sore in
affliction, that of all men he saw himself most contemptible, and his
distresses so nigh: he prays to add continual presence and favor and his
speedy might again to deliver him and save him. That he and all that fear God,
the seed of Jacob and Israel, may declare and praise his name in the church,
and glorifye him, and stand in aw of him for his grace and countenance and
attendance to the humble and aflicted; and they that seek God, may feed upon
his doctrine with full contentment, and refresh their hearts for ever: that the
ends of all the earth may thereby, be converted and have mind to com to God,
and Iaphet may dwell in the tents of Sem. And because the Kingdom and rule of
all nations is Gods: that all the fanilyes of the Hethen may bow down and
worship before him; yea the miserable souls that have no life in them; and are
going to their grave: may be fed and bow down and worship like him. That the
gentiles may com in, to prais God and serve him, and be counted for his
children; and declare his Justice, and tell what things he has don, to all
that shall be born hereafter. The sum af all is this, that seeing he was cast
upon the Eternal from his birth, and has had no friend but God in all his
life; he that for deliverances had all the praises of Israel, and that he
has committed no aduletry that way, Ps. 73. now in extreme distress, he
prays for speedy comfort, and not to be cast off, that he may also praise
God, and so that all people may be fed with his doctrine, that even the very
hethen may admire it, and worship the eternal for his infinite Kingdom, and
likewise become his childeren to prais him. That God leaves not his servant, in
any low estate, nor despises them for any affliction, nor turns at any time
from his servants and children that turn not from him. his servants being
counted for his children and generation, that all sorts should seek him, and
not for any affliction change their God, seeing he is King of all nations.

Construction. The letters are to extinguish, or put out from Cabha, or to be
extinguished, as the seed of the godly, shall never be. This is seen in
repetition of the word seed of Jacob, the seed of Israel the Seed that serves
the Lord and fears the Eternal, shall be an everlasting posterity and no
affliction or adversity shall extinguish it. That feed upon the word and adore
the Eternal. These words also are repeted, as caph, to bow ^arang, outcasts and
afflicted, Dust, Ashes, aged, feeble, all degrees and kinds of extincts. His
misery can not extinguish him, because the unquenchable spirit of the word
comforts him. Caph, a hand, for might, beth, for be, ezra helping be) as the
grammarians call, and this sense and words is three times repeated. Far from
may help, be not far, when distress is nigh, and I have no helper, Ps. 32. Is.
58. and o Eternal my might make have to my help, as go the letters, so go
their allusions together, easy to be marked.

Genesis: The mighty God has left him helpless, and is far off, and the just
God hears him not, for all his calling. Though the fathers triumphed in his
deliverance. But he has his delight in the merciful Eternal, upon their
faith and cryeing to him. Their quiescency is their faith, his quiescencey is
in his faith in the Eternal, and his Kingdom, in the help of God. The token
thereof is in El and Ejaloth. For might, the same word in a double form;
perfect and imperfect, and the words of delivering often repeated, and faith,
the means of help, be gnezra ha El, by the help of God. He is delighted with
the invocation upon the Eternal, Ps. 14. which also is a reformation of man.

PSALM XXIII.
WHen God is shepherd, then is the church the flock, Psalm. 80. and the
scriptures and word of God, the pasture, he that in this Psalm is shepherd,
in the last and in the Psalm following, is King, as you see. Here in, David
finds such refreshing and releeft in distresses, that he reckons himself
heerby, to abound, to be strong and rich, in all want, and poverty, and
persecution what soever, that he has ever stusteined him, that he need not
despair: for he wants nothing that is good, Ps. 37. Now because ingratitude
is a theevery, and not to restore, as great a stealth as taking by force: and
he has received heerin, and heerby, the high^st blessings that can be: and
that they have been his guide, his meat, his drink, his companion, his feast,
his anoyntment, his mirth, his peace, and plenty, in darck and cloudy times of
adversity, and that in the sight of his persecutors: and has still brought him
through, for his own names sake, and to show the power and strength of his
word, as in Psalm. 22. and therefore from hence he gets this resolution of
thankfullnes, lest he should seem to have any thing that he did not requite
or pay for, which wear stealth. And because he was so much bound unto God for
his great bounty and love, all his life long, for the true service of him; he
will be his true servant to his lives end. And so, seeing by following the
doctrine of the Law of God; called the green feeld, and the quiet wate^s, he
wants nothing, his mind is converted, and himself guided the right way to
all blessedness of this life; and seeing in all doubtful cases, he has great
comfort and boldness thereby: he resolves to continue in the contemplation
thereof for ever. And this for one part of the way of God, P, 25.

Construction: Caph, a hand, whereby he leads him, and guides like a sheep,
Psalm. 77.78. by repetition of the sense in diverse words to that purpose,
leads, converteth, guides. The office of a shephard. Ciph, a cliff or cave,
which to a sheep is by nature most^ fearful, also any dark passage. The third
part is from Ghimel, to reward or waine. As a sheep heard is a pastor or
feeder: so here he makes him awaynlings feast, as Genesis 21. and he was ever
favorable to him. That was his reward, as Ps. 62. Prove. 31.

Genesis. His quiescency is the doctrine of the ministry, as Noah walked with
God and found favor in his sight, Genesis 6. so he is no way deficient, but for
lodgeing, course, direction and diet, is about him, by him, before him, and
after him, with all consolation, and comforts, and graces? He abounds, by
daily feeding on the word. The quiescents are full in many words, to be
marked, so he is begotten and reformed by grace.

PSALM XXIV.
THe last Psalm 23, was of the excellent Love and kindenes of God unto his
faithful servantes, and this of the truth and faithfullnes of his word, to
them that love him; unite-ed in the next psalm 25. for the whole way of God.
The manner of the creation argues and truly testifies the Creator: so the
works of a man be found to signify the heart, then if the heart be pure and
clean: the testimony is good and true. He that has neither wrought with his
hands, nor thought wrong in his heart: a man that is true and faithful and just
with his tongue, and is not given to falsehood, dissembling and deceit: he it
is, that shall be blessed of God and receive the crown of righteousness and
salvation Ps. 4.133.134. And these are they that follow the Lamb. Apo. 19.
Seeing this same and such was the very protestation of the Jews and s^rvantes
of God, and the church, which mightily excelled all nations, for pureity of
profession and religion; as Ps, 47. he shows, that their Testimony is most
neighbourly, and most Justifiable before God; and that all religion beside
this, did t^st^fy falsshood, and was most damnable to all. Therefore seeing in
this Psalm, Religion is made a true protestation, or protestation of the
truth, or verification, or justification, or truth it self: and faith and
strength: Ps. 22. and illumination of the Law of God and glory of all men: Ps.
4. and that the God of this religion being truth, that rideeth on a white horse
and fights valiantly, the written verity, and righteousness, that excels in
strength and victory, and is a mighty warrier: and the people of the Jews and
seed of Jacob the protestants thereof: and because their religion and profession
shone beyond all men, for Glory, which is righteousness: Ps: 4. Therefore the
Prophet makes proclamation thereof, and cries room for them, before all men,
and all enter^animent and preferment to be given them, in all hollynes.
Aeternaque ferri robera etc: the everlasting gates to be set open for them;
Which without all question or doubt, for glory, are the cheeffest; and their
God, the King of Glory. This is a pure and undefiled religion, free of all
filthy conversation, whereby a man may live unspotted in the world, and
unsteined of men.

Construction. Caph the sole of the foot, and that in these words, who shall go
up and who shall stand, being the office and property of the feet, as Ios. 3.
Caph a hand: by innocent hands, which he interprets the purity and syncerity
of the Mind, and also the office, which is to take or receive, as in Nasa
repeated. Daleth a door or gate often, as open your cheeffe gates, set up your
mighty doors etc. This was the gate of the Eternal and the Princes only: the
east gate of the temple Eze. 44. that never was to be opened, but for them. Ps.
118.

Genesis. The quiescents, the letters Ehevi, mentioned in Chi how and mi how.
And the letters Iehova are the replenishing of words, being written, as the
Massorets call them. Which is the general domination of them, in the
perfection of wrighting. He that is not defect in his devotion, shall receive
full quiescencey and content. Thee only have I seen righteous, in this
generation. Genesis 6. The sincere shall entertain the kingdom of glory, the
Kingdom of Righteousness and be exalted, dwell with God and rest with him. Thou
art my beloved son, in thee I am well pleased. The quiescency is
entertainment, and that is signified in Nasa, diversely taken, and Bo, diversely
written. both full and defect, with a quiescent and without, called nah nirce
and nah nister a quiescent seen, and unseen, written and not written. mark the
repetition.

PSALM. XXV.
TO dash all worldly covetousnes, which is the root of all evil and the net of
all intanglements, the witchery of all transgression and breach of all the
Commandments, by the wickedness of the mind and liquorishnes of Imagination:
he shows that his whole mind is set upon God, and the way of Godlynes, which
is his faith and truth, and love; as Ps. 23.24. that his trust and whole rely
is upon him, and that all his hope and expectation is in him, and all his
waiting for him, and all his covet is his Law: Ps. 115. and all his honor and
riches and glory and strength and delighte is God. And that he may not fail of
his direction heerin: that his mind is not set upon gain, but to the Law of
God, Ps. 119. h. because Gods mind and promiss, and covenant, is to teach all
them that will observe his word, and to make the humble and meek most learned
therein; and to set them well at e^s, and make them heirs of the Land. Now when
a multitude of enimyes have a most unjust hatred to him, and distresses very
many and great are befallen him, and his affliction and greeff exceeding much,
for his sins: he prays, that for his daily expectance, he be not
deceived, nor ashamed of his hope; but as his eyes are always upon him, that
God will teach him the right way of salvation, through his tru^he and
everlasting mercyes and kindenesses to him. Ps. 143. That he would forgive the
sins of his youth; and pardon his extreme iniquity, that he would rid him
out all torments and pains of mind, and bring his feet out of this net, and
save his life, and deliver him: and pity him for his great desolation and
affliction. And s^eing the Eternal, in his uprightnes, is to teach sinners and
them that fear him his ways, acco^ding to his covenant to them: Ps. 1. to wit,
Loveing kindenes and faythfullnes, Ps: 117, to the keepers of his Covenants and
Testimonies: he prays for instruction therein in an ABC facion, (because it is
the beginning of wisdom) that so both he, and the Church may find both
forgivenes of sins and deliverances out of all distr^sses; considering his
and their sound trust and waiting upon him. that he and they go not away
abashed thereof, Ps. 129 but that they all be confounded that wickedly and
vainly transgress.

Construction. The letters Cah of Cahah, is to be dark or blind. Heerto he
opposes waiting. Concerniing the one, he speaks all for direct^on, and for
^he other, all for Pardon; lest sin take away his sight, and make his
expectation blind. And all his confidence vain. The coming so often round of
the words will assure the sense. and the letters Quoph and vau, which spelled
together do signify to wait: are not in the Rue therefore, but wait.

Genesis. To open these everlasting gates of the ABC, his Doctrine here is, the
letters begad cephath with dagesh and Raphe. From hence, he draws sin, and
affliction, and forgivn^s, Vav is exempted, for his crookednes, as in L, to
signify cephath, crookednes, the one form of the finals, bash them in the
ent^ance, by the resounding of the term Albash, that are pervers and revolting.
for dagesh, the strictnes of his misery, for Raphe, that is remission. By these
words, see mine Affliction, etc. And forgive; see mine Enimyes, in R. pardon
mine iniquity; in L. where Vav is reviveed, but out of course, that he might be
marked. And as crookednes is abandoned, so in them; and he prays that
straitenes, and uprightnes, and simple purity may preserve him; and that to be
the way of redemption, by pe peshutah. or p finale. In this Psalm, he
personats the church, so that the net is the Captivity. Now for a final
redemption from all adversity: between pe cephuphah and pe peshutah in the ABC,
a certain term is set, tsarar, that spelleth 490 which is Tsarar the
afflictor; to show how long the Affl^ctors and persecutors could reign: in
doubling of resh to tsade and skipping of Quoph even 70. sevens of years, Dan:
9. the Angel Gabriels knowledge, dureing many generations. Seven fold the
misery of the Church, Ps. 8.6. The sevenfold adversity to all Gods Enimyes.
Ier: 25. This number is made by multiplication of zain by gnain. the one being
made a principal, by exemption of Vav, and the other final, by doubling of
Pe. Ps. 34. Sin makes all sorrow, so an enimye lasts long, and there must be
long waiting, and much patience. The same sum makes just the space f^o^
Saul's reign to the captivity, while the wicked keep the rue the Just must wait
and want a room. Vau is left out, for it signifies a hook or crook, to hold,
as captivity, and this psalm is for deliverance or redemption, the contrary.
Ps. 37. the sum. 490. is also found in the word shequets, Abomination: spoken
of, Dan. 9. Matthew. 24. that is a mark of the end of that dealeing, and
foresheweth the desolation.

PSALM XXVI
ALL this have I don. As the young man in the Gospel, so David in this Psalm
sets out plainly what manner of man he is, as touching the rule and Law
prescribe-ed in the former Psalm; measu^ing himself, and his carriage, and
conversation thoroughly, by the line thereof. And thereby, looking upon himself as
in a glass, and approoving his image and feature of Godlynes: presumeeth to
offer him self unto God, for a faithful, and a just, and an entire man,
wholely dedicate-ed unto him. First According unto Ps. 15. for the first
commandment, he walks the perfect-way of Godlynes, and it is ever before
him. Ps. 25. and this signifies his Thummim, and perfection, as must be noteed
in the first and last verses. 2. he abides not any falsifyers, counterfeiters
or dissembling hypocrites, but abhors all graven graven imagination besides
the Law of God. 3. also he hates all wicked company, and the seat and
assembly of ill and guilty comunication; showing that all comunication, and
conference, and society of the wicked is faulty before God: 4. That he is a
most precise keeper of the sabbath, throughout the whole service of God; in all
preparation, behavior, repair and diligence, in all the exercise of hearing,
and preaching, and love and affection to his house. 5. Therefore, that he would
not end his life and abridge, his days, and shorten his time with the time of
sinners and disobeyers of parents and all government. 6 And men of bloody
thoughts and murderers. 7. and 8. that he is free from all whoorish theft
and rapine 9. and 10. And that his days, be not shortened with those that love
rewards and swear falsely, because he walks most entirely: most uprightly
and neighbourly in all things: that he may still remain in the righteous
congregations, still praising and blessing the Eternal uprightely. And this is
his confidence that he slip not, and his staff that he fall not. And thus he
puts himself to trial before God, for his curious observation, according to
all terms and points of Eternity and happiness propounded, Ps. 1. And this
plainly for his integrity, his Thummim, and infallible confidence in the
Eternal, and walking in his ways, and his love of his house and service: he
prays for exemption. That he may have nothing to do with any such, nor lead
his life with the un-even dealers of the world, nor be counted in the number of
them, that break the Law; that he may stand upon even ground in the way of
happiness, and be thoroughly blessed, Ps. 1.119. a, blessing God in his church,
Lev. 8. Deuteronomy. 33. For the walking with God, Genesis 6.

Constructio^. Upon Caph. for the sole of the foot, he shows where he
sets his foot, and how, his whole conversation and behavior, he stands in
faith and a sound conscience, and this he makes sound footing, and plain
ground, and good company and good exercise, sure standing. The first and last
verses show by the words, walking, slipping feet, and standing in uprightnes,
according to the end of the last Psalm. Likewise Caph, a hand, for his
innocence, Vau, for his company, loveing and hateing, signified by the
preposition with: as it may as well be said with, as and.

Genesis. Caph Dimjon, in grammar, signifies likeness and resemblance, so he
makes himself wholely to differ from the wicked. Vau, which is. And, the
conjuncttion copulative, with them Vau hibbur, grounds the society. As beged
cephath, or the Ephod is joined to the breast plate or Thummim, Exodus 28.29.39.
For this precise life intends the priestly attendance, and therefore he
alludes to the ornament.

PSALM. XXVII.
FLesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee. The Scriptures and word of
God have great use in this life and that to com, for teaching, improoving, and
correcting, and for instructing in righteousness, that the man of God may be,
absolute, and perfect in all good works, they so plainly testifying of God, by
whose light we do see light, Ps. 36. and obtein faith, and strength and
courage in the heart, as Ps. 10. and by continual waiting, exaltation, as Ps.
40. And for this is the promiss, that godlynes is profitable unto all things,
and has everlasting life. God is not literal but spiritual, and the mystery
and hidden secrets of godlynes very great, and the high rooms of salvation
are by revelation. The power and esticacy of the Scriptures stands in
spiritual interpretation and divineing of the word, and in revelations, and
the extraction of the letter: the spirit and life of the word, which made and
revealed all things. And thus overliveth Abraham's God, thus is David a man
conformable to Gods own heart, and Christ is, the engraven form of his father,
and speaks all by authority. And this he calls his reviveing, and all his
stay of life and salvation. So David being fo^saken of the world and in great
distress; by the Law, called the light of the Eternal, or his vrim, his stay
of life, and salvation: he is out of all fear, so he may be in he service of
God. And prays for right direction, and makes request for it, and to see the
face of the Eternal, which is his Law, his plesantnes, as Psalm. 16. to be
always conversant with him. That he may be exalted over his enimyes, and he
may pra^se God, which he is confident to see, er he dye, by his valiant
waiting on the Eternal, Lev. 8. Deuteronomy. 33. by his faith and confidence in his
illumination in the promises, by his seeking the face and presence of God, in
performance according to the Law, and covenant, Ps. 24.

Construction. The letter Caph, a hand, is here taken to cover, as Exodus 33.
which is the contrary to relevation by the Vrim, light and judgment, yet this
being God his hand and his direction, it is taken proper, for his covering and
protection, for he fears nothing, if he have that about him, which must
only be in time of priestly function; in the most holy place, and then he is
sure to be safe. The words, hideing, keeping close, the rock, etc. show, the
same. Zain is to hear or attend, as in the words, hearing seeking his face:
begging for attendance, and his faithful waiting, twice commanded, which does
now intimate the promiss. which will strengthen the heart, as it is the strength
of the Law.

Genesis. From the fortitude of Dages, which lives by the quiescents in
Iehova, and despises his enimyes the gutturals: ach ragnab, and resh, the
brother of malice, or malicious ones and all their attempts against him. When
naughty men, etc. The strength of his faith is devised heerupon, and the
enimnity of the gutturals and resh is, because they receive no dages and differ
in vowels: so that they walk irregular, and by and crooked ways (say the
Grammarians) and not according to the rule of Dagesforte or grave. For this he
prays, that he may not satisfy their appetit; or be eaten up and consumed by
them, by their wrong voweling: when injury breaths, etc. and falls witnesses
or wrong p^onunciation arises. But that he may always be taught and led the
right rule of Grammar, to be helped, and save-ed from his enemies. A sound
judgment or a good brestplate reveals the face of God, which is all his
will, as Vrim is worn on the brestplate. This makes a constant waiting and a
sure faith in the promises. The Abce are the parents of Dages, though some
letters fo^sake him: yet justice and regularity shall preserve him. For all,
consider the doubling of words, the repeating of phrases, the intimation of the
sense throughout.

PSALM XXVIII.
Ye err not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of them; being ignorant of
the works of God, and the deeds of his hands: and ye cannot be edifyed
thereby, but be destroyed, defaceed and abase-ed, and deprived of that little ye
have, for want of knowledge, which is the rock of the Church, and the
foundation thereof; even Christ with the Host of Israel, that feeds and
succors them, susteynes them and supports them for ever. For without the
foundation of knowledge, can be no edification and building up of a faithful
and a perfect man, but men continue graceless even as the dumb beasts, Ps. 49.
Now that he has obtained knowledge and understanding sufficient, and
revelations from heaven: and the heavens be opened to him as Psalm. 26.27. And
that he is perfect in the operation of the word of God; and knows well what
the work of God means: and is much delighted with the confidence, and
protection he has gotten thereby: and having had his particular request in
Psalm. 26, for which he blessed the Eternal: to wit, for his own safety and
edification by his integrity in the word of God, and the just destruction of
the wicked that neither do nor understand the same; but follow their
imaginations: he thanketh God, and prays for the salvation and edification
of his people, Ps. 147. and the whole church and inheritance of God, that they
may likewise be well fed and sustained with doctrine for ever, the rock, Exodus
17. Number. 20. 1. Cor. 10. Gods holy oracle; that yielded waters abundantly, of
wholesome doctrine to thirsty souls, that believed strongly the promiss to be
performed and the Law to be given, after 430. years.

Construction. Here Caph, or Kiph, is for a rock, and that he makes the
Eternal, as Ps. 18. Also Caph, a hand, Cheth, to destroy and not to build: and
both the letters together; as Choach; virtue, faculty, might, help or strength,
he comes in to the holiest and smite-eth the Rock, with invocation and
petition at the holy word, the oracle: in his Ephod, or shield of faith, his
rock, and has his request, his great consolation which he wishes his people
for ever. From wence is all salvation. Here they knock for all that they want.
Actu and potentia. works for power, as effects so strength.

Genesis. Between the Quiescents and the gutturall letters there is great
variance: such he makes between wicked and spiritual men. The one sort
calls upon the Eternal, because the letters Ehevi, are in the name of the
Eternal, the other abide not the same, Ps. 14. The vowels of the one, being
long, the other, short and irregular. The signification of the gutturalls is,
that they speak peacebley and freendly with their neighbors, when they yet do
malice them, and this is the way to swallow them, as Ps. 5.14. what way the
guiescents take, in Grammar, the Gutturalls take not the same. Dagesh forte
belongs to the one, the other will no dagesh at all. and for this corruption,
the Gutturalls perish and have their reward, and by the power of the Eternal,
the Quiescents are preserved. Peace and silence etc. note the quiescents.

PSALM XXIX
THe word of God is mighty in operation: it divides between the marrow, and
the bone. Out of the light of salvation, Ps. 27. and knowledge in the Law of
God, rises admirable glory and mighty confidence, for edification and
sustenance in the spirit, as Ps. 28. That the glory and power thereof may be
most famous, as Ps. 76. where the very sound thereof breaks the weapons, and
makes an end of the war: by the chideing of the most high, in his dwelling
place and sanctuary, Salem and Zion. For exceeding luster and strength heerof,
it is called a Kingdom, as Ps. 143.144.145. and here therefore, the effect
thereof is called a King, and God of glory, to reign for ever, as Ps. 24.19.
And this is for the voice and spirit of the word it self, and possession of the
Scriptures, called the waters and the great waters, and the flood, which he
occupyeth with such majesty, and such command, with such aflonishment of
Doctrine, such terror to the Princes, and tossing of the mountains, the Cedars
and Lebanon and all the lofty ones; setting their hearts and all the woods on
fire, as in Cadesh, and to tremble, with great greeft, making all things
naked, and revealing of all secrets, discovering of al hearts, and greeving the
great deer of the forest, for want of cover. And because he so shines in his
temple, and so disquieteth his Enimyes, and gives his people such blessing of
strength and peace, beyond the power of all Gods; that he wills all Gods and
princes, and mighty and godly men, the children of the Gods, and Ministers, to
ascribe all power and glory to him for ever: the glory of his name, with all
humility, in his decent sanctuary. So for the might and majesty of Gods word in
the Scriptures, called the waters, Ps. 68.150. and his thundering out, of his
miraculous Acts therein, that plague the great kings in the wilderness of Zin, in
Cadesh, 38. years, by the firey flames of the Law, and because all that he
speaks in his temple is glory, and because the Eternalls throne is upon the
flood thereof, where he sits ever king, and gives strength, end peace to his
people as Psalm. 93.147. he wishes all glory and strength to be as^cribed to
the Eternal and his name, as Ps. 96. and great worship in his sanctuary.

Construction. Caph, a hand, yield or give, ascribe or offer. Caph to bow, bend
or worship, for adoration and oblation of the Priests and Ministers. Caphah, a
branch, when the trees be all shivered and the woods made all bare of boughs,
Job. 15. Exodus 9. Tet, of Tete, to sweep away all, Isai. 14. and this by the
most terrible Meteors, to show the force and fiercenes of the word of God.
Therefore that they should yield him the glory of calling upon him, with all
glory.

Genesis. The quiescency is in Iehova, that mastereth the wat^rs, as Noah in
the Ark. The double doctrine of Dagesh, in begad cepheth, to be woren in the
Ephod, one kind of Dagesh, on the one shoulder, and the other, on the other,
by these words, yield etc. glory and strength, Dagesh tiphereth, and dagesh
chazak, they must adore with decency. The voice etc. is with might and with
majesty. The glorious giving of the Law in mount Sina, called the waters, Exodus
19. Deuteronomy. 5. the strength and quiescency of his church, to make his name and
the calling upon him, most glorious. Iehova, or Hovah, Isai. 47. by calamities
and comfort. He tells Iehevah 18 times over, and El twice, to show the weight
and glory of his name Jah, which make 20. Mark the repetition.

PSALM. XXX.
HE that ascended is he that descended first into the lower parts of the
earth. In the eighteenth Psalm, David was baptized in trouble, and in the
nineteenth, born by the word, and made the child of God by reformation, and
from thence strengthened and confirmed by his Name, for which he gives all
glory to God. And in this Psalm he is received to glory, the greatest glory
of God being his resurrection. Before the loss of the Ark, David was but over
shoes and wetshod in affliction, yet he made his recovery great, and his
deliverance miraculous; but now, he is up to the neeck, yea over head and
ears in hevynes, when he has lost his charge, his strength and ornament and
salvation. So that he means here an infinite magnifying of God for his
resurrection out of such a sorrow, being as a poor ship wract man of all his
confidence. For there is no descent so low as into a man's enimyes hands, and no
captivity so miserable, or any misery so greevous as the whole Churches, to a
Defendour, as is seen by Moses. And having lost a sure estate, and feeling the
horror of Gods wrath and destruction, and fallen in this terrible pit of
distresses and affliction, as seeing no way but death before him; and
considering well, that there would com no profit by the death of a poor and
wreched sinner, but rather by his conversion: and considering that God is not
for ever angry, as Ps. 77. and that there is Joy and life to be in Gods favor
and likeing, Ps. 34. he turns wholely to God for help, and cries out of
this great deep, for redemption and forgivenes, as Ps. 130. and obteineth to
be remitted, and salved, raised again and quickened, that he may sing and
dance for joy; and that his own Glory may for ever prais him, for this shifting
of him out of such miserable and sinful corruption, into such a glorious
liberty again. That he ought for ever to worship him, and Say, Death, where is
thy sting. and hell where is thy victory? And for this he so mightily extolleth
God. And as all the stars in heaven differ in glory: so the greatest glory in
man's profession and protestation of religion, is his resurrection from base
corruption. And therefore, that there is no way in heaven or earth, to extol it,
or thank him worthyly. And this much for his dedication. 2. Sam. 5.6.

Construction. Lamed, for lerning or truth, he makes the light and life of the
world, Io. 1. he dealing by the contrary, as by the terms of darkness: of
adversity, the pit, horror, Anger, terror, night: mentioning heerby the
lamentable and unprofitable state of darkness or ignorance, that is intended.
From whence, S. Matthew has the children of the Kingdom, which should be the
children of light: shall become utterly ignorant, by term, utter Darkness and
sorrow. Which is nothing but the state of Ignorance, Math: 8. When God hides
his face and his glory shines not, and the Scriptures are not clear. For this
he prays for illumination, and his glory, to worship a right, which is the
brightness of lerning, to declare the truth. His heavynes and his reviveing, is
from his God eternal, Jehovah his virtuous remedy of Compassion, marck the
office of Lamed for rarity, by repeating the words, Chaunt unto the Eternal.
That Glory may chaunt thee out etc. For the learned priests, Gods holy ones and
gracious ministers. Is. 42. the grace of Doctrine, being a lively and a
lightsom thing, as ignorance is wrathful and horrible.

Genesis. Dagesh tephereth, Dagesh of glory, in beged cepet and Raphe. As in
these words: that Glory may chaunt thee etc. And in these words, thou did
heal, Tirpaeni. Which Dagesh, is used for sweetness of sound in the oration,
and this Dagesh is only, in six letters dagesht, and six undagesht, according
to the six tribes on either shoulder of the Ephod, wherein the priest was to
Minister.

PSALM XXXI.
Having seen the goodness of the Eternal which he trusted verily to see; as Ps.
27. To wit, his wonderful kindenes, that he was at liberty among his Enimyes,
and that in a strange and strict city (Gath) and shows the benefit thereof,
and teaches it, as in Psalm 34. A B C. by his valiant waiting, who gives
thanks for his deliverance, for fearing the Eternal: and that he was not cut
off from the sight of God: but had his request, to inioye his service, Now in
great perplexity by his false accusers, and being mightily broken through
iniquity, for their privy plotting for his life; by all manner of false
reports and violence; he prays for his own deliverance, by this Argument,
first by the righteousness of the Eternal, and for his Name, righteousness sake,
which should lead, and guide him, aright to salvation. Secondly, to the
Eternal, his strength, his fort and Garrison, because he commended and
committed his life into his hands, with his whole trust and rely upon him. And
thirdly, that the Eternal was a God of truth, and that he could not abide
vain falsehood, but did put his trust only in the Eternal. And against his
Enimyes thus: that all arrogant, falls, lofty, proud and spiteful speakers
against the Just may have an everlasting silence below, and be dumb in the
ground. And seeing these are the just rewards of the Eternal: he comfort
them that wait on him, in hope that he shall never be ashamed thereof. showing
in this Psalm, what is his whole rely and confidence, what is his Rock and
Garrison, and faith and beleeff, and the first Article of his Creed: even to
believe in the truth, the Word, Ps. 120, 45. the God and power thereof. And to
trust therein for Salvation, and to committ him self wholly thereto: to be
redeemed by the knowledge of the Law, and confidently trusting to work out his
salvation, by the observing thereof. And this is that which makes him faith
full and patient, and long suffering, and constant, and not faint in
distersses, and miseryes, but to be of good cheer, and of good comfort, because
God will strengthen their hearts with his Goodness. Exodus; 33.

Construction^ Lamed and Aleph, lerning and instruction, for the strength of
the Law, Ps. 29. which is here defineed and determined to be Justice, Love,
and truth which is the firmnes of their faith and boldness, hope, and patience
and comfort of the believers, and therefore called the church and the
foundation, and the Rock and stro^g-hold, for the sure preservation, redemption
and safe carriage of life unto salvation of them. Math. 16. This is the
spiritual rock that refreshed the whole camp, which rock was Christ 1 Cor.
10. etc. The breast plate of righteousness that imboldned him, Ephesians. 1. as is
seen by the doubling of these words: relying, trusting and committing of him
self in all kind of distresses. This is formed from, Exodus 33. where it is
called Gods presence, favor, goodness, and glory, and rock, and safety by using
the same terms as after a perfet model. also for Lo of Laah, to be dissolved,
and deficient, as he was.

Genesis. The term, hiemanti in grammar, to believe. And heerby, the Eternal
preserves the faithful that are well fed with the word, and wear this
confidence: and soundly pays the wicked, proud and contemptuous persons with
destruction. The word hasah to rely, alludeth to hosen the fortitude, the
stones of reputation, and hasin the strength of the Eternal Ps. 89. The
number, to the 12. dagghesfo^tes or hazakim. sh, q, ts, t, s, n, v, z, l, i, m,
h. For comfort of the heart and confirming the mind. That the mind be
established in all good Doctrine, in these words, hizkois lebhabhchen make
strong your mind, be ye of good cheer and courageous.

PSALM XXXII.
Having felt the hevy hand of God upon him, and the parching of his wrath, by
his trobles for all his trespass, sin, deceit and iniquity, which let his
Prayer, and the happiness of his forgivenes, Ps. 65. After his confession and
prayer to him: he counsels the Godly to pray in time, and conveniently,
left, in time of inundation of trobles (called waters) Ps. 120. they find
impediment and harder entertainment. And for this cause he prays to his
Defense, the Eternal for preservation from Distress, and to be regarded by
the Eternal, his righteousness, for direction and righteousness. Who answers:
if they be not Asses, and will understand, his Eye shall tend him and teach
him his way. And where sorrows belong to the wicked: his loveing kindenes shall
inviron him about. If you have ten thousand Instructors, yet you have but one
father, and who can forgive sins but God only? even the Allsufficient father
of instruction. The Law that binds and loses, saves and condemns? The
ever wakeing Eye of the Law shall tend them, and advise them and teach them and
instruct them. So they be not like Asses, and dull headed, and except they
will not lend their ears to understanding: that for acknowledgeing their
sins, they may be forgiven, remitted and saved. And thus by faith are the
righteous saved and blessed; from the Mercy seat, Exodus 25, 26, 27. In
judgment remember Mercy: where Judgment is expressed by the hevynes of Gods
hand, as love covers a multitude of sins. S. Paul's rule. So at the Mercy
seat, Atonement and reconciliation was to be made for all. As Lev. 16. after
confession. The Mystery, whose sins are covered and condemnations wipeed out,
from kipporeth, which is to cover, or a Covering, by all allusion. As the mercy
seat is over the Ark, and Mercy rejoices over Judgment, and loveing kindenes
shall be round about a faithful man, and they that cry for Mercy here, shall
be rescued and let escape damnation, as the goat etc. Lev. 16. From hence was
Moses admonished Number. 7.

Construction. Lamed, learned. Lerning is still a guard to a wise man, to keep
him from sin. And what a great felcity is it, to be found faultless or cleared
by the word of God? to beware of trespass and to see the way to Grace. I will
wise etc. Beth is a house, by his hideing and preserving; or protection, for
favor and kindenes, the walls of Salvation, the good Edification that is
daily about the Just. So the tractable are edifyed, and the submissive and the
gentle, well endued: but the froward hamperd, and are kirbed, Psalm. 18. As the
letters Lamed and beth are first over the Psalm, so are they the last,
signifying the heart: Where all crosses and comfort meet, where sin harbors,
where grace enters, faith and repentance works, and amendment grows
confession and all plainenes issues, and remission comes, and all salvation
and joy, and happiness and triumph follows.

Genesis. The Retoricall Accent, Metheg, a bridle, is used, compared to the
Law, to check the froward and to pardon the penitent, the happy estate of
remission to the refreiners, the great grace of continence, as Metheg is to the
word, for sweetness: and especially for distance: and Gaja for roaring and
crying, as the prince of Accents. Is. 55. Ps. 22. All language is doltish and
senseles without the Melody of time, and quantity in syllabes and points, and
stops in Oration: according to all degrees of Declination, in the sentence.
There is no trespass but against righteousness, the virtue of the Eternal: and
there is no forgevines but from the God thereof, nor happynes, nor joy but to
trust in him, and endeavor it.

PSALM XXXIII.
NOw he wills all the just to triumph royally, for the certainty and effect
of Gods word, which he fully-ly describe-eth, and the happiness of the Nation
that are the Eternalls inheritance. And for that in all the Scriptures, called
the heavens, and his dwelling seat (from whence he has his prospect) which
are formed to the hearts of all men, no salvation is found to have been, by
great Armies of Kings, or strength of men and horses, as Psalm. 147. but by the
vigilancey and care of the Eternal, in his Law (called his Eye) to deliver and
releeve them that fear him: and because their Soul waits upon the Eternal,
whom they make their sole defense; and delight and trust in him: he craveeth
the like mercy upon the whole Church, as their hope is in him. Now seeing the
counsel of Gods word, passes the counsel and all conceit of the heathen,
for creating, and reforming of mankind, and bringing them to knowledge: that
they may be strong in faith, and of a sound hope unto salvation, and that
instruction is a new Creation: he wills a sabath of praise and
sanctification to be solemnized, as Psalm. 92. by the just, for the godlynes of
them and praise of his maker. For salvation is not by strength but by faith, as
appears in the Lords battles, by patience, the Armor of the saints. Gods
holy Oracle and mercy seat considers all men. From hence was Moses
admonished, Number. 7. by the breast plate of Judgment, the engraven form of
Godhead and wisdom, Exodus 28.39.

Construction. Lamed, leerning, showing the instruction promissed, Ps. 32. The
preservation of the Saints and believers. Levit. 8. showing judgment,
justice, mercey and truth to be the definition of the word of God, Ioh. 1.
Math. 23. that ye may know what it is, and this is a lerning. This Psalm
belongs to the former, by repeating the words thereof, and the mystery, in
the prospect of the Eternal, doubled for the priest, and deeps in treasures,
and counsel, and cogitation, for the breast plate of judgment imbrodered. The
Efficacy and power of the word of God, the eternity of the light, the
advisement, and discretion thereof, the breast plate, and the vanity of humane
lerning. What reverence it asks, what fear of offending, how precious the
observing, and how painful the offending is. Fear ye the Eternal, etc.
Ghimel, he rewards according to all men's works, how sure it comes, how
beneficial to the elect, the providence to the^ that fear God, for the best
understanding. There is no safety by multitude fortitude, nor faculty, but all
grace and pardon and forgivenes, help and protection, is by faith and patience.
The fear of God is the observing of the commandments, which is his word, and
the making conscience of transgression thereof: seeing all that is don is for
fear or love, and this is final and a principal lerning, as the End of the
commandment is love, etc. 1. Tim. 1. The Scriptures are an Eternal Oracle of
counsel and advise, they have both Vrim and Thummim, in them, light of
knowledge, and perfection of life. The tree of knowledge and of carriage that is
taught of God, Genesis 3. Io. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. and this is that which the priest is
to bear upon his heart, and to be endued with all: to show that the kingdom of
God stands in suffering, and not in pomp.

Genesis. Metheg, a bridle, so is the word of God a rule to hold us in: and
direct us, it is full of regularity, right and strait and true, as the world it
self in his course, the honor of upright me^. For Metheg Jasher or Munnah,
Metheg turned to Munnah, to serve Zakeph caton, the grammatical Acent. Metheg
gaja, the accutest and loudest music Accent. Other propertyes of the rule be
expressed by the words, counsel, Actions, by faith and patience, by the waiting
and trustinge, by refreining and absteining from ill, and restraining the
mind. And this is a moderation above all kingdom, or worldly dominion of horse,
or man whatsoever, and governs all things.

PSALM. XXXIV.
FOr Gods mercyes upon him and giving him that strength of beleeff, he
resolves to praise him and bless him always, and with all his might, and
allureeth a whole congregation to the sanctifying of him, for the releeff of
his distressed case, by his great goodness and mercyes: in guarding him by the
spirit of his word. Therefore he will now let them know the use and benefit of
Gods service, and fear: that is, that it will make men like giants, for
countenance and continuance, and state of Eternity, Psalm. 112. And for stature
like goodly Cedars: and as it is the way to long life, by description: so what
this service and fear is, by definition, Psalm. 92. and how it is accomplished:
to speak plainly and truly, and without any hypocrisy or dissimulation, to do
good, and not evil, following the way of peace. And in this way the Lord will
look upon them and hear them always, and deliver them out of all evils. Be
the woes of the just never so many, yet he will save him whole from falling
into temptation, when the wicked by some ill shall be utterly desolate wasted
and slain. And this is expressed farther by a mystery between P, and P, in the
A, B, C, rue, showing that the afflictions of the church, shall have joys
sevenfold after captivity, of 70. at 490 years end, as in two Reshes, and
Tsade, in the Verse Resh, where he shows eternal comfort to the just by Gods
favors, and the utter condemnation of the wicked by Gods angry looks upon
the^ out of his word. And this behavior, David accounts to avail much to
the strengthening of his faith: to wait for all promiss of this life, and that
to com. And thus much for the upright child of the Church, begotten by much
misery and affliction, and brought forth by a painful travail, Ps. 102. as
the child of the holy Ghost and son of God by righteousness. This sum of 490,
is made up, by multiplying Zain by gnain, seventy by seven: the one being made
principal, by exemption of Vau, and the other final, by doubling of Pe, Ps.
25. in the first letters of the three first words in the verse Resh, is the
whole 490. expressed also as before, and likewise you may see the same in the
first letters of the two first words in the verse Zain, and these both expounded
in the verse Gnain, and Tsade.

Construction. Lamed, lerning. The lerning is here the fear of the Lord,
defineed for a passing wisdom to resist the Divill, and escape temptation. It
teaches Redemption and deliverance and saveing of the just at last, and
therefore the letter Vau, a hook or crook, is left out of the Abce for the
wicked; which shall no longer continue or hold the just. And also conscience of
sin and bashfulnesse of evil, bridleth and withholds the Just. So this
defection of Vau stands upon holding and loosing. The Lions shall be
defective and fail for all their claws, but they that seek the Eternal
shall not, etc. These kinds of hooks there be: seeking, clawing, visiting,
calling, compassing, crying, relyeing. The wickeds term Rashang shall be
maimed, and his bones broken and be all dismembered, and be slain by Ragnah,
the term evil, taken from it, the first and last letters of his name, his own
property, which is doing of ill, and thus he comes to desolation. Daleth a
door. Keep thy tongue, etc. watch thy mouth, be porter at the door of thy lips,
as Ps. 141. Lamed and Daleth, makes Ledh, which is to beget, as the children
of God are they that fear him, serve him, seek him and rely on him. And to
such is his lesson, and to such is life, and to such shall be no desolatio^,
and the matter is plain by itteration of the words.

Genesis. The Genesis of this Psalm is much confirmed by the Title. Tagnam is
taste or behavior, and Tagnam is the Grammatical Accent, the sense is the
best taste of both, the changeing is the declineing of both. The Grammatical
Accent turned into Azla or Geresh, and the Rhetorical into Qadmah, and is
signified by these words Iegareshehow Vajelek, and so rises the Regiment and
variation of Accents, from Metheg. A life without godlynes is no life, no more
is any speech sensible without Accents or Points. The fear of God is sweetness
of life, and the acutenes of understanding is a good distinction, against
David's conterfet distraction. See how he thinks of all the five Senses, and
begins at the Verse He, for seeing and smelling, and in Zain, for hearing,
and Hheth, for touching and in Tet, for tasting, with most effectual
intimation.

PSALM XXXV.
Because of the privy trap of falls and cruel witnesses to take away his life,
and deceitful and Collusion talk, and derision of Saul his pursuer and mighty
Enemy: and the greatness, yea the kingdom of compassion in him, toward Saul and
his followers; and their sport at his misery: and their underhand plotting for
his life, and secret tearing and backbiteing of him; and their insulting for
advantage over him, rewarding evil for good: as Ps. 109. He prays for their
sudden and inevitable destruction, by the Justice of the Cause. That the
Eternal will stand before them, and stop them with his weapons, that they may
be all in darkness, and slippery placees, with a cruel wind behind them, to
make them fall and vanish, as Ps. 141. That is, that for a Judgment, their own
causles fury and malice, with their ignorance and unconstancey likewise, may
Justly, bring unawares their own destruction: that they may not laugh at him,
nor have their wills, but be eternally ashameed. And that he and all just
ones may have cause to rejoice; to tell and commend the Justice of the Eternal
for ever. That without ever a broken bone, he may soundly confess the
infinitnes of his salvation, by him, and rejoice for ever in him; that he may
be delivered from all evil, which is from the will and desire of his Enimyes.
And that God would be awake at his judgment, and at his quarrel, and show him
salvation out of his word: and assure him, that he may proclaim it. That
drowzines of mind, and lazynes and care of the world, take not away his Zeal,
and bereave him of understanding; and destroy him.

Construction. Lamed, for lerning or instruction. And here upon he groundeth a
stratagem or doctrine of war: by mention of the instruments, help and
encouragement, from God, as Ps. 18.144. in the beginning: and discouragement
and shame to his Enimyes that be wrongers of him. Their instruction is snares
and intanglement, false witnesses, ill for good, rejoyceing at harm,
detraction, mocking, grinning and skorning, laughing and wincking, deceiveing,
gaping and mowing with the mouth, to vex him out of his life. He makes none
like God for help: therefore he doubleth his first request, arise and awak to my
judgment, etc. and also the words for his Enimyes confusion, as a consequence
of their own lerning, for their not being right in Gods sight. He paragogique.
They are gathered together. Heah, an Interjection of skorning, doubled often, and
intimated in all the way of the wicked: also He, for seeing and beholding. How
long will thou behold it? etc. we have seen it, thou see, o Eternal, etc.
awake to my judgment, etc. Lah, Lamed, and He, from Lahah, utterly to fail,
as the mischevous and deceitful, Genesis 47. Prove. 26. that make a sport of
vexation.

Genesis. The Gutturall letters, and Resh, are here the devouring wicked ones,
that seek, this way to swallow the just, by their irregularity and crooked
ways: and to dimm their glory. They be for these words: as for my friend, or
for my brother, etc. again for these words: ah sir, our ey has seen it, or we
have seen it, etc. in the interjection, and the two first letters of the next
words following: and again, for these words: ho, we have our desire, we have
swallowed him, for the gutturalls only.

PSALM. XXXVI.
Because of the ungodlynes which he sees in the wicked, that neither fear God,
nor will walk in his way, setting light by it, as his daily trespass shows,
but is carried away with pride, and led astray by a wicked hand, unto
destruction, Prove. 16. considering the greatness of the kindenes and
faythfullness of the Eternal, the highth and depth of his justice and
judgment, as Ps. 119. l, and the pretiousnes of his way, when it saveeth all
men: his word being their protection and shadow called his wings, the fat and
liquor of his house, their refreshing, his light, their guide and instruction:
as Psalm. 29.110. he prays that he will bestow his kindenes and righteousness
upon them that know him, and men of upright minds, that he may not err, and
fall after the same manner. And this from the Paradise and church of God, Genesis
2. for the rivers of Doctrine, flowing hence. There is a well of life in the
Law, and a great depth of judgment in the word of God, and the righteousness
thereof, the light to walk by: the wicked are proud and skorn it, and are
condemned for their extreme trespass against it. and therefore, he prays for
grace out of it, that pride of mind lead him not into temptation, nor wicked
counsel draw him to fall into the damnation of it, like them that never rise
again, which is an utter defection, for want of grace and the fear of God, Ps.
34.

Construction, Lamed, lerning. The doctrine here, is grace, and reprobation: or
approbation and rejection, the one word answering to the other by the like
repetition, each thrice, to import it. Which are the contrary studyes of the
Godly and the wicked. The one calls for Gods favor, or his kindenes, which
is life; and there is a fountain of it, that will never be drawn dry, and an
everlasting light, if it shine upon us: the other studyeth nothing but greeff
and molestation, so kindenes and greeff be the words repeated. And he makes
nothing of sin. The word Gnenau, his eyes, comes twice, in a hard
construction, to show it. The letter Vau, for a hook or crook, is for the
instrument of drawing of the same kindenes, by a metaphor, for lerning, which
is a kind of drawing, as we draw knowledge out of the word. And this
instrument Christ used, that the woman of Samaria perceived not. Likewise
pride, and the powerful hand of the wicked draws to damnation, as pride
goes before the fall, Prove. 16. the two letters together, Lo, do signify
property, or habit, to wit, his, or belonging to him. In the first words the
wickeds habit is shown, by which he is condemned: in the next, Gods property,
by which all are saved that love it. And this for a standing or falling
perpetual.

Genesis. He begins with the wickeds trespass, and ends with his utter
fall and defection: which shows that of him and of his end, he speaks. The
letters Aven, for the word greeff, be defective letters, also Lamed, which is
intended by a repetition and a construction, Chadal, to Leav off, and Maas, to
refuse, betoken the defectives also, and utter falling.

PSALM XXXVII.
He exhorts to that heavenly kingdom of Christ, that is, faith and patience
in all distress. For allurements thereto, he propounds to the just:
prosperity, cleernes of judgment, everlasting success, and continuance upon
earth, hearts desire, peace after affliction, satiety in time of dearth,
certainty and blessing in proceeding, unguiltynes in judgment, and all help,
salvation and deliverance, from the Eternal. And wills them not be
troubled, at the wicked course and prosperity of naughty men, as Psalm.
79.73.86. seeing the end of them, and their posterity, is sudden; when they
once persecute the Just: like growing grass, that is in the flower, cut to
wither, and not suffered to seed, Ps. 92.109. and like a brave Imp, that is
soon broke-en off, or dies. So vanishes, and consumeeth all their bravery,
honor and advancement, like smoke in the air, that love not God. The note of
the Just man is compassion, bountyfullnes, liberality, and consolation in the
Eternal; wise comunication, and daily meditation on the Law of God, that he
fall not. The note of the wicked: he ever works and devises, by all means
against the just, he has not pity, and will borrow and not pay again, he
will not bestow but rob. Now because in this Psalm, the just man's part is true
meaning, waiting for the Eternal, trusting and delighting in him; that is the
observing of his Law, shunning evil and doing of good, the beginning of
wisdom and understanding: the form of the Psalm, is an A, B, Cc like
instruction, in the Hebrew. That there be no imprudencey left to God, and his
spirit: here is exposition of every letter in the Rue. Therefore mark the
interruption, mark the Iteration, the acceptance and imbraceing of some, and
reprobation and exprobation of other letters of the rue, and the general
allusion to the terms of them, as Nun young, etc. that if they would wait 430
years Quoqh, Shin, and Lamed, in Quoph; they should inherit the land Canaan,
mark the letters Tsar, Tsade, and Resh for Tsadiq, and Rashang, the righteous
and the wicked. Therefore mark the replenishing of the mouth and mind of the
righteous in Tsade, and the Arring, and currishnes of the wicked, by this
Iteration, of all these Arres and Gnains in his Raithi, or the letter Arr or
Resh, Persius Sat: 1. where is taught 400. also. And leaving out Gnain in the
rue etc. to show the cutting off of the wicked, being the last letter of the
term Rashang, for his posterity: and the blessing of the righteous, with peace
and prosperity, Ps. 128. and long life, Psalm. 34. and posterity in Shalom, the
holding out of the Just, 930, the years of Adam, as Ps. 144. in Tsel, a shadow.
Tom va jasher: in Shin, for the space from the promiss to the Temple of
Solomon, and likewise the same number from the Temple to Christ, all perfection
and uprightnes, even twice 930. as in Quoph also. And thus in the Chronicle
from the promiss to Christ, the Prince of Peace: with many a gooly stage of
salvation, and refreshing of faith, Psalm. 25. Out of his experience of the Law,
and his faith, he prays the Church to be patient and wait a while, And they
shall have peace enough and the wicked shall be cut off, and the inheritance
shall be theirs: showing that the birth of righteous men has a painful
travail, but a comfortable and a joyful deliverance at last, as Ps. 34.

Construction. Lamed, lerning. The doctrine here is the way of God, Psalm. 1.
the truth and life, Io. 14. the Law and Gospel of Christ, the end whereof is
salvation, by righteousness and judgment. The means is patience, and the
Enemy, anger. For all helps are lost, by not indureing, and impatience, and
headynes, and rashness and hasty malice: which is the speedy cutting off of the
wicked. For by this, their attempts turn all against themselves, but God helps
the Godly, because they believe and wait for his promiss. By their patience,
they are made perfect, and by perfection are they prolonged to Eternity. For
all his speech and thoughts are of the wisdom and judgment of the Law of God,
and all his steps according to that breast plate, the power of God, and
induement of his saints, that his carriage fails not. The letter Zain, for
conception and apprehension is the same. The repetition of these words shall
proov it. Way, Judgment, help, salvation, wait and rely, rescue etc. right and
perfection. Lamed and Zain, together, is Laz, to decline from this true way,
which is abomination to the Lord, and therefore are such justly and speedily cut
off. Vau, abounding in the last verse out of his place shows, that God, is
saveing, redeeming, and rescueing and delivering, is a kind of uncrooking and
unheaching of the just out of the wickeds hands.

Genesis. He works upon the Gutturall letters, and that you shall observe,
when you com to every one of them in the Abce, for their irregularity in
Grammar, touching Dagesh, and Sheva. In Aleph, he advises against Anger, and
Ielousy: which is a devouter and a consumeing fire in a man, Psalm. 124. which
he remedieth with patience. In He, he advises the same, and has all the
Guttural letters and Resh, doubled in that verse, to show the same. Presumption
and wrong from the wicked and their success, does eat the just, for the just be
perfect and regular, and the wicked are irregular and outlawes. In Cheth, they
show their quarrel: they will have Cateph Pathach, rapine, and destroy the
right rule: and therefore they are rapt away and destroyed. In Gnain, is manifest
defection, by the leaving of that letter quite out of the rue: as the rest are
enimyes and defectives to the rule. In Resh, mark how Resh is sorted with all
the gutturalls: and how often it is doubled with them, their great glory and
sudden dificiencey.

PSALM XXXVIII.
Being once overreached and tripped by Nathan the Prophet, concerning his
sin, that he had not a word to say; he was fain to be silent at all the
railing, and subtle practices of Absalom his Enemy, and his accomplices, Shemei,
Achitophel, and others, lest they should upbraid him and laugh at him: and his
body being wholely distempered with the wrath of God for the same, and his
greeff of mind therefore so great, being forsake-en of all; that by
unexpressible sighs, he is force-ed to signify, his requests and desire, to
God that knows all, that he would vouchsafe to answer and still them: yet
because his cause is good against his Enimyes, be they never so-many: he
prays, that he will not correct him, nor be from him, but be his salvation,
and make haste to help him. He shows his sore suffering for sin, Psalm. 134.
through his faith and waiting for Gods salvation, praying that God will not
consume him with correction, nor in his anger quite forsake him, but with all
speed, help him and save him, and answer him, and releev him in his sorrow, for
confessing his sins. Sorrow and affliction beget children unto God, and with
much travail and long waiting and great correction are they born, and with much
ado are the righteous delivered from the body and death of Sin, and folly and
wrath of God, and corruption of the flesh and bonds and thralldom of Satan,
and all adversity: to be brought to the glorious liberty of the sons of God,
and to be raised again in the Spirit, and to be made alive again by
righteousness and forgivenes of Sin. And this for the low estate of suffering,
the very death and passion of a just man. Like that of Job and Ierimiah, that
thought no sickness so sore as theirs. So he has no soundnes left in all his
body, that has lost a bone, and is halting, and alone, and in need of help, as
Adam, Genesis 2.

Construction. Lamed, doctrine. His declination by sin, his hard discipline.
He makes himself a scholar under the rod, and is sorely corrected for missing
his rules, the Law of God, that it sticks both on his stomach and on his
back: hoe is bowed, weak and bruseed, he is sad, he is sore, he is greeved,
his heart cries and is removed, and he is sensles with sorrow, as if he were
aware of nothing: for all parts pay for it, the rage of error is such. And here
he thinks upon Adam, that there was no help left meet for man, Genesis 2. among
men: for friends help not, but are corrupt and dec^itfull to entangle, and
Enimyes hurt, and are against him. So he makes God his master and his
helper, and recoverer and waiting, Ps. 94. for that the offense is only against
him, and he only is sensible of his sorrow and of his desire. Thusmuch you
shall perceive by mention of all the words in that text of Adams wound, and
curious repetition of them. For the Law wounds all men. Genesis 2. Cheth, the
broken and destroyed state of sinful man. The two letters, together, make
Lach, green, and fresh, and lively: his estate is all contrary, and therefore, so
he argues upon the contrary.

Genesis. The G^ammaticall part is deficiencey. When he sees how imperfet a
scholar in the Law, he is, discernes how foolish and pervers his ways are:
he calls himself such and Heteroclite as this, for all kind of
defectivenes. There is no whole thing or health etc. There is no ease or peace or
perfection etc. And this of Verbs Perfet and Imperfet, the Imperfet are
quiescents or defectives: the one, is of letters present and silent, which
neither hear nor speak: the other, of letters abolished for ill
neighborhood. As friends are not to be u^ed or trusted to: so Enimyes are not
to be conferred with. Nun, is diversely defective in the Psalm, and for that,
the number of verses agrees with the Abce number of letters, and is likewise
consonant to Adams defect, by his stroke with that sinful sleep, Genesis 2. This
is Nah, nireeh, by the words: in the beginning, his arrows light, and his hand
lies, etc. All his desire and his groaning. etc.

PSALM. XXXIX.
BY silence in the last Psalm, some good things being forborne because of the
wicked: which now occasioneth Ieduthun as follows; to inquire how long he
can endure alive, considering his correction, frailty, vanity and shortness of
the age of man, of no abideing, as Psalm. 119. g, k, and being, but as a
strangeer or guest in the earth, because he waits for the Lord, and is not
troubled with worldly affairs: he would be delivered from his trespasses,
and temptation of Gods hand, and have his correction somewhat abated before he
dies. That he be not a reproach to the vile and foolish, seeing that
correction for iniquity, freats and consumes like a moth. Which as he sees,
will otherwise shorten the shortness of his time: and this with pittyfull cry
and request unto the Eternal. Man that is born of a woman has but a short
time to live, and his days are full of sorrow. In the former Psalm there is
great waiting of David, for the glorious liberty of the sons of God, out of
the bondage of corruption, by indureing so great adversity for a godly life:
Here he considers the vanity of the creature, and the small moment of the
life of man, and the great and vain stir that man makeeth in the world, that
he can not be silent at. But that his waiting is for nothing, but for
forgivenes of his trespasses, and the abatement of his troubles, and some
refreshing ere he dies. And this is all his waiting and covet and desire,
that he suffer not reproach by the vile and wicked people of the world, or be
ashamed for the hope that he is subject to. And this for an other article of
his faith which he has gotten by the Law. Upon the story of Cain and Abel,
Genesis 4. two brethren, vanity and vexation Ecclesiastes. One slays the other,
as worldly sorrow causes death.

Construction. Lamed, doctrine, or Limmed, to teach. The doctrine begins,
where the first word, I said, or I thought, is used, in the last Psalm, and
that concerning his halting and imperfection, and that in speech. He would
feign preach, it seems, but then woe be to him, for the cavilling of the
wicked. yet preach he will, it seems, for his conscience can not hold to be
silent, he will keep his ways, and keep his mouth, and rule his tongue. This
is lerning and an observation. God sets the wicked upon him, and this is a
sharp rod of correction: he desires his end, or ease and forgivenes; that he
be not made a fool for his waiting, which is only on God. Spare him, take off
the rod, and his sore hand upon him, and hearken to his begging and hear his
crying: and this according to the case of a scholar. And therefore is Adonah, so
especial-ly and so often used, in this Psalm and the other, for Lord or
Master: Teth, for the extending of Gods hand upon him, and so much provoking
him. Both the letters together make Lat, to ly hid, or to hide. Against this,
he prays to be showed the hidden knowledge of his end.

Genesis. The grammatical instruction or creation is Nah nistar, the hidden
quiescent and that is seen by the doubling of that form, in Edhegnah, and
Jedang; and Elek, etc. One quiescencey is silence, an other, death, and the end
of his days: another, vanity, and vanishing, when all is don, and at an end:
and another, the end of his punishment. With double mention of Ish, also, Man,
wounded and cureed, Genesis 4.

PSALM XL.
AFter long study in the Law of God, called the waiting on the Eternal, Ps.
130. being satisfied and delivered from ignorance, and doubtful hesitation,
called a mirey dungeon: and having obtained a sound beleeff, called sure
footing upon a Rock, that made him change his note by a praise to God; that
brought many to the like confidence in the Eternal, that saw it: now showing
the infinite miracles that God has don for the Church, and their happiness for
trusting in him: and seeing that no sacrifice nor offering can gratify, content
or satisfy for the same, as Ps. 50. but hearing and obeying the word: and
findeing his own aptnes, promptnes and inclination that way: he starteth up,
and utters his profession and faith (the preaching of the same) which because
it is the whole will of God, Ps. 1.137. and he has pleasure in it, and for
mercy bestowed upon othersheerin: he prays for mercy, as Ps. 119. L. And
speedy deliverance, from the Eternal, Psalm. 61. out of his innumerable and
pitiful evils for iniquity, by his Enimyes that seek his life. That they may
be stund with their shame for there mocking; and they that seek the Eternal
and love his salvation, may rejoice in him and magnify him for ever.

Construction. Mem, signifies waters, of which he makes diverse kinds,
according to the propertyes thereof, as he begins in the first word doubled,
Qavah, to wait or hope, from the nature of a standing pool, called from thence
Miqve, and so for, the sea Genesis 1. continual-ly waiting for resort. So is
Tiqveh, hope also, and for the continual frequenting of the Scriptures and
word of God, from Quavithi, in the other Psalm. The Scriptures are called
waters: in my belly is the Law for the vessel etc. The great congregation twice
uttered, for the Church and assembly. I preach etc. for I sprinkle, the parts
and propertyes of the Law and of the will of God. And of these waters; the
waightyest things, are Justice and fidelity, truth and mercy, and the great and
wonderful works of God, which he declares Actor. 2. Another kind of waters
are woes, and crosses and iniquityes in the world, that overcom the hearts of
men, and take away their sight, when they abound, Ps. 32. like a swefen or
soumn. An other kind of waters are Enemies, as Ps. 18. and 70.32. Ierm. 49.
That study to make an end of him and to hurt him, and flout him. These waters
he would have astonished, and run back for shame and their current stopped:
that the right students my rejoice for deliverance. All which is notable by
itteration.

Genesis. A kind of quiescencey is here in his hope, his faith, his rock, the
Eternal, for constancey: as a sound groundwork of preaching. His ripenes in
the Scriptures and perfect knowledge and understanding of them, Ps. 73. This is
his rest that shall comfort, like Noah etc. Genesis 7.2. Pet. 2. he is pleased
also in edification and reparation. to tell Gods miracles and his mercyes. The
will of God is his delight. This is his rest and rely in all troubles,
adversityes, afflictions and reproach concerning all his works and sorrow of
hands, to comfort him, Genesis 7. that God may be pleased in him, Math. 3. And
thus by the revolution of the words of the text.

PSALM XLI.
COnsidering the goodness of the Eternal to them that be good to the poor, and
their happiness that be releevers and instructers of them, as Psalm. 112. and
the hardness, ill will, and mercylessnes of his Enimyes, and confederat friends
toward him, when he was ill and in misery: he prays the Eternal himself,
to ^ake pity upon his sinful soul and heal it, which had sinned against him;
and to raise him again, that he may also recompense them. Knowing heerby the
love of God toward him, when his Enimyes have not their wilis against him; but
he keeps his integrity and the presence of the Eternal, to wit, his divine
meditation (thanked be God) for ever. The teaching of the poor the Law, is the
saveing from sin, and David being sick with sin; now for his doctrine out of
the Law, p^ayeth for forgivenes and remission of his sins, and to be healed
and to be revive-ed from sorrow, and raised out of troubles. His Enimyes
being against his resurrection, pray that still some divillish distress may
keep him down and torment him, that he never rise again, and never be cheered
more. But because nothing can quell his Enimyes more, then Gods favor in
mainteyning his integrity out of the Law, and keeping him still in the study
thereof: and nothing cheer him so much, as a sound belief out of the word: Ps.
21. and nothing pay his Enimyes so sore, as his recovery: and that there is no
way to requite or quite them but faith, wherewith the wicked are not indueed nor
have any weapon so durable: they are so thoroughly paid for iniquity by his
foundnes. And this is the way he desireeth to pay them, Ps. 91.6. and this for
his everlasting life, his resurrection of his body and forgivenes of his
sins. And this is the faith that delivers from Satan, and all divillish,
falls and conterfet visitation, both of foes and friends, as in Job. Which is
most incident to Godly men, because they are a vexation to the wicked; that
when he sees no way to still them: yet he is sure that his prosperity and
redemption from misery must needs pacify them, and make them have not a word to
say. Which Psalm is an abridgement of the whole book of Job: for an absolution
for sin, after confession and repentance: he being well resolved of the
favor and love of God in accepting of him, and that he has pleased him,
because of his Advancement.

Construction. Mem, is waters, and Aleph, to teach. The waters of doctrine are a
great blessing, and he is most blessed that bestows it. The waters of
doctrine are taken for physique, and for medicine, from the freshnes of their
nature, and their fluentnes: for Enimyes of diverse sorts, and for misery, for
overflowing, as Is. 7. By the one kind, he prays to be saved from the
other. That he swim upon them and not be sunk by them: as the waters of Noah,
for comfort, and destruction, mark the repetition.

Genesis. The quiescenceys are diverse. Doctrine heals the sick. They have eas
in their sickness, and rest on their bed, and are well supported, they have rest
for their souls, and forgivenes of sin, and it eases the mind. The
contrary, is molestation and vexation, of Enimyes and the world, that would
have him dead, and out of mind, for a rest when he had no rest, and never no
eas while he lives. His professed friends are not peaceable to him. These
waters, he wishes for lerning enough to assuage and quiet. He marketh Gods
pleasure and quiescency in him, in brooking of his integrity and taking him to
his presence, and useing him, and in prevailing over them. For a certain token
of forgivenes.

THE SECOND BOOK.
PSALM. XLII.
HIs son Absalom having drive^ him out of Jerusalem from the presence and
service of God, called his face, and having him in chase and hot pursuit, and
skorning him, his God and his salvation: saying, where is thy God, and where is
thy salvation: as in Ps. 3. that he was now in a new misery after that of
Saul, like one deep calling another, or many channels making a pool of
affliction, with greeff upon greeff even to slaugther, Psalm. 115. so that with
extremity of tears and sighs and greeff, even in his very bones, at the
railing and revileing, and hard oppression of the Enemy; and doubting of his
God that he so solemnly protested before them: David bewaileth his Exile, and
with great affectation of Gods presence again, prays for his loveing kindenes
for it, that he may have a song to sing for the same, Ps. 30. a prayer to the
preserver of his life. With a good-cheer, still urgeing his undaunted
confidence in the Eternal, confesses him his present Salvation. But keeping
alive the matter of the last book, which begann with Jehovah the Eternal, and
his righteousness, and ended, with the rock whereupon his foot stands, the
faith and confidence that he obtained by his way: he proceeds now by the
Name of Elohim, judgment, and Kingdom of God, his Rock, useinge no other name
in this Psalm but once Jehovah for mercy, and repeating that so often, and as
ernestly as thirstynes requireeth drink. In whom he is, and will be ever
comforted, and have his full trust and affiance, and for ever confess him, and
wait for his salvation: and will endure, though it be never so long, in hope
to come to Beth-el, Luz, and Iebuz, and Jerusalem, the house of God, and his
holly Hill and Tabernacle and Altar, and to the true service of God. And this
from Exodus, for loveing kindenes and zeal, the fire and cloud: part of the Law.

Construction. Mem, for waters. The Beast has but one kind, to quench his
thirst: therefore his soul is unworthy to be expressed. But the soul of man has
diverse, by reason of his divinity. The presence of God is the Scriptures: the
waters of life, and salvation, and his God, and his Rock: cares, deeps,
spoutes, breaches, waves, for affliction. Beth a house: in tabernacles and the
house of God, he honored the Scriptures, before them all, in Passover: this he
has to prove Gods presence and salvation which he will ever wait for without
dismay, in all calamity. Attributes of water are also these: thirst, pouring
out, passing over, troubling, confess, make to flow or publish etc. As you
shall find plain by the allusion and affectation of words.

Exodus. The first Petaroth, and chapter, begins with these words. These
are the Names etc. The most memorable, and the best names under heaven, and
the only ones for salvation and invocation are the Names of God, which here,
he never gives over repeating. From hence the commission of Moses and of the
Prophets; Christ and his Apostles, Exodus 3. what God? The God of his life, of
salvation, his rock, the Eternal that shall com etc.

PSALM XLIII.
BY this prayer, he claims his defense from God, because his Enimyes are
ungodly, unjust and deceiptful men; and so makes the quarrel his, wondering
that he should be thus rejected, and have such cause of sadness by oppression.
And prayeing for a perfect understanding of the word, and his truth called his
light, that may lead him, and bring him again, to his hill, and to the Altar of
God, his only joy and delight, to thank him: he cheers up himself with this,
that he yet still waits on God and confesses him his present salvation
without despair. After the cloud and fire, Exodus 13. To make this book
suitable to the book of Exodus or coming out of Egypt: you shall mark how he
deals. First, he treats of the person that brought them out: his only God,
and trust, and rely, and present salvation, as in the last Psalm. 42. where he
medleth with nothing but his Name, and his confidence in his word, his thirst
after it, his comfort by it, and attendance to it. So that he will have no
other Gods but him, according to the first commandment. And because his
deliverance must be by prayer: in this Psalm, he frame-th his request from
the Promiss, Genesis 15. That dureing this time of bondage of 400 years, wherein
they were to be so ill entreated, by a wrongful and a subtle nation: that God
now would judge him, and fight his quarrel and deliver him, as Ps. 119. L. from
such unkind, untractable, subdole and unjust men, and by the light of his
truth, bring him to the right service of him. For his place, his dwellings,
his Altar and his Person: that he may com hard unto him, the God of all his
joy, and delight, and that he has no other to be merry with but him: and he
shall be his only and very God, and no other. And therefore he wills his
mind not to be troubled and greeved, abased and dejected at this burden of
sorrow for himself: but to trust still and to wait strongly upon this God, whom
he will worship, being sure, that he will with all speed deliver him, and
presently save him. The mystery of this Psalm is easily gathered from the
first words, which are plain from the promiss: as for the 400. years in Ribhah
Ribhi, where the two Arrs make the 400 of affliction, by their travail and
servitude, and unhumane usage whom God will judge. The same words com again to
the same purpose in Psalm, 119. R. 74. And thus he intends to tune his
harp, in this book, wholely to the first commandment, and play upon the
promiss. Genesis 15. for the strength of beleeff: that he would never give over
his confidence for any affliction: be it never so long or so sore. For Truth,
the other part of the way of God.

Construction. Mem, waters. For nations: and deceitfullnes and failing also:
Job 6. light and truth for the waters of the Law. Other kinds and propertyes
in the last Psalm: oppression, Enemy, trouble, confess, which is to make to
flow abroad etc. Ghimel, for reward, is here answered by judgeing and
revengeing Genesis 15. for the equity and justice in the office of a judge. 1.
Sam. 24. And by his solemn celebration as a sacrifice. Ghimel, for waining
also, as by his waiting, Ps. 131. Mog, both the letters, are to melt: as when
the soul is troubled and the heart faints.

Exodus. Gods name: his strength and confidence, and his Mirth, and his
celebration, as Ps. 28. For his salvation: his mirth depends upon his
salvation, and his salvation upon his presence, and that, upon his faith. And
these are, Terms, and definitions of Godhead, as Names of God.

PSALM XLIIII.
AS the people of God, in old time, prospered not by the strength of their own
arms (as appeered still by the ods against them) but by their wise direction,
Ministry and discipline called the right hand and arm of God: and the
knowledge of the Law, called the light of his countenance: and his favor,
because their Religion pleased him: God himself being leader of their armies,
as a shepherd leads his sheep: and seeing God has now failed to go with
his people (erring in their understanding) and made no reckoning of them; but
has given them, and sold them for nothing, to their Enimyes, and obscured them
among the Dragons, the Hethen, to shame them: that they suffer all manner of
reproach, of all about them; that Jacob is ashamed of his command: now because
he himself trusted not in his own strength for salvation, but he and they all
of the same faith, and the same Religion, and that they never failed a Jot of
the covenant between God and them (notwithstanding their misery) but held
themselves from all forain worship: and for that all their punishment was for
him, that is, for their Religions sake: The church, as Ps. 134. prays for his
loveing kindenes likewise, that he would consider their oppression and not to
sleep, as Ps. 121. but redeem and help them, and by his Name deliver them. That
they might have a victorious Issue over their Enimyes, with shame to them, and
prais to his Name for ever. In the first part of this Psalm, is the manifest
majesty, and souveraignty, and worship of God in his works of old, as Ps. 111.
and he makeeth him a king for the bringing of the children of Israel out of
Egypt, by his judgeme^t in his Law, and placeing the^ in the la^d of promiss,
pitying their case and favoring the^. Making Jacob a cunning wrestler, and
to trise up the heels of the hethe^, and supplant the^. So now as the church
has need, he prays God to help Jacob and the Church against their Enimyes,
because their trust is only in him, and not in weapons, and the strength of
man. In the second part: he shows that the Church is in wors case them that
in Egypt, and their suffering, slavery, subjection and servitude far greater:
in so much, as he shows heerin, true sacrifice for the love of God.
Affliction stands for Sacrifice, as sacrifice is a Type of affliction in the
Law; which being indureed for the love of God and his Law, and covenant: does
challenge favor from God, and reconcilement to him. Now the Church offers to
be tried by God, to whom no secrets of the heart are hid: that dureing all this
heavy burden of oppression, they have never forgotten, nor been falls in his
covenant: neither in thought nor deed have once fallen back, or turned their
steps aside out of his way: or have been out of mind of him, or have once held
up their hands or besought any other God. And for this great love, they being
thus daily slain: according to the second commandment (as it belongs to the
first) he prays for Gods favor and redemption, out of their low estate by
affliction and oppression; with a sound hope and confidence of salvation, as
they have offered their sincere and clean hearts, and upright and pure minds,
the sacrifice of righteousness and innocencey before him, as Psalm. 4. from
Abraham's offering of his son, Genesis 22.

Construction. Mem, waters. As the Hethen, Nations and peoples, Enemy,
afflictors, misery and oppression, place of Dragons, great rivers or sea of
Egypt. Daleth, a door: the door of hope, Hos. 2. Is. 65. from Ios. 7. door,
for a valley. The Entrance of their plantation in Canaan. Which was in the valley
of Akor where they received discomfiture and fled, before Aie. The Allusion is
plain, by repeating of the word Achor being of the same sound, Is. 45. Their
turning back. There is a kind of entrance by the sword which is called a door.
Likewise the door of faith, Actor. 14. by the Ministry called the right hand
and Arm of God. And by the light of Gods presence, which is instruction. Where
by, Christ calls himself a door, and a shepherd, for goeing in and out by
him, and his feeding of them, Ioh. 10. as of Cirus, Is. 45. Mad, to meat, for
the division of the land by Joshua, Mad, a garment for both the letters.

Exodus. His King and his Lord, the God of Isaac: that he would not sleep
when he is called upon, and let his people be made a laughing stock to the
world, but rise and help them. In Isaak was his covenant, and Jacob hitherto
has syncerely kept it: therefore they would not be made a scoff to the world, a
reproach and shame to their neighbors, and all ignominy to suffer, as
sacrifice, when they have Gods Name in such singular honor and reverence. From
Isaaks Name and sacrifice, Genesis 17.22. which is here meant by the vileness of
reputation, and sorenes of affliction, which they got by their defect in war,
when Gods word and his presence shined not unto them. Remember the Echo: and
like sheep for their meat, etc. like slain sheep etc. Again, thou put us a
laughter, etc. thou put us a byword, etc.

PSALM XLV.
HE shows in this psalm, the Espousals of the Lamb and his wife: of Christ
and the Church: the Kingdom and majesty of God Ps. 145. and the heavenly
Jerusalem: the reconcilement between the word and the faithful believers: for
the mutual love of wedlock, and chastity, and continencey in religion; by an
Emblem of an eternal comfort, and a pleasant love song or Epithalamion, most
sweetly. That as Marriage make-eth glad and merry hearts: that they bestow their
hearts and delights and whole love, one upon another: so that the Church
should have none other God but one. And to this purpose, he handles both
parts of the Ephithalamion, which shows to be more glorious, and more
virtuous then the earth can bear, yet occasioned by Salomons Match with Pharohs
daughter. And beginning with the Groom: he makeeth him the fairest and best
spokeen of all men, because by his gracious carriage, he got worship and honor
from all men, and is blessed of God for ever. And this is his Cincture, and
strength, and virtue, Ps. 111.145. that makeeth him like a Giant, or a worthy,
Ps. 19.89. He makeeth him also a Knight, that is mounted upon victorious
Truth, and carried with meek Justice, with true humility, to ride prosperously.
That insisting and insideing heerupon, his Ministry and right hand may teach
him terrible things: and from hence to steek his Enimyes to the heart. And with
sharp and keen words, subdue the people under him. Lastly, he makeeth him a
King, that has none but God for his Throne, and rest and confidence: for
soundnes of Judgment, and defense of religion. as Psalm 89. And his Rod of
Justice gets him a crown of rejoyceing, and anoyntment above his fellows: from
his very God that he serves. The precious matter he had to write of. His
clothes are all perfumed with lovely carriage, and sweet behavior, to make him
delectable and amiable, before the Queen and her women, all in Gold and perles,
the lovelynes of the church, for pureity of religion and cleernes of doctrine,
to delight him. And now, having runn through all the kinds of fansyes, and
bravery of the word of God, of Christ, the Law and the Bridegroom, that can
move love or affection, to allure the Church to his society and familiarity,
and to woo them: he passes to the other part of the Epithalamion, of the
Bride, the Church: how she might possible, stir the love of Christ unto her:
And this is all, by her inward service of him, her allegiance and obedience to
him, to forsake father and mother and all the world for him, to subject herself
only unto him. And bow unto him and follow him, whither-so-ever he goes. And
this is the bewty of the Bride that wins her Husband, and this is the
carriage that shall get her honor, and presents, and exaltation from the
richest even her Humility. Besides, the Bride has no outward glory, nor pomp,
neither is the churches bravery in visibility, or worldly Eminencey: but is
both secret and sacred, and most spiritual and inward, to make it the more
worthy, the more precious, the more optative, expetible and desirable: so that
as, she is inwardly most glorious and rich: so the bravery of the Church, and
riches of religion, is only in the depth of the spirit and divine wisdom, and
secrecy of understanding, most maydenly chaste and holy. Which being of a pure
conversation, shall be reveled and brought unto Christ, with a train, of pure
virgins and undefiled Saints, the Catholic Church: which is holy by the
mysteryes of godlynes. And the better to affect him: they shall com flowing to
his court, with all alacrity and cheerfulnes, to pleas him. The end of all is,
that in steed of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, his fathers, the principal men of
religion: by this affinity and union: there may be propagated, a stemm of
princes out of their children, (they being become one flesh) to rule all
nations, to make his Name a famous memorial in every generation, for the
people to worship for ever. For his defense and deliverance. And this is a
great secret, concerning Christ and the Church, for the convoy of the Church to
the service of God, showing their God and King and Defendour and Conductor. As
the Poet has Hector and Andromache for the General and his host.

Construction. Mem waters, peoples and Nations and kingdoms etc. Throne for
kingdom, Name for kingdom as in the Lords prayer. By the repeating of the
eternity of both. This Throne is for ever etc. And thy Name and fame I will
make remembered, by the people for ever and ever. etc. as Ps. 145. For the
property of water: these words doubled: the Queen and her women shall be
brought flowing, and com unto the King etc. and unto his closset etc. He, for
the bravery of his presence, the choicest presence. Mem and He, for Meh, what,
for the definition, being a good matter: and his work of the King: his marriage
being the best for the Joy thereof. And Mahah, to linger, mentions the
expedition: as swift, etc. flowing, etc.

Exodus. The Passover: of the Queen to the King, and their famous Issue for
ever. as before. The Name of God, and the Termn King, is here confounded, as
Ps. 95. 2. Kings. 18.19. etc. by definition the King is called a God, as the
poet called Augustus etc. Elohim being taken vocative, but in the greek it is
doubtful Heb. 1. as both vocative and nominative.

PSALM XLVI.
Where God is present and people well advised, there wants no ready help in
distress: so the Church of God having always the Ark and the doctrine
thereof, called the river-chanels of the city, by them to instruct them: fear
nothing. Though the rageing Hethen, called the roreing sea, set upon them: and
though the Kingdoms called the mountains, shake with their proud invasion, and
many Kingdoms overthrowen by it, and great alteration be in the world: yet
they assure themselves, Jerusalem cannot be stirred, because God, their Ark and
confidence is in it, and will help them early, before the Enemy be up; being
sure by the word, the God of war is with them, and will releeve them. That
uses to make strange work in the word: as Ps. 76. to cease wars, and make
them hold their hands, that he himself only may be exalted. A virgin shall
conceive and bear a son, and thou shall call his Name Immanuel. All the
Churches conception is peace, and the child that is born, is wonderful for
counsel, and the prince of peace, and has all the government to himself, as a
God of valor and father of eternity. And this is the God of Jacob that is all
their Munition, the God of hosts that is always with them, by their
confidence in the wisdom and righteousness of the Law. And in all their
distresses they call upon him, as Immanuel, and in all commotions, for the God
of Jacob, the God of war and prince of peace, their safeguard and whole rely.
Being persuaded of present help from him, because they see, by the Scriptures:
what wonderful debate he has quieted, and the strife and contention he has
ceased, and the peace that he has made in despite of all preparation, that
he only may be conqueror, and stand the last man upon the earth, as
Redeemer, and be exalted for ever. For his dwelling always among them, and
his watchfullnes over them, and his early riseing to defend them, by the power
of his word. And for this cause they will have no other Gods but him, the God
of hosts, the God of Jacob, the right God of their Salvation: upon whom they
still presume, and are stout and undaunted for ever.

Construction. Mem, waters: swelling, and roreing, and troubled waters: for
Seas: the rageing of the Nations and Kingdoms: and for War: any distres and
desolations by war, as Da: 9. secondly, the quiet waters of life, in the
temple, and doctrine of the word to save, which they call, the God of war, for
martial discipline that is still on their side, and ready to help them: and
voweth to prevail over all the other kinds of waters. Vav, a hook or crook,
for the copulative. The church is not pulled back with fear or cowardlynes, but
affixed as God with us etc. The two letters make the Incliticque. Mo, Ps. 2.
alluded unto, by the Churches Relyeing, and help: affixed. Mark the repetition.

Exodus. This resembles altogether the passing the red sea, both for phrase and
effect: the one water working upon the other. The word melted the hearts of
them, it runs through the battle, and dauntes the Army. And makes way through
the Enemy, and tameth the seas by the presence thereof, the High: for Moses
authority. The Nam^ is Jacobs God, the God of war, the best discipline, and
Munition about them. Mark the repetition. The God of Hosts etc: and mountains
and kingdoms, and waters, and nations compared etc. For a kind of Passover or
escape.

PSALM. XLVII.
THe Eternal being sovereign King and Defender of all the earth, having
conquered diverse Nations, gives Jacob the best inheritance, because he loved
him; and sitting in his holy Throne (the Scriptures) of all people in the world
he prefers the Jews, the people of Abraham's God: that is, them of the
faith and righteousness of Abraham, and that of the law. Therefore, the
Corites invent for the church, to sing a plaudite and triumph to their king,
with all shrilnes and alacrity, for that their God reigns and that for their
Justification. The second Psalm gives warning to all the world, to subject
themselves to the Promiss, and content themselves with obedience thereunto, and
reverently and willingly abide it: and not to resist the hope of the faithful,
for fear of destruction. Neither was the law of Moses made to resist the faith
of Abraham, or against the promiss: but to describe the righteousness of
Abraham, and set out the tree of a godly life, whose leaves never fall to the
ground, as Psalm 1; but all his words are with judgment as Psalm. 112. And so
is the law the way to grace, and hinders not the promiss: and Moses and the
Prophets, to Abraham's bosom. Now the Sunbeams of the promiss psalm. 2. in this
Psalm, shine upon the walls of Sion, both in the same words and matter. For
God haueing subdued the Nations, and given Jacob a proud Inheritance: that he
has prevailed with great shouting, both high, and terrible: and is inthronized
in his law, as a mighty King and defendour of all the earth: for this great
defense of the Church, and their deliverance, and their setting of them now at
their rest: They will all Nations to triumph, and sing to their God, and extol
their King, and praise his wisdom, and to have no other God, because this
their God, the God of Abraham's people, have been best defended of all the
people of the world, and he has here performed his promiss Genesis 15. And thus
the child of righteousness receaueth his blessing, psalm. 2. and anoyntment
above his fellows, as psalm. 45. Now the reason of inverting the words,
Abraham, Isack and Jacob, in the three last Psalms: is, that he may with
Abraham conclude the promise, and fall again to the story. And this also is
holy and most mystical, but usual: As Thummim before Vrim, Ps. 26.27. Sarah
before Abraham psalm. 111.112. and the diverse transpositions and interruptions,
altering and maiming of the order of the A B C Psalms for godly mysteryes.

Construction. Mem, waters, people and Nations, Inheritance, the pride of Jacob
etc. Gods holy throne is the Sciptures, which is also waters. if all the
Nations in the world were gathered together, like the water Genesis 1. yet because
he reigns over all in the scriptures, his people are cheeff for the
preeminence of discipline, as the waters above the firmament, have domination
over the waters beneath. So he sits upon the water and rules ^he waters:
Ps. 29. by subdueing all and taking his choice. For this, upon the letter
Zain, to hear: the loudest and most triumphing noise and voices for the
hearing, and sweetest chaunting and psalming is commanded, for the excellencey
of his Majesty, by the way of waters also. Psalm. 93, 96. by a like metaphore
of clapping etc,

Exodus. The God of Abraham, one other of the Names of Moses authority and
commission, is described, Exo. 3. From Genesis 14. by the term, Eljon, High etc.
Maggen Defens: words from that text. There is no higher thing then reigning and
power and Dominion. And this for being above all, and excelling all: he is to
be honored above all, and solemnized, as by the doubled words and phrases:
Sing psalms etc. so is he over all, and passes all, and his kingdom is for a
kind of passover, and promotion.

PSALM. XLVIII.
FOr the greatness of the majesty of God, and the glory of Sion, the wonder of
the world: the Enimyes that combineed against Jerusalem, were astonyed, and
trembled for fear. This was Edom; Moab and Amon, against Iehoshaphat King of
Judah. Now because they know, that their Gods Righteousness; Judgment and daily
kindenes for their service of him, dwelling in their towers and Temple, is
their Defens; whose Name and Prais is over all the world: the Chorites sing in
Procession his Judgments, Ps. 97. goeing round about the city, to consider
her strength and glory, to record it, and tell it to their children, that they
may keep it in mind for ever, in memory of their deliverance and serve him. As
all bodies live by the heart: so the Law, and body of Moses, is not without
affection and devotion, and a liueing and a gracious soul within it, for
salvation and recovery of Mankind after sin, and redemption after his fall.
And this is by a righteous government called the Kingdom of God, which was
still their conductor and defendour, and the cloud over the mercy seat, that
was the priests warrant for sacrifice and atonement: so highly commended in the
last Psalm. For the wonderful grace and blessing of inheritance, bestowed
upon them in the promiss: which was covered with a vail, as the veil lay over
their hearts and understanding, when they read it. For as the Law of Moses is
to trick out and express the righteousness of Abraham: it must not forget his
faith, nor his love, nor his bountifullnes and gifts of the mind that last
for ever: Judgment, fidelity and mercy, the weighty matters, as Psalm. 112. but
in one Ceremony or other precept or complement, the whole man must be thought
upon, as well for grace and adoption as for judgment and condemnation, as Ps.
101. seeing life is promissed to the observers. And this part of the Law, is
that which Christ in the new Testament so much prefers; as uprightnes and
cleernes of the inner man, which is the absolute holiness and perfection of
godlynes, the way to grace which he requires. Whereby a man seems to be
divided against himself: the flesh against the spirit, and grace becomes
opposite to works, as the Apostle shows by division of the Law. And this is
Christ's fullfilling of the Law, and baptism of the holy Ghost, that angered
the Jews, and set all the world on fire, being beyond the comun
understanding. In this Psalm he comes to the kingdom and city of their
great king, and defendour, their God of righteousness, in the last Psalm, and
this is Jerusalem; their university, mount Sion, his holy hill, the school of
all godlynes and virtue, and of the Law of God. The Law shall com forth of
Sion, and the word of God out of Jerusalem etc. Now as all types of holiness
were to be most glorious for worship and majesty: as Psalm. 45.145.111. So the
Jews (for fame, of their religion) would have the place (like the tabernacle)
to excel. So that all the world might take delight in the structure and order
of the temple, and Synagogue of Jerusalem, this theater and oracle of the Law,
and stage where the word is acted: more then the Queen of the South, took, in
the sitting of Salomons servantes. Where two or three are gathered togeter in my
name, there am I in the midst of them, and so experience has taught them and
assures the Church, that Gods love is always in his Temple where his service
is, and never away from them that fear him. And showing first the greatness of
God in this place, for his daily worship and his fame, his name and calling
upon him, their munition, his presence and releeff upon their Batlementes,
Psalm. 56. by confounding their enimyes: his kindenes in his temple, which is
better then life, as Ps. 63. his fame and praise over all the world: and
because he does nothing but Justice, with his right hand, and scepter of his
learned ministry; that breaks all the heathen in pieces, as Ps. 2. that Sion
and all Judah may be glad of his judgments: they would not have this place
ever forgotten. For that this is the very God, their only God that has saved
them from death. And therefore likewise, they will have no other God but him for
ever. As in the former Psalms, and according to the Tabernacle, Exodus 36.
wherein, the love of God was daily resident.

Construction. Mem, waters, for the City and Godly policy thereof, the
habitation of Godlynes and holiness, Is. 33.48. of kindenes and Justice and
Judgment. the waters of the Law. The letter Cheth, to break or terrify, by the
shipwreck and astonishment of the Enemy. Macha, applauding, Zach. 12. as of
the City, and of the towns of Judah. Or Machah, for abolishing, as of the
Enemy, Ps. 9. in the contrary, by Sapper to register, or tell or write up, for
Is. 33. to book, and not to blot out. Marck the repetition and resounding of
the terms.

Exodus. Here is the dwelling of the great God, and righteous King, the King of
Salem and Sion, Ps. 76. here is the place of blessing, here hence righteousness
does flow, and salvation is all about it, and God does lead men from death, as
a kind of passover. For another Name of God. The God of Shem, Genesis 9. of
renowm and fame, for Justice: even Melchisedeq an other of Gods Ministers,
Sacrificer of the most high God; Genesis 14. Heeris the Altar of God, and here is
the Priesthood, and place of service and sacrifice, which Israel in Egypt, so
much desired, Exo. 7.8.9. according to the promiss to return to, and to make
merry at, and the Name of the City is, There is the Eternal, Ezech. 48. as the
Name Jehovah the Eternal, is Righteousness.

PSALM XLIX.
THe wisdom and understanding of this Prable, which he would have all the
world to know, is this. The vanity of riches to be trusted in, and of the
Owners; their foolish ways that glory in them, and their disappointments that
keep not their honor, but dye like beasts, and consume in the pit, like
rotten sheep, and their wealth comes they know not to whom, to make merry
withal, while death and the grave get dominion over them. And the comfort of
the Poor in a hard time, in famine or other adversity, or perplexity, the
crossnes of his life, called the iniquity of his heels. That when as the
Richeman that likeed this life, and the worship belonging to it, shall dye
without riches or glory, to descend with him: the Poor-man shall be, redeemed
from his misery, and be accepted and live, to be heir to his fathers that
are deceasseed, and enjoy his substance, the word of God. Thus is the Poor man
for his patience, exalted up to heaven, and the Richman condemned to hell, for
want of understanding: the one being alive and happy, and the other dead and
in hell for sorrow. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. etc.
If Moses and the Prophets can quench the wrath of God, and extinguish the
flames of Hell, and quiet a tormented conscience; then surely, Moses and the
Prophets are the true and living way to grace and to Christ: as Christ is the
way to the father, and the understanding of Moses and the Scriptures. Abraham's
bosom. And from hence is that parable, luke 16. which is here proclaimed to
Riche-men, and Men in adversity. Which doctrine, as it is called a parable in
the greek, and a comparison in the hebrew: so in latin, it is most properly
to be termed a conjecture, which is a doctrine much used of the Jews, called
Signs, and is most frequent in the Psalms: parables being a good
demonstration, and a principal evidence of truth. As tokens show friends: so
signs are a piece of knowledge, whereby we are brought to beleeff: and as we
know in part by them: So is it a step of faith. And by this observation, David
is mightily confirmed, and highly honors the doctrine through-out the
Psalms, and greatly complains, that Jerusalem wanted learned men, therein, as
Ps. 74. Therefore he first propounds the Riche-mans travail concerning the
world: counting it a hard thing for him to enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And making all his habilements and facultyes of riches, nothing worth, and all
his pleasure to be but the flattery of the world, and but for a short season:
because the Rich has many friends, as Solomon says, and good likeing, is
highly commended of the world, that takes him clean away and deludeeth him,
and bewitcheth and astonyeth his understanding; that he is no more capable
then a beast Dan. 4. of the golden rules of righteousness, by law or by faith,
as a scholar of Jerusalem. So dies he and goes into oblivion, and descends
into utter darkness, and corruption, like a dumb beast never to be mentioned
more: which for want of faith or virtue to succed him, or good education to out
live or survive him: he dies a second death, and all his honor and glory is
ended with him in the dust, as Ps. 7. and death triumphs over him. And as
Pride goes before the fall: so the fall of man, is the trusting in riches, and
honor, and letting slip knowledge and understanding and the fear of the Lord.
When David sees this end com of the Rich, whose state all along is contrary,
2. These. 1. to his: he being much perplexed with the errors of his life: he
easily concludes, that by his daily affliction and misery, he is thereby, to
look for eternal comfort, glory and felicity. Therefore he fears not but he
shall be made wise unto salvation, and by correction escape the pit, that his
form and shape corrupt not, as Ps^ 16. but his faith and rigteousnes shall last
for ever. From the fall of Adam, who was turned out of honor for disobedience,
Genesis 3.

Construction. Mem, waters. For understanding and knowledge, waters of life,
the waters of Judah etc. Is. 48. also riches or abundance of wealth, the
Riche-mans way makes him a fool, and no better tha^ a beast, if he wants
wisdom. He seeks for land and houses to last for ever in his Name: he
finds suddenly the grave, for his everlasting dwelling, which shall have the
dominion over him, and wear him all to dust, for the letter Tet, and Mot, both
the letters, for his translation, such is his passing hence, or demigration, a
kind of passover. The most illustrious estate in this world, and most
glittering turns to long lasting obscurity, Eccl. 11. mark the resounding.
Man in honor etc. and all the terms doubled. Is. 8.11.32. Ier. 2.51.

Exodus. The ninth Petaroth, and chapter 30. for the Sacrifice or offering money
of every person. But that can not redeem from death. No wealth is sufficient,
but the waters of life and understanding, of knowledge, and of the fear of God.
This is the substance he presumes on Ps. 16. mark the words of redemption: no
man shall redeem, etc: but God will redeem etc. again remember. A kind of Name
is when a man desires to leave a Memory.

PSALM L.
THe word of the Everlasting, the God of Gods, by the mouth of Moses in his
last testament to the children of Israel: has been preached in Sion, to all
the world, for a warning of his angry, fearful and horrible judgment of his
Law, called a consumeing fire, for falling away and transgression. Now he,
being the God that judges: calls heaven and earth to witness of his
Iust^ce, which as in Psalm 40. in the Priestly part of service, is an utter
condemnation of sacrifice for the glorifyeing of God. And also of the
leviticall part: the usurping of the word, that is, without regard of
instruction or observation. Therefore, because he is a God of mercy, and in his
mercy releaseth, when they call on him in distress: he will have mercy, and no^
Sacrifice; a spiritual Thanks-offering, rather then a cloveen footed bullock,
Ps. 69. to glorify him: and he will show him the way of salvation; least in
his wrath, they be consumeed and devoured without deliverance. As gifts are
not gracious to the kind, and as presents provoke not friends: and all the
glory of friends, is to be freely used, and called upon in distress: so al
Gods glory is free mercy, and not sacrifice, and to be wholely, and only
relied and called upon: because the best sacrifice serves not in time of
judgment: but a penitent invocation in trouble, for him that will be saveed
and comforted. And they must have no other friend or God, but him, to worship,
to call upon or to serve. And this is for the profession of his deer Saints,
and chosen Servantes, and Elect, mentioned in the first table: whom in his
Kingdom, he thus reprooveth, for their drowzines in observing. Again the
wicked are utterly condemned before him, for taking his name wholely in vain,
through out the second table; when he observes none of his commandments: but
resists his will, and breaks his Law, though it be in his mouth. To these
also belong confession, repentance and amendment, and a calling upon God, if
they will be put in the way of salvation. So that, the book of the Law, the two
Tables being opened, and the whole world to be judged: either for misdooing
or not doing, we are all condemned, without repentance and the mercy of God.
Like the breaking of the Tables, Exo. 31.32. for defect in the holy preesthood
and Levites, as well as the wicked. Lev. 6.7. And he makes prayer, and the
calling upon God, and his Name; better then sacrifice, as grace is ever more
worth then wo^kes.

Construction. Nun. Defective. That all are defective by the Law. In manner of
performance, what the perfection is: what the imperfection. Nun, for offspring,
what is to be disanulled, and what to be established: what to be condemned,
and what to be justified. I approove not: etc. but I will reproove thee etc.

Exodus. The diverse kinds of Sacrificers, when they are com to sacrifice to
their God, as they pretended in Egypt. And what kind of Sacrifice is best,
and properest way of salvation, and the greatest glory to God, even the Fruit
and Calves of the lips, Hos. 14. Heb. 13. See these words repeated: Sacrifice
to God, etc. He that sacrifice-eth Thanks-offering etc. God called a
consumming fire, for his Name.

PSALM LI.
DAvid takeeth his occasion in this Psalm, to accuse himself, of Murder and
Adultery, though he speaks but of Murder, which was caused by Adultery. And
seeing in his conscience the uglynes of this Sin and transgression, and the
continual blemish, of his guiltines; and that he had only sinned against
God, and highly displeased him, by transgressing his word; because the fleshly
and natural man had prevailed in him, and that he had this wickedness in him
from the womb, according to the truth of the Scriptures, as Ps. 58. and God
loved the truth from the heart: and confession being requireed, as Ps. 50. and
as the story of the Leper does follow sacrifice in the Law: so here. And
therefore he turns his sinning to Lepry; and for his form, proceeds in the
person of a Leper, and prays for forgivenes, as a Leper for clensing, Math.
8. Luc. 17. And in this cloud, he begins at the mercy seat, that God would
show his mighty kindenes and mercy upon him, and wipe away all his trespass,
and wash away all his sin, and clens him from the spots of his iniquity, which
compassed his heels and marred his goeing, as Ps. 49. and give him inward
wisdom, to sanctifye him and purge him like Issop and cleanse him: to justify
him, and wash him, whiteer then snow, and deliver him out of temptation, and
cheer his krokeen bones. That he would not look upon the sorenes of his
sins, and that he would blot out, and deface his iniquity, that he would
clens his corrupt thoughts and clothe him with a clean skinn, skinn him over
again with a right spirit, and make him a new man. That God would not put him
out of the Church, for his plague and sores of Sin, not deprive him, of all
his spirit of holiness; but make him glad with his salvation, and sustein him
with the spirit of zeal and willingness: Ps. 145. that he may convert
trespassers and sinners, to the ways of Godliness. And that the very God of his
salvation, would deliver him from Murder, that he may be able to speak of
Gods Justice, and tell out his Prais. For the Matter, because it is the
confession, and confidence requireed in the last Psalm, and because God
refuseeth all other sacrifice and offering: he comes now with his brokeen
and contrite heart, and a mind all in pieces, with greeff for his sin. That
he would mend up Zion, repair his knowledge, and re-edify his understanding,
by the walls of Jerusalem, that God may pleas himself, with a perfet offering
and sacrifice of righteousness, when they offer up bullocks upon his Altar.
Math. 8. Le. 1.14.

Construction. Nun defective. His great defect is his sin, his trespass, his
iniquity with all these terms doubled. Aleph to teach; teach me the wisdom
etc. That I may teach trespassers etc. The letters Nun and Aleph: Na or No: to
annihilate, frustrate, refute, abolish or make void, is intended in these
words: washing, rensing, clensing, wipeing, blotting out, to do away, and
salving. The Accidents, to make a whole and a clean subject. To deliver him,
and cure him.

Exodus. His Sacrifice here, is a Sinn-offering or Burnt-offering, a brokeen
heart, Penitencey, and Greeff for his sin. And a broken spirit, for a means of
a new Creation of a clean heart, right and firm, of a chaste, and of a holy
spirit, of a free spirit and a willing mind, and the whole man: that God may
delight in his Sacrifice etc: Mark how all the words are doubled, to show the
intention. And save him, make him glad once again, and to rejoice in him, with
righteousness and prais. Hos. 14 Heb. 13. For another kind of sacrifice, to
perform their promiss in Egypt. a God of Salvation, for his Name.

PSALM LII.
BEtween us and you is firmed a great gulf, they that would go from hence to
you, cannot, and they that would com from thence to us, cannot. So is the
difference and distance between the Rich and the Poor, not small, and the
passage impossible. For when the Poor has all his hope and trust in God: the
Rich reckons not of God at all, having gotten what his heart can wish, but
blaspheme^h as Ps. 10. Neither can the Rich-man be brought to the Poor-mans
faith, nor the Poor be made profane, or can they be reconcileed each to other;
So far a sunder is Prosperity and Adversity, pride and bashfullnes. Neither by
any means, can their punishment or reward be changed, so great a firmament,
and so unpassible a space is set between them. Disdeigne keeps off the one,
and f^ar, the other. And likewise, when their lots be changeed, the one being
made happy, the other accursed, to make the righteous merry. And this opposition
is good, by the diverse and contrary sens of diverse words in the same Psalm,
as Havoth, wealth and corruption: Chesed, blasphemy, and kindenes: and Sheresh,
in a contrary sens. as Psalm. 80. The occasion of this Psalm is Doegs discovery
of David, and complaining of his friend Ahimelek, to get his life, and that the
Poor, in affliction, might have no place left him at all: and this, by the
practice of a keen and subdole tongue, that causes all mischeeff and division,
variance and debate, strife and contention, never to be reconcileed or
appeased more. It is corrupt, and falls, and subdole, and sharp, malicious, and
spiteful, and inflameed with blasphemy, and useeth all the ways of
destruction, devouring and subversion: so his judgment must be to feel
eternal flames therein, and his own overthrow from God, and an expelling out of
his house and plantation, and an utter rooting of him out of the world with
disgrace, for trusting in his high place and his wealth, because the hevenly
Father planted him not: when David is still green in the house of God, with the
faith in his merceyes, and admireing the mighty goodness and operation of his
Name for ever. The form is, from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and
the tree of life Genesis 3. Behold, I put before you, good and bad, life and
death, blessing and cursing etc. Now where the tongue should be kept from evil,
and the lips from guile, and they should hate and shunn evil, and do good, if
they mean to have life, and good days: as Ps. 97.34. Doeg is blameed here, for
his love^ng of ill more then good, and therefore held accursed, and to be thrown
out of his habitation, and out of the favor of God. For man lives not by
b^ead only, but by the word of God and faith thereon. Which is the tree of
life, as Psalm. 56. The favor of God, Ps. 30. The tree of the everlasting
mercyes of God, that are never to be spent and consumeed: but by faith men
gather them continually, like Manna in the wilderness, and they be renewed every
morning, always green by a lively faith. And this is David's plantation and
habitation in the house of God. The matter is, the abjection, rejection and
condemnation of the Rich, out of all favor of God: and the everlasting
continuance of the Godly, in the bosom of Abraham, and pleasant study of the
Law. And as Lazarus is raised in David, by prayer, as Ps. 51. by such a faith,
to be entertained and comforted in heaven: so the rich Doeg is thrown down into
torments of disgrace in hell, in this Psalm, by the final judgment of God,
that is of a mighty depth, as Ps. 36. and that is an everlasting gulf betwixt
them. So as the 50. is for judgment, the 51 and this Psalm, for the parties:
so all are from the Parable, Ps. 49.

Construction. The letter Nun, defective: or the word Nun, to spring or grow,
or from Nub, Ps. 6.2. to bring forth riches, grow or increas. The whole is
defection or affection, and the end, destruction or flowrishing. How the great
man misseth, you may see, Ps. 34.97. both in his tongue and affection,
delighting in evil, in steed of good, and speaking of falsehood. So missing of
truth, the fear of God: his life is shortened. David delights in the best
good: the Mercey and Name of God, and the preaching of that, and outliveth.
Beth, house, and tabernacles etc. thou love etc. twice.

Exodus. The life that pleases God, or that God commands, is in steed of a
service and sacrifice unto God: and here David sacrifices his whole time to
the word of God. For the fear of God, as Psalm. 34. his trust being called his
Strength, for another of Gods Names.

PSALM LIII.
There is no folly so great as the denyeing of God, and who is so foolish as my
people, says God? with their filth an abominable wrong, that makes them stink
in his sight. Jerusalem had many eyes, yet could they not see what belonged to
their peace. Pride and prodigality throws them out of their estates, sin,
and transgression of the Law of God, whippeth them out of doors, like the rod
upon the fools back. For disobedience, they are made d^solate, the flood has
swept them clean away, they are cast into prison, and utter da^knes, and
obscureity, and carried into a lamentable captivity, where is nothing but
weeping and howling, till their tongues be dry, and on fire, and their hearts
burn with horror and wrath and sorrow, and they have no comfort. In this
horrible affliction and torment, they call, and cry pittiously for Jerusalem
again, and for some of the joys and praises of Sion, the place of their
salvation, to tip their tongues and refresh them. And this is the occasion. The
form is from Adams expulsion out of Paradise, Genesis 3. as all the heavens are
Gods, but the earth is given to the children of men: Ps. 115. so God having
placed man, innocent upon the earth: he by and by grows full of corruption,
and most abominable for wrong dealing. Then God looks out of the highest
heavens, and asks for him, and out of the Scriptures, he inquireeth for his
innocencey, and his wisdom in seeking of God: and they play all hid, and no
such man was to be found, no, not one good man at all, as Ps. 12. They all
stink with abominable corruption and folly, and go backward, and dare not com
forth; but are a frayed and abashed, that God has forsaken them, because they
are expelled for their trespass, and their bones all scattered in captivity.
Shall we sin that grace may abound? God forbid, says the Apostle: So, all
molesters and workers of Mischeff, that call not upon God, eat of the tree of
life, and devour it like bread, destroy the Scriptures, and make havok of the
word, and spend the mercyes of God, and waste and consume the people of God,
and eat up the Church with profanenes. So, the question is not, where man is,
but where a good man is, and there is no such, which is the Mystery of this
Psalm, by repetition of the words. The matter, whereby it hangs to the
former Psalm is, that they all love falsehood more then truth, and wrong more
then righteousness: and therefore they receive the wages of sin, which is death,
because they loved not life, nor the word of God that should save their souls.

Construction. Nun, to spring or grow: the contrary is to fade, or to be
defective. So the wicked are, in the fear of God, in doing of good, as Ps. 34.
or of wisdom, in not calling upon him. Ghimel, to do good: so both the
Wiseman and the Goodman is wanting, by their works. Both the letters make Nag,
of Nagah, to be clear. Mark the doubling of the termns, and it will express the
intendement.

Exodus. The Fear, for the fear of God, and the despair that the wicked make.
Because God, the Fear that guardeth them that fear him, and worship him, Psalm.
34. has scattered them. The not serving of God, because he lets his people
go into captivity, does much hurt among them, and freats them, and much
dismayes them: therefore they pray for return. The people are not in the right
fear, and there is a defect in the service, and the Sacrifice is reprooved: as
if it would be mended, if God would releas his people. For with them, there is
no God, or else they despair of the right God etc. So the termnes Fear, and God,
are equal here, and the one soundes to the other, to express the same. As the
Fear of Isaac, for the God of Isaac. Genesis 31.

PSALM. LIVE.
SAtan shall seek to fann and winnow you like wheat, and some of you shall he
cast into prison. There is no safe place for the man of God, but the divill and
tirants will find him out and beewray him; strangers and such as have no
respect of God at all, as Ps. 53. as were the Zips, which made haste to tell
Saul, as soon as they could discry him, amongst them. And thus be all placees
sifted for him, that he can have no rest, which makes him in the next Psalm,
wish for the wings of a dove, to fly from them far enough, into the wilderness,
for rest: and all is for his life. This shows that the rich has many
friends, and all places will serve the mighty. Wherever David goeeth, or
wherever he hide-eth, Saul can hear of him. Says Eliah, they have slain thy
Prophets, and I only am left alive, and they seek my life; the same may be
said of David and more: there is only one good man left, and one after Gods
own heart, and they seek his life: but this is the hour and power of darkness.
From these, David prays, that seeing all their doing is against God and his
word; and that God is all his help and confidence: and the Lord is with them
that sustein him: that he would by his victorious Name, and light of his word,
defend him and save him; and reward his Enimyes with the evil, and destroy
them, as Ps. 89. according to his promiss. That he may liberally and freely
sacrifice to him, and worship his beneficial Name, and his word, and the
calling upon him, for delivering him from all distress, to stand in the face of
his Enimye and behold him.

Construction. Nun, defective. The whole is upon desolation, resisting and
deprivation, as strangers and aliens, and cruel ones, and they that are clean
without God, Ephesians. 2. that seek his life, on the one part: and on the contrary:
Assisting, saveing and defending, by the great calling upon God. According to
the word, Nun, to spring or wax great, Ps. 72. Daleth, a door, for the
enterteynment of his prayer, from the door of his mouth, Psalm. 141. Mich. 7.
door of utterance, Col. 4. Nod a fugitive for another kind of defection.

Exodus. His Free will offering, shall be his commendation of prayer, and the
Name of God, for his deliverance and salvation, and for the great benefit of
calling upon him, as you may see, by the entrance, and conclusion, by the
repetition. His victorious Name, etc. the goodness of his Name etc. And this for
another kind of sacrifice, and a reasonable serving of God, Romans 12. according
to their promiss in Egypt. For his virtue, the rigteousnes of his Name, and
goodness that attended Moses, Exodus 33. against them, because they were opposite.

PSALM LV.
Being in a mighty agony for the rebellion of his son Absalom, and revolting
of his privy counselor, Ahitophel, his usual companion, as Ps. 62. (of which
he could not beware, because of trust, nor bear it) and for the seditious
treachery of the City, and lamentable and mischevous deceit, that Jerusalem
was full of: and the mischeeffs in their dwelling houses, which was
intolerable: when they strike hand, (being secure) and perform not: and speak
fair words and cut his throat: whom he was now fallen foul on: David prays
for speedy conveiance out of it, into the wilderness, from the hurly burly of
it, and by the wings of a dove; which he makeeth his providence upon the
Eternal; in whom he trusts, to whom he greatly complains, and upon whom
he always calls for deliverance: for confusion of their tongues for unjust
contention. That they may swallow their tongues, and eat their own threatenings.
That they may feel death and hell, in their lives likewise, and torments, by a
pit of destruction. And as they are Murderers, and Traitors, and shorteners of
life: so that they may not reach out half their time; that he may have peace,
for the war they make him. And this he prays the Almighty, that is always
present, with them, and knows their minds: to answer them; their dissembling
being unanswerable by man. His request in this Psalm, is deliverance from
guile, and injury, the breed of deceit and corruption, and viperousnes, which
is contention, and strife, and that by degradation in bodies politic, from
the highest, to the lowest. In the City, it is every where: upon the walls, in
the streets, and in their dwelling houses, and among friends, as falsehood in
fellowship continually. Upon the walls: they are traitors, in their streets:
cousseners and in their houses: hypocrites, and with their friends:
dissemblers and falls brethren, showing that no watch is sufficient against
these, as Psalm. 127. and no Enemy so dangerous. Therefore, all day long, he
teaches to watch and pray to be defended from them, and Especially from falls
companions: which are most mischeevous and hard to be avoided. These does
Christ call ravening wolves in sheeps clothing; that the subdolity of Serpents
nor innocencey of dooves can beware of, though the one be wise, and the other
God defendes. This is frameed from the subdolity of the Serpent, that was a
liar and a murderer from the beginning, Genesis 3. By expressing all the
propertyes and parts of knavery, and wickedness, and is the corruption spoken
of Psalm. 52.53.

Construction. Nun, defective, for the whole defect of the City, which he
shows: the policy shall be overthrowen. He tells of his defect.
Complains unto God: upon the letter and term He, behold, for presence, lo,
the open and plain man. Upon the contrary, he prays God not to conceal
himself etc. he would lodge in the wilderness etc, far enough off: his near
companion that knew his counsel etc. dissimulation, and God that inhabiteth
presence: he that presents himself unto God, God will mainteyn him, and the
just shall never fleet away etc. These all be kinds of presence, and what
nearer, than his great agony, and fear that he was daily put in, by them? And
such a lamentable state it is, that he so damneth to hell, and destruction,
and bewaileth. Nah, from Nahah to lament, consider the words complaining, and
crying out, repeated etc.

Exodus. Offer your presents to God: cast your providence upon him etc. your
sacrifices of prayer and faith unto him, Hos. 12. your daily oblation: evening
and morning and at noon, like himself. Always present him, put him in mind, and
call on him, for a kind of presence and sacrifice. Object your faythfullnes
and your prayer and offer righteousness, and he will sustein and releev you,
and you shall never be cast away, nor rejected. Gods Name here, is the God of
peace: by the opposition of the Terms: peace and war repeated.

PSALM LVI.
FOxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have nests: but the son of man
has no place to rest his head. Whither shall David fly? he is every where
beewrayed, and Saul is at his heels, driveing him at last into the net,
hunting him into his Enimyes hands. He that so often, and so sore daunted the
Phelists, his sore-est Enimyes: as Ps. 9.10, 27. must now fly for succor to
them. What a case was this? where they hold counsel of his fidelity, and seek
his life, to suppress him. But in distress, he is made resolute, by the word
of God. Therefore he is thankful for his deliverance out of his fear, when he
cried, and prays God to pity him. The form is from, Genesis 3. I will put
Enimity between thee and her, and between thy seed and her seed, he shall
bruise thy head, and thou shall hurt his heel. The strife is, his serpentlike
Enimyes are innumerable, and shall never rest afflicting, greeving and
tormenting of him, and perpetually strive to oppress him, and daily contend for
the upper hand of him. And shall always watch his heels, and be still
pryeing at his course and carriage of his life, to cast him, and destroy him, as
Psalm. 17. And such is the snakynes of Saul, and viperousnes of the Phelists,
for secret mischeeffs, and privy conspiracy against him, beehinde his back, his
hunting of him, and lying in wait for him, whithersoever he goes: and thus
does the serpent his Enemy, tread upon his heels, and hurts his life and
lets his way. How can a man go, when his Enemy treds on his heels? yet for
all this he is not afraid, because of his trust in God (which he thanketh his
word for) of any thing they can do unto him. But prays God, to beat them
away for their molestation. And dash them, and throw them down by his angry
countenance, and consider, with what greeff and how often, he had been forced
to fly, and remember it. At which moan, and complaint, and cry unto God, and
his faith in him and his word, he sees his Enimyes turn back: he presumeeth
then that God is with him, and that with his presence he has now broke-en the
serpents head, as Psalm. 9.48. by turning his Enemy from his purpose, that made
head against him. Thus to make the Enemy to turn head, and the serpent to creep
into his hole again, is said to break or bruise his head, or frustrate his
devises, as Ps. 74. The mystery is seen, by and between the report and bringing
again, of these words: In God I put my trust, I fear not, etc. His daily
contention, and his trust in God. The matter is his faith, which he obteineth
by the light and wisdom of the word, and presence of God. That cutteth off the
fingers of the wicked, and makeeth them loose their hold, and disappointes
them: and continues most li^^ly, from Psalm. 52.54.55. and is able to knock
his mightyest Enimyes in the head, and confound them.

Construction. For Nun, deficient: they seek utterly to devour him, and to
constrein him even out of this life. and used all devises to make him to fall.
Mark the doubling of the first words. for this he wishes their destruction
and his own preservation, which he finds, and is thankful. Vau, the second
letter, a hook or crook. is for fear, to this is opposed boldness, faith and
confidence, both the letters being, Nau, of Navah, to prais, or adorn, Exo^.
15. all which you shall find in the same repetition: In God I prais his word,
etc.

Exodus. The Sacrifice here, is praising of God, which they vowed in Egypt, to
perform, after their deliverance. And this he promisseth to pay; as Ps. 50. for
the defeat of his Enemy, and his own preservation, which is upright with the
construction also. For his Name Immanuel God with us, Is. 7. If God be with
us, etc. To. 8.

PSALM LVII.
ALexander the Coppersmith did Paul much harm, but the Lord delivered him out
of that lions mouth: so David is delivered out of the mouth of Saul, at his
request to God, by the protection of Gods word, called the shadow of his wings,
as Ps. 36. and his way of loveing kindenes and truth, faith and love, which
he counts a wonderful work: and therefore he extolls his glory over all the
world, and with all his instruments, sets out the highth of his love, and
faithfullnes of his promiss: the high tree of the mercyes of God: and among
all people and nations is thankful to him. Neither do the wicked loos their
reward: they lay nets to catch them selves, and digg pitts and fall into them.
This Psalm concerns the former by the same form. It is framed from the
Enimnity between the serpents seed, and seed of the woman; the one being the
seed of war, and the other of peace. The Serpents and Enimyes of Gods word:
sow sedition, strife, emulation, contention, debate and discord: they sow
spears, and arrows, and swords, by back-byteing and gnawing, brawling,
quarelling, bitter and cursed speaking, as Ps. 14.53. never hearkening to the
way of peace, but are all for war, as Ps. 120. and from hence is that fine
Metamorphosis of the Poet: where the Serpents teeth being sown, there grow up
armed men. So biteing language is the seed of arms, and hot and inflameed
mouths, and falls tongues, are weapons of war. Now the woman's seed and the
Churches, is nothing but the way of God, which is mercey and love, and truth,
with lips unfeined, as Ps. 17. sowing concord and peace. as Ps. 108. And
therefore now, David being saveed by God, his heart brings forth lutes, and
harps, and viols, and is all for musicque, and instruments of peace, and is
ready to sing, and set forth his glory, as Ps. 145. that he may be heard
beyond all nations, and his noise above the clouds, for his deliv^rance. The
Mystery is showed by these words, and, Gloria in excelsis, reported and
repeated. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory over all the
earth. The Matter is, his faith in the green tree of the merceyes of God, as
Ps. 52. and the highth of his love and promiss, as Ps. 89. which is above all
reach, and shall bruise the serpents head, as Ps. 56.74.

Construction. Nun defective, devouring is for defection. The devourer is
devoured, and the patient preserved. The one waits all corruption and
falsehood, reproach and disgrace, and detraction: according to both the letters.
Naz, of Nazah, to sprinckle, as a kind of sprinckling or aspersion. The other
waits for Grace and truth, to defend him, and calls upon God the high: to
glorify him. as Ps. 50. And by his indur^ing and calling on God, how mightyly
his glory is exalted. mark the repetition. Zain to hear or conceive, or listen,
he will open the ears, or the daughters of Musicque, Eccl. 12. by his
musicque, and make them hear. As by the coactive, for a kind of hearing.

Exodus. His calling upon God in this misery, and his whole relyeing on him:
serves for a sacrifice and a glory to him, as Ps. 50. in these words: I call
unto God etc. the Almighty etc. For the Elect, Calamity is shortened, Math. 24.
and passes over, and the righteous are mightyly redeemed. So is Gods Glory the
more mightyly advanced, and to be extolled: the harder the deliverance is. For
it is full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1. in saveing, God gives both grace and
glory, all the good that can be, for trusting in him, Ps. 84. therefore the same
is to be ascribeed to him, in the highest, for the power of it. the Name Elyon,
for the extolling, etc.

PSALM: LVIII.
Because the wicked do always wrong, in thought word and deed, and miss, and
lie in all things, Psalm. 1. by reason of their furey and rage, which is deaff
to all reason and instruction; and will no more be pacifyed and perswadeed
(like a spiteful and rageing Enimye) then a serpent or a lion; no, not by the
wiseest Moderator, from their work of backbiteing and devouring talk: therefore
David's prayer is, that their serpentlike biteing teeth, and their devouring
grinders (the seed of arms) may be brokeen in pe^cees, as Ps. 3. That their
Arrows of bitter words, their endless aims, as Ps. 64. may be shunned, as
easy as water, and being brokeen, they and all their work miscarry with
unripenes, and melt away: that it never com to ^ffect nor see the sunn. That
his choler may most speedyly boil him alive, for his defeat, and the just may
be comforted with their revenge, and victory over the wicked: and that men may
be sure and confess, seeing some men's works go before unto Judgment, and some
men's follow after: that there is fruit for the just, and there be Gods that are
Judges in the earth. This Psalm from, Job 19. deserves to be written with a
pen of iron, and carved in stone for Eternity, and drawn with lead that never
may go out. God will judge every deed, says Solomon, and bring all a man's
life in question, and draw all his actions to judgment, whether they be good
or bad. Therefore David from his enimyes wicked life: and the nature of the
Serpent, draws a condemnation, and out of the experience of his tribulations,
cannot but hope for an end of him. And thus he prays according to the curs,
as Ps. 109. That seeing he can neither speak nor judge aright, but all wrong
and injury is in his heart and hands, to recompens, as Ps. 5.52.140. and his
mind does ponder nothing else, and is false as soon as he is born, with
incorrigible error and malice: he enters into this curs and prayer against
him, as Ps. 109.140. as against a murderer and a temper from the beginning.
That all his instruments may be brokeen, that he may be easyly avoided, that
his way may perish, Ps. 1. and himself enter into consumption, as follows.
That his falsehood may com to nothing, and melt, and not be able to abide the
Sunn, but to be suppressed for ever: which is the cursed grovelling of the
wicked in the Ground, never to look up, being ashameed of the sunn. And his
Enimyes licking of the dust, as Ps. 72. And for his Malice: that as soon as the
pot is over, that it may bu^n; so, that his own rancor may burn him and consume
him, as soon as he is offended. The end is, that the Just may be cheered for
his victory, even his faith: that his Enemy is ashameed of all his ways, and
has no fruit or comfort of them: and that there is fruit and reward for the
just, that they are revenge-ed of the wicked, by the judgment of God, that
pays every man according to his work. as Ps. 62. And this from these words of
the Curs: Cursed art thou above all creatures, upon thy belly shall thou go
and dust shall thou eat all days of thy life. Genesis 3.

Construction. For Nun defective: he speaks of a general defection in the
sinning parts: the tongue, the ears, the heart and hands. The tongue is tied from
good and so are the ears stopped, for hearing of good, the mind is all
buissyed about wrong, and the hands with injury. And all that they pronounce,
is nothing but error and falsehood. Therefore, that they may be made defect in
their pronunciation, by breaking of their teeth and their Jaws: and their
arrows, according to the letter, Heth, to break, Another defection is, in
consuming, and another, to be an abortive, never to be any thing, or never
born. Another, that as soon as they live and have life, they be tormented, Is.
9. for the two letters Nach for rest, as they be all straying and erring, and
will not be instructed: so that they may be restless. The whole subject is all
of wrong.

Exodus. He deals here upon the privative. The sacrifice and burnt offering
of the children of wrath. for a defect of all righteousness, to oppose the
sacrifice thereof, as Psalm. 4. Deuteronomy. 33. that all wrong dealing may stopp his
mouth. For he concludeeth that there is a reward of righteousness, as Romans 6.
Mat. 6. Genesis 4. And as the wicked are wrong in all their actions: so is their
end utter destruction, and that by a righteous judgment and revenge upon them,
even in the earth. So among the rest, such sac^ifice also they used in the
wilderness. Gods, ^amed judges etc. by the first and last words, and God, the
God of revenge, as Ps. 94.

PSALM LIX.
Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all days of thy life.
The divill, like a roaring lion seeks to devour all he can. To this text he
brings the strong appetite of the Hethen, to devour the church of God: and
Saul's appetite to the life of David: and thus they go all upon the belly, like
hungry dogs about the town, to satisfy themselves with the lives of the just.
Their appetite is sharp, they lie in wait most secretly, and babble much with
their mouths, they slay him, with proud words behind his back, Ps. 94. but
God sets him before their face, as Ps. 92. and wills them and commands them,
not meddle with his people that have their trust and confidence in him, and
laughs at their secrecy and promisseth ^o preserve him. Against these, he
prays God, the Churches Lord and Defendour, ^o quash them, and debase them,
and prostrate them, and subject them by his power: to bring them down, and
subdue them: and power them strait along, as dirt in the street, as Ps. 18. And
that none may hear them, none may take them up, none may save them, none may
pity them, that they may never rise again to afflict him. And that God would
make runagates of them, and vagabundes like Cain, and bring them to the lowest
degree, and scatter them as dust before the wind, as Ps. 1.68. That their
state may be a cursed state. And as pride goes before the fall: so that by
their pride (like Lucifer) they may be takeen and cast down into hell, as
accursed; and that the cursses of their own mouths, and ill wishes toward
him, and proud pursuit of him for his life; and their bloody minds: may all
com home to themselves, as Ps. 63.64. and work their own destruction, and
consume them. And that God would in this very rage destroy them, whereby they
are offended and angry at him: to teach them, that God will be master and have
dominion in Jacob, and in all the world also. And so they may go like hungry
dogs about the town, murmuring and curssing, and beg from door to door: as Ps.
73.109. and never be satisfied. And as he is bound to sing of the firmnes and
strength of Gods promiss, and his loveing kindenes, for his escape and refuge,
in his affliction and sore distress: so to his strength and confidence and the
God of his mercey, he will sing in Psalms for his escape.

Construction. For Nun, defective. They seek here, deprivation of his life that
had no defect in him, neither sin nor trespass, nor iniquity, they being both
bloody and cursed, which makes the equity of his salvation and preservation,
and their damnation, with utter destruct^on prayed for, that they may like
doges never be satisfied: Is. 56. And let them go yelling, etc. which words
be curiously doubled, to show want and misery for their greedynes. And from
Not, and Natah, to decline or bring down, Ps. 17. their base life as
vagabundes, to buissy them: according to the title: that they hurt him not,
though they wait to kill him. Against their streng^h of persecution: he
applies Gods strength, the Ark and truth of his word, for his Garrison and
salvation, which he observes. And his kindenes in rewarding, as Ps. 62. These
words com often also, to make them notable.

Exodus. He intends here, the sacrifice of fools, that are hasty to vow: as
vows, for the sin of the mouth, Eccles. 5. Deuteronomy. 23. being with much pride,
and much furey uttered, much swearing, much curssing, much lyeing, and
deceiving: and with these ginnes, he would have them taken, and destroyed for
their defect. Like the vow of conspiracey, against Paul: Actor. 23. The God of
Releeff: for strength and kindness, repeated. Psalm. ^8.144

PSALM LX.
THe promises of God do hold the Church to their faith, and they are sweet,
all yea and Amen. And by Gods promiss in the Scripture, they all hold, and
live, and are refreshed, because he is merciful in them all, and faithful to
the end. The Church is often sick and diseased, but through faith they are
recovered and made whole. The Sickness of the people of God, is persecution, and
famine of the word, and tottering in religion, yet, as long as the fire is not
quite out, and faith quite extinguished, and their knowledge of the word, quite
decayed: there is no fear of death. And this is the hope that David has, when
the people of God are even at deaths door, as Ps. 9. even his beloveed, whom
he would so fain have refreshed, healed and released. The wrath of God for
sin causes all diseases: so he falls into an enumeration of them, by the
shakeing, cleaving, breaking, and dissolution of the earth. Which is for their
infidelity, their strife among themselves, their sedition, muteny, and discord,
loosnes and unconstancy; and because they have been put to much hardness, and
were made giddy, and faint hearted, with the cup of their adversity, Ier. 48.
and could not tell what to do: they now, being in this Acatastasy, and
unsetlednes, and not knowing what to think: he remembers by Gods word, what
Nations were to com in, and that the world was not quite at an end, with them;
but as the Priests lips preserves knowledge: so they yield also faith. Therefore,
he prays for Gods right hand called his Ministry, their oracle and advise,
to save them. From whence they have this assurance from the word, that God will
fall to shareing of the world, and to partition of the Nations, to enlarge the
borders of the Church. That Shechem should be divideed, and Succoth measured.
That he would have Gilead and Manasses his own. Ephraim should be confirmed
unto him, and Judah should be written and conveyed. That he would wash his
feet, and take possession in Moab. And put off his shoos, and take his rest in
Edom. And triumph, and keep holy day in Phelistia. And out of this promiss, the
Church does hope for victory over all their Enimyes. For this he thanketh God
for their salvation, and prays still for his most prosperous help, to tread
down the Serpent, as Ps. 92. and vainquish their Enimyes for them, as Ps. 108.

Construction. Samek, to uphold: it is here taken all along, for help and
salvation, as Isai. 63. as, O consider, and help etc. and O give us help. And
arm thy beloved etc. God shows the Assistantes, and the strength of the
Church: when it felt all kind of weakness, when God stood not to them, but
forsook them. There is nothing showed but dissolution and susteyning. And that
God is their only stay.

Exodus. From Isa. 34. To kill Gods Enimyes is good service: so that this great
slaughter is counted for a sacrifice, as that in Bozra and Edom, according to
the title. See Ier. 49. Ezech. 25.35. Jehovah Nissi, Exodus 17. God, his
standard.

PSALM. LXI.
DAvid having fled out of the land for Absalom, and being now faint and
feeble hearted in his old age, and allmoste out of the world also, for greeff of
heart, because he was absent far from the Church of God: prays God, as he
had been his rely and strong tower from the Enimyes, which is the instruction
of the Ark: that he would safe conduct him by that high Rock also, the word,
as Ps. 27.18. to his Tabernacle. That there, he might now dwell for ever,
relyeing under his wings, which is the Cherubs, his Mercey. And as God gives
possession to them that fear him: the Israelites after 40 years in the
wilderness: so that he would hearken to his wishes, now after his reign of 40
years: and ad abundance of years more unto them: that he might abide still in
the presence of God, preserved by loveing kindenes and truth, his portion, his
meat, his Manna. And as Ps. 81. paying hi^ vows, and chaunting his Name for
ever. After the Tower, the Ark and mercy seat, Rock and Manna. And seeing by
the Scriptures, the way is to pleas God, and get up to his tabernacle, and
dwell with him, as Ps. 15. and to obtein the habitation of godlynes, and Mount
of holiness, and height of sanctification, as in the Psalms of degrees: which
are their shelter and tower of defens, and safety, from the floodes of wicked
Enimyes, by the quiet waters of refreshing, flowing from them, Ps. 23. When
David's heart fainted: he knocks at this Rock, and prays for direction
thither, to receive a heavenly possession, with them that fear God, and length
of days, and all requests, by the sustenance thereof, the way of godlynes;
grace and truth. Psalm. 25. That feeding heerupon, as upon unperishing Manna,
he may be always preserved by God, to serve him. And this is the spiritual
rock of Christ, that followed the Host, and served Israel, and was the Exodus,
and Passage, and conveyance of them. 1. Cor, 10.

Construction. Samec, is here taken passively, as Nismac, to rely, or lean
upon. As in a feeble estate, by repeating the word rely. And the reckoning up
of all his stays, the rock for a guide, Tabernacle and tower, and cherubs, and
kindenes and truth, for preservation. Aleph for instruction or education, is
signified by the rock, and tower whose top reaches to heaven, and is a name
exalted so much in all the world, by prayer and prais. Sa, of Nasa, both the
letters, to lift up.

Exodus. They that fear the Name of God, shall have the possession of all that
they long for. then vows upon condition are due, for hearkening to their
wishes: they must make unto God full satisfaction, and pay their vows: and
this serves for a sacrifice in the wilderness also. as by the doubling of the
word vows. His vow here is, an everlasting devotion, if God will give him
days. As by the terms of eternity, so often repeated. God, his Rock. 1. Cor.
10. For his susteining.

PSALM LXII.
ILL Servants mar good children. The subtilty and reach of Ahitophel, David's
counselor, hit upon the pride and vanity of Absalom, his son, as Ps. 55. and
puffed him up to rebellion, to rob his father of his subjects and kingdom. The
matter now being at open hostility, and they in counsel agreeing to a
murtherous practice upon his person; for it: yet David by a clear judgment,
fails not of his faith and trust in God; nor doubts of his salvation, as
Ps. 42. but is sure of his redeemer, Job. 19. and that he shall not be
overthrowen, b^caus they be lovers of falsehood, and dissembling traitors, that
seek his life: the Godhead of truth and Justice; and the strength of the word,
called his rock, being the glory of his salvation and rely: and wills to
all his people, that from their hearts they utter the same profession. And
seeing the children of men are more falls and light than vanity it self: they
should not trust to be rich or strong, by robbery or oppression, Ps. 17.
because all strength is Gods, that still prevails, and Kindenes, that
rewards every man aright. which is; according to his request, Ps. 55. to his
Enimyes: half their days, by a desperate end to Ahitophel, for miscarrying of
his wisdom: and the foolish end of Absalom, for his vain hope. The Church, as
it is Catholicque, and also holy: so it does hold, either by the Law, or by the
Promiss. By the Law, it stands in performance, and that is impossible for the
flesh, by reason of weakness, and sin, and condemnation and death enter
thereupon: and the letter kills, which is the face of the church, but the
mind and spirit of God, which quickneth every man unto eternal life, is by
the Promiss, which is holy: of things unseen, gracees and mercyes of God, and
forgivenes, and a better and an everlasting life, by faith and hope, and this
knows no man but the holy spirit of God in man. And thus is faith the rock to
build upon, as diverse times in the word, whereby he pays every man according
to his work, and judges all men according to their mind. As the mind is
contained in the body: so the Promiss is the soul of the Law, and as we are
forbid to care for the body: so the church is commanded to provide for the
soul, to cast them selves upon God, to seek contentment by a gracious
government, and let all rudiments go. And this is his sure rock of victory and
of salvation, even his faith.

Construction. Here, Sam^c, is taken passively also, showing his rely, repose
and trust: and the strength of his support, which is God. The weakness of the
p^oples confidence that trust in the vanity of misgotten riches, or in the
falsehood of Man. Ps. 146. Beth, a house, they thrust hard at him, and set upon
him, to overthrow and beat down all his riseing, and his exaltation and dignity
of his house, and to ruin all his repose by falsehood. which is a kind of
dwelling of the mind. Sab to compass or inviron, Gods wall about him, which is
his kindenes grace and favor, Ps. 21. cannot be beaten down, it is so strong.
And this confidence deceives no man, but pays every man for his travail.

Exodus. Hos. 12. The people play the crafty merchants, in sacrificeing their
misgotten wealth, and set their minds wholely thereupon for their salvation:
where their faith is reprooved. Being in an opposite course to the sacrifices of
righteousness, Ps. 4. and faith of David, which is counted righteousness. so he
deals by privation. Every one that works righteousness is accepted with God.
etc. Mark the repetition of terms concerning all points. God, his rock and
trust.

PSALM LXIII.
ASk and you shall receive, and seek and you shall find, and knock and it
shall be opened unto you. In the Last Psalm, 62. he shows that his life is
sought by flaterers and dissembling hypocrites, that use smooth words, and
have throtes like open graves, and wicked and corrupt thoughts to devour him,
and gape wide to receive him, as Ps. 5. where he casts off his confidence in
Man, for vanity: and wealth that grows by wrong, he counts nothing worth,
to save him: and therefore relyeth wholly upon the strength of the kindenes and
mercyes of God. Here they seek his life with the sword, and hunt him into holes
and corners of the earth: and in this, for playing the foxes with him: he
prays, that foxes may prey upon them, and bait upon them in the ground, and
that he may be merry and have good cheer in the house of God, as Psalm. 23; and
be ravished with his glory, and releeved with the living waters of his mercy,
which he counts better then life: that he may bless and prais his Name for
ever, and all their treacherous mouths may be stopped. That this may be: he
knocks at the word of Grace, being athirst in the wilderness, for waters of
the scripture to refresh him. Which wilderness he makes his solitary bed, as
often as he awakes and thinks on him, then to call upon him. That he himself
may rejoice in God, and all may boast and glory to be sworn in him.

Construction. Samec, again for the function of Godlynes, the work of relyeing,
daily adoration, and admiration of his strength, and glory and commendation,
for his grace: as thanks of triumph, after great good cheer of his mercyes;
daily conversation and comunication with him. Ghimel, for Ghamul, a wainling,
as he was, from all his affections, in the wilderness. Sag, both the letters,
to depart, or go back. This sense shines through the whole Psalm, being
contrary to Appetition, longing and adheering, which is the whole tenor thereof,
Zeph. 1. mark the report of the phrase, David's seeking of God, and his Enimyes
seeking of him.

Exodus. The first of Zephany also, shall show what sacrifice the Lord will
sometime have, and what sacrifice is here meant by the fullnes of the terms, and
sense of this psalm, in it: destruction of them that turn from the Lord, and
them that seek him not. That they, that play the foxes and betray him, may have
a foxes part, in the wilderness, Eze. 13. their treacherous mouths stopped in
the earth, God will have his sacrifice as well of his own sworn children, that
depart from him: as of them that be devoted to other Gods, and have never yet
served him. He will serve him self out of all sorts, when he ordeineth a
destruction.

PSALM LXIV.
COnsidering the deadly fear of persecution which David felt, as Psalm. 55. the
sharpnes and egernes of his Enimyes daily plots, and secret conspiracy for his
life: to kill a just man, without fear, and to compass it suddenly, by means
not to be descryed, nor discovered by any eye: by deep prying into his heart and
all his ways, rekoning that none can see them: he prays to be delivered
from this horror. And as Servantes make their quarrel, their masters: so David
concluding, that they conspire against God, belyeing him, because he sees all
their doings, and gives warning in the heart, by some passion and light of
every action: he prays, that God may give them a just recompens, by this
means of their own inventio^. That their own reckoning may fall upon them,
that their own tongues that belie him, may be true upon themselves: to strike
them sudainly, that they never see the stroke, till it light upon them, and
they feel it to destruction. That the very standers-by man perceive the plain
judgment of God upon them, and that the just may rejoice, and glory in their
relying in him. O full of all subtilty, the child of the Divill, and Enemy of
all righteousness. This is the man he fears, this is he that he cries out
upon, to be defended, and his life to be preserved from. That he fall not
into his hands: whom he describeeth by his practice and combination: the
secret pryeing and conspiracy against him, and creeping into his bosom to
beguile him; by plotting and consulting against him, as the Hethen do in the
same terms, Ps. 2. This man is above all the Enimyes in the world to be
feared, Ps. 55. This man keeps him company to Church and home, prays with him,
and eats with him, and lernes with him, and holds with him, as if he wear of
the same religion, and Diet with him, and all to devour him. What beast or fowl
is so wild, or so vigilant to look to his life, that daily conversation will
not tame and beguile, and in time, secure him? Against such a one, a man has
need to be awake, and watch early and late and at noon day, Ps. 55.
mischeevous, greevous, hurtful and most dangerous men: As great Enimyes, as
Satan, and mischevous as the Divill, as subdole as the Serpent, and as holy as
an Angel; to deceive the Angels, yea if it were possible, the very Elect.
Wherefore all his attributes are given in the contrary sens, as naked for subdole
and covered, as Gnarum. which in this Psalm is remembered, Mar, and Rang,
bitter and bad, from Merignim. This is the fowler, Ps. 91. And the
schoolfellow, Psalm. 55. That fetches him off, and he shall never know who
hurt him: so all his ways and words are bitter and distast^full, and cut like
a rasor, and are deadly and mortal, because they are falls and deceitful and
damnable. Now because to live in fear of such a one, is a terrible thing: he
complains greatly of this terror of an Enemy, and prays that he may not
live in fear of such a one, but that God would preserve his life from such a
fear; which fear is expressed, Ps. 55. It is dolorous, and with pangs within
one, it is as cruel as death it self, falling upon one, inexorable crueltyes,
as of death, a trembling fear, that assailes him, and sets upon him, and
befalls him, and buffeteth him, as it did Paul. He is overcom with horror. And
this is the fear he prays to be freed of, and the Enemy that he would have
terribly cut off: by his own ways, and perish by his own traps. That the just
and plain meaning men that trust in God: with great joy, may admire and
acknowledge his work, and prais him.

Construction. Samec, to uphold. He shows here the privative thereof, and the
contrary, by the effect of bad tongues, that by slander, backbiteing, and
scandal, overthrow men, as a bad report and an ill name does hang one. This
they do with boldness and assurance, artificially and stoutly: which is as a
kind of door, emptines or opening, as for Daleth, the second letter. The
contrary heerunto is fear, that has no comfort or relying. Both the letters
make Sod, a secret or counsel, and show all along so much, by the terms, and
phrases, hide snares and search etc. with the contrary. So all is, secret or
pubilique, fear or confidence, susteining or overthrowing.

Exodus. In the Law, all Sacrifice must be found and perfect, and without
blemish: or any ill thing, Lev. 22. Deuteronomy. 17.15. here: the most holy and
precious service of the wicked is, the maiming, spotting and staining of all
integrity, syncerity, and soundnes of upright and perfect men. And by
detraction and defamation, to mar their reputation, even by transcending and
mounting up to their thoughts: their closenes, and deep diveing into the
conscience and mind of them. And slaughter of the tongue, as Ier. 18. by way of
privation, a Sacrifice of wrongs, or Burnt-offering, of daily consumming
greeff, molestation and vexation.

PSALM LXV.
BEcause God is the only hearer of prayer, and has been reconcileed and
pacifyed, concerning his flood and inundation, of iniquity and trespasses, as
Psalm. 32. which overcame him, that all prais and vows are due to him in Zion:
he inviteeth all the world to set out the happiness of that habitation, the
Church, and of his Election, and the comfortable substance, that is had from
thence for salvation, against the fearful justice of condemnation; he being
the trust of all the world by his power, the Law: walking upon the seas, and
having them under his feet, by his unknown steps, and sailing through the Law,
Psalm. 77.8.47. etc. setleing kingdoms, putting down the rageing and wicked
nations, floodes of iniquity, and delighting them that fear him, with sending
his word among them, the River of the Scriptures to water and enrich them, to
make them fuitfull: He now prays God for the farther propagation of the
Church under a form of husbandry. That as he looks out of the Scriptures
upon the earth and it prospers: so that he would do all good husbandry upon
the ground, to make it fit for receiving the seed of the word, with mollyfying
all hard and savage hearts and ways of men: and sending showers of grace into
them. Then, that he will bless the begetting, and crown all the growth thereof,
with goodness: that his ways may make the word to flow plentifully in all
ignorant countries, called the wilderness, that they may be as well set, as
the rest, and triumph as well as the rest together, Ps. 67.

Construction. Samec, to uphold or sustein. The kinds of sustenance here, is
forgivenes of sins, and satiety of grace out of the house of God, the trust and
susteiner of all the world. Whose indument of strength and might holds fast up
the hills: and beats down the seas etc. by this privation. The manner of
susteining the earth, is by his daily and plentiful watering of it: and
provideing of Corn, as for the dwellers in it, and plantation. So that
Husbundry mainteynes all, as Solomon says. He, the other letter, signifying
behold: is all for presence or absence, in sight or out of sight, or distant
and overhealing, and that of diverse kinds, as prayer and prays to God. By
chuseing and entertaining nearest unto him, etc. Ends and longinquities etc.
and make the farthest countries mea^y Ps. 103. thou look etc. on the earth
etc. That the earth may be covered with corn and cattle etc. that a man can
not see the ground, reconcileing them, and covering of sins. Love covers a
multitude of sins: so the Merceyseat, and man's protection is set over the
Law. Because the Justice thereof is so terrible. Accordingly, Seh, both the
letters of Nasah, to lift up, or take away, or pardon.

Exodus. Ier. 31. and Ps. 50. Lev. 7. you are told what sacrifice he here
means: to wit, thanks-offering and vows, for his gracious protection and
susteining of him, by his merciful goodness out of his word. Gods gentle
audience, forgiveing of sins, and provideing for food and raiment, is a most
mercy full thing, and well deserves the prais and devotion of all the world;
and therefore this audience and satisfaction was bidden proper in Zion, the place
of Gods habitation.

PSALM. LXVI.
SEeing by fearful and terrible means, and by mighty and strange works, by
the greatness of his strength in this Law, God has preserved his Church and
subdued his Enimyes: and increased his worship, trying his people by all manner
of tentation and troubles: the vigilance of his word, called his eyes, tending
them, and saveing them, to a place of refreshing: and with life and rejoiceing
in their souls, that he let not their feet be moved; and overthrew their
Enimyes, lest they should vaunt over them: he wills all the earth and all
nations, to prais their God, and to set out his glorious Name for the same,
because he himself is ready to pay his vows in the house of God, having
obtained the request that he made in his distress.

Construction. Samec, to put upon, or hold up: by the term put so often used
upon or under, exalt or putting upon, or lay upon, or ride upon etc. also by
submitting pressing, straineing, and bowing down as well as advanceing, ruleing
over, high invention, etc. turning up-side-down by his terrible might, as the
Sea into dry land etc. Van, a hook or crook: for prayer, for mercy in distress,
which was heard and granted. Sau, as from Savah, from whence is Masveh, a
mask. The deepth of the sea shall be discovered, and the dry land shall appeer
Genesis 1. and be unmasked. So likewise for trying, and prooving etc.

Exodus. Here be used all the terms of prays and glory of God, and the
calling upon him, that can be thought on: shouting, singing, chanting,
hymning, Psalming, blessing, etc. with the doubling of the terms, prays and
glory, to show of what sort the Sacrifice here must be: to wit, according to
Ps. 50. praising and glorifying of God, for deliverance: by way of exaltations,
in likeness of burnt-offering and vows, here repeated. Not without fine
allusion to the manner of offering: for all sacrifices must pass through fire
and water, it must be soundly tried, and found as pure as silver (he that
finds no wickedness in himself shall be heard) it must be strayned. A man must
justify it, and bless it by putting his hand upon the head of the sacrifice.
And this is meant by rydeing over our heads etc. commanded.

PSALM LXVII.
Here the whole Church prays for illumination in the Law of God, called his
countenance: that it be merry and gracious upon them; that they may be a
light to all the world, and all nations may confess him; for his justice, and
upright Judgment in guiding his people. And that their own God will bless
their labors, that the earth and all the ends thereof, be replenished
abundantly with the fear of God. Forgivenes is the way to life, Ps. 65. and
faith in the promises, and merceys of God, which are eternal. The Law came by
Moses, but grace and truth, by Jesus Christ. Heerby Christ extolled Moses, and
sets him out, and fully commends him, to fulfill all righteousness of him.
That by a way that the Jews took no heed of, he might bring forth a
celestial government, which he calls the kingdom of heaven and of God, Ps.
145. The Jews were apt, in prosperity, to delight, and content themselves with
a superficial study of the Law, and therein to strain out a gnat and stumble at
a straw, and be much buissyed with trifles, as concerning the letter: but this
depth, and bottom, and hid wisdom of the Law, as Ps. 51. they skip and runn
clean over. They turminate and chew much upon the one, but swallow down the
other whole. Regarding small things, but this Judgment, and fidelity, and love
and mercy of God; the weighty things of the Law, and way of Salvation: they
wholely omit, and call Christ a blasphemer for meddling with them: delighting
to hear, not at all, nor any whit regarding the faith that comes by hearing,
nor the word of conscience that is within them, nor obeying the doctrine of
their own profession; but are offended with the restorer thereof. Now this is
the way, that David in this Psalm, would have all the world to know, by the
perfection of the Church of God: which he supposes, should purchase in all
the world, and easily winn them all. And as the Law sets all the world to
school: that this way may abundantly increase the Church. Therefore the Church
prays, that the bottom of this light of the Law: kindenes and faithfullnes,
faith and love, judgment and mercey, whereby they are well led and rightely
governed; may also lighten the Gentiles: that Canaan may serve, and Iaphet, and
Sem, and all the world may be of one religion, and protestation, and fear God
with them. And that God will persuade Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Sem.

Construction. Samec, to hold or bear up. Here his countenance, which is his
word, bears up all things, as Heb. 1. The knowledge whereof, makes a blessed
and a sure estate. A right government makes the earth prosperous and Joyful.
And the blessing of God is all, which heerin, is peace, by the often repetion
of the word. Another kind, for Samec, is to lay hands upon the head, to bless
or confirm, etc. Zain, to hear or conceive, is from the Hiphil, or coactive
sens, a general publication and prosperity of the word: in these words: that
all may know it, and confess it, as by the like repetition.

Exodus is here, the sacrifice of thanks and peace offering, with joy and
Triumph: by the term and work of confession and celebration, and prais
repeated. which is for all nations to hear and reverence. Ps. 50. also. Le. 7.
Isa. 51. they pray for Gods blessing, the word, for their peace, Psalm. 29.
that all May sacrifice peace offering for abundance.

PSALM LXVIII.
Because the virtue of the Ark is such, and of God, that rides in the Deserts
and in the Scriptures, which by his word in the church, is a provident father
for the fatherless, and a comfortable husband for the widow, and a good
companion for solitary folk, and a Recreator of the restrained, Ps. 144.149.
and a condemner of the rebellious; for which he wills all triumph: and
because by his showers of sermons from Sinai, that shook the earth, and entered
into all men's hearts, releeving with the blessing thereof, and confirming them
in their wearynes (38. years) by the Manna and Quails, the heavenly food
thereof: and provideed for all the poor among them, by his word and an army of
evangelicall Messengers: that the glory and beams thereof dashed the
countenances of Kings, and put them to flight, that they became a prey to
women at home in their houses: and that they fell and lay slain on the hills
like snow, for resisting the promiss and ordinance of God: not considering his
invincible army of Angels, being millions of legions in the church of Sinai:
and the infinite number of Spirits of salvation in the Law of God, Ps. 120. by
which he once captiveth all men, and ransometh some, and the rest for their
rebellion abide in wrath: for this, his Mercy is above his Justice, as the
Mercy seat and the Cherubs, for reconciliation, and succor, are set over the
Ark: for consideration of salvation against all burden and oppression, Now as
his Procession and Marching is all most glorious and orderly, and all escapes
of death are the Eternalls, with punishment of all his Enimyes and the heads of
them, as Ps. 110. according to his Promiss: Now he prays, the church may
find that strength from God, the Ark his strength, from his temple and Oracles
which is promissed, and that which he has wrought for his people, that all
kings may bring gifts to them, and his enimyes may melt away and fly like
smoke: and that (as in a skant time of weapons in Israel) he would drive and
chastize all the Kingdoms and people great and small, the whole drove, by the
terme^ of bulls, and calves, with a reed or quill, and scatter all that delight
in war, that Egypt and Cush may com in, and all Kingdoms of the earth, for
the increas of the church, may sing to Gods Name, the Eternal, that rideeth,
and is glorious, mounted in the Scriptures, the Ancient Heavens before them:
that with a mighty voice in his church do cry: give all strength to God for
his surpassing defens and pride of Israel in the skies, Psalm. 29.15. that is
terrible in his sanctuary, and strengthens his people.

Construction. Samec, to uphold or maintein: whereunto is opposeed kinds of
perishing. Upholding is by strength of it, he makeeth diverse kinds, and his
virtues there: God upholdeth as a father, a husband, a comfortable consort
alone, a redeemer out of bands, etc. And all in his church, by his word that
sustained his people. And such was the strength and nourishment of them, even
preaching. Gods army is of great and invincible strength, and able always to
save and recover out of the greatest deep of Misery. As is his preachng so is
his order, of admirable strength and virtue, which is useed for tameing of the
Nations. The perishing part is vanishing smoke, melting wax, snow, painting
pride, flieing, scattering, etc. From Cheth, to prostrate, break and wound, and
strewing etc. spreding like snow, etc. The two letters, Sach of Nasach, to
overthrow, to be plucked up and destroyed. For the privative, likewise.

Exodus. In the same sens, God is eternal and rides perpetually in the word,
where he is every where so highly exalted and praised. And for this stately and
everlasting residence he is worthy. Apo. 4.5.7. to have all glory, honor and
power, and strength etc. ascribeed to him. The sacrifice is of singing and
rejoyceing and exaltation of the Name of God for the strength of his salvation,
Is. 12.19. for the setting up of Israel. And the Name, Iah, for Lord, all for
strength so often, and Jehovah, for Elohim El and Adonah, to note the same. for a
free will and heave offering, Exodus, 35. by skipping and daunceing before the
Ark. So liberally is he mainteyned. The Name of God comes 26. times, for the
Honor of his Name, Jehovah, which letters signify so many just. So God has
the whole fe^ld to him self here, as Job. 19.

PASLM LXIX.
COnsidering the multitude and reprochefullnes that daily exercise themselves
upon him, the miserable case that he is in, reproach and greeff having
brokeen his heart for continuance of his troubles, which are termed by all kind
of troublesome wa^ers, that by no means, by spending of his voice and his eyes,
with calling and looking for help, he can get out off. And considering the
want and distastefullnes, and strangenes of his friends and acquaintance that
he was quite abashed: compareing his troubled mind, to the affliction of a
prisoned man: and considering that this, that is com upon him, is all for his
godlynes, and that all is for zeal to Gods house and service, more then for his
sin, from them: now his prayer is, that it would pleas him, of all kindenes,
to deliver him heerof. That it make not an end of him, but that God will leap
in to him, and com near to his soul, and redeem his life: that the rest of the
church may not be abashed at his perishing. And because of the trayterousnes
and causlesnes of his Enimyes: that their own meat be made a bait to catch
them, and their table-talk, to ensnare them; that they may lie tumbling, and
burn in wrath, when they look in the book of God and see his angry countenance.
And because they still persecute a man in misery, whom God himself has
strooken, and already slain, for his foolish transgression; adding strokes
unto strokes, wrongfully and beastly: so, that God would add iniquity to their
iniquity still, and that they may do more wrong and more, and never com to do
right: that they may be cut off by their own ways, and never be recorded
with the Just, nor mentioned in the book of life. That he may sing a song of
Thanks-giveing, a principal sacrifice for his deliverance. That all the whole
church may rejoice in their hearts, that he will once think upon the poor and
imprisoned: and all Creatures may prais him for his care and advauncement of
his church, and the inheritance of his seed for ever.

Construction. Samec, to uphold. He deals here by way of privation, in a
contrary sens; His misery is so great that there is no support, but he is sunk
over head and ears, and he has no good footing to stand upon, or any thing
to bear him up, but is quite drowned and overwhelmed. The means of his pain,
are faults and folly, from his Enimyes: reproach and depravation for his
godlynes, and skoffing at all his profession. Neither would his nearest friends
know him, that much daunted and sunk him in his spirit. He prays for the
favor of God and his truth, to prop him, and suggest him therewith, by hearing
and delivering of him. He looked for refuge and comforters, but they failed,
and wear eger and distasteful to him. That sunk him also. Therefore that all his
Enimyes stay might fayl them. And Gods salvation may exalt and succor the
oppressed and greeved, to the comfort of the godly and the just. Tet, for mire
or dirt, by sticking or sinking, and mire, for declining, wise repeated. as Ps.
9. Set, both l^tters, Jehovah, inflected, Iehovih: declineed to show the same.

Exodus. The sacrifice here is a prais of the Name and calling upon God in
distress. Ps. 50. and a Thanks-offering, like the Magnificat of Mary, the
mother of Jesus. Lu. 1. better then any declination or double way of the
wicked. Hos. 5. And this shall hold up Jerusalem, and Jerusalem: the Saints
for ever. Heerto are these words to be applied. I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. Math. 9. an upholder. And such a sacrifice he will have in the
wilderness also, Exodus etc. Remember still the iteration of terms. to confirm
the doctrine. The request is, for Ignominy: Namelessnes and utter Extinction.
Mark the declineing of Jehovah, into Iehovih the form of Elohim, for the God
of Hosts, and of Israel, at the beginning of the doctrine.

PSALM. LXX.
THis Psalm, as it stands for a Cadence in the first book, in the end of the
40. after magnifyeing of the prais of God: so here it serves for a Cadence
(together with the 71) of this book also, and of his prayers, and of the years
of his life, to induce his prais 71. That considering now the fleetnes of his
life, and that his life is now allmoste spent: that he would make great haste
to deliver him, that he might ere he dye, see all his Enimyes confounded, Ps.
71. and that he may be able, even to the last, to set out his prais, and that
he may be found strong therein, when his Enimyes hold him forsaken of God: with
request as follows, 71.

Construction. Gnajin, an eye: from the word Gnajin, 1. Sam. 18. to ey one, or
invye one, as Saul did David, lyeing in wait for his life, and to hurt him. The
contrary is to respect, help and deliver. That they may be thoroughly daunted,
and their current stopped, that seek to hurt, and delight in ill. And such most
merry, and cheer themselves, that seek God, and love and look for his salvation:
and therefore, he prays for Gods speedy help and deliverance, as springs run
merrily that are not stopped. Another sens of Gnayn, or Gnen. The whole is
terror, that stops or turns back: and cheerfullnes by deliverance, and
help: and hurt. Marck the iteration, seek, hurt, help, hasten etc. tarry, turn
back, abashed etc.

Exodus. The magnifying of, God, is here a sacrifice of preaching him, opposed
to the wickeds scoffing: in the words O sir etc. Which also is a service of him
in the wilderness, as they promissed in Egypt.

PSALM. LXXI.
Whereas he had been bred up all his life time, eve^ from his birth, in the
fear of God, and a right service of him: and was cast wholely upon him from his
mothers womb: and was daily instructed, all his youth in the word: and made a
perfect preacher and setter forth of his righteousness and salvation hitherto,
as Psalm. 40. which was his only comfort, and which often revived him, and took
him up, when he was buried in deep distresses: and which greatly magnifyed
him, and that now, his sour and injurious wrangling Enimyes presume upon the
weakness of his years, for advantage over him; and now seeing God had all the
service of his youth, and because his whole rely is upon him: that he would
not now forsake him in his old age, but turn to him, and direct him, and rescue
him from his Enimyes, by his strong rock, his word, which is his whole telye,
and daily buissines of commendation, that they may admire it. That he may yet
prais him farther and farther, for ever, for his singular Justice. That his
mighty arm of salvation might be shown by him, to the highest, to all
generations to com; what evils he has rid him of, and how he has reviveed
him, and put down his Enimyes, and clotheed them with shame and reproach of
their own forming. That he may sing of his truth and faithfullnes upon the
harp, with triumphing lips, and his very soul, sing for his redemption, and
that his tongue may never have don talking of his righteousness, for confounding
his Enimyes, for their proud presumption against him.

Construction. Gnajin, or Gnen. An eye as before, from Gnajan. To eye for
malice. The contrary he follows here. Reckoning all the saving means, and
the kinds of helps unto salvation. To wit, his rely and strong waiting, and
trust in God, as his rock to dwell in. His hope and his praising of him all his
life long. Another sens of gnain is here, when it means 70 the old age of a
man, as Ps. 90. which makes the repetition of the word, old age, etc. Another
presence for assistance, by the doubling, of leaving and forsaking, and turning
again and absence, etc. you must understand what occasions also the Enemy
takes for to seek his life, and means for it. Aleph, is to teach or be
taught, by marking and wi^hstanding of him, etc. Which shows his singular
education in the word of God, his preaching of righteousness, another help and
means might and arm of salvation, Is. 46.49. to be exalted. Mark the
repetition of the terms The manner of salvation, rescueing and saveing, is a
resurection, raising of him out of troubles, and bringing to life again, which
is his comforting of him, by the purity of the word, the holy Ghost, as Io.
14.15.16. In the verses, He, behold, and Gnain, an eye, Jehovah is declined to
Iehovih, to note: and in Resh, the Chronicle of 490 years, also to be eyed. It
being an A B C. Psalm also, as La^s. though obscure and close. In the seventh
verse, you shall find the two letters Zain, and Gnain, by addition in the term
Gnoz, strength, which is that he prays for, in his old age. But being
multiply: they make the gracious time of r^demption after captivity or bondage,
mark the terms reviveing, raising, comforting: and the three Queris and
Ketibhes, of the same form and sens, all together, to serve for both.

Exodus. The sacrifice of Prais, and sermon and righteousness, the fruit of the
lips, as Hebr. 13. Hos. 14. Isa. 57. The sacrifice of righteousness, Psalm. 4.
which is without leaven or falls doctrine or wrong dealing, of the Pharisees and
Saduces, Man. 16. because they must not eat leaven in the passover, nor in any
of their feasts or offering, Exodus 12. Lev. 2. For the tartnes and sowernes
thereof. His prayer is to God, his Rock, his Fortress and Rescuer; as Psalm.
18.144. and all by righteousness, the definition of Jehovah, his Name.

PSALM. LXXII.
Having hitherto commended the heavenly Justice, and profound judgment, and
wisdom of the Law of God: and the whole way of God, Psalm. 25. and the way to
peace, Psalm. 34.37.97. David now prays that God would bestow the same upon
his son Solomon, that he may fully reap peace thereby, and that he may govern
so discreetly, that all the world may be happy by him, and blessed in him.
Though his own days were full of affliction, and spent in Sorrow: yet he
considers, there is fruit of Justice, as Psalm. 58. and that God would reward
his travail in the peace of his son, who is said, to have never a Satan,
Enimye or Adversary in the world: so greatly he prospered by the wisdom, that
God gave him, at his request. And because many things belong to the wisdom of
Solomon, and infinite blessings to com from his Justice: David as a father,
prays for his son; but the Scope, is more heavenly, for the Church. First,
that according to his Name, his peace may never go out or be extinguished.
That the Just may grow and flowrish by him, and the Poor be delivered from
oppression, guile and injury, and his Enimyes laid flat along in the dust, as
Psalm. 59. That he may deserve presents and gifts and tribute over all the
world, and that all nations countries and Kingdoms may serve him, and admire
him, for his mercy to the Poor: and pray for him, and bless him. So that a
little poor feeld of corn, upon a barren hill top, being manureed with
righteousness, may be as heavy in the head as the trees of the forest, and the
Cittyes flowrish like grass, for the peace of the people, and growth of the
Church. And thus he concludeeth this book, and Exodus, and the way to peace
and rest, and blesses the most heavenly God, and his most glorious Name, for
the only dooer of great works and miracles, whereby he so shines, as Ps. 136.
by lending him so bewtifull a light in his house, and of the Church against the
end of his days.

Construction. In the second verse, the two letters are doubled, to be thought
upon, Gnain, an eye, or to eye, as before, is here still to regard, or help:
which is applied to the Poor to save him from guile, and injury, and
oppression, which he is most ^ubject to, The means righteousness and equity,
the instrument Solomon, the end peace, and then prosperity and beatitude, and
then honor, and then glory. The clearnes of the estate that he wishes, is
plainly intimated by the letters Gnajin, eyeing, by the sunn and moon, when it
is a shineing estate, free from oppression, delivered and cleared from all
cloudynes, the sens of Gnab: both the letters together, for a cloud, or by
metaphor, a da^k floor over head, as for Beth, that signifies a house: this
word is takeen for a beam, that is an appurtenance, that the arms of his house
and his fame and renown may reach over all the world. Mark all the several
repetitions Is. 60.

Exodus. The peace of God is the blessing of God, and it passes all
understanding in the world. Therefore a Peace and thanks-offering is here the
Sacrifice meant. And it is by these words. The Poor when he shouteth etc. and
in the last words of glory to the Name of God, and the calling on him, as
Psalm. 50. and according to the gospel, Glory be to God on high; and on earth,
peace and good likeing among men. etc. So as the glory of God consists in
delivering and saveing of the poor: so is he most highly blessed, that is an
instrument of his salvation. All which, you shall find most curiously woven
and plotted in this Text. And thus is their sacrifice and service in the
wilderness, made acceptable, and to some purpose in the spirit, before God:
having particularly asscribeed al worthynes, and true worship unto God, that
is due unto the lamb, Apoc. 4.5.7. to wit, all might, and riches, wisdom,
thanks, and honor, strength and prais, and glory, for ever and ever. A
sacrifice of all Nations, Is. 60. And this way is Salomons Name set forth, to
continue for ever, because it signifies Peace.

THE THIRD BOOK.
PSALM LXXIII.
WHen the wicked do all manner of wrong, and that they are even clotheed with
continuance and custom in it: that they are proud with their worldly
prosperity: and that they are so well fed that their eyes can not see; nor
their hearts receive understanding: for their worldly pleasures which they lay
unto them: highly disteigning the knowledge of God: and that they have all
felicity, wealth and peace, and are not plagued at all: to whom, he thought,
belonged all adversity, plague, and sorrow, even to their graves: and that there
should be no peace to them: and that he walked with a pure heart, with all
innocencey according to instruction, and yet is plagued and has correction,
every morning to his breakfast, and has no peace in the world: he feels a
burning at heart, and pricking in the reins at this, and frets, that he was
almost confounded with despair, for not knowing the reason heerof, which was
hard unto him, till he understood it by the word of God. Then he calls Gods
people unto him, and promisseth them a sufficient exposition of it, which he
calls the wringing out plenty of waters, even the Scriptures: showing that
all the standing of the wicked is in slippery placees. They are subject to all
trains, snares and intanglements, and are brought to a fearful end, and utter
consumption in a moment. And that their life is but like a dream, that a man
does mar with his wakeing. So vanish they as soon as they be up, and God
holds him fast by the right hand, being always with him, that he fail
not, and makeeth his correction, his counsel to lead him, that he may bring
him to glory at the last. And for this, he confesses that God is good to the
pure mindeed of Israel, and all leviticall men, and godly souls, by making
them happy by the sight of him; of which he prooves himself, for that he has
neither kith nor kinn in all the world, nor any wight in heaven or earth, to
delight in but him, and that God is graveen in his very heart, and is his
portion for ever. And because he sees, that all that estrange themselves from
God, and go a whooring from him, following some other worship, God or vanity,
in the world, against his commandments; do perish and com to naught: he
likes to be near God in his Ministry, evermore telling his messages, and
relying in him for ever. which is his priestly devotion, Psalm. 16.110. from the
blessing of Levi, Deuteronomy. 33. for an Argument of the whole book of Leviticus.

Construction. To be good unto etc. and to be brought to Glory, is intimateed
by the first and last. The letter, Ghimel, to reward, and to be plagued and
touched, for hurtful, and quite destroyed and wasteed etc. is for the
opposite. The pure hearted: Math. 5. he intends from the two letters
together, Gnog, for a cake: the unleavened, and men of sincere minds:
equivocating the word Lebhabh, a heart, being also for Lebhabha, a cake. The
contrary is of the wicked: of corrupt and counterfeit carriage, and impure
thoughts. Gnajin, to envye or malice, is in the word freat or inflict, etc. as
Ps. 37. like or dislike, or despise etc. his heart failed, he almost fell, to
see their ways succeed. His heart was levened, and aches, Ex. 12. etc. In vain
he cheered his heart. etc. O Lord thou marrest, thou despisest. etc. their
image, because it is not like thee, etc. But because his heart is according to
Gods heart: he looks for the reward of the pure mindeed.

Leviticus. Or in the Hebrew, Vajicra, he called, or cried, or preached, the
first word of the book: as the purity and cleanes of the charge of Gods word,
requireeth not to think of any worldly generation, or to reckon of any
beginning or end: as in that of Meschi zedek, Heb. 7. of Christ, Math. 12.
Mark. 3. and from the blessing of Levi, De. 33. so here his pureity is in
playing the preacher, always at Gods hand, to be employed in his Messages
and his service. Is. 61.62. Which also touches the first and second
commandment. Mark all the repetitions.

PSALM LXXIV.
WHen Prophets be scant and knowledge vanishes, it is no wonder if the
calamity be miserable, and the Church of God, even his own plantation: the
soles of his feet, be now in the snare and caught. As at Nebuchadnezars
rifeling of the Temple, and burning of the city and Synagogues of Jerusalem:
and for not taking heed to their signs, and the counsel of God, that they
feel his wrath and suffer all reproach, Ps. 71.89. without knowing any end
thereof. Yet because his inheritance is of so great antiquity, and that he
bought his assembly so long ago: and has fed them so long, and has saveed
them by so many and sundry deliverances: and so often and so miraculously,
vanquished their Enimyes, and released them: and that he was Lord and creator
of all the bounds and limitations of the earth: the people of God now prays,
that he will show some end of this desolation, as Ps. 14.53. and limit their
unsp^akable misery and distress, and strech out his hand and save them. And
that he would not give away his Church wholely, and the souls of his innocent
dooves, to the beastly kingdoms of the heathen, and never more to think upon
it: but that he would look to his covenant, and pluck their feet out of the
snare, and defend them from the injury of the darkness of the heathen, and
maintein his own quarrel: that the Enemy that revile him, grow not too proud,
and the poor praisers of his name, go away with reproach for ever.

Construction. Gnain, an eye or to ey, or look directly upon. To remember, is a
kind of looking upon. And it comes often, so look or behold, etc. The contrary
is to turn away angry, and forget, and regard not, all doubled words. Daleth,
the day light and the Sunn, for the means of sight and pleasure of the eye:
Gnen, for aspect, and for fountains and rivers: Daleth, a door, for the doors
and light of heaven, or the opening of the understanding, Mat. 3. If. 11. both
the letters spell, Gnad, until or unto: for the Termini, or reaching, from one
thing to another, a quo ad quem, etc. And of this sort, is day and night,
summer and winter, etc. for seasons or signs, which shall never ceas. Genesis
1.9. The limitation is by 400, in the words, Ribhah, Ribheka, as Ps. 43.119. R.
or 34.25. by the doubling of the word Tsorareka, thy besiegers, for 490, etc.
Mark Chajath, in a contrary sens, and the words remember and forget, and
signs, etc. repeated. How long, etc. Gned, eternity, by the often repeating of
Netsach, the continuation till when, etc. Gnadhab, to indue, for assembly, by
all kinds and terms of the Church. Sheep of thy pasture, shaft or tribe or
rod of inheritance, the hill of Sion, holiness, Synagogue, Sanctuary,
Tabernacle, congregation, etc. The indument and habit of the Church, is the
praising of the name of God: and the roaring and blasphemy of the Enemy, the
contrary. For privation, which is the sum. And again, Gnad, for spoil, for the
doubling of the outrage of the Enemy, in their ransacking of it. Salvation were
the walls, and the gates are prais, now turned all to havok and reproach.

Leviticus. There is a new City, or a new civility, which is the word of God,
whose walls are salvation, and her Gates are prais. Heerby, God has showed
himself a saveing King in the midst of all the world, by dividing it by his
Ministry, which is his strength, and passing through, as through a sea, Exodus
14. Ezech. 47. And making it as clear as glass, Apoc. 4. where the heads of
the Arc-enimyes are broken in pieces, and the great devouring fishes of the
Sea, brought to land and devoured. Preachers break up the fountains of the
word, that rivers of doctrine flow: they discover the depth, and show the
bottom of mighty rivers. Mark the iteration of the words, the affectation and
prosecution of them, and you shall plainly see the intendement. The Synagogue
and place of exercise, preaching and invocation destroyed.

PSALM LXXV.
FOr the revelation of the mystryes of godlynes, and propinquitye of Gods word,
called his Name, which is the inward and hearty understanding thereof, in person
of the church. And because he has had time to attein to a perfect judgment
therein, and to discern what mould every man is made of, and the frailty thereof,
and is cunning in his works and ways, and all his ends: and that all the
people in the world be but melting pillars of earth; and vainglorious and
wicked men, that aim at high preferment: he assureeth them, that stand they
never so stiff, and look they never so high, one way or another, or far off:
they add nothing to their stature, Ps. 83. but that it is God that knows
their size, that advanceeth or abaseeth all men, according to their
understanding. And because in the hand of the Eternal, are the Scriptures,
called a vessel full of sparkling and seething wine, with the spirit thereof,
which he draws out, and propounds: and that the wicked drinck but the
litterall dregs thereof, as Ps. 11. and are of a muddy understanding: he
shows that he will tell, and sing the same, in psalms perpetually, to the
God of Jacob. That he may, by this doctrine, cut off the loftynes and vain
glory of the wicked; called his horns, the image and power of oppression. Dan.
2.8. That the Just may the better shine, and be highly glorified.

Construction. Gnajin, an eye: from Gnaian to set eyes or affections on, for
high looks, and strange projects for preferment and glory; for seeking it east
and west, and all the wild world over. He, the second letter, to behold: Lo
here or there, to thank or confess, thy name is nigh, they declare thy miracles,
etc. I will tell to the God of Jacob, etc. to draw out, and wring out, etc.
which is to bring hid things to light, or in presence, or to show or vaunt, or
to sweep them away, as by the two letters: from Jagnah, to sweep, Is. 28. for
the contrary. And this kind of sweeping, is the cutting off of the horns and
glory of the wicked, etc. he exalts, etc. the doubling of He, is a
pointing, etc.

Leviticus. The sermon is, that God and his word does all, and that is ever
present, and near, that he does measure us, and weigh us, and condemn us,
puts down, and sets up. Da. 2. from Is. 28. Where Judgment is laid to
the rule, and righteousness to the balance, etc. By these words, I measure,
etc. God is he that ^udgeeth, etc. by resembling of the scales and balances,
high and low, etc. Besides, he has his cup of condemnation, to sweep away the
wicked, by preaching it unto them. The effect of all is discretion, and
demonstration. That a true light of all, and not a vain or proud conceit,
promoteeth.

PSALM LXXVI.
GOD is most famous in Judah and Israel, and especially-ly in Zion and
Jerusalem, where he dwells; for discomfiting the Kings of Canaan, called the
devouring hills; utterly destroying them in his anger, for their Malice to the
Church and the Promiss, as Ps. 2. rebukeing them and their forcees, with an
eternal sleep, astonishment and stupidity, with his angry presence, and his
Judgment, proclaimed out of the Scriptures, called the heavens; when he
riseeth to save his poor people, the church, and to set them in quiet. Now
seeing Gods anger, and malice so kindled in them, does make him so famous, by
so horrible destruction: he prays to indue them with the rest of his choler,
to make an end of his Enimyes. And wills his church to pay their vows to
their God, and to keep promiss and covenant with him: and that they do
gratifye the Eternal for his terror, that so faythfull-ly, and so terriblely,
confounded the spirit and wits of Kings and Princees; cropping high trees and
Kingdoms, for them, to perform his Promiss, Genesis 12. etc. as Ps. 2. Whence
this psalm is formed, which shows, that that psalm, together with the
first, has his authority from the beginning of the book, and is a Narration
to the whole Pile, and is no later work.

Construction. Gnajin an eye, or prospect, as the word of God has out of
Jerusalem and Zion, and he is admirable for his Name there. A contrary property
of the eye, is sleep: they slept their sleep, etc. Both chariot and horse were
in a swef^, etc. that he is more eminent, and more in sight, then any savage
mountain or promontory whatsoever. Thou appeerest greater, etc. thou art very
terrible, etc. even as a lion, Amos 3. Vau, the second letter, for a hook or
crook, betokens feat. Their weapons fell out of their hands, and they could
not hold them for fear. Fear of the Judgment of God pulls them back. As a
lion is terrible in his sight and voice: so is God terrible in rebuke and
anger, and wrath, etc. and crosses all projects, and stops and perverteth
the ways of men. La. 3. By both the letters, Gnav, from Gnavah, to cross. or
pervert or mar.

Leviticus. The Scriptures and preaching of the word of God, make the hands of
the wicked to shake, it dauntes their courage, and takes down the stoutest, to
save and help the poor in Zion. He is cheeffly honored, where he has don
most for his people: he requireeth his ministers office with diligence, for
this favor, in these words: ye that be about him, etc. to be always
mindful of his benefits, and with great devotion to serve him. The whole is
fear and terror. Gods Name is a lion in Judah. Genesis 49. Amo. 3. Apo. 5.

PSALM. LXXVII.
THinking upon the days of old, as Ps. 143. and the years of the right hand
of the most high, which is the time that Israel was burdened in distress, and
in sore affliction, and was wonderfully and mightyly redeemed, and miraculously
saveed and delivered, as Ps. 114. by their cryeing and complaining unto God,
their Savior in their distress: Seeing now he cries most incessantly in his
distress, and will never leave calling, nor be pacified, having been long
therein without attendance, stretching out his unweeryed hands, with an
uncomforted soul, crying himself out of breath, stareing with his eyes, and
amassed, Ps. 17. that he knows not what to say, at the long suffering and
tarying of the Eternal, his God: but wondereth at his high displeasure,
whether in his anger, he has forgotten his promiss, of Grace and loveing
kindenes, or has sealed and stopped up all his mercyes, with anger: so
considering Gods mighty redemption of the church, when they cried; by his
walking on the waters and paths in the seas: Psalm. 8.65. he wondereth he is
not heard.

Construction. Gnajin, an eye, or sight. I sought, etc. by all means my hand
was stretched out, etc. thy way, etc. 1. Sam. 1. heerto he alludeeth, in
things in sight, and things out of sight, the sight of the eye, mine
eye-watches, etc. the waters, seas, etc. to remember and call to mind, sight
of the mind, soul, heart, spirit, etc. for a kind of seeing, turning away, and
forgetting, and Meteors, etc. lightnings, etc. as Chronicles, by the term
world, generation, ever, never more. etc. Zain, to hear: by compulsion, of a
continual voice, by all kind of means, in a hiphil or coactive sens, by
force of sound, as touching his prayer, and also the Elements. As the ears be
daughters of musicque: so his songs, and meditations and his talk and
commemoration in the night, are to open his ears. Concerning both the letters,
they signify 77. the limits of Judgment, of condemnation, wrath and revenge;
which is the bounds of Chronicles seven fold, and seventy fold vengeance. And
that now Mercy was to be looked for; after such an expiration. And the same
letters spell, Gnaz, strength: for Gods unspeakable Acts, don by his Arm and
right hand: his Ministry. mark the doubling of the general and special. that
is all kinds and propertyes whatsover.

Leviticus. Thy way is in thy Sanctuary, etc. and thy way is in the Sea. and in
the great waters of the Scriptures, etc. and because thy steps are hard to
find: it is to be preached by the Ministry, for conducting of the people, as
it was by Moses and Aaron. that mercy and truth be all ways set before them,
which is the way of God, Ps. 25. And the fidelity of Gods promiss, and covenant
by which his people live. In this Psalm the term Jehovah, is not used at all,
but Adona, and El: to express power and dominion, accordingly. So do the
Teachers become Rulers: as the Levites had charge of the Ark and word of God,
and the regularity thereof, that mighty strength.

PSALM LXXVIII.
EPhraim by Idolatry started from the Church, and rebelled in Jeroboam, that
Hosea shows, which is the parable of this Psalm: pointing out by this, all
the stubbornes and perverseness of Israel, and faithfullnes of the Church: and
their often temptations and revoltings. How they continually vexed and angered
God: that at the last, notwithstanding all his compassion and reconciliation,
he destroyed and cast them off in Shilo, as Ps. 132. and refuseed Ephraim, and
chose Sion for to dwell at, and chose the tribe of Judah for his inheritance,
and out of it, his servant David to feed them, as Ps. 108. So seeing every
transgression has just recompense: He recounteth all from Egypt to David,
and wills the Church to be warned by the example of Ephraim, who for
shooting aside, and refuseing of God; was soon rejected by God: and this is the
sum of all Hosea, and the doctrine of this parable.

Construction. Gnajin, or Gnen, the letter for 70, as for an age, or
generation, which is seventy years, by the term Dor, so often doubled. Gnaijn,
or Gnen, the word: for an eye, or look: as for parables or ridles: which are to
the eye: to look unto; or seeming truths. And after the manner of truths,
when they be revealed. Heerto belong great wonders, secrets, miracles and
mystryes of the Scriptures. The Sea, the cloud, the fire of the Law, Deuteronomy. 33.
The rock, and bread, and flesh, 1. Cor. 10. Ioh. 6. Math. 16. see: he clave
the sea, etc. he clave the rocks: mark all the repetition of the words, rock
etc. when hard and cloudy, dark and hid sayings are brought to light, and to a
heavenly sense, as Gnen, for fountain and rivers of doctrine broken up. So
likewise, concerning the plagues, he sent ill generations, and ill kinds of
men, and angry occasions, Ps. 105. for a destruction. Apo. 21.16. Ch^th, the
other letter, for Fear; bringeth-in all the terrible things of God: fire and
sword, and all plagues for tempting angring of him, for not keepeing his way:
baptizeing with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3. Marc. 1. Luc. 3. Ioh. 1.
and firey judgment of the Law. And mercy also, faith and confidence, etc hope
in the promiss, and despair. He smote the Enimyes of the Church for the
Church, and the Church, for themselves and their own misbeleeff.

Leviticus. David being now Pastor and leader of the people of God, makes
all, the opening of the Scriptures: the releeff and redemption of the Godly,
and the plaguing and damning of unbeleevers. Which is the work of the preacher.
His calling was from God, and he gave himself to the service of him. God his
own elect, Ps. 89. For interpretation of parables and all hard things and
figures, Job. 33. Is. 43. Proverb. 1. Hab. 2. as good Rulers are bread and
water to the people. Is. 3.

PSALM. LXXIX.
THe Church considering the miserable and hard estate that they are in: their
siege, their desolation and captivity, as Psalm. 74. And showing all the abusees
of the heathen, with a sore complaint against them; for entering Gods proper
inheritance, counfounding all service, and prophancing all the civility and
statelynes of Jerusalem, contrary to his ordinances: and making havok of the
blood of his most deer and precious servants, and carrion of all their gracious
personages: and bringing all their precious lives into reproach with their
neighbors; and th^nking that they have felt enough of his wrath, considering
their calling upon him, and daily service of him: they now pray, that he will
turn his hand to the heathen, and destroy them that have thus consumeed the
Church, and be blasphemers of his Name: and that for ^he ancient glory of his
Name, he would not think upon their iniquityes any farther, but speedyly, to
let them see his mercey, and his reconciliation for their sins, for his Name
sake. And the end is, that the Heathen may be disappointed of their glory, and
Gods just revenge of his servants may appeer in might: by hearing the prisoners
groneing, and redeeming their captivity, and multiplyeing of their reproach, of
him and his servantes, many fold into their own bosoms: even seven times
seventy for the seventy years captivity, 490 years, taught in A B C, of Psalm
25, by the letters Ts, r, r, to consume the oppressors and bring final
redemption, that Gods people may set forth his prais for ever. Dan. 1.9.

Construction. The letter Gnajin, for 70, implies the 70 years captivity of
Babylon, that great reproach of the Church, which to be seven times multiplied,
for judgment and vengeance upon the Enimyes, make 490 years. And Gods merceyes
are according thereunto, Ps. 119. R, Gnajin, the word, for an eye or sight, is
for the appeerance and presence thereof, for the glory of God, and his name
sake. The two letters, Gnat, from Gnit, or Gnatah, to cover or object: as love
covers sins, by reconciliation, and the grave, bodies, which be kinds of
covering, as reproaches are for opprobrious, and ignominious, and abominable
Objects.

Leviticus. God is Pastor and shepherd, Psalm. 15.80. Ioh. 10. when his
Ministry is stain, and his Church defiled, and his learned inheritance laid
waste, and all their preaching and teaching become a laughing stock: etc. His
people and sheep pray for his mercey, and redemption, to glorify himself in the
salvation of them, by his mighty Arm, in this time of desolation, that they
may prais him. Because all vengeance and mercy is Gods.

PSALM LXXX.
IN the marching of Israel toward Canaan, and their camping, the whole host
was divideed (in warlike manner) into four squadrons, three tribes to every
squadron: three before, eastward, and three upon either side, and three
behind: this three was Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasse. Within these squadrous,
was left large room, for petty squadrons, of Priests and Levites, ordered in
like manner: having their several chargees, and several offices about the
Tabernacle, which they guarded accordingly. Now within the tabernacle, was the
Ark, and upon it, the mercy seat, and over it, the Cherub wings; the figure of
their protector: in the Ark was the Law, and in it the strength of Israel,
which for the justice, being the Godhead and protection of Israel: he prays
to the God of war, for the shineing out, and for the rouseing the strong
defense thereof, to save them, in their lamentable Misery and desolation, as he
now walked before Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasses. That notwithstanding, now the
whole Church lies waste, and the hedgees of the Law are broken, and they are a
mockery to their Enimyes: the transplanted vine of Joseph, trodden under foot
and devoured, by the swineish and beastly Hethen, as Psalm. 74. and 79. and left
accursed: and Ephraim the son of his right hand, is scorched with this
chideing countenance, for transgression; yet because of his blessing of them,
with his right hand, they pray God that the shining of God and of the Law may
guide him. That from heaven, he would look out some mercy upon the work of his
own hands, revive them and raise them again, out of their thralldom and
captivity, he being the son of his right hand, and confirm them, root them
well and save them. That they may not turn back from him, as Ps. 14.53. but
seek him and call upon him, to save them, having been long as dead men in the
true service of him.

Construction. The letter Pe, is 80. The word Pe, signifies a mouth: and here
to, he brings eating and feeding, Kal, and Hiphil, active and coactive. The
swine devour, etc. God is sheephard and feeder. He feeds with weeping and
tears etc. he prays to be fed, with the clear light of the Law, called his
countenance, for a kind of feeding to salvation, and to be turned and wended
by the word, like sheep. Conduct us, and guide us etc. mark the repetition. To
quicken, by calling upon him. These be the two meats, adversity, and
salvation, etc.

Leviticus. That he would look upon the Church, the vine. God is here sheep
heard, Pastor and feeder, and conducter of them, etc. by the fire light of the
Law of the Church, being scorched with his smokeing wrath: Gods fiery and Angry
look, and strife and scoffing and chideing countenance, and fumeing against
their prayer, which burns or eats, Is. 33. For the fire and cloud and
lightning: he is prayed to shine out by clearnes of truth and mercy, and look
upon it and save it, because his right hand, the Ministry, in Joseph and
Ephraim, Genesis 49 and the tribe whom he had tied to his service, has planted
it. And lay his hand upon the Ministry, and bless all the laborers in the
Church. Mark the doubling of these words, Son for the Church, Psalm. 2. right
hand, confirm, etc. vine etc. That they may be quickened by hearing, and
riviveed, by calling upon the Name of God. That they may profit and go
forward, and not fall back from him.

PSALM. LXXXI.
THat they should lay no fault upon God, this Psalm concludeeth the justice of
the desolation in all the former Psalms. Every state has proper ordinance of
conservation, which failing, all the constitution soon comes to ruin. The
whole strength and stay was the Law of God, and his service, which when they
failed to do, and fell to strange service: God was no farther tied by promiss
nor covenant, to defend them. Most solemn Anthemes and Choralls, must
perpetually be sung, by the Church, to this strength, in their Passovers, and
feasts of unleavened bread, and new moons, etc. for their sweet redemption
from their sore burdens, and sower travail of affliction, in Egypt: being
delivered from a corrupt and slavish bondage, to a glorious liberty of the
service of God. At their sore cry and request, he released them, and sustained
them, that they might only serve him: which if they had don, and kept
themselves wholely to him, unspotted; and chaste, and undefileed with Idolatry:
as he answered all their hard questions, and temptations, at meribah, and by
thundering Sermons, opened the Scriptures in Sina: as Ps. 61.68. so whatsoever
sweet thing they had asked farther; he would had given them their mouths and
their bellyes full of satisfaction; as the destruction of all their Enimyes,
plenty and perpetuity of their estate, and had fed them with milk and honey. But
they would not hearken to his voice, nor be ruleed by his word, and would none
of him, but follow other Gods, what they thought good in their own hearts:
therefore are they justly left off, and thus tormented, and let go to
destruction. This from the first and second commandment.

Construction. Pe, a mouth: the mouth was fed and satisfied: when they cried in
Egypt, and God heard them, their lips for mouth. He will fill their mouth he
will feed him deintily with doctrine, and give him all his longing. By sweet
words, and clear interpretation, and sermons, and Judgments, and sentences,
sweeter then honey, Psalm. 19. Aleph, to learn, or instruct, if so be they will
hear and be instructed, and not forsake their religion; but they would not
hearken not be instructed, but erred in their hearts, Psalm. 95. and that was
destruction to them. A soft answer puts away strife. Gods word contenteth
the soul, as meat is for the belly. Thunder, and Meribah, and Voice, and Tower,
and Rock, and release, and Victory, agree for answer and satisfaction. Mark the
words repeated, strange God, etc. hear, hearken, walk, etc. Testimony,
protest, all asking and fullfilling, and triumphing, and the work of the mouth.

Leviticus. The lips of the Priests preserv knowledge: so prais is the fruit of
the lips, open my mouth, etc. Ps. 51.71. This was an ordinance, and an Act and
duty, for the Ministry, in the remembrance of their redemption and deliverance.
Number. 10. See the diverse writeing: of Joseph, in the 80. And in this, Iehoseph,
to show, that Joseph added much to the Church, as Act. 2. at the preaching of
Peter. Mark the blessing of Joseph, Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 33. his strength and
sweetness, the stone of Israel and Rock of the Church. And shepherd, and
feeder, and teacher, and Nazarit, and separate, and consecrate of his
brethren, etc.

PSALM LXXXII.
Until Iniquity be com to the full, Estates com not to final ruin: Iniquity
comes not to the full, till Judgment be lost, and knowledge and syncerity
decayed; for heerby was the world made; and stedfastnes of all estates. This
word was committed, unto the Angels, the Priests and ministers, to be preserved
in their lips, and worn in and upon their hearts; for the continual succor and
estate of Gods people: also to anoint Kings and Judges of the Earth, who for
the Mi^istration heerof, from God, were termed Gods, and the Children and the
sonns of God. Now seeing all justice is for the Poor, and all succor is
ordained for them that be comforttless and oppressed: and seeing in the
church, even in the presence of God that judges them; they favor the wicked
ones, and by wrong Judgment, leave the poor in their hands, and this for want
of judgment and understanding, which shakes all: that they take the Name of
God in vain: wherefore they shall loos their Names, their placees, and their
immortal state of knowledge, and fall from heaven, to the ordinary estate and
end of humane Princees, and comun men; and all for Ignorance or Partiality. He
at last appealeth and prays, that God himself will now arise, and do the
earth justice, and judge his inheritance in all Nations. and this according to
the third Commandment.

Construction. Lev. 19. In petaroth, Quedoshim: that is holy, or holy ones,
etc. Pro. 31. for Pe, a mouth, for the sentence of the Judge, and cry of the
poor: and as you may see by the harping upon the words, just, judge, God,
deliver, poor, etc. for Justice feeds the poor by rele^ving them. And where
just and right judgment fails by ignorance: all houses, and buildings,
foundations, and ground works shake, and there is an earthquake and tottering of
all instruction and edification. And that is according to the letter Beth, a
house. And all government shall fall to ground.

Leviticus. Shall not the judge of all the world do right? so he appealeth,
when the Church and Ministry are without knowledge, and unjust: for the
iniquity of judgment among the Gods and Ministers of the Church, for foolish
and pervers judgment, to the most upright God himself, that well knows, and
rightly weighes all; and all from the first and last words. Gods is the
Archbishop and cheeff Pastor and Prelat: to ^ondemne the leaders and Princees
of the Levites, by the words cheeff, and Prin^^, answering one the other,
Nitsabh, and Sar.

PSALM LXXXIII.
THey that be born after the flesh, still persecute them that are born of the
spirit. Because of the ill will of these mixed and impure Nations, at Zion: and
their particular and spiteful quarells against Jerusalem: as Edom and Amalek,
for birth^ight: the Ismaelites for bondage, and Moab and Ammon, and Amalek: For
bastardize. whch always grudgeing, or being grudgeed of them, or accurssed:
with Phelistia, Tire and Ashur, that joined with them: they grow stout and
presumptions of their great strength. They draw to counsel and ^onsult against
Iehoshaphat and the Church of God, 2 Cro. 1.20. How to cut off their Nation,
with their noble and famous memory for ever. And make a league and combine
themselves by covenant against God, and for the abolishing of his Name for
ever, as Psalm. 48. The Churches prayer now is, that God will not be silent or
sit still at this. But because they keep not holy day: that he would bestirr
himself, against them likewise. And handle them, as he dealt with the
Midianites, for the like attempt and presumption; and handle their Princees,
and choice Men, as he handled theirs. That they may fly like chaff before the
wind, he pursueing them with flames, of Terror of his tempestuous wrath: and
while men seek the Name of the Eternal, it may scorch their faces, and turn
them about again, like a whirlwinde. That for their noise and high looks, as
Ps. 75. it may still them and abase them, ^onfound them, and destroy them for
ever. Psalm. 48. 2. Cro. 20. To teach them, that there is no such sovereignty nor
Majesty in all the world, as is the Eternal, and his name, the seeking of him,
and calling on him. See likewise numbers, 22.23.24. where these same Nations
were kindled against it.

Construction. Pe, a mouth. That he be not silent, the Enimyes rore etc,
consult and compact together, etc. That they be concealed or cut off etc. that
there be no more mention made of them. The fire burns, so the wrath of God,
is a kind of burning and an eating or consumeing fire, and his terror, a
scorching. Ghimel, for reward, or recompens, or revenge, by comparison or
example: as to such and such, or so and so, put their Princes and elect, like
such and such, etc. that sought the like. Both the letters are spelt Fag, from
Fug: remiss, or slack. That Gods terror slackens the counsel and bent of the
wicked, by abashing and confounding of them. As not to remitt, intermit, or
pardon, as in the first words. Mark the words of silence, and utterance, the
words of fire work, and all kind of winds, and of terror, and confusion. And
princes and Name etc. doubled. confuteing of adversaryes, by sermons on the
Sabbath.

Leviticus. Princes and sacred ones, the protected and Elect, for Pastors and
sheepheards, as Mich. 5. By doubling of the words and kinds, and also the
phrases and affixes etc. to be noteed. The fire work and the winds, for the
Angels and Ministry, and the seekers of the name of God, etc. as Psalm. 104.
Heb. 1.10. Exodus 3. For the firey and terrible judgment, pronounced and
preached out of the word, Is. 66. for a confutation by the Anointed and hidden
ones, so God is judge. And for the Enimyes making, and taking head, by crafty
counsel behind their backs, the terror of the word by the Ministers, shall
all-to-crush them with bashfullnes, and confound them, Genesis 3. How terrible a
thing is it, when the word of God is right against us, and blows in our
faces. Mark the doubling of the words, for reward.

PSALM LXXXIV.
THis Psalm grows upon the occasion of the former. Seeing Iehoshaphat was
delivered from that mischeevous plott, and invinceible strength of these nations
that besiegeed, by prayer and trust in God, when he was past all hope of
secureity, by himself or his people, and in that distress that he knew not what
to do: and seeing together with their defense, God rained blessings of
strength, and riches upon them, in Baca or b^rachah, of the valley of
Iehosaphat, by Gods judgment, Joel. 3. which confusion of language, is usual
as Number. 26. For Shephuphim, Shuphim, likewise for Sharbet, shebet, for
Darmeshek, Dammeshek, etc. He first admireeth the person of God, for his
warlikenes, secondly, the lovelynes of his dwellings, for the succor they
yield to the distressed. And thirdly, the happynes of all that serve him, trust
in him, and are present with him, for their defens from him. And for this, he
would so faigne be like the birds, in and about the Temple, always praising
of him, showing, that if they well consider the face of the Church, called the
Anointed, now after deliverance: they shall see, that one days service in the
house of God, and his courts, is more worth then a thousand, yea then all ones
life, in the Tents and conversation of the wicked: Seeing from hence is light
and defense, from hence is glory and Grace, as Psalm. 144. and from hence is all
goodness, to just and upright men. From, 2 Cro. 20.

Construction. Pe, a mouth: it is construed here according to the phrase, as
mouth to mouth, for face to face, Number. 12. because of the presence of God in
his Church and temple. Daleth, for a door, is here meant by the house of God,
which is called, the gate of heaven, Genesis 28. and of God, Psalm. 24.118. Both
the letters make Pad, from Padah, to redeem. Mark the doubling of the terms:
to hear, and to see, and appeer, etc. and prayer and faith, and affection, for
presence, from virtue to virtu^, from one virtue to another, from one faculty
to another by the word, till they become ripe and perfect in faith, and have his
ways in their minds, whereby they see God. Math. 5. Mark the doubleing of
house, etc. by all kinds: to signify Gods habitation, and the place of
presence and redemption. Ma^k the doubling of the warlike Eternal, etc. and
God of war, etc. for the warfare of the Ministers. The rareity of
construction, in Elohim, so many times. The person, is God and the Church. The
time is preaching and prayer.

Leviticus. God is the Lord of the Ministry, and of the Levites: and of their
exercise, Nu. 8. He raineth all strength and confi^ence out of his word, he
is the redeemer and Lord of life, by his plenty of Doctrine and blessed
showers, Joel. 2. which is the happynes of the frequenters of the Church. Mark
the repetition: mark the streng^h and brightness of the word, like the Sunn in
his strength. For glory, he is full of grace and favor, for a protector or
shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. As Moses guide to rest, Exodus 33. and yields all
good to his anointed ones, by his presence, Exodus 33. Psalm. 34. Mark the sound
of the words: sunn, and shield, and grace, and glory. for such a sunn goes
not down, but shineeth more then a day. Ios. 10. Is. 38. Apoc. 22.

PSALM LXXXV.
IT is observed by the Church, that all their captivityes and distresses
proceed from the wrath of God: for their height of iniquity, extreme
offenses, perverseness and sin against him. And that he is wont to pardon all,
and to be reconcileed unto them, upon their turning again unto him, with
confession, renewing of their minds, and amendment. And that he has so good
a likeing to his country, as still to bring them home again unto it, after some
correction of them, and their sorrow to repentance, to prais him. Now
considering the tediousnes of this last captivity, by Babel, that in a whole
generation they felt no life in them, nor token of salvation, for the fiercenes
of Gods anger upon them: their prayer is, that he will now show such kindenes
unto them, as to give to all sorts of them, a more dureabl^ peace then before,
and that his salvation, now be not long withholden from them that fear him.
And for the flowerishing and glory of their land: that faith and love may
procure such heavenly Justice as may set them in the way of peace, that they
never err again. Like the way of the Eternal, Psalm. 25.34. with the doubling
of the letter Resh, to the letter Tsade, in the words Ratsitha and Arts^ca, The
first words, to make the number 490, etc.

Construction. Pe, the letter, a mouth: by the doubling of the word, speak, and
Pe, the word, for meeting or kissing, as mouth to mouth, or face to face: or
near or present, by the itteration of the terms, kindenes, and truth, and
righteousness or Justice, and peace etc. He, to behold, for the privative. Thou
forgavest, and coveredst, and thou contractedst, break off etc. For the habit:
show Us, etc. And the prospect of Truth, and righteousness. For his presence.
mark the doubling of the words, Salvation, Ps. 42. and country, and land. The
Eternalls likeing, and goodness to it. In the first and last words.

Leviticus. The good will of him that dwelt in the bush, Deuteronomy. 33. is to his
holy Land, Exodus 3. his presence, glory and bounty, Exodus 33. Ios. 5. and faith
and love, and righteousness; and peace, and salvation, the rest of the Godly
Armor, and holy weapons and weeds of the Ministry, Ps. 132. For mercy and
remission, and salvation, in peril for sin, that they be not consumed, with
the flame of Gods wrath, when they look in the Law. Ministers of righteousness
shall go before, and lead as Prophets, to direct his feet, Luc. 1.

PSALM LXXXVI.
THis Psalm is fitted to the former, by the very words of the 25. That the
reader should not miss, but have an eye thither, to mark the starr of his
redemption, and line of Gods Justice and judgment, which is seven fold the
misery that they inflict upon the just, and Gods vengeance and revenge upon the
wicked, and his payment of them, to bring the Poor, their hopes of inheritance,
and peace eternal, with all plenty and delight, with it: by an utter rooting
out of the wicked for ever, as Ps. 37. And this is all for his kindenes and
faith toward the Poor and distressed, which he calls his way, which also is
his work, which together is wonderful: that there is none the like nor any God
like him. This way (with many just reasons to be heard) he prays to be
taught, and his heart to be sharpened, that he may walk by the word of truth,
in the fear of his name, to publish and glorify him for ever, for his great
deliverance by it, as Ps. 88. That when many proud and terrible Tyrants, which
set not God nor his Law before them, seek his life: that God in the Kingdom of
his compassion and kindenes, would pity them, and bestow upon him his
strength, which is his Law, and thereby save the child of the Church, called
the son of his hand maid, and to show some sign of this good unto him; that
the high and fearful looking men, may be abashed and abased, when they see,
that God does take his part, against them.

Construction. Pe, a mouth: for calling, cryeing, voice and prayer, and name,
and hearing, hea^kening and considering etc. Relatives. Mark the doubling of
these words, with requests and reasons, which also is, for Vau, the other
letter, for a crook: a kind of crooking or fetching by petition. Likewise, the
two letters together make Po, here, or hither, which is also toward. Which is
the nature of pity and kindenes also, words often repeated. By his mighty
pulling of them out of hell, and pittes of distresses, and saveing them, Mark
the doubling of these words. His persuasions and inducements. He is poor: he
is pittyfull: he trusts to him: he calls on him: he sets his mind on
him, etc. God is wonderful kind, and a wonderful doer, 2. Cor. 4. And saves
strangely, etc. to the great glory and prais of his Name and calling upon him,
Ps. 50.91. and a shame to his foes, by a sign of prosperity.

Leviticus. He is com from Pastors, Rulers and Kings, and Gods, and Angels,
and hosts, Armies and exercisers, or soldiers in the former Psalms, now to
Ministers, works, creatures and servantes of God, Psalm. 134.103. Mark the often
doubling of the word servant: and son etc. and the word Lord, the relative, to
implye the same. Such as be the Priests, daily Callers upon God, as was Moses
and Aaron, and Samuel, Psalm. 99. and Ezra, etc. For Saver or Helper of the
people.

PSALM LXXXVII.
There is no such mother as the Church of God, nor any parentage like unto God
his word: there is no such Church as Jerusalem and Sion, from whence the word of
God and the Law issues: that the gates (the goeings in and out) of Sion, are
better beloved with the everlasting, then all the dwellings or cittyes of
Jacob, or the Church elsewhere beside. For, when other cit^yes are mentioned,
and that this man or that man was born in them: of Sion, it is said more, that
this man was born in her, in that, which the most high built and established.
And when he writeeth up his people, he will not leave out the place, of their
birth, that were born there, because of the excellent springs of music that
are in it. And this commends the Child of the Church, and expounds the
son of the hand maid in the former Psalm; to show the pretiousnes of the
children of God, the deernes of his servantes blood, and the worthynes of their
redemption.

Construction. Pe, a mouth, by the ineffable fame of Jerusalem, the mouth and
talk of all the world. By the words: unspeakeable, mention, be said, reckon,
etc. for kinds of utterance; springes, singers and pipeers. For mouth music.
Zain, for hear: for the renowm and prais of the city, and what an honor it
was to be born in it, and to be brought up there. Mark the word born, doubled.
Zain, for Zeh, this, for certainty, by the repetition of that termn and sens so
often. This man, he and he, or every one, and he, etc. both the letters make
Paz, for gold. The golden city, new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. also Paz, strength,
Genesis 49.

Leviticus. For the Church and Assembly, and deer house of God, and his beloved
Ministry, for the place of highest degree of honor and prais, called the gates
of Sion. The holy hill, dwelling of Jacob, City of God, Gods founding and
establishing, etc. for his service: a place of harmony, that there is no place
nor Church of the like Glory and strength and authority. The Leviticall office
here, are the Musicians and praisers of God, of which there were 4000. 2. Cro.
23.

PSALM. LXXXVIII.
Being now in the Cadence and conclusion of this book, and service also, which
is the proper place of praising and gloryfying of the name of God, that in this
Psalm, by true course, nothing else c^n be expected, but commendation and prais
of the Everlasting; for his great works of love and kindenes toward them: Now
by the languishing of the Church, and their oppression in long captivity, the
Estate being altered, the Memory and glory of Jerusalem dyeing and decaying
every day; seeing they now tell of their birthes in diverse Nations and Cittyes,
and at length the Ierusalemites grow few, as the Egyptian generation in the
wilderness: and they are estrangeed, and their acquaintance obscureed, and their
estate abhorred, and beecom abominable, like dead men: now being thus dead in
sorrowful lives, buried deeply in distresses, and covered with wrongful
oppression, shutt up from their freindes and acquaintance by remotenes, and
terriblely amaseed by affliction, and Gods angry terror upon them; Now how can
they confess him aright, as Psalm. 86.137. and show his kindenes and
faithfullnes among the Destroyers, and make his Miracles plain among them that
understand nothing, or manifest his Justice, where it shall not be remembered?
For this he prays aloud, in the night, as Psalm 134. And holds up his
hands, and calls daily for salvation and redemption, with early shouting and
prayer for the same: to wit, their return to Jerusalem, to prais him; counting
all placees else in the world, but an absolute state of death, whersoever they
were captiveed.

Construction. Pe, a mouth: mouth to mouth: or face to face: for manifest, as
by prayer, and Oration to God. Affliction is the contrary, for obscureity;
signified by the whole nature of the grave, and dead men. What their estate is,
mark his presence in these words, before thee, praying, shouting and cryeing,
and calling, confess, told, manifested, Gods wrath, remember. And a miserable
estate is compareed to a grave for all propertyes. So his life is full of all
evils, none evil escapes him. He is at the mouth of the pit, expireth. He
is dead, slain, weak, out of mind, cut off, in the deep, in the dark, in
place of destruction, land of forgetfullnes, out of his acquaintance, in
abomination, shut up for ever: In wrath, he rejects, and hides his face. He
does no wonderful and secret thing, his mercey is not revealed. Cheth, fear,
prostration, and breaches, amaseed, terrors, terrible passions, oppression,
etc. Both the letters spelt, make Pach, a Governor, Duke or Prince, Neh. 5.
according to Ie. 48. also, a snare, which for his adversity he makes death
and the grave. as Ps. 18.

Leviticus. Nehemiah, chap. 5. shows, by useing the like words of this
Psalm, that he is the Crier and Governor, and cheeff Prelate here meant,
having the like occasion in the behalf of the church.

PSALM. LXXXIX.
THe faithfullnes and kindenes and justice and judgment of the Everlasting, by
which the heaven and earth and all thrones are built and preserved; must be
for ever sung. And happy are the people that can delight and be merry in the
presence and light of the Everlasting, being exalted by him, Where he has
ordained the sounding out of his Name. And that there is none to be compar^ed
either in heaven or earth to the Eternal; for his warlikenes, for might, or
counsel, or terror; for beating down the proud Nations and scattering of his
Enimyes. Now having exalted David, and covenanted with him, and sworn, that
his Throne shall be for ever, and his seed after him, and that he would so
strengthen him, that no enimyes should hurt or oppress him; and that he would
make him as deer as his Eldest son, and give him a supremacey above all the
kings of the Earth: and that he would never take his kindenes from him, only
correct him with ^odds for transgression of his Law: Now he noteeth, that the
Enimye has the advantage, and rejoice, God is angry and breaks his covenant,
Jerusalem is takeen and laid desolate, the crown of his Anointed is cast on the
ground, the church is in captivity, even in their prime; their swords nor
their hearts have any edges to battle, and his Throne is overturned, and he
is abashed, and is a reproach to his neighbors; and praye^h, that he would no
longer now hide his face, in his ang^y dealing thus against them, but remember
what stripes they be able to carry, and not to make an end of them in his
wrath, but let them see his salvation in time, and redeem them, and to think of
what continuance they are, seeing oppression makes an end of the strongest (and
what was their Creation worth without Redemption) and think upon his
kindenesses again, and faithful covenant to David, and consider all his ways,
after this correction, and the Reproach that the church puts up, at the
hands of these great Nations, their Enimyes, that cannot abide his steps.

Construction. Pe, a mouth, for all kinds of speech: covenant, swear, confess,
triumph sing, be merry with, exalt, speaking, saying, falsifying of promiss,
violating of covenant, breaking his word, changeing the thing that is gone out
of his lips, lying, reprocheing, etc. covenant, law, Judgments,
prescriptions, commandments, his word or mouth. Kinds of mouths: the edge of
the sword, the hand of hell, or mouth, Ps. 141. gaps in hedges, and breaches in
walls: thou have broken down all his walls, etc. Tet, dirt or clay, as beating
for dust, his throne is down, and his garland and crown, and all his exalting
defiled in the ground, and abaseed, and all Kingdom and honor in the dust, and
shame and reproach to cover it. His song is the Mercey^s and miraculous dealing
of God, and his truth in promiss, which is all his way, Ps. 25. his mighty way
of salvation, rule and assistance. See the repetition of kindenes and
faythfullnes, and wonders, for kindenes, and walk, of diverse writeing, to be
noteed. Mark the eternity, and throne of God, where he sits in his word,
which is his mouth, for ever, world without end, for the wisdom and uprightnes
thereof, Judgment and Justice.

Leviticus. The Seed of the woman shall crush the serpents head, Ge. 3. Michael
the Archangel of the covenant, is cheeff prince and prelate here. Da. 7.10.12.
Zac. 3. Ap. 12. Jude. Like Immanuel, Is. 7.8. Nu. 13. as by Gods Name of might
and strength, to help and rule, and command, El, and Chasin Iah, etc. Mark the
admiration, who among the children of the Gods. etc. who is so mighty a God,
etc. So, Mi, Ca, El, signifies, who is like God, Deuteronomy 33. cheeff in the
congregation and counsel of the holy ones. He beats down the grown seas,
and lofty billows, and heads of the Enimyes: By his ministry, called his Arm
and right hand, and strength thereof; which is called his help. For this help,
he peeked David out of the people, to conquer the Enimyes, one that no Serpent
could prevent: Ge. 3. The seed of his doctrine shall be for ever. Mark, for
the creation of the church: the woman out of the Man's side, from ^ll the words
repeated: build; help; before, or for find, Enemy for serpent, etc. beguile,
etc. only the serpent shall reproach his steps, and blaspheme, or hurt his
heels. Mark still the rep^tition.

THE FOVVERTH BOOK.
PSALM. XC.
COmpareing the age of man with the age of the Church, they find the ods to
be infinite; not a wakeing in the night, to a thousand years: which they call
but a shower of a sleep, that they were in God before the creation, and has
lasted ever since without extinguishment. His servants be brought to a few,
and pounded to dust, but he reviveeth them, with sonns and daughters: and when
they flowerish most, their youthfullnes in iniquity angreth God and consumes
them. All the whole time of man upon earth, is but an angry time, and it is gone
ere they think of it, his age is short and painful, and soon com about, which
being seventy, or eighty, at most; remembereth still their state of
captivity, and fain they would be wise in reckoning of their years, as Ps.
25.79.89. etc. which is, rightly to apply one time to another; whereby
concludeing their calamity to be near at an end, and their captivity allmoste
out: the Church now prays, that God will now with all speed, com again unto
them, and comfort his s^rvants. And betime, give them their fill of his
kindenes, and make them wise, and redeem them, that they may sing and be
merry, and keep sabbath all their lives. They love much to whom much is
forgiven: so, that their height of joy might be according to the sorenes of
their affliction, and the days and years of their happiness and mirth, may
infinitely exceed, for their days of evil. That they and their children, may
see his most inestimable works, and that, in his pleasantnes, God would make
good the labor, and long service of him. According to Moses his request, Ex.
32. Deuteronomy. 9. An Argument of the book of Numbers. For so many reckonings as are
in it of times and seasons, which is the sum of all.

Construction. Tsade, meat. The travail for wisdom serves for meat, and
comfort; which Christ in the Gospel speaks from hence, Luc. 2. Io. 4. To
dwell eternally in God, in his power; and live and believe in him for Eternal
life, is a kind of food, Io. 6.14. Gods wrath and terror is an eating or
consumeing fire, that wasteeth and diminishes man, with affliction for sin,
by fiery judgment, Ps. 78. Ier. 10. Apo. 8.9.10. Is. 9.24. And out of the dust,
he has his conversion again, and is satisfied with comfort and joy, Gods
plesantnes to him, and his estimation of him, and blessing of all his works:
For mercey and kindenes which he feeds on. Mark the relation of the parts,
and repetition of the terms. Anger and terror and utter consumming, opposeed
to kindenes, joy and prosperity. Which is closely employed in the beginning, by
the first and last letters of A B C, Athbash, for the term of the Alphabet,
beginning the three first verses, and in the third verse, twice converted and
^urned backwards, and made Tashba, in these words: thou bring etc. and
say, com again, etc. so the year, is a kind of conve^sion or retu^n, sleep
and refreshing, flourish, cut and wither, and all alteration: to show the
confusion, before the digesting of the word, by confounding Athbash, for the
Alphabet.

Numbers is called Bammidhbar, in the wilderness, that they remained in
eternity, with God, in time of rudenes, Genesis 1. and have an everlasting
dependence from him. The opposition is eternity, and temporality: without
variablenes, and with change, as between God, and his creature, Is. 29.40. Ps.
102. also Bammidhbar, by the word, their faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word, etc. and thus they are made his subjects, and he, their Lord and
God: by the terms of Adonah, and El. And such effect has the voice in the
wilderness, for reformation etc. of a few out of manny, by way of affliction.
See the doubling of these words, of eternity, and of moment, all ages, etc.
generation. Years, night, day, sleep, in wakeing, morning, evening, fresh,
withered, cut, past, ^^y, and haste, etc. bring, com again, return* For
recreation: cheer and mirth, etc. God brings all to a wilderness, and again
makes a habitation of the same: so that habitation here, supposes a wilderness.

PSALM XCI.
THis Psalm by way of answer to the former, shows wherein the safety of the
Church consists, their victory and also their rule of redemption, having
their dwelling with God, and lodgeing and relyeing in the shadow of his wings,
under the book of God, the word of truth. They shall be so defended and
shielded thereby, that no weapons nor snares nor ods, by night or day, at home
nor abroad, can dea^e with them. His Ministry has such charge of them, and
with their doctrine so sound, that with their voluble tongues their flowrishing
blades, and spiritual swords, they defend their lives, and keep and save
them. They lead them right, and keep them out of harms way, and explane their
ways, that they stumble not. That by their faith and confidence heerin, they
may stop the mouths of Lions, withstand all fiercenes, and vanguish all
terror, and beware of the subdolty of the serpent, and escape the divillish
crauling temptation of vipers; and overcom all wrangling and spiteful Enimyes,
Ps. 41. With this consolation in counsel: because they know him, and honor
him, and call on him, he will grant them their whole request in the former
Psalm.

Construction. Tsadeh, from Tsad and Tsadah, to hunt or foul, or lie in wait
for prey, La. 3.4. Ts, Ier. 16. He describeeth the chase of an Enimye, how it
is, by day force, and by night craft. This he termneth a terrible plague, the
stroke of fear: and the smart of the arrow, that comes from him, lighting on
him. Another sens of Tsade, is Tsad, a side, where as all fell beside him, and
no kinds of stroke, nor scourge, nor plague could f^ll on him, etc. The second
letter is Aleph, for a thousand, and also many thousands, by declineing it.
And Aleph, for study, or lerning, which is meant by the words embrace, and
known, etc. also Tsadeh for food which is his study and instruction, which
brings salvation and his fill of days and all benefit, and victory. There is
no fear nor d^nger in the word of God, nor fetching any one out of his house,
that is so full of instruction. Mark the repetition, both letters make Tse,
except, or without, or go out, or escape, as concerning the snares. Metsudah,
a fortress, for the first letter, concerning the stroke. This thinks upon Jah,
for Jehovah, by the number of verses, by protection against the plague of
corruption, in Havath. Mark the seven affixed Hows, or hims, at the end, for
exception and onelynes, for the whole Name Jehovah.

Numbers. The wilderness is here supposed, by the sport, being savage, also by
the dwellings, the spoil of privative of desolation. As you may see by
insisting upon the words; dwelling, lodgeing, relyeing, truth, habitation,
tabernacle, etc. The person is faith, the house is the word of the most High,
and All-sufficient, for his most safe protection. The Ministers are his
Tutors, to keep him from all offense, and peril, and shame, in the world. From
hence is all victory, their faith and love and dwelling with God, and adviseing
with his word and loveing of him, and his grace is sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.
Because his trust is aloft, in Eljon, the High: he concludeeth his salvation
from all and victory over all. Mark the repetition, and relation to Eljon, and
Shadda, the High, and the All-sufficient, evermore.

PSALM XCII.
Most sweetly by the fowerth, does this Psalm hang to the former two, for that
Psalm has all parts of the th^ee. Having obtained their request, and
deliverance from evil days: they can not but be merry, and sing the ways
and wo^kes of the Eternal, with solemn worship, evening and morning, to
advance his Name. Which they acknowledge to be a benefit of high
transscendence, and excellent consequence to them, and past the understanding
of the beastly and froward kind of men: which is, let the wicked, the
Molesters of the Church, and the Enimyes of God, flowerish never so well; and
look never so green: they note, they shall be rooted out for ever, and perish,
as Ps. 109. and be soon dissevered one from an other, and all their
combination frustratee^; when God shall survive for ever, and hold up the horn
and glory of his Church, with a fresh anoyntment. And they shall have a
whispering intelligence out of the word (by examples) of all plottes and
practices against them, and shall behold their Tormentors, as plain as in a
glass. And they, the Just, as Ps. 36. shall be green and flowe^ish in their
age, be in good likeing, that are planted in the house of God, and grow as
upright as Cedars, to show the uprightenes of the Eternal, and their rock:
that there is no wrong in him. This from Eden, the garden and plantation of God:
Genesis 2. for the Congregation.

Construction. Tsadeh, for meat or food, and this is the Sabbath instruction,
out of the word of God, the continual praising and preaching thereof, the
Sabbath service, early and late, he makeeth it meat and drink to think upon,
and relate his creation, Psalm. 1. of so deep a cogitation. He deals upon the
effect, as far, of feeding; with fresh oil I am all perfused, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.
Ne. 9. Prove. 21. to wit, oiley, o^ fat. Again, they shall be still far and
fresh, etc. that be preachers of righteousness. Beth, a house, the second
letter, for the plantation of his house, and courts and congregation. And both
the letters make Tsab, or Tsaba, to play the minister, or to exercise the
Ministry and leitourgy of the church, to tell out, etc. to declare etc: which
is to feed. The food is Kindenes, and faythfullnes, and uprightnes, etc. also,
a kind of feeding is seen by a flourishing, and prospering, and freshnes and
greenenes. Tsab, also of Iatsabh, to stand, or abide, Eljon, above, or
surmounting, as between God and his Enimyes is here plainly argued. Mark the
repetition of the words, for the eternity of the godly life, and the vanity
and frailty of the contrary. This for the same number of verses, must be
considered, to think of Iah, for Jehovah, 15. in both. Mark the relation to
Eljon. All alludes to Eljon, the High.

Numbers. The wilderness here is the sottish, rude, bruteish and froward kind
of people, and wrong dooers, and enimyes to the creation of Man, and all
reformation of manners, which are against all culture and manureance of the
church. These for their wickedness, in all their prime and flower are supplanted
rooted out and perish. When Gods house, and plantation, and colony of the just
shall flowerish, with all manner of prosperity, for ever. It is a good thing to
be thankful for our reformation, and to be disciplined unto eternal life.
Mark the repetition of words, and also of kinds.

PSALM XCIII.
THis Psalm farther prooveth the benefit of the Sabbath service, which
according to Ps. 29. sets out the strength and statelynes of the Ministry,
that at this time and place, the word of God bears swey; that amaseeth,
judgeeth and confirms all the world; It is the precious attire of the
Eternal, imagined by the costly jewels, stones and softnes of raiment, which
the priesthood ware. Wherefore to this psalm and the former, and the rest of the
sabbath, belongs the whole epistle to the Hebrews, much of the revelation
and Ezekiel, and a great part of Exodus, all buissines of the Tabernacle. The
Eternal is the righteousness of the word of God, and his Throne the Scriptures,
both ancient of days, from everlasting antiquity: the gaynes of habit, and
ornament thereof, is wisdom, and the cincture truth, which is the whole
strength and stay of the world: and this is the law of God, that holds all
the world uprighte. The rivers, great waters, and the seas, all the degrees of
the Heathen have lofty things to utter, but the word of God far passes all.
His Testimonies and Law, his protestation, and covenant, be most firm
things, and sure, to lean unto, there is no fault or dissembling in them, and
that makeeth the holiness of his house, for which, all the world have their
affection and resort thereunto, as long as the world lasts.

Construction. Tsade, for meat or food, which is here the word of God, Deuteronomy. 8.
Math. 4. intended by the iterateing of the termn, voice, as the most high
voice of the Crier, in the wilderness, Math. 3. Mark. 1. Luc. 3. Io. 1. Is.
52.40. the preaching of the word, and the raigneing and prevailing of the
righteousness thereof, what a wonderful, and everlasting nourishment, the
kingdom of God yields to the Godly, and appetite of the faithful, after
their creation and reformation? It yields food and raiment, Is. 59. Math. 6.
Ps. 29. The word is endued with high excellencey, and with great might. And
this is the strong angelical food, Ps. 78. Io. 6. even faith; the holiness of
his house: mark all the repetition and relation, to the Sabbath. Ghimel, has a
contrary sens heerunto, as to wayne, and may not be useed here, but is useed
in the next piece, where Daleth is spareed, because it makes the first letter,
by spelling. Both the letters make Tsag, of Iatsag, to constitute, or place:
For the place or constitution, church or assembly.

Numbers. The paradise of God, Genesis 2.3. a place most expetible and
desirable, a Kingdom and Dominion raised out of rudenes, a requiteing and
bearing down of the Nations, called the waters, by the waters of the Law, far
excelling, with all power and Glory, and sanctification everlasting, enclosed.

PSALM XCIV.
NOw when righteousness reigns, is a time for the Church to call for Judgment
upon their oppressors. Seeeing God, that is the Judge of the world, does hear,
and see, and understand all the works of the proud and wicked heathen, and
corrects them, and brings them to knowledge, beyond and contrary to their
imaginations: he well knowing the vanity of men's thoughts. Now seeing
Judgment is according to Justice, and answers to all upright minds, after
the Law: they are sure to do well, and prosper at the last, notwithstanding
their correction. Which being for the Law and for rest; dureeth, but while a
pit of utter destruction is in making for the wicked: which as great bodies
moove slowly: so, their end being delayed, is surviveed by Justice and
patience at last. He that makeeth the senses is not senseless, but full of
light, and full of Judgment, and wholely just; and lighteneth all by his Law,
and must needs require attendance of brutish and heathenish men. To turn him
from the way of destruction, to the way of salvation: from the bad way, to the
good way, from the way of death, to the way of life, by the Scriptures, and
confirm him. And this likewise is a wonderful benefit of the Sabbath. Now in
the greatest distress that can com, by the Molesters of the church, that might
even break a man's heart to think on: Ps. 115. when they see their feet are gone
from under them, and they are about to despair of life and safety: then the
repetitions of Gods great works and kindenesses do releeve them, and set them
up again, with this comfort within them: that no corrupt estate or government
can endure or reign check by jowl with him: or any Corregnum, of such, as plot
and decree Mischeeff against the just and harmless. Therefore now the church
prays for a clear revenge, a due retribution, and a treble reward upon their
oppressors: and that their God, the Eternal, their trust and rely, would
unweave their mischeeff, and unplot their devisees, and render their own sorrow
upon them, and destroy them.

Construction. Tsade, Food: which is the light and understanding of the word:
the first of all creatures, Genesis 1. Io. 1. and it yields all contentment and
satiety, help and succor. Here in this piece, the brute and foolish are
opposed to the learned: and the vexers, wicked and ungodly: to the Godly and
just, and quiet ones, answerable to the 92. (as it were the same) and the
greevers there, are Judged here. A great door is opened, etc. Daleth, an
entrance or door, for instruction. Mark the repetition destroy etc. workers of
Greeff, etc. brute and foolish, etc. correction, teaching, omnipotencey of the
Eternal, in knowledge and power, to revenge: by paying every one according to
their works, as Judges of the earth, Ps. 62. That the unquiet and disquieters
may have no quiet, rest nor Sabbath at all, but end with greeff, and mischeeff
of their own. And this according to the letter Ghimel, in the last piece, for
reward, or right, or judgment, or revenge, as if it were still the same
psalm, observing the A B C for verses, with one over, to show Ghimel, in the
second verse.

Numbers. The wilderness here is the proud, the wicked, the disquieters, the
bruteish, the foolish, insulters, the vaunters, the arrogant, oppressors,
sleyers, murderers, naughty and mischeevous ones, ill Rulers that hunt for the
life of the just, and condemners of innocents, etc. The word gives rest from
such, and safety and defens: but to such, is no peace, rest, nor Sabbath at
all. Is. 54.48. Jude, etc.

PSALM XCV.
There is no peace to the wicked: so there is no rest but to them of
understanding, and how great a benefit is it then to be brought unto it? In
this psalm, it is by way of their behavior, in the church and Sabbath
service. They must beginn with triumph to the Everlasting, their righteousness,
and accord to the rock of their salvation, the Scriptures, from whence they
were dug and formed, with psalms of thanks offering for deliverance for the
greatness of God, and his kingdom who has in his hands all unaccessible
places, by power of creation; putting off the shoos of fowl ways, and unclean
lives, for the holiness of the place, by the feet of the saints. They must do
all manner of reverence to their makeer, their God, for their induement of
Grace and Manners, for their Education, and fostering them with his own hand,
by his Law: and not with hard and stony hearts, full of strife and infidelity,
and devilish temptation, to hear his word: but without any wrath or murmuring,
as Ps. 4. with all contentment, to hearken to him and consider his work. That
they be not wicked and greeve God, and err still in their hearts, ignorant of
his ways, notwithstanding their instructions, and be depriveed of their rest.
Ps. 81. Consider the great work of the third day, Genesis 1. Com. 4. where it is to
be noteed, that the weightynes of the work, is still to be admireed, for the
necessity of rest; and for greater sanctification and blessing of the Sabbath,
ever some part of the creation is recorded, and the Great Creator to be
magnifyed, extolled and worshipped.

Construction. Tsade, for meat or food: and that is the making and creating of
us by the word. by the coming together of the words, made and formed, and
feeding, and hands, etc. And he bids prepare gentle and soft hearts for
instruction, at the time of hearing the word, that the meat may do them good,
that they may believe and relent, and repent at the coming of the Kingdom.
When they see the word to reign, and rule, see their hearts are mislead and
hardened, and cannot repent, nor receive, the food at Meribah, and Massah, Exodus
16. He, behold, for the greatness of the Creator, they must present themselves
in songs, gratefullnes, in prayers of humblenes, with all reverence, for the
deep serchings out of sight, and the steep hills, in sight: by the abounding
and defect of He, in diverse words, and rareity of construction. It is also
apparent, by Hem, the demonstrative, they, coming twice together.

Numbers. There is nothing but the word and the wilderness, Government and no
Government, docible and tractable, and quiet people: and hard hearted, and
disquiet, and molesters, tempters and provokers. Which have no benefit of the
word, and cannot obtein the rest, of the Kingdom: but to the troublesome, is
tribulation and anguish.

PSALM. XCVI.
THe Everlasting, the God of righteousness is greater, and more commendable, and
far more reverend, then all the Gods of the Heathen, for making and confirming
the heavens of his sanctuary, wherall worship, Majesty, strength and decencey
is taught before him, out of his word: where he reigns and setleth all the
world, as Ps. 29. so sure by his doctrine, that it can never be moved, or
carried away again by any wind. And this is likewise to be reckoned, a great
benefit of the Sabbath service, to all nations: and thought worthy of a new
song of triumph, to his Name and the glory thereof: His kingdom of righteousness,
as Ps. 4. and his miraculous salvation heerby, to be preached, and told every
day among the Heathen. That all Nations, famylyes, of all the earth: may
ascribe all glory and strength to his Name, and offer and bow unto him, with
holy fear and trembling before him. That the Heavens and the earth, the sea and
all that is in it, may thunder out joy and gladness, and all plants, feeld-herbs
and trees of the wood, leap and triumph and keep Sabbath, for the Justice,
constancey and faythfullnes of their king, at his coming to judgment (now by
his word) and secureity of their kingdom for evermore. Consider the second
days work, Genesis 1. with the Commandment.

Construction. Tsade, for meat or food: this is, joy in the kingdom of heaven:
for the righteousness, and peace, and salvation thereof. For this he shows all
kind of of rejoycieing, approoving thereof, amendment of life and a welcome:
singing, leaping, daunceing, vaunting of all creatures, and boasting and
publishing thereof: which is the meat offering, in his courts, at Jerusalem,
the joy of all the earth, for the reigning of righteousness, and of the word.
And so comes the kingdom of heaven to be meat and drink, by joy in the holy
ghost, and a heavenly delight in the power and glory thereof; the prevailing of
the word in man, and the luster of a godly life. Mark the words, and the
insisting thereon. For Vav, a crook, or to take hold, he deals by the
contrary: to give and offer, and bow unto, and do reverence, and worship and
tremble, by the word, yield, etc. Take up presents, etc. Mark the iteration.
Tsav, of Tsivvah, both the letters, signify, commend, command or bequeath, or
send, to the same purpose: for the coming of the kingdom, for which we pray,
Math. 6. As all kingdom is with power and strength and command, Ps. 68.

Numbers. The wilderness here, is the wild nations and marches of the Heathen.
where the word of God, and this Kingdom of a godly man is to be preached, and
published all abroad: to setle them in a sound doctrine, that they may never
be moved more. What a delight they have to entertain it, what a rejoyceing and
a welcome is, at the coming of righteousness, Is. 52. when the nations be
conquered by it, and the church increased? mark the doubling of the word
Hethen, Nations, familyes, people, etc. what a God he is in respect of their
Idols: that is so to be commended? mark the charge, bless him, preach him,
tell out his glory, etc. And this for true and right Judgment, the stay of
the whole world. Mark the doubling again.

PSALM. XCVII.
THe kingdom of heaven, of righteousness and of God, is not with outward
observation, but he reigns in darkness, with a cloud about him, in a dark and
obscure style of speaking, that his Enimyes may not perceive him. For right
judgment and understanding of the mind is his Throne, and the fire of the Law
he sets before him, that burns round about his foes. The flashes of his
lightnings make all the earth afraid, and the hearts of great kingdoms (the
Mountains of the world) to melt as wax at his presence, and to become soft and
yield unto him. And his Glory, being like the heavens; puts down all
idolatry and bragging worship, and saves his gracious ones from the wicked,
and to preserve their lives, by forsakeing of ill, by that subintellectuall
light which is preached unto them. And for these benefits may the Islands
rejoice, and triumph, and keep holy Sabbath, for the peace that preserves
their trade: Mount Sion and Judah, for his Judgments and advauncement of their
God above all: the Godly, for their preservation, and the just, for light and
understanding.

Construction. Tsade, for meat or food, which is the delight which they have in
the Kingdom of God, and reigning of righteousness, by preaching and instruction,
of the Sabbath, that all the earth may be glad of. And also for Gods excellent
Judgments, of Zion, Ps. 19. to rejoice in. Another part of the kingdom of God,
is his judgment, and punishment, sevenfold upon his foes, when he teaches
the Godly and his deer ones, how to save their lives: and this by fire work of
his wrath out of the Law before him: according to the letter Zain, for
sevenfold. Mark the doubling of both parts of the throne: the one part is of
justice, and of light, and the other of darkness and of firey judgment. The
buissines of rejoyceing is all over light to the righteous, and judgment upon
the wicked that the earth tremble at. Mark all the repetitions, and relative
speeches, for that.

Numbers. The wilderness here, is Gods Enimyes, opposed to his beloved and deer
ones: and the Idolaters of the Nations, and Image-makeers, they are the cheeff
that be daunted and abashed at his Glory: inviteed to his worship, for his
excelling of all Gods for judgments, being Lord of all the earth. Mark the
relation, and repetition: between light and darkness, God and Idols,
rejoyceing, etc. And this for the glory of the kingdom.

PSALM XCVIII.
Wonderful strange works of salvation, has the Everlasting wrought by the
Dexterity of his holy ministry, and his righteousness in the Law, called his
right hand and holy Arm, even in the sight of the heathen: which he
fullfilled, in carrying them through the sea, and drawing them out of mighty
waters, as Ps. 18. being kind and faithful to Israel: that all the world
have taken notice of the salvation of their God. Therefore now, they are to sing
a new song unto him. And that with all solemnity, and greatest triumph that can
be, before their king; with Iubeling, and chaunting, psalms and sonets, with
heart and musical voice, with shrill soundes of trumpets, that the sea and all
that is in it, the world and all the dwellers in it; rivers and hills and all
creatures where ever men go: may thunder and sound out Echoes of Joy and
gladness, and rejoice and keep holy day before him: he comes to judge the
earth, that judges all justly, divideing the word.

Construction. Tsade, for meat or food. They are fed with the great joy of his
salvation: by revelations and clear interpretations of his mysteryes and hid
things of the word, Act. 14. Ier. 15. At his coming and reigning with
righteousness, Ephesians. 3. and a clear judgment within them. Whereto all the world
ought to be obedient. they are made wise unto salvation, and to judge right
with in them selves. His food of mercy and truth they live by. Mark the
repetition: salvation, wonderful work: and reveled, made known, remembered and
see: relatives. Mark the doubling of all the words: reacting his prais and joy.
The two letters Tsach, clear, or to clear, Is. 66. by loudnes shrillnes,
plainnes, etc. the letter Cheth, for fear, is spareed, because of the insisting
upon rejoyceing: the contrary.

Numbers. The wilderness is employed by the Heathen, the ends of the earth, and
the confuseed world and her inhabitants. that before the coming of the word
unto them, were without God in the world, or any true judgment unto salvation,
to delight in. Mark the repetition: word, judge, justly, etc. They must needs
therefore, greatly rejoice at the coming thereof.

PSALM XCIX.
HOw bewtifull are the feet of him that preaches good tideings, and brings
news of peace and salvation in his lips? Now Righteousness reigns in the
Ministers, the Angels and Cheru^s; woe be to the Gentiles and nations of the
Heathen. And while God is so great in Zion, and so far exalted above them:
they were best to incline to his Kingdom and worship his Name, that is so
great, so reverend, and so holy. For all the strength of a Kingdom is the
lov^ing of Judgment, and prepareing of Right, which is the Law, as Psalm. 111.
And God has made in Jacob, in that kingdom of priests: a Law both of judgment
and justice, for the peace and salvation of his servants; which he committed
to Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, of his Priests, in a cloudy and dark style, when
they called upon him, that they should handle the same; and they observed it,
and received the understanding of it, to preach it to all. The sum of all
which he answered them; was the two parts of the Law, defineing himself unto
them, as Ps. 19. that the Law had reward and punishment in it, and that he was
a God of forgivenes, and a God of revenge, for their works. Therefore that they
should exalt greatly the throne of that kingdom of justice, of their God, and
fall at his feet, at his footstool, Jerusalem, and become his subjects, because
he is holy; and prostrate their selves in Zion, at his holy hill, for the
holiness of the Law and the utterance thereof, the everlasting Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness.

Construction. Tsade, for food, for receiving of the word and preaching of it:
Exodus 19.20. Judgment, the strength of Government, and of a King, is here for
food, Micah. 5. This was Jacobs portion, and the majesty of Zion, Gods
Testimonies and prescripts, and answers out of the Law, in a secret style.
Heerwith is his ministry fed when they call, and all rule preserved, and
kingdom established. He reigns within the veil, in the most holy place,
and feeds with mercey and forgiveness, from the mercy seat, and revenge, a
kind of judgment from the Law. And this is his holiness. mark the word
repeated and argued: Judgment, answer, holy, strength, and confirming,
calling, etc. Theth, to decline, or stoop, or bow, or prostrate, as from Cheth,
the second letter in the other piece. They extol him with all humility and
reverence, for the same. Mark the doubling, of the words: Exalt, and
prostrate, etc. and equals: footstool, holy hill, etc.

Numbers. The Nations, for want of Judgment have no strength nor stay of
government, but are in commotion, and are declineing and tottering, all in
pieces, kingdoms divideed against them selves: they cannot stand. The doctrine
of Zion being so far above theirs, is to be admirably exalted and
reverence^d, and for the holiness of it, opposeed to the wilderness of their
profanenes.

PSALM C.
WHat it is to tell out the loueing kindenes and faithfullnes of God, at
morning and evening prayer, of the Sabbath, Ps. 92. and the worthynes and
benefit thereof; is showed clearly in this psalm, to be thankfullnes unto him.
For what better thing can be then it, by which God is best and only gloryfied,
Ps. 50. and man best pleased, seeing that the repeating of kindenes expresses
thanks? Then as kindenes is measureed by the benefits, and faithfullnes seen in
all good turns: so, the greatest good turn, and greatest benefit, and the
greatest kindenes deserves the greatest thanks. Now, what greater goodness
could there be to the Church, then their Creation, and reforming of their
heathenish manners, and the making of them by his Word and Law, whereby he
became a father unto them: begetting them out of all darkness, fear and
distress, to a most glorious light, and boldness, and salvation: to make them
his own people, his holy people, and his only inheritance; his sheep, and
flock, and congregation; and to be their daily sheephard and Pastor, as Ps.
23. giueing them their education and food, out of the Doctrine thereof? And what
worship, thanks or blessing or prais or honor, can be sufficient for so great
a benefit? Therefore, for the goodness of his everlasting kindenes and
faithfulness, it is required, that they neglect not, but come before him, and
keep Sabbath in his holy place, and with all alacrity, all triumph, all glory
and melody that can be; that of all offerings, they remember to sacrifice
thanks and praise in his courts, with all their forcees. And that they
recompens worship, and blessing of his Name, the cheeffest service for
evermore: then which, nothing can be sweeter in the nostrels of God.

Construction. Quoph, of Jaquaph, to compass, beseege, or invade, Ios. 6. which
he expounds, by the word bo, to come upon, or to, or invade, Is. 41.
wherefore the word is twice vseed, that it may be noteed. As also by the rest
of the words, that intend the priests function that minister about him, in the
congregation, on the Sabbath: as triumph, serve, and thank, and prais and
bless, etc. the Eternal and his Name in his house: for his loueing kindenes,
that is always round about them, and compassing them, Ps. 32. and imbraceing
of them.

Numbers. He imbraceed them with his grace in the wilderness, and with his love
and kindenes drew them to him, and built them up with Faith in his Word, Is.
31. The Eternal is the God that made them, and owes them, and feeds them. What
is here intended, but the godhead of grace and mercy, in the Name Jehovah,
Eternal, the way of God, Psalm. 145.116 Deuteronomy. 4. Exodus 33. Distinguished by the
repetition of the demonstratiue. He, he, that, etc. And this his everlasting
mercyes, and goodness and truth of his word, his faith and love have compassed
them, and wonn them out of rudeness, and mended their manners. So the Makeer,
Owner, and Pasture, is nothing but the way of God, which is, to lead and live
an eternal life: which never expireeth, as the Law that dies not while the
kingdom stands, which being a life for all, and for ever, and for rest, is
called Eternal.

PSALM CI.
IN this Psalm, David makeeth God to teach his way, and to tell his mind to
them that fear him, promissed, Psalm. 25. which is, the Judgment and the
kindenes mentioned in the Psalms here before; which he now makeeth a Psalm
of: to wit, of Grace and of condemnation, which the word yields at the
hearing thereof: being the Baptism of the holy Ghost and of fire, and the fann
that purges the floor, and makeeth clean the corn from the chaff, and
diuideeth the sheep from the Goats, the blessed from the cursed, and the Elect
from the reprobate. Where God teaches in his Church the perfect way, that he
himself walks in his house: with an intyre heart, as Ps. 26. when they come
unto him, showing whom he sets out of sight, and who shall not clean with
him, whom he hateeth, and whom he will put away, whom he will take no
knowledge of, whom he will utterly dissolve, and whom he cannot abide. Whom
his eyes are upon, to dwell with him, walk with him, and serve him; and who
shall not dwell with him, nor tarry in his sight. That by this division: the
Enimyes of God may be soon cut off and dissolved from the city of God and
his habitation. The knowledge whereof is also a wonderful benefit. For by this
description and separation, and excommunication of the wicked: the just may be
saveed and the church increased. For how shall they be saveed but by faith,
and faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God? Heerby they
discern, whether they be of God or no, and what way they go or ought to walk.

Construction. Quoph, of jaquaph, to compass or inviron: here he intimates the
kindenes, grace and favor of God, called his house and city, that entertaines
none but the faithful, and them that walk uprightly before him. Mark the
words: within my house, in my sight, mine eyes are upon, dwell, tarry, etc.
doubled. Also the word city, equal to it. According to the instruction of the
word, intimated likewise by the letter Aleph, to instruct: as by the doubling
of these words: perfect way, instruct, etc. Both the letters make Qua, vomit, or
to vomit, or purge. to which he frameeth the reprobate, and the contrary
church, and synagogue of Satan. Apo. 2.3. the hurtful children, or belial,
that are every way, in their hearts, far from God and his way, and his word,
and therefore are not to dwell with him, Math. 7. Is. 29. Ier. 12. but to be cut
off, and to be spewed out, and not brooked. Ap. 3. Mark the doubling: of put
away, etc. and dissolve, etc. and abide, etc.

Numbers. The wilderness here is the devillishnes of mankind, for which he is
accursed and cast out, forsaken and left desolate, turners from instruction,
froward hearts, secret accuseers, proud, dissemblers, deceivers and liars and
workers of greeff. Which being banished the Church and hevenly city of God:
there will remain nothing but salvation, strength and power, and the Kingdom of
God therein. Ap. 12.21.22. For the manifold judgment of a wicked heart, that is
always compassing of ill ways. 2. Cor. 5.6. Pro. 11.19. Na. 1.2.

PSALM CII.
Jerusalem long waiting, for the expiration of their captivity, and return from
Babel, being promissed to them by the Prophet, to be within seventy years:
now when the time approcheed, they beginn deeply to consider their misery, with
a hearty sadness, like David, Ps. 31. and upon many considerations, to pray, that
God will not fail, at the set time to deliver them, and have compassion on it:
for his own glory; because he built it, and has his name called upon, in it:
and for his servants glory in the service of him, and their love to the place:
and for the glory of the place it self, being the joy of all the earth: and
for their great pains of dureance, and an intolerable feeling that they have
of their calamity, growing old and withering therein. They pray, and shout hard
unto God, to be heard quickly, because their age is almost evapoured away, and
their lives expir^ed, their bones burning, and their hearts withering in their
bellyes for sorrow, they cannot eat their meat, and they sigh till all their
f^esh be gone, and skinn and bone com together. They are wondered at like owls
in the day, and like some lone or strange bird upon the house, to all the rest;
railed and charmed at, by their Enimyes, that bread and ashes in all one to
them, for meat, and they have store of tears to their drink: for the terrible
wrath which they feel in them, that he has cast them off. Now, for that their
days go downward, and their lives decline like an afternoon, and God and his
remembrance remains still, before and after heaven and earth, that he has
made with hands: they pray, that he will have pity upon Zion, and for his
own prais in future generations, hear the Prayer of his people that is
overthrowen, without disdeigne, and loos them home again, to prais him in Zion,
Ps. 133. and serve him with other nations in Jerusalem; and that he that beat
down their strength, when they wear in the middle of their course, having
enjoyed their Glory but a while, and has such plenty of years and generations
left: that he would spare them some years of their lives, to return with joy
and delight in them, that they and their children may abide still before him,
and never be stirred again.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: to bes^^ch, for mercey, and kindenes, and
favor, and grace: and compass, in misery: when the days be com about, Job. 1.
Mark the words: hear, and attend, time, and set time, days, years, etc. Mercy,
compassion, regard, despise, etc. And the end is enlargement: the grace is upon
Zion, for the special glory of it: that is, for the church and house of God, in
so great account in the world: according to Beth, the second letter, for a
house: and now so waste. The prayer is for the eternal memory of it, intended
from Quabhabh to curs: in the Petaroth, Balak. Number. 22.23.24. Vseing the
contrary sens: as praying in steed of Cu^sing: and for grace in steed of
vengeance. Mark the repetitions, prayer and the manner, remain, generations,
servant, seed, Zion, abide, or dwell, glory, etc.

Numbers. The wilderness. The church, Ier. 12. She is all solitary, and
strange, she is waste, cast out, and ruined, her Enimyes have vowed her
destruction, she is in a consumption with greeff, and become a very Anatomy in
her destress. Mark the repetition, her days consume, etc. her days decline
etc. she is withered like an herb, etc. wilderness, an owl among the nations,
etc: so their state is the wilderness. Ier. 12. They can not find where they
are, they are so distracted with distress. And all for lack of Zion, and the
word of God, that they pine away for.

PSALM. CIII.
THese two Psalms show the judgment and kindenes of Psalm. 101. How for
their wickedness and hollownes, men are brought in distress, and banished from
God: and for their humility and integrity, pittyed and reecived again: this
being the grant of the request in the former: whereby the blessing of the Name
of God, Ps. 100. for benefits and kindenes, is still continued: Thus coming by
paires; as Ps. 20.21.90.91. Request and reward: Prayer and Prais: misery and
joy together. Now all correction is greevous for the time, though it be
profitable, and necessary for salvation at last; because the mighty gracees and
favors of God, by it, are brought: and they must be laid once at Gods feet,
and trodden to dust, and pounded to powder, before rhey will be reformed of
their haughtynes, hollownes, and stubbornnes that he ^indeeth in them. which
now being considered; he admireeth much the kingdom of Gods patience, and the
dureablenes of his mercyes toward his childeren; how he heals their greeff,
and pardons their iniquityes, (awaiting their conversion, humility,
repentance and amendment of them;) and recovereth them again out of the pit, to
grace them with all good ornaments (having once stripped them of all), attireing
them anew, with all good gifts of the spirit, which may be profitable to life.
Now because all Gods correction has been with favor and compassion, being
willing to be reconcileed unto them, spareing their faults, and throwing their
trespasses away, in his heavenly kingdom: he wills his soul that loveeth
him, and all the propertyes and forcees that he has in him, and all that ever
he can do, and all the Excercisers of the Ministry, that hear his voice and
may do his will, and commandment, and all the rest of the Church, his works:
to bless him, and thank his Name for all his benefits.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass. Heerupon he handles the infinite
reach and work, Kingdom of Mercy and grace, and love and kindenes of God, the
excellence thereof to his observers, and all them of tender hearts that fear
transgression. His angels pitch round about such. Psalm. 34. This is equalled in
the words: and guardeth thee with kindenes and Mercey. See the repetition:
kindenes, mercey, fear him, and Eternal, etc. For his kingdom and property of
merccy, domination, dominion, kingdom, etc. Ghimel, the second letter, to
reward, or be beneficial unto; which is first in the word, good deeds, etc.
He has not don according, etc. but, etc. and then by returning of thanks, by
the termn bless, so often repeated. And requireed of all degrees, of ministers,
the kingdom and of the word and his will, as grace for Grace. He handles here
Gods lenity, Mercey and goodness only, according to the letters, and also the
Name Jehovah and of his virtue. Exo. 33. To. 9. The Psalm has just the A B C,
number of verses, to show that of some one letter he treats. which is Ghimel,
for his great Goodness to all sorts. Mark the repetition.

Numbers. The wilderness is where the word of God is not hard of, wherefore the
preaching of the kingdom of it was in wild countries, such as was John
Baptists and Paul's, etc. To Nations rude and hard hearted; which is here
intimated by the precisenes and great ability of the Ministry, the contrary:
that can hear, and are able to do his word, his will and his Kingdom of
forgivenes, their place is to thank him. Because mercy, kindenes, and charity
reigns in them. This is that which we crave in the Lords prayer, Math. 6.
See the repetition in commandments, word, voice, hear, etc. For until the
Kingdom be com which is compassed with all heavenly, civility: We remain
still in the wilderness; ungoverned, and unformed, barbarous and rude.

PSALM CIV.
THe everlasting righteousness of the Law of God, the word, by which all things
were made; and without it was made nothing that was made; and that gives life
and breath and all things, and that all have their living and their mooveing
and their being in him: the everlasting father and creator of the Church, and
Prince of peace, being here describeed: for the utility and benefit heerof,
the people must meeds continue his blessing of the everlasting in his soul, and
thanks unto his God; his discipline being of this sort. First of his majesty
and greatness, then his apparel, then his habitation, then his goeing, and his
sending, and his work, that the word of God is a comely, a reverend, a grave
and a stately thing to behold, and for beehaviour and counsel, to listen to:
It is arrayed all with light and glory, and manteled with the heavens of
understanding, It dwells in the Scriptures, and rideeth in parables, out of
sight, in a dark style, above the clouds. It is swift and speedy in operation,
as the wind, and his message and Ministry so swift and so firey, that there is
no withstanding or disputing, he so establishes the earth in doctrine, that
shall never be moved; the waters of the scriptures are so deep about it that
all the world is drowned in them: yet his thundering spirit, mooving upon them,
by doctrine divideeth them, and discouvereth the deep and his secrets thereof:
and sending the rivers of his doctrine between the hills, among the villages,
to instruct the brutish: where the heavenly birds of men, may sing praises in
the woods the books of the Bible; by the fruit of his creation, the hills are
taught to bear fruit, to satisfy and content the earth, with grass for beasts,
as Nabuchadnezar, that proud King, and outward man, with that base diet of
uncapability, and herbs and fruit, to make themselves all manner of
sustenance, countenance and confidence and grace to his creature, the Church
and inner man with all deintyes, Psalm. 23.21. That they may be contented, with
the doctrine of the cedars, the Ministry, which God has set in his Church:
where the queristers dwell, where for loftynes of building and edification, the
holy stork is safe: so is the Roe by the hills, and the cunny by the rocks: so
that all salvation is by it. He puts of his light at seasons, and lays
down his clothes of understanding, by setting waneing and eclipsing of the
lights; and makeeth darkness for the wicked to seek their pray, and wild and
savage brute men to walk in ignorance; that couch (as soon as it is light, and
knowledge ariseeth) at hearing of the word: that the Church may travail safe,
and have all the understanding, and enjoy the light thereof till the evening,
all their lives. And what is there in all the earth that the wisdom of God has
not wrought? His wisdom is in the broad sea, the Heathen and the deep is round
about him, and there is knowledge and understanding of all the creatures therein,
and the sport of the devil among them: and of the ships upon it, the Arks, and
the Churches saveed and transported by it. All which do hope upon him, to
receive instruction in their time; who deals unto them his doctrine; and they
are well satisfied and contented. If they want the word, or it be restrained
from them, they are dead, there is no life in them, and consume to nothing but
at his sending out of his spirit, the Law, his firey message: the face of the
earth is clean changeed, and the Church renewed and repaired, and re-edifyed
again And now, that the glory of God, the righteousness of the Law, Psalm. 19.
may be revealed by him, and God may rejoice in him, his Minister and work of
his word: and because his ^peech pleases him, who is so terrible: he
promiseeth to sing Psalms unto him. And because God likeeth it; he will never
have don, that the wicked may be quite consumeed. And wills his soul still
to bless him. For benefits as before.

Construction. Quoph: of Iaquaph, to compass or inviron, which is here, by all
kinds of habit, all habitude of apparel, or worship or reputation that a man
wears, or puts on, or that he is endued with, or is bestowed upon him, or
covers, Ps. 109. Chariots, Chambers, Servants, etc about him as light,
heavens, garment, clothed, putting off covering, chamber, wind, breath, Ghost,
spirit, etc. See the repetition^ Daleth, the second letter, for a door, is
expressed by the riseing and setting, the goeing out and in of the Sunn, in the
Hebrew, Ps. 19. For the use or end thereof. Both the letters Quad, of Quadad, to
incline, or bow down the head, or croune, for a worship after the manner of the
Jews: which with Psalms and great rejoyceing, he expresses. Mark the
doubling: sing, Psalms, sweet, speech, bless, rejoice, etc. as in the former
Psalm.

Numbers. The Ministry is the Creator. Mark the first and last words. The
Message, and messengers, the work, the spirit, send, man's heart, bread, satisfy,
etc. the words doubled show the Metaphore. And that preaching, so far
resembles the creation, by reformation out of dust, bread of the word for to
comfort man's heart, etc. The end of all is the creating of man, and his
renewing: which is not don but when God has once been thoroughly angry with his
people. And has brought them to their wits end, that they be even become dust
again, with misery and affliction, trampling and upon of the wicked, quite to
abolish wickedness and sin, and make an end of iniquity, Dan. 9. and make all
plain before them, so that by the reformation, the wildnernes is discerned.
Here Nun, is added to the plural, for reformation of the word, according to
the singular. For increas of the Church and creation of strangeers, Psalm. 146.

PSALM CV.
BEcause all creation were vain and not worthy prais without preservation, as
Ps. 89. he makeeth here the Cadence of this book to continue, dureing both,
to the end heerof: showing in these two Psalms, and that following, all his
mighty and strange works of his deliverance and saveing of them, and his
kindenes to them, all along. Wherefore, as it is a good thing still to be
mindful of gracees, as Ps. 92. So this Psalm is penned for a Psalm of
thanks-giveing or grace after meat, for the Church to sing. Showing their poor
and hard beginning, for number, acquaintance and provision: their growing,
increasing, fruitfullnes and strength in a strange country, against all
conspiraceys. How Moses, with the light of the Law starved their Enimyes, by
the cups of the wrath of God, which plagued their policy, bringing darkness upon
their understanding and befooling them, and steined all their learning. God
sent Crawlers for promotion in their Kings court, and sent a number of biteing
rumors, and Enimyes, and invasion in their coasts; with hail of oppression,
that beat down all their doctrine and good things, and he made their spoilers
and their pollers of their common-welth to increas, and destroy their Princees,
Apoc. 16. Heerby Israel grew strong and wealthy, and terrible to their Enimyes,
brought out by a cloud, and secret purpos of the Law, and lighted them in the
night by the fire thereof, their earnestnes of song and ege^nes of zeal among
them, to guide them: and fed them with all deinty meats and music, the
doctrine of the promiss, which being performed in the highest degree, that
they might keep and observe his Laws. Now they being thus fed and delivered:
he wishes the Church to worship him, and call upon his Name and prais him,
and sing Psalms unto him, and mention all his works, and make merry with his
Name, and inquire out his strength, and seek his face, and remember all his
wonderful works, and show themselves by all means thankful for them.

Constuction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass or inviron, is here interpreted by
Joseph's bonds and imprisonment: by the words, hurt and instruct, for oppress
and bind, and also the contrary, by loosing, and inlargeing, etc. which
implies a kind of compassing, containing, and holding. The two letters Quoph,
and He, make Quhah, or Quah, from Jaquah, to obey. Heerto he alludeeth, by all
strength, rule and command, and obedience and disobedience. Mark the
repetition and cleernes, by the relation of kinds of contraryes. And this
agrees to the first. For Joseph is made ruler and Lord of all. And binds and
loses, and has the keys of the Kingdom and of the house, to ordein and
instruct all, Math. 16. by all bonds and covenants, good rulers, the staff of
bread and water, Is. 3. These words are doubled: ruler, command, send, word,
etc. he was found right by the rule of the word. He, to behold, the second
letter, is reported in such words as these, for presence and absence, plain and
secret things. The servants of God, the continual and all manner of
worshipping, and serving, and seeking of him, the repetition will make it plain.
Name, signs, miracles, wonders, servants, chosen, and all mysteryes, vail,
cloud, light, etc, Abraham, Jacob, Isaac. Israel, etc, strangeer, preaching,
boasting, seek, inquire, face, remember, statutes for judgment, etc. For
discretion or decree, etc.

Numbers. The wilderness is the wasteing of the Enimye by invasion and plagues
of destruction. The message of evil Angels and spirits of wrath, Ps. 78. Job.
1. adversity makes them loos their hold. The Church is arrived according to the
promiss and preserved. The Patriarchs and Prophets, by their message and the
word, are the walls and circuit thereof, Ap. 7.11. What went ye forth into
the wilderness to see, etc. There is nothing but strange and hard things, and
wonders and monsters there, that is incredible to report. So there is much
mystery in the word and of Godlynes; and when the Church is not well informed,
the word it self seems a desert, for the wonderful hardness of it: which the
letter makeeth in this Psalm. But it is cleared by a heavenly revelation and
spiritual interpretation, which is the seeking of his face by the mighty
operation of the word: and brought to be believed by the Church. And the rest
for infidelity, is left a wilderness, Apoc. 12. Ier. 2. Mark the repetition:
wonderful works, excellent Acts, wonderful miracles, signs and miracles,
etc. and this in nations where no culture, or manurance and right worship is.
For the Kingdom and conduct of the word.

PSALM. CVI.
Showing the often sinning, transgression, and fall of the Church, and their
murmuring against God, and their often receiving again to favor and mercey, by
God: and their often forgetting of his kindenes to them, and his often
pardoning and forgiveing them again: in Egypt, at the Sea, in the wilderness,
in Horeb, in their tents, at Meribah, in their wars, in their offerings, at
the request of Moses and Phineas, and of his own good will: often times
delivering them out of their distresses, remembering his covenant; and also
being comfortable to them, by hearing their own requests; and according to his
great kindenesses, taking them to mercey before their captivers, whereby they
believed his word and sung his prais: but for the goodness of such everlasting
favor, and the virtues of his kingdom, what wight is able sufficiently to set
out, and worship and thank him worthyly? Now the Church having sinned in
frowardnes like their fathers, and being in the like distress, in captivity,
and scatered among the heathen: he prays, that now at his request, he would
gather them again, and bring them home to worship his holy Name. And that God
would let them see the kind salvation of his people likewise, that he may
also behold the joy and wealth of his Choseen, and become a glorious Actor of
his prais and commendation with his inheritance also, and thank him for the
same.

Construction. Quoph, of Jaquaph, to compass or inviron, you must consider, the
largenes and the bountifullness of Gods loveing kindenes, and his exceeding
mercyes, and the wide compass of his grace, and the greatness of his good will,
that entertaineth all that observe him. The contrary heerunto is, the rebellion
and wrathfullnes of the people, as Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. Col. 3. Ia. 1.
following all ungodlines, putting on a contrary habit, merely to anger him, and
tempt him. Thereto belong the doubling of the words: Chosen, inheritance,
Virtue, over-cover, overwhelm, people, as Psalm. 117. Kindenes, goodness, mercy,
favorable, refuse, overthrow, Anger, freat, vex, rebel, prais and worship, in
the first and last words. Vav, a hook, or crook, to pull them out of the fire,
and out of the water, to save and deliver them. By the doubling of the words:
saveed, Salvation, quit, delivered, Savior. The contrary: overthrow, scatter,
captivers. Both the letters, make Quav, of Quavah, to expect, or gather
together. Heerto they expect not, nor wait, but are impatient of all Gods
Counsel, and fall on lusting, Ia. 1. Mark the repetition: murmur, believed and
word, counsel, assembly, gather, scatter, etc.

Numbers. The word, and parts of the kingdom of God: which is faith and
patience. Apo. 1. Which the people failed of: and could not abide such
spiritual diet. They could not beleev the covenant, nor wait for the promiss,
but lust and murmur, and repine, and grew all abroad, and out of rule, and out
of all obedience, and at havok, like a wilderness. See the repetition; word,
hear, hearken, beleev, wait, counsel, Covenant, etc. Here particular Name:
they put on the manners of the Hethen. See the Petaroth, Phineas, Nu. 25. For
the word of atonement and mediation, the kingdom of Priesthood, etc.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
PSALM CVII.
Fools will not understand, but they that be wise will understand. That this
book may be no foreiner to the rest, it has his Text and foundation from the
former, to wit, being hanged and coupled to the 92. like the rest of that
book, and to express the glorious Instruments of this Service, the diverse
kinds of misery and the means: the sundry manners, and the causes of them:
and the duty and necessity of thanks, and declaration of kindenes. By famous
prayers: from the skill of the sweet singer of Israel, the harps and viols of
the saints, and sweet odours and sacrificees of thanks, that men may learn and
mark well the way to distress and beware thereof. The Church being scattered
over all the world, without any certain dwelling, with great wandering, and
great scarceity, and much oppression by pilgrimage and error: the obscurity,
and their dark imprisonment for stubborn ignorance against the word of God:
what horrible sorrows they fall into, to affict them: by transgressing the word
for want of knowledge thereof* The high dangeer of sea-buissines, as if they
sought to oppose God for deliverance: yet by faith, they crying for help: the
word, and knowledge thereof is sent still to save them. Mar: 13. Ps. 56. Which
by showing them their mighty and often deliverancees and blessings, and
teaching them the way to beleev their salvation: and building their faith upon
a ground of former deliverancees, and cherishing the just and stopping the
mouths of the wicked: now for the inestimable goodness and price of this
wonderful and everlasting kindenes and redemption, he would have the Church
still to be minde-full of, and make always confession of the same, with
continual thanks; and the best and worst in the congregation, to exalt him and
worship him: being sure, that they that be wise, will remember it and not
neglect the same, but observe, that the wisdom of the word shall be still
their deliverance, and the faith thereon shall save them.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass or go about, intended by these
words, tormentor, wandered, distress, streits, prisoners, in iron bands,
afflicted, streit troubles, co^streint, run about, reeling, gidy, storm,
dwelling city, a walled town, ransom, save, deliver, bring out, etc. doubled.
And they signify the stretines of affliction. Zain, to hear. They cry, and they
are heard and saved, etc. he deals by the subject. Mark the word cry, in
hebrew, spelt twice with Zain, and twice other wise, as Neh. 9. also Zain,
seven, for sevenfold judgment, and also sevenfold kindenes. Mark the
repetition, wrong calling for judgment can not be heard, for repentance, and
crying for mercy is so loud.

Deuteronomy. Elle ha debharim, these are the words, or Acts, or things, etc.
a running over the other books of the Law, a recitation, Neh. 9. and a
coronation of them by an infinite confession, and publication, of all the
wonderful works of God, Job. 37. his deliverances out of all kind of
affliction, and his perpetual kindenes to them, intended by the repetition of
the words: worship, confess, declare, works, wonderful works, of kindenes,
thanks, exalt, observe, understand, for to reckon, etc.

PSALM CVIII.
IN this Psalm he brings part of the 57, for his readiness to sing after his
calamities: and the 60, for joy of victory and prosperity, and word of comfort
out of the word of God, for inlargeing the Church, and all for the kindenes of
God, Psalm. 92. that when he has handled the other parts of that Psalm; he
makes this the last. Therefore now, being ready to sing, he takes up his
Instruments, which are as well the Skill of his heart, Psalm. 78. By which he
led the people: as the form of material Instruments. Of which he handleeth
the 10 stringed viol by 10 countries, the Church and holy land of Canaan, which
he makeeth to sing by setting and tuneing of them, Upon these 10 countries the
song is skoreed out as upon ten cords, by all the cliffs, all which being
instruments of the prais of God: are here made musical strings, and concord of
the Church and keys of David. This is the quire and lute, and harp, and
singers, that carry the parts and play them, and the song is all upon the
decachord decalogne, the ten commandments, his Theme and Tex^, and glory, That
notwithstanding this great strength and power and officious readiness of all
parts of the Church: he gives all strength to the Law, and the righteousness
and holiness thereof, and all prosperity to God, as Ps. 60. This righteousness
being his glory and his God, as Psalm. 4. He calls up betime, to invent and
sing, as Ps. 92. And to set him out in all nations, for the greatness of his
kindenes, and faithfullnes of his promiss. And because the same is infinite,
and reaches up to heaven, and over all the earth: that with songs of prais,
and Psalms of exposition, he might exalt him, and glorify him over all the
world. That the clouds and glory, and the understanding and the substance
thereof, may be zealously revealed unto all, and thanks for all.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to inviron or compass, which is here girding,
besieging and constreining, strictnes, affliction or distress: which is here
argued by the contrary, releasing, inlargeing, saveing and helping, prosper,
Pro. 11. Mark the repetition, help, save, releas, distress, besiegers, etc.
Cheth, to prostrate, is argued by exalting likewise, as up, awake, a bove the
heavens, to the clouds, ^x^lt, over all the earth, also to lay prostrate, and
tread down. Both the letters make Quach, of Laquach, to take or receive as for
ones own, or proper or belonging, and does intend propriety, and right to these
countries, which he chalengeeth as for his proper people: by the often
itterateing of the habit, and term of propriety, in expressing his officers.

Deuteronomy. The reciteing, and repeating of their conquest, by their singing
and celebrating of ^ods high way, which is grace and truth, kindenes and
faithfullnes of his word, Io. 1. which shineeth above the skies, in his
wonderful works, by subdueing of the countries within the promiss, and
bringing them into subjection: these wild countries to the word, according to
the letters as before, in making them of the Church, and to appertain unto it.
That makeeth men so glorious over all the world. The light and glory of God,
that is far out of reach, and not atteined unto. And hereto he sets his
heart and his whole delight. And where he says, these are the words, etc. He
means the effect and the sum of them, an Eternal life. That is, Gods
promiss, I will divide, etc.

PSALM CIX.
NOw because the mouths of the wicked are full of dissembling, opened against
him, and talking with him, and they compass him with hatered, and backbite him
for nothing, and are against him for his love: while he is in prayer and
plays and imply^th himself herein: putting upon him evil for good, and
hatered for his love: The thing that he most hateed, loathed, detested and
abhorred, Ps. 26. in steed of that which he most longed for and affected:
falsehood for truth, the Instrument of all his glory, Ps. 4. gall for meat, and
vinegar for drink, Psalm. 69. for all his charity: and because of the
mercylessnes of the wicked, that never thinks of any compassion on the
afflicted, but pursue the poor, to make an end of the brokeen hearted Psalm. 35.
loveing cursing and not blessing: he prays the God of his prais, that is,
all Justice, reason and equity, to hear him, as Ps. 4. That a wicked man may
be set over him, and that is adversary may have the better hand of him, and
when he is to be censureed, that he be counted a guilty and a wicked man,
and all his prayers and requests sinful and faulty. That for his dissembling
and falsehood and repugning without cause, whereby he deceives, injures all, and
mischeeffs: every thing may likewise deceive him, and inflict injury and
mischeeff on him. That he may have nothing in deed and in truth that he
desireeth and would have; or keep any thing that he has, or enjoy ought that
he delights in. But that all things may fail him, as Ps. 5.37. That he may
dye quickly and loos his office, and leave his childeren fatherless and his
wife a widow, that his childeren may go about, and beg and seek out of their
desolate Cotes, and have none to have compassion or pity upon them. That the
deceiver may catch all that he has, and strangeers robb him of his labor.
That for the iniquity of his father and mother, he may be cut off, and have
no posterity or memory in the next generation. That the Curs may light upon
him, all blessing may be far from him, upon an other hill, Deuteronomy. 27. That he
may always wear it about him. In sum, that he suffer all adversity and
misery, and be frustrate of all his hopes, that he be every way accursed;
for a just reward of God upon them that slander his life, and speak ill of him.
And that the Everlasting would have commiseratio^ and compassion on him for his
names sake, and deliver him, his heart being slain with affliction, with in
him, and his age declineing and fadeing: his knees fail with fasting, and his
flesh will not be fatt, and he is a mocking stock and a reproach with them:
and help him and save him. That they may know it to be his doing, and that
he will turn their cursing to blessing, that they (his adversaryes) may be
ashameed all over them, of their riseing against him, and his servant may
rejoice, and that he may set forth the Eternal with the instrument of his
mouth, and prais him openly: assisting him, and saveing the needy and destitute
man from his condemner. And this from the curs of the Serpent, and enimyes of
the Church, Genesis 2. For prayer and for the cursed.

Construction. Quoph, to compass, or besiege, or inviron, and such are hatred,
and the words of hatred, called Sineah, doubled. For improsperousnes of
sinisterity and left hand affairs, signified by the letter Sin, called Smol,
with his prick on his left hand thus, to paint out the crossnes and untowardnes
of the devil, Ps. 119. Sh. They go about, and oppugn, etc. He deals also,
e diametro, by the opposite point. Satan the adversary Both the circumventing
and the resisting Enemy. Mark the repetition: put on: wear, upper garment, to
be, wrapping, weed, girdle, gird, etc. go about. E diametro: oppugn, be or
stand against, adversary, etc. right hand, etc. kindenes. etc. entangle,
blessing, cursing, etc. Teth, to decline, or sweep a way, as a declineing,
driven away, weak knees, lean flesh, etc. Both the letters make Quot, to be
yrksom, and greevous. His way is wholey yrksom, and advers to all good motion.
Mark the repetition, prayer. Mark again the declineing of Jehovah, into Iehovi,
to show the Mystery.

Deuteronomy. His whole life is an yrksom way, and without the compass of grace
or favor from God: and his reward from God is as yrksom. God gives him all
adversity and improsperity that can be, and works him no deliverance,
because he is false and mercyless. God forsakes him, and he dies accursed
and his name is out. See name, blot, remembrance, etc. doubled. The recitation
is destruction and deliverance. Here mercy and truth kiss not each other, but
are far a sunder, Ps. 85. and have no habitation in such. And so much for a
Deuterosis, or an enumeration of a cursed and wicked man.

PSALM CX.
THe Kings right hand is his Ministry. By discipline faith and prayer the
Serpents head is brokeen, and the Church delivered from bondage, and thus he
comes to conquer him, and clear the Grammar. If God be on our side who can
be against us? if God fight for us whom should we fear? Therefore if he take
our part, we may sit down and be still. And if the quarrel be his, what
need we stir? God has no quarrel but for his Church, which here is personed
by David the defendour and head of the same. Which, because it is a flock of
perfect and upright men, and are not many, but have many adversaryes: God will
by their own consistance; of righteousness, and peace the fruit thereof, subdue
their Enimyes, and bring their Enemy, the Devil and Satan underfoot; which
shall fall by their own wrong and perish by their wicked ways: for what can
be the fruit of wrong but destruction? By the flowerishing rod of Justice and
judgment (the strength of the Law, and ten commandments, out of Sion) and ten
st^inged instrument of the Decalogue, Ps. 92.98. He shall subdue them, and
rule among them: for their wrongful resisting the promiss, and their right to
Canaan. Which rod of government, that divideeth waters, and brings doctrine
out of hard rocks of Scripture: being once cast out of their hands, was
turned to serpent like Enimyes of God, as Ps. 92. But Moses was showed by
catching it by the tail, and the returning to a rod, that they should have the
government again: which should be an iron rod and hard government, as Ps. 2.
to the Resisters. For his battle, he will have none but Levites, and the
first born, the flower and choice of the womb and seed of woman, the best
learned in the Church. The right hand and dexterity of the Ministry shall wound
kings: his Enimyes and heads of them, as Ps. 68. when he is angry: even the
head of the Arch-enimy, the King of the land of Rabbah, of the Amonites: by
uncrowning him, and tortureing the bodies of his people striveing with him. He
drank of the river of doctrine, the discipline of the Law, Ps: 36. Thus by the
Church, shall God bring David's Enimyes under his feet, and he shall conquer
and hold up his head, as Ps. 92. and shall be a Priest for ever, Is. 61. like
Melchizedeq: not born of flesh and blood, nor of the will of man, Io. 1. but of
the spirit of God, and to walk with God, without father and without mother,
without beginning or end of the days of life, or any worldly respect. And he
shall sit at Gods right hand, Ps. 16. and continue in special favor and grace
with God, for the Eternity of the Church. And this from the conquest of the
Serpent, Genesis 3. For the Instrument of subjection and government: for the
sweetness of majesty, Lordship, Rule and Dominion: and victory of Shin, over
Sin, (ye sheep to the right hand, and ye goats to the left) Iamin, over
Smol; the right hand over the left: the Ministry over the devil and Satan and
all temptation, Psalm. 119. Sh.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or besiege, is expressed by Enimyes, as Ps.
17. that are all ways attempting mischeeff, invadeing upon all sides: which is
the subdole and hurtful serpent, Ge. 3. to the Church. The second letter Iod,
for a hand, is expounded by the right hand, the Ministry, favor and
pre-emenence of God. Mark the repetition. He shows how the armed with the
word, Sem or Melchizedeqs Kingdom, Isa. 33. the seed of Sion, Is. 2. They are
the destruction of the Serpent and his adherents, by the power and glory of the
Kingdom and people of ^xpedition, Ps. 68. in the Church. Mark the words, head,
and wound, repeated: day, when, Lord and judgment, etc. He alludeeth also to
the dexter point that makeeth, Shin, that signifies weaponed men, as Ps.
68.119. N. and the victory, the inevitable power of Gods m^ssuage. Mich. 4.5.
2. Sam. 17. like dew over the Heathen, and the head of them. Mark how Shin is
compassed with the next letters on both sides: Resh, and Tau, in the first and
last words, to show the allusion.

Deuteronomy. The recitation is, God will have it is own work, and the victory
his, and that a wonderful work and way of the Law and word of God: the rivers
in the Law called the way, Ier. 31. conceived and born in Sion. And the Serpent
by a Gospel preached, the river of wisdom out of Sion: Prove. 18. shall be
made to stoop, for a footstool, and to lick the dust, Psalm. 72. and heathen
Kings subdued and Archenimyes conquered, and the head of his Anointed shall be
exalted, that medleth not. So that with the armor of God and his host, and
exercise only, the Serpents head is brokeen. And this is a great kindenes, Ps.
119. N. Ps. 68. And such were the soldiers of Christ, of another world,
preachers and not fighters, Ioh. 18. tormentors of the divills, free men and
voluntary, 1. Cor. 6. Ps. 119. N. Ps. 68. Spiritual men, against spiritual
Adversaryes, Mat. 8.

PSALM CXI.
Here he passes from the Instrument to the work, according to the order in
Ps. 92. to show us the miraculous effect of the Law, and covenant and promiss
(which in his mercy and compassion, he preached to his people) he recorded to
feed them. And the mightynes of the work of God, by this Instrument of his
appears, by his conquest of the heathen, and recovery of their country again,
out of so many strong hands and lions claws: consisting in truth, and
certainty, and judgment, justice and mercy and the fear of God, wherein it
excelled. Whereby it becomes durable and credible; for at end of the 430, and
after the fourth generation (intended in the verse Lamed, and again in Tau, he
sends for his Church out of Egypt, by his covenant and his promiss, in the
hands of Moses and Aaron: feeding them all that space, by faith in his promiss
and covenant, which he made last for ever unto them, and redeemed them. And
because this Instrument, being vseed for all their delights and sportes, by
his everlasting Justice, works also great worship and honor and wisdom:
which is begunn in the fear of God, their profession, and perfected by
performing the Law: as ps. 99. He wills the same evermore to be
reverenceed, and hallowed. And because his works by this Instrument, are so
many, so mighty, so great, so sweet and delightful and searchable: he wills
all the whole Church, in all meetings, to prais and worship God, as he will
do the same himself, with all his heart. And this from the promiss, Genesis 15.
for the spirits of the Law, and works of performance, and possession of Canaan,
for the Spirit and worship and reverence and fear of God, the profession that
begins wisdom: and therefore together with the next psalm, is made by the
Abce: also the 119. where the performance of the Law, brings good
understanding. To perform the commandments satisfyeth this Appitite and
temptation, and the Kingdom of heaven has all. He that is wise will
unde^stand and observe these things, Io. 14. Christ calls himself the way the
truth and the life, which he spoke hebraically. This to be translateed into
our phrase is the true and liveing way or the true and very way of life. And
this consisting so much of the grace of God, and so much of faith and truth,
that it is beyond all imagination; his work and his way is called so
wonderful, is fit matter for continual prais and daily worship and
repetition, the subject of this book.

Construction. Quoph, ^o compass or invireon: the band of covenant and
strictn^s of promiss, Neh. 9. the sec^nd lette^ Iod, for a hand, or to worship,
is to confess or repeat, and remember, etc. For allusion to Jod, in Sara, the
tenth verse is divideed and cast to the ninthe and the eleventh: for Iod, in
Sara, and the operation of the two He-es, in the words Hodh Vehadhar, in the
letter He, for example and princely habit of godliness, Ps. 104.45.145.21. and
reward of righteousness, making the one a Princess, the other ^ Monark
according to Iah, in prais of the Name of God, which contains Iod, and two
He-es. Aleph: for their daily instruction in the promiss, and in the word,
wherewith they are sed to a perfect understanding. All three letters spell Qui,
to vomit, he works by the contrary: the good operation, digestion, and
delightfullnes of Gods works, being glorious and mighty. Mark the repetition.

Deuteronomy. The Recitation is the wonderfullnes of the work and way of God in
the mystery of his promiss, thus concealed. Mark the repetition prais, worship,
fear, reverend, convenant: truth, rememberance, works, gracious and merciful
for ever, for the eternity of the life, and work and way of God, and the
comendation of it. His works are wonderful: they are so delightful, so
reverend, so seemly, so just, so loveing and kind and pittyfull, so mighty, so
true, so judicious and discreet: and his word, so faithful and so plain.

PSALM. CXII.
Merciful and just men have more light then other men: That when for pity
they lend: that being good, they may provide their matters by Judgment;
because they remain still and are remembered for ever. And having their faith
and confidence upon this sure foundation of the righteousness of the Law; and
their heart so established therein: that for any ill report of the spies, and the
promiss to Abraham; or ill or hard look of their enimyes: they fear not. They
likewise bestow their goods upon the poor, that heerin, their righteousness
also may last for ever, and that they may be highly glorified thereby. Whereas,
in this, the wicked, for want of his desire, melts, and gnasheth his teeth
for envye to see it. Now, does happiness consist in abundance of riches? or
shall we take care to fulfill the lusts of it? or think ye that riches in
godlynes? No, Godlynes is great riches, if a man be content, with that he
has, and great reward and happiness follows the profession thereof. Therefore,
laying away this shadow, let us com to the light: the sens then is, that men's
hearts by the fear of God shall be storeed, and mightyly blessed with
knowledge, and doctrine of the Law, and promises, Psalm 145. as also with great
judgment to use it, as Ps. 40. and great alacrity to impart it, as Ps. 41.
which is the riches of grace, and of God, and of the word of God, and the
constant preaching thereof, to those that want understanding, and are without
the same. Which is the breaking and giveing to the poor; thus cooling the tongs
of the thirsty. Through which the righteous are for ever blessed and their
righteousness remains for ever, Ps. 1. in despite of all malignity of the
wicked, and to the great horror and tormenting of them. This Psalm alludeeth
wholely to the first, because that is the beginning of wisdom, showing the
everlasting prospority of righteousness, that tree of a godly life, Psalm. 1.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to turn back or about. As at hearing ill
news or sight of an Enemy: by the word fear, doubled and opposed to
confidence, reputed for righteousness, in Tsedhaquah. Which letters yield a
hundred, and ninety and nine, to bear at, the fruit of godly life. That
Abraham's great riches was the promiss, which he believed at 75, by the words
Hon Vegnosher, in the letter He. Iod, for the commutation of the letter Iod,
idle in Sara, the mutual love and faith of them both: by divideing and
casting that verse of Iod, the tenth: into the nineth and eleventh, like the
former Psalm, for Abraham. According to Iah, Gods name of eternity, that
counteineth in it, Iod, and the two He-es. Beth, a house, for everlasting. Mark
the repetition, Just, upright, fear, righteousness, remain for ever, gracious,
pitiful, etc.

Deuteronomy. The recitation is the way of a just man that fears God: that
shall be mighty in having, and mighty in doing, and greatly blessed in the
way and work of eternal life: mercey and truth, and faith and love and
delight in the Law. And he shall have wonderful and strange success, to his
hearts desire, when the way of the wicked shall melt.

PSALM. CXIII.
THis psalm hangs to the last by receiving the word from aloft, from the
Angels and Ministers, from heaven, being preached to the Poor, and divideed
and distributeed to the simple and destitute of knowledge, and unlearned; such
as have need of understanding, and are in distress and misery. Likewise it
prays by the prayer and confidence of Hannah, for a third heaven of
understanding. Concerning the literal sens: he shows first, that there is
none so merciful, or compassionate, nor to be compareed for humility with
God, that vouchsafes from his glorious dwelling, to visit the base earth, and
to redeem them that be trodden to dust by oppression, and as it were cast
awayes, and such as are thrown to the dunghill, for things of naught, and of
no value: to make them valewable with the best, and promote them to the
highest, and to quicken the dead and fruitless wombs, and to cheer the barren
woman with a houffull of children, and to make the despiseed and upbraided
woman, an honorable mother, and wipeing away all tears from the eyes. Now
beecaus there is such prosperity by calling upon God, and praying to him: he
praises him again, and again, and wills his Ministers from morning to
Everning, and for ever as long as the sunn shineeth: to prais and bless the
Name of the Everlasting. So the excellent and most sovereign Name of God,
being Scriptures, wherein he is nameed, the whole word and Law of God, wherein
he is mentioned: and being meditateed or preached, or meditateed and
preached: is so repleat with Grace, and mercey and favor, and compassion from
on high, on the afflicted and low degree: that it gives them all life and
consolation and resurrection, and comfort in the spirit. He records here the
prayer and prais of Hannah, 1. Sa. 1.2. and Mary, Luc. 1. for Sara, Genesis 11.
Merry for Isaak, Genesis 18. For power and might and glory of creation. Genesis 1.
And whole days service of the Sabath.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or invireon. Like houses and dwellings and
Company: by the multiplyeing the termn, dwelling: by sit, dwell, and inhabit,
house, etc. also doubling the word, with, people, princees and childeren,
opposeed to barren, or one rooted out, poor, desolat or cut off. Is. 54. Iod,
of Hodah, to confess, publish or commend, by the multiplyeing the termn prais:
for blessing and thanking, magnifying and extolling the high Name of the
Eternal. See the doubling of the word: high, raise. set up, above, etc. Is. 25.
Deuteronomy. 20. And this also agrees with Ghimel, to requi^e or reward. How God
rewards prayer: and thanks do pay for Grace.

Deuteronomy. The Name of God is his Law and his word, which shineeth all over
the world: and the glory thereof is compareed to the sunn in his course. Ps. 19.
The true consideration heerof, and daily lectureing heerupon, and invocation
and consulting on the same: is as prosperous to the baseer and conteinned sort
of people, which affect it; as the Sunn is to make the grass to flowrish. And
cheerful, as Sarah for her son Isaak, and as comfortable to the disconsolate
ones. See Name multiplyeed. See h^ghe, raise, set up, the words doubled. The
rehearsing: is by the perpetual celebration and praising of it. It is a Name
above all Names, 1. Kings, 8. Phil. 2. And this is a wonderful work of
kindenes: which is his way, etc. Gods humiliation, to resp^ct them. Like a
resurrection of them. For the Mighty effect of the Name Iah, distributeed to
Abram and Sara: as before. In exalting and multiplyeing of them. And these be
the Words here, from. Genesis 17.

PSALM CXIV.
There be three things that cannot be satisfied, and the fowerth can never
have enough: no more can the Law ever be sufficiently glorified by sens, and
enriched by interpretation, whereof there is no end. This psalm shows by way
of example, the effect of understanding the former. When Israel had obtained
the blessing, and was redeemed from a base bondage and miserable slavery, to
be great Lords and Conquerors in Canaan: and had Judah for his Church, and
all Jacob for his Lordship: how could they refrain to dance and sing; to see
the Gentiles and the Hethen fly, and Nations to turn their backs, and
kingdoms and Dominions to quake at their coming, as Ps. 77. and presence of
the God of Jacob, that turns hard placees of scriptures into smooth and easy
doctrine? for the hardness of the letter, such was the commotion, and horror of
the Nations. But for the spiritual sens, it serves for rejoyceing to the
church, for depth of imagination and greatn^s of his works, as Ps. 92. Also
when the hard hearts of savage men be melted into water and tempered; that they
become docible and affable and tractable by hearing the word. And not continue
as at Meribah, Ps. 95. full of provokeing: when all shadows fly away and they
continue with him; with whom there is no shadowing or varying or turning: out of
all horror or fear or trouble or trembling, in the holsom doctrine and
righteousness of the Law, and clear expositions and interpretation thereof, by
separating, and by putting away all confusion thereby. According to the Creation
of sea and dry land. Genesis 1. For uncovering to the Creator, and rejoyceing
before him.

Construction. Quoph, of Jaquaph, to fetch a compass, to com about again or
return. Which is signified by Israel and Jacob repeated, for their return
likewise, for the turning back of the river, the daunceing of the hills and
turning round of the earth, for their coming home and fullfilling the promiss,
the supplanting, tripping of the^, overthrowing and subverting, turning the
rocks, etc. contrary to the work in the former. For all things are made to turn
their course; clean contrary: the mountains to moove, the rocks to flow, and
rivers run back, and the sea to give way. Ex. 15. Genesis 15.46. Is. 11.43.48.
Hab. 3. Jod, a hand, for bancks or shores? or sides, Daleth, a door, for
turning backward, and see the repetition of the words. Judah had the leading
and command. Iohovah, for mercy, is not: but Adon, for Lord and rule.

Deuteronomy. He mentions here 4. mighty miracles: in correcting of the
creation: at his pleasure. for no course nor estate is able to resist God his
presence, which he promissed for a conductor in all the travail, or keep his
place or his way. It is so terrible that no creature can abide it. Jacobs own
presence is also wonderful, which, of so few as 70. in four hundred years,
grew to an army of six hundred thousand; beside the women and children and
aged. It might fright the country where they came, and make them horred, and
their hair to stand upright; to behold them, etc. What is it that a great
Commander cannot? New Lords, new laws, and all upside-down. And such are the
words, and Acts here meant, as before in the Construction.

PSALM CXV.
NOtwithstanding the rejoyceing of the Church for the recovering of Canaan, and
injoyeing the blessing and promiss: yet in this Psalm they forget not to give
all the glory thereof to God and to his Name, as Psalm. 29.44. for his wonderful
works of kindenes and faithfullnes, as Ps. 92. For his helping and defending of
them in all distresses: for remembering of them being in misery; and blessing
of them with the inheritance promissed, Psalm. 2. The cheeff strength and glory
of the song, the makeer of heaven and earth, and owner of the highest heavens,
and of all the senses, and disposeer of the earth, and dwells in heaven, and
does whatsoever he pleases. That all the whole church, both Laity and clergey
and all that fear him or Profess him, he may bless all, little and great, and
much more abundantly: them and their childeren after them, in reproach of the
heathen and their sensles Images, that can do nothing, nor have their five
wits or any wit about them. And therefore, because they that are worn out and are
dead, and are buried in their travail, can not prais him: they that be alive
resolve to bless him, and wish to prais him for ever. In which Psalm, is found
the whole profession of godliness, of faith, and confession and thanks giveing,
of Glory and prayer, and prais, etc. Spiritually, to the Law of God and
righteousness thereof, and judgment therein, that has every point of atteinment
contained in it, be ascribeed this help and defense, remembrance and blessing,
as Psalm. 66. To the which therefore, and in which be the glory, confidence and
prais that he wishes: the employment of the senses, which Imagees neither
know nor do: therefore all the senses, and ways of blessing and prais, be
ascribeed thereunto. Because for Idolatry, the Heathen are turned out of doors,
and the Church for the fear of God, and reverence of his Law, are redeemed and
made Heirs: that they give all glory thereunto, and put their trust in the
righteousness thereof, and commend it. Because all the Senses are to be employed
for judgment, and the whole wisdom of Man rests in the Law: the Law is to
be glorified with all might. And because by wisdom blessings are obtained: it
self is to be re-applyed in all afflictions, and to be blessed for ever, from
the creation of heaven and earth. Genesis 1. And this for the foolery of Idolatry
that slays the Church with greeff, Psalm 42.44. With speaking against it, or
denieing it.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass or invireon, for the kindenes of
God: that does always stand about the faithful, and protecteth them, and
helps them, and comfort them that trust in him, Ps. 32.33. Quotou, they
are yrksom, lothsom and tedious, as are the Images that there is no use of. For
there is no light in us: but in the Law of God that is the makeer of heaven and
earth. See the repetition, God thrice: for the opposeing of Imagees. God can
do all things, and they nothing. Eternal, for affection and preservation of
the whole church. Trust, help and defense, etc. Prais, Iah, 15. by the works of
Jehovah, and for the spirit thereof that images have not. Ps. 135.149.

Deuteronomy. The reciteing and Rehersall here, is the general blessing of God
for his grace, and the wonderful light of his truth through faith. Mark the
repetition Israel, Aaron, and all that fear God, bless. Eternal twice
abridged, Jah, for Jehovah, heaven upon you, twice, etc. For multiplyeing of
his grace for ever. And this serves for an admiration of the wonderful way of
God. Imagees and dead men can say nothing, to it, it belongs to the liveing to
register the Acts of the Eternal. That they may be of blessed memory, and
have a fruitful posterity. Consider the infinite increas and fructifyeing in
Egypt. Deuteronomy. 10. Number. 2. According to the Name of Joseph, in phrase of adding,
as Act. 2. And his blessing: Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 33. As the like is in the next, of
Iosuah in phrase of saveing. Dealing upon the story as it goes.

PSALM CXVI.
THis psalm is joined to the former: by showing, why the Name of God should
be so glorified above all, as Ps. 92. And the effect of calling upon him: for
at what time so ever he calls, in what distress so ever he be, and
whatsoever he requesteth: it is readily granted, and he is heard and
reveeled. When for mis^rable distress and greeff, the very pangs of death and
the grave had fallen upon him, and had hold of him, as Psalm. 18. that he
doubted of life, and he was quite exhausted and spent, as David, Psalm. 142.
he prays for life and he was helped: that is, the Everlasting, that is just
and kind in all things of his ways, and works, and preserves the simple ones
by his word, as Ps. 19. saveed him. When he was so spent with affliction and
misery, that no promiss of life or salvation could possess him or comfort him:
and all that was promissed was incredible unto him, and seemed unpossible: and
yet for the deer respect of his saints he sav^ed him: delivering him from
death and pain and wandering, to walk before God and his Saints in
immortality. For this grace he professes the love of God, and wills his
mind and soul to be content, and at quiet, and thoroughly satisfied, and take
rest: seeing God has dealt so bountifully with him, as nothing more is to be
demanded, nor any thing can be a sufficient reward, for his good turns, so
doubled and trebled upon him. Therefore he will take the Scriptures, the book of
the Law, of the promiss, of the Covenant, and all the doctrine called the book
of salvation, and from thence throughout them all, wassail and call upon the
Name of God: Ps. 119. Q. and sacrifice his devotion in Sermons of Thanks unto
him, in presence of all his people, in witness thereof: and wills him to be
praised. And as he is his Minister and servant at his right hand, and son of
his handmaid the Church: he requesteth that he may be loosed, and at liberty
to do the same accordingly. Now seeing God calls his son the Church out of
Egypt, here is likewise their invocation, the mercey of God upon them in
redeeming them from sorrow, and bringing them home to Eden, their promissed
rest of Canaan, the gift of the Nations, and their contentment and love and
thankfullnes for the same, to the study and contemplation of the Law of God,
for the love thereof. For their continual succor and satisfaction, safe
conduit and comfort, by the righteousness and glory and pureity thereof, as Ps.
19. recovering them, even from the chains and thralldoom of ignorance, and pit
of despair, by his miraculous grace and reconciliation to serve him: in all
perfet knowledge and understanding in the Church and Paradise of God for ever,
whereto they are also thankful and devoteed above measure. And seeing all these
may well content: he wills his soul to turn to her rest, showing how
bountiful God has dealt with him, and resolving to pay ample vows for the
same.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to invireon or compass, is here dilateed by
snares and torments, and bonds, and misery, strict affliction: and with releas,
and deliverance, the opposite terms. Iod, a hand, for death, and hell, and
bonds that apprehended him, and had hold of him. Vav, a crook, has the same
sens: but by way of saveing, redeemeing, and deliveringe, and pulling him out
of the snares and grave of affliction, etc. He would fain be loosed that he
might serve him, because he is his servant. See the repetition. The three
letters make Quaju, they vomited: he deals on the contrary: which is his
love and good digestion of the good turns and merceyes of God upon him. Which
agree well with the godly by their deliverance when they call upon him. Ier.
25. in so much that they mean to make him recompense by the thankful service
of him. The Merciful Eternal Jah, the Name of Jehovah is fifteen times
repeated. He deals here upon Ghimel, as in the 103. And Iah, and therefore
there want three verses of the A B C. Mark diligently the repetition and the
kinds of instruments.

Deuteronomy. He will call and speak and preach much of the Name of God, and
celebrate and proclaim his wonderful merceyes, by daily service, offering and
sacrifice, for a recitation. For he redeemed them from slaveish death of
Egypt, and satisfied them, and gave them rest by Joshua, by phrase of helping or
saveing. Mark the words: Name, Call, beseech, death, liveing, bountiful, good
turns, Eternal: for merceyfull, Gracious, invocation, servant, pay vows, in
the sight of his people, doubled: in the place of rest. Heb. 4. They make
earnest here, of their delusion of Pharoh by their excuse of departure. Ex.
4.5. etc.

PSALM CXVII.
THis Psalm by grace in the last psalm, reaching to the kindenes and truth,
Psalm. 115. for which Gods name is so laudable and glorious, and so to psalm. 92.
where it is to be chaunted out for it: and seeing it lights upon a seventh,
and therefore to require a rest, as also for sanctification of the seventh year,
after the forty from Egypt, with a Sabath work of rest for the land, according
to the 47. days rain before the entering the Ark, and also for the number of
the subdueed nations being seven, which the loveing kindenes of God, and his
faithfullnes overcame: and the strength of his everlasting truth and his word,
has conquered for them, as psalm. 18. and his gentleness of doctrine has
excelled, and prevailed over them, and fitteth on them, ps. 29. the Church now,
where kindenes and truth abounds, seven times a day, yea infinitely, do wish
the nations and the heathen to prais him, and commend him for his kindenes,
with a book of commendations for it: for growing of the word of God and waters
of the Law through them and among them: as the number of clean creatures for
the pureitey of language, and preferment of a pure profession, ps. 19. because
there is so excellent reward of truth and kindenes, the way of Godlynes, psalm.
25.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass, is here the mercy of the Eternal
whose property is salvation, for the compassing and saveing of them and
pardoning of the Godly. Which is meant the compassing waters: by the nations and
people and heathen, of one kind, and the waters of kindenes and truth, another
kind. And the words: to abound or flow over, and assuage. Iod, the second
letter from Iadah, to flow, and so from Hodah, to confess, here for prais and
commend: several words of one sens, so that the sens is doubled, as Shabach,
to allay the flood. And both agre^ with Iod, to confess or publish, preach or
celebrate, for a note of repetition. Zain, the third letter is for the
auditory: to hear. For hearing is supposed by great commendation and prais, and
confession and often repetition.

Deuteronomy. The Deuterosy and recitation here, is the buissines of prais and
commendations of the way of God, and the wonderful abundance and riches of his
grace upon them, Ps. 103. Romans 5.6. Ephesians. 1.2. This he would have the nations
take notice of. How greatly his mercy and fidelity and waters of life exceeded
over them. By the name Jehovah, which has here a new division: into How, and
Iah, as in termination Eli-jahu, Ieshang-jahu, etc. also by inchoation: as in
Ie-hosuang, Ie-hoseph, etc. for assistance. Achaz-jah Jeho-shaphat, Io-nadab,
etc. For addition.

PSALM CXVIII.
He now propounds in this Psalm the Cup which he promissed, as Ps. 116. of
the waters of life, freely to the Church, out of the Law, filled from, Psalm.
92. with the benefit of the worship of God, and invocation of his Name: and the
worthynes of his reward to God for all, even faith, through which, he fears
not the threats nor looks of his Enimyes: which is more worth then any
confidence in man. Therefore, when he is infinitely besett and afflicted and
corrected: he finds life and salvation in the word of God and calling upon
his name, by works of strange success and kindenes from him, as the whole
Church can witness, whom he wills to worship God therefore. And all his
testimony shall be of his salvation which is true, and his only note and
song, perpetually of his strange deliverance, Ps. 143. This is the song of
salvation that he goes into the Church to worship with, and his invocation
upon the Law, in the Psalm following: when the Church with great admiration and
joy do entertain, salute and bless him; with a Hosanna, wishing all prosperity
in the Church, for coming in the name of the everlasting God. And the better
to welcome him, and that God may the better accept of him, and shine unto them:
they sacrifice to him, that he may worship and extol the Almighty his God.
He now greets the Church with a Salve or Ave; hail or wassail, and cup of
salvation, by entering the Ministry and becoming a Preacher of righteousness,
which was strange unto them. For because of the uncleannes of his hands, and
impurity of his heart, as Psalm. 15.24.51. rejoiceing at the mercyes of God in
him: they wish all blessing and prosperity of the same, as Ps. 15.2.4. with the
like congratulation for the Church. And that they had fed upon the rest thereof,
in remembrance and token of their full and mighty redemption, and great
salvation from God: so that the whole Church may confess the everlasting
kindenes of God, and worship him. Because his throne is the right hand of God,
as psalm. 110. and the right hand of God is the Ministry, and that is the word
of God, and that is judgment and Justice, mercey and fidelity, as psalm. 89.
the conqueror truth, the written word, that rideeth upon the white horse, and
fights valiantly: from which oracle, all victory and succor proceeds; and
all battles are the Lords and the discipline his: he now exalts greatly
the dex^erousnes and prosperity thereof. And prays for an open door of the
righteousness of the Law and knowledge of the word, that he may enter into the
service of him and extol him, and find the way to pleas him. That his
testimony and song, and burden of his song be nothing but the everlasting
kindenes and salvation of God, and the faithful recording and testifying
thereof in presence of his saints, as psalm. 149. and with the help of them.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass or inviron. Here are diverse kinds
of compassing: helping and afflicting: helping in these words: kindenes (and
that is continual help and salvation) and grace to help, Heb. 4. Tit. 2. Ephesians.
1.2. It is of this sort: God is by him and present with him always. The
Eternal is with me, etc. he is the only rely and trust and confidence:
they compass him, etc. but by his invocation he circumcised them, and cut
them off. Mark the doubling of the words, and kinds of compassing: nations,
bees and circumcideing, etc. Iod, for a hand: by the right hand doubled, Jod,
to confess, and publish: by worship. Cheth, to prostrate, to cast down, etc.
Ier. 23. the three letters Quiach, of Quoach, to take or receive: are intended
by the gates and entertainment, hearing and welcome in his name, and also by the
term of rejection or refuseing. He prays God to bid him welcome, out of his
word and the house of God, Genesis 28. Mark the repetition: we beseech thee give
salvation: bid God save you, bid God prosper you: we bless, etc.

Deuteronomy. Gods everlasting kindenes in his word is an eternal liveing and
food for human men: mighty matters and wonderful are don by his name and his
right hand, for which he is to be worshipped. Therefore for his recitation here,
he useeth the words: worship, declare, exalt, extol, say, beseech, etc.
sonet and loud voice, for the mightynes of his Acts of salvation. The term
Almighty is doubled, and also the abreviation Iah, for Jehovah, and Jehovah,
the Eternal, six and twenty times: according to the letters Jehovah, for the
mightynes of his salvation and kindenes, Psalm. 136. to show the same: and how
beneficial God has always been to his people by his Name, Exo. 33. Mark the
terms repeated.

PSALM CXIX.
THe door of righteousness is a strait gate, and prayer is a narrow entrance,
and the way of life is hard to find, and principles are the surest keys:
therefore in this psalm, he makeeth every letter a preacher, and keeper of the
Law. He deals not only by A, B, C, as in other psalms, to ground them in
the profession of Godliness: but by mood and method in all art, to instruct them
to felicity, and to crown them with eternal life: that is, the best
understanding, the well performing of the Law according to the true sens thereof.
So as every letter useeth to vary according to the work: this is eight fold,
for the number of consequencees and works of the Law. For now, he seeks not
the way of the Lord, as ps. 25. nor the fear of God, ps. 34. nor faith, psalm.
37. nor the work of God, psalm. 111. nor charitable riches, ps. 112. but the
whole perfection and light of the Law, ps. 19. the stone that slew Goliath,
psalm. 9. and perfect way of God, the sunn and moon light of judgment, ps.
19.37. the flood that drowneth the Enimyes and destroying meteors, ps. 29. and
bridle of humility 39. and redemption 49. the cloud 99. the curs of the serpent
109. by note and collection where all the 22 letters do show their skill, in
keeping the Law: that he may drink a health unto them, as ps. 116. and he may
be thoroughly welcome for doctrine, as in the last psalm, having on the whole
armor of salvation, against all sweet temptation, as of riches, prais and
strength and favor. The second, third, fowerth and fifth verses, in R^sh,
contein Chronicle: in their first words and first letters. For the several
states from the promised and time of peregrination in Egypt, and till they
returned to Canaan again 430. for the time of the judges 480. For the time of
the Kingdom, till the end of the captivity 477. from thence are the 490,
Daniels weeks to Christ. which St. Math. has by generations: from Abraham to
David: to the captivity: and then to Christ.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass, is most proper the grace and
love of God, and the truth of the word, the way of eternal life, to guard him
and save him. Iod, for continual publication and confession thereof. Teth, of
Natah, to decline, as the keeping of the Law or swarving from it. Quit, for
Quot, to greev or be yrksom or loathe. He disputes by the contrary: his
exceeding love and delight that he has to the Law. Therefore that he might be
perfected.

Deuteronomy. His recitation here is of the grace and truth of the word and of
the wonderful effects of it, propertyes and parts of the Law, which be 8,
according to Exo. 20. Com. 2. He prays for mercy infinite, for his infinite
love and observation of the same. That he may have life thereby. The Abce is
eight-fold: frameed to the eight terms of the Law: so that not one verse in all
the Psalm does fail of some one of the said remnes: and ever more in every verse
one of them is doubled, to make you mark it. In He, the eighth letter himself,
only excepted. And these be the words here meant, by a kind of Mishne, or
duplication, by A B Ces, to eight.

PSALM CXX.
THese fifteen psalms have not one word of the Law nor Elohim, the name of God
for judgment once in them, whereby it appears, they argue tresspass and
transgression: according to the title and the style as for trespass offerings,
and for grace and peace, and pardon and forgivenes wholely. Because he dares
not stand to the Law for his salvation, as ps. 130. The number agrees with
Iah, the eternal for his grace and goodness and continual presence, Exodus 33.
The Jews affected a heavenly Kingdom, and the heathen them. This Psalm
keeps reckoning of the days of strife, Genesis 6. the degrees of excellence of
the Law 15 cubits above all nations and Kingdoms of the world, by the baptism
of the holy Ghost. The divill was a murderer from the beginning: the serpent
and Enimye of God and his Church, by lyeing and falls dissembling, which is his
whole practice against the truth, for which he is accursed and condemned. as
ps. 109. heerwith he wounds most deeply with greeff, the heart of the Godly,
that love the truth^: that a Giants strength can not pierce so deep, with the
sharpest arrow; and kindle-eth hotter wrath and more smarting strife, then can
be resembled by the hotest burning coals that can be. This Enimye is Meshek
and Kedar, an ill neighbor of the Church, the country of Gog, of the sons of
Iaphet, northward, which yet could not like to be of Sems religion, being
sown among them. For they were mighty, and desireed war with the Church, and
hateed the peace thereof. For this, the Church is far from building tabernacles
among them for their preachers glory. But for the coursnes of their
neighborhood and entertainment: thought themselves accursed to dwell with
them, and the time too long they had spent among them, and the time too long
they had spent among them, and set their mind upon them. And because they know
not what belongs to this peace and prosperity of the Church, and are good for
nothing but to offend it: and have nothing in them but this kind of
persecution, as they are scattered among them: the Church being in this woe
and d^stress, prays for deliveran^e from them.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to inviron, is here to gird too streit, by
the termn distress or affliction. He is besieged with spiteful and
contentious neighbors. These 15. compass, by the figure Anadyplosis,
duplication or repetition, according to Mishne torah. Of the suns goeing back,
Is. 38. adding to the kings days, by life of the Law. Psalm. 61. in repairing
Hezekias, according to his Name. Caph, to bow or bend, transferred to the bow
of the tongue that is said to shoot fal^ and deceiptfull words, Ier. 9. Ps.
64.58. like arrows of wildfire, and inflammations unquenchable. Ia. 3. Mark
the repetition: to be environed and confineed, as to inhabit, sojourn or dwell:
affliction peace, war, deceiptfull tongue, etc. Caph, a hand for the betakeing
their hands to weapons. And arrows are for hands, and also tongues. Psalm.
35.64.

Deuteronomy. This kind has nothing to do with the Godly, no more then the
divills with Christ. Math. 8. Mar. 5. Luc. 8. Not to talk grace or truth, or to
meddle with a godly way, or repeating of God his miraculous works, or confessing
his kindness, or preaching his truth and eternal life: being Enimyes to
peace. What shall it give, etc. What shall it add: etc. Which is here for
recitation. They can not do God any service, being quite opposite.

PSALM. CXXI.
BY faith all men are made the sons of God, therefore stand fast in the faith,
for by faith ye stand. This psalm is fitted to the former, to show the
succor and releeff for such distress. That against the fals-hood, there is no
such strength as uprightnes, and no such confidence as in a clear conscience,
and in right perfection, and no such preservation as that of the Creator him
self. That whatsoever is well preserved and don, and wrought according to God,
Io. 3. is likewise well saveed and easily defended and maintained. And for this
the Church has their beleeff and faith in God the maker of heaven and earth,
for their ready help in distresses, as Ps. 46.115. and for their continual
preservation. Seeing, that as a father has pity on his ^wn child, and a
mother succoureth that she brings forth: so that there will wan^ no care and
vigilancey in the Creator, for succor and maintenance and preservation of the
creature (who will not sleep) from the shadow of the word from Jerusalem, on
their right hand, that is on their south side, and instruction from thence. And
so all things may be possible unto them, for their deliverance, to keep them
that they fall into no ill ways, that no season or weather, shall hurt them.
That they be not sunn bu^nt and scorched with infamy and ignominious reproach:
and be safe from the greatest dominions on either side, round about them. That
all their goeing out and in, all their Exodus, and leading of their lives from
morning till evening, and from day to day, shall be with security, from time
to time for ever.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to inviron, as standers by one, or to one, as
helpers and assisters, Ps. 94. a shadow at the right hand, for a Defendour and
a Protector. Ps. 16. Ier. 3. And a looker to. Caph, of Caphaph, to bow or bend:
his feet shall not be stirred by captivity. He that keeps him will not sleep
and let him be taken, but will see him safe forth and home, by day and by
night. Caph, a hand: for help and shadow and saveing, etc. Ex. 33. Aleph, for
instruction: he means by the great builder and instructor: his tutor and
keeper of the way of his life, Ge. 3. Ps. 146.91. Mark the repetition.

Deuteronomy. Here the rehearsal is of the God of kindenes him self: the
Eternal, so often repeated. And God of truth: that is so infinite in his
mercey and compassion. That takeeth in hand all misery and all calamity to
cure, Ps. 146. How vigilant he is, It is wonderful, for the salvation of his
people, according to his word that sleeps not. Ps. 33. Ehje, and Jehovah, Are
terms of greeff, Eze. 7. Is. 47. and greeff and woe keeps wakeing; greeff
moves compassion, and that is the Eternal, Is. 54. that sends and pittyeth,
etc. Ex. 3.33. Ma. 24. Mark the efficacey of the words. Eternal, keep,
preserve, etc. goeing out and in, life, etc.

PSALM. CXXII.
THough I had all faith, that I could remove mountains, and had not love, it
were nothing: love is better then any sacrifice, love fullfilleth the Law, love
is the end of the comandemment. To. 13. 1. Tim. 1. Math. 22. Therefore he that
judges rightly of it, is not far from the kingdom of God. The peace of God
passes all understanding, and keeps the heart in knowledge and love of him;
therefore except the church be well seasoned with knowledge, and have peace one
with an other: faith is not so dureable, so firm, so constant and so forceible.
For without knowledge follows no beleeff, nor any conclusion, without
circumstance. nor any rock without a sound demonstration, nor effect without
charity: which is, by marriage and Affinity of consequencees, and aptnes and
likeing by conjugation* that whatsoever can be concludeed, likeed, and also
agreed upon, by the Church, what ever it be: that undoubtedly is made
possible. Therefore all is to be don in Love, for love has boldness, and there is
no fear in love. So what can be believed, but that which the love and
affectation and combination of the causes, and concord in all moodes may
perform? or what beleeff in Christ, except, the ground work be love? for
knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth. And for this he prooveth the
amiablenes of Jerusalem and the glory of the Church of God, and allurements
thereunto, Psalm. 87. (to abide in the Law of God is to keep his commandments)
by the construction: the resort, the Exercise, for fraternity, freendship and
acquaintance, and the house of God that is in it; for which he loveeth it
most deerly, and wishes peace about it, and prosperity within it, and that
all may prosper that love it; and delighteeth so much, to go up unto it, and
remain in it.

Construction. Quoph, of Iaquaph, to compass or inviron: as by the trenches and
palacees, that are about the city, for peace. Alludeing to the Name of the
city, Is. 20.32.60, Ps. 48.147. By their greeting and saluteing and freendly
wishes, is meant their manner, which is bowing, for Caph, the second letter, as
Mich. 6. by bidding and wishing their wealth and peace, as Math. 10. Lu. 10.
Caph, for the soles of the feet. Jerusalem, because there were the cheeff thrones
and Assemblyes. B^th, a house, is here by the house of the Eternal: and the house
of David, etc. Also the tribes, or branches for houses. Mark all the repeating
of the termnes.

Deuteronomy. They say that in Jerusalem men ought to worship. Io. 4. Deu.
12.16. This is the place of repeating and admireing, and recreating of all
flesh with the word, and remembrance of all God his works and goodness to them,
Ps. 65. which they frequented; and whither they solemnly resorted therefore:
Zach. 14. Mark the repetition and commendation of it. Both for preaching and
judgeing and correcting of them.

PSALM CXXIII.
BY these degrees they get up into celestial dwellings, high placees, and
rooms of godlynes and spiritual understanding, by which all principality and
power is subdueed, and the captiveers them selves captiveed, as Ps. 68. And
they are made a complet building and temple of holiness, and divine knowledge,
and replenished with the fullnes of God. From which Asscension and cogitation
being higher then any heaven: all degrees of Ministers according to their
measure and gift for the gathering of the Saint, are furnished. Ephesians. 4. Now
that this Psalm and the former, as they touch, so that they may be seen to
concern each other: mark the property of love, it suffers long and bears all
things. And again because God has his whole dwelling in these heavenly placees,
and they are in so base esteem, and skorned (among the proud Quiescents, by
them that are at case) for their poverty, by which they have long remained in
great derision; as servants steadfastly look and gape and tend at their masters
hands for meat and wagees: so the Churches eyes are bent unto the father of
spirits, looking for some spiritual grace, that he will pity them and give
them some heavenly reward and victory and salvation. For their singular
suffering and waiting.

Construction. Grace mercy and peace, the comun safeguard of the Apostles is
here the invironing, for Quoph, the first letter, by doubling of the termn
pity: as also of the name Eternal. For countenance, Exodus 33. Psalm. 84. The
contrary, is skorn and contempt, that they have their fill of in time of
captivity, by proud invadeers. Like the frozen and settled ones, Zeph. 1. The
despisers and deriders, Job. 12. Ne. 4. Mat. 6. Luc. 16. Pro. 30. Caph, of
Caphaph, the second letter, to bow, oppressed, made to stoop and bowed. Ghimel,
the third letter, reward: the giveing of grace and countinance for their
waiting, as fit gifts for children. And this, as it is the work of the eye,
Prove. 30. So he that dwells in the heavens, the great regarder and great
derideer is prayed unto, Psalm. 2. Ma^k the repetition through out agreeing.

Deuteronomy. He that prays unto God, does glorifye God, Psalm. 50. he that
comes unto God, confesses that God is: his praying for countenance, is as
much as confessing and publishing of his grace, and repeating of his eternal
life, and everlasting way, and wonderful work of salvation. These 15 Psalms
have a figurative excellence in them, Is. 38. returning, and reciteing, and
climeing higher and higher, to heaven and understanding, by words.

PSALM CXXIV.
MOnt Sion was the glory of Jerusalem, and the Musicians the glory of Sion, as
Psalm. 87. and these Psalms the glory of the Musicians. The merry songs of Sion,
which they so much longed to hear, and inquireed for, in Babylon, Ps. 137 by
which men are sung alive again from death, every Psalm being a step from
misery, and a step to honor, and that of the Kingdom of heaven: from the
greatest ignorance and darkness, to the greatest knowledge and light. Heerby,
the Apostles sing open the prison doors, and sing off the bands of their feet
(for the word of God is not bound, Psalm. 68. Act. 16. 2. Tim. 2.) and take the
keeper prisoner. For here is a new earth, a new city and a new Sion, and a new
tabernacle of God with men, and a new and a heavenly knowledge in man, a new
man which captiveeth all power, and can not be captiveed. The fruit of the
spirit being in all goodness righteousness and truth, sends out such hymns
and Psalms and spiritual songs of thanks, of melody in their hearts for
salvation; that makes all manner of subjection captivity, and bonds and
imprisonment tolerable. God is ever good unto his people, and ever near his
elect, as Ps. 73 to glorify his chosen, as Psalm. 84.86. when all the troubles
and malice and anger in the world, aros and kindled against them. And he
cracketh all the building and plots of the Enimye, by his goodness and kindenes,
when he is called upon, as Ps. 118. After long waiting, as Ps. 40. and great
affliction, as Ps. 90.109. when the people of God be even eaten up alive, with
reproach, and scornful biteing and defamation at the hands of the proud: at
last God useeth to be good and gracious and merciful and comfortable unto
them, by taking the^, out of those lions jaws, which in long gapeing get the
cramp and never close again. And though a world of nations, like stoods of
Enimyes, set upon them: yet there is that dullnes in their understanding, and
sottery in proceeding, and dissension, and division, and imperfection in the
manifacture of their cords, which they lay, that they are soon brokeen: for
the devil being author of confusion and of discord: they no better agree one
with another, then they agree with the Church, and their work is soon
destroyed. For the works of discord are not st^ong nor durable. And thus often
times, by the muteny of the Enimye the Church is safe: as in Egypt, Assure,
Babylon, etc. Absalom, etc. where the salvation of the Godly is out of the sight
of the wicked, and they have a miraculous deliverance, and all by their
invocation and calling upon the Name of God, and serving of their Creator, as
92. which in due time hears, if they faint not. And this is the Experience
and hope which they have by patience, whereby this Psalm suiteth with the
former.

Construction. Quoph, of Jaquaph, to invi^on, is of the compassing of the E^imy
by the abundance and inundation of them: compared to the swelling of Jordan and
the proud wars of the men of Adam, and their invasion, Ios. 3. of the Church,
Job 22. Ps. 42.116. Ier. 12. Ion. 1. The opposition is Gods present assistance
and standing to them and with them, by his existens and name Jehovah. And about
them in helping, Romans 8. Consider the first and last words doubled. Caph, for
bowing down, and pressing of the Enimye in captivity: by snares and waters, to
wit, the 70 of Babel. See the affecting of Iod, with Zain, in Azza, and in
Zedonim, to be multiplied for 70. as Zain and Gnain, Ps. 25.34. Daleth, a door,
is Gods discipline and remedy, as the Medes and Persians, to dissolve the
captivity of the Babylonians. Mark the repetition to all.

Deuteronomy. These songs of return be sufficient conf^ssion of Gods
merciful, and miraculous deliverance, which he would have the Church still in
mind of, and to use them for repetitions, as being so much bound for their
salvation, to him.

PSALM CXXV.
THey that believe not, shall not be established. Righteousness. and God, and
the Kingdom of God is the same thing: for other gifts of government are
contained in it. There is no stedfastnes but in justice, nor any trust or
beleeff or assurance but in the everlastingnes thereof, because, for this are
Gods people immutable and immovable, having the light of the Law, and the
glory thereof shineing about them, to guard them for ever. That there shall no
wicked dominion, Lordship or punishment rest where the righteous dwell, because
they do not wrong, as Psalm. 15. and that the wicked do overgripe themselves,
that meddle with them, and are forceed to loos their hold, and releas their
captivityes. Therefore he that seeks righteousness seeks all, and he that
seeks it, findeeth all. It is found in the Law, called the face of God, as
Psalm. 24. that pure Israel only seeks, and is blessed therewith. The Church
now prays for judgment: favor to the upright, strait and plain mindeed men;
and condemnation to the variable and crooked, and declineers in hell, with the
mischevous and evil dooers, as Ps. 5. That Israel may once have peace, and the
Ark have rest, and the Church never fail. Mat. 16.

Construction. Quoph, the compassing here is in the term about, as the hills,
and the eternal Existence. God does guard his people by his providence: the
wicked shall not rest among them for fear of corrupting them: the confident and
faithful shall not miscarry, no more then hills or rocks, Mat. 16. and this
is the Eternal presence of God, and the faithful according to the third
letter, He, behold, and the absence of the wicked that must not com nighe the
Righteous. The faithful are define^d: good and upright, strait and direct in
their hearts, against declineers and benders, and wrong and crooked ways: and
this for Caph, to bend or crook also. So the cherishing of the good and the
banishing of molesters, is the way of peace. Caph, a hand, or a shaft or rod,
as of the wicked. Mark the repetition.

Deuteronomy. Ieshurun, and Israel are acted, as Deuteronomy. 32. Ies. 44. that the
uprightnes of Israel should bring peace to Israel. What is Israel but a
quint-offence of uprightenes, and pureity, to whom, God useeth to be
beneficial? Mark Jesharim and Israel: all they that trust etc. his people, all
the righteous, all good and upright, etc. and this may serve for a rehearsal
also.

PSALM. CXXVI.
IF God be made unto us wisdom, righteousness and sanctification and
redemption: he that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord, for high degrees
of knowledge, and exaltation into a paradise of revelation. Let him rejoice in
the service and worship of him, and the calling upon his Name, as Ps. 92. in
the time of peace, for in troubles when they are not with themselves, they are
far from God, and can not com nighe him in time of wrath, as Psalm. 32. Now out
of the greatest sorrow springs the greatest joy, and out of abundance of
suffering, abundance of consolation: and the Church has been often fetched out
of the mire, and deep pit of destruction, and the midst of hell, Ps. 69.130.
and by the mercyes of God; in keeping still life in them, in their captivityes,
and raising them again and redeeming them, from the torment and thralldom of
their consciences and themselves, to the wonder of the world, yea in the sight
of the Heathen: which useeth to strike such passion of joy into the veins and
heart of them, that they could not choos but laugh and sing in their sleep, for
their peace and redemption, which was their whole affection and waiting being
awake: and in this they had their full desires, that their joys might be
full. Now confessing and magnifying Gods great works of kindenes toward them
before, in diverse reductions of them from diverse countries: they pray that he
would now, by that example, bring them again from the rest, as the Southeren
rivers, return and flow from the south: that out of a heavy seednes of
deprivation, they being scattered and sown thus among the heathen; there may
be a joyful return of them, like a merry and fruitful harvest of Sheaves.

Construction. Quoph, is here returning, and coming about, or back again as
the days of the year, Ps. 19. 2. Sam. 11. Job 1. For the days of life, Is.
38. also bringing about, or to pass, or compassing, or effecting much, etc.
Caph, of Caphaph, to bow or bend, the lamentable depressing of them; Psalm. 146.
captivity and holding, and seed lep, and sheaves, and gripes, for Caph, a hand
also. Vau, a crook, or hook: for their deportation and redemption also, and for
fellowship: so here is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, Eccl. 2.
counterfeteed upon the story of Ishak for the merry return of the promissed
seed, with so great increas, Am. 7. Genesis 16.17.21. Gal. 4. Is. 1. Romans 9. By
the word Laughter, etc. The name of Isaak. Mark the repetition, Psalm. 14.53.

Deuteronomy. They increased and grew in their bondage, like that in Egypt, as
men fed in their sleep and grown fat, Job. 39. and multiplied in their
captivity, which was a great work of Gods mercey and kindenes, for the heathen
to note, and to make them merry.

PSALM CXXVII.
OVt of joy proceeds comfort and consolation, in this Psalm and the next:
the Churches sheaves of posterity, and other gifts of peace, for the rest and
peace of the Church. because the idolatrous care of this world chokeeth the joy
in the Kingdom of God, and stifleth all comfort and consolation in the word,
and in the holy Ghost: and because the Church has all their reward and
strength by inheritance from the service of God, Ps. 16. and the Prophets are
the bars of the city gates, Ps. 147 and all comfort and quietness, secureity
and boldness against their Enimyes, by youthful fruitfullnes of a Godly issue,
and are most blessed from the love of him: In this Psalm, from Salomons
overmuch preparation, for Rehoboam, a simple son: the vanity of to much
provision, is most wisely describeed. For heerin, men fall into diverse
temptations: when their work is not spiritual, nor their building God. For
they build with things not theirs, and for want of due right, and property,
there wants concord, and for want of concord, no construction or building can
go up, or stick together; nor no care in the world can keep such together; that
which God provideth not. As in the building of Babel. Genesis 11. and edification
in st^ange tongues: for in Babel, the stones of Jerusalem will not serve for
building: they can make no workmanship of them: they feed upon Idolatry, and
labor in vain: walls nor watchmen can hold them; they know not what to do
with these spiritual stones, but send them home as the Philist^ns did the Ark.

Construction. Quoph, to inviron, is the building for defense, and strong watch
about the city. The house of Israel cannot be safe and sure, but upon the
covenants and promises of God, and instructions of the word. this psalm is to
be construed from Genesis 15: 2. Sa. 12. 2. Cro. 23. La. 3. 1. Cro. 22. 1. Cor, 3.
Pro. 8. the restoring of the captivity is the reward of children Ier. 31. as
well as the birth, ps. 2. for building, Genesis 16.30. Caph, bowed, Caph, a hand,
to contein, or quiver, or belly, arrows, and children: See build, builders,
house, city, children, fruit of the womb, children of youth, arrows, they shall
bring forth their building with pain and sorrow, opposed to contentment: for
neither walls nor watching can save their city: but good education and
godliness. Zain to hear, or conceive the doctrine of the word, or edification,
such is Gods building, and such are his children, as it is good to build, and
not a vain thing: but a thing that will endure. He writes upon Gnir, a city,
which is derived from Gnir, to erect or build and also to watch. Therefore he
us^th all kinds both of building and watching, and by sundry termnes. mark the
repetition.

Deuteronomy. The children of God are well edified, and no better defens nor
security can be, than good edification out of his word: it is a blessed thing
to abound with them, and not a vain thing. He shows: it is the Lords work to
restore them, and that they cannot stand nor consist without him: which is a
wonderful kindenes: the contenting and blessing of his beloved.

PSALM CXXVIII.
A Mischeevous end belongs to the wicked, by reason of falsshood and deceit,
but to the godly and just man, no temptation shall take them, but that which
they may well bear, neither shall one bone of them be broken, or any temptation
impair them at all, that truly follow the way to peace: but (for all
happiness) their labors of their hands shall follow them, and stick unto them,
to cherish them. It shall be good and dureable because of the equity thereof,
chiefly, their wives: the greatest blessings: they shall have them to stick
fast to the house sides, showing their love: they shall have no wandering
thoughts, but be ever about the house, so that her husband never want her, nor
suffer widdowhood; and she shall be fruitful, to imbolden him; she shall bring
up his children to stick round about his table, to grace him; and that there be
no dispersion: and that he shall see one generation under another, of children,
dureing the peace and wealth of the church, which he shall see all his life. In
Jerusalem dwelt of all nations, men that feared God, that were learned in the
kingdom of God, and could speak this language of righteousness, and peace, and
other gifts of the holy ghost (being not in word but in power) one to another,
being of diverse countries. For in this is the Church greatly beholding to God,
and is to thank him for it, because they are made rich in all kind of speech,
and knowledge, and doctrine of the holy ghost, that they be not destitute of
any gift: and hereby they speak all one thing, with one accord, and without
dissension, being of one mind, and of the same judgment. The gifts of the
mind are heavenly gifts, and no music is comparable to them, nor any
kingdom to that government, and the harmony thereof, but to the sweetness of
concord, and of peace, when all agree to hold together by it, as the souldure
or band of the rest: no one gift can be equalled thereunto. Peace joyneth all
nations together and reconcileth them in Christ: that they are no longer
strangers of foreiners: but all near kin and well acquainted in Christ, and
citizens with the saints, and of the household of God. Here is an high
coronation, and heerby men reign as kings: when all is thus tuned and brought
in peace, peace offerings are due, and such sacrifice as this of thanks to be
sung. Therefore, whatsoever things are true, honest, just, or pure or belong to
love, or of good report: if there be any virtue, or if there be any prais:
these things are to be thought upon, and the God of peace shall be with them.
For in whom dwells the fullness of these things: he it is that reconcileth
all and sets at peace, even Christ: this is the unworldly peace that God
gives, that the heart be never troubled not in fear, and which overcommeth all
affliction in the world: And thus are they sanctified throughout, and by peace
are made happy that are the children and servants of God.

Construction Quoph, of Jaquaph, to compass, is his wife, the vines wedded to
the house sides and his children waiting at the tabl^, for helps and good
additions to him. Caph, for bowing, or subjection, like the obedient vine, and
olive plants, alludeing to Cippath, a vine branch, as Caph, a hand etc. Cheth
to fear, as Mal. 2. He shows what is no vain work, but a blessed work, and
what the blessings be: consider the doubling of the words: happy, blessed,
wealth, well, peace, lo: and so alluding to the name Jerusalem, they shall see
peace. children, fear, etc. He works evermore upon the diverse sens of the
word.

Deut^ronomy. the confession here is, what felicity there comes of a godly
life: they have their hearts desire: and they shall be blessed out of Zion with
eternal life: they shall have posterity and peace, and all delight with it.
ps. 37. with the kind God will show himself kind, etc. ps. 18. The story of
Abraham is again thought upon, as Genesis 12. for his blessing. etc. He will
bless them that bless him. etc. Luke 1.

PSALM. CXXIX.
ALl the culture and tillage of the wicked is upon the backs of the godly: that
is, their whole field, where they sow all mischief, is a spoiling, and defacing
of their lives, and all the pains they take is against them. They overlode
them, as Ps. 68. they urge them, torment them and constrein them, and overwork
them, and tire them with temptation, they drive them, and pursue them, that the
whip is never off their backs, and all their devises, cogitations, and plots
are to destroy them. And for this they draw all together, and are a teem
always harnessed, ps. 83. and ready to plow upon them, and ride them. And this
the Church found in Egypt, Edom, and Moab, in Canaan, in Ashur, and Babylon, in
great measure, and with great continuance; yea out of measure and without
c^asing. yea though they galled them sore, and prevailed not: yet they never
give over, they are never at lands end, they never throw up the plow, their
furlongs are endless, and their enmity lasts still. They must suffer crosses
that will live godly, and they must long bear that will be blessed, and the
crosses of the church for their profession, are innumerable: by tyranny, fear,
threatening: treachery, robbing, revenge; wars, captivities, and other trialls,
and they make an exercise of bearing of them. They are to be commended for
this high degree of patience, which they call long-suffering, a great gift of
government. Such crosses and affliction and tribulation must be undergone and
carried, and must be rejoiced in, for that glorious victory and coronation of
them that endure and hold out, and overcome, and are excellent in those
uncarnall thoughts, and, spiritual gifts of the mind promised. Thus is the
loss of life, the salving and preserving of it, the changing of a worse for a
better; that tribulation bringing patience, and patience bringing experience,
and experience hope, and hope the things hopeed for: that men be not ashamed of
their hope, or the vanity thereof, as Ps. 25. Now because this is the justice
of God to succor the Just. and a just thing with him, to recomp^nse vengeance
to the troublers of the godly, and to them that hate them for the word: the
church prays, that it may be after this sort, that even still one thing for
another, and like for like; for envying Zion and the prosperity thereof, and of
all the Church: nothing may prosper that they put their hands too, and they may
be ashamed of every purpose, and fail of all their attempts against it. Ps.
132. that God would cut their harness that they draw by, unyoke them and
uncouple them, and chop their weethes and cords in pieces, and destroy utterly
their husbandry, that they may retire with shame, availing themselves nothing,
but retire and take off their hands for shame and their purposes may wither,
and all their thoughts be extinguished, and stare out their eyes with looking
for, and become mad with their hope, and cut off ere they see their desires:
That they may labor for nothing, and they may be ashamed of their crop, that
for nothing bear malice and hatred and arms against it; that they may have
neither harvest nor blessing of all their plots and devises, to delight them.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or inviron is here to afflict, of Zarar, to
gird strait or strain hard or wring or oppress: by which word, three times and
three several ways is the number 490 contained and expressed, to signify the
determining of the judgments of God upon Israel, though long, even seventy
sevenfold. Gods justice cuts the band of wrong, and sets them at liberty and
releaseth them out of the hands of Satan, their captivity and sore distress.
Caph, bowing or stooping, is the plowing upon their backs and oppressing of
them, by so long ridges upon them. there is a ridge of furrows, and a ridge of
a house or house top, for a back: as they torment one kind, that the other may
fail, and they may turn the back. Caph, a hand also: for holding and griping
etc. oppression is rewarded with improsperitie, as the wicked keep down the
Church: so they accursed for want of maintenance do fade. Teth, to decline and
bow, also for the soil where the tillage is. Mark the repetition of the words.
He is still in the story of Abraham, he will curs them that curs him etc.
Genesis 12. Ps. 80.

Deuteronomy. He observes the frequent and sore adversity of Israel from a
child, yet God still maintained them, and cut off their enemies: therefore
they should justly confess him. They that hate the church shall be accursed.

PSALM CXXX.
THis is the way unto Abraham's bosom, this way men know Abraham and keep him
company in the kingdom of God, prepareing for grace and mercy and not for
justice and judgment Ps, 143. The Church weighing their iniquity, and their
suffering: they find their afflictions nothing to their deserts. And weighing
their afflictions with the glory that they look for: they find their crosses
short of it, and not to be accounted worthy of such an eternal weight as is
promised to the children of God, by their adoption which live in admiration of
all spiritual glory, and not of temporal things: which by suffering are made
heirs, and com unto the kingdom of God: and so rare and so high a calling and
freedom, from corrupt slavery of sin. For this cause is every creature of God
brought under hope, and waits continually, to see their day of redemption;
and considering their vanity with unexpressible fervency, groan for it; and the
spirit, that knows their mind helps them. By which hope and long waiting,
in as much as it is with all stedfastnes, as Ps. 40. they get their degree in
the kingdom of God; and are saved, with much rejoicing and continual prayer,
never to be ashamed of. This hope comes by patience, and comfott of the
scriptures; because all these afflictions happen to him for love to the word, and
observing Gods commandments, Ps. 119. Z. Sh, Which hope is laid up for them in
heaven, to be fullfilled with all knowledge and spiritual understanding, and
the mystery of God, by the grace of God. And heerof have you for example;;
Noah, Daniel, and Job: their blessed end. This hope is for things not to be
seen, all things working for the best thus their degree: to be predestined,
and called, and chosen, and justified, and glorified, and saved. Therefore no
tribulation, nor no persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor
sword, nor any other adversity or prosperity, loss or preferment, present or
future, high or low or any thing else in the world, can cut off their waiting
for this glory, and this kingdom: but they show themselves approved in all
things, and tried men in all crosses of the world; which are the very Accents
of holiness. And for this is their uncessant calling upon God, in their deep
distresses, not to regard their sins and iniquities. but seeing he was so
reverend, for pardon and forgivenes, and was so kind and so full of
redemption: which is the hope of Gods calling: and that he would hear him, and
set Israel in the right way, forgive him, and redeem him; and this with an
exceeding hope, more then that of the watchmen, for their r^st.

Construction. Quoph, to compass, iniquities, Ps. 49. Deeps Ion. 2. Ps. 69.
where there is no standing: so all are cast by iniquities which have hold of
them. Lamed, learning, is waiting, and attending, and contending, redemption,
and forgivenes, and releas of captivity, and bondage of the devil and all
their enemies, Is. 64. Ier. 33.31. Prove. 16. Neh. 9. Hos. 14. both the letters
make Quol,, a voice, the Lords attention, and revealing of his word, releaseth
and redeemeth, being full of pardon and grace. Quol, is taken also for word,
which is the promised forgivenes. and redemption from tr^spass. This belongs
to Rulers and therefore Lord, is doubled. Quol, also is thunder, which is
terrible judgment out of the word, that no man is able to abide it. Qual is
gentle, light, and easy: as is forgivenes. Mark well the repetition of all the
termns, and reckoning of the kinds: of voices, waitings, and forgivenes etc.
His waiting is to be set once free of his crosses and his encumbrances, which
he calls iniquities, by proper grace of the Eternal. Like a servants waiting
for his masters coming. Mat. 24.

Deuteronomy. It is wrought upon the story of Jacobs wrestling Genesis 21.32. Hos.
12. and waiting and earnest request is a kind of wrestling for grace. As Jacob
wrestled: so Israel must wait. Mark the doubling of Israel, and repeating of
Lord so often, to signify might and power of prevailing, upon El, in Isra-el
the mighty. And this recites a wonderful grace and blessing of God, and
kindenes to his people.

PSALM CXXXI.
BLessed are the poor in spirit, the lowly and meek, the humble and quiet
minded men, and such as suffer persecution for righteousness; for they shall
reign and excel in heavenly gifts, and also inherit the earth, Ps. 37. And be
called the children of God. O Zion, behold, thy king comes, meekly sitting
upon an ass. By meeknes and gentleness, every thought and imagination against
God, and every high thing is cast down and captiveed, and subdued and made
nothing worth. for all the kingdom of God is in suffering, and willing and
gentle submission and obedience; by which; by having themselves in command:
they overcome and cast down invincible holds. A little contenteth these men,
and all things are bestowed upon them: they seek the celestial kingdom, and
riches of godliness, and want nothing that is good: so, as when they suffer, it
is in hope, and also in meeknes, not grudgeing, nor resisting, nor murmuring:
therefore he subdueth his mind from high conceits and far and foreign hopes, and
great and secret things to the plain and easy things of the law and
commandments, near at hand, and hard by him. In this subjection he has his
mind by the Law, that meekly waits on him like a wainling: so that the Law
and he, are inseparable, and his mind always a companion with God, by
having his word always in his mouth, and in his heart; and thus he would have
Israel wait upon God for ever.

Construction. Quoph, to compass, is here the compassing of the heart; the
wild affection of the mind. Eccl. 7. Is. 10. Ps. 101. Pro. 6. known by these
tokens, the lust of the flesh, and of the eyes, and pride of life: all worldly
aspireing and ambitious appetite, 1, Ioh. 2. not fit for a scholar. Lamed, and
Al^ph, for learning, and instruction: they make Lo, not so, that he is no
such: but humble and a reformed man, meek and docible, fit to attend doctrine,
and the pleasure and kindenes of God. He is not carried away with pride and
worldly pleasure, but is content to be taught: as a child his A. B, Ce. Is.
28. and so he shows by a double mention of the first letters of the rue. And
is contented with the things revealed, Deuteronomy. 29. And so he would have Israel
to be perpetually. All the three letters make Quala, to dis-esteem, as he was
vile in his own eyes. Mark these words repeated: soul, waiting, not, etc. and
words varyed: high, lofty, great, hard, opposed to tame, and plain, and wained,
etc. as Aspireing to contentment.

Deuteronomy. All waiting of Israel is for grace and kindenes, and performance
of promiss to such as be fit, and adopted, and chosen, etc. while Israel
serves, etc.

PSALM. CXXXII.
There is a majesty of Godliness, and there is a heavenly countenance of pure
religion, but zeal and devotion make the dignity thereof: that a man may be
found approoved, and in all points perfect and holy before God. Which is hee^
showed by David's vow, and the Lords, considering both: that is, the place that
David so devourly sought for, and found: the Lord so much delighted and
affected. And because their affections so met, and their hearts so well agreed:
and because God promissed to David, all benefit of salvation from Sion, by the
Priesthood: and aflowershing and a learned, and a dureing estate of the Kingdom,
if he kept his covenant: and that he will victual the city well with the
word of God, Psalm. 81. and confound his enimyes therewith; till they blush and
retire thereat: he prays God now to take his rest upon his holy hill, and by
the strength of his Law, Ps. 99. the Ark of judgment and right, to send it,
that the Priests may preach righteousness, Ps. 40. and the people do all
worship, and the queristers sing out aloud, holy, holy, holy, and highly
sanctifye the God of Sabbath; with all habit and behavior of holiness. That the
anointed may never remove, or turn back again, but seek unto their patience,
and faith and love and spiritual knowledge, and provide for all their wants,
that nothing may be wanting, but that they may overcom in their trial, and
be refreshed in the paradise of God, be made Kings and wear the crown of
Eternal life, and be fed with the scriptures, and to receive holy names in the
book of life, never to be blotted. And reign over nations, and be like
everlasting pillars in the temple, with new names of their new creation, graven
upon them, and sit in the throne of Godlynes, blessed with all dignity and
honor; by these keys of knowledge, that open all undeniable truth and shut
the mouths of fashood; that bindeeth the divill and Satan hand and foot, in
his arguments and caste^h him into utter darkness, and giveeth clear light to
them that sit in darkness: and that he would dissolve the chains of ignorance,
of them that walk in absurdity, and redeem them and save them.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or inviron, by his affliction and his vow of
absteining from rest: and fasting from so great an appetite: to find an
entertainment and contentment for the great Pastor of Israel, Lev. 23. Is. 58.
also clothing or indueing, Job 19. Is. 61. Lamed, doctrine: from Beth-lehem,
and Sion, where the poor have their fill of bread, Ier. 50. of righteousness and
salvation perpetually preached, and praises: Beth, a house: dwelling,
habitation, place of rest, footstool, etc see the doubling of the words and the
synonimyes throughout: appetite, affliction and satisfaction, is all, Deuteronomy. 12.
He reckons here all the kinds of rests that can be imagined, because it is
Gods rest; and that by doubling the word, Tabernacle, house, bed, sleep,
dwelling, habitation, footstool, right doctrine, a joyful Ministry, their
Anointed, throne, meat, and bred of salvation, a flowrishing, crown, their
anointed, and shame to their Enimyes: neither is he unmindefull of the
Quiescents grammatical, as in the word Jvva, he desired, doubled.

Deuteronomy. Sion is the place he has chosen to be served and glorified in,
Deuteronomy. 2. for a perpetual countenance to his elect, and a shame to their foes,
if they observe his word and keep his covenant: the life thereof shall be their
life for ever, Deuteronomy. 32. and they shall not be stirred.

PSALM CXXXIII.
THe Church being settled in a quiet conscience, and having a peacable Kingdom
within them: he now comes to the admiration of the goodness and the benefit,
the glory and the sweetness of it. Where he makeeth the subjects all of one
degree: where there is no difference, between the servant and the son, male and
female, servant and servant, far or near: there being one master and father
and reconcileer unto all; for they are both by grace and both by adoption: nor
between Jew and gentile, bond or free; for there is a redemption from bondage,
and a freedom from servitude, to which, as well they in the house as out of the
house, are predestined ^o become all alike the children of God, being led by
the spirit of God. And thus Christ was before Abraham, and thus Abraham
rejoiced to see his days, by having the same Kingdom and religion in his
bosom. So that there is no priority or pre-eminence here, to take place: and as
they are all children and sons of God by faith: so they are all heirs, and
all part-takeers of the Kingdom and blessedness thereof, as they have been
part-takeers of the suffering belonging to it. And therefore are they called
brethren, for all have one and the same birth and parentage, having the same
conceits, doing the same works, leading the same lives, mind the same
things, knit together all in one mind, being of the same study and
affection, the same endeavor, and the same subjection, and the same
protestation; and this in the same service of God, the father and master, in
all holiness, and rightheousnes, when all their hearts agree in all things, and
God with them: how admirable (inde^d may they say) is their dwelling together,
It yeeldes a sweet prospect; for how sweet are the sermons of righteousness that
flow over the Priests lips, and drop down his beard, and the gift of grace and
the indument of them, that runs down, all the coat of Levi, from high to
low, even to the skirts and the doctrine that falls upon them, as the dew
upon the grass. The^ is no ointment so sweet and good, nor rain so pleasant, as
these savery showers of heavenly understanding, and spiritual blessings, and
everlasting life, when as from hill to hill, one heart lends another grace,
and knowledge, and peace and joy eternal, in a quiet mind.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: so the band of fraternity, Za. 11. and unity
of religion: Lamed, the anointing, and doctrine, 1. Io. 2. Ghimel, the reward,
and blessing of life, as Ps. 3. proper to the congregation and the people of
the house of God, as showers to Sion, or anointing to the Priests, an
everlasting spring, and all the good, that can descend. Where two or three are
gathered together, etc. Mat. 18. Mark the repetition all things resembling
unity and propri^ty: pleasant, precious, beard, runn down, etc.

Deuteronomy. The confession here is, the life of the word, the blessing of it,
to them that concur in observing is, as the congregation: the wonderful
refreshing they have by that ordinance, and favor of God, by destilling of
doctrine upon the assembly, as ointment on the beard, etc.

PSALM CXXXIV.
AT the end of every work the Creator is to be blessed, and the Creation
sanctified, so now to end these 15. Songs of return or asscension, the last two
being of the Ministry and holy service of God, and of the fraternity and holy
assembly in spiritual houses of holiness, to wit, of the Church and
congregation, Psalm. 92.90. of the place and frequentation, the high place and
degree of Godlynes and the comunion and unanimity of the Saints: and whereas
he has figureed the place to be Sion, and the company Israel, to whom all
the service appertained, and what Godlynes there is in them: Now for higheth of
sanctification, that the Temple of God may be thoroughly clean, and that they
may grow up to a full holiness: he makes the time the Sabbath, hous-hold
exercise. The whole law of God is a tree of abstinence, as taste not, touch
not, do not, handle not, to bridle the will; that, be it a thing that makes
never so fair a show, for any kind of respect: it must be refreined and
a^oyded: and so work by the Ministry and a perpetual thanks giveing by the
Min^sters, never ceasing. Sabbath day to be useed, so that the refreining from
pleasure, and coveteousnes fullfilleth all, Psalm. 119. H, for he that lives
in pleasure is said to be dead while he lives, and to be a sleep in it, and
drunk therewith, and apt to all temptation. Except God be in a man, the body is
dead, and the greatest holiness in the world is to retire one self, and walk
with God, to forbear: and the grea^est government in a man, is to bridle
himself. And therefore he wills the servants of God that keep holy, and rest,
that keep house with him, and dwell in the Lords house, by night, and abstein
from labor and fowling their hands upon any work: to lift up their hands, of
so high holiness and sanctification, and bless this everlasting righteousness of
God. For bestowing the same blessing upon them, even everlasting life. And that
as God, in six days, made heaven and earth, etc. and rested the seventh and
blessed and sanctified it: so for keeping the same, they may receive from him,
likewise, the blessing of sanctification throughout.

Construction. Quoph, to compass about, his servants that lodge in house with
him, and remain always about him, Ps. 76. his most worthy Ministers, to do
their function of thanks perpetual, for Gods blessing from Sion, his mighty
reformation: by Lamed, lerning, and Daleth, a door, for the opening of the word
by doctrine. Mark the words: bless, and Eternal, servant, stand, etc. how often
the one implies the other. He works upon the double sens of Berek, to bless,
to which, here is prayed a blessing, and also to give it. See the only doubling
of that termn and the Eternal. And this is for a door, as knocking and
opening, etc.

Deuteronomy. This blessing intends confession of the goodness and grace of
God, and comfort which they receive from the place which God has chosen, Deuteronomy.
12. from Sion, the blessed word of creation out of rudenes. Wherein is life,
etc. Ioh. 1.

PSALM CXXXV.
WHat was hard to suffer is now sweet to remember. Great is his goodness that
brings peace and redemption; and sweet and pleasant is his name, that has
made chois of the Church, and has pleasure in them, and gives them their
inheritance, and defends and comfort them: and a good and sweet hearing it
is, that he has brought them out of slave^y, into the Elysian feeld^s of
salvation and saveed them: and this by a transscendent power, meteoricall and
miraculous: by an invisible safety: setting his hand upon their Enimyes face,
as Psalm. 138. beclouding the Scriptures with an earthly sense, and making from
thence lightning of Sermons, for rain of doctrine, from one end of the world to
the other: as was the glittering of that coming of the son of Man, in power
and great glory; and to bring out the deep and hid sens out of his treasure, to
smite all the Kings of the earth, and astonish them; that there is no such God
among the heathen, of all their precious Idols which they follow, as Ps. 16.
and that he knows and confesses, that he which they serve, is the greatest
above Gods and Kings, and Lords, Ps. 95. and to be preferred only, and meet to
be chosen before all other gods. Therefore, because his doctrine is the tillage
and manureance of all the earth: we must sue unto the Word, the creator of our
understanding, which sees in secret and brings forth an op^n reward; no man
knowing the father but the son, and he, to whom the son will reveal him* And
therefore, he wishes, that all men would prais his name; especially his house
hold servantes, remaining in his courts, for his goodness; and chaunt out, for
the pleasantnes of his name, as Ps. 92. and that Israel, the Church and
Ministry, and all the Professors of of Godlynes, and all Jerusalem, may thank
him therefore, from Sion.

Constructium. Quoph, to compass: for the servants of God that are always
about him, dwelling in his house: 38000. 1. Cron. 23. Lamed, learned, or
doctrine: this is the name of God, Iah, or Jehovah, the Eternal, as one is for
the other in hallelujah. And according to the letters of the one, the other is
repeated: just fifteen times, for Iah, the term Jehovah, fifteen. And after
the fifteen Psalms of degrees. Hezek-jah shall see Jah, Iah, in the land of
the living, that is, fifteen years alive, Is. 38. The letter, He behold, that
is the presence of God: the clouds, and lightnings, and winds, present him,
his strokes upon his Enimyes, his signs, and deliverance, all markable.
Qualah, which contain all the letters, is to be light, and vile in repute, by
which he magnifyeth the power of God and vilifyeth the idols, that have no
aspiration or sound in their throat, like Iah, Psalm. 149. nor smiteing like
Iod, a hand. Mark the repetition.

Deuteronomy. The confession is continual praising and blessing of God and his
name, by the Ministry and whole Church of God. So sweet and pleasant, for the
benefit.

PSALM. CXXXVI.
He shows that all was don in the Creation, by intellectual power, and that
that high Godhead and sovereign Lordship only, did with his mighty hand, and
long reaching arm, all the wonderful works in the world, of his goodness and
his mercey, Psalm. 23. and his everlasting Kingdom of kindenes and compassion:
in cutting off the ungodly, and saveing of the Church: in thinking upon them in
their low estate, and settling them in their enimyes land, and provideing food
for all flesh, the unperishing food of his word: the searching whereof, is the
bread of eternal life, and an everlasting nuriture. So the wicked are visited
justly, for ignorant worship and workmanship, to the sowerth degree, of the
ungodly and disobedient: but his mercy is to last for thousands, even for ever,
to the Godly and obedient; rebellion against the word being a sin of witch
craft, and transgression, most wicked idolatry. There was no imagination
presented or propounded with it, but that all tricks and forms and fansyes of
man, wear vain and hateful, and abominable, Psalm. 119. S. For this Godhead of
understanding, being the God of all possiblity, and to whom nothing is
impossible or hard, but all his ways are secrets, and miraculous in the eyes
of man, whereby, all was made and facioned, and revealed, preserved and
maintened, and by perpetual judgment, defended and saveed: how absurd then is
the imploreing of senseless aid, against all rule of creation, and against the
Kingdom of grace prayed for? If he does the things which no man else does, why
believe they him not? if not for his own sake, yet for his works, he ought to
be believed in, and trusted unto. Therefore, that they worship that wonderful
Creator, defender and preserver, the God of heaven, that made the heaven and
the earth, the sea and all fountains for his infinite works of mercey, grace
and compassion, in his Kingdom, by his heavenly light of wisdom, reason and
knowledge, invented, disscerned and brought in frame: and not so placable Gods
of their own making wherein against all reason and understanding the Creature
is set in place of the Creator, and a man worshipeth what he will, and
contenteth himself as he will, which is most monstrous. For this invention
yields no correction, nor am^ndment, and is no part of the Kingdom prayed
for, seeing no obedience is due to the work of a man's own hands, no more then
the father should obey the child, or child^en lay up and provide for their
parents. Therefore, who so ever receives not the Kingdom of God, as a little
child, for correction and obedience; he shall not enter therinto.

Construction. Quoph, of Jaquaph, to compass, by kindenes ps. 32. worship and
adoreing of the ministers: tormentors the contrary. Lamed, for lerning, the
word of creation and preservation. The Eternal his existens is of so great
extent and power and wisdom by his ministry, that it masters all the gods, and
kings, and lords of the world, Deuteronomy. 10. Ex. 34. The diverse vowelling of
Jehovah used but once all the psalm, intends but rule and might: and mercy
ps. 102. repeated, according to the letters Jehovah, twenty six times. Vav, a
hook or crook, he brought them out, etc. he freed them from, etc. Lord, and
worship agree. Ier. 22. Ps. 8. Mark the repetition. The three letters make
quolo, his voice, or word, as Ps. 29.

Deuteronomy. the Ministers are set to prais and bless and worship, 1 Cro. 16.
so in the last psalm and this, the Eternal is the mighty Actor of salvation,
by his grace. Mark the first and last words, and the continual burden of the
song: for a rehearsal. Gods kindenes twenty six times repeated, according to
the number of 26, made up just by the letters of Jehovah.

PSALM CXXXVII.
IN this psalm, the Jews show care in pleasing God, rather than man; their
Creator, Redeemer, and Inductor, rather than their captiveer and suspender: for
either they will not sing at all, and hang up their harps; or if they will have
them to sing, it shall be that which they have little pleasure to hear, for
fear of taking Gods name in vain, and transgressing his will, in vain
rejoyceing, in their heavy season, against their hearts; or making their
enemies merry, with their sacred and good things, which God would not allow of.
So that after they have made it a hard thing to sing, for people in their case,
and harder to rejoice, with holy songs of Sion: and that they did not think it
meet to sing these holy things, among such hounds, in a strange and an enemies
land: yet that the name of Sion, and fame of Jerusalem, may not be forgotten by
them: they take down their harps and apply their fingers, and looss their tongs
from the rooffs of their mouths; to show, that all their joy and delight, was
in Jerusalem, and not with them; all their song is nothing but a bitter prayer
to God for a terrible revenge and payment upon them. That as the Edomites,
encouraged to destroy Jerusalem to the ground, to the utter ruin and
desolation of it: and no less could content them, and the destroying city
Babel; performd as much: that now, God would remember all their dealing, and
make them happy that should require them treble, ps. 94. with a merciless
revenge and destruction, upon them. that there may be no mercy to the merciless
or their children, but that it may pleas God, to dash them all in pieces
against the stones, with an utter confusion and destruction of them. And this,
lest they should transgress the third commandment, and displeas their God, at
their enemies request, to use his name unprofitabely, and deserv new
punishment, and disobey his known will, and be worse beaten than before, after
their return home. And because all pleasure is a kind of idolatry, but the true
and only worship of God; they will not pleas themselves nor their enemies, with
one word of their lips, ps. 16. nor shed one drop of prais, or sacrifice any
commendation to them at all.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: Captiveers, Inthraulers, hanging, taking.
Lamed, lerning: his tongue and hand shall be disused, and all cunning forgotten.
Babel is repeated for a town of confusion and destruction of learning, Genesis 11.
and Jerusalem for perfection, alludeing to both: mount Sion opposed to the
rivers also. So weeping and mirth, remembering etc. by Zain, to hear, by
singing, and Song: the sens and rule of relation: as the ears are the
daughters of songs. Eccl. 12. they shall be happy that pay the^ with confusion
that seek it, Obadiah* mark the repetitio^, you shall see the A. B. C.
confounded also by words of purpos under words of song, which is also verse: he
conceals a return or torment

Deuteronomy. Singing is here the act of repeating for a memorial. It shall be
life eternal to punish persecutors. So he has still mind of his wonderful
way of salvation. mark the repeating of these words: happy, repay, dealt, down
with it. etc.

PSALM CXXXVIII.
HEaring is the way to Christ, and Moses and the Prophets are the Doctors to
draw men unto him, for they shall be all taught of God; and this teaching and
hearing is the Sabbath work of refreshing and reviveing the miserable and
dead-comfortless soul of man, ps. 113. This is the food of the congregation,
the miraculous sustenance out of the Law and Testaments, that lasts from meal
to meal: with full cupbordes for ever, as ps. 144. That whereof every disciples
basket, and his store is blessed with increas: and for this is the day to be
kept holy and sanctified, for the presence of God and his word in it, that
sanctifyeth the hearers. Which presence if God vouchsafe not: the people are
forsaken and perish, for want of his kingdom. Now that in this psalm, he may
seem to sanctify the Sabbath, and to keep it holy: he lays down precisely
all the circumstance of his behavior, and the worship, and keeping of it; and
that most from ps. 92. that he may seem more capable of this food and
sanctifycation of the spirit: by the manner, the presence, the place the end
and the reason of all. As thus, he will worship God with all his heart, he will
chant him out before the gods and Angels, and judges, he throws himself
prostrate at his temple, he worships his Name for his loveing kindenes and his
faithfullnes; and that because he has made his promise greater than all his
Name, ps. 12. Now because his worship is so perfect: he desires to be heard
in the day and time of his calling, and that he would sustein, with great
strength, in his mind, and releev him largely. That all the kings of the world
might likewise worship God, when they have him and his words; and sing of his
ways and of his great glory, which are his miraculous and wonderful works of
kindenes: also of his promiss and faithfulness. Now because he is high, and
beholds the low and the mean ones: psalm. 113: and seeing he is lofty and
kenneth far, and his word finds men out every where: he prays now, that
God would bestow his heavenly food and bread of sustenance upon him. That as
we labor all the week to rest the sabbath: so that we may be fed in the
sabbath, to be able, to labor all the week. That is, that of a man in great
distress and in the midst of sorrows: he would make him a cheerful man, and
revive him; and being besieged round about with adversity, that he would lay
his hand upon his enemies face, and blindefold them, and by the prosperous and
dexterous right hand of his ministry, save him. And that God, who is the only
doer about him, and his kindenes is for ever: would not now forsake the works
of his own hands, and creatures of his Law; and that he would never fail them
with his kingdom that brings all things with it: but let him see the fulness,
and pleasure, and joy at his right hand, being his portion and cup and
inheritance ps, 16.116.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: the kindenes of God about him to strengthen
him in affliction gi^deth him. Mark Gnoz, and Zarrah seven seventies and 490:
ps. 25.34.119. see kindenes repeated, Ion. 2. Lamed, Lerning: is here a larger
extent of Gods Name: it is all his Law, and his word, and his work, and his
way, which is grace, and truth, that shines after him by effect, that with his
glory ps. 29. puts out his enemies eyes, and spieth the afflicted, being
never so deep or far from him, to releeve him. It commends the reading of
the Law, and Prophets, and for this the word saying, and Name, and hand is
repeated. Cheth, to prostrate, by bowing down etc. and lowly etc. all his
humble supplication and adoration in deep distress ps. 5. Is. 18. all the
letters qualach, from whence qualachah, a caldron, for affliction.

Deuteronomy. his daily worship and psalming in the Temple, can be nothing but
of his mervilous acts of grace toward his church and creatures, and of the
life of the word that feeds them, and disgrace to his enemies Ier. 20. Mark
the word worship, for a repetition or confession. He fullfilleth all his
saying, and all by his saying.

PSALM CXXXIX.
IN this psalm beginning with Trespass: he shows by the stones of trial,
in the brestplate of judgment, described, as ps. 149. by the law, is a man's
life spanned out, and made square every way, that God is made privy to them
all. If it be in position: by lyeing down, and riseing up, he knows their
miscarriage therein. If it be in their travail, or their rest: he keeps
round about all their ways, and pryeth into every trick of them. If it be in
speech or language, he knows every word. He besets them round about, they
cannot go forth nor back, but his hand is upon them: which is their conscience
of sin against the law, which he calls a wonderful, and a higher knowledge
than he can attain unto. from the sight of which trespass and conscience of
sin: because there is no escapeing: neither in heaven; nor hell, nor beyond
sea, nor in the dark: whatsoever he committeeth by imagination or worship: but
he is every where with them, and always in sight of them: and he can no way
out-goe him or hide from him, nay that God possessed his reins before he was
born: and because he was fearfully hidden, and he knew that his works were
wonderful, and that he saw his bones though they were made in secret: and
that he was set together under the earth: and his clue, and windeing: and his
days recorded before he was born: now for this he devides himself from the
wicked, deerly, to think of God* as a father; and to worship and honor him for
his creation, and that his cheeff and dearest and most honorable thoughts are
mighty and wonderful many of him; even above the sand of the sea in number,
seeing as long as he is awake, he is never out of mind of him. He will have
no fellowship with any wickedness, with such as rebel and ris^ against God, in
falls and vain imagination, and idolatrous trespass. Ps. 119. S. And thoroughly
hates all the enemies of God, and they to him, are for deadly Enimyes. And all
the sinister side for Sin, ps. 109.119. sh. and has God on his right hand, as
ps. 16. to show his conversion, repentance, and amendment. Now seeing nothing
can be hid from God, and from his all seeing presence in his Law, and
conscience, but they shall be visited to the third and fourth generation: he
prays to be searcheed, and his heart and thoughts to be tried, and known
thoroughly, to see, if there be any way or work of idolatry or sorrowful
trespass in him. If there be, that he would lead him the way and work of
eternity, and amendment of life, and forgive him. And this is a resurrection
which the Law performs, by long looking into the hearts and consciences of
men, to restore them and deliver them, out of the bonds of sin, and death, and
hell, and the devil, and from all slavery, wherinto they are sunk by offenses;
if there be any spark of grace left in their hearts: and that they be not given
over to a reprobate sens: And for this the Prophet is in hope never to see
corruption, but by amendment to come to life and joy eternal.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: he is both without and within every where,
and at all times: that by any means nothing can be hid from him, or is hard to
him: and this, according to Lamed, the second letter, is a wonderful
knowledge, and beyond his capacity, that he cannot be deceived therefore he
prays God the Almighty to search his heart if it honored him aright: Is. 29.
Ier. 16. Being always mindful of him, and in love with him, and in
detestation of the wicked: that he would kill the wicked, and cut off his
days, for his guiltiness: and not shorten his in the land, the word kill has
the number of the psalm, in the letters quatal, 139. Tet, clay, he shows
that he rises not against his maker, Is. 29. but is always a most zealous
champion for him, the word vex, and raise, etc. in the Hebrw, intend no less,
Honey soit qui mal y pense, he means no sorrow, therefore he would fain be
blessed: By the old way, Ier. 6.22. Mark all the repetitions. Qualat, all the
letters, to shrink, or retire, as for refuge, as miqlat, Num^ 35. Is. 20. etc,
there is no sanctuary to fly from God.

Deuteronomy. He is heerupon the everlastingnes of Gods way, called the old
and ancient way: Ier. 6.22. that is incorrupt, that is truth, and life for
ever: Ioh. 12. the way that shall not fail, ps. 1. opposed to the way of
sorrow, ps. 16. of the cross, and pervers. Mark the repetition, and this
serves for a confession, as he lays himself open unto God.

PSALM CXL.
He shows here, wherein murder consists; as in temptation: and that in
injury and contention, and that in w^ath, and that in the heart, the tongue and
the hands, and all villainous practices, and that with exceeding spite and
malice, and choler: so that their hearts invent mischeeff, and they inhabit
wars, and dwell always in contention: with sharp and stinging tongues, and
poisoned lips like serpents. That whatsoever they say, does by intent,
maliciously kill, with words of malignity. Another part of Temptation is
practice, and plots to destroy him in all his courses, to meet with him in all
his ways, wherever he goes, by watching opportunity to trip him and entrap
him. the way he goes, the life he leads, the work he exercises, or the
thing he desires: for which the Divil has sundry baits to make men fall,
and the tempters be the haughty and proud men of the world. Now that he seeeth
that all is injury and injustice, and the root of all, malignity of the heart,
and fierceness of wrath against him: he makes this suite to God, that he
would not fulfill the lusts of the wicked man, nor content him in his
purposes, to make him proud. And as he had been always his helmet, and the
invironing salvation of his head: so he prays that the mischeeff of their
lips, and bitter curses may light upon themselves, and that God would forbid
them, and deliver him from their hands, that he be not tempted by them. And
as they seek to slay by anger and wrath: So that the judgment of a counsel
may condemn them, and men may cast coals of wrath upon them, and cast them into
the fire, and hot burning embers, even into hell fire; that they never rise
again, that an ill and an injurious tongue may not be established in the earth,
but hunt himself to destruction; because he is sure, that God will right the
afflicted and needy in their sentence and judgment. And the just and upright
shall be preserved, to worship him and call upon his Name, and remain for ever
before him, Ps. 9.14.53.149.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or invireon: to watch and ward, as 2. King.
11. by the words keep, and preserve, and releas, and deliver from etc. Mem,
waters: the corrupt world, Genesis 6. Ps. 9.101. wicked studies, and wicked hands,
and wicked tongues, and all for wars, and strife: such as make debate. Quom,
both the letters, to stand, or rise. the prayer is, that they may neither:
because none but just and upright men are reserved. Consider the doubling of
these words: preserv, keep, malicious, injurious, mischeeff, heart and mind,
meditate, devise, wars, tongue, lips, hands, and the relation, all words of
justice and judgment together. The vowells of Jehovah, are turned to the
vowells of Elohim, for his office of judgment and revenge, and executeing of
justice for his servants. He shows Quoum, an insurrection, and all the
manner: he prays for deliverance from them, and condemnation to them, because
in fiery malice they rise: they may be buried in fire, that they may never
rise, that the just only and upright may stand up and abide: because their
thoughts be on fire that they may never be sufficed, and no water may quench
them. Mark the many Mems, for water in that verse of his judgment and his
thoughts. None of refreshing, but all of affliction: that their thoughts and
studyes may afflict them.

Deuteronomy. It shows not here the way of life, but of death, Deuteronomy. 30. the
contrary: such as was the corruption of the old world that perish, and of the
wrath of the serpent, to be ruined, the way of sorrow, as in the last psalm;
which is killing by temptation and vexation: a cursed way. His prayer serves
for a confession.

PSALM CXLI.
AS sweet meats have sower saw^e: so there be no dishes so dainty as
temptations; and no such baits as rankest poison. Now seeing, in this Psalm,
that their bones, are not only brokeen with temptation, but lie at the graves
side, as chips and clifts by the saw-pits-side, of the hewer and squareer: and
he is in prayer while they are in their mischeeff: and that he calls upon
God and his eyes are ever bent unto him: and he trusts in him: he now
prays, that he would with speed, hearken unto him, and take his prayer for
an evening sacrifice, Ephesians. 4. And seeing the tongue is that unrulely evil of
provocation, and that which sets all the world on fire, as in the last
Psalm, and is so forward and so full of poison: that God would lock up his
lips, and guard his mouth, that nothing of temptation or ill matter pass by
them, from his heart, in the way of wickedness or slander; and that their deinty
messes entice him not, nor bewitch him to transgress; but that the just man
should instruct him in love, though it be with stripes, rather to bring the
precious oil of the Kingdom of heaven upon his head, and crown him with
celestial understanding, of joy above his fellows, as Psalm. 45. That their
defenders and deliverers may not have a word to say, but be strooken as silent
and dumb as a stone, to hea^ken to the sweetness of his words, which is, for
the Justice, and equity of the matter, like sine pom-granats and aples of gold,
that the righteousness of the P^ists lips might ring: that though his bones lie
so nigh the pit: yet because his trust is only in God, and his eyes are
always upon him: that he would not strip him out of all, and overthrow him,
and deprive him by it, but that he would keep him out of all the snares of the
workers of greeff and molestation, and temptation, which they lay for him;
which are every hour, as an open pit ready to swallow him: and that the
wicked, may justly fall into the meashes of their own nets, and into the pit
of their own making. While he escapes, and has his issue out of temptation,
and is delivered.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: or stand or set about: as a watch and ward
to his mouth. 2. Cor. 11. or deinty meats. Mem, waters: for the waters of
Idolatry opposed to the pleasant and sweet waters of the Law of God, Ps. 16.36.
etc. taken here for adultry. He shows the way of it by the mouth, the heart,
the hands, and snares, and fruit of it. And that all is sorrow, as the corrupt
calling upon God, Genesis 4. By Cains posterity. And should deserv to be stoneed,
Ezech. 16.22. Lev. 18. Is. 37. Deuteronomy. 7.19. he prays to be righted: though
he feel it, and smart for it. And this from Aleph, to instruct. That his wits
be not confounded by her, nor his strength ill bestowed, being so nighe
perishing. He prays, their judges or Gods may be smitten, etc. so he
intends the destruction of all their trust, by the pureitey of his prayers,
and Gods acceptance of him. He sacrifyeeth by prayer, as Psalm. 50. all is for
Instruction, against Instruction. Mark the number of repetitions.

Deuteronomy. He shows another way of declineing, and missing of Eternal
life, as Math. 19. by spiritual adultery. And as he handles yet the word and
name of God: so here he terms their Gods and Idols, judges, as Psalm. 82. and
for the certainty heerof, is Jehovah, made Iehovih, and vowelled like Elohim,
which is judgment, that property of God. His calling and prayer serves for
confession and recitation, as Psalm. 50.91.

PSALM CXLII.
There is no such theeft as to take men from the service and Altar of God, Psalm.
26. Now to be applied properly to this Psalm: seeing all persecution is
theeft and robbery: and because David was now chaseed by Saul into the Cave,
Psalm. 143. he finds a way of excerciseing his Kingdom of patience, as if he
should say: blessed are they when men revile them, and persecute them; to steal
away their good name, or rob them of their liberty or substance: speaking all
manner of evil against them, for Gods sake falsely, Math. 5. for then great is
their reward: and not to resist evil. And this is that which David waits for,
for his singular patience and suffering, not seeking any revenge, or
restitution, or amends: and he will not seek to mend his portion in this life,
but that God and his rely, and his Kingdom shall be all circumscription
thereof, to wall him in, and confine him, and content him. And thus he sticks
fast to the mercy of God, because all kingdom is his, and serves for a reproof
for Saul, and a comfort for himself. Therefore being now in a disperate case and
in great distress: that his spirit fainted, and that he was intrapped in all
his courses: and snares laid for him, which way soever he went: and that there
is no refuge at his right hand to be found: or any man at all to distinguish or
entertain him: or any bosom to receive him: or to disscern or help him: or
that careeth for him, to save his life: he now cries unto God, and beseeches
him, making him his portion, and setting him at his right hand, as Psalm. 16.
that considering his great poverty of distress, he would hearken to him and
deliver him from his persecutors, seeing they were too strong for him: and that
he would enlarge him, and make it a wonderful and bountiful deliverance,
that being shod with the Gospel, he may worship his name, with the just
ones, for so great a reward upon him.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: as distress, seege and want of succor about
him, naked in the cave, Psalm. 141. He would feign have the congregation about
him, etc. and be at liberty to serve God and repair to him. Mem, waters: which
are affliction, Psalm. 124. Beth, a house: bring out of hold, etc. repetitions
are not only here but argument of theft: by the letter He, behold: because all
stealing is privily, Ioh. 10. diverse sorts of He-es, do appeer, as curiously
in the word, go, Psalm. 143. and liveing, and bring out, etc for curiosity and
rareitey intimates as well as repetition. And the whole Psalm is indicative.
He bewrayes all to God, that they should not steal his servant, Deuteronomy. 24. Is.
42. willed Psalm. 50.91. Mark the repitition. Voice, cry, Eternal, to thee,
before him, life or person. So power out, tell, look, see, acquaintance,
present or absent, worship, etc. with the contrary: hide, overcom or faint,
hold. etc.

Deuteronomy. He, confesses his wonderful distress: and prays for
deliverance, that they make not a prey of Gods servant. That he may have
matter to worship his name, for his bounty, which serves for a memorial of
his mercy, and way of life in his word, which is in crossing of theeft.

PSALM. CXLIII.
He prays, not to be called to account or strictly examined, lest he be
condemned, of the breach of this commandment. For the keeping of which: he
propounds to himself, to depart from evil, as Psalm. 37. and that as far as
he can go, which he makeeth the resisting of the Divill, that he may fly
from him. And shows that in all his perplexity and adversity, being chased
by his Enemy into the ground, as Ps. 142. and to obscure dwelling, like as if
he were dead: and feeling faintnes of heart, and all his courage and spirit
spent: and his heart by guiltynes wasteed and shivered within him: that he
recedes now, as far from falls testimony against his neighbor, as he can
devise: which is, to the rememebrance of the ancient kindenes, and wonderful
works of Gods hands, as Psalm. 118. and to a meditation, witness and true
testimony of them, and to tell of them: to study the Scriptures for his comfort
and to keep them in mind, and bear record of them; which is the opposition,
which he propounds, and this with a great longing. Therefore, that now, when
his spirit is so nigh spent, and himself almost at the grave with greeff: and
that he truststeth in God, and makes all his Kingdom the righteousness thereof:
he now requesteth that he would hear him, and answer him therewith, and
whisper him in the ear by his word, and teach him the way of deliverance from
his Enimyes, and to do his will. And because he is his servant: that by his
good spirit, God will still lead him in plain ground, and by this means bring
him out of all distress and destroy his Enimyes, and for his names sake revive
him: and that he would grant him this kindenes with speed, and not to hide
his face, and the understanding of his law from him, and confound him. This
power is such as Christ gave to his Disciples over unclean spirits, to cast
them out, and to heal all disseases, that is, to purge and rid men of all ill
conversation of life, by their doctrine, speaking by the spirit of the father,
the word, and addressing them to the keeping of the commandments; which is the
power of the Kingdom and government here prayed for. If I cast out divills by
the spirit of God: then is the Kingdom of God com unto you.

Construction. Quoph, to compass: by the words distress, and torment, and
loveing kindenes, and supplication, etc. Mem, waters, for doctrine: teach me,
lead me, revive me, let me hear, let me know, hide not thy face, hear,
consider, meditate, remember, talk, etc. For an Enemy: pursue or flood or
persecution. Ghimel, a reward, loving kindenes, servant, Psalm. 62. He
chalengeth much because of his service of him, his instruction to him, and
destruction to his Enimyes, and heerunto is Enemy opposeed. Mark all his works,
how they witness nothing but desolation, body and mind. God must testify by his
grace and favor to him in his deliverance. Mark all the repetitions. Eternal,
hear, righteousness, consider, servant, liveing, Enemy, soul, ground, spirit,
doing, hands, unto thee, distress, etc. He prays God to cut off his
working, by his way of righteousness, opposed to falsehood. Causes why, upon
Ghimel, to reward, hear or answer, twenty six, according to the letters of
Jehovah.

Deuteronomy. He shows himself to be a sound profession before God, and
diligent in all the employment of godlynes, and prays for the fruit and
testimony of the way of godlynes, and the liveing way and everlasting, life: by
finding the mercyes and favor of God, upon him, by his instruction; as men's
works witness of them, Ioh. 5.8.10. and this for a confession also, to cross
falls testimony.

PSALM. CXLIV.
Because his servants life and his house is so greedily coveted: he prays God
to take it to heart, and with a furious judgment, to descend to deliver him
from these uncircumcised tongues and hands, of the separate ones, and aliens
from his glory or wealth, called great waters. That according to Psalm. 92. he
may set the ten stringed violl to work with a new song; a song of judgment and
grace, as Psalm. 101. by saveing of Kings, by his servant, from the hurtful
sword, according to his precept: thou shall not covet his servant, etc. that
seeing the commandments be out, he may beginn, with the Petaroth of
judgments, laws and statutes of condemnation and justification: the Vrim and
Thummim, or the two hills, and brefts of the Priests. That so great a glory of
Israel and the Church should not be extinguished. That all estates might have
their full utility, plenty and ripenes: that their sonns and daughters may be
safe, without any ravenous or untimely covet or stealth, to grow up well
educateed, and neatly, and gloriously facioned and edifyed in their youth, in
the fear of God. And this for his manservant, and his maid servant, bec^us
Gods servants are his Children. That their cup-bord may never be empty, and
that their sheep may be infinite many, increased in their streets, and the ox
and the ass, with their daily burdens of wealth and store: without any
freebooting or robbery or covetous filching, or wrangling, or violent stealing,
or cause of out cry among them. This he counts a most glorious and happy
estate of all, with whom it thus fares, and whose God and neighbor the
everlasting is: against whom there is no prevailing; and when the child and
hous-hold servants of God, do flowrish, and are well replenished, like Temples
of holiness. So as men are commanded to do good, especially to them of the
hous-hold of faith: so here* the strictest forbidding of Covet is, that the
Godly may enjoy their quiet and their labors, as Ps. 128. whithout deprivation
or disturbance, that God would bow the heavens and decline the Scriptures and
touch the mountains and Kingdoms and nations therewith, that they may smoke
again, with the condemnation and firey judgment of them. And that he would
blast them and dispers them, and with terrible arrows of his lightning destroy
the Churches Enimyes. And deliver his servantes from them. Because all means of
deliverance, and way of salvation is his, to rely on, the shield of faith. That
he takeeth notice of the Church and Ark of Noah under the person of Adam, whose
days, are 930. And keeps such computation of it, as in the word Tsel, 930, a
shadow most like to vanity, and this agrees with the posterity of the just in
the termn Shalom, 930 years, Psalm. 37. This Psalm keeps the square of the
Church the length and breadth to be one, Ezech. 41. Apoc. 7.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or inviron: is here the great waters of
falsehood and injury of strangers, that are opposite to all vicinity and good
society, Ps. 18.22. Ioh. 2. Also by all parts of his fortification: defense and
safety, and Gods mercy about him. Mem, waters: his heavens, or waters above the
firmament, lightning Gods Arrows, Zach. 9. Gods hands and messages and
judgments, Kings, montaines. Mem final is 600. and that number is in the
letters Shequer, falsehood or wrong. Waters for people abundance or wealthy
estate, war or doctrine of deliverance. Daleth, a door. Doors of heaven, Ps.
78. By breaking in, running out, streats, without doors, etc. Math. 6. Ioh.
10. The effect of all is condemnation opposed to felicity: how void of damage
and hurt all neighbor hood should be, ps. 15. And how improper and
improsperous all covet is but God only. Mark all the repetition: blessed,
happy, hands, fingers, war, battle, people, man, heavens, highthes, waters,
lightnings, arrows, hands, scatter, Kings, mountains, send, rid or open,
deliver, falsehood, wrong. Alians, mouth, etc. sing, song, Psalm, salvation and
hurtful one, in respect of the other, sons, buttersses, buttryes, Zach. 9.
meat, thousands, cattle, with other relations.

Deuteronomy. He makes here happynes the eternity, which only consists in
relyeing in God. That saves him, that he can not be hurt, nor suffer any
depriveing by foreiners at all. He reckons up Gods safeguard, and his gracees
to him, for a confession, and sings his deliverance. The fathers before the
flood: their long lives: and desolation of the Church: quite overwhelmed, with
the waters of war, as Dan. 9. strangeers and falsehood, beast, Apoc. 13.

PSALM CXLV.
TO sum up the Lords prayer and petition, which holds out after the
commandments; in one word: which is the Kingdom of heaven and power and glory
thereof. He shows, because the greatness of God far passes all magnificence
and his estimablenes far beyond all examination, Ps. 50. For his pity and
compassion, for his long patience, and great benignity and kindenes: for his
goodness and mercyes to and over all his works: because his Kingdom and power
and glory is eternal: for susteining them that are falling and in decay, and
setting upright them that are declineing, and giving all things their meat in
due time: and liberally and freely, and bountifully satisfyeing all living
creatures with his open hands. For his justice in all his ways, and kindenes
upon all his creatures of his Church: for his neernes to them that call upon
him faithfully, by performing what soever they request, and hearing them and
saveing them: and destroying all the wicked, as Psalm. 92. That therefore, seeing
this Kingdom is of this kind of heavenly operation, and not of the world;
which is the seed of the word sown in the heart of man to govern him; he now
as in the conclusions of all the rest of the books, exalts greatly this God
and King of his, and blesses his name, and the calling upon him for ever and
ever. Which exaltation, and hallowing of his Name is a new work after the
petition is ended, to finish all, which shall last for ever, as Psalm. 111, for
making him sundry ways ripe in the word of God, and cherishing him therewith,
for setting him in the doctrine that lasts for ever and ever. That ever
generation from the beginning to the end might prais his works and the power
thereof. And that he will esteem the glory of his worshipp, and tell of his
wonderful acts, by the mystery of the priesthood, and that they may speak of,
and confess the reverendnes, and the strength of all his worship, as Psa. 92,
and mighty terrors, ps. 90. He has thus reckoned his magnificence and
greatness; that all his works and holy creatures might confess him, and bless
him and tell out his glory ps. 57. and speak of his power, to make known to all
the children of men, his powers and most inestimable glory of his kingdom, that
all eyes do wait for, for their food of wisdom and understanding which is never
out of season, ps. 1. For which he would that his mouth should always speak
Gods prais, and all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

Construction. Quoph, of Jaquaph, to compass, or circuit, as 1. K. 7. Heerto
he brings the greatness of his mercy and huge extent of his kingdom and
power, and glory thereof: by his infinite working without all circuit or bounds,
to receive all that call. Mem, waters, for a kingdom, rule and domination Is.
8. the king is Jehovah, as ps. 24. by the curious taking of the letters of his
name in a new spelling of Jehovah, for Iod He, and Vav, his miracles, glory and
mercy, the salvation is, the Scriptures, for his kingdom of drawing and
allureing, when men hear and read, and are ruled by them, which is the calling
upon them and serching them, drawing and governing Ier. 31. Is. 54. Io. 6.
behold for the admirable glory and shineing of it, in all his creatures, as by
all words of utterance and declaration. Quamah, to stand or endure: for the
eternity, perfection, and infinite stature of his name for his exaltation, and
therefore the defective letter Nun, or N. is left out of the row of the A. B.C.
also Quamah, for a field of standing corn. Mark the doubleing of the words in
all.

Deuteronomy. The confession is the continueing of words of declartion of his
acts of eternal life, and wonderful kindenes, and way, and works of
salvation and exaltation of his name. Mark the repetition.

PSALM CXLVI.
IN this psalm he considers that he will make his confidence sure, and
then spend all his life in prais and psalms unto his God, as ps. 92. Therefore
taking away all vanity of worldly confidence; he seeks the heavenly
happiness thereof; that the God of Sion and the Church, and his righteousness is
to reign for ever, and to be exalted and praised. Therefore here, as ps. 118.
he wills not to trust in unchariritable princes or any human men, which know
not the high wisdom of God, nor the depth of the mystery thereof, determined
for the glory and safety of the Church, which have no salvation or help in
them; that by and by consume and turn to earth, as soon as the breath is out of
them, and in the same day, all their estimation and reputation and thoughts are
at an end and perish: he now shows a more than fleshly revelation, to them
that love him, that is the godly, of a sound rock to build upon; that
spiritual things must be set to spiritual things, our faith in spiritual
charity, because God is spirit, and this a healing faith: he commends greatly
the beleeff in God and his word, the Creator, maintainer and restorer of all
things, and the happiness of him that reposeeth all his help and hope in him,
setting him forth by his heavenly properties. Tell John what things ye have
seen, a preserver of truth, and keeper of faithfullnes for ever, a Releever of
the oppressed, and a graunter of his request, and a righter of their cause, a
feeder of them that hunger for him, a resolver of all that be tied in ignorance
and doubt or haesitation, a giver of sight and knowledge to the blind and
unlearned, and a streighter and director of them that be of a wrong and a
crooked opinion, or lame and declining in their understanding, and a lover of
them that be right, and most charitablely preserves strangers with
hospitality, and mainteineth parents for orphans, and husbands for widows, as
ps. 68. and a perverter and crosser of all the ways, and works of wicked men,
as ps. 1, that they may perpetually be seen to perish, and com to naught: the
everlasting God and his most charitable word of righteousness, the God of Sion
that reigns and helps for ever, for all ages, and throghout all
generations. And thus much concerning a right beleeff and confidence, as in the
15 psalms of deg^ees, as upon the end of the petition.

Construction. Quoph, to compass, he keeps, 2 Kin. 11 salvation for walls
Is. 26. faith salveth, thy faith has made thee whole etc. Mem waters, Lam. 3.
G. the working doctrine of the Kingdom, of the king and God Jehovah, Eternal:
the works of righteousness and great works of God, by the word doing and
making, for his mighty reforming of all sorts, Is. 42. Mark the repetition,
for one part of the kingdom. Vau, a hook, or crook: faith, hope, and love, for
affection and appetite, the distinction, and opposition of his trust. The tree
letters, Quomo, are for the raiser and comforter, Is. 26.42. the opposition is
God and man, the one a releever, and a reformer of the godly of all sorts Am,
7. and the other a decayer Is. 2. God is an everlasting erecter and helper, of
his, and an overthrower of the wicked. Mark the repetition.

Deuteronomy. The praising and blessing of the Eternal, does intend his
miraculous Acts, and works of eternity, and of the kingdom expressed, and way
of eternal life, for a confession, celebration or rehearsal.

PSALM CXLVII.
BEcause Gods prais is so desirable a thing, and so comely: and God so good
and so pleasant: for building Jerusalem, as a nest for his Saints, and a
Synagogue of all the Church. to salve all their dispersion, and cure their
broken har^s, and bindeing up their grief; keeping the number of all his starts
and ministers, in the book of life, and making a catalogue of them: because
their lord is of great power, and of infinite understanding, continueing the
lowly: making the weakest to last longest, and humbling the wicked, and
proudest and strongest to the ground: for covering the heavens of understanding
with parabolicall clouds, and making lerning to rain on the earth, and grass
and food for all creatures that call for it: and has his only delight and
pleasure in them that fear him and wait for his kindenes, and not in man's
desires or humane delights, as ps. 37.33. Because he has made their city,
strong gates of salvation, by the doctrine of the Prophets to keep it, as ps.
127 and blessed their children with the comfort of the word of God, within it,
as ps. 28.29. and peace and plenty of fine wheat flower, in all her borders;
sending out his word and servants, that most speedily runn through the whole
land; that when a winter season of frost and snow, and hard clumpers of ice are
cast out, to possess the intractable hearts of men, to correct the stubbornnes
of man, and to mollify their hardness, and to make them more fruitful, and to
add strength unto them for increas and multiplication of them: he by and by,
sends his spirit, the south and warm wind of his word, and thaweth them, and
they yield doctrine, that no other nation should know his judgments: which
follow properly after the commandments, as just payments for the breaches of
them, and a perfect recompens of all men's works, giveing them weight for
weight, and measure for measure. Therefore according to ps. 92. he wills to
prais God, and chant out his prais. and because his wisdom in this psalm is so
infinitely set out, as his special property: here he ascribes that unto him,
and wills, that they sing psalms to him with thanks, on the harp, ps. 92, and
that Jerusalem and Sion above all, should commend and prais him: for their so
great benefit for the service of him, ps. 92. Furthermore, having done with
the preacher, he comes now to the sermon, which is, righteosnes, and this is
the content of all the Scriptures and sum of them, the word of God and sword
of the spirit, which he handles, ps. 141^ Therefore, in this psalm he
reckoneeth the books of the bible, as Ovid reckoned the books of Virgill, Am.
Eleg. 15. then fo this work and authority: and first, the five books of the
Law, then the first Prophets, containing Iosuah, Judges, Samuel, and Kings, the
charets and horsemen of Israel, and lastly the sixteen last Prophets, the strong
bars of the city gates of Jerusalem, as ps. 127. the garrison of peace in
their borders, and plentiful provision of chois blessings within it, with
sweet annotations for mention of them, wherein he shows, that although God
has given the church the cup of his wrath to taste, and sent them the hard
weather of his swift judgment by the law of condemnation, and making their
hearts as cold as hard as a stone: yet turning the wind about, there comes a
thaw of comfortable doctrine, out of the Prophets to save them. So that the
whole Scriptures and scope of them, and the judgments and prescripts and
comfort and salvation, being only known unto the Church: all the world could
not compare with them, as ps. 47. And heerin is the pleasantnes and sweetness of
the everlasting. And this is a most seemly prais, and that which best becomes
Preachers, and that which they are bound unto.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or invireon, by the building of Jerusalem, by
the walls, borders, and limits that contein them. Lam. 3. g. seeing the
termination of the word, Jerusalem, is peace, another part of the kingdom. Mark
the doubling of the word, kinds of compassing, gathering, bindeing, and
summing or telling, etc. Scatter. Mem, waters, his saying, word, prescripts,
judgments, sending, drop, waters, rain, thaweth, snow, frost, ice, and cold
for properties. Zain, to hear: or make to hear, by the coactive sens: and this
is by words of declaration, tell, number, declare, all, doubled. His hearing is
by contenting them that call, and giveing them daily food and sustenance of the
word: Miqra, the Scripture, and accepting of them. Mat. 6.4. to them that he
delighteeth in, and wait for his kindenes. Mark the doubling and definition:
bread, wheatenflower, morsels, etc. according to Quemach the number of the next
psalm which is flower or meal.

Deuteronomy. The confession here is in all kinds of words of prais and
commendation of the eternal, in three places of the psalm. For his sundry acts
of his way of eternal life, in sundry manners, by Jerusalem. for his goodness
to them and especial regard of them. Mark the doubling.

PSALM CXLVIII.
IN this psalm, because Gods words and commandments have formed them, and made
them that they are; he wills that of right, and by good reason, they should
all creatures in the world, do his commandment and set forth his prais, out of
heaven in the highest, as ps. 92. and that he wills his angels and ministers
of his church, and all the army of them, being the whole host of heaven, and
heavenly sanctuary to do. And out of the earth, all the instruments and organs
of his wrath ps. 72.18. that are his executioners, as in the Revelation. that
they prais him, the great mountains and kingdoms of the world. the most
glorious trees, and liveing creatures, to prais and commend his creation, and
the installing of man to a second and a better wisdom, of repentance and
amendment of life, and reformation and regeneraon of the Church of God, that
brings still their salvation: and all sorts of people to do the same. Because
his name only is to be exalted, and his worship spread, above and over all
the earth, and the heaven, and all ^lements, psalm. 68. for exalting the church.
For now is salvation in heaven, by a clear judgment and separation of the
clean from the unclean, and just to life, and the unjust to damnation, by his
message of ill angels, ps. 90. the whirling and side-long wheels of Gods angry
judgment, Is. 5. Ezekiel. 10. Like tempestuous whirlwindes from the creation Genesis
1. That all the stars of the ministry should prais God, out of the Scriptures
in lofty styles, for their glorious creation, and limitation from the Law, even
the angels that sail above the heavens, in the waters thereof, as Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob and the tribes, Moses, and Aaron, and the Levites; and all low
degreees of crea^ures (either by sin or destiny) to prais him by subjection:
and the kings, and judges, in the person of Adam, reigning and ruleing over all
things liveing, and therefore were they to prais him. Young men and maids;
because he was created male and female. Old folks and children: by their
fructifying and multiplication of a godly seed, from the word, Increas and
Multiply. And in this, because Israel was best entertained, and the nearest
people to him, and had all preferment: that his worship and exaltation of his
name should in no wise be neglected of them his Saints, for ever.

Construction. Quoph, to compass or to inviron, as with the cloak of prais, Is.
61. from all his creatures and his dwelling in praises and inhabiting of them.
Ps. 22. that all his works, and especially his people Israel, and his
messengers nearest about him, for his exaltation of them, should inviron him
with prais. Apoc. 19.4. Mark the words, highthes, hold up, above, exalt,
doubled, Jehovah, only. Mem, waters. The name of the Eternal to be praised,
before and above heaven and earth, and all the most commendable things of the
world, because they were made and exalted by him. He works upon the term
Jehovah, By all the moods and tenses in the Hebrew, how he was imperative,
future: and infinite: and never preterite and transitory: according to the
present tens, Hove, Jehovah, he shall be and remain for ever, in his works
and decrees, ps. 119^ and therefore is called Eternal. The waters, all kind of
nations, kinds, and degrees. Mark people, heaven, earth, etc. The name is six
times for six days work. He is to prais the name of Jehovah; and that he
does in the term Hu, the affix of Jehovah, as Elihu, Abihu, which two letters
in number make just the repetition of the word prais. Heth, to prostrate, is
employed in the adoration, and exaltation and worship of him, and casting down
their crowns before him. Apoc. 4. Quemach, meal, for all sorts. Persius sat.
3.5.

Deuteronomy. Infinite praises and worship, is due to him, for leaving so many
commendations behind him in his works of all sorts, ps. 11 1. and this must
needs be confessed a work of great mercy and kindenes also, and way of
eternal life.

PSALM CXLIX.
NOw that the judgment may be the clear, he makes this Psalm a copula or
Medium, suitable to the former, last gone before. To tell this judgment, was
the work of all the Prophets until John, and then, this kingdom was takeen by
violence and force, and men pressed unto it. So that now, after all places of
invention, he now comes to a collection or syllogizeing of the whole work by
the judicial part, for ever unconfuteable. That God that made the world,
should judge the same: by sound confirmations, consequences, and proprietyes
and rightes and laws, according to the power of his name Eloah, and Elohim, of
Alah to swear, to do judgment and justice and right: and to perform the oath
which he swear, to be a perpetual redemption to his Church, Psalm. 110. and a
glory to his people Israel, with a reprooveing of all injury and injustice of
the reprobate. So the end is com, the end is com (as the Prophet says) and
Satan with all his perversity and adversity, with all his malice and falsehood,
and subdolity and treachery is judged, and the day of wrath is com, and he is
discovered and overcom, and cast down and condemned for his cotinuall
persecution of the Church. For this benefit, they are greatly to prais his
name, and sing Psalms to him in honor of his name, and make invocation
thereupon, that has don all for them: for reprooving confuteing and tormenting,
all their adversaryes, and cheeff of them, and that the Saints for this peace
should leap up in their beds for joy, and make a glorious exaltation, and
triumph, for this great day of victory and salvation, with accents of
exaltations and high praises of God, and choice songs in their throats: and a
sharp sword in their hands lyeing by them, to show their means of deliverance
and courage and valor and preparation of the word of God, their defendour,
that whispers in the ears of all men and warns them. Heerto belong the
fignified virtues in the apparel of the Priesthood, that they may be happy
whom the Eternal, the God of justice chargeeth not with iniquity, Psalm. 32. So
that now it is in vain for to strive, as Psalm. 2. or the Kings and heads, to
think of casting away the cords, and bands of their yokes of subjection to
the Church: for he has appointed his King over Sion, and his horn and his
anointed, and his prais, as Psalm. 141.92.86. God has still favored them that
fear him, and planted a gardine of pleasure for them, that he has begotten: a
paradise of safety and salvation for his children, and has appointed his
Angels and Ministers to pitch about them, as. Ps. 34. King of Jacob, Is. 41.43.
Ier. 8. to keep and preserve the way of righteousness in this life, the tree of
their lives in holiness. And with this grace has God clotheed his saints while
their Enimyes, are judged, as ps. 2.92.79. and for this ornament and Paradise
and comely weed of salvation, the skinn that covers all nakedness, that has no
cloud of shames upon it, no spot or wrinkle in it, Ephesians. 5. That his saints
should prais him, in their congregation, with a sonet of all confidence, as ps.
118.

Construction. Quoph, to compass, or inviron, as the gracious ones, Israel and
the children of Sion, in praising of him. with Joy in the holy Ghost, another
part of the Kingdom, ps: 145. in commendation of Iah, their King and makeer,
Is. 53.22.41.43. Ier. 8. ps. 29.48.24. by the spiritual and gutturall sound
and prononciation of Jehovah, psalm. 115.135. For every Law must have a King.
Jehovah, calamity, Jad, a hand and He, the coactive conjugation of Hiphil,
working salvation and revenge. Mark the words gracious ones and saints: maker,
work, and fulfill. Mem, waters: people, heathen, nations, Kings, Nobles, etc.
The calamity and captivity of them, and cutting them off, and wearying of them
according to Quamat, to be wearyed or dissolved, Job 16.22. Jah, is intimated.
By exaltations in his Throat, is the aspiration of He, meant, being a
gutturall letter: so is Iod, signified by sword for hand, ps. 17. And thus he
is taken for maker, King and God and Almighty and Revenger. So they have the
name of God, or God in their throat and in their hand. Mark all the words of
Joy, rejoyceing and prais according to it, and the repetition upon all, Is. 45.

Deuteronomy. By all kinds of rejoyceing for their salvation, the glory of
their Kingdom 145.111.112.45. for his notable acts, and the majesty of his name
Jah, in them, in making and governing and saveing of them, in being kind to
the kind, etc. as psalm. 18. And this prais is also a good confession or
rehearsal of his grace, in the other Psalm, his works and frame of the world
set him out, and in this, his gracious ones (his Ministry) must bless him, ps.
145. with all their might and all the ways they can.

PSALM CL.
THe things in this Psalm to be set out, are the everlasting strength of God,
by his judgment and justice, and his holiness, and his great stature and
estimation, by his victories and salvation, and his great prevailing and
overcomming, by the Law, and that in his sanctuary, and in the highth of his
hollynes and all solemnityes. And for creation and conservation, that all
things breathing should again and again prais him, and evermore extol him, and
glorifye him world without end, with many an Amen, and many a hallelujah, and,
God be praised, for the same. The voice of God in his sanctuary requireeth
great strength and glory, as psalm. 29. and great confidence in the firmament of
the heavens thereof, ps. 68. And because his word and all that is spokeen in his
Temple is glorious: he must have a lofty and a bold utterance and a loud
pronuntiation even in the skies for the syncerity thereof. Because the
scriptures be the creators of the children of God: so they be their Elders,
their father and authorityes and witnesses, to judge all men quick and dead and
by their testimony, to disscide all strife and contention. So he that speaks
from hence, speaks soundly, and there is no replyeing against the authority
heerof. This prooff and testimony puts the Divil to silence, and this of
great validity in judgment. Because it belongs to all parts of the
sylogisme, to proov or reproov the same. So that the commandments being
positive, and the Cases diverse that rise from thence, and all condemnation is
by judgment: so in all cas^es testimony must bring forth truth; and truth
an upright sentence which in this psalm, for an approbation of all men: he
wills the whole Church to confirm, and to justify all that is spoken, and
that in a high majesty in his Church, and that they should prais God in a
firmament of faith and confidence, as the faithful and true witness, Amen.
That they should prais him for his victoryes, dignity and excellence and for
his great magnificence and worthynes, honor and estimation, as ps. 146. And
for testimony: that he should protest and witness the same, and prais him with
all kind of music, ye the lowdest: and wills, that every breath and gasp
and aspiration should testifye the judgment and applaude it and sing prais of
God. Because by this, the way of God and all just men, is manifest and plain, as
ps. 1. There is no witness like the father, and a testimony of the Scripture is a
good demonstration. So to conclude the strength of the Law, and laws and
judgments thereof with judgment, as ps. 99. and all the praises of Israel with
prais: he has thus finished the book for the Church, that there is salvation
for the people of God, ps. 3. and that by the Law, psalm. 4. and Kingdom of
righteousness, ps. 5. with this high glory to God above the heavens, ps. 8. and
worship over all the earth. Now is the wrath of God, upon the gentiles com, and
the time of the dead, that they should be judged, ps. 145.149. and that he
should give reward to his servants the Prophers, and to the saints and them
that fear his name, to small and great, and should destroy them that destroy
the earth, Deuteronomy. 28. Apoc. 11. and all the mystery of God and of the Law, and
of the Prophets, revealed and finished, Apoc. 10.

Construction. Quopb, to compass, is here meant by praising, and assemblies
about him, as the last declareed the person: ps. 48. the Church is the element
of his strength, and principal dwelling of the Law and word of God, by the
preaching and extolling of it; ps. 29. compared to the sunn as ps. 19. for
visiting all men with all kind of luster and grace about them, as Saul; Act.
9. as the mighty king, according to the power and greatness of him, being
possessor and conqueror of heaven and earth Genesis 14. by the letters Quen, a
nest, seat, or possession, Ier. 22. psalm. 84. of Quanah, to get or obtein, or
conquer. That his name Iah, may spring and grow in the sunn, as psalm. 72.
according to the letter Nun, or N. to grow, for his public prais by music,
full of aspiration to express his name Iah, exceeding triumph for his exceeding
greatness. Hu, is a name of God from Jehovah, as well as for his excellence, and
onelynes. In respect whereof the term is here so often repeated and affixed to
praise. to wit, 11 times, the number of the two letters. he is praised in
respect of his onelynes where, and wherein, and in measure, also wherewith: and
those be the instruments just 11.

Deuteronomy. A hundred and fifty days the flood increased: so have the
praises of God, who sits upon the flood, as ps. 22. He is king for ever,
and the strength of his Law is infinite, that he gives to his people, and
feeds them withal, ps. 28.29. that they should for ever prais him, and ever
comment upon him and confess his wonderful kindenes to the children of men.
Praised be God.

FINIS.

