AN AVNSVVERE MADE BY BAR, TRAHERON TO A PRIVY PAPISTE, which crepte in to
the english congregation of christian exiles under the visor of a fauorer of
the gospel, but at lenghth bewraied himself to be one of the popes asses,
thorough his slouche ears, and than became a laughing stock to all the
company, whom he had amassed before with his mask. Hereunto is added the
subscription of the chiefest of the company first, and afterward the
subscriptio^ of M. To. Watson alone, in special words, because he was co^pted
the best learned among the rest, and therefore his judgment was most regarded,
and required.

Imprinted Anno. 1558.

TO MASTER GILBERT BARCKLEY.
I Heard with great grief of mind, how a countrefaite papiste labored
shamelesly to deface your most honest, and godly behauior toward him, with
the foul name of simuled frenship, and flattery. And I know the tenderness of
your heart, and how much it ever justly grieueth you, that the good name, that
god has given you, should be blemished with false reports, and impudent lies.
But I trust your wisdom is such, that you will not be long trobled, with the
barckinges of so foul a mouthed mastife. Wherefore I exhort you to stay your
self against this open injury upon the ground of an honest upright
conscience, whereof sondrie, that be here p^sent, and have long time known
you, give undoubted testimonies, and have seen most certain fruits. This
mastife, whose name I will not vttre, though it signify, that he came of a
wily generation, has opened his mouth against me also, and has enforced
himself to scratch, and tear me with his nails. But god of his goodness, has
given me always, where with to defend my self. The defense that he has now
ministered unto me, against this three headed Cerberus bred, and long fed in
the popes kennel, I dedicate to you my dear fre^d master Barckley, because you
have sustained part of this cross with me, and have as well at this time, as at
many other stood so ernestly in the defense of gods truth, that you have
therefore provoked a slau^derous tongue against you. God shall surely requite
you with his favor, and the lord Jesus shall give you a good report in the last
day. Pray for me, and cease not to love me, as I love you, both for your
other singular good qualities, and also for your honest godly zeal, that you
have showed in this matter. The lord Jesus conforte you. Amen.

THis sentence of. S. August. I alleged to prove that al things come to pass
by gods will, and ordinance. These be the great and most exquisite worckes of
god, that where as the nature of man, and angel had sinned, that is to say,
had do^ not that he would, but that it would, even by the same will of the
creature, where by that was don, that the creator would not, he fulfilled that
he would, using well even evil things, as good himself in the highest degree,
to the damnation of them, whom he justly foreordained to punishment, and to the
salvation of them, whom he mercifully foreordained to grace. For touching the^
selves they did, that god would not, but touching the omnipote^tie of god, they
cold no way do it. For even in this that they did against gods will, gods
will was fulfilled upon them, or touching them. For therefore great, and
exquisite ar the lords worckes thorough out al his will, that after a
marvelous, and unspeakable manner, that is not don besides gods will, that is
don against gods will. In Enchirid. ca. 120.

TO THIS HERE FOLLOWS MASTER MASKERS REPLICATION.
SAint Aug. in the place by you alleged / speaking of the great / and exquisite
worckes of god / says that when the nature of angels / and man had sinned /
that is to say / had don not that god would / but that the same nature would /
that he by the will of the same creature / whereby was don that / which the
creator would not / might fulfille that he would.

Here have you Saint Augustines sentence in these few words al ready twice
against your assertion / which is that it was the will of god / that Adam should
sin. For S. Augustine says that man when he sinned / did not that god would.
And again / did not that the creator would. And if you yet vndrestand not. S.
Aug. to be manifestly against you / than I counsel you / go to a logician / and
ask of him / and he will tell you / that your assertion / which is / that it was
the will of god / that Adam should sin / and S. Augustines censure / which is /
that man / when he sinned / did not that god would / be opposita contraria,
which strive so sore / that they can not stand to gether, but the one
overthrows the other.

Further to make the matter more evident / S. Aug. says / that as pertaininge
to them / that is to say angel / and man / they did that god would not / but as
to the o^nipotentie of god / they cold in no wise so have do^ / that is to say
have sinned against the will of god / which. S. August. by and by interprets /
that it was the will of god to suffer them to sin. Hitherto master Masker. And
upon these words of. S. August. that is not do^ besides gods will / that is
don against gods will / this wise doctor makes this gloss. That which is do^
against the will of god / is yet not don besides his will / that is to say in
suffringe.

HERE UPON I SENT HIM THIS LETTRE.
Because you handle the place of Saint Aug. by me alleged, after such sort,
as you had never red any other sentence in him, I will desire you to read, and
to answer these few places more over. These be. S. Aug. words in the. 3. bo.
de trinitate. Nothing is don, that proceeds not out of the inward, and
intelligible court of the sovereign emperor, according to his unspeakable
justice. For where does not the wisedo^ of almighty god work that he will,
which reaches from end to end strongly, and disposes al things swetely.
Again. S. Aug. has these words: It is than this will only, from which is
sprounge, what soever is. Item, Nothing set in man's free will, overcomes
the will of god, and though man do against gods will, yet against his will,
which is him self, we ought to think nothing to be so do^, as though he would
have it to be don, and it is not don, or that he would not have to be don, and
it is don. For that will is ever fulfilled, either touching us, or of us.
Touching us, it is fulfilled, but we fulfille it not, when we sin. Of us it
is fulfilled, when we do good. Item, so of man also god ever fulfilleth his
will, for man does nothing, whereof god worcketh not, that he will. Item,
gods will is the necessitee of al things. I cold allege innumerable such
places, but that it is pity, to combre so slendre a doctor, with to many
places at once. If you had been as much occupied in reading. S. Au. as you have been occupied in dreaming vain victories to your self, in doting after glory,
and in making your self droncken, whith the swetenes thereof, you should have
known, that this is a principal proposition in. S. Aug. which to prove, he
drives his arguments. But you have spent so much time in kissing your fair
daughter vain glory, that you have had no leisure, to know what Saint Aug.
goes about. Surely master. N. if you were not to be pitied because of your
madness, you were well to be laughed at, because of your fondnes. But I think
it rather my duty, to lament your most miserable state. But this I will say,
that if you amend not your manners in time, you shall give me^ occasion, to
bewraie your long ears.

And than though you have long walked, tanqua^ leo cumanus, it will be known
what you be in deed. I would be loathe to make a farther anatomy of your foul
inward parts, but if I shall perceive, that it shall be to your wealth, I will not
stick to give you a launch, or two. I have hitherto handled you a great deal
more honestly, than you deserve, for such respects, as god knows, and I have
labored to cover many an il favored spotte, but if you go forth in your
wickedness, I will strippe you stark naked, and show your scabbes to the world.
God almighty vouchsafe to drive out that perte spirit, that combreth you.
Amen.


To this lettre master Masker au^swered first, that he would differ the answer
to these places of. S. Aug. until I had answered his former interpretation
upon. S. Au.

Secondly that I fall to to raging, and that I can not justly charge him with
fondnes and madness. Thirdly he coniureth me to show him his scabbes of
iniquitee, if I know any in him etc. Whereu^to here follows my answer.
Since the places, that I sent you out of. S. Aug. plainly prove your
vndrestanding of S. Aug. to be extremely fond, and mere dotage, it is a
shameless shift of you master Masker to say, you will differ the answer, until
I have answered your interp^tation wrounge, and wrested not only with
violence, but also with some loss of an honest conscience. Would you have a
better interpreter of S. August. than S. Aug. is him self? Make first S.
Augustines declaration agree with your interpretation, and tha^ you shall see,
what I can say farther. But because you press me, to say somewhat to your
interpretation, first you shall vndrestande, that I wot not, whether I may
impute it to ignorance, or to a gauled conscience, that you have falsely
englisshed S. Aug. words. For, etiam per eandem creaturae voluntatem, that is
to say, eue^ by the same will of the creature, you have turned in to these
words, by the will of the same creature. Which change of the word, the same,
diminishes the weight of the sentence. But upon this hole sentence of S. Aug.
wha^ you have well rubbed your forehead, you say, that S. Aug. is twice against
me. For I say, that it was gods will, that Ada^ should sin, and S. Aug.
says, that man, when he sinned, did that god would not. But to say, that it
was gods will, that man should sin, and that man in sinning, did that god
would not, be opposita contraria. I au^swer that if a logicia^ will tell me so,, I
will tell him that he is an ass. For these two, as you vndrestand them, be not
opposita contraria as heat, and cold, but they be contradictoria, as this,
master Master is unlearned, and m. Masker is not unlearned. And than if Saint
Aug. be against us, he speaks contradictoria. For he says, that by the same
will, whereby that was don, that god would not, god fulfilled that he would. If
god fulfilled that he would, by Adams sin, than was it plainly gods will,
that Ada^ should sin. Or else god fulfilled his will by chance, and not upon
his infallible purpose fast grounded aeternally before, but suspended his
determination, and kept it uncertain upon Ada^s doing, and Adam might have
turned, and changed the hole matter. And if S. Aug. say, that Adam did not
that god would after your meaning, than he speaks contradictorie sentences,
whereof the one must ever overthrow the other. But these two, be nether
opposita contraria, nor contradictoria, as you vnlernedly affirm. For this
word, will, is not taken in one sense, in both places. For when S Aug says
in the first place, that Ada^ did that god would not, he means that Adam did,
that god allowed not in it self, and for it self. And when he says, that god
by the same will of Adam, fulfilled that he would, he means that he fulfilled
the thing, that he purposed, decreed, and ordained. For that S. Aug. meant that
it was gods will, that Adam should sin, these words signify plai^ly, to al
them, that are not quite past shame: Nothing is don, that proceeds not out of
the inward court of the sovereign emperor etc. And the rest of the sentences,
that I sent you before declare the same most evidently. But you go forth as
wisely, and as honestly, as you began. For these words of S. Aug. Hoc quippe
ipso, quod co^tra voluntate^ dei fecerunt, de ipsis facta est dei voluntas, you
translate thus: In that they did against the will of god, of them was don the
will of god. First you slenderly turn, hoc quippe ipso, that is to say, in
this very thing it self, in to this, in that they did, leaving out the
emphasis, and force of the speech. And these words: De ipsis facta est
voluntas Dei, you translate, of them was don gods will, which translation
makes the sentence doubteful, whether we shall vndrestande, that they did
gods will, or whether god did his will touching them. Where as the later sense
only, is S. Augusti. meaning. Once more I ask you, whether I shall ascribe this
to want of lerning, or to want of honesty. But I pray you sir, he that
says, that gods will was fulfilled in the very sin of Adam, means he
not, that it was gods will, that Adam should sin?

And when you say afterward, that the angels, and Adam cold not have sinned
against the will of god, will not your peuish pride suffer you to perceive, that
so you grant against your self, that it was gods will that they should sin?
For all other men see, that what soever is not don against gods will, is don
with his will. For you can not make god to sit as a neuter, enclining to
nether part. But how preatie is this, that where S. Aug. says, that, that is
not don besides gods will, that is don against his will, you interpret, that
S. August. means, that it is not don besides gods will in suffering. So many
things are not don besides master Maskers will in suffringe, where withal yet
master Masker has nothing to do. But we say, that nothing is do^ besides
gods will in ordaining, and ordring. For S. Aug. so exponeth him self in
these words. For if this were not good, that evil things also should be, they
should in no wise be suffered of that almighty good, that is to say, god. To
who^ without doubt, as easy as it is, to do what he will, so easy is it not
to suffer, that he will not to be don. By these words it appears, that S.
Augustines meaning is, that god suffers nothing, but that he wills, and
ordains to be don. And than I send you this syllogism, what soever god
suffers to be don, he wills, and ordains to be don, after S. Augusti.
meaning, but god suffered Adam to sin, as no great saint master Masker
grau^teth, ergo it was gods will, and ordinance, that Ada^ should sin, after
S. Aug. meaning. And than no great saint master Masker has troubled this
company, without cause, to his own shame. Take to you this syllogism also:
All the good things that be do^ in the world, ar don by gods will, and
ordinance, but it is good that evil things should be do^ in the world, as S.
Aug. teaches, ergo evil things ar don in the world, by gods will, and
ordinance. Can you say gentle brother, without red cheeks, that nothing is
don besides gods will, constrained by the words of S. Aug., and yet deny
that it was gods will, that Adam should sin? Who will tha^ think that you ar
at home, when you speak? But now that I have showed you, your wilful blindness,
and gross ignorance in interpreting S. Aug. I will peruse more of your lettre.
You say that I fall to raging. But you shall find in the end, that it was a
good honest zele uttered only to amend your outrageous faults. You ar angry
that I charge you with madness, and fondnes, for you ca^ not see them, in your
propre person. But if you call to remembrance your whole behauior in this only
matter, that of late you have enterprised among us, you shall find more madness,
and fondnes, than can be expressed. And though you perchance can not find it,
because you be blinded with self love, yet al other me^ have marked it, more
than makes for your honesty. You are not ashamed to say, that you offered a
writing for reconciliation, which in deed contains nothing but shameless
vaunting of your self, defacing of other far honester than you, railinges,
malicious slanders, and open lies. And yet you can not see, wherein you have
broken charitee. Was not that very charitably don of you, so gredely, and so
maliciously to desire, that M. Rose might be punished, a man that has
travailed so long, so painfully, and so frutefully in the ministry of gods
word, only because he rubbed your gauled back, in telling you the truth? Was
not that very charitably don of you, to defame that right godly sobre man,
master Barckley, with most despiteful, and shameless lies? Was not that very
charitably don of you to accuse, and condemn the hole company of hypocrital
praiyng to god, besides your self, the greatest hypocrite of al? Was not that
very charitably don of you to vttre such a mass of poison against good men,
when you should have pprepared your self to have received the holy communion
with them, if you had not ben a secret papiste, and an ungodly man. Woe worth
such charitee as might have stayed so godly a purpose, if god had not wrought
more strongly for virtue, tha^ the devil cold work mischeuously for vice. But
now because you conjure me, to show what scabbes of iniquity I know in you, I
will discharge my conscience. First I say that you ar a visored, and disguised
papist, as you have plainly enough discovered your self. Secondly I say, that
I see in you a proud, arrogant, contentious, unquiet, and envious spirit,
which I pray god most hertely, to chase out of you, that we may embrace you
again as a brother, who^ now we have just cause to abhor, as a man void of
gods fear, and stuffed with many horrible vices, besides your subtle
secret papistrie. This unclean spirit that I speak of, and know to be in
you, is the very cause I am sure, why you dissente from us in this question of
gods providence. For thorough gods grace we have not ben obscure, nor
perplexed in this matter, nether can you pretend ignorance. Envy, and the
love that still remains in you to your old harlotte popery, has moved you to
stir these coals. Let the fear of god, and love of truth move you again to
quench the fire that you have kendled, or surely there shall be a fire kendled in
your heart that no man, nor time shall quench. But I trust you will call to god
for a better mind. And to that end I wrote before, and now write to you
again. And I pass not though I seem to you to rage, so I may bring you from
very raging in deed, and mere madness. Where you feign, that I would draw you,
from repliyng against me with threats, that proceeds from your old disease.
For I know by that, that you have written already, that you can say nothing
to the purpose against me. Yea if I were deirous of glory I would desire you to
reply, that you might vttre more folly, which I cold easily turn to my
greater praise. For I am sure that you can bring nothing, but that, a man of
mean lerning may easily overthrow, and so get glory. Wherefore I need not
let you, to reply as much as you can, so you would do it without bitterness of
mind, without furious passions, without vain bragges, without obstinate, and
wilful blindness, without dro^cken affection to your old Ione silver pin of
Rome, which some think a man shall hardly obtain at your hands. Further I
must desire you to make less sophistical arguments, than you have don in your
former writings. For when you say, that it was the will of him only that Adam
should sin, which only of his malicious nature, and pro: pre inclination,
tempts man to sin, you shall find in sophisterie, that it is called petitio
principij. For no man will grant, that it was Satan's will only, and that it cold
be the will of none other, but of him that delights in sin, that Adam should
sin, onles he be as fond, as you ar. And this I have declared sufficiently
in my former au^swer al ready published, against which you threaten to drive
your blind battle rams.

But I trust your push shall only bruise your self, and never shake, nor move
me. For I thank god I stand faster, and upon a surer ground, than that so
slender battery can beat me down. You have another dow baack reason of like
meal, which is this: he that wills not the death of a sinner, which is the
reward, and effect of sin, wills not that man should sin. I pray you how
prove you that god wills the death of no sinner seeing that S. Pau. says,
that he has vessels prepared unto destruction? Wills not the death of those,
whom he has prepared to destruction? Again how childish sophistry is this:
he that is the author of life, wills no sin, which is the cause of death. It
seems that you think, that god wills no man to die. And than al men die
besides gods will. Which no man I dare say will affirm, onles he be starcke
mad. I advise you therefore, to leave these toies of plain fransie. God give
to you, and to me speedy repentance of our faults, and open your eyes in this
matter, as he has vouch safed to open ours, that we may together agree in the
truth, in unfeigned humilitee, and in christian love, which christian love yet
has her sharpnes, and will bite the faults, that will not other wise be
amended. Wherefore at my hands you shall look to have your boiles lau^ched, and
to have corrosies and smarting plasters laid upon them, until they be cured.
Gods spirit direct us.

Bar. Traheron your friend as soon as you can love the truth.

TO THIS LETTRE OUR countrefaite protestant sent me an au^swer stuffed with an
huge heap of railing words, whereupon I wrote thus unto him again.
IF you be not sore sick, and feoble, after so great thronges, and after your
deliverance of such a swarm of innumerable railing words, as it were of young
devils, you may be matched with any she giaunt in the world in strong, and
lusty trauail, and in your fair happy childbed. It seems to me, that in the
midst of your rauinge trance, you had a little wit remaining.

For whereas you despeared victory in all other things, you thought you would
over comme at the lest in railing, scoffing, and tau^ting. And surely you have
brought your sweet purpose to pass. For I yield unto you this noble victory,
and hold up my hands. And because you have a marvelous greedy hunger, and a
thirst unquenchable for vain glory, you shall have this praise at my hands
also, that you ar the the ioliest scold, and the greatest railer, that ever I
heard, or shall ear I think. But shall I not think that you would sport your
self in play, and refresh your forworen wit with a preatie, pleasant,
frantike imagination, wha^ you wrote in the beginni^g of your lusty lettre
after that you had powered out at one belche more than half a dousen malicious
railing words, that you were taught by S. Pet. not to render rebuke for
rebuke. Thought you it so good a thing to take a while a little pa^time in your
ioieous fransie, that you passed not how long men should lawgh at your mad
behauior afterward? But if I should meddle with all your strange prankes, and
with all your new follies, I should show my self little less fond, than you ar.
I will therefore pike out here, and there, that I think may combre a simple
reader. Otherwise to say the truth, al your gaie stuff is such, as i^ might
be better despised, than answered In regard of the unlearned, and to show you
your foul fete, while you glory in your p^cockes feathers I must do some what
against mine own judgment, and stoop so to houg^ your hammes behind, that
you shall be see^ to halte in this matter. Because I said tha^ you wrested S.
Au. not only violently, but also with some loss of a good conscience you
permit to your self to affirm, that play Antichrists part, so proudly to
presume, to have a place in man's conscience. But if I play Antichrists
part in judging your conscience by the manifest fruits thereof, whose part
play you, when in your writing, you judge so often, that to be in my heart,
whereof you never saw fruit, nor spark, nor any manner of likelihod, I tha^cke
god? Well I believe ere it be long, you shall feel, whose part you have played.
You be very angry that I doubted whether you vndrestode S. Aug. words, and
you would have me to impute the fault of your translation, to want of diligent
examination.

For you had lever al othet faults should be found in you, than lack of
lerning. Well I am co^tente for this once, that you shall wipe away one fault
with another, and that men shall rather compte you rash, and to run blind
fold for have, tha^ not to vndresta^d so easy latin words. But you be so
good a man than you will teach me my grammar to: For you say, I englissh
impleret, he fulfilled. For thorough have to teach, you stick not to make a
lie. For this is my translation: These be the great worckes of god etc. that he
fulfilled etc. Where I make impleret, the subiunctiue mode, and not the
indicative mode, as you either shamelesly, or vnlernedly affirm. You englisse
the word, impleret, might fulfille, and so might I to, if I would have showed my
self as ignorant, as you ar. For might fulfill, makes the sentence doubteful.
For god might fulfille his will, though he did not fulfille his will. But S. Aug.
meant not, to leave the sentence in suspense, that god might fulfill his will, and
did not, but he meant to teach cerrainly, that he did fulfille his will. And thus
by turni^g the subiu^ctiue mode in to the potential, you have taken great
pains, to show your self as ignorant in grammar, as you did before, and do
afterward in logike.

Where I said that S. Aug. means, that Adam did, that god would not in it
self, and for it self, because you can not confute it, you would avoid it
with a marvelous preatie shift. For you aunswrr, that if it might be permitted
to you, so to wrest every author, you would have none against you, and that I
affirm mine vndrestanding only upon a lordly autorite. Howbeit if you have
leisure to be at home a little while, you shall vndrestand, that I affirm not my
saiynge, upon mine own autoritee, but upon a good ground. For if you deny
that, or the like to be S. Au. meaning, you shall make him to speak, not
opposita co^traria, as you unadvisedly power out your words at adventure, but
plain co^tradictorie se^te^ces, and to fight against him self. But now at
the last you show an high point of wit, and lerninge.

For where I proved that it was S. Augustines mind, that Ada^ sinned by gods
will, and ordinance, out of these his words: No thing is don etc., and out of
the other sentences alleged before, you say that none of those places, prove
the matter. For, say you, al those places speak of gods providence, whereby
al things have their being, and ar governed. If al things be governed by
gods providence, as you confess, than sinful acts ar governed by his
providence also, and comme not to pass besides his will, and ordinance. And
what a preatie argument of yours is this, sin is a deprauation of nature, and
the absence of righteousness, ergo it comes not to pass by the ordinance of
god. But, I ween, that the Iues committed in procuryng of Christ's death, was
a deprauation of nature, and and an absence of righteousness, and yet gods
hand foreordained it to be do^, as the scripture testifies. If you had made
your argument thus, sin is a deprauation of nature, ergo god is not the
author, nor propre worcker of it, you should have been heard, and allowed. For it
is not al one to ordain sin, and to be the author of sin, as you in your
dream make them al one, when you wot not what you speak. But I must go
farther, and first tell you that sondrie other of your aunsweres following ar
nothing else but (...) pythagoraes he spoke it, which any reader may easily
epsy by him self. And because your authority with me is as great, as the
popes mules majesty, I must tell you moreover that, I will spend no time
about your naked affirmations. But it is a sport to see how clearly you teach
me logike. I asked you this question: he that says, that Adams sin was not
don besides gods will, means he not, that it was don by gods will? To this
you say, that my question pretends a simple conversion, and because you
doubt whether ever I red logike, you vouchesafe gently to teach me what a
simple conversion requires. But your luck is ever unhappy. For while you
labor to show your self conning, you show that you have lost your wit, and
al lerning to. I have red diligently though you frette more, than I would wish
for envy, the best autors, that write of logike. And they teach, that their be
three manners of conuersions. The first is called conuersio simplex. And that
is, when the same signs, and the same qualite remaining, the predicate is
turned in to the subject, and the subject in to the predicate. And this
change is made only in an universal negative, and a particular affirmative. I
must use of force logike terms, with a logician. The exemple of an vvniuersal
negative is this: Noman that loves god, abhors the readi^g of the
scripture, ergo noman that abhors the reading of the scripture, loves god.
Of a particular affirmative this may be an exe^ple: Some raging passion in a
man's heart, is anger, ergo some anger is a raging passion.

The second conversion is called conuersio per accidens. And that is, when the
subject is made of the predicate, and the predicate of the subject, the same
qualite remaining, but the signs changed, that is to say, the universal
turned in to a particular thus: Every good thing is profitable, ergo some
profitable thing is good. The third is called conuersio per contrapositionem,
wha^ the subject is made of the predicate, and the predicate of the subject,
so that by the removing of the predicate, the subject is removed, as what so
ever is profitable, is honest, ergo what so ever is not honest, is not
profitable. Now let a logician show me in what conversion my quaestion is: he
that says, that Ada^s sin was not don besides gods will, says, that it
was don by gods will. My scolemaster says it is in a simple conversion. But
here the subject is not turned in to the predicate, nor the predicate in to
the subject, but a declaration only is made, that, not besides gods will, and
by gods will is al one.

And this had been a simple conversion: Adams sin was not don besides gods
will, and gods will was not don besides Adams sin. Wherefore seeing that in my
question there is no simple conversion, my master, affirming it so to be, is a
very simple logician. But he says moreover, that I should have put the
question thus, he that says that Adams sin was not don besides gods will,
means he not, that Adam sinned, not besides gods will. Now this is the song
of a couckoo, a tautologie, and vain repetition of the self same thing, or
it imports, that the speeches be of one force, and signify the same thing
after my meaning. Who sees not now that god has sent such a swimming in to
this adle head, that the man knows not what he reproves, dut confirms his
adversaries saying, while he would overthrow it. Let us proceed, to this my
syllogism. Whatsoever god suffers to be don, he wills and ordains to be
don, after S. Augustines meaning, but god suffered Adam to sin, as no great
saint m. Masker grants, ergo it was gods will, that Ada^ should sin,
this disguised popely person, says that the mayor, and the conclusion be
false. But I will prove the mayor to be true, and than I trust he will not stick
to grant the conclusion to be true. For I am sure that he will find no fault
in the minor, because it is his own. S. Aug. says, that god suffers
nothing, but by just judgment, and that he suffers nothing unwilling. If god
suffer nothing besides his just judgment, and his will, who sees not, that
whatsoever god suffers, he wills, and ordains to be don, by his just
judgment. For show me a thing, that he wills to be don in the world, and
therefore is don in the world, and yet he ordained it not to be don? For the
scripture says, that what soever he would, he has don in heaven, and in earth.
And he has not brought any thing to pass in the world, besides his
ordinance. And S. Aug. says, that this sentence of the scipture should not be
true, if god would have any thing to be don, and nevertheless has not don it.
But this new saint dares affirm, that god would that Adam should not have
sinned, and yet brought it not to pass, and so ouermalapertly, or rather
blasphemously ere he beware, he accuses the holy ghost, and good S. Aug. of
untruth. But now I must hear his worthy syllogism.

Bar. Taheron says / that it was gods will and ordinance / that Adam should
sin / but the word of god / and S. Aug. say clean contrary / ergo Bar.
Traheron lies.

I answer that my master with another lie says that I lie, because his minor
is shamelesly false. For nether the word of god, nor S. Aug. is against my
saying, but both make most plainly with it. The trial whereof I permit to
the godly. As for the preatie plays, wherein he to^bleth himself afterward
in his answer, I have disclosed before. The similitude, which he puts of a
king, who perdoneth an offender according to his long purpose before, for the
love he bears to him, is very poor as himself calls it, and as I may
add to his own saying, very peuisch to. For he says, that the king
fulfilled his will upon the man, and yet ordained not, that the man should
offend. And than he thincketh, that he has brought forth a marvelous monstre,
after a great terrible crack. But he must show, that god has no more to do in
ruling men's minds, than a king has in ruling the minds of his subjects,
if he will bring any thing to the purpose. A temporal kings power enters not
in to men's hertes, nor directs them, but Salomo^ says, that the heart of
a king is in gods hand, be it never so fierce, wild, and violent, and that he
turns it whether soever he will. And therefore we ascribe unto god a farther
matter, than to perdon offenses, according to his purpose, namely even to
ordain al things that are don in the world, and to direct, not only men's
bodies, but also their minds to what it seems good to his unsearchable
wisdom. And this the scripture teaches so plai^ly, that he must needs have a
face of woodde, that will deny it. But after that this countrefaite has
proprely played this much of his interlude he goes about to wasshe an
ethiopian, and to purge him self of such vices, as al men know to be in him,
that know him. But ever his hap is such, that every thing is the worse for
his handling. For the more he wassheth, and scoureth himself, the fowler he
seems to al men. But I am werie of the unpleasant savor of that box, which I
wisch never more to be opened before me. As for his railinges upon me, and good
m. Barckley, we pass as much as we do by the barckinges of a curre. Wherefore
I leave all that, and comme to our matter again. He believes, that I have
belied those great worthy learned men, whom I named in my book, and affirmed to
be on my side. wherein he shows himself to be a man of less reading, than I
thought. But let him read Zuinglius De prouidentia Dei, OEcolampadius
commenta. upon Esaie, Mar. Bucere upon the epist. to the To. Lutheres seruum
arbitriu^, Petre Martyrs comment. upon the epist. to the Cor. Caluines
Institution, and answer contra calumnias nebulonis cuiusdam, and there he shall
find this doctrine that I hold, more plainly taught, and more strongly
confirmed, than I can teach, or confirm. Now all that follows in this iolie
triumphant lettre, is a sincke of such filth, that I am feign to run from it,
and let him wallow in it him self alone, that he may brag, that noma^ durst
set upon him. As for me I had rather play the cowarde, and take me to my
legs, than to assault him in so vile and stinking a place, where I should be
more combred with carinous sauors, than honored with the overthrow of mine
adversary. Wherefore he shall stick there still for me, and singe triumphs to
himself alone.

AFTER THIS LETTRE, THERE FOLLOWS A REPLIcation to my book, and former
aunsweres made to certain cauillations, and thereto this is the reioinder.
MY stout adversaries replication contains much superfluous talk. But I will
draw al in to as much shortness, as I can, and meddle only with those points,
that have some color, whereby the simple may be begiled. Where I said, that if
this be an vnreuerent speech to say, that it was gods will and ordinance,
that Adam should sin, tha^ this is an vnreuere^t speech, to say, that it was
gods will and ordinance, that the Iues should crucify Christ etc. he denies
my consequent, like a great logicia^, and labors miserably to find some
thing unlike in these speeches. And at the last he has espied, that the
scripture says not that it was gods will, and ordinance, that the Iues should
sin in crucifiyng Christ. But o sophister how cold god ordain, that the Iues
should crucify Christ, so innocent a man without their sin? Wherefore he that
ordained the Iues to crucify Christ, ordained them to sin in crucifii^g
Christ. And than I give you this syllogism where upon to gnaw: Who so
ordains a nawghtie man to kill a very innocent, ordains him to sin, but
god ordained the wicked Iues to kill Christ a most innocent blameles man ergo he
ordained them to sin. And ye^ god was not the author and propre work of the
malicious cruelty, that was in the Iues, but ordained only, that the Iues
should sin in uttering that cruelty of their awn hertes wrought of them
selves, and sproung out of their own corruption upon his son Christ, as I
have showed in my book, and will show more largely hereafter, when I must
bewraie how hedstrong a beast this is, which will not obeie the bridle, but
ru^ne onstil, and affirm, that to ordain a thing, and to be the author, and
propre worcker of a thing, is al one. As for his folly in turning gods
ordinance, which word the scripture has in this place, in to gods bare
sufferi^g, which word the scripture has not, is sufficiently uttered before.
But see what a foul fall this fair beast gives himself. For he writes, that
we can not say, that god so suffered the Iues acts, that he had no doing, or
meddling therewith. For their bodies, and sowles, says he, and all the powers,
stirringes, and motions of them, were of god etc, First if god had to do with
their acts, I am sure they did nothing, whether he would, or no. Secondly if al
their stirringes, and motions were of god, than that they stirred, and moved
them selves against Christ, was of god. And how that cold be don without their
sin, let this lusty logician show. And thus he teaches, that it was of god,
that the Iues sinned against Christ. For we speak not of stirring, and moving
simply, but of stirring and moving against Christ, which is sin. Howbeit I
use not that speech, that the Iues sinning against Christ, was of god, not that
it may no way be suffered, but because that it may seem to signify, that
god was the author, and propre worcker of their sinning, which is horribly
false. But I say that their sinning was ordained and ordered by god. For god
ordained that they, after that sort, should vttre the sins, that lurcked in
their hertes, and so commit most wicked acts against Christ

This Polyphemus than has not yet healed his wounded forehed, but in saluing
of it, has made it worse. I alleged this place of Solomon, god has wrought al
things for him self, to prove that the world is governed, by gods
providence, and tha^ nothing comes to pass, besides his ordnance. To this
our noble adversary replieth, with these words.

Who denies that god wrought al thinge^ for him self / but what makes that
to prove that it was gods will / and ordinance / that Adam should sin?

It seems that this famous clercke, thincketh that Solomon speaks of gods
making of creatures, as though his word were bara, or asa, or iatser, but his
word is paal, and he uses it, in that sense, wherein it is used in the psalm.
44. our fathers have told us, poal paaltha, the work that thou wroughtest in
their days. Solomon than speaks of gods providence, in directing and
governing all the acts, that comme to pass in the world to his glory. And
than I say, that if it be so that gods providence is extended thorough out
al men's doings, than Adam sinned not besides his will, and ordinance. But how
like himself is this doughtie wight, when he makes this great reason.

Sin is a privation / and absence of righteousness / ergo it camme not to
pass by gods will / and ordinance.

For who knows not, that darcknes is a privation, and absence of light? and
yet who so shall say, that darcknes camme to pass besides gods will, and
ordinance, shall be hissed out of the company of al christians, and driven home
again to the popes poisoned puddel, or to Epicures swines stie. Where Solomon
says, that god has wrought the ungodly to an evil day, our solemn divine
says, that god wrought in the generation, and begetting of the wicked, and
left him in the state of perdition, that he contracted of his parents. But
Salomons meaning is, that god has ordained the wicked to damnation for his
own glory, in setting forth his righteousness, as it is known almost to
every barber. When Jeremy asks this question: who is he that says, a
thing is don, and the lord commanded it not, it signifies to them, that have
any skille in the hebrew tou^ge, as much as if he had said, who is he, that
says, that any thing is don, and the lord ordained it not. This sentence
our giaunt violently crussheth together, and restrains only to plages, and
punischmentes. But I will know, who gave him authority, to curtal large
sentences, and to turn every thing, in to some thing before I yield to his
tyranny. In the exposition of the second place of Jeremy, which I alleged to
prove, that gods providence reaches to the directing of me^nes doings, he
grau^teth, that god used the fury, and malice of the devil, and of the king
of Babilo^ to punisch his people, and yet he will not grant, that he ordains
men's sins. And no meruail, for they that speak in a fransie, stick not to
speak things fightinge with them selves. For they know not what they speak.
He laboreth afterward to show, that the king of Babilons sin camme of his
own corrupt inclination, and not of god, as though I had not made it plain
before, that though god use, and ordain men's sins to his glory, yet he is
not the author and propre worcker of them. To the place of Solomon, concerning
the gouerna^ce of lottes, and to the place of Esaie, where god teaches us that
he frames etc. These be his words for answer.

These places manifestly prove / that al things ar wrought / and governed by
gods providence. And who denies that? But what is this to prove / that it
was gods will / that Adam should sin / which came of the malice of the deuel
/ and Adams unclean lust.

Hitherto this sick man. For he must be very sick, that says, that al
things ar wrought, and governed by gods providence, and yet holds that
sins ar committed in the world besides his will, and ordinance. He must be
also some what il at ease in his brain, that makes this argument, sin camme
of the malice of the devil and man's lust, ergo it was not ordained by god.
For god ca^, and does ordain things whereof the devil, and man's nawghtie
heart, be the autors, very causes, and propre worckers, as I think we have
now made manifest to every child. But hear farther.

If you will say / says he / that gods providence so ruled / and turned
Adams sin / that he made it to serve his glory / than shall you vndrestand
these places rightly / and tha^ I will say with you.

Surely sir, you know well enough, that I have so said, and written more than
twice, or thrice, and so have you granted against your will, and to the loss
of your sore travail, that I have rightly vndrestanded those places of the
scripture, and so must you yield to me in this matter, if you be be an honest
man of your word. But some fear you will say rather that you spoke all this in
a trance, or in a sudden passion, or that for lack of leisure, you examined
not well your writings. But how can you say, that god determined before al
time, to rule, and govern Adams sin, and yet that Adam sinned besides gods
will, and ordinance. For god does nothing, that he had not certainly purposed
before al time. But he cold not certainly determine to rule, and turn Adams
sin to his glory, if Adam sinned besides his will, and ordinance, and might
for all his will, and ordinance have not sinned. After this our glorious champian
comes to the argument, that was made out of these words of David, god
wills none iniquite, and grants without thanks, that I have taught the
true meaning of the place, and so over turns the reason, wherein he gloried
so much before. But he falls again to his old gross error, that a man can
will nothing, wherein he delights not, which fondnes he might have found
confuted in the later end of my book sent unto him. And if he red that place,
and yet would stick still in the same mire, it appears, that he had lever be
compted shameless, than a man reformed. And so I fear I shall be feign to leave
him, onles god vouchsafe speedely to show his mighty hand. Where I said that
they ascribe weakness to god, that teach, that Ada^ sinned besides gods will,
and whether god would, or no, he auoideth it proprely with this only, that my
similitude ascribes weakness to gods will. But though I had so slenderly
handled the matter, as I thank god I have not, yet he had not therefore
avoided, but that he had ascribed weakness to god.

Nether should he have thought, that he had well purged the more of his own
garments, by casting other like mire upon mine. But let us see how profoundly
he perceth to the botome of darcknes to fetch up this gear. To say, that god
wills a thing, wherein he delights not for it self, he affirms to
ascribe weakness to god. For we can not will a thing, wherein we delight not, nor
allow, but for eschewing of greater inconvenience, which else we can in no wise
avoid. First marcke, that whereas he affirmed simply before, that we can not
will the thing, that we delighte not in here I ca^ not tell by what mischaunce,
he grants, that we may will a thing, wherein we delight not, for the
auoidance of a greater inconvenience. But I will shortly show that we may will
a thing for a certain purpose, and not delighte in it, for it self, though
we be not compelled thereunto thorough the danger of a greater inconvenience,
and though we might avoid it. I pray you o the lest of the noble company of
Durandes, and Dorbeles, may I not will, that you shall vttre your folly in
writing, wherein I promise you, I delight not, for a certain purpose, namely
that no man hereafter may run in to the like madness, though I cold otherwise
avoid it, without the compulsion of necessity? And albeit that I cold not
bring all this to pass, yet I know god cold bring it to pass, not thorough
the weakness of his will, as you dream, but thorough the mightines of his will,
as me^ see that be awake. Cold not god I pray you will and ordain Satan's
ministers, to rob Job, onles he delighted in their robbery for it self, or
of necessitee to avoid a greater inconvenience? Cold not he will, and ordain
Achabs false prophets to lie, onles he delighted in their liyng for it self?
Cold not he will, and ordain, that Hophnie, and Phineas should not hear their
fathers good admonition, because he would kill them, onles he delighted in their
stubburne disobedience, or of necessitee to avoid a greater inconvenience? God
than wills things, that he delights not in for them selves, nether by
reason of weakness, nor to avoid a greater inconvenience, but to set forth
before men's eyes, his power, his wisdom, his righteousness, his goodness, and
mercy. Which virtues yet never to be known to the world, we may well judge to
be an inconvenience touching us, but touching god, it is none at al. For he
might have remained perfectly blisful in him self, though he had never made
us. Away than with this vain iangling. But let us se more of this gaie
stuff. Our preatie Polyphemus will not confess, that he goes about to pulle
god out of his throne. For says he, his office of governing, consists not
in this, that it was his will, and ordinance, that Adam should sin. But if you
take from god the ordaining, governing, and directing of Ada^s sin, and of al
men's sins, you shall discharch him of a great part of his government, and
so far like a young giaunt, you go furiously about, to pulle him out of his
throne, to your own destruction. But we are demanded an high quaestion, how we
can prove that they, which teach, that it was not gods will, that Adam should
sin, do teach that things be do^ whether god will or no. I pray you master
Doctor, he that does the thing, that you would it should not be do^, does he it
not, whether you will, or no? But you say, that Adam sinned not, whether god
would or no, for god suffered him to sin. But that proves not yet, but that
Adam sinned whether god would, or no. For one may suffer a thing to be don,
whether he will or no. If you will say, that god suffered it willingly, than you
grant with us, that it was his will, that Adam should sin. And than you have
played the part of a very honest wise man all this while. Where to mine
answer, that god testified to Adam by his commaundment, what he allowed, and
what his pleasure was, you reply, that if god had willed, and decreed, that
Ada^ should through his own fault, do the thing which god had forbidden
before, god should therein have willed, and decreed, the commaundment that he
gave before to be broken, and than that had been a contrarietee, and repugnantie
in him, I answer that you have more than serpents eyes, if you see that
contrarietee, and repugnantie.

You may well dream, that you see it in your sleep, but when you awake, you
shall perceive, that it was but a vain fancy, and a fliyng imagination. For
may not a father lay up apples in his chamber, and give a commaundment to his
children, that they shall nor meddle with them, and yet will, and decree with him
self as much as a man may will, and decree, that they shall steal them away,
and eat them, to this end, that he may ierke them well, and thriftely,
whereby while they live afterward, they may fear to steal, or to be
lycorous, or to break their fathers commaundment? May not I say a father do
all this, onles he be contrary, and repugnant to him self? Much more cold god
will, and decree, that Adam should break his commaundment thorough his own
fault, for a more excellent purpose, without contrarietee, and repugnance in
him self. When afterward you say, that Ada^ in sinning did not the will of
god, if by the word, will, you mean gods decree, you miss the cusshion, if
by the word, will, you mean that god allowed not Adams sin, ne had pleasure in
it, for the sin it self, I assente thereunto. But how have you than proved
that it was not gods will, decree, and ordinance, that Adam should sin?
Against mine answer to the fourth argument spoken of in my book, you have
brought nothing worthy to be rehearsed. Wherefore I pass over to mine answer
to the fifth argument. Against him that objected Adams fre will, I said that
gods will, and ordinance, let not, but that Ada^ should do freely, and
willingly without compulsion, that he did. And how that might be, I showed by
exemples, which you touch not because they were to hot. But to that you
reply, that I wringe Adams free will al together on the lift hand, that is to
sin, and death, but I leave not free will to the right hand, that is to the
keeping of gods commaundment, and aeternal life. I answer that god made Adam
in such integritee, vprightnes, and perfection of nature, that wha^ he would do
gods commaundmentes, he might do them freely, and willingly, and have abundant
sufficientie of natural strenghth thereunto, and when he would decline from
gods commandment, he might do the same freely, and willingly thorough his
own fault, and not thorough want of natural strength. And I say that his fre
will stood in this vprightnes, strength, and perfection of nature, and not in
choice of this, or that. For if there were no free will, but where a man may
choose whether he will do the thing that is good, or the thing that is evil,
than there were no fre will in god, whose will is most free. For he can do no
evil, but only the things that be good. Wherefore where things be don freely,
and willingly, and wihout compulsion thorough no want of natural strength,
there is free will say I.

And this I know was in Adam, but no such fre will, whereby he might disappoint
gods certain purpose, or whereby it should follow, that god had yet determined
nothing certainly. But now though many things powered out to no purpose follow
in this replication, I may not pass over, that where I asked, whether he would
say this: Death came in to the world by the envy of the devil, ergo it was
not ordained by god, he au^swereth flatly, that death was not ordained by god.
And allegeth a sentence for him, out of the first of wisdom. God made not
death, nether has he pleasure in the destruction of the living. To this I
say, that the author of that book, means no more but that god was not the
propre cause of death, but the devils envy, and man's sin, and yet it
follows not but that god ordained death for men's sin. For a king in his
realm ordains hanginge for thieves, and murderers, and yet is not the propre
cause of their hanging, but their own nawghtines. And I say once more that he
that says, that god ordains not death for men's sins, says that men
die besides gods ordinance. But this gear is to gross, where with farther
to co^bre the reader. Now follows a worthy matter. I made this syllogism:
whatsoever was in Adam, was in him by gods will, and ordinance, sin was in
Adam, ergo etc. My ioilie chalenger denies the mayor of this syllogism. as
though all the scriptures that I alleged before, and S. Aug. sentences, did not
prove it to be infallibly true. But to say that sin was in Adam by gods
will, and ordinance, he affirms to be al one with this, god is the author of
sin, for he can not see how any body can ordain a thing, and not be the
author, head spring, cause, and propre worcker of it.

And he laboreth to prove this by lame similitudes, as though that if he cold
prove it so in some things, he had by and by proved it so in all things.
Hereunto I answer, that the scipture shows plainly, that all the things,
that be in man, be in him by gods ordinance, and the same scripture shows,
as plainly that god is not the author of sin. Wherefore to ordain sin, and
to be the author of sin, is not al one. And that to ordain a thing, and to
be the propre cause, author, and worcker of a thing, is not al one, these
exemples may teach the unlearned. He that sets his wine abroad in the sun
to be made vinegar, ordains it to be made vinegar, and yet he is not the
propre cause of vinegar, but the nature of the wine, and the hot sun beams.
Again he that in spain cutteth dounne grapes, in the summer, and lays them
in a sunnie place, ordains them to be made reasines, and yet he is not the
propre cause of reasines, but the nature of the grapes, and the heat of the
sun. Finally to bring a plain rustical exemple, he that hangs up swines
flesh in a chimneie, ordains it to be made bacon, and yet he is not the
propre cause of bacon, but the nature of the flesch, and smoke. Wherefore since
it is evident, that it is not ever al one, to ordain a thing, and to be the
propre cause, and author of a thing, we may boldly say, the scripture
bearinge plain record, and S. Aug. and sondrie other most excellent writers
holding up their hands to the same, that god ordains sin, and yet is not
the author of sin. How god ordained Adam to sin, thorough Adams own fault,
and without al manner of fault in god, I grant in deed, that it is hard for
weak wits to vndrestande, nevertheless I am sure, that it is most certai^ly
true. And so we are al bound to believe, whether we understand it, or no, onles
we will flatter and please our selves in a most open, and a most dangerous
error. And if I would superfluously spend words, I could easily show, that the
exemples, which my doctor brings to declare, that to ordain, and to be the
author of a thing, is al one, prove not his purpose. For who knows not, that
Solon was not the author of the laws, which he ordained among the Atheniens.
For those laws were before in other commonweals, and cheyfely in the
commune weal of the hebru., and gods wisedo^ in deed is the author of al good
laws, and noma^nes head. But the matter is to manifest of it self. And the
rest of the replication is mere trifeling. Where the scripture teaches, that
god bad the liyng spirit to go in to Ahabs prophets, and to deceive Ahab, he
answers, that god suffered the liyng spirit to go etc. But he should have
showed, that to command a thing to be don, is no more, but to suffer a
thing to be don. But I will here present my doctor with this syllogism: he
that commanded the liynge spirit to go, and to make liers, commanded him to
sin, but god commanded him to go, and to make false liyng prophets, ergo he
commanded him to sin. But god commands nothing, which he ordains not,
so he ordained him to sin. And yet every starcke fool may see, that god
was not the author, and propre worcker of the liyng spirits sin, but found it
in him al ready wrought, thorough his own corrupting of himself, and justly
used it to punisch that nawghtie man. And why, I pray you, should not god
command and ordain a sinful body to show his nature, that is to say, to
sin? It is certain by the testimony of the scripture, that god commands
Satan to do many things, and I would feign know how he can bid him to do any
thing, and not to sin. Wherefore he that bids him do any thing, must
needs bid him to sin. But seeing that god commands him to do many
things, and commands nothing besides his own ordinance, it follows of
necessitee, that god ordains sins to be don, though he be not the author,
and propre worcker of sin. But let us see more. He is angry that I said,
that he turned al gods doings in to sufferinges. For he says, he turns
not al, but some. But than I say, that he has brought nothing against my
sentence, that it was gods will, and ordinance, that Adam should sin. For
onles he can prove, that al gods doings be suffringes, I will hold my
sentence still in the nombre of those things that are don, and ordained by god,
and not among those, that be only suffered by god. And I will not suffer my
sentence to go a straw breadth from her place, until I see by what right he can
remove her. Touching gods sufferance, and how he suffers nothing besides
his will, and ordinance, and that his sufferance is his ordinance, I have
sufficiently declared before. Here I might make an end, saving that my good
honest fellow co^plaineth, that I left three things of his vnaunswered, where
as in deed I left but one of them vnaunswered, and that was, for that I saw no
cause why I should au^swer it. And this is the gaie thing that must be answered.

Your assertion simply vndrestanded / says he / is plain blasphemy by your
own confession.

Because I am driven, and compelled, I answer to this, that hitherto I never
said so in my life. And yet I deny not, but that it may be so expouned, that
it may co^teine blasphemy, as if a man would say, when I affirm that it was
gods will and ordinance, that Adam should sin, that god ordained Adam to
sin, only because he delighted in sin, or for the sins sake alone, or as
though god were the author, and propre worker of Adams sin. But I say that
such an interpreter, and gloser, should not only show himself a froward
overthwart fool but also a shameless mad man. For I my self have declared
that, that is as far from my meaning, as hell is from heaven. Nether ca^ any
man justly pike it out of the words. Howbeit I know that there is nothing so
well spoken, that a perverse wranglinge wit can not by wresting, and wringing
deprave. And here I would make an end of these iustes, but first I am required
to say somewhat to the commune objection, that is in the mouth of every pert
peremonger, of every raskal, and every rakehel. For they babble, that if al
things, comme to pass according to gods foresight, providence, and certain
unmoved, and unchangeable ordinance, than they will make no provision for
meat, to satisfiie their honger, they will use no medicine in their sickness,
they will not procure to avoid any danger etc. For the good things that god
has ordained For them, they shall have, and the evil, that god has appointed,
they can not eschew. So that either it shall not need, or it shall not boot to
labor for the obteining of the one or avoiding of the other, since al must be,
as it is already decreed, and determined without alteration, and change. But
o rude rabble what if god will use your labor, and the wisdom, and gifts
wherewith he has furnished you, to serve his providence, will you refuse to be
his instruments with all that you have of him? If it be his ordinance to feed
you thorough your trauail, will you lie gaping while meat fall in to your
mouths out of the clouds, which thing you perceive he has not appointed? If
it please him to heal you by the virtue, that he has given to herbs, or
spices, or other simples, a^ you will not be so healed, I would you should be
sick still. If he will have you to escape dangers thorough the wisdom, and
warines, that he has planted in your hertes, an you will not use the same, you
ar worthy to perisch in them, and so god will use your folly to your just
destruction. The godly ever like that well, that pleases god, nether will they
show them selves either so unthankful, or so folisch, as to despice, or refuse
the means, that he has appointed. And though they know that nothing can comme
to pass otherwise tha^ he has ordained, yet they know not whether this way,
or that way, by this mean, or that mean, he will bring his purpose to pass.
And therefore they use the mean with thanckes, that seems most likely,
according to the wisdom, that god has given them. For whether god work
things by him self, or by those means and instruments, that he has
appointed, al his one to them, and they acknowledge his wisdom, and goodness
as well in the one, as in the other. But yet these hogs gru^te more swinishly,
that if al things comme to pass by gods providence, than robberies,
adulteries, murders are not don, but by gods will, and ordinance, and than why
ar thieves, adulterers, and murderers punisched, since they have served gods
will and providence. This filthy flock must vndresta^de that wicked men
commit not their nawghtie vilainous acts to the intent to serve gods will,
but to satisfy their own lusts. For he serves gods will, that does the
thing, that god commands him to do by his word. But in what word has god
commanded any man to commit adultery etc. But you will say if god had not
determined, and ordained these things, they should not come to pass. I grant,
for god uses men's nawghtines to his glory, and shows his wisdom in
uttering men's inward poisoned affections, and his righteousness in punishing
one sin with another. But ar they therefore not to be punished, because god
ordains, that they shall bewraie their privy filthiness and abomination? Or do
they power out and show abroad the wickedness of their hertes, to serve gods
will, or their own will, and raging desires? If it be plain, that they dotingly
ru^ne after their own unbridled lusts, without al respect of gods will, and
commaundment, yea in contempt of god, and his word, they ar nether worthy,
nor shall escape gods vengeance. And we may not be now so folisch, and
asseheaded as to think that god in ordaining men's evil deeds is defiled
therewith. For we have been taught often enough, that he is not the author, and
propre worcker of them. And therefore he remains ever pure himself in
bringing forth to light, and in ordring that is vnpure in us, and the filthiness
cleaves upon them only, that are the propre worckers of evil, and not on him,
who ordains well, that men, and devils have wrought evil. But of this matter
we have spoken as much, as may suffice al such, as seek rather to know the
truth, than to wrangle, and show eloquence in pratinge braulinge, and
cauillinge.

Now good reader thou shall vndrestand, that before I had al finished this my
little travail, the papiste that I here speak of, who challenged me, and ran
against me at the tilte, though his place remained, was no where found. Seeing
than that he was conueyghed out of the nature of things, thorough gods
goodness, I thought it should be hurteful to noman, and profitable to many, if I
went foreward with my matter begone, and if I should publishe it to the world,
whereof I had delivered part to the printer before. Further thou shall
vndrestand, that these godly men, whose names here follow, with certain other,
not only subscribed with their own hands to the doctrine, which I have here
set forth, but also confirmed the same with sound, and pithie arguments
written by common co^sente in a lettre to the papiste now departed, and gone
out of the world.

These be their names.

M. Roger Parker. M. Johan. Turnor. M. Doctor Perkins. M. Thomas Rose. M.
Gilbert Barckley.
Of these the first two be very godly gentle men, and well trained in gods
word. The other three have been long faithful ministers of gods word, and be
al men right worthy to be reverenced, not only for their honorable age, and
graye hears, but also much more for their fervent zeal toward true religion,
and for their great grauite, and sinceritee of life.

After this M. Robert Watson a witty man long exercised in matters of
diuinitee, and able to ioigne in disputation with the popes band in their
chief filled of glory, and where they most approach the altar, though he were
not present at the first subscription, yet afterward being talked withal, and
required to show his judgment, subscribed, with these words:

IT WAS GODS VVIL, AND ORDINANCE, WILLINGLY TO SVFFRE ADAM TO SIN, WHICH
SIN GOD OF HIS OMNIPOTENT POWER TVRNED TO HIS GLORY. BY ME TO. WATSON. In
this short sentence M. Watson has declared, that god suffered Adam to sin,
not as one that would not meddle with the matter, nor bend to any part, but as
one that had willed, and ordained, that sin to be don. And therefore he
thought it not enough, to say, that it was gods will, but he would add
moreover, that it was gods ordinance, and that willingly, because he so
purposed of him self, and because it seemed so good to his aeternal wisdom.
And that noma^ therefore should impute the fault of Adams fall to god, ne make
god the author, or propre worcker of sin, he would signify by this word (to
suffer) that albeit that it was gods will, and ordinance, that Adam should
sin, yet god wrought not Adams sin, but in suffering ordained it according
to his will to be wrought thorough the envy of the devil, and Adams own
fault, as M. Watson than plainly expressed, and as you may find sufficiently
taught in my exposition upon a part of the 4. cha. of S. Io. revel. and in the
later end of my former answer to certain sophistical cauillations. Certain
other also very godly men, and very worthy to be remembered, subscribed to
this our sentence, whose names in consideration of their travail abroad in the
midst of this crooked generation, I thought not good to express in this
place. Finally the hole company agreed to this doctrine, that I have here
defended, and published, except one person only, which stood as a neuter,
nether co^demning, nor approving either part. And in deed among al other, he
was of lest estimation. To god almighty therefore, who thorough his gracious
goodness vouchsafed to open this truth unto us, to the great conforte, and stay
of our weak afflicted minds in this woeful time, and has given us a commune
consent therein, be al glory, and praise for ever. Amen amen.

S. Aug. in the first book of the predest. of saints cha, 16. It is tha^ in
the power of nawghtie men to sin. But that in sinning the same nawghtines
shall do this, or this, it is not in their power, but in the power of god, who
divides darcknes, and ordreth it, that of this also that they do against
gods will, there is nothing fulfilled but gods will. S. Aug. in the bo. of
free will and grace cha. 20. Which holy scripture, if it be diligently looked in
to, shows that not only the good wills of men, which he made of evil wills,
and being made good by him guides to good acts, but also those wills that
continue the creation of the world, be so in gods power, that he makes them
to be bowed whither he will, and when he will, either to do good to some, or to
punissh some, as he him self declares by his most hidden in deed, but
undoubtedly most just judgment. For we find some sins to be punishementes
even of other sins. As is the hardening of Pharao, the cause whereof is also
declared, to show godddes power in him. Wherefore the lord says to Iosue: The
children of Israel shall not be able to stand. What is this, they shall not be
able to stand? Why did they not stand by their fre will, but fled their will
being trobled thorough fear, saving that god rules over the wills of men,
and when he is angry, turns whom he will in to fear? Did not the shameless
man, the son of Iemini rail upon king David by his own will? Nevertheless
what says David? Suffer him to rail, for the lord has commanded him to
rail upon David. Lo how it is proved, that god uses the hertes even of evil
men, to the praise, and aid of good men. In the same bo. cha. 31. Who should
not tremble at these judgments of god, whereby he works even in the hertes
of evil men whatsoever he will, rendering yet to them according to their
deserts. And again: By these and such testimonies of the holy scripture, it
is made manifest enough, that god worcketh in the hertes of men, to bow their
wills whither so ever he will, either to good things according to his mercy,
or to evil according to their deserts, thorough his own judgment without
doubt sometimes open, sometimes hidden, but ever just. CESSENT SOLITA

printer's device with a farmer or agricultural worker labelled "SAT QVERCVS"
standing between a wheatfield with a crucifix at the center labelled "VERITAS"
and a tree entwined by a serpent labelled "VMBRA"

DVM MELIORA.

AN. DOMINI M.D.LVIII


