A LEARNED AND A VERY PROFITABLE EXPOSITION made upon the CXI. Psalm.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackfriers. 15^9.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THE MA^TE^, FELLOWS, SCHOLARS, and other Students
of the College of the holy and undivided Trinity in Cambridge, Grace, mercy,
and peace, from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
AGAINST grief conceived in the death of a worthy friend, often times
succor is s^^ghte in a Tomb or other monument, thereby to deliver the deades
virtue and commendable life, from the unkind forgetfulness of unthankful
men. Therefore with the family of the author of this book, and with me also
which in good will to him in his life, and sorrow for his death come next unto
them, it falls out very well, that the sol^ce which our poor estate denies
us, the learned diligence of our deceased friends, by making at vnarares his
own tomb in his life time, has supplied unto us. Now if by dedication of it
unto you, it be (as it were) set up in your College, it shall be (I hope) a
thankful work: considering that whether you look to the kind of a tomb in
general, or to this in particular, the work brings you commendations from
them both. For whereas other tombs are often times the generation of full
c^sers, without company had with any great virtue or singular learning, this is
the birth of the ^i^* sanctifying by the true fear and knowledge of God. And
where others come out of the ^hoppe, this comes out of the schole, and that
of Christ: Those may bring us some message of death, but these bring also the
good tidings of life, and that in death: with a number such preheminences, for
which as this kind of monument ought of right to have the right hand of the
other, so ought it to have gladder eyes to look rather upon it, the^ upon the
other. And as for the special matter which commends this tomb, it may be
drawn from the workman of it most plentifully. He was first by a scholership,
and after by a fellowship planted in your College: Therefore it will rellie the
better that it is fruit of your own planting: The work was both made and
uttered in your College, and for it alone: if you should not therefore
prepare your selves at the warning of others, be yet in a readiness at the voice
of your own, and proper trumpet. It cost him the loss^ of his fellowship, I
might have said of his life: which by quietness in his College, should likely
have been prolo^ged. So that herein it is provided even for them, to whom
dayntie things are not dedicate unless they be dear bought. If you look also
that it should be far fetched, the principal and as it were the marble
thereof was taken from the highest heaven, the grauing from the utmost parts of
the earth, whither by an insatiable hunger of reading, he had (sitting in his
study) travailed. For, beginning at Rome (I mean the old and eloquent, not
this barbarous Rome) and from thence taking his iorne, into Greece, he landed
in Canaan, where he had gotten not the bare and empty ^a^ke of the three, the
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues, but with them the good merchandise of arts
and sciences contained in them. For although in the love which he bare to a
simple and plain handling of the word of God he suppressed the show of them,
yet, at the faces which are continually in the Sun can not but be tanned and
slayned therewith, so his speech could not but carry some color of the learning
and knowledge wherein he was continually conversant.

And as for the change of his life, if a good death do wash away the filth of
the former life, his death (which was such as my soul wishes, and hops for
the like) must needs set a pleasant gl^^ both upon the rest of his life that
was holily led, and upon this work especially, which thorough conscience of a
great duty discharged therein, caused him to go e^^^ ^^ragiously to meet
with death, and (as i^ were) to take it by the hand or ever it had taken him.

Bring hither therefore your eyes: first, indifferent to judge of the
sincerity of it* then discrete, that you may discern his spirit zealous with
judgment and earnest in weighty matters: bring thirdly your learned eyes, that
as in a piece of tapestrie, you may see with the variety of colors, the
diversity also of the knottes and flowers not only to look on, but to take
them out and make the like. So shall your profit be pleasant, and your
pleasure profitable, so shall you of his loss get gain, and of his pain get
pleasure: finally so shall that which was to him the valley of Achor, be unto
you the gate of hope. And I beseech that holy and blessed Trinity which is
the patron of your College, that he would so fill you with all knowledge,
especially of himself, that after you have brought many to this blessed
society, your selves may enter into that holy fellowship whereunto (in Christ)
you were chosen before the beginning of the world. Amen.

By him which in the reverend good will he bears to you, has taken an
obligation of himself, daily to pray for you.

THE VERSES OF M. Portus upon thautor.
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...) I. X. K.
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
A PRAYER.
THY word o Lord is holy and pure as thy majesty: and I of an unclean heart
and vnp^rt ^^ppes unworthy either to speak of it, or to profess thy name: yet
because of thy merciful rotation I beseech thee so to sanctify me that I may
speak of thy word reverently, and thy children bear fruitfully, not to death
and condem^^tion, but to life and salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.

PSALM. CXI. Praise ye the Lord.
I will praise the Lord with all my heart, etc. I have chosen to interpret and
speak of this CXI. Psalm. for the excellency and perfitnes of the same for
although it be but little and short yet the holy Prophet comprehends in it the
sum of many Psalms. And as when he gave his mind to the preparing of those
things which should serve to the building of the material temple, he
disposed in his mind unto what use this and that jewel or weight of gold and
silver and a number of other things should be applied: So I doubt not but in
these Psalms which this noble and worthy Prophet left for the ornaments of the
Church of God which is his spiritual temple, he had great consideration
whereunto each Psalm should serve. So the wise and godly king appointed some
to declare the use of the Sabbath: others, to remember the benefits of their
deliverance: some to celebrate the providence of God in all things: and so
many other Psalms he wrote which he consecrated as tables to the honor of God
and praise of his mercy for his deliverance out of his dangers, and as
glasses for the children of God to see their estate in. This Psalm
comprehends not one or two points, but is left us as a most beautiful and
precious diamond, wherein we might see almost all things. For first, he
celebrateth the goodness of God which appears in the whole world: then
particulerly the benefits bestowed on his Church: Lastly, the duty of the
children of God for these benefits, with an exhortacion to the fear of God: so
that this Psalm is to us, as many Psalms. And for this cause it seems that
he has labored to pen and write it artificially. for it is made according
to the Hebrewe letters every half verse, as they are in order beginning with a
letter unto the two last verses, where he puts three in a verse. Which art
and diligence which the spirit of God in him has used exhorts us to give
diligent heed and care to mark and understand this Psalm. For if it become
all flesh to stand and give care when God speaks, surely it becomes us to
give an excellent attentiuenes to the Lord when he uses a singular manner of
writing or speaking, and to add to our accustomed diligence, an artificial
diligence, where the Lord speaks by art, and, as it were, to set our cares,
where he sets his words. This for us that are hearers. Further we are here
to learn when God shall call us to the ministry of his word in his Church,
that we ought not to come negligently, to speak of the works and mercies of
God: lest by our foolishnes and negligence the doctrine of God come into
contempt. But to stir up our minds and senses and all the powers of our
wits how we may in most excellent, and fruitful kind of preaching speak and
utter it. Therefore it behooves us now in the days of our youth while the Lord
of his mercy gives us time and opportunity, that we omit not those good
healpes which are fit for our furtherance and profit in these studies, neither
idly and negligently to let the days and months and years pass over us
without consideration of ou^ profiting from time to time: lest we become but
slubberers and unfit instruments for the Lords glory and praise by our own
naughty slothfulnes and idleness.

Praise the Lord. This is the inscription or title of this Psalm: where before
he begins this song he calls other into the fellowship of the same
exercise with him. Wherein we se what a notable zeal the Prophet of God had,
to the setting forth of the Lords glory, who is not content him self only
to praise God alone, but stirs up other also thereunto. Do we think that
such examples are left in the Scriptures that we should ouerlooke them, and
not think that they are written for our example? Nay doubt we not, but the
Lord has set such lights before us, that we should take light of them, that
we may also give light to others, that by our words and examples, we should
also stir up and inflame others to the praise of God with us. For if we
have not that affection of calling others, surely we deceive our selves if we
think we love the Lord. Therefore not in this Prophet only we see such
excellent and so many exhortations to others to praise the Lord with him, but
also in many places of the Prophets, and namely in the second of Esaias, Esaias.
2.3.
where he prophesying of the kingdom of Christ, brings in the people
stirring one an other, and saying: Come and let us go up to the Mountain of
the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he shall teach us his vvaye^,
and we will walk in his paths. Heb. 10.29
So thApostle to the Hebrews shows that it becomes the children of God to
stir up one an other to the fear of God, whereunto he applies that
sentence, Comfort one an other, and strengthen the weak knees (which is spoken
of in the Prophet Esaye) to all the faithful. Heb. 12.12. Esaias 35.3.
So that we may not rest in our selves, if we be in company, and hear and see
the Lords name abused, or our brethren and companions abuse them selves in
any sort, but that in a Christian and godly manner we ought to admonish
them, if not openly, yet at the least secretly: and not to be glad only if
we see their deformity, considering that it is well with us in comparison, but
(if we have the spirit of God) we are bound to seek their amendment also.
But what do I speak of admonishing others? Ala^ ^yther we are mockers, and
impatient of all admonition, or else we are not fit to speak to others, being
our selves so far behind. Therefore we see here what we ought to labor to
attain unto, even to be filled with zeal and godliness, with knowledge and
wisdom, that as the sea is full of waters, so we mayn be full and plentiful
in all goodness, so that we may water others with our fulness. And thus much the
title of the Psalm teaches us, for although it was then (when the Psalm was
made) spoken to the singers, yet now it is spoken to us and all that since that
time have been before us, or shall come after us.

I will praise the Lord with my whole heart. Here follows now that noble
and excellent protestation and profession of the praise of God which David does
promise for the manifold mercies of God. And although (as I have partly showed)
the thing which he speaks of are in deed wonderful and excellent, and
worthy to be praised, yet David had no more cause to praise God for them, then
any of us. For he reme^breth no private benefit to him self, but even those
which he has common either with all the world, or else with all the house of
Israel. It is therefore no less required of us to whom these benefits do
equally belong, or unto whom the Lord has showed much more exceeding mercy
then upon David and the house of Israel, that we promise the same vow and pay
it to the Lord. For David desired to see the days that we see, yet God
otherwise dispensed according to his wisdom that we should see them, who yet
do not esteem them. But if David had lived in these times wherein the kingdom
of Jesus Christ is so manifest, he would no doubt have so far passed that
zeal and knowledge that he had then, as we would have been worse if we had
been in those darker days. Therefore let us know that we all ought to make
this protestation of the praise of God even as the benefits of God require of
us, and be no less earnest to sing this thanks giving unto him, than David
was: and seeing the benefits be common, to join with him praising God for
them. Further we may learn here, what lies upon it if we take upon us to
call other to the praise of God, it is that we our selves first give example
even as David, who as he called others, so he leads first and shows the way
to them. For if we call others and are deaf our selves, if we bid other go,
and we si^^ still, if we pipe and singe to our neighbors, and we be not our
selves therewith delighted, what do woe but mock God and condemn our selves.
Therefore in the 12. Esaias 12.4.
of Esaye, the faythefull do not only exhort other, but they begin the
song of praise and thanks giving them selves: I will praise the Lord with my
whole heart, etc. Here the Prophet teachethe us a notable doctrine, if we
ascribe not to nature as the profane Philosophers, or to stars as vain men,
or to fortune, as the blind and covetous, or to any other thing then to the
Lord alone, this excellent order which we see in all the world, or that
redemption and these benefits which were bestowed upon Israel at his
departinge out of Egypt, but that in both we acknowledge only the wisdom
and mercy of our God, whose hand and power brought all these things to
pass. Yea let other praise their Idols which they feign unto them selves with
the dishonor of God, we will O Lord acknowledge thee, and make mention only
of thy wisdom and loving kindness and truth that has wrought this goodly
order in all the world, such mercies and benefits for thy Church, and such
judgments against the wicked, and them that know not thy name. I will
praise the Lord with my whole heart. Here the Prophet declares what kind of
thanks giving and song this shall be that he purposes to singe unto the
Lord, not an outward and hipocriticall praise, not in words only to come
near unto him, not only in tongue and mouth: but an hearty, an earnest, a
true song, a song and Psalm wherein all the parts and powers of his mind
and understanding shall be joined together in as much as a man is able. For
he means not that thi^ song of praise shall answer to the exactnes of the
Law, wherein we are commanded with all our heart and soul to serve the
Lord: But the whole heart in this place is opposed to a dissembling and
hipocriticall heart, and as he speaks in an other place, to a heart, and a
heart that is a double heart. Psalm. 12.^.
So that here is no hold for any to take, that man is able to fulfill the
Law, if we admit the Holy Ghost Interpreter of him self. But alas, what
should I dispute that man is not able to fulfill that commandment of the full
love of God which is required, wh^ is he that dare dispute for it? I ask no
other witness against himself then his own conscience, if he vouchsafe to
look into it. Shall he not there see a sea of wicked thoughts? a world of
vain devises? a hell of blasphemies, and foul imaginations? shall he not see
a slave and servant of the body, or rather an infinite number even so many
bond men to sin, and ministers to Satan, as he has parts and members? O
the depth, length, and breadth of that wickedness that remains and dwells
in us! Well the Prophet teaches us that know our selves, that we come not
before the Lord, before whose eyes all our hearts are open and manifest with a
face only and show of godliness, but that together with our tongue, our spirit
and soul be joined, and so to come to sing or pray unto the Lord. For if we
come before the Lord either hipocritically or negligently, let us be assured
that he whose honor we stain by our boldness and impudency, will require it
of us to the uttermost. It follows: In the congregation and assembly of the
just, that is openly and in the face of the Church. For that inward and dark
godliness that yet men love so much, that they will praise God in their
chambers, in their studies, in their hearts, that can not suffice. Nay, that
is no godliness which in time and place will not openly show it self to the
praise and glory of God. But yet this profession and declaration of our
service, that is required of us, is not so much for the Lords cause, as for
our own certayntie touching our election, and for the furtheraunce of the
children of God to the like by our example. And if we consider who this is, and
what a man he was that speaks this, we will easilye grant that I would
prove. For who was more diligent, earnest, and often in private prayers then
David? Psalm. 119.62. Psalm. 42.6. Psalm. 6.6.
How many nights are witnesses of his godliness? in the wilderness, in the
mountains, and caves of the earth, in his privy chamber, and in his bed,
how was he accustomed to power out his spirit before the Lord? Yet we se^
this godly and great Prophet exempteth not him self from public and common
assemblies, where the children of God were according to the appoyntmente of God
gathered to praise him, and confess unto him their sins, and to hear his
word, with other exercises for the increase of his faith and godliness. But
what do I say that he did not exempt him self, which thought it the greatest
benefit under heaven to have a part and portion in the Church and communion
of Saints. Therefore in banishment he so be wayleth and lamenteth his state
being as it were by tyranny excommunicated from that Paradise, Psalm 42. and.
84.
and from that earthly heaven, I mean the temple, when were manifest signs of
the presence of God. Not that David knew not but that he moved, and lived, and
had his being in God, or that the Lord would not hear his prayers out of the
temple, but for the same causes that every one of us ought to be so affected to
the common places of prayer and hearing the word, and receiving the
Sacraments, was this earnest desire in David's heart, because there the Lord
had appointed to be worshipped, there the sacrifices to be offered, there the
ministry of the Priests, there was the fellowship of Gods children, there
was a Sacrament of the presence of God, which all more fully, and clearly, and
lively now in every faithful congregation gathered according to the word of
God, do appear to us then they did in the temple. And yet who accompteth it as
the least part of his cross, when he is sick or otherwise hindered from the
service of God? who considers the happiness of their feet that tread in
the temple of God? Who wishes for his appearance before the Lord, as the Heart
brayeth for the rivers of water, in the congregation? O the wonderful contempt
of the benefits of God, and the singular patience of the Lord. Exodus 5.3.
Moses when the people were kept with Pharaos hand as with a chain in
Egypt, asks their deliverance of the king that they might serve the Lord in
the wilderness at the day appointed, least the Lord should slay them. And who
is he that this day fears the hand of the Lord, if he omit the service
of God? I say not holden from it by Pharaoh, but tied with his own linkes and
chains which he has made unto himself either business or ydlenes* But a day
will come when these deriders and contemners of his word, and the fellowship of
his children, shall account it most extreme myserie to be secluded from them,
whom yet here they contemned. This doctrine is as plain as justification by
faith, or no merits of works, and yet how few authors and approuers has it?
But herein appears our religion, that it is in imagination, not in faith: or
opinion, not in judgment in the braynd, not in the heart, in word not in
deed and effect. It follows, In the assembly of the just. This is a title
which David gives to the Church of God, thereby declaring who they are that
have in deed a place in the temple. For although all come both good and badde,
both the swearer and he that fears God, both the adulterer and he that made a
covenant with his eyes, both the vain and idle person, and they that walk in
their vocation diligently: yet David did see in the word of God who were right
witnesses of the praise of God, and therefore as with a rod he stands and
seuereth the wicked from this company. Psalm. 15.1.
So in the xv. Psalm he asks of God seeing all go thither, who they be that
shall dwell and abide for ever in his tabernacle? that have their names as it
were written in heaven, and belong unto that company? and he answers
himself, that such as are pure and clean in their works, he that is no
extortioner, no vserer, he that fears God and loves and makes much of them
that fear the Lord. Psalm. 24.6.
And in the xxiiij. Psalm, This is that generation of Jacob of them that seek
thy face. The rest are bastardes, and not the true generation of Jacob. And in
the 50. Psalm the Lord does as it were muster his true children from amongst
all Israel, and seuereth the wicked, and forbids them to sacrifice or to do
any thing whereby they professed that they served God, Psalm. 50.16.17.
seeing they hated to be reformed, and were fellows and companions of the
wicked. All which places teach us how we ought to labor daily by prayer and
those means that God has left to profit us, that we may be counted before
God of the number of his true children, he means not that those only which
are without sin are of the Church of God, but as it is taken in the
Scripture in other places, for such as to their power serve God. Job. 1.1.
Luke 1.6. Genesis 7.1.
So Job is called a just man, one that feared God: Elizabeth and Zachary are
called just, and Noah a just man: which all yet, had their great and many
sins: but those he calls here just who propounded to them selves the
fear of God to live after it: who walked before God in the ways of
righteousness and holiness, although they sometime fell: so that unless we
have this before our eyes to live according to the word of God, to come to the
temple or congregation to profit, to put off daily some piece of our old
man, (...) to be enriched and decked with Jesus Christ in Wisdom, Justice,
Redemption, Sanctification more and more, by our coming to the Church we
pollute the congregation and infect the very place, and make it a witness
against us in the day of judgment, and we despise the holy company of
Angels, who are together present with the children of God witnessers of all
their behavior, and we much and provoke the Lord against us. It were better
never to see the Church, never to set foot within the doors, then thus
proudly and presumptuously to break into the temple of God with so great
dishonor to his name. For what do we make of God, or how do we account of him
otherwise then of an Idol, who neither sees, hears, nor knows us, when
thus impudently we dare take place among the Saints of God? Therefore let
every one that is wicked and purposed to remain in his wickedness, hear what
I say unto him in the message of the Lord* These gates are the gates of
righteousness, Ps. 118.19
as says the Prophet, the righteousse shall enter into the^: this house is the
house of mine honor, the contemners and despisers of God have no inche of room
therein: This company is the Church of Gods Saints and children, there are
no dogs or swine in this number. Know therefore that the very steps of
the Church door are holy ground and therefore not to be profaned: know that
there stands at the door the Angel of the Lord with a sword in his hand to
hinder thy entrance into this earthly paradise, who will surely smite thee at
the last, Genesis 3.24.
for all this dispite against the Lord. Job. 4.24.
As for us that by Gods grace are not guilty of this contempt, let us still
fear God and worship him in spirit and truth: let us be diligent, sincere,
earnest, true and faithful in our duties to God, who will in the day appointed
set us with his Angels for ever to praise him, Luc. 20.36. Apo. 21.27.
and will cast out the polluted and unclean out of his Church. He will put
their names out of the book of life where they seem to have been written,
Gal. 4.30. Mat. 25.33
he will cast out with Ismaell all mockers and give them their portion with the
goats. This great God and righteous judge save us and keep us from the
temptations of Satan that we may ever stick unto him in truth and faith. Amen.

Great are the works of God sought out of all that delight therein. This is
the first verse of the Psalm of praise which David sings to the Lord. For
the former verse which I have spoken of is but a preface, and a preparing unto
the Psalm, whereby he stirs up him self and other to singe, and hear this
song. In the beginning therefore of the Psalm let us examine and search the
whole purpose and parts of it, that thend being understood we may see what
causes, reasons and arguments are the grounds thereof: which be the parts and
the strings upon which he plays and sings this song that if they be common
to us with him, if they be now as moving as ever they were, we join our selves
also unto this fellowship with him. First therefore he begins at the
general and common works which are in the whole world to praise God. After
these two verses he begins the remembrance of their deliverance with those
benefits which together the Lord showed them, as the spoil of Egypt, the
possession of the land of Canaan and the benefits of the knowledge of God by
his word, and in these points consists this Psalm. We see therefore as I
have showed already that here is no mention of any special and particular
benefits bestowed only upon the Prophet, but that the causes pertain as well
to the whole church of God as to him: whereupon it follows that we
understanding this song and seeing all the parts and veins of it, we give
our selves to no less hartye and earnest praise of God then David has showed
us example, but that we cast ou^ eyes a^ he does here on every side to obtain
some furtheraunce and help to stir us up to praise the Lord, let us then
follow the Prophet, as it were step by step and schole by schole, that we
may attain to the like zeal. Great are the works, etc. Here we see the first
schole, the first masters and doctors that David had eue^ the works of God in
the whole world. Whereby we see what schole the spirit of God trained him up
in, to learn to know the Lord: a schole in deed most fit to learn the
knowledge of God in, if we have the eyes that David had, and the diligence
which from time to time the children of God have bestowed therein. Romans 1.19.
Therefore it is that (...) Apostle in the first to the Romans says that
which was to be known of God that is his eternal power and Godhead may be
known by them. For which cause he condemns all the wise men of the world
even by these witnesses of the glory of God: who though they knew, yet learned
not by them to worship God as became them, that is in spirits But they
changed the glory of the everlasting and holy God into the similitude of
mortal and unclean beasts. Therefore in the first Epistle to the Corinth.
the Apostle calls it wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.21.
which God set before the world when they were without the word and had only
his works for books to read upon. Act. 14.17.
Therefore last of all the Apostle calls these works of God the rain and
seasonable weather, and joy of heart, witnesses of God. We see then that that
is in deed a school of wisdom by the doctrine of the Scriptures which also
may appear unto us by the effects of that excellent and high knowledge which
the Philosophers attained even by them only. How many of them knew the
providence of God? How many the immortality of the soul? the creation of the
world, and many other truths, without the written word of God? But as th
Apostle says they attained not to that point to worship him aright by these
things, but they mingled their devises and imaginations together with the truth
and their foolish hearts were darkened Romans 1.21.
that attained not to any profitable knowledge, further then to make their
condemnation just. But they might have learned by them the fear and worship of
God as Jeremy also witnesses accusing the Jews that even by the blessings of
God they did not learn to fear him who so mercifully blessed them. Ier. 5.24.
They might well have learned, Act. 17.28.
seeing that we move and live and have our being in God, as certain of their
own Poets taught them, that Gods power is infinite and everlasting, that there
is one God above all things to whom only honor and worship is due. They that
require further to see what the Heathen have learned even by reason I refer
them to Iustine Martyr (...) where he sets forth largely all that they
understood by the works of God. If then the works of God so clearly and
manifestly have showed unto men only wise and cunning in things not
pertayninge unto salvation, so much of the knowledge of God, it is a shame
that we having not only the works of those men but also our own experience
and the word of God which teaches us further of these works that men of them
selves use to seek, if we become not very excellently and perfectly learned
in those things which the works of the Lord do teach us. For we may not think
that the heavens were made to gape on, or the earth for to tread upon, the
creatures of God for us, and we for our selves, but we must even, out of all
them learn much wisdom concerning the knowledge of God, and most out of our
selves. But we have not that mind to profit that other of the children of God
have showed, and are le^t for our example. Why are we not all Salomo^s that be
in Camb. that have such helps and means left and lent unto us of God for our
furtheraunce in the knowledge of the things that God has made? Nay we are as
the most rude and ignorant men and yet seek not for better. If we look to
the heavens, it is a sealed book unto us, we know nothing of those quarters,
we can not hear that excellent sound and noyce and same of God that they sound
to his praise. If we look unto the earth, upon the fruts, herbs, and trees, we
can not read, we know no more then is good for the pot and for our bellies,
and greater knowledge we neither follow nor desire. I am persuaded that if that
care had been in men that might and ought to have been, never a one of us when
we were first bachelors had been so rude and ignorant in these most noble arts
(which many yet know not almost by name) as we are now even after some years
that we have taken the profession of them upon us, we may take heed by the
ignorance and negligence of the days that are past, and if we have not such
amongst us as can teach them, let us by rewards and liberal stipends provoke
some to the study of them who may be after lights to other therein. Sure the
least piece of learning consists in understanding quiddities, and I think
means might be found to have every scholar in this house within four years
if men had humble minds that they would harken to other (although then
inferiors) not only well learned in the three noble tongues, but also in the
seven liberal arts and sciences. This is peradventure unsavory to some, and
seems to have small edification, but to him that judges a right, he shall
find that in Colleges and in Trinity College it should seem hye time for
men to lay their hands to it, if we look either for godliness or learning to
florishe in it. For how shall we see into the works of God without eyes? how
shall we hear without ears? and how shall we understand what they mean if
they still lie hidden from us? They are all great, excellent, and notable, but
as David says sought out and searched and inquired into. And if we stand to
consider them from Behemoth of whom we read in Job to the Oistrich: Job. 40.10.
1. Reg. 4.33
from the Egle to the fly, from the Cedar of Libanus to the Isope that grows
upon the hill, from the stars of heaven to the dust of the earth, and from
the Angels of God to the worms that creep upon the ground. These are the
bounds of our knowledge in the works of God. These are our borders and limits
wherein to stay, and yet we think we are greatly learned in Philosophy, if we
know almost one of them, or a few quiddities of materia prima and such like
things. Oh that we propounded unto us at the last true and good knowledge,
sound profit and absolute learning, that man would with a cotage and life seek
to labor to his power to attain unto it. But David here notes our fault when
he says, they are sought out of them that delight therein. For wherein is our
delight but in vanities, but in play, but in pride, but in idleness, but in
pleasures, but in eating and drinking and losing the time? Here is matter for
Magistrates to look unto who are to be desired to hear by our acts and
exercises of learning how we go forwards: and if they find us not as the sons
of the prophets but sons of Beliall, to thrust us out of the College and
give our places to those which will be better then we. O Lord kindle in us the
fear of thee that for conscience we may behave our selves diligently in our
vocation, in those studies whereby we may profit in the knowledge of thee: That
abandoning al vain delights which as the lightning are soon extinguished, we
may set our minds and studies upon such things as may serve to the setting
forth of thy glory through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Because of the singular and notable zeal concerning the praise of God in the
congregation which David professed and promised in the first verse, I have
entered the examination of the whole Psalm to se the reasons and causes, the
arguments and proves which David had. Wherefore so to stir up al his wits and
all his heart and soul in this song. The last time speaki^g of the 2. verse at
the which this praise of god begins, and as it were beginning this anatomye
at the head, and looking nearely eue^ for the beginning and infancy of David's
zeal, and considering the first schools and masters which he had, I found the^
al in this verse: Great are the works of the Lord, etc. For here the Prophet
fetches and draws eue^ as from the furthest fou^taines this praise of God.
Now it follows in this third verse. Praise and glory are his works, etc.
which declares unto us the same doctrine of the praise of the works of God
which we did see in the former verse. For in these two sentences he
comprehends that knoweledge of God which may be understood out of the
creatures of God in the whole world, but he speaks here more particularly and
distinctly of that knowledge which may here be learned of those which look
diligently for them and delight in the consideration of them. For it is
requisite both because we are dim of sight and the Lord works have like the
courtaines of Salomo^ their beauty within, Cant. cant. 1.41.
that we hold our eyes near unto them and put our heads as it were within
them to consider them if we will see those things in the^ which David a most
excellent interpreter notes and poynteth at Praise and glory, etc. Let us
first examine this that he says: praise and glory, etc. the meaning of the
Prophet is that the Lord has in such wisdom and counsel made his works that
even by them may appear to all that consider them the praise and glory of the
Creator, which doctrine he had in the verse before declared but not so clearly
and manifestly: for here he expounds what he meant before when he called them
great or excellent, that is full of the praise and renown of the maker,
perfect masters of Gods wisdom, excellent teachers of his glory, and most
sufficient witnesses of his praise. This doctrine although it was declared
partly before in the exposition of the former verse, yet it may not be either
tedious to you nor grievous to me some thing more to speak of the same, seeing
the holy Ghost vouchsafes ^o stand upon it. And we may thereby understand
that the doctrine of the praise of God taught by his works is not lightly and
smally to be esteemed, seeing the spirit of God witnesses it unto us by
repetitio^. True it is that the word of God is the hie and principal master
of the knowledge of God in the Church of Christ as we shall see in the next
verse, the temple wherein his glory most appears: but notwithstanding these
are helps appointed of God to the raising of our minds to his glory, moving
us being bodies with bodily things and therefore unless we be forgetful of our
weakness, we may not neglect the ordinary means. The Prophets and holy men of
God whose love and zeal of the Lords glory is left for our example, have
labored in them and profited by them to the praise of God. Let us therefore
follow them and namely David in this place, Let us follow the same steps
and ways which he has trod before us: Let us stand with him as it were in
the midst of the world, and lift up our eyes to heaven, and after cast
them down upon the earth: yea let us behold even our selves with those eyes
which we see David to have done in the 139. Psalm. shall we not then be amazed
and astonished at the wisdom we shall find in them, Psalm. 139.
and give glory to the Lord? shall we not in meditating but of our selves,
find a world of notable and excellent works of God? Let us look but a little
above us into that shop of the Lords notable works, where he makes the
rain, hayle, and snow, lightning and thunder, and consider from whence he
sends rain, how he has powered it as into barrels or bottels till we need
it. Consider above that, the light of the sun, the moon, the number and
order of the stars, the workmanship of the heavens, that fair and excellent
courtayne which the Lord has drawn over us, the^ also the power of winds,
the multitude of waters, and the stretching out of the air, the nature of
beasts, the fruits of the trees, the smell of flowers, the beauty and property
of stones, the virtue of herbs and of roots, and in a word the whole earth
and the heavens, with all their hosts and furniture: Have they not as it were
written and graven upon them in great and text letters praise and glory to the
Lord our Creator? In the 19. Psalm the Prophet attributes this same voice of
glory to the heavens: Psalm. 19.1
The heavens (says he) speak the glory of God. etc. and makes that noble and
swifte grant the sun the messenger of the same word to all the world. Psa.
104.2.
In the 104. Psalm he compares the light to a robe of glory and honor that
the Lord covers him self withal, because the light declares manifestly
all the works of God which are glasses of his praise. And in the 148. Psalm,
Psalm. 148.
he puts this song of the praise of God into the mouth of all creatures,
even of the hills and mountains, of the souls of the air, trees of the
wodde, of the dragons and worms that creep upon the earth. Job. 38. and 39.
and. 40.
So in the thirty eight and nine chapters of Job, the Lord to the end that
he might humble Job, and bring him to the knowledge of the praise of God and
his own confusion, he reckons the works of his hands in order, even the
heavens and earth and beasts of the field. Job. 40.5.
And in the forty Chapter he byddeth Job likewise to deck him self with
glory and majesty, and to array hi^ self with beauty and excellency, that
i^, to make such works in which there may^ appear his praise, and renown.
Praise therefore and glory is his work, so that where so ever we cast our
eyes, whether before us or behind us, above or beneath us, or within us, on
the right hand or o^ the left hand, all are full of the glory and praise of
God: even as our Savior Christ teaches, Mat. 5.34.
forbidding to swear by the heavens or earth, o^ any the least creature,
because they are the Lords seat, and this is his footestoole, and seeing we
can not make a very hear, we must confess that even there also is a mark
and token of the Lords glory and majesty. Wherefore let us with this wise and
godly Prophet learn the beginning of our praising of God ever at these
creatures, and know that it shall be shame and sin for us to be dumme, when
they are so hye and loud: but most of all to ou^ grievous condemnation, if
where they declare the glory of God, we bring by ou^e wickedness, by our vain
and ungodly behavior, shame, reproach, and ignominy to his name. It
follows, And his goodness remains for ever. I translate the word so:
although it properly signifies righteousness, because I think that to be the
Prophets meaning. For in the next Psalm the Prophet has this half verse in
the same words speaking of the good and merciful man whose goodness is not
soon dried but continues for ever, that is, Psalm. 112.3
all his life. Dan. 4.14.
So Daniell exhorts Nabuchad. to redeem his sins by mercy and
liberality, and yet uses this word of justice. Here therefore the Prophet
likewise means the goodness and liberality and mercy of God which may be
learned also out of his very ordinary and common works. Psalm. 136.
This piece of the verse is notably enlarged by the Prophet David in the 136.
Psalm where he attributes the creation of heavens, of the sun and moon, of
the stars, of the day and night, of the placing of the earth upon the waters,
to the everlasting mercy of God: making this the ground and foot of the
Psalm or song: For his mercy indureth for ever. And our Savior Christ also
teaching his disciples to be good to their enemies brings in thexample of God
the father whose sun and rain shines and falls upon his enemies also.
Matt. 5.45.
Where we see this doctrine of the Prophet confirmed and expounded, that is,
that the creatures of God are witnesses unto all the world of his mercy and
loving bindnesse. In this sense are the Prophet^ to be expounded, when they
speak ^f the darkeninge of the Sun, for the mean not that the Sun shall
fail a fall but only by that which is unto us (...) a testimony, and token
of Gods mercy when it shines they describe the greatne^ of troubles and
confussion of all things to come when the Lord arises to take vengeance of
sin, which shall be so great and horrible confusion as if the Sun were
fallen out of heaven. This goodness of God is not only manifest by the Sun
and those excellent and high creatures, but even as I have showed in the last
verse, his glory also appears his mercy and goodness even in the least of all
creatures: not only toward us for whose godly use he has made them, but also
to them selves. For first it is great goodness to them in that they are:
Secondly it is great glory to them in that they are the works of the
glorious and eternal God: But especially and principally this goodness of
God is toward us in all creatures, that in the use of them we may thankefullie
and humbly acknowledge the exceeding mercy of God. The earth that we tread
upon, the houses that we dwell in, the air which we live by, the bread which
we eat, and water or wine which we drink, the fire that we warm us by, the
clothes which we wa^e, and to be short, all the creatures of God which we
apply to our use, ought to lead us to, and admonish us of that goodness and
mercy of God, by whose only bountiful grace and mercy we take and use them:
without the feling and knowledge o^ which mercy of God, who so ever thou art
that use any creature of God, thou stealest it. The bread and drink which
thou deuou^est is worse then poison unto thee: for unless we rise to the
consideration of the love of God toward us, a^ a father toward his children,
who provides these things for us, by what right can we think that they
pert^ine unto us* We see there^^^e that they are no less witnesses of Gods
mercy, then of his glory and praise: And that who so ever shall ^yse to accuse
the Lord of c^ueltie o^ (...), may be ^^th ^^^ntly by the creatures of God
command^d. And how can not they be ashamed ^^laye this upon the Lords, from
whose only goodness and mercy it comes that the world is, and we and all
things hau^ (...) him life and being and moving. But the Lord has more
excellently deel (...) ^^s goodness to us by his creatures, as the Prophet^ by
this notes in that he adds [and continues for ever.] No man can deny but
that the Lord had showed great mercy and love toward us if he had made this
world like unto a stage, and brought us in for a little time, and after a while
as it were to have taken down the stage, and so with the clapping of hands to
have gone away again. If he had made the use of all his excellent and noble
creatures, the Angels the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, the heaven and
earth, and all their ornaments for a year, a month, a week, or a day, who
can deny but the Lord had done us great honor and worship to vouchsafe us
the use of them? Yea if he had brought us into the world but for a moment,
and set us on a pinnacle to have seen these heavens and this earth, to have
seen the creatures of God according to their kind, the benefit had been
great, and the grace and favor more excellent then can be uttered. But how
has the Lord commended unto us his grace and favor, his love and m^rcy, in
that he has made them permanent and durable, and not like the smoke that
per^^^^eth, o^ like the grass that grows up, and straightwaye withers, but
like the trees of eternity whose roots are stayed and nourished for ever.
This grace and mercy even to Adam in his perfection had been worthy continual
praise and remembrance, how much more now in this sinful and miserable
life? For let us examine and try our selves* let us lay out lives to the rule
of the Law of God, let us look and behold them in that glass which
r^u^^l^th all things, and seeing we have the use of these creatures by no
other condition but by the obedien e of Gods commandments, what grace and
mercy may we see in that they are not every moment taken away from us. I
marvel that the sun which is witness of so great and innumerable faults
upon the earth stands so long in the heavens: that the heavens melt not for
the infection that ^^n them by our corruption: and that Jesus Christ comes
not to burn them and the earth so polluted with our sins, to make that new
heaven and that n^we earth wherein righteousness shall dwell. Which of us is he
that perceives not to ^ise out of him! If as out of a filthy bottomless
pit, ^mo^^ and infection that were able to darke^ the sun and cover all the
compass of y heavens that may not justly wonder at the Lords mercy i^ that
the earth is able to bear us so laden with ungodliness and unrighteousness?
O Lord thy mercy reaches unto the heavens, Psa. 57.10.
and thy goodness unto the highest heavens. Thy pity and compassion is infinite
and wonderful, and yet who is he that considers these things* Thus I will
leave the consideration of the mercy of God in this part to your godly
meditation, and come to the more n^^e and perfect sight and knowledge o^ God
which appear th m h s Church on^l^ (...) you by the gl^r^ of God and lou^ o^
I^s^s Ch^^st that ^^ ^^member s^eing the h^^uens and ^arth, and s^eing all
things in them are ours, (...) the mercies of God they continue (...) (...)
use, that we ma^^ also ^e Christ ^s as thapostle her^o^ me^^^eth, that (...) to
the love of his word and (...) his G^sp^ll, eu^n a^ h^w ^s in all thing
obedient to God. Thus we (...) the glory and mercy of God out of the creatiues
which h^ has app^ynt^d (...) witnesses thereof in the whol^ world, (...) only
one place, but al the whole world may b^ ^all^d (...), because the Lord
^^^e^leth his glory and mercy in every part thereof but yet if we compare this
knowledge ^^ the glory and mercy of God learned here out of his creatures, to
that which may be known out of his Church and out of his word, we shall
perceive that in the creatures we see but his back and hinder parts, we see
him but da^^ly as in a glass of steel^, but as in the nether and outward
courts o^ his temple, here in the church we shall (...) his glory, as in the
holiest place of all (...) in the place of the oracl^s, is n a gl^ss^^
Crystal, and as it were face to face Wherefore let us draw near and come
unto the temple, let us look into this glass and b^hold his fatherly
countenance. He has made t^ his w^nderfull work remembrances. The Prophet in
this verse shows the passing and wonderful work^ that he has done for his
Church, and the exceeding love that he bears to his church. For although we
have already seen the mercy and goodness which he has declared as well to them
as to other even in the verse of his common creatures, yet because they are
common to others with the^, the particular and private love which the Lord
bears unto the^ above others, does not so clearly appear. Therefore here the
Prophet begins a Catalog, although not with many words, yet full^ (...)
remembering all, and calling them to mind b^ general words. And first that
this special and parti^ular care which he has of his Church may be known to
pass the common and universal order of things, I think it may be noted out
of the conferences of the words. In the second verse he says, Great are his
w^rkes, etc. Here he uses a greater word, and says, they are wonderful, for
although this Prophet in other places call the common works of God wonderful,
and are so in deed in them selves considered, yet ^opa^ed with these they are
great, and these wonderful so in half of the third verse he says, his
goodness remains, etc. But here he uses words which seem to come out of the
Lords heart and bowell^s gracious and m^r^^full: and he doubleth them, because
his love is double and triple and manyfolde upon them. This greatness of the
woders of God he commends in these words, He has made the remembrance or
memorial of them, etc. Not that the goodness of God which rises out of his
creatures is to be forgotten o^ negligently to be regarded, for we know
therefore the Lord in the beginning to have instituted the Sabbath for a
perpetual memory to us of his great love, and goodness, and mercy, and wi^dome,
which appears in the world: and David has also made diverse Psalms in their
remembrance, whereof some, ^s that of the Sabbath was song in the temple. Psalm.
91.
But he speaks after an excellent sort, (...) principally and chiefly giving
remembran^e unto the^, as if that in comparison of th^s^, the other be forgotten.
^o^ as the Prophet speaking of the benefit of the deliverance o^ rather
resurrection of the Jews out of Babylon, says that it shall no more be said
then, the Lord ^^ueth which brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, but
they shall speak of the Lord thus, the Lord lives which brought them out of
Babylon, meaning that this shall be so excellent, that in respect thereof the
former (although so notable and as it is here also thus highly commended should
be no more spoken of, so in this place the benefits which he has showed to
his Church in their deliverance, after a sort makes the other to be forgotten.
Psa. 60.19
And Esaias speaking of the light of the Gospel in the kingdom of Christ, says,
that in that day the sun shall give no light, nor the moon appear: meaning
also that in comparison of ye light which shall be seven times greater the^ ye
light of the sun, eue^ the sun shall be darkened as the moon at his
presence: so in this place the lord has ye remembrance of these his works so
famous and glorious that the former benefit like the stars at the rising of
the sun are obscured and hidden. For i^ they were wo^thy once to be spoken
of, these are worthy ^ften times: if those to be written with a pen in paper,
these are worthy to be written in v^on and with an Ad^mant stone: if those with
the hand of a man, these are to be printed with the singer of God. For as high
as the heavens are in co^paris^n of the earth, so much has the ^^^d magnified
the measure of his graces and benefits toward the Church above the rest of
the son of men. But let us consider particularly what they were. The Prophet
means the signs and wonders which the Lord declared by the hand of Moses
and Aron in the midst of the land of Egypt upon Pharao and al his servants,
the turning of the water into blood, the destroying of trees and fruits of the
earth by the caterpillars, the filling of the land full of frogs and he,
and those other which are written of by Moses the 9. Exodus 9. Psalm. 78.
of Exodus and repeated in the Psalm. 78. but above all these, he understands
the cause and the occasion of all these the na^^^^tie, and as it were the
creation of the Church, which was a greater and more excellent work then the
making of the whole world. For the heavens and earth as says the Prophet, Ps.
102.26
shall wax old and perish, but his favor and grace to his church shall
endure for evermore. Therefore the Lord in respect of Jerusalem man t^^o
account of the whole world, as ^ say in the person of God reasone ^ with that
proud Sanacharib, who thought that he could as easily have one (...) ^d
Ierusal^^, (...) he had done Samaria and the other (...) desolation, Ps. 36 19.
Ps. 37.26.
Have thou not heard (says the how I have tourmed it of old, not naming but
meaning and emphaticall; noting Jerusalem, Esaias 49.23.
whom he prefers before all the whole world. And the prophet Esaias
prophesies that the kings and Monarchs of the earth shall like the dust of
her feet, thereby noting what honor she shall be in even with her enemies.
Seeing then the preservation of her, as appears, is so precious in the eyes
of God, that in the respect thereof he conten^neth al things ^l^, the begett^ng
and birth of it must needs be the g^eatest and most excellent work that ever
was, and therefore the remembrance of it, and all those signs and wonders which
the Lord wrought for it, turning the whole course of nature for his Church,
ought perpetually to be with care and diligence celebrated. So Moses wondreth
at it and says, was eue^ the like heard that God should come to a people and
take the^ out of another people in such signs and tokens and wonders? Deuteronomy.
4.34.
The Lord therefore has printed the memory of his marvelous works, so that
they cannot be forgotten. Nay Egypt shall be a witness from generation to
generation for ever, that the grace of God to his Church passes all
understanding. This mark shall remain for ever, which the Lords mighty hand
and naked arm printed and sealed upon his enemies by ten strokes. The Prophet
by this kind of speaking exhorts all Israel, who^ the Lord has so
maruelously delivered, to remember these works, and tell them further with
gladness as in diverse Psalms. This doctrine therefore of the remembrance of the
wonderful works and benefits of God is something to be declared. For if ever
there were need to speak of it, behold the days of joy and gladness, of
security and ease, of sport and play, and of piping and dancing, of riote and
wantonness, even the days of forgetfulness of Gods benefits. And if ever there
were fear of the fulfilling of ye prophecy amongst the Jews, that being full
they would forget the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.10.
as Moses prophesied, this is the day and hour that Moses, as if he had sen^
so long before, prophesied even of us. Every one of us sits under his vine
and under his fig tree in his seeled and garnished chamber, and the troubles
that are so great and many both in our own country and abroad, they touch
us not by Gods mercy. And why have we all this case of God? to abuse our time
and other benefits? or rather to remember them perpetually, and use them
lawfully to the praise of god. This is therefore our time of danger, our time
of forgetting ye goodness of our God, our time of falling away from the Lord.
If you the Lords ministers and watchemen make it not your time of care and
diligence of holding and staying us, of remembering and repeating, and night and
day remembering and repeating the goodness of our God upon us, his statutes and
his ordinances, his laws and his commandments which he has appointed for us
to do the^, what danger are we in? Therefore I wonder and marvel at it, that
you see not the slippery places we stand on, and seek to help us. The goodness
of God has so provided that in this College there might be every morning at
prayer a Sermon, every evening with prayers a sermon, every sunday of ye
forenoone and afternoon together with prayers the word of God preached, that
the words of God perpetually sounding in our ears, may make this College as
it is called Trinitye College, to be named the Lord is there. There be
thirteen places appointed for Preachers, beside those that are not accounted
for the house: and yet this is not done, whereas I am persuaded that three
doing their office in care and zeal, in godliness and faithfulness, were able by
Gods grace to make this College together with the Magistrate a College of
Saints, a College where no blasphemer, no idle, no profane person, no son
of Belial, no Cananite could be found, And if so many can not in their course
maintain this order in preaching, how many will do it? Is there any i^ the
places that are unworthy, that are not al able? the^ let the book and license
be takes out of his hand and given to his fellow that is better the^ he. I am
sure there is none of the wise and godly sort, but wish and desire that which
I say. For as the benefits of the Lord are perpetually and everlasting, so
ought also the remembrance of them to be, but there be men of corrupt
consciences, wicked children, ungodly and profane persons which content them
selves with a face or visard of religion who know not what it is to serve God,
that will securely deride this and laughe it to scorn. Well the Lord would have
his benefits to be remembered, let us look how we remember then* but it were an
infinite thing to speak of all: let us consider the remembrance but of this
one wondrous and marvelous benefit even the greatest that ever was, God
manifested in the flesh. This I speak of, admonished by this time, of the
feast of the Nativity that the word which was spoken the last day, may stand
in the mouths of two witnesses. They which remember the fearful example that
fell out after in that Christmas as we call it, may witness that God by his
servant following direction of his word, threatens not in vain
And if neither you of your selves neither at the word of God will give place, I
pray God that a terrible and heavy judgment be not the third witness of this
truth unto us. Has Jesus Christ comen into the flesh to lay the bridle of our
necks to run after our vain devises? has he obtained by his coming twelve
days of God the Father for carding, dising, and lotting, for masking and
mumming, for mocking and mowing, for crying and laughing, for the practicing of
every vain devise that comes to our heads all the year, or do we think
that this profaning of so holy a thing, this mocking of so earnest a matter,
this t^rning of the grace of God into license and wantonness, that it shall be
unpunished? what is this but even to give a reed into the hand of Jesus
Christ, and to mock h^^ kingdom? What crowning of him is it (...) this vain
mirthe and wantonness, b^ with briars and thorns to prick his head Is this
the joy spoken of by the Angel that came to declare his birthe? told (...)
tydinges of this gladness? Is this the benefit that thou have purchased to us
by the wonderful mystery of thine incarnation of Emmanuel? oh I am ashamed
that it should ever be heard of amongst the Jews an^ Turks, that the
Christians at that time of the year when their Savior was borne, give the^
selves for many days from their ordinary ^dest and shamefaced behavior, from
walki^^ ordinarily in their vocation and studies, to v^ modest and shameful
practices, to watching (...) waking, and al for vain and unfruitful works
(...) darkness. Wherein differs our celebratio^ (...) the nativity of Christ
from the popish Christmas? that it ought to differ as far as hea^ even the
highest heavens from the nether most hell. How do we look to call Papi^^ from
their vain conversation, when we a^ not our selves a foot from them? Is this
the conversation that shall strike men with a^ admiration and love of virtue?
1. Pet. 3.1.
If it be required of women so to behave them selue^ that other may be won
thereby to God, does it not more appertain to men who were first made to Gods
glory? but ought it not yet more to appear in scholars and those which are
called scholars of the holy Trinity. I think if but thus much were spoken
amongst the Heathen against so great an abuse, they would repent in sackcloth
and ashes. And yet I know that this people will not be brought from this vain
conversation, for they love it and delight in it, and will hide it and keep it
as a jewel. For without these things they complain that it is but a dead
Christmas. These men will never confess the truth of this doctrine, till God
have sealed it with some plague or other. Well thus we ought not to remember
the benefit of that unspeakable misterye, by the which we are joined to God
and God to us, but in joy of the spirit that utters forth Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual songs, and such l ke. Coloss. 3.16
We ought also to keep in mind not this only, but all the other miracles
which the Lord wrought for the defense, safgard and benefit of his Church, so
that our hearts should be like the arc of witness: wherein as there was contained
for a perpetual remembrance, a pot or cruse of manna and Arons rod for an
euerlastig witness of the care of G d for the provision Nu^. 17.10. Heb. 9.4.
of his Church: and miracles, whereby (...) testified his election of Arons
posterity, (...) to have in our hearts all those things which the Lord either
works for all the church or particularly for any part thereof. In the rest of
the verse he renders a reason o^ these so great mercies: even the Lords p^^
not desert, Ex. 33.19. Rom 9.15.
but as he says to Moses: I wi^ have mercy on who^ I will have mercy: making
his mercy the cause of mercy. So here his pity is made the cause, and he uses
tw^ words doubling it, because his mercy (...) manifold toward his. Ezech.
16.6
Ezechiel in his 16. cap does notably set out this pity and free grace of the
Lord toward this people in comparing him self to a man that seeing a poo^
helples child newborn without any help^ of midwife or other, wallowing in her
blo^^ of very pity and compassion washes as cleanses her: does all things
needful se^ the succor of it in such a case: he then after brings her up
feeding and cherishin^ her til the be mariageable: he then clothe^ her with all
costly array, and sets her o^ with all precious jewels, and casting hi^ love
upon her takes her to be his w^^^ as more at large is to be seen: in that
place It follows: He has given a pray, etc In the verse going before we
have see^ the exceeding love of God toward his Church testified by so many
and such notable seals as he declared in the land of Egypt. Where for the
deliverance of the Church, he changed the whole course of nature, and as it
were in the bringing forth of a more excellent and precious thing then the
whole world which was at a word made and furnished, he did as it were many
days in pains and travels labor before the birth of the Church, so great a
thing was it to make unto him a Church. We have also seen his only pity and
compassion to have been the cause thereof. Now it follows in the fifth verse:
He gave a pray etc. For although in the scripture sometime this word signifies
a portion or a part, as in the 31. of the Proverbs, Pro. 31.15.
yet properly it signifies a spoil which a lion gets for him self, and the
circumstance of this place needs forces this sense. For he reme^breth the
notable benefit of the spoil of Egypt what time they went out of the la^d:
which although it may seem at the first not to be so excellent or notable, and
not to be spoken of particularly when the other are not severally reckened, but
together and as it were in one word bound up, yet we shall see this although not
the only cause, why the prophet namely reme^breth it passing the other briefly,
yet a sufficient and just cause. Exodus 7.19.
True it is that (...) miracle of turning the waters of Epypt (...) blod, Ioh.
2.6.
was wonderful and a marvelous work. For if we marvel at the turning of six
great po^ of water into wine in the 2. of John, what sh^^ we say at the turning
of whole rivers and fo^taines from their nature? And if we see in a few quarts
of water the finger of God, sha^^ not the hand and arm of the Lord appear
(...) turning the great river, that great river N^lus, and all the waters
besides of Egypt, not (...) fix earthen pots, but in sixteen times (...)
thousand pots of wood and stone? Act. 12.23.
And if in the destruction of one man by lice or worms the wonderful power of
God appeared, what and how marvelous is the power, that made s^ many as were
able to destroy a mighty kingdom and innumerable people for if the striking
with botches and sores of one man: and destr^ction of his catle astonisheth us
in the 1. Job. 1. Exodus 12.
(...) Job, at the striking of all Egypt, both man (...) beast, how shall we be
affected? or if in the blinding of one city of Sodom, Genesis 19.11. Genesis 10.23.
the marvelous hand of God showed it self, what is (...) be thought in the
blindness of al Egypt? The rest of the miracles may also in like manner be set
out by comparing other iudgement^ of God with them. But I let them pass.
Consider only the destruction of the first borne, both of man and beast. Exodus
12.
Could the Lord do a more marvelous work for the benefit of his Church, that
would so pearce the heart of them as the destruction of their eldest children,
their might, the beginning of their strength, and the excellency of their
powers? Could the Lord do a more notable work the^ fight for the^ from heaven
by the hand of his angel? What then means the Prophet to remember this of the
spoil of their goods omitting other such fearful and wonderful tokens as we
see? we shall see in the next piece of the verse a sufficient reason. But yet in
the very miracle and wonder it self, sufficient cause why to remember it
omitting the rest. For if we way and examine this spoil and pray that the
Lord gave his children with the circu^tances of the same, we shall find that
great and mighty power to have wrought herein, more the^ in the rest. For
remember the hate, the tyra^nous hate that they bear unto Israel, all the
injuries and wrongs which they did unto them. First their counsel taking for
the destroying of their men children privily by the midwiues, then their open
cruelty in destroying them, their exactions, their grievous exactions, their
anger, their fierce anger, their crueltye, their unnatural cruelty, which all
in a moment the mighty hand of God turned to kindness, (...) love, to gentleness,
even kindness, gentleness and love supernatural. Ex. 12.36.
For at a word and request of the Israelites, all the Egyptian gave unto them
their gold and silver, there jewels and ornaments, and whatsoever they had
dear and precious. Yea I think if they had asked, they would not have denied
them their own eyes, so mighty and above nature the hand of God wrought that
he turned in a moment even in the twinkling of an eye their hearts, their sto^
and adamant hearts into fleshly and waxe^ hearts and their eyes, their Crocadiles
eyes that w^^ sight would have destroyed them, into tender and womanish eyes:
their hands, eue^ there armed and wat like hands, into liberal and peace able
hands: and in a word he made of wolves lambs: of cruel Tigres, fawning dogs,
an meek doves, of fiery and flying serpent which work in my judgment so
notable^ so wonderful as you may perceive passe^ al the other miracles. For by
our own sin (...) cruel affections which nevertheless a^ stayed by the
spirit of God in his children, (...) may well perceive what strength and power
it needs to resist and overcome them. The sea ^ageth not with such rage: nor
Behemoth is not so strong as the rage and power Job. 40.10.
of sin is which dwells in us: so that marvel it is that it ca^ be stayed.
Here in therefore appeared the mighty hand of God, eue^ of that God that is able
to stay the raging of the seas, and fiercenes of cruel beasts, that he not only
stayed their hatred, but also turned it into love and kindness. Wherefore let us
serve God and be not careful what man can think and imagine against us. Their
hearts are no less in the hand of God to move the^ to love us than to hate us,
but he leads even the kings heart as easily to his purpose, as the water. So
Joseph feared God, Prou 21.1. Genesis 41.38
and he gave him grace with Pharao and al his nobles, although they knew not
God. And David often times and in a moment perceived Saules love and dear
affection, although other times he was purposed to kill him. Dan. 2.46.
And to Daniell in the carrying into captivity into Babel, Dan 5.29.
the Lord gave not only in the eyes of Nebuchadneser and Baltasar his son
love and favor, Dan. 6.28.
but also with the Persian kings Darius and Cyrus, although a poor prisoner.
And the same Cyrus and an other Darius and Artashasta were bended by the hand
of God to love and further the interprise of Zorobabell, Nehemias, Esia, Esdra^
1.1. Nehem. 2.8
and the rest that returned to the building of the temple of God. Seeing then
the Lord has showed such light to them that serve him, where they saw
nothing but darkness and desperation of all good things, what shame and sin,
yea how great and just shall the condemnation of our fearfulnes be, if in the
Church of God amongst them that profess godliness with us, and who are also
appointed for the^^ praise and reward that do well, if (I say) we d^ not love,
embrace, and follow after god^^nes. Well, here appears then first in the
miracle the hand and power of God for o^r comfort and calling forward to the
service of God. Here appears also a notable example for the proof of the
doctrine of the justice of God, who will not always wink at the prosperity
of the wicked. For although the Egyptians had heaped riches and gold, ie^els
and ornaments of pearls and precio^ stones which they had gotten by extorsio^
and exaction of the Israelits, or else by other covetous and crafty ways, yet
the pacient ^biding of the Lord, and as it were the holdin^ of his peace, Psa.
50.21.
as David says in the 50. Psal^ shall not continue for ever, but some ti^^ he
draws the wicked upon the high sta^^ to be seen both of them that fear the
Lord, and also that follow the like wickedness, and plucketh the pray out of
their teeth, and gives it to his children. F^^ God comfort his children by
such judgments, and fears other by their examples. 2. King. 7.7.
So in the second of the Kings seventh Chapter, the Aramites left their
tents beside Samaria, and the children of God had a pray vessels and clothes,
silver and gold, corn and vittells, as it is spoken by the mouth of the
servants of God. Job. 27.16.
For Job says though the wicked should heap up silver as the dust, and
prepare raiment as clay, he may prepare, but the just shall put it on: and the
innocent shall divide the silver. And Solomon says, Prou. 13.22
a good man shall give inheritance unto his children, but the riches of the
sinner are laid up for the just. And although this always appear not, yet
many such notable and excellent examples are in the Scriptures of Gods just
judgments, whereby he vpholdeth the faith of his children that there feet
slip not: and those wicked ones and sinners whom the Lord lifts up all
their life higher and higher, and are not in this sort spoiled, are also
lifted up that the trial of our faith in such tentations may be more
precious, and their ruin and fall the greater and more horrible. Yet as in the
punishment of other sins sometime the Lord exercises his judgments upon
the earth, so here also: and leaves other for the last judgment as S. Paul
declares, 1. Tim. 5.24
some men's sins are manifest before judgment, and some follow. And this (as
the Apostle has in an other place) is a demonstration of his justice, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5
to be reueiled in the last day. Now let us consider the epithe^ or title
which he gives to them on who^ he bestowed this pray. The Prophet say^^ He
gave a pray to them that fear him. He gives this title to all the children of
Israel as though their name were the fearers of God. Psalm. 111.1
So we see in the first verse that David would praise the Lord in the
congregation of the just: meaning in the temple, when the children of God were
gathered together: to teach them whom God has called out of darkness into
light, that they are called even to his fear, to his service, to justice, to
godliness, to sobernes, to modesty to all parts of holiness. Psalm. 50.5.
Thus the Prophet David in the 50. Psalm. in the person of God calling all the
Jews together before who^ the Lord would reprove the wicked and ungodly men,
(that notwithstanding their ungodly lives yet took the name of God (...) their
mouths) calls them Saints. And thApostle S. Paul writing to the Romane^
says: Romans 1.1. 1. Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1.
Beloved of God [called Saincts] unto the Church of Corinth. [Saincts by
calling] And to the Ephesians. he exhorts them to pray with watching and
perseverance for all Saints. And in the end of his Epistles, [the Saints
salute you. Even as the Scripture speaking of the reprobate, describes them by
those fruits and practices to the which the devil has framed them. Prou. 1.10.
My son if sinners do entise thee and say, come let us lay in wait for
blood, and 1. Psalm. Happy is he that is not conuersaunt with the wicked,
with sinners, Psalm. 1.1.
with mockers of al godly and profitable instructions, so that by those names
which the Scripture gives unto us, we see our calling, we see the end of Gods
mercies and benefits bestowed upon us. Not as they which know not God, to
fear no godly majesty, to serve no divine power, to lead a careless and
dissolute life, to walk in license and wantonness, to give our minds and
bodies as servants to sin and vanities, but in fear and reverence of him
who has powered his benefits upon us, in his service and will to walk all the
days of our life. This we learn by this title of the faithful which the
Prophet gives to them: and because it comes to be spoken of again in this
Psalm, I refer it till then. Only beseching you that we lay our own hearts
in this balance, and see whether we answer to them or no. Alas I know before
we be put in, what weight we haue^ how light we should be found, although we
should take even any of the least of Gods benefits to be wayed withal. Let
us only remember this pray which the Lord has given us and wrong it out of
the hands and teeth of the Epicures and Papists which enjoyed these livings
before us: our knowledge of the Gospel is something more our light greater: our
conversation no do^ something better: But how little is ou^ knowledge, how
obscure is our light, ho^ far is our godliness from that we might have
known and attained to, if we had loved the Gospel of God with all ou^ souls
and all our desires? Who is not g^tie to him self that in few years, (within
the years of a Master of art) he might have gotten as much learning as we
commonly get in seven years more added unto them, that in four or fewer
years, might not get all the arts that we attain to commonly in eight or
nine years, tha^ might not in a years study get such knowledge of the
Scriptures as we get not i^ seven years? For we spend the good time God
gives us in feasting often in the country, in bed, in walkinge, in gaminge,
in idle and unprofitable exercises, that oftentimes a whole month together,
some think not of any thing but cunninge and rehearsinge of parts to play:
and God knows the least time is given to our studies, our profitable and
fruitful, our godly and honest studies. In playing, we are of labor pacient
whole nights and days: In godly exercises for the increase of our faith and
knowledge, too too impatient to tarry a little time: earnest in vanities, slack
and slow in prayers, and weary in sermon time, careful, wise and swift in
attayning thend of our devises, but negligent, foolish and slow to any good
thing, quick in understanding evil, but deaf and doltishe and not able at
twice telling to perceive a godly instruction: As Hasael or as the Roe of the
field to over take a vain man whom we propounde to us to follow, but heavy
as the sand, and slow as the worms, or messengers of evil news to follow
a good and virtuous and learned example. And yet we say, wherein are we to be
reproved? It is but for fashions sake or because we find a fit phrase in the
Scripture, yet we may have grace and commendacions. An idle belly, ah profane
heart, ah Epicure, ah the depth and bottom of sin, my heart tells me there be
such evil beasts in the College. Nay my eyes and my ears are witnesses of
this, and my mind tells me a great deal more, which the just God will to
the shame of these idle beasts bring upon their heads as he has done upon
some already. Well these be the fruits of the Egyptians whose spoil the Lord
has given to us to fear and serve him: which he will (if we hinder him not by
our security and carelesnes) make more plentiful with new blessings: or else
as to this people will give these and more too, (but to our condemnation,)
only for his promise sake. For it follows [he will always remember his
couenaunt] Here the Prophet notes the cause of this benefit which the Lord
bestowed upon the Israelits not their fathers deseruings. For Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob had their many infirmities, as appears in the Scriptures: much
less their own, being now as it were Egyptians, Idolaters, worshippers of
oxen, and calves, and serpents, and having forgot the God of their fathers, but
for the merciful covenant and promise which he made to Abraham their father,
that after their bondage in a strange land four ages he would bring them
forth with great substance. Genesis 15.13.
Here is the ground of the joy and comfort of the Saints even the Lords
mercy in promising, and truth in performing. We have no other title to the
least of Gods benefits but even his truth to clame them by: that the world
shall be no more destroyed with water, Genesis 9.11.
what assurance have we that deserve every moment to be overwhelmed with
waters: but only his covenant, that according to his mercy he will always
remember? Ioh. 5.29.
What certainty have we for our resurrection to life but only the truth of Gods
promise? Seeing we have deserved even the best of us to lie and rotte in the
earth for ever. But O Lord thy faith endures for ever. Thou will for thy
promise sake have mercy upon us, although our sins, the bonds and chains
of our sins are able to keep us in hell without redemption. It follows in
the next verse. He has declared the power of his works unto his people etc.
As the Lord presents still his blessings upon his people, so the Prophet
follows the commendation of them. And as the Lord rises in mercy and
favor, so David acco^ding to th^^ degree speaks of them. The benefit of
their deliverance was as we have seen wonderfully and miraculously brought to
pass. These enriching more wonderfully: this which the Prophet now remembers
is more then the other. And therefore he says the Lord showed the strength and
power of his works in giving unto them the heritage of the Heathen. As if he
should say although thus wonderfully and miraculously thy hand O Lord
delivered thy children, although so mercifully thou broughtest them forth in
great substance, yet these were little in thine eyes, thine hand and thine arm
provided for them, besides all these a perpetual heritage. Let us therefore
examine this miracle and see whether it so excedeth as the Prophet speaks.
For thereby seeing the love, the tender and excedi^g love that the Lord bears
to his Church, we may draw and receive great comfort if we also be of the same
body. For the Lord did nothing then, which now he will not do for his people or
rather in more excellent and notable manner. First therefore consider the
murmurings of this people, their idolatry, their evil lusts, their many and
sundry tentations, wherewith forty years together they provoked the Lord
their redeemer, by their unfaithfulness, their rebellion to their Captains, and
last of al their fear of these nations whom the Lord had already discomfited
and destroyed in heaven, and their desire to return into Egypt (that was to
hell) again, where so cruelly they had been handled: Consider all these sins
and many more which the Lord saw in their hearts: And above all the miracles
that we yet see, we shall wonder at this miracle of their bringing into the
la^d of promise. Surely God is omnipote^t, yet sin is able to close his hand
and (I speak in reverence and fear) able to tie his arms that he give
nothing. His face is seven times more favorable and gracious then the Sun,
yet unfaithfulness is able to hide and covet it. His love is fire in deed, but
the waters of ungodliness are able to quench it. His strength is wonderful for
the destruction of our enemies, but our sin, our unfaithfulness, our
wickedness, our rebellion, makes him weaker then water. The Lord is a mighty
Sa^pson in deed, but our sins are sharper the^ any ra^er whereby we weake^ the
strength and (if I may so speak) shave the head of this great Sa^pson our
Judge and defender. The Lord is invincible, 1. Sam. 4.11
yet our ungodliness has made him bin taken prisoner. His nature is
invulnerable, yet by our sin we pearse him. He is life: Zachar. 12.10.
and yet by our ungodliness (I speak an horrible thing) we slay him. Here is
therefore the strength of the Lord revealed, that notwithstanding all these
rocks and cragges as the Prophet Amos speaks the course of the Lords benefits
was not hindered, his hands not bound, his light not darkened, his love not
quenched, his strength not weakened, his will nothing changed, it repented him
not of his promise as in the days of Noah, and that he made not an utter
co^sumption of this sinful people. This may be well noted for the setting
forth of this great benefit. Besides this we may also remember the unfitness of
this people for battle. Exodus 5.18.
They had been brought up in kilnes among the bricks, they were accustomed to
bearing of burdens for the building of the Egyptian piramides: not instituted
or instructed in feats of war, not armed, not politic, yet in this
infirmity the Lords strength appeared: they were strangers in the country
and therefore easily overthrown in unknown places they were but one people:
their enemies cunning in the country: Exodus 7.7.
and seven greater and mightier nations then they: they remained in tents:
their enemies in strong and walled towns, Number. 13.29
whose walls reached unto the heavens: these were footmen: their enemies on
horses and iron chariots: these without weapons of war, without any other
outward help which all their enemies had in great abundance: yet for all these
the hand of God brought them unto the land that he had promised and sworn to
their fathers. So that the miracles in Egypt and their spoil may be forgotten,
in respect of this great and wonderful work: Moises not spoken of in
comparison of Iehosua by whose hand the Lord brought this work to pass. In
their deliverance he shook the earth: but in their placing he moved the
heavens. Exo. 10.22.
The day was turned into night in Egypt: But here the whole course and order of
the world both in the heavens and earth was changed at the standing of the
Sun, which as astonished at this work, at this great work stood and forgot
to run his course. Exo. 12.29.
The first borne were but destroyed in Egypt, but all their children from the
first borne to the child in the womb were here destroyed. There they were
spoiled only of their richesse and jewels: but here of their richesse and
inheritance. There one King was destroyed: here the Lord scattered many
Kings for their sake, and made Iehosuah to tread upon their Kings necks, and
profane all their crowns. This did the wonderful zeal of the Lord of
hosts bring to pass for his promise sake, and showed as the Prophet says
even his power and his strength in this work, Exodus 15.
to give his people the heritage of the Heathen. Seeing then the hand of the
Lord brought all these things to pass for them, not only to bring the^ out of
the iron furnace but to place them in a paradise, not to begin to be merciful
but to bring it to an end, and as the Prophet Ezechiel co^pareth it, Ezech. 16.4
not only to cut the navel of this woman child, to wash it, to salt it, to say
unto it, live even in blood: to say unto it live, but to bring it up, to form
her, to fashion her, to deck her with ornaments, and to give her an heritage,
so large and goodly an heritage. What fear, what obedience what reverence is
there that she ought not to give to God her redemer that took her out of the
jaws of death to be a peculiar, a dear, and beloved people above all the
nations of the earth unto him. He passed that Lady of all the world, the
Monarchis of Assiria so great in power, so excellent in glory, so famous in
victories, or what other nation or Kingdom so ever was fair and excellent, he
passed by them all to take unto him out of Egypt strangers, servants, and
slaves of Pharao upon whom he would show his love and mercies, Therefore let
them and us together with them magnify the Lord of heaven and earth, the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose truth remains for ever and pray that as
to them he gave such benefits to serve him, Psalm. 105.45.
to keep his statutes, and observe his laws as David says, making this the
end of these wonders and benefits, so the power of his works which he has
also showed toward us in infinite and innumerable benefits, may work an
excellent kind of service, in the which, the power and the excellency of the
fear and worship of God may appear to his glory and our comfort Amen.

It follows in the 7. verse: The works of his hand are verity and
judgment, all his fla^^^es are true. I have heretofore declared the wonderful
and notable works which the Lord executed in the placing of the people of
Israel, in the land of the Cananits, Hitits, Heresits etc. and showed by it,
that which the Prophet speaks of the strength of God: which benefit (as has
appeared) was to be accounted of above the other of the deliverance and pray
of Egypt: which notwithstanding were as I have showed wondrous and marvelous
works. In this verse the Prophet renders a reason of this wonderful counsel
of God. And first he declares that it was so be^^^ by God appointed. For he
calls the performance of it, ^^^eth. And because as flesh and and sin is
proud and quickly leapeth into the throne of judgment even over God him
self and his doings, (such vile and abominable devils are we) The Prophet
gives a further reason when as he says the works of his hands are judgment.
He says not, ^^ger, least any should think cruelty in God. The works of
his hands are truth The Hebrews use this word when they speak of a sure and
certain performance of that which is promised. Therefore they join these two
words mercy and truth together, whether they speak of God or man. David
praises God for mercy and truth: Psalm. 85.10
that is, for his merciful promise and faithful and true performance. Genesis
47.29.
And Jacob swears Joseph to do this mercy and truth to him, that he be carried
to be buried in the land of promise. These examples shall suffice, although I
might bring almost infinite. But this is enough to understand the meaning of
David. Now that the work was truth, we shall understand if we remember the
notable promise which the Lord made unto Abraham, and confirmed it unto Isaac
and afterward to Jacob that he would give to them and to their seed after
them the land of these seven nations. Genesis 13.14.
For the Lord after that Lot was departed from Abraham, commanded Abraham
dwelling in the land of Canaan to lift up his eyes and look from the place he
stood in, to the East, and the West, and the North, and Sowth, and promised to
give it unto his sede after him for ever. This was done five times to Abraham.
And Abraham died and was buried in the land of Canaan. In the xxvj. Genesis 26.24.
chap. the Lord promises Isaac to keep the same oath that he swear to his
father Abraham. And in the xxviij. Genesis 28.13.
chap. the Lord appeared to Jacob in the way to Mesopotamia in a dream and
promised to make his seed also to florishe and to spread even to the North and
Sowth and East and West, although he was then a stranger and alone. And the
same also is in the xxxv. Genesis 35.11.
chap. with this addition, that even Kings should come out of him. These are
the promises and other which the Lord made and bound him self to keep to this
people: which as we have seen after 400. years, the Lord accomplished. This
truth which David speaks of shall be more excellent and famous, if we consider
those hinderaunces, which seemed to have been able to have made all these
promises vain. First consider what dangers and perils that Abraham was often
in, being but one man, and d^iuen from country to country. And as David says
both of him and of Isaac and Jacob, they were driven from one kingdom to an
other people. And this came to Abraham what time he had no feed. So that by
the enmity of the Philistians, by the danger he was in for his wife, the
promise of God concerning his posterity was in great danger. Genesis 17.17. Heb.
11.12.
Consider the barennesse of Sara^ and so many years after this first promise
so that it might have been thought he had forgotten his promise. After this
what was the condition of Isaac in whom now all the hope of the promise rested?
how far of from death was he when his father had already stretched out his
hand for his death and that at the Lords commandment? where then seemed any
hope of this promise or of this truth that David commends in this place?
After this the barennes of Rebecca, which when it was taken away behold a new
hinderaunce. The children fought in her womb together that she was in great
fear that the one would have destroyed the other. Then the fear of danger that
Jacob was in of his brother Esaw who had vowed his death. And after that he was
returned out of Siria, when Simion and Leui destroyed the Shecamites, what hope
was there then that one of all the ^^^cke should have been left alive? Which
Jacob also feared, and had not that God of truth (who to bring to pass his
promise had before so miraculously preserved his father from his enemies) as it
were holden him under his arm and kept him in his bosom, they had at that
time been all destroyed. But the fear of them fell upon the nations about
them and they escaped danger. Then followed also an other enemy for the
hinderaunce of his promise, even the famine which was in the land of Canaan
now risen as it were against the truth of God. After that the bondage of
Egypt in which furnace much more hot then the furnace of Nebucadnesar, yet
nevertheless they were not consumed. These circumstaunces considered which
were as so many contrary winds against this purpose of God, or like so many
red seas to their entrance into this land, or so many walls of iron and gates
of brass through which they must break before they could come into this
promised city, These circumstances of hindera^ce I say considered, which
notwithstanding the great and mighty God for his promise sake removed, do make
the arm of the glory and power of God so much more famous and glorious and
more greatly to be praised, neither that only, but comfortable also unto all
that wait for his promises in faith and patience. For here we see an example
drawn before us by the finger of God to look upon, for the confirmation of our
faith and hope, if we wait also for those things which the Lord of his mercy
has promised to us. We see that the Lord has promised that he will give the
Gospel free passage in the kingdom of Christ. And this we look for, and all
they whose hearts are touched with the love of the glory of God wait and look
for it till their eyes dasell in their heads. For we see mountains, and hills,
seas, and waters, kingdoms, and peoples, Kings, Princes, and Counselers of the
earth, lift up them selves and stand against it: yet we may comfort our selves
with these words, that the Lord of mercy is the God of truth and will bring
this promise to pass as we see it begun this day. For we see these kingdoms of
England, Scotland, Denmark, Germany, Polonia and diverse other kingdoms which
together with Italy, France, and Spain, were as a Scepter or mace in the hand
of the devil of Rome, (as we se in tragedies in the hands of furies) we have
seen this mace although for a time fair and bewtifull with crowns and gold
in his hand, yet now almost burnt out of his hand. The fire of the Gospel
brake forth first one piece of his mace in Germany: then it cracked of this
side and then of that side the sea: and now it cracketh in France, and what
is left in his hand but a stumpe of Italy and Spain which the Lord for his
truth and promise sake will burn also out of his hand. Neither will (...)
thus leave. But I doubt not but as the other Antichrist of the East the Turk
began together with him, so he shall end together: and hope that when the man
of sin is consumed, the Lord will also take his people out of his hand and
accomplish the number of the elect. In Barbary, Greece, and else where. And
when Lord? how long shall thy foes triumph over thee and make a mock of thy
son Jesus our Savior whom we look and wait for, for the destruction of
these Tirants that have lift up them selves against him, and for the refreshing
of thy wearye and faintye children? Doubt ye not but the Lord numbreth the
years of their captivity and of their appointed time for salvation, when our
Redemer will come and fulfill all things which have been spoken and determined
by the Lord of truth. Thus may we (...) comfort our selves in (...) Gods
promises which because it were (...) to follow, I will rest on this one example.
Which for all other may be a pattern to us of the truth of God. For in this
verse is bec^^^ offered again to speak of it. The works of (...) hands are
truth and judgment etc. This second word which the Prophet used I have already
said is added to correct our wicked judgments against God, because such and so
great is our corruption, so venomous and poysenfull we are of nature yt we
content not our selves with equal enmities, but our sin breaks out and
falls upon the just and great God. Therefore the Prophet attributes this
title to the Lords works yt they are no less righteous and just, then they are
true and sure. Now he means in this place yt the punishments which he
executed for his people upon the Cananits and Egyptians, were most righteous
judgments as we have seen therefore the truth of God in these works, so let
us consider now therein his righteousness. And first for the Egyptians. I dispure
not of the secret and hid causes which are only known to the Lord. Why he set
this people and the other of Canaan above all other nations as it were upon a
stage in whose persons this traged^ should be seen, which can not be unjustly
(...) by the Judge of heaven and earth, the (...) of all the world, as Abraham
says, Genesis 18.25
but I will only remember those manifest and re^a^ed reasons by the scripture
which were the occasion of al their punishments, wher^^ we may remember that
Egypt most tyrannously and cruelly handled this people. Know thou not, oh
unthankful Egypt, how to deal with thy patrons and benefactors? was the
benefit thou had by Joseph forgotten in whose hand was thy life, and in
his wisdom thy glory? in whose will was thy destruction, and in his pleasure
thy shame? had ye forgotten the law of nature, oh Pharao and al thy Senators,
and all the people of the land of Egypt, so discourteously and ungently to handle
strangers? Came they to be your servants and bo^dmen, or felows and
co^panio^s? and yet said, Come let us take counsel against the^? Exodus 1.10.
Knew you not last of all that they were gods people, his heritage, his
children, his priests and kings, who^ whosoever blessed, Genesis 12.3.
he had promised he would bless again, and curse the^ yt cursed them? had not
their God threatened and smitte^ even kings for their fathers sakes Abraham and
Isaac, eue^ Pharao and Abimelech? had not Egypt a singular benefit above all
nations to be ye hosts of the^ yt were so dear to ye Lord? Were not they more
the^ Nilus in her highest and deepest inundations profitable to the increase of
the fruits of the land? The heat of the sun, the influence of the stars,
and all other benefits that are required for the ryping of their fruits, came
out of no other heaven then even this very people. For as the Prophet
describing the return of the children of Israel out of Babylon, for whom the
Lord would dig fountaynes even in the wilderness, turns to the serpe^ts,
and exhorts them to praise God that had given waters in the wilderness,
because through the blessing of this people it was also common to them: So
these serpents and tigers of Egypt receive these blessings of God as by
occasion, that is, for his peoples sake: their corn, their wine, and increase
of all things, and yet they take counsel to slay some of them, and to keep the
rest in perpetual bondage. Just therefore were these thy judgments, oh Lord,
and righteous was all thy counsel against this cruel and unnatural people.
Tho^ turnedst their waters into blood, because they were a bloody people: thy
hand strok^ the^ with darkness, because they were blind and ignorant of the
benefits: They hand brought botches and sores upon the^, because they were
full of ve^^n and poison: frogs and he and vermin were sent amongst them,
because they were a proud generation: they ^^re deprived of their substance and
ornaments, because they were gotten by cruelty and extortion: their first borne
slain, because they were the beginning of their wicked strength: the king and
his hosts drowned in the sea, because they were all malicious and obstinate.
The works therefore of thy hands in this people, were justice and judgment.
Now I will consider the Cananites and declare the Lord my God to have bin in
their destruction also most just and most righteous. This is often declared in
the prophets, when they show Israel of their Idolatry, diuinations, cruelty,
and such like, for they say the land is full of abominations as it was in the
days when the Amorites and ^ittits dwelled in it. And Ezechiel declaring all
their wickedness in two words, saying, Abraham was not their father, nor Saray
their mother, but some Amorrea^ begat the^, Eze. 16.3.
and some Hittite surely bare the^. Whereby the sin and abominatio^s of this
people are manifest. And if we look for the lord in his own person to give
sentence of the^, Genesis 15.13
behold he appoynteth 400. years to pass ere the seed of Abraham should enjoy
this land because the measure of the sin of the Amorites was not then full,
their fruits (...) ripe, the waters of wickedness not yet o^^ their heads, but
the^ very near ripe, though not fit for the harvest. For the merciful and
gracious God does so long bear with the wickedness of the world till it reach
to the very heavens: that his long patience (as thapostle teaches the Romans)
might drive them to the consideration of it, Romans 2.4.
and to repentance. But the Lord has all that long time that he spares, his
ballaunce in his hand, wherewith he wayeth the beginning and increase and full
weight of their sin, and then he casts them out. He considers the^, and
wayteth for the ripenes, before he sends messengers to pluck them of the
tree, or cut them of the earth. He tarieth till they be dry and fit for the
fire before he throw them in: till they be far, before he slay them: till
they be dry and withered, before he put the axe to hew them down. Therefore it
is contained in ye scripture that the earth was full of sin when the Lord
sent the flood and destroyed the world, Gene. 6.5.
and made it as before the distinction of light and darkness, Gene. 8.
almost for a year. We read also that the sin of Sodom was great, and that
the cry thereof ascended up to the ears of the Lord of hosts. Genesis 18.20
Thus also the Lord in a vision of ripe apples shows Amos ye time of the
Israelites destruction to be at ye door. Amos. 8.1.
And our Savior Christ teaches this long ^^^^ing of the Lord by the parable
of the husbandmen, who wayteth 3. Luke. 13.7.
years after no fruit came, to see if any fruit would appear. But we see the
lord not to have waited three years for the repentance of this people, or till
they were ripe, Neither 120. years as in the days of Noy, But 400. years as he
had declared before to Abraham. Therefore the works of his hands were not
against this people impatient in anger or fury, but righteous in justice and
judgment. The sword whereby they were slain from the prince to all the people
even women and children, was ye sword of righteousness: and the fire that
consumed their cities and destroyed their houses, was the fire of judgment the
hayle and tempest yt fought against the^, reason, justice and equiry. That God
therefore destroyed the great and small, the old and young, and as it is said, the
mother and her children, it was not cruel rage, not injury, but right and
justice, in striki^g at ye last: and patience and long suffering in forbearing
the^ so long: finally great wisdom in destroying ye leprous generation, lest
it should still increase: and great mercy to his church. Thus the^ appears not
only ye truth and faith of ye works of God in performing (...) which were so
long spoken of before ^^^^ning ye bringing of his people out of Egypt and
placing the^ in Canaan, but also ^^^^ment, wisdom, and mercy. Now (...)
half of this verse which follows, the Prophet teaches that doctrine and
fruit which is here to be gathered. For he says, all his statutes are true,
so that from these particular promises and judgments of God, the Prophet
ryseth and reasons for the surety of all Gods promises, whether they be for
the destruction of his enemies, or benefits promised to his Church. For by
statutes it should appear by the circumstance of this place, that he
understands all this.

First therefore for the surety of the works of God in that behalf (for
after we shall see it in the other part concerning the benefits toward his
Church) he says all his statutes are true: that is, all his appointed counsels
are sure and faithful, whether they be a destruction and overthrow of the
wicked, or a comfort to the godly. And how shall not they be most sure and
most truly performed, seeing they are determined by him, whose hands made the
world and all that is therein, who has done what so^^^^ he purposed and was
good in his (...), whose hand is the hand of power and (...) almighty? Man in
deed in vain and deceiuable, and able to be hindered of that which he has
determined, but the lord the almighty God creator of heaven and earth, in whose
power are al creatures, even kings and princes, and in whose hands are the
chains and bitte and bridle, whereby the very devils are at his word losed and
bound, sent out and called in again, is never deceived nor hindered from
bringing his counsels to pass. The waters of Tema and Sheba, Job. 6.19.
as Job says, are with heat dried up, so that they which look for help at
them, are confounded and ashamed; but the counsels of god are as l^^ing and
springing waters, which shall continue faithful and sure and vndried, though
all the mountains and fountaynes from whence the rivers and floods do flow,
yea though the sea should be dried up, for those run out of the earth, but
the counsels of God flow from his hand which no sun can dry, nor wind
drive away, till al be fulfilled that he has determined. They are therefore
like the springing waters, that is, continual and durable: like the great
mountains that can not be removed, Psa. 125.1.
as says the Prophet^ like the field that (...) brings forth fruit, and
can by no injury of weather be hindered: like the word and commandment of
the Persian kings, Dan. 6.12.
whose word is sure, as it is in Daniel or rather like the Lord himself,
Iea^. 1.17.
who is immutable and unchangeable. Cry therefore and weep, make a noise and
howl ye contemners of the Lord, ye that delight in your vanities, and take
pleasure in that that is abominable, Malac. 4.1
for behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, and
all that do wickedness, shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn
them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave the^ neither root nor
branch. Hear ye drunkards and gluttons, ye Epicures, and idle bellies, Iud.
14.
and fear, for behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to
give judgment against you of all the wickedness you have committed, and of all
the cruel words which wicked men have spoken against his word. For this is
determined by the sentence of the mighty God, whose name is wonderful and
power marvelous, whose decrees are sure and counsels infallible. This
fearful lesson the Prophet teaches the wicked and abominable children, that
dishonor the glorious and be ^^cifull name of the Lord our God, ^
when he says, all his appoyntments or decrees are sure. For they may be sure
and certain, they may persuade themselves, and write of it, that the judgment
of God upon them in what sort soever the Lord have given sentence upon the^,
whether to their destruction by the^ selves or by other, whether immediately
from heaven or by common death, or by some notable spectacle, or in what sort
or kind soever it be, that it sleeps not, but it comes upon a chariot,
whose horses are the winds, and whose wheels are the whirlwinds even spedily
and hastily to their destruction. And now you that fear God and delight in his
commandments, that frankely and freely g^^e your souls and bodies to the
Lords service, that love his word^, his glory, and his children, that endeavor
with all your power in that vocation whereto you are called, to sanctify and
praise that holy name, that are in battle and field against temptations with
sin, with the devil, with the intisementes of vanity, that have sold all
things for the precious jewel of the Gospel, and delight your selves therein,
that therefore bare the hate of the wicked, the mockes of the scornful, the
injuries of the violent, that groan and mourn and lament, and sight and weep
under the burden of sin and power thereof, that would reign in our mortal
bodies, let us at this voice of the Prophet when he says all the Lords decrees
are sure, let us, I say, lift up our heads and patiently and joyfully look
for that day when the Lord shall deliver us and all our fellows from al
oppression and injury of the wicked: when Satan shall no more watch against us:
when the power of sin shall not hinder the spirit of God to have his full
and perfect work in us. That which follows in ye ne^ verse is only a
repetition of this that I have already expounded: for where he ha^^ say^^ the
works of his hands are truth, here more plainly he says, They are established
for ever and ever. And where he said, They were truth and judgment, he now
says, They are done in truth and equity. Therefore: is a doctrine most
necessary to know the truth of God in performing his promise^^ his judgment,
and equity in the same, sei^^ the Prophet so diligently notes it, yt in the
short Psalm he gives two verses to it, knoting other things up very briefly.
Let (...) therefore for our seal to his truth and ius^^^ of god in ^l his
works, what sort soever th^^ are of: and let them that know and fear t^^ Lord,
say always the Lord is true and right^ ou^ to him be glory for ever and ever
^m^^

I am come by the grace of God to the end of the Cxj. Psalm, which now
almost a year ago I took in hand, wherein I have spoken first of the proeme
which is in the first verse, stirring up him self to the writing of it to
the praise of God: then of the double matter in^t, both of the work of God
appearinge in the whole world, ^^^e they are witnesses unto us and masters of
the glory and mercy of the creator who is blessed for ever Amen: Then of his
benefits bestowed upon his church, the creation of it, their deliverance,
their miraculous deliverance, their more miraculous enriching, and their most
miraculous and wonderful placing in the land of their inheritance. All,
arguments of a most entire and tender love and affection that God had to his
Church, and severity, justice and truth toward the Egyptians and Amoheans as
I have declared. Now follows the last and principal benefit that they
received, to be spoken of. He sent redemption unto his people, he commanded
his covenant for ever etc. This benefit is the declaring and opening of the
will and commandments of the Lord unto them. Of the which to speak according
as it is requisite by proportion and measure of this to the other which they
before received, I need a more plentiful wisdom, and a m^^e gracious tongue
which the Lord grant me. For if in the other I have spoken with the tongue of a
man, in this I have need of the tongue of an Angel: For if we accounted of
the other as precious, excellent and heavenly blessing^, of this, we ought to
make much more account as by comparison shall appear. And first for their
deliverance out of Egypt, you all are witnesses what a notable thing it was,
and how I have labored to set forth therein the hand and power of God, and his
love to his people in it: yet the scriptures do lighten it in other places, as
we shall see. For we read that the Lord did also bring the Philistines from
Oaphtor, and the Syrians from Tire, Amos 9.7.
as Amos declares. The^ we see that their deliverance out of Egypt was no
singular or proper thing which the L. wrought for them more then for other.
Also their placing in the land of Canaa^, although so notable as I have before
showed, Deuteronomy. 2.9.
yet Moses shows the like done for other people. The Israelits were placed
in the la^d of Canaan, the Ammonits and the Moabits those incestuous sons
with their incestuous generations were likewise placed in the land of the
Zamzonuns. he destroyed the Enakymes, for Israel: likewise he destroyed these
Za^zomias. For the Amonits, a people great and tal as the En^^imes so the Lord
destroyed the Horymes and brought in ye sons of Esawe in their place, And the
Attins wc dwelt in Hor^rim even unto Aza. Them, the Caphtorims destroyed and
dwelt in their places. Where then is become the privilege of Israel or those
great works for them, wc we magnified so greatly and highly before. What
vehemence then is in this exhortation of the Prophets, where they ever bring
in their deliverance out of Egypt, then placing in the la^d, their use of the
fructs which they planted not, corn which they sowed not, and houses which
they builded not, seeing these have been no less done for Infidels then for his
own people? Surely it can not be denied but although their deliverance were
common to them with other, yet the manner of their deliverance was not able and
singular. for so Moses says, was it ever heard before that God should come
as it were from heaven to deliver one people out of an other that oppressed
them with signs and tokens and wonders as he did to them, as if he him self
had been oppressed with them? as if he had burned in the furnace with them? as
if he had labored under their burde^s? as if he had fled out of the land with
them? yet notwithstanding all these things which were wrought for their
deliverance, were both marvelous and singular, yet they are but dead and idle
without this which now the Prophet David adds as the life and perfection of
the rest. Romans 3.1.
Even as the Ap. S. Paul teaches, where he asks what the perferme^t of the
Jews was above the Gentiles? he answers that it was very much, because
that unto them were committed the words of God, the couenaunts, the law, the
service of God, and the promises, as also we have in the 127. Psalm the
testimony of the Prophet David to this purpose, Psalm. 127.
he showed says he his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto
Israel: he has not dealt so with any nation, neither have the heathen
knowledge of his laws. Thus then it appears that not in their deliverance,
neither in their inheritance, but in the word of God reueiled unto them, their
principal blessings and tokens of Gods favor appeared. From Horeb and Sinai,
and neither out of the riches of Egypt, nor the inheritance of Canaan, came
their felicity, for although that the riches of Egypt, and goods of the
Caanits were great and notable tokens of Gods favor unto them, yet by them
they were not joined and coupled with the Lord. They were not made bones of
Jesus Christ bones, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30
as by the word and covenant and testimonies of God they were. For Moses as a
M^diator between the Lord and his people did in the giving of the law, bind
the^e two, God and his people together: putting as it were the Lords hand into
the hand of all Israel, and giving his likewise as a father into the power of
God, making of two on: by Jesus Christ the head. Therefore the Prophet Ezech.
Ezech. 19.
co^pareth all other benefits that God gave his people, to the ornaments of
apparel, namely to her bracelits and billiments, to her rings and cheynes, and
earings, to her Crown of gold for her head, white silk for her body, and
shoes of taxus for her feet, to honey, oil, and the finest flower of wheat
for her diet, but the giving of his word and statut^ unto them, to his marriage
with her. Therefore are all those complaints in this Ezechiel, and in the rest
of the Prophets concerning her fornication, when she left the commandments of
God, and followed after strange gods and new laws: And therefore also there
is mention of diuorcement between them. This was then the greatest and highest
and heauenliest benefit that ever came unto them to be joined in league with
God, to have him swear and bind him self unto them to be their God, that is
their defender and mainteiner, if they would be his people, he dealt not so with
any nation, or kingdom, or city under the cope of heaven. Oh Israel, oh house
of Jacob, what wast thou that the lord so rewarded thee, or what was Abraham
thy father that he so visited him? he made for him self a people only out of
Sem, and cast away Cham and Iaphet, Gebal and Ammon, and Amaleck he abhorred,
but Judah and Leui and Joseph he loved he exalted and honored, he made them of
all the world his sons, and first begotten, all them he made Kings and
Priests unto him as Melchisedech, he made them all little inferiors to the
Angels, and joined the^ with the son of God. Ex. 14.30.
The night then that they departed out of Egypt was a day of love unto the^,
the day that Mannah first fell from the heavens, Ex. 16.13.
was in deed a day of joy and great gladness unto them: But that day that they
received the laws and ordinances and statuts of God, although it was a
cloudye and a dark day, a day of tribulation and anguish, of fear and
sorrow, of a noise and sound of a terrible trumpet and thunder, which all
caused to the outward man heaviness and sadness, yet in deed if we consider what
good that day brought to his people, what honor, what pre-eminence, what state,
what majesty, what as it were familiarity even with God, that cloudye and
mystye, that dark and dreadefull day was the blesseddest day that ever rose
over them. A sort of poor and sinful men to be joined in league, and as it
were in marriage with God, and to have the company of Angels as it were
bridemen at the marriage. My eyes are not so daseled with beholding the
brightness of the Sun, nor mine ears so astonished with the thunder, not my
mind so with joy ever confounded, as my understanding at the consideration of
this so great mercy, yea my words are swallowed in it, and my judgment
vanishes and melts before it. But the Lord as Moses says, in deed loved
his people. Well we see then what just cause David had to remember this benefit
in the Catalogue of the Lords mercies. He sent redemption to his people, he
commanded his couenaunts for ever. Now also let us a little leave them and
think of our selves and the revelation of the word and will of God unto us:
that in knowing the goodness of God toward us in this part, we may labor to
love the Lord and embrace his gracious calling thankfully. What the^ is
England this little poor corner of the world to Italy and Spain, to the great
and rich countries of Asia and Africa under the Turk, and other barbarous and
blind Princes, that God should from heaven look as it were and cast aside his
eye to this little hole, passing over and contemning such glorious and famous
Monarchies, and kingdoms, to cast the seed of his word and the precious stone
of his glory amongst us, to make us while other labor and travel for earthly
and corruptible wares, to be Marchaunts of this such a jewel, buyers of such a
treasure wherein life and salvation is contained, and to lighten us with the
blessed beams of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. Oh before how many
goodly and rich nations has he preferred us? how has he loved and honored us
before other kingdoms, that in glory and riches do far exceed us? Oh whom
shall they send to heaven to fetch the word of God? or whom shall they send
to the deep places of the earth or beyond the seas that may bring thence
this treasure? for the Lord has blinded them most justly that they can not see
the Sun, and stopped their ears that they may not smell the body of the
Gospel, neither follow the Egles that fly unto it. We were a far of as they
are, strangers from God and his couenaunts with them, sinners of the Gentiles
as they, uncircumcised, untaught, unholy, nay dogs as our Savior Christ
says, and swine, and tigers: but we are illuminated, we are taught, we are
sanctified, we are made near, even Citizens of Jerusalem, sons of the
kingdom, and heirs of the promises, and coheires with Jesus Christ, who is God
blessed for ever. Amen. Now no more unholy, no more blind, no more cruel, no
more idle, no more abominable before God. for we are if the kingdom of God be
in deed come unto us and into us, that is even into our minds and
consciences, then we are the lambs and doves and antes of the Lord, in all
holiness and patience and diligence, waiting for the coming of Christ our
Savior. For unless we walk in these and such like fruits of godliness, though
the Sun be risen in the Realm, surely it has not shined upon us, but we
remain yet in ignorance as we did. Yea surely it is an undoubted truth that
so much we know, as we practice. Otherwise let us talk of the Gospel never so
much, we are still dead in sin and ignorance. let us exalt it never so
high, it exalts not us, but rather thrusts us down to hell, but if in deed
we have received the Gospel, so that we both know the glory and mercy of God,
and also seek by all our power to glorify and set forth the same in our life
and studies, then are we truly lightened, and the light of God shall continue
with us and increase in us more and more till the day star that is the full
and perfect knowledge of Jesus Christ arise in our hearts, 1. Cor. 13.12
when we shall know no more in part, but fully and absolutely as we shall be
taught, as thAp. says: for so I think that sentence is to be interpreted.
Thus I say if the kingdom of God be come unto us in truth, and not in opinion,
in heart not in face, in works not in words, then may we both for the common
benefit of the realm, and our own grace, lift up our hands unto heaven and
bless him that lives for ever, who has of so great mercy called us from so
great damnation as we were in, to life and glory. Oh that it would please him
to make not only an altar in us and in the realm for his worship, but fully
and perfectly to build his temple in such order and perfectnes amongst us,
that we might see his Church begin to flourishe and spread her bows over the
whole land: that all might have a true knowledge of him and whom he has sent
Jesus Christ. For this ignorance that is amongst us, and this untowardness
that is in us either to learn the good will of God, or to put in practice that
which we know, makes this blessing but half a blessing, this grace half a
grace, this light half dark, nay this blessing no blessing, this grace no
grace, this light no light at all. And I pray God we make: it not a curse in
the end and extreme darkness. This in deed can not be denied but great grace
is come unto us. But as when the ark of God was with great gladness received of
the Bethsanits, 1. Sam. 6.19
when it came from the Philistines, but with little reverence used, it caused a
death and destruction of many, even fiftye thousand and seventy men, so it is
to be feared and almost looked for, that if generally an other way be not taken
in hand for the furtheraunce of the Gospel, and perticularly every one frame
him self after an other sort to serve God, the Gospel which should be our
life, will be the destruction and death both of us and of the realm. And as
Jesus Christ coming in the flesh unto the Jews, although he was acknowledged
of some to be the Savior of the world, yet being generally contemned, was
enemy unto them, and the revenger of his contempt, So the Gospel if we
receive it not in all reverence and fear, and to our power labor that it may
be likewise received of all, that which otherwise should be and would be the
water of life to save us, will be a sea to drown us: the sweet powder of our
health, will be powder to our destruction: meat to feed us, poison to kill
us: apparel to clothe and keep us, will with vermin infect and ^ot us: last
of all that which should be a Gospel unto us, will bring the heauiest and
saddest news that ever we heard. Well howsoever we use it, the gospel of it
self is the precious and excellent tree of life: and happy is the garden
wherein it is planted: yea happy be the day and blessed from above, in which
the Gospel came unto us: let that month be respected of God, and let it be
the head of the year, joyful and pleasant may it be, and let them that are
ready to bless, bless that day: Let not darkness rise in it, and in it let no
clouds appear, but let his son be ever seen: for blessed are the feet of
the^ that bring glad tidings of peace and life. We celebrate as it were the
nativity of the whole world every day: but the nativity of the Gospel we
ought to celebrate every day seven times yea to make it the beginning of the
supputation of years, as we read that the Jews reckened their years from the
year of the Jubilee, Leu. 25.
and from the finding of the law in Iosaahs time: for then comes the true
year of Jubilee, the year of joy and freedom, and deliverance from bondage,
when the Gospel comes unto us. We write in deed in all our letters and leases
the year of the incarnation of Jesus Christ. But I would we so often
considered the benefit and uses of the incarnation deeply, and wayed that in
our minds. Well I need labor no further to prove the benefit that we receive
by the Gospel to set forth the excellency and dignity of it: but if yet we
know it not sufficiently by all these colors, look into the black countries
of ignorance far or neat in the old time, or at this day void of the
light of the word of God. Remember the blindness of Sodom and Egypt, whereof the
darkness and night that God sent upon them was a visible sign and argument.
Look into the kingdom of Turkey, if for darkness we can perceive it what
confusion and horror is amongst them: look into the Church and Sinagogue of
the Papists, if thorough gold and silver, stone, and pearl, silk and velvet,
and fine linen, we can see her horrible filthiness: that by th^^ black and
dark colors of ignorance, and blasphemies, the beautiful and glorious face
of the Gospel of God may appear. For they in deed and we (how many soever
live in ignorance and idleness even in this place) are those Cymmerians that
the Sun shines not upon although we walk all the day in the Sun. Nay
Cymmet^a^s are not Cymmetians, night no night, and darkness no darkness to this
darkness. The dragons and serpents that lie in the deep caves and cauernes of
the earth, the moles that are always in then holes, and batts that delight in
the night, are paterns and portratures unto us of then estate: or rather they
are already in confusion and hellish darkness which in the end they shall dwell
in for evermore. ^o^ I beseech you is not he dishonored is not Jesus Christ
mocked, is not the spirit banished? are not the godly hated and persecuted? is
not the word of God detested of some, corrupt of other, and despised of all
such? Then there is no affinity between them and God, who is light and
holiness: no love between them, no affection, no thought of either toward
other, but they are a far of as the Apostle says: they are enemies, they are
two. But they who receive the word, are one with God, and one with Jesus
Christ* yea as I have said, bones of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30
and flesh of his flesh. Then to conclude this, we see what an excellent and
high calling it is, to have the word of God sent to any people: and what
cause David had to remember it, as the chief and principal above the rest.
For in deed it is the end and scope to the which all the rest are to be
referred: as the place wherein he reckeneth it, well notes it so. ^o^ do we
think that their deliverance, tha then enriching by the jewels of Egypt, that
their inheritance in Canaan was bestow^d of them for their selves to mock
them ^oly fellows, rich, brave and glorious? Psalm. 5.44.
No the Prophet David and Esaias appoint the end thereof to be far other. For
he says that he made them a vine for him self which he brought out of Egypt,
Esaias 5.
and I say in that notable song declares how he planted them there, that he
might delight him self in the (...) of it, and as in another place he says
that he made a people for himself. So th^n it was and now is much more: even
so much more, as the grace of God is more aboundaunt then it was at that t^me.
For the grace of God has appeared in these latter days, as th Apostle says,
Tit. 2.11.
that brings salvation unto all men: it has appeared instructing us that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and justly and
holily in this life, wishing for the blessed hope and revelation of the glory
of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ who gave him self for us that he
might deliver us from all unrighteousness, and purge us unto him self a
peculier people, seruently and earnestly following good works, and in deed most
justly: Iere. 31.31.
for he speaks of those days whereof Jeremy prophesied, that the Lord would
strike a new covenant with his people, not as he had done with then fathers,
from the which they started, but he would not put his laws in then hearts to do
them. Then seeing the grace of God has been so marvelous, so excellent, and
superabundant in these days above the other, by proportion and reason there is
greater thankfulness required of us to whom such grace and mercy has been
showed. So that if they meet once for the praise of God, we ought to meet
seven times: if they had one preacher of it in one city, we in one city
should have seven: if they had charge that they should put the commandments
and the words of God into their hearts and souls, and to bind them for a sign
upon their hands, to be a perpetual warning in their eyes, to teach them their
children, to talk of them walking in the way, and sitting in the house, and
rising in the morning, and l^ing down in the night, to write them upon the
door posts and corner of the house, we surely ought not to perform this
alone, but even to dream of them in the night: Day and night to meditate with
our selves of them. And if their love to this merciful God was as the love of
children toward their father, or as the love of wife toward her husband with
whom she is one flesh, our love my brethren ought to be as the love of a
friend who is with his friend one soul. For without doubt unspeakable is the
grace and mercy that is reueiled by the Gospel. The eye of none can not see,
nor ear hear, nor heart understand it, but such as have the spirit of God who
knows the secrets of God. Now in that the Prophet David say the he
commanded his covenant for ever: he does not only praise it for the
perpetuity and continuance of it in respect of God, but also in a word
exhorts all men to faithful and continual obedience in performing the
conditions of their covenant of their part also. And of Gods behalf it had
been great love if with Abraham alone the father of the people he had stricken
this covenant or with his generation after him, for some hundredth years: but
to make it to rest upon the head of his seed so long after him, even from
generation to generation for ever, to grant him this inheritance, the riches
and fountain of his mercy appears. For although that some now are fallen
away and their body in a manner dead, yet notwithstanding the truth of the
covenant remains at this day. And if they had continued faithful, it had
never been broken: for God remained still sure of the one party for the
performaunce of the old covenant. Then think a little of this benefit, or
rather let it occupy al ou^ whole minds in consideration of it that perpetually
with one people (as in an arc that should never be broken) the Lord laid the
precious treasure of his commandments. Although he departed from Siloth and
left also Sion at the last, yet he never clean cast away the root and
branches of Israel, but kept and keeps thowsands to him self, and we look
for the rest to be called even thowsands and ten thowsandes in every tribe.
This people through their much iniqu ty vaned and vanished as the moon: and
oftentimes has b^ne and now is in a dangerous and fearful eclipse. But by
the grace and mercy of God and his word appearing near unto them, they have
gotten and do get some light and shall in thend be in the full, when God grant
our unthankfulness that be of the Gentiles, breed not great confusion to us
which have had them our example but would not learn. He raised amongst them
by his word that remained with them, not one in one age, but many in many ages
as it were Angels, even out of their bodies: I mean, the wise Prophets, noble
Judges and deliuerers, holy Priests and Leuits, godly Kings and Angellike
Nazarits. Joel. 2.28.
Even of your young men I raised Prophets unto you says the Lord, and of your
children Doctors, I powered my spirit upon your servant, and upon your
daughters from time to time. And last of al as I opened my co^duits in the
days of Noah for destruction, so the conduits of grace were reueiled unto you
from heaven: yea the windows of heaven were opened at the ascension of Jesus
Christ and wisdom and understanding rained upon all flesh, even to thends of
the world. Thus we may remember the commendations of this covenant that David
comprehends in one word. And seeing there is also now come to us like grace,
the same is also to be understood in our selves. Now of the other part in
that he says, he commanded his covenant for ever, Beside this praise of the
mercy of God, I have said that he exhorted the^ and us to continual
faithfulness, in keeping the Lords covenant with us. Now if we agree with our
selves one of us with an other, a man with his fellow, if we after break our
faith, we can not but condemn our selves of great wickedness. But if we break
with our betters as some Prince or King it is more both wickedness and shame:
but if the covenant that we made with God in the beginning by our fathers and
have renewed it in our baptism since, be by our sins broken of, what misery
and shame what sin and death hangs over us? It behooves therefore in
respect of the covenant it self, first that we keep faith and truth to the
commandments: and that not for an hour or the time while we hear the word,
or when we come to the communion, or for a day we hang down our heads and
some mortified and consecrat to God in says and holiness, not only to please
our selves if we see a good motion in us though it be sooner quenched then the
lightning, but to labor to follow it, to nourish it, to blow it up, to make
a fire of it, that we be not as the unfaithful waters which in the summer are
dried up, or as the dead trees which perish in the winter, but that we remain
whole, and sound, and perfect as the living waters and Olives of the Lord that
ever shed forth their sweetenes and fatness: that we make a covenant with God
even binding our selves as it were in statute merchant for performaunce: that
we make as the Scripture speaks a covenant of salt durable and perpetual
with the Lord to live before him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life: that our hands and hearts and knees be never weary of praying, our
ears never weary in hearing the word of God, our minds ever occupied in our
vocation or something furthering our knowledge and godliness. All this we are
bound to in respect only of our covenant. Now if we think of him who has
stricken this league with us, we can not chose but do it. For as David says
here, holy and fearful is his name. In which words two arguments are
contained and forceable reasons to draw us and drive us to the performaunce of
it. first in that he is a holy, Secondly a fearful God. This reason you know
is set almost at thend of every commandment in Moises. ^ot he concludes
them thus always: This I command you for I am the Lord that is an holy God
which would not command, were it not both good in it self and good for you:
and a fearful God which will visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. Exodus 20.5.
Then we see whether to look for help if we be slack or weak or ready to
fall in the breach of the commaundeme^ts of God. Art thou weak and overcome
almost with anger, with the affections of adultery in thy heart or in thine
eyes? Then remember that the holy God whose thou art and whom thou oughst to
serve has forbidden them both. Art thou acquainted with sin, art thou an
old adulterer, an old backebiter and procuter of hate against them that fear
God? Know that the fearful God will knock thy pate if thou go on still in
thy wickedness. These reasons I leave for you to think of, because I will be
short and make an end of the Psalm, and because the next and last verse
hangs on this, namely to declare unto us how to come to the keeping of the
covenant with God. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, as if he
should say: Art thou desirous to follow the will of God and keep his
commandments? Remember that god is an holy and fearful God, with whom thou
have a covenant, the beginning whereof is the keeping of his commandments, and
the root of this wisdom is the fear of him. This is the first step, and this
is that which when thou have gotten, promise thy soul rest. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, whither then shall he go to get this fear of
the Lord, whose end is so pleasant and fruit so precious? shall we go to
mount Sinai and Horeb again, where we shall hear the thunder, and terrible
voice of a trumphet, where fire and smoke and darkness appears without, and
horror and fear within? Or shall the Lord give into my hand a fearful sleep
to send, upon you to prepare you to hear the word of God? Nay these days
are past, and God now speaks to us by his beloved son. Him let us hear,
let us look unto him, let us consider the faithful in the scripture and
company of Angels which fear him. For Jesus Christ him self although the one
and only son, yet he feared God, as Esaias says, Esaias. 11.2.
and was obedient to him, he feared him, and was dilligent in prayer unto him in
the night, and exercised in his vocation all the day, he feared God, and
preached the Gospel diligently for the salvation of the souls of men, and
carefully and pitifully considering their misery, delivered them from
infirmity of their bodies. The Angels that are in heaven they fear god and
reverence his power, they hide their faces at his glory, and worship him at his
feet: Joseph and Io^ias, Samuel and Daniell among the young men, and Noah and
Abraham, Moses and Job, among the fathers, David and Ezechias among the kings,
feared him, and walked in his commandments. These examples are set before us.
Now Solomon he exhorts in his Proverbs to the fear of God, who sees and
considers al our doings, before who^ we and al our inmost cogitations are
naked and open: from who^ no shadow, no cloud, no wood, no dungeon, no
enchau^tment, can hide us, for he sees us that made us: and how can he not
know us now, that knew us in our mothers womb, as David says. And thapostle
to the Hebrews hereupon exhorts to the reverence and fear of God, seeing we
call him father who judges every man according to justice without respect of
person. And to them that will occupy themselves in the scriptures, many other
fountaynes will appear from which this fear of God will slow. Now seeing it
is the beginning or rather the principal part of wisdom, yea even half of
it, we must cast by what means soonest we may obtain it. For if we he wo^ers
and lovers of wisdom, this is the mother which must give her unto us: if we be
marchantes and travelers for her, this is the key and haven where we must
first ariue: if we be Gardners, this the first herb that is to be got and set
in our minds: if we be scholars, this is the first form: if we seek for
her, she will bring them to her. Oh ye Tutors hear how al our labor is in
vain, if we seek not to set this before all. We call the liberal arts and
sciences (...): but in deed preposterously. For the first knowledge of all
knowledge, is a true and grounded knowledge in the will and word of God. And
in deed if we look for fruit at any time of good arts and knowledge of good
tongues, let our first care be, that they fear and serve God: that they be
both brought up in such exercises, and trained up in such studies as increase
godliness: and led so and governed by our example and diligence in our vocations
to follow us, as children their fathers. These are ye means for the spirit of
God to be get fear of God which is the beginning of wisdom: Nay which is the
whole half of wisdom, or rather as Job says, perfect wisdom: without which
al knowledge in heaven and earth is vain and foolish: but with which it is, I
dare say, with Solomon the chiefest holiness. Now hear what commendation the
Prophet gives unto them that have it. He says, that they have good
understanding, and that their praise remains for ever, where we see what is
thought in heaven of all such as fear God, notwithstanding they be contemned
and condemned in our Colleges, and in the world ab^^^^. ^^t a good
understanding (says the Prophet ^^ue a^ such as do thereafter. This
commendation is drawn out of the law where Moses often and many times uses
the same verb, whereof this now comes. For thus he says in the 8. chapter: O
that they were wise and understood this, that they would consider the latter
end. And in diverse other places he uses this word, when he teaches that
they should do wisely in doing the commandments of God. And Solomon in his
Proverbs does often note a godly man by this title, A man of understanding. The
world magnifieth and lifts up on high, Policy, and knowledge of ord^^ng a
common wealth, of conducting an army, of getting great wealth and riches by
merchandise: But who remembers the highest and most principal and ^oueraigne
wisdom of all wisdoms to be godliness? These are surely things very
commendable and necessary, but if we make comparison, these are not to be
accounted of in respect of this wisdom. Therefore this is called wisdom in
the scripture after an excellent sort, as though other were falsely called
wisdom, or by leave as it were. Therefore Moses often times repeateth unto
them in that exhortation made to the commandments, that this shall be their
wisdom before all people: that for this cause other nations shall acknowledge
them to be a wise and understanding people. And in deed as God is only wise, 1.
Tim. 1.17.
as the Apostle says to Timothy, so this treasure and grace he gives only to
his children, when other even his enemies excel in other gifts of the mind.
Egypt has been famous for the Mathematikes. And Athens the schole of eloquence
in all the world: In Lacedemon the tents of soldiers and ^eates of
cheualtie: Physicians in Italy: Laws in France: Merchants in Venice: Now
(as in old time) in Tyrus, in the land of Hauilah are the mountains and
veins of gold and precious stones, scarlet, silk, and crystal in Syria,
yuery and costly wood in Chrum, best wines in Damascus, tapestrie i^ ^^damus,
and so forth might ye cons^der other countries with then chief merchandise:
But the fear of God, the love of his commandments, which is only wisdom,
and only precious, is only found in the Church of God. Therefore all the
faithful which fear the Lord are all marchaunts and occupiers of wisdom,
more famous then the Marchaunts and occupiers of Tyrus who were like the
Princes of the earth, and her chapmen as the Dukes and Nobles in the world For
they are al kings and priests, as Peter and Moses says, but our kingdom and
priesthood are spiritual: it is not seen: and therefore not esteemed. But
because time forces me to break of here, I leave the finishing of these two
last verse to an other time.

(...).

