A bryef and short declaracyon made, wherbye euer^ christen man may know,
what is a sacrament. Of what parts a sacraments consysteth and is made, for
what intent sacraments were instituted, and what is the pryncypall effect of
sacraments, and finally of the abuse of the sacrament of christen body and
blood.

Imprinted At London by Robert Stoughton Dwelling within Ludgate. at the sign
of the Bysshoppes Myter.

AFter the mind of Saint Augustyne A Sacrament is a vysyble shappe or sign of
an inuysyble grace that is as much to say a sacrament is an owtward sign
whereby God thorowghe his word declared in the admynystracyon of the same
testyfyeth and assures our conscience of his favor and good will and i^ this
differth a sacrament from other natural sins. For every natural sign
represents and sygnyfyeth the thing whreof it is a sign, But it has no
promysse of God, there unto annexed. But a Sacrament has a promise of god there
unto annexyd. Which makes the same sign and outward substance to be a
sacrament. And if the receyuer of the sacrament believe not the word of
promysse declared to him before the admynystracion of the sacrament then he
receives not any spyrytuall grace represented and offered in the sacrament.
Allthough he receive the sacrament a thousand times. This suffyseth for the
dyscrecyon of a sacrament and also the dyuersyte of a sacrament from other
natural signs.

The parts whereof a sacrament consists and is by these following. An owtward
vysyble substance and a promysse of God made unto us: which pronounced and
declared unto us, makyth the vysyble substance to be a sacrament unto us which
hear the promise of god declared the thing and Spyrytuall grace represented
and offered in ye sacrament is such a Part of the Sacrament that they only
receive it which believe ye promysse of god declared unto them. And al such as
believe not the promysse of god declared unto them in the admynystracyon of the
sacrament. Allthough they receive the sacrament, yet they receue not ye grace
represented therein.

The cause wherefore sacraments were Instytuted, is to declare and set fourth
the benyfyttes of god exhybyted and done to us. And to prynte and grafte them
in owre Minds: And so confyrme owre faith so that we may boldlye reyoyce and
say, that christ and al christ's merytes and deseruinges beowres.

The effect of Sacraments is to comfort every conscience troubled vexed, and
oppressed with the condemnacyon and judgment of gods law and sentence,
given upon al sins. Also to comfort them which be grieved with the sight of
the multytud and gretnes of their Sins and no less with the long
cotynuaunce, use, and perseueraunce in the same. Such Judgment and sentence
given against Sins, with the sight of their sins, and of the multitude and
greatness, and the long contynuance therein, desperacyo^ must needs ensue, and
follow, until they here this promysse of God unto this sacrament annexed or
such other like wc they heryng, rejoice inwardly, and with great gredenes and
comfort come to receue the sacrament, as an erneste pledge, of remyssyon of
sins purchased by Christ only, without their deservings by faith i^ the
promise they believe christ's body and blood to be flai^ and shed for the
remyssyo^ of their si^nes And thus they eat Christ's flesh, and drynk his
blood, the clargy of england be herein to be reformed by cause they maintain
errors contrary to these true pri^ciples, taught by ye premitiue church and al
ye blessed fathers, and ancient doctores,

The first abuse.
First where saynct Augustyne and other Ancient wrytters have taught that the
word of God in the mynystracyon of the vysyble substance, makes a sacrament
there of our clergy admynyster, the vysyble substance, without any
declaracyon of any word of Christ's Instytutyon, wc is not only against the
doctrine of the primityue church, but also against Christ's first Practysse wc
he used when he first instytuted the Same and mynystred it unto his Appostles.
It is also against the Appostles practyse, as it aperyth by Paul which
says. He has delivered to them, that which he received of the lord, The
lord Jesus in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and gyuynge
thanks, brake it, and said, take, eat, This is my body which shall be
betrayed for you, do this in the remembrance of me. Likewise after he had
supped he took the cup. Saying. This cup is ye new Testament, i^ my blood
as often as ye shall drink of it, drynk it in ye remembrance of me.

This practyse of Christ and of his dyscyples so long also continued, used and
freque^ted in ye church of god should have been a suffycye^t doctrine, to all
Christ's church over and besides that, Christ in the admynistracyon of the
Sacrament demanded his dyscyples, saying, do this in remembrance of me,
which word (this) has relacyon to the hole manner of dooynge and also speaking
of Christ

Also our clergy speak the words of Christ's instytutyon secretly which
can not proffytte him which hears the not and also if that he should hear ye
words of christ's institucyon pronounced in the latin tongue as our clergy use
to speak the^, it could not profyt ye herer, wc understands not ye lati^g
to^g, for he hears not the^ so yt he by his heryng understands them, 1.
Cor. ij.
and so the vysyble substance is not become a sacrament unto him for Paul
says, that he which speaks in the tongue or strange langage or speech speaks
to God and not unto men for no man hears him meaning therbye no man
understands him / because the hearer knows not the speech as it appears
after, where Paul says, if I know not ye virtue and meaning of the voice, I
shall be to hy^ wc speaks an alyaunt, and to me he shall be an alyaun^ or
stranger, further he says, Brethren if I shall come unto you speaking in
tongues or straung speeches what shall I profyt you, except I speak unto you
either in reuelacio^ or knowledge or in prophesy, or in lerni^g, for he wc
preaches or prophecyeth, speaks unto me, for edyfyeng and confort, he wc
speaks in the tongue edyfyeth hi^ self he ye prophesyeth edyfyeth the church of
god. Wherefore Paul comaundeth all things to be done according to an order, and
to the edyfyeng of the Church so ye Paul says yt he had rather speak five
words in his sense, yt he might therwt instruct and teach other then x.M.
words in the tongue, in so much as he concludes yt if any man speak in a
straung tongue in the church let hi^ pray that his speech may be interpreted and
if there be no interpreter to declare the meaning of his tongue or straung
speech then let, hy^ hold his pease and keep silence in the Church, and speak
to hy^ self and to God. By all this chapter meany^g yt no man should speak in ye
church, to ye congregation in such to^g or spech wc they kno not nor vndsta^d
not because ye church ca^ take no comodity and proffit thereby. And because ye
clergy speak ye words of Christ's institucyon in latin secretly they take away
from such as understand ye latin tongue ^he sacrament and further because they
speak ye words of Christ's instytucyo^, so secretly yt nether latin man nor
inglysh man do know or understand what they signify or mean therefore the clergy
administer no sacrament to ye people, for the words of CHRIST'S institucyon
pronounced and declared in the admynystracyon of the visykle substance,
causes it to be a sacrament but doubtless the blind error is overflowed the
hole Christen church for ye punyshme^t of the people for their iniquity
committed against God, as it apereth in Deu. where God for the sin of the
people declarethe many curses, deu. xxviij.
and malcoyetyons, to come upon them amongst the which punyshement is
rehearsed that God will send a mighty people from afar and froward,
styfnecked and old people whose voice the People shall not know nor
understand what they speak. The same punysshemente the pr^phet Ieremye does
prophesye, to come upon the people.

Christ gave the Appostles the grace of tongues, Acts. ij.
that who so ever heard them, speak, did understand them i^ their own
language and Speech by this gift it appears manyfestly, that god would his
people, to be taught in such form and co^dycyones, that they might perceive
the sense and understanding, of the word and mysteryes often spoken in a
strange tongue which they do not understand, profyteth the^ not. But because
owre clergy will not obey gods commandment, which is to preach the
gospel, and to teach the people according to gods commandment god has
given the^ over, to follow their wicked thoughts from the wc they would have
turned the^ if they had followed his counsel: and declared, and made open his
words to the people as i^ is pla^^^ John.viij. and Ieremye.xxiii saying if
they had stand in my counsel and taught my people to know my words truly I
would have turned the^ from their evil ways, and from their most wicked
thoughts. And because they have not fedd the flock, God threreneth them by
his ^^^phete Ezechyell, Sa^ng, I will require my flock upon the hands of my
Shepperdes. I will make them crasse yt they shall not fead the^ no more, nor
shall not fead their selves doutles this punyssheme^t, is come even upon owre
clergy for there were never so many ygnoraunt sheperdes, which ca^ not fead
their flock nor excute their office

The second abuse
The Clergy be no less to be reprehendyd and also reformed which receue the
hole sacrament to them selves not dystrybutynge it to the people, contrary to
christ's practysse which at his last supper did not only eat and drynk, him
self, But also gave the same unto all which were there present, sygnyfyeng and
expressyng, thereby yt he with all his merytes, and benyffytes, should be common
to all his Elect, and Chosen, and no synguler, and peculyar, to one a love
this churlysshe facio^ of eating and Drynkyng, by themselves, not expectyng and
tari^g for their neybours is ernestly reprouyd by the Appostle, j. Cor. xi.
Saying brethren when you come together, to eat, look or Expect, and tarry
one for the other if any man be hungrye let him eat at home.

If saynct Ambrose doctrine be true, as dowtlesse it is who so ever Eats /
and Drynketh so Churlysshelye (that is to receive the sacrament in the church
so privately does receive it unworthily, Ambrose upon the.i. Corin ye.ii.
Chapyter
to his eternal Damnacion, These be ye words of saynct Ambrose, he receives
unworthily which Celebrateth, the mysterye Otherwise then of the lord it was
delivered for he can not be devout which presumes otherwise, then it was
given of the Author or first instytutor. Also the same says Therefore if you so
come together that every man might eat his own these should not be don in the
church where the coming to gether should be, because of unity and of the
mystery, and not for dyssensyon, or for the belly. Athanasyus that auncyente
writer which wrote before Sayncte Ambrose says ye have defiled, Truly this
supper, Athanasyus upon the i. of ye Cor. ye.ij. Chap
which being the lords and commen to all men ye have made it synguler, and
probate also that auncyente clarke and Bishop, of Constantynople,
Chrysostom, no less reprouethe this Pryuate and chorlyssche opinion Saying
Truly, these things which be the Lords, upon the of ye first of the Cor.
ye xx. vij. homylye
they be not of this servant or of an Other, but commen to all, it is all one
thyngt this word the Lords, and the word commen for if it be of the Lords as
dowbtles it is, you ought not to receive it to thy self as thine own, but to
set it forth, as ye thing of ye lord co^me^ly to al for truly yt is to be ye
lords but now you sufrest not, yt to beco^me^ but eatest it to thy self wherefore
ye apostle did ad every one presumes to eat his own supper. Also i^ ye same
homylye he says. The lord for thy Sake, did give him self but the^ for ye
love of thine own self do not make thy brother pertaker with they Christ
comaundeth al his people, to ca^ no master in earth, not thereby prohybiting
the servant and every inserycure or mean parson to call his superyoure lord
or master but Christ means by his prohybytyons that his elect should not
accept any in earth concerning the christen relygyon to teach them any other
doctrine or lernyng than he has taught them which was doubtless suffycyent
for them.

Wherefore saint Ihon the euangelyst exhortyng all men to cleave to christ's
doctrine and not to follow or regard any man's doctrine, i. John.ij.
says. Let that (meaning) learning abide in you, which ye have herd from
the beginning, for if that abide in you which you have hard from the
beginning? ye shall also abide in the son and in the father, yea christ him
self said if ye abide in my word ye shall be my dyscyples and you shall know
the truth / and the truth shall deliver you wherefore doutles the forsaki^g of
christ's doctrine and followyng men's doctrine is the only cause of all
error, John. viii.
as it appears plainly where God by his prophet Hyeremye, Iere. xxiij
forbyddeth us to here any preacher which Preaches not his word saying hear
not the words of the prophets, wc prophecy to you and deceue you, they speak
the visions of their oune hearts and not of the mouth of the lord. I did not
send the Prophets / and they did run, Ierem. ix
I spoke not to them and they did prophecye. The same is also reproved by the
same prophet. Therefore Paul pronounces them accursed which preach any other
gospel, Gallat. iij
than yt which was preached.

The Ancient writers Latynist Tertulyan, faith it is not lawful, Tertllian
in his bo^ called prescripcions xcv. leafe^
for us to Cheryshe or Favor any thing of our own Fre will, nor yet to
chose any thing that any other man shall bring in his own will, we have the
Apostles of the Lord, authors and Examples, which did not chose any thing of
there own Fre will that, they would bring in but did set forth that doctrine
faith fullye to the nacyons which they had received of Christ.

Now I trust every Christen manne may perceive, how our clergy contrary to
Christ's doctrine, and also practice, have abused this most blessed sacrament
of his body and blood, and no less contrary to all the ancient writers as it
appears by saint Sipriane, Sypryane to Sesyliu^
which says if christ ought only to be hard, we ought not to take heed or
regard what any man before us have, taught to be done, but what he which before
al is, christ first has done, nor we ought not to follow the custume of men
but the truth of God.

Now christen Reader pondre and also well remember that CHRIST when he
Admynistred the Sacrament to his dyscyples declared what benefyt and proffit
they should receive by his death wc was remissyo^ at their sy^nes but our clergy
when they adminystre the sacrament to the congregatyon either speak so
secretlye that no man hears them or speak in such a speech, that the
congregacyon understand them not or, else when they adminystre they speak of
their o^ne and not the words of christ's instytucyon, which is manyfeste,
contrary to christ's instytucyon and commandment so that every man / which
well consydereth their doi^ges / ca^ not otherwise Judge them, but the natural
seade of Antychryste. also where christ admynystred / he destrybuted the
sacrament to all his dysciples, but our clargy receive, all the sacrament in
their pryuat Mass to them selves, and dystrybute it unto none other, contrary
to the practis of Christ, and of his Appostles / and no less contrary to the
practyse and doctrine of the pryuat Church, and the most godly and clarkly
ancyent writers: so that I think there is nether godly nor learned man yt
compares the learning use and practysse of Christ / and his Appostelles / with
the learning use and practysse of our clargy: But that he will Judge our clargy
to be the most hateful enemies, of Christ, and all the christen Relygyon.

The third abuse
Where I said i^ mi third princyple / yt ye effect of sacraments was to
comfort al troubled conscyences which be oppressed with the knowledge and
remembrance of the sentence of Gods law pronounced, and given against all
sinners, and with the inward remembrance and consyde rasyons of the multitude,
and greatenes of their sins, and of the long co^tynuaunce in the same, so
that they in remembrance of those things, be utterly adacted and driven to
extreme desperacyon for remedy whereof Christ most mercyfullye and louyngly
(as the true bishop of our souls, which suffered al our temptacyons in his
flesh, Hibre. ix.
that he knowing them might have the more compassyon upon us did instytute and
ordeine this most blessed sacrament of his body and blood in the admynystratyon
whereof he declared and dyuulged to all the receauers thereof that his body should
be betrayed for us, and his blood should be shed for the remyssyon of their
Sins, all this which he did to the adminystracyon of this blessed sacrament
he did it for cure example comaunding us that as of ^^n as we should do this we
should do it in remembrance of him. And his Appostle commanded also that as
often, as we should receive this sacrament, we should show the death of the
lord: To show ye death of the lord, is to declare that we through our
sins, have deserved most Justly eternal death, from the which, we be
delivered only thoroughe the passion, bloudshedynge, and death of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by none other means.

O what comfort, quyetnes / and joy is this to the troubled and vexed
conscience, when he consydreth this inestimable Love, which god has showed
unto him in this most paynefull passion, most cruel and shamfull death, of
his only begotten son, and owre only sauyoure Jesus christ. The fearful and
miserable sinner, can now Boldelye with great gladness, reyoyce, and say,
seeing that god our father has given unto us his only begotten son, for
our redempcyon, we then being his enemies how can it be possible, yt he should
not also now give us all things (bri^ge his fryndes) with him yea doutles
remyssyon of Sins, and eternal life. This comfort and yoye, is taken a way
from us by our cleargye with when they admynystre the Sacrament, they never
show the Death, of the lord, suffered for our Redempcyon, not only hydynge
and keeping, secret, this estymable Benyfytte, done for and to us, by Jesus
Christ / but also most wyckedly convert and turn, the benefytte of owr
redemption to them selves, declaryng the sacrament offered up to God, by them
to be a Sacryfyce, which Work, for the works sake, deserves remyssyo^ of
Sy^nes, and eternal life. if that doctrine be True then there is no thank to
be given to Christ, but to our Pryestes, which daily do make innumerable
Sacrifyces, as they say and Think, therbye to take a Way, and remytt Sins,
Although the holy scryptures Say / that christ was the only sacryfyce for
sin which offered up upon the cross ones, was a suffycyente sacrifyce, for
ever / and the sacrament duelye Admynystred, in the form instytuted of
Christ by the old fathers called a sacrifice, because it was a memoryall of
christ's sacrifyce, and not because it is in it self a sacrifice either
propiciatory or satisfactorye, but only called by the name of a sacryfyce
because it was a memoryall thereof to bring to our remembrance and to prynte
therein the sacryfice of Christ ones parfectlye done and performed for us for
ever: even so the ancient writers call the sacrament of christ's body and
blood a sacryfyce to God for two causes whereof I have rehearsed the one, that
is to say, because it is a memoryall thereof if it be duelye admynistred
according to christ's instytucyon / An other cause is that we that be christ's
church, and members be represented, and sygnyfyed in and by the sacrament, for
our bodies truly mortyfyed from all lusts and concupyscence be an acceptable
sacrifice to God as it apereth in the.xii. to the romans There Paull says,
brethren I beseech you by the mercy of god that ye exhybite your bodies a
lyuelye and holy sacryfyce acceptable and pleasing to GOD also Peter says.
And you as living stones, be builded a spyritual house / an holy presthode,
offerenge spyrytual sacrifyces / acceptable to god, by Jesus Christ also
sayncte Augustyne, in a sermon to young Children says, if ye will understand
what is the body of Christ, hear the Appostles saying. Ye be the body of
christ, members of membre, if therefore ye be of the body Christ, and
members? your mysterye is see upon the boorde, of the lord / you receive the
mystery of the lord, unto that you be, ye Answer, Amen. And so answering you
subscrybe or affirm, also the same doctors writing upon the holy feast of
Easter, says because Christ has suffered for us, he has commended to us, i^
this sacrament his body and blood, which also he has made us, our selves,
for we be made his body, and through his mercy, we be the same, which we receive

Thus the holy doctors, in the prymatiue Church, cauled the, sacrament, a
sacrifice wherein we offer owre selves a living Sacryfyce, from all sins
mortyfyed, and dead not meaning that the pryests should offer a Sacryfyce to
GOD for sin, which oblacyons should defyne remyssyon of Sin, ever for the
works sake as folysh Sophysters write contrary to the holy scryptures.

What living Creatures hearing Sayncte Augustyne wrytting in this manner of
the sacrament will not Judge it the speech a Mystycall speech, and not to be
taken as the words sound, Also our clargye offering us the Sacrame^te,
give it to GOD as a Sacryfyce for Sin, which we be commanded of Christ to
receive as a memoryall of a benefytte given by him unto us, to nourysshe and
confyrme our faith thereby and not to be given by us unto him.

Thus they declare them selves, to be right Antychrystes which manyfestlye
change CHRIST'S or: denaunces and use them clean contrary turnyng receauyng,
to giving, this is not to do these things, in the remembrance of Christ, but
rather to put al Christ's doings out of remembrance.

They sell the same to us for money which Christ has given us freely, wherefore
they make us very fools, to bye with our money that thing which is our oune
most surely already, by gods gift And thus by byenge of our own, we not
only lo^se our monye, but also commit Simony, byeng the spyrytuall gift of God
for temporal reward.

The clergy also rob not only the poor wyddowes but many other also
taking money for the applyenge of a sacrament as a sacrifyce, for the dead wc
cannot eat it nor do it in the remembrance of Christ nor give thanks for it
which is required of every faithful receauer thereof, to do. For as the words
of God profyteth no man, but only such as hereth it and believes it that so in
like manner the sacrament profyteth not any man except he receue it and believe
the promyses thereto annexed, this is the most wicked craft and subtilty of
the deuel, that all such thing which be most Godly, and so proffitable to all
men that by their craft or subtilty they can not cause such things to be had
in hatred then seek they, out new pellices and crafts whereby ye use of such
godly things way be kept secret or else unknown or not regarded or else so
altered and changed yt the proffytable effect thereof be not perceived yet
while they permyt and let the name of the thing continue in a graet admyration
and estimacyon but not profitable to men. And thus oftentimes it is come to
pass that such things wc we reinstituted and ordained very proffytable to men
now through the use (or more truly said abuse) of them, they be be ^ me very
vnpoffytable, hurtful and also wicked.

The only cause of this is yt we follow not Christ, in doctrine, and example
but with great gredynes follow the fond opinion of men, where God by his prophet
reproves us saying my people have done two euelles, Esaye^^.
they have forsaken me the fountain of life and dygged the^ sesternes even
such as can not hold waters also Cypryane that blessed Martyr, and ancient
writer, Sypryane to Sesyliu^
says, Jesus christ our lord he is the high Pryst, by god the father, and he
first offered Sacryfyce, to god the father, and commanded that to be done, in
the remembrance of him. Verelye that pryste occupyeth truly the Room / and
stead of christ which follows that, which christ did, and then offreth a true
sacryfyceful in the church, to god the father: when he Begynnythe, even so to
offer, as he sees and parceyueth christ to have offered. But otherwise all the
Lernyng, of relygyon, and of the truth is converted and overthrown if that
which is spyrytually commanded be not faithfully observed and kept. Therefore
the cleargye ought to be reformed, by the king and his honorable counsel,
that from Henceforthe, they should not make any sacryfyce, for quycke and dead,
of the sacrament which sacryfyce, for the works sake, should deserve
remyssion of sins for there is no thing more contrary to remyssyon of sins
/ freely given by grace, also it is plain contrary to Christ's first
institucyon of the sacrament which ordained it to be a memory all of Christ's
only sacryfyce wherein we receive remyssyon of Sins.

And if the pryestes sacrament be a sacryfyce, for the sins of the quick and
of the dead. why than is not the sacrament which the lay men receive, as well
a sacryfyce for the quyck and the dead or else let our clergy show by the
scrypturs how their sacrament, is of more value, before God then ours of the
layety? And yet I doubt not but if a lay man should daily receive the sacrament
and take money therefore saying that he did make a sacryfyce for the remissyon
of the sins of the quyck and the dead that our clergy would not sease until
they with fire had made him dead, and not living and quick. Thus it is come to
pas that the use of the sacrament only serves the couetouse appetyte,
Dronkennes, whordome and just of the wicked pryests. And not one ministre
thereof, administre it duly as Christ instytuted, it that is for the
spyrytuall comfort, and for the confyrmacyon of the faith of the receyuer of
the sacrament because the word of Christ's Instytucyon, is not declared in the
admynystracyon of the Sacrament christ is not Received, which only by
faith must be received, thorough the hearing of his word declared. And
because in the admynystracyon of the Sacrament, the cleargye do not declare
the words of christ's Instytucyon, which words by Gods promysse of
remyssyon of Sins, through Christ's Body betrayed, and his blood shed: The
receyuers of the Sacrament, receive it with out Faith, to their Dampnacyon,
for Faith, comes by herynge of gods word which they here not declared
wherefore they can not believe.

Note well Chryste^ Reader, whether our clargy be not most detestable
sacrame^taryes, wc take away christ's words of Instytucyo^, of ye sacrame^te
of his body and blood in the admynystracyon there of whereby the materyal
substance of bred and wine, should be made a sacrament to ye receyuers thereof
mark well also whether they do not contrary to Gods commandment, add and
put to words of their oun faint imagynacyon and ta^tas^ which another christ
nor his Apostles nor the prymatyue church did other practysse or command.

Thyrdely consydere gentell reader that our cleargye do not declare any
benyfytes of god showed to us in Jesus Christ nor they ^omforte not us which be
oppressed wythsynne nor confyrme owre faith through christ's body be trayed:

And his blood shed for the remyssyon of our sins thus deprive they us both
of the sacrament and of all christ's benefytes and of all consolacyon and yoye
wc we should receive thereby. so that both ye cause porpose and effect,
wherefore christ instytuted this sacrament of his body and Blood, be utterly
obscured and taken away from us: And yet when we other preach or write
against these their errors, by them practyssed contrary to the hosy scryptures
and all the ancient doctors, they call us sacramentaryes, and when we desire
to have the right sacraments practysed by Christ and his apostles to be
restored, unto his Church than they cry a faggot a fire, for these heretykes.
But now Christen Reader by the authorytyes before alleged, Judge yt who be
both heritikes and sacramentaryes. And thus I commytte the Christen Reader to
God, who send true and faithful administratours of his sacrament and true
preachers of his word. Amen.

Compyled by Rychard Tracye
Finis.
Anno.1548. the.10. of Nouembre.


