A SYNOPSIS OR COMPENDIVM OF THE FATHERS, Or of the most Famous and Ancient
Doctors of the Church, as also of the SCHOOLMEN.

Wherein is clearly showed how much is to be attributed to them, in what
several times they lived, with what Caution they are to be read, and which
were their perfections, which their Errors.

A Treatise most necessary, and profitable to young Divines, and delightful to
all such whose Studies in Humanity take from them the leisure, though not the
desire of reading the Fathers; whose Curiosity this brief surveigh of
Antiquity will in part satisfy.

Written in Latin by that Reverend and Renowned Divine, DANIEL TOSSANVS, chief
Professor of Divinity in the University of Heidelberge, and faithfully
Englished by A. S. Gent

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Red
Bull in Little-Brittaine. 1635.

TO HIS TRVLY WORTHY, AND NOBLE FRIEND, SIR R. C. KNIGHT.
Sir,
WHat is not mine own, I cannot dedicate, and therefore can neither prefix your
name nor mine before this Book. I appeal to you here, not as an indulgent
Patron, but a learned Judge: Of such you have the two requisites, Ability and
Commodity. The first is within you, an acute and solid Understanding; the
latter, without you, a complete Library, which Chrysologus styles the only
Paradise of this world. You sit every day most happily incircled with the most
famous Writers of all kinds. Thus environed, the poorest Scholar thinks
himself majestically enthroned, and securely guarded. There is not a quotation
in this Treatise, which you cannot readily bring to the Test, and therefore I
choose you as a most fit Trier of the Authors Integrity, in whose praise when I
have spoken much, it will appear in a discerning eye too little. His Brevity is
such, that sometime I resemble him to one who makes an exact surveigh of an
Immense Kingdom in a moment; sometimes to the Sun himself, who compasses
the world in a natural day. For the same proportion holds this short Discourse
with vast Antiquity. I dare maintain that in far greater Volumes of the
same subject, (as Medulla patrum, Favus patrum, Flores patrum) you shall not
find so accurate a judgment of the Fathers, neither delivered with so entire
a faith, and so clean a sifting of the Meal from the branne, of their
perfections from their errors.

More Sentences, it may be, they contain, and the more the worse; For those
wretched Summularies, or Florists are the very Bane of Learning, who in stead
of culling out the choycest flowers, do, indeed, nothing but weed Authors:
They leave the pure wine behind, and give their thirsty Readers the unsavory
Lees to drink.

Believe me, the Fountains themselves are far sweeter. Possevin has
inserted Campians ten Reasons in his Biblfotheca Selecta, and alleges the
cause to be his fear, lest the Volume being so small, Heretics might in time
collect, and sacrifice them all to Vulcan. I think this little work is of as
great value, and merits no less care, especially since it is already become so
rare, that it is hardly by prayer, or money to be purchased Of its dignity this
is no obscure Argument, that the learned son of our Tossanus thought it
worthy the Dedication to Iacobus Arminius, who rose with as great a luster as
any light of the Modern Church, though it was his evil Destiny to set in a
Cloud. For the Translation I say little, both because it is mine own, as also
that books of this nature admit no flourishes, nor Elegancy of phrase. I am
confident I have not altered the sense, and that is as much as the most severe
Critic can require at my hands. The love to Knowledge, and her Professors, is
yours by Inheritance, who derive it from your truly great Father, on whose Head
my Divining Soul fore-sees impartial Posterity setting that Crown which as
yet the Modesty of his friends, and the Malice of his enemies deny him. I
presume therefore that you will add the perusal of this Treatise to your
other favors, which are so many, that should I endeavor to sum them up, I
should at once prove grateful to you, and tedious to the Reader. I beseech you
therefore to accept of the bare acknowledgement, and of the religious
protestation that I am,

Noble Sir, Your most humble Servant, A. S.

THE AVTHORS PREFACE, WHICH TOGEther with the Treatise it self was delivered
by way of Lecture.
MY Courteous Auditors, I have oftentimes called to mind the saying of that
most excellent, and grave Philosopher, Seneca, Magnam esse dementiam intanta
Temporis egestate supervacua discere: It is great madness, says he, in so
great want of time to learn things superfluous. For that first Aphorism of
Hippocrates the Prince of Physicians, is most true, Vita brevis est, Ars longa:
Life is short, Art long. Though this be most true, yet can I not assent unto
them, who think it enough for a Student in Divinity to be thoroughly versed in
the sacred Scriptures, and that he need learn and meditate nothing else; that
the immense Volumes of the Fathers, and ancient Doctors, as a vast and
fadomelesse Sea are to be avoided, because they bring greater doubt and
perplexity, than light and science to the mind; especially if a man will dwell
upon the manifold Commentaries of the late Doctors, whom we call Schoolmen.
These Assertions (though they may at first sight appear fair and goodly) yet
savor too much of Arrogance. Far be it from any Divine to assume that
Nestorian Pride, who, as the Ecclesiastical History testifies, relying on the
volubility of his own Tongue, arrogantly contemned the Writings of the most
ancient Interpreters. I confess, the sacred Scriptures are able to render a
man abundantly wise, as says Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3. and to instruct him in all
things pertaining to salvation, by the faith which is in Jesus Christ. I
confess also some men have not the understanding rightly to judge of so many
Commentaries of the Ancients; others have not the leisure to read them, and not
a few want means to procure them. Yet in these a Divine ought not to be
altogether a stranger. Nesoire quid antequam natus sis acciderit idest semper
esse puerum, says Cicero in his Oratory. To be ignorant altogether of what
happened before thou were borne, is always to be a child: and the
commemoration of Antiquity, and producing of examples, gives not only delight,
but authority and credit to an Oration. It was an ancient and laudable custom,
as witnesses Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 4. that if any question were disputed, the
judgment and consent of the most ancient Churches wherein the Apostles were
conversant, should be enquired into, and fully known.

But here certain Cautions are necessary, which being not observed by the
Papists, they have erred many ways in reading of the Fathers, and have proved
not so much Theologi, as Patrologi, and Anthropologi:

The first Caution is, that none read the Fathers except they be well
exercised in the Scriptures, which neglected, they shall grope like one blind
in the dark, and sail in a wide Sea without either North-Starre or Compass.
Another Caution ought to be, that though the authority and consent of the
Fathers in the Truth, do much confirm and comfort, yet Faith is only to be
builded upon the Apostolical and Prophetical Scriptures, as a foundation most
firm. For the Scripture, as the only Queen and Empress (as Luther is used to
say) ought to have the sovereign Command. The third Caution is, that in
reading the Fathers we do not imitate those flatterers of ^ionisius Siculu,
who licking up the Tyrants spittle, affirmed it to be sweeter than Nectar. To
these I may liken such as without any exception embrace and magnify
indifferently all the Writings and Sayings of the Fathers. These are the points
about which at this day we combat the Jesuits, the stoutest Champions the Pope
has; and not (as they labor to persuade the vulgar) about the Fathers
themselves, or reverent Antiquity, as if we did plainly reject them, and
after the Athenian manner were delighted with the novelties of Newes-tellers.
For first, we recall them to true Antiquity, which is to be derived from the
ancient of days, and his revelations, that so we may refuse and condemn as
new whatsoever Christ has not taught us, as Saint Ambrose advises us, lib. 1.
Officior. Next we distinguish between the ages of the Church, and between
Father and Father, and demonstrate in one and the same Father what is
authentical, what erroneous, irreptitious, and inserted by the Monks.

Moreover, when we enquire after the Church, we do not seek the degenerate
and adulterate, but the chaste and holy Spouse of Christ: And why may not we
say the same of the Roman Church at this day, that Cicero in his Oration for
his house said of the Roman people, An tu populum Romanum esse putas qui
constat ex iis qui mercede conducuntur, qui impelluntur ut vim adferant
magistrastibus, optant quotidie praecipiti furore, caedem, incendia, rapinas; O
speciem dignitatis populi Romani, quam scilicet reges, quam nationes ex terrae,
quam gentes ultimae pertimescunt: Do thou think, says he, that to be the
people of Rome which consists of those that are mercenary; who are ready to
offer violence to Magistrates, that desire daily with a desperate fury, fire,
rapes, and slaughter: Oath goodly dignity of the Roman people, whom Kings,
foreign Nations, and the most remote inhabitants of the earth do fear. We
do indeed much esteem that Roman Church whose faith is preached through the
whole world, we likewise reverence those Fathers and Bishops which are not
commended to us by the only authority and Canonization of Popes, but by their
own purity of Doctrine, Innocence of life, and constancy in Martyrdom. But it
is well the Jesuits so distrust their own cause, that they dare not stand to
the decision of the sacred Scriptures, nor of the Fathers themselves, except
they be mutilated, and altered according to their will, and deformed with many
suppositious books. Their Impudency this way clearly appears in their Index
Expurgatorius not long since here published; out of all which we may easily
collect that they retain neither shame, faith, nor conscience, nor any thing
authenticke either in the Scriptures, or Fathers, but only what is
appropriated to their superstition, and will worship of Images.

Now, most loving Auditors, because it is much material to the Students in
Divinity (though all have not the means and faculty of reading the Fathers) at
least to know what is to be judged and determined of them in general, and
which were the most famous Fathers, and Scholasticall Authors, as also with
what judgment and choice they are to be read, I think it will neither be a
service unacceptable, nor unprofitable, if in the end of these doggedayes, and
before the Mart now at hand, I instruct you in the premises, and contract the
whole matter into, as it were, a Synopsis, or abridgement.

Errata.
Page 2. line 3. read it^^ p. 5. l. 4. r. litera^. p. 8. l. 8. r. Academicorum.
p. 11. l. penu^^. r. ^^lle. p. 14. l. 1. r. Canon law. p. 19. l. 13. r. A
Doctrina. p. 23. l. 13, r. Constantinople. p. 24. l. 11. f. prejudice, r.
produce. p. 27. l. 14. r. quantum. p. 70 l. 12. r. Lazarum. p. 71. l. 10. r.
Mass. p. 77. l. 2. r. taught. p. 67. l. 7. r. Nestorius. p. 71. l. 3. f.
shall, r. does. p. 72. l. 19. r. it is told u^ p. 74. r. French. p. 76. l.
penult. f. upon Books r. upon the sacred Writ.

A SYNOPSIS, OR COMPENDIVM of the Fathers; or of the most Famous and Ancient
Doctors of the Church, as also of the Schoolmen.
General Aphorisms containing certain Rules by which we may judge in reading
of the Fathers of their true Antiquity, and Purity, together with the Solutions
of some Objections.
Aphorism 1.
THat true Antiquity is to be sought after, and magnified, is the Common
Tenent of all Pious People.

(2.)
For it is manifest that the Christian Religion is the most Ancient, as
deriving it Testimonies from the very beginning of the world.

(3.)
But this is not to be esteemed true Antiquity, to understand Quid hic, aut
ille ante nos fecerit, aut docuerit: sed quid is qui ante omnes est, Christus,
et qui solus via est, veritas, et vita, a cujus praeceptis nullo modo
recedendum est: What this, or that man did, or taught before us, but what he
did who was before all, even Christ himself, who only is the Way, the Truth,
and the Life, from whose Precepts we ought not to digress, as says Saint
Cyprian ad Caecil. lib. 2. epist. 3.

(4.)
Omnis quippe Antiquitas, ct consuctudo sine veritate nihil aliud nisi Err^ris
vetustas censenda est: So that all Antiquity, and Custom, not grounded on the
Truth, is to be accounted no other than an Ancient Error, as the same Saint
Cyprian piously writes to Pomp. against the Epistle of Stephanus.

(5.)
But the Ancient Truth God taught us by his Prophets and Apostles, who though
in condition they were men, and, indeed, sinners, yet in Doctrine which was
revealed to them supernaturally by the holy Ghost, not by the will of man, we
know them rightly to be fellow-Witneffes, Ephesians. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 20.

(6.)
The Perfection of the Scriptures is easily proved by these two Arguments:
First, That they are sufficient to instruct in those things that belong to
salvation, and to the full knowledge of the Truth. John 5. 39. John 20. 30. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. Secondly, Because in Temptations Faith only finds rest in the
Testimonies of the sacred Scriptures; having always for its Object the Word of
God revealed by the Prophets and Apostles, which cannot be said of any other
Writings or Books whatsoever.

(7.)
To recall us therefore from the manifest Testimonies of the Scriptures to the
Writings of the Fathers, or other men, were injustice, and contumely against
the holy Ghost himself; especially since our Faith does not consist in
wisdom, or in the words of men, but in the power of God, or in the evident
proofs of the holy Ghost., 1 Cor. 2.

(8.)
Wherefore Saint Austine writes thus against the Donausts, lib. 2. cap. 3.
Quis nescit sanctam Scripturam Canonicam tam veteris quam novi Testamenti
omnibus posterioribus Episcoporum literis ita praeponi, ut de illa omnino
dubitari, et disceptari non possit: Episcoporum autem literis, quae post
confirmatum Canonem vel scriptae sunt, vel scribuntur a doctioribus libere
reprehendi, et particularia Concilia a plenariis, et haec quoque a
posterioribus emendari? Who knows not the holy Scripture Canonical, as well
of the old as New Testament, so far to excel all the writings of the later
Bishops, as that there needs no doubt, or dispute thereof: and that the works
of Bishops which have been, or are now written after the confirmed Canon, may
be freely reprehended by the more learned, and that particular Councels may be
amended by General, and these also by the Successive.

(9.)
Moreover, Whereas many complain of the obscurity of the Scriptures we ought
to make no scruple thereof, there being greater obscurity, less purity, and
certainety in the writings of men, as plainly manifest the almost infinite
Commentaries upon Peter Lombard, and not a few animadversions of the Sorbonists
upon him; Cum it a sit temperata Scripturae obscuritas, (they be the words of
Saint Austine, lib. 3. de Doct. Christ.) ut facile quis se possit expedire,
modo cum similibus, et apertioribus locis Scripturae locum obscuriorem
conferamus, et imprimis oculos a scopo non dem^veamus, et quod in uno idiomate
non intelligimus, ex alio cognoscere studeamus: Whereas the obscurity of the
Scriptures is so tempered that we may easily explain it, if we confer the
obscure place with places more open, and perspicuous; especially if we move
not our eyes from the scope; and what we understand not in one tongue, we
study to know by another.

(10.)
Lastly, the Fathers have often erred, as also the Schoolmen, as the Papists
themselves confess: but that the Scriptures are void of all error, no
Christian doubts.

(11.)
It is enquired therefore whether there be any need of reading the Fathers,
and ancient Doctors; and, if it be needful, how much we ought attribute to
them.

(12.)
To read the Fathers profitably no man forbids, but it is not necessary to
read them all, neither are they promiscuously to be read by all persons;
neither to the same proper end that we read the Scriptures.

(13.)
They are not presently to be accounted the writings of the Fathers that are
fathered on them. As for example; Some things pass under the name of one
Dionissius Areopagita, others under that of Origin, whereof part were forged by
idle Monks, part were falsely attributed to those Fathers; as also many Legends
of Saints: Neither has every man such light, and knowledge of the Scriptures,
as may enable him to judge of the Fathers, whom we read not as Foundations of
our Faith.

(14.)
Civitas Dei (says Austin, lib. 19. de Civit. Dei. c. 18.) dubitationem
Academicoram tanquam Dementiam detestatur: credit Scripturis sanctis veteribus,
et novis, quas Canonicas appellamus, unde fides ipsa concepta est, qua justus
vivit, per quam sine dubitatione ambulamus: The City of God detests all the
doubts of the Academicks as mere madness: She believes the sacred Scriptures
both old, and new, which are called Canonical, from whence Faith it self is
derived, whereby the Just shall live, by which we walk with full assurance.

(15.)
Wherefore Christ, and the Apostles, when they taught, did not cite the Rabins,
nor any Father before them but Moses, and the Prophets: nor was it in vain
decreed in the third Council of Cartharge, that nothing should be read in the
Church but the Canonical Scriptures.

(16.)
But the Fathers are read, and are often cited in the Schools, partly that we
may see the consent of the ancient Church concerning the principal Heads of
Doctrine after they were first constituted by the sacred Scriptures; and partly
that we may know the History of the Church and discern her inclination, who
(as witnesses Eusebeus lib. 3. Hist. cap. 29.) after the Apostles times
remained not long a Virgin, nor long retained her faith incorrupted: partly
also, that we may accommodate to our use the many pious admonitions, and
consolations savouring of the very spirit of Martyrdom, together with the many
elegant similitudes, and comparisons, as somewhere says Erasmus.

(17.)
And we read so that we may try all, as admonishes Saint Hierom, in epist.
ad Minerium. Meum est prepositum Antiquos legere, probare singula, retinere
quae bona sunt, et a fide verae Ecclesiae Catholicae non recedere; It is my
purpose to read the Aneients, to prove every particular, to retain that which
is good, and not to fall from the Faith of the true Catholic Church.

(18.)
The same, in a manner, writes Saint Austine to Bishop Fortunatianus. Neque
enim, inquit, quorumlibet Disputationes, quamvis Catholicorum, et laudatorum
hominum, velut Scripturas Canonicas habeee debemus, ut nobis non liceat, (salva
honorificentia quae illis debetur hominibus) aliquid in eorum Scriptis
reprobare, atquerespuere, si forte inveniamus quod aliter senserint, quam
veritas habet: Talis ego sum in Scriptis aliorum, tales volo esse inttllectores
meorum. Neither, says he, ought we to have the Disputations of any in the
same esteem with the Canonical Scriptures, although they be men truly
Catholic, and praiseworthy; nor to lose the freedom (paying the reverence
due to them) of censuring their writings, if we find any thing in them not
consonant to Truth: Such am I in the works of others; such would I have the
understanders of mine.

(19.)
Wherefore the madness of them is great, who without choice would simply admit
all the sayings of the Fathers, which often contradict each other, and as often
digress from the Truth.

(20.)
Lapsus est a fide, et crimen maximae Superbiae (says Saint Basil, in oration
de confession. fidei) velle a Scripturis recedere, veleas solas, cum agitur de
side, molle admittere. Christus enim ait, suas oves, suam vocem audire, non
alterius: It is a falling from the faith, and a crime of the highest Arrogance,
to forsake the Scriptures; or, when Faith is our Theme, not to receive them
only. For Christ says, His Sheep hear his voice, not another.

(21.)
Wherefore Saint Austine (when Cyprians authority was urged against him
concerning Baptism of Heretics) answered, that he held not the Epistles of
Saint Cyprian for Canonical; and (when Saint Hierome had cited three, or four
Fathers touching the reprehension of Saint Peter by Saint Paul) he replied,
that he also could quote the Fathers, but he had rather appeal to the sacred
Scriptures.

(22.)
For it is certain that Saint Cyprian dissented from the Church about the
Baptism of Heretics; and that Tertullian being bewitched by the Montanists,
wrote some Tracts against the Tenants of the Church: as also that Saint
Lactantius, and others, were too much addicted to the opinions of the
Chiliasts, and Platonists: and as true it is, that many things are ascribed to
the Fathers falsely, which savor neither of their style, faith, nor piety, as
shall be showed in its proper place.

(23.)
Moreover, it is most sure that Councels have often erred, and that those
things which had been well constituted by some Councels, were overthrown by
others: Yea, and in the Nicene Council it self, an unjust sentence had been
pronounced against the marriage of Priests, had not one Paphnutius, an old man,
opposed it. In that Council also there was an overhard Canon written against
them, who, after a Confession of faith once made, did fight for their Princes.

(24.)
Not without reason therefore is that of Panormitanus, a Doctor of the Common
Law, De Elect. cap. significasti. Magis credendum Laico, si Scriptaras adferat
quam Papae et toti Concilio, si absque Scripturis agant: We owe a greater
belief to a Lay man producing the Scriptures, than to the Pope, and a whole
Council, if they determine any thing without them.

(25.)
They err therefore who would have the common opinion pass for a Law,
preferring the multitude of humane Testimonies before the Scriptures.

(26.)
But some will say, Heretics believe not the Scriptures, and therefore we
must have recourse to the authority of the Fathers: To which I answer, that
they will less believe the Fathers, and the Church, as appears in the
Ecclesiastical History by the Arians, and Nestorians, who after the Councels
of Nice, and Ephesus, and the crees of the Fathers, became more obstinate than
before.

(27.)
Whereas therefore the Evangelicall Divines of Worms, anno 57. when they
affirmed the holy Writ only to be the Judge of Controversy, being asked
thereupon, whether or no thereby they meant to take away all authority from the
Fathers? answered, that they willingly would receive the Fathers which lived in
the first 500. years after Christ; it is not so to be understood as if they
did simply approve them in all things, which the very Papists themselves do
not; but comparatively, that the corruption of Doctrine was less in those
times than in the Ages following; although there were not wanting who after
those 500. years retained the Apostolical Doctrine in many points: as
Fulgentius, Vigilius, Leo Bishop of Rome, Bernard, and Damascene himself,
especially if you consider the Doctrine of the person of Christ.

(28.)
It remains that we answer them who demand what is to be done when places are
produced out of those first Fathers which seem somewhat to confirm the
opinions of the Papists, or the errors of others, as in prayer for the dead,
the sacrifice of the Mass, Free Will, etc. To this I answer, First, that
proofs of opinions are to be derived from the Scriptures, and the rule of
Saint Paul to be strictly observed. 2 Cor. 13. We can do nothing against the
Truth, but all for the Truth. Secondly, we must compare many places together.
Thirdly, we must consider how, and secundum quid, any thing is spoken by the
Fathers. Fourthly, we must distinguish the Authenticke books from the Bastard
and supposed, or suspected; as are the books Hypognosticon of S. Austin, and
of Questions of the old, and new Testament, of a blessed life, and many more
not rellishing like the doctrine, or style of S. Austin, as Erasmus, and
Iacobus Hermerus rightly observe.

THE SECOND PART. Of the Writings of the Fathers, whereof some are public, and
some private,
CHAP. I.
Of the Canons, which they call the Apostles Canons, and are wont to be
inserted in the first Tome of Councels, in the beginning.
THere are certain Canons published in the Greek Tongue, which they call the
Apostles Canons; some maintaining, that they were collected by Clement the
Successor of Saint Peter: but it is manifest that Rapsody to have been written
long after the times of the Apostles; for there are many things spoken of
utterly unknown to the Apostles days, As of celebrating the Paschall Feast
before the Vernall Aequinoctiall; of gold and silver vessels sanctified; of
Clergy men, and Laymen, etc. Withal, it is unjust, that the Papists should
object against, and impose upon us those Canons which they themselves in many
things observe not; as the Canon of Clergy men taken in Tavernes to be denied
the Communion: of all the faithful entering the Church, who are commanded to
hear, and communicate the Scriptures: as also the Canon that no Bishop, or
Priest, put away his wife under the pretext of Religion, etc. Lastly, in
Gratianus himself, Did 16. those Canons by the authority of one Isidorus are
numbered amongst the Apocripha although in another place, by the authority of
one Zephirinus, they are simply received: which contradiction the gloss cannot
otherwise reconcile than by distinction of those Canons, whereof some are
Apostolical, and some suspected.

It stands otherwise with the Apostles Creed, which has authority above, and
is received before all other Confessions, because almost all of it consists of
the words of the Scripture it self, and comes to us by Apostolical Tradition.
See Cyprian, and Ruffin. in Symbol. That Creed also is the Fountain and
Original of all other Creeds.

For (as Irenaeus rightly admonishes, lib. 3 cap. 1.) Doctrina Apostolorum
simpliciter pendemus, nec cogitandum est alios doctiores, aut sapientiores
successisse Apostolis: We merely depend upon the Doctrine of the Apostles;
neither ought we to think that any more wise, or learned than they have
succeeded them.

CHAP. II.
Of Councels,
AFter the Apostles time there were Synods often assembled to decide
Ecclesiastical controversies, and that before the Nicene Council; as about
the Controversy concerning the Paschall Feast in the year of Christ, 198. in
Palestine, and at Rome: also against the Novatians at Rome, and in Africa: and
against Paulus Samosatenus, anno 278. to confute whose error, and blasphemy,
there is extant an excellent confession of Gregorius Neocaesariensis. But those
Synods before the Nicene, were accounted but particular, and provincial,
because the persecution being so hot, they could not conveniently call General
Councels. The General, or Oecumenicall (as Saint Augustine calls them) are
chiefly four.

Constantine the great, about the year 332.

Gratianus, and Theodosius the elder, anno 386. assembled against Macedonius,
and men of pneumaticall spirits.

The first Ephesine, anno 435. called by Theodosius the younger, against
Nestorius.

The Chalcedonian in the reign of the Martianus, anno 456. In which were
condemned Eutyches, Abbot of Constantinople, and Dioscorns, Bishop of
Alexandria.

To these four universal Councels, Beda, and some others add two more, not
of much less Authority, but in which almost nothing but the Decrees of the
former Councels were established: as that of Constantinople the fourth, and
sixth, about the year 680. which condemned the errors of the Monothelites, who
averred that the Deity and Humanity of Christ had only one will, and operation.

But Gregory the first Bishop of Rome erred, who, lib. 2. epist. 10. writes
thus, Quatuor Synodos sanctae universalis Ecclesiae, sicut quatuor libros
sancti Evangelii recipimus: We receive the four Synods of the holy universal
Church, as we do the four Evangelists, Gratianus writes somewhat better in
Decreto, Canon. 3. Sancta Romana Ecclesia post veteris, et novi Testamenti
Scripturas, quas regulariter suscipit, etiam quatuor Synodos suscipi non
prohibet: The holy Roman Church, says he, after the Scriptures of the old,
and new Testament, which it regularly receives, does not forbid the admittance
of the four Synods.

Moreover, these rules are to be observed concerning those four Oecumenicall
Councels.





them by Scripture, and produce them against Heretics.

Councels may be ex^mined, and searched Paul, and confer it with the
Scriptures, why may not we examine the Councels, since many of them
contradictone another; as the Nicene and the Ariminensian; the Chalcedonian,
and the second Ephesian; the sixth at Constantine-Poole touching the pulling
down of Images, and the second Nicene under Irenes against the defacers of
Images. Also many have erred, as that of Carthage before the Nicene, of the
re-baptizing of Heretics; the Nicene concerning warfare; the second Ephesian,
in defending Euryches, although some great and famous men were present. Leo,
Bishop of Rome, epist. 30. 31. says, that he does approve of the decrees of
the Chalcedon Synod as far as they concern Doctrine, but not those which
were acted with Anatholius. And the saying of Saint Austin, lib. 3. cont.
Maximinus, is very remarkable: Nec ego tibi Nicoenum Concilium, nec tu mihi
Arimin^^^e tanquam praeiudicaturus proferas: nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu
illius detineris: Scripturarum authoritatibus, non quorumlibet propriis, sed
utrisque communibus testibus certemus: res cum re, ratio cum ratione decertet:
Neither, says he, will I with prejudice urge against thee the Nicene
Council, neither do thou prejudice against me the Ariminensian: neither am I
tied to the Authority of the one, nor thou of the other: Let us both submit our
selves to the Authority of the Scriptures, witnesses not proper to one, but
common to both: Let one matter, one reason contest with another.

But some Councels deliberated only upon those things which appertained to the
Ecclesiastical policy; as that of Spain, and the Laodicenian. Other Councels
decreed partly some things holy, partly many impious: as the Lateran celebrated
at Rome under Innocent the third, where the profane Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was ranked with the Articles of our faith. And so in the
following Councels (the state of the Church always declining) many Idolatries
were established; so that not without cause, the Evangelical Churches have
rejected their Authority, and have appealed from them to the Antiquity of the
Apostolical Age.

CHAP. III.
Of the private Writings of the Fathers.
BEfore the Nicene Council there flourished in the Church the two Disciples of
the Apostles, Polycarpus. Ignatius.
Polycarpus and Ignatius, in their youth Auditors of Saint John the Apostle.
But of these there are no writings extant, except certain fragments of the
Epistles of Ignatius.

To them succeeded Irenaeus, Irenaeus.
Bishop of Lions, and Justinius the Philosopher, surnamed Martyr, in the reign
of Antonius the Emperor. Hierom in his Catalogue of the Ecclesiastical
Writers, testifies Irenaeus to have written many things, but now there is only
one Volume remaining, consisting of five books against the Heresy of
Valentinus, and the like; wherein there are excellent sayings of the cunning
Arguments of Heretics; as also of the authority, and consent of the
Ecclesiastical Doctrine. Among others, this saying is very rife, lib. 3. cap.
21. Christum pro nobis passum requiesconte verbo, at crucifigi, et mori posset:
The Word resting, Christ suffered for us, that he might be crucified, and dye.
Irenaeus, anno 70. was set forth at Geneva with the notes of Nicholas Gelasius,
who has explained certain things unfitly spoken; as that in his third Book,
Filium hominis commixtum verbo Dei;. Sayings of his not justifiable
The son of man is mixed with the word of God: Also, Mariam sibi, et universo
generi humano factam causam salutis: Mary was made the cause of salvation to
her self, and all mankind: which to say is blasphemy, unless we consider her
as the Organ through which our Savior passed into the world.

There are extant both deserving, Justinius Martyr.
and learned writings of Justinius Martyr, in Greek; Questions, and Answers
against the Gentiles about true faith, and an Apology for the Christians to
Antoninus. In the second book there is a memorable place of the Liturgy of the
Ancient Christians; out of which may be proved how much the Papists degenerate
from the custom of the ancient Church; for thus he says, Die, qui Solis
dicitur, omnes, tum qui in opidis, tum qui in agris morantur, in unum
convenimus, et ex Commentariis Apostolorum, et Prophetarum Scriptis recitatur
quantam licet. Deinde ubi destitit qui recitat, antistes orationem habet, quae
admonet, hertaturque ad pulchrarum illarum rerum imitationem. Postea omnes una
surgimus, et precamur. Postquam autem a precibus destitimus profertur panis, et
vinum, et aqua. Tum antistes rursus precatur, et gratias agit quanta potest
contentione, populusque acclamat, dicens, Amen: et iis, super quibus actae sunt
gratiae unusquisque participat. On the day called Sunday, we assemble together
as well they which are in the Towns, as those that dwell in the fields; when
as much as is convenient is recited out of the Commentaries of the Apostles,
and writings of the Prophets. When the Reciter has ended, the chief Priest
makes an Oration, which admonishes, and exhorts to the imitation of those
fair things. After this we rise altogether, and pray: prayers being ended,
there is brought forth bread, wine, and water. Then the chief Priest prays
again, and gives thanks with as great ardency as he can, and the people cry,
Amen. Then every one participates of those things already consecrated by prayer
and thanksgiving.

This, What is less approveable in Justinius Martyr.
among other things, some approve not of in Justinius Martyr, that while he
labors to convince the Gentiles out of the writings of the Philosophers, he
sometimes attributes too much to the later, whose subtilty certainly did not
penetrate to these mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.

At that time flourished the Alexandrian an School ( Commodus being Emperor)
and namely the famous Clemens Alexandrinus, The Alexandrian School. Clemens
Alexandrinus.
anno 195. many of whose writings are yet extant in Greek: as the adhortatory
book against the Gentiles, called Protrepticos: three books of the
Schoolmaster, wherein he teaches the Son of God to be our Tutor, and what
ought to be the manners of Christians; Commentaries of the diverse and manifold
literature required to institute a Christian Philosopher. Lib. 3. strom. he
makes mention of a Gospel according to the Egyptians, wherein there is a
saying of Christ to Solon, Veni ad dissolvendum opera foeminae; I came to
dissolve the works of the woman: But they are fabulous. That in his second
book of the Schoolmasters seems to some harsh, and may be wrested to a
more hard construction; Harsh saying of his.
Duplicem esse Sanguinem Domini, alterum carnalem quo redempti sumus, alterum
spiritualem quo uncti: et hoc essebibere sanguinem Domini, incorruptionis eius
esse participem: That there is a twofold blood of our Lord, the one carnal,
whereby we are redeemed; the other spiritual, wherewith we are anointed; and
this is to drink the blood of our Lord, to be a partaker of his Incorruption.
Where the blood of Christ is improperly put for the effect, or fruit thereof.

Origin was the Disciple of Clement under Severus the Emperor, Origin.
ann. 200. after Christ, who being from his Infancy thoroughly grounded in all
kind of learning, had also an incredible zeal in comforting the Martyrs, as
also industry, and acuteness in confuting the Philosophers, and those
Arrabians, who would have souls to dye with their bodies; as also Berillus the
Heretic, who denied the eternity of Christ, whom at length he reduced into
the right way. See Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2. and 4. But as the sharpest, and best
metled Knives easily grow dull, or are broken; so oftentimes the most acute
wits, either by too much confidence, or inconstancy, are soon overthrown. So
it befell Origin, The errors of Origin.
who for his many errors, ( as of all souls created at once: of the
Resurrection of new bodies according to substance: of the salvation of the
Devils at last: of the possibility of the Law against the Doctrine of
Justification) is ranked rather with the Heretics than the Fathers.

Of the Origenists, Heretics, see Saint Augustine, cap 43. de haeresib. and
Epiphanius, who with a strong endeavor of mind, opposed Origin; and Hieram,
Tom. 6. confuteth some of his errors. Yet wants he not his defenders, who
excuse him, and think many things to be falsely imputed to him* as Pamphi^us
the Priest, Ruffinus, and Chrysostom. Some of his books are yet extant, as
eight books of Principles against Celsus, The five books of Moses.
and Commentaries upon Pentateucham, and the Epistle to the Romans.

At the same time lived S. Tertullian, Tertullian.
whom the Historians make somewhat ancienter than Origin. His writings are
extant in Latin, in a style harsh, and rough enough, although in some places
(as the Learned affirm) it is mutilated, and misplaced, especially in what he
wrote against Marcia and Praxea. He wrote many things not to be despised, of
praescriptions against Heretics: of Patience: of the flesh of Christ: of the
resurrection of Christ: of the Trinity: of Baptism: but above all, his Apology
against the Gentiles deserves praise (which (as Saint Hierome affirms)
contains the learning of all Ages. His blemishes
In other of his books he is either too pure, or too crabbed and severe: as in
his book touching flight in persecution, which he simply dis-allowes: also in
his book of Fasting; of the Cloak; of the Crown of a Soldier; of Virgins to
be veyled. But in his books to his Wife, and of having one only Wife;
Monogamy; and of the exhortation to Chastity, he seems to embrace the errors
of Montanus. Saint Hierome thinks Tertullian to have been provoked to this by
the Roman Clergy. B. Rhenanus excuses him thus, That in the time of
Persecution, and the day of Judgment (as most of the Ancients then thought)
being at hand, he judged Marriage not greatly to be desired. He was addicted
to the opinion of the Chiliasts, as is collected out of his third book against
Marcio. In his book against Praxea, are many dangerous phrases: as, Patrem
tota substantia Deum esse, Filium derivatione, et portione aliqua Deitatis:
That the Father is God according to the whole substance, the Son by
derivation, and some part of the Godhead. Saint Augustine, de Genes. ad
literam, lib. 10. cap. 25. notes also this error in Tertullian, that he
believed the soul to be a body, for no other cause, says the same Father,
then that he could not think it to be incorporeall, fearing lest it should be
nothing if it were not a body. Neither could he conceive otherwise of God
himself, to whom he gave a body. Which notwithstanding S. Augustine elsewhere
so interprets, as if he there understood by a body, a Nature, or Substance.
Curiosities of speech.
Yet are these Acurologiai to be avoided.

These things considered, who sees not how preposterous the judgments of the
Papists are, who complain of the obscurity of the Scriptures, and tie us to
the Fathers; that is, lead us from certainties to uncertainties; from things
simply true, to doubtful; from clear, to troubled and perplexed? For whether
or no they did it out of weakness, or out of policy to draw and allure the
heathen to them, it is incredible to be spoken* sometimes how wittily, and
sometimes again how simply the Fathers of those times have Philosophiz'd
concerning things Divine. To omit Ceremonies, many of which the Papists
themselves have changed; as that in the time of Tertullian, milk and wine were
given to the Baptized: that Christians abstained from Sawsiges and Puddings:
that they offered sacrifices for the dead, and on birth days.

In the year of Christ, Cyprianus.
250. ( Decius, and Valerianus being Emperors) flourished Coecilius Cyprianus,
an Affrican. He was first a Rhetorician, then a Priest, next a Bishop, and at
length a Martyr of Christ, whom Lactantius commends for perspicuity and
elegancy of phrase. Erasmus gives him this Testimony, Si omnia Cypriani opera
haberemus, quae magna ex part interciderunt, cum unum, multorum instar haberi
posse, sive Eloqu^ntiam, sive Doctrinam, sive Apostolici Spiritus vigorem
spectes: If we had all Cyprians works, whereof many are lost, he alone would
in value counterpoize many, either in respect of Eloquence, Doctrine, or the
vigor of the Apostolical spirit. Gratianus in 1 part Decreti, Did. 15. can.
3. when he numbreth the Fathers received in the Church, begins with Saint
Cyprian.

Except his Epistles, and some other short Tracts, as of Patience, of
Mortality, of the lapsed; also against Demetrianus, and the Jews, scarce
anything of Saint Cyprian is left us, although I cannot deny some other Sermons
are inserted. The explication of the Creed is rather made by Ruffinus than
Saint Cyprian. The Treatise of the Lords Supper seems also to have another
Author. After the Frobenian, and Lugdunensian Edition, his works were printed,
and revised by Turnebus at Paris, and after that at Colen, with an addition of
some fragments. He confuted Novatus the Heretic, whom in his Epistles he
styles an importunate Innovat^r, and a murderer of penitence.

The stains of Saint Cyprian were, His blemishes
that he contended too obstinately, that they were to be rebaptized who were
baptized by Heretics; or who, leaving Heresy, repented. Although the
Affrican Council assented to him, yet Stephanus, a Roman Bishop, opposed him.
Saint Augustine, lib. 2. contra Crescon. Grammat. says thus, Nos nullam
Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius quaslibet literas a Canonica Divinarum
Scripturarum anthoritate distinguimus. Non teneor authoritate Epistolae
Cypriani ad Iubaianum, et cum eius pace, quod cum Scripturis non convenit,
respuo: We do no wrong to Cyprian, if we distinguish any of his letters from
the Canonical Authority of the Divine Scriptures. I am not tied to the
authority of Cyprians letter to Iubaianus, and by his leave I refuse that which
agrees not with the Scriptures. Saint Cyprian also in his Epistles,
overcarefully, and superstitiously urges water to be mixed with wine in the
Administration of the Lords Supper, because water and blood flowed from the
side of Christ. Also, Epist. 8. lib. 3. he affirms, Infantes statim esse
baptizandos ne pereant, quod eis misericordia non sit deneganda; That Infants
must forthwith be baptized, lest they perish; because mercy is not to be denied
them. Where he seems to confine mercy to the Signs.

Anno 260. Gregorius Neocaesariensis.
Gregorius Neocaesariensis, the Disciple of Origin, a learned, and pious man,
confuted Samosatenus; of whose works there is nothing extant, save a
confession of his in the Council of Antioch against Samosatenus.

To these times may be referred Arnobius, Arnobius.
an Affrican; of whose composing, eight books are extant against the Gentiles;
as also his Commentaries on the Psalms, but they are very brief, and
falsified by the Monks.

About the year after Christ, Lactantius.
317. flourished Lactantius Firmianus, in the beginning of the reign of
Constantine the great, to whom he dedicated his books of Divine Institutions
against the Gentiles. He lived at Nicodemia, and excelled in Elegancy, and
luster of Language, all the Writers of the Church. His stains.
But he seemed little to understand the proper Doctrine of the Gospel
concerning the Benefits of Christ, and of Faith: For he expressly writes, that
Christ was therefore sent, that by his Word, and Example, he might invite us
to virtue, and suffered only to be a president of Patience.

And when in his 5. and 6. book he expressly, and of purpose handles the point
of Christian Justice, he only disputes of the Justice of the Law, and mentions
very sparingly the Justification by Faith. But the first part of his
Institutions which taxes the heathenish Idolatries, and Philosophical
opinions of God, and the Chief Good; as also his book of the Workmanship of
God in the structure of man, may be read with great profit and pleasure.

The Fathers in the time of the Nicene Council, which was held, anno Christi,
330. whose Writings are extant.
Athanasius, Athanasius.
although in the time of the Council he were not a Bishop, yet was he always
a faithful assistant of Alexander the Bishop of Alexandria, whom he afterward
succeeded, and deservedly obtaines the first place amongst the Fathers of that
time: For although he were exposed to innumerable Calumnies, yet with an
incredible constancy he frustrated all the endeavors of his adversaries, and is
styled the Bulwark of Faith in the Ecclesiastical History: neither was there
any other cause that more whetted the bitter hatred of the Arians against him
(as says Theodoret, lib. 1. hist.) than that they perceived the sharpness of
his wit, and industry, in confuting of Heretics in the Nicene Council. His
Creed, or his explication of the Apostolical Creed is in the Church among other
Creeds received.

There are yet some of his most grave, The works of Athanasius.
and excellent Treatises extant at Basil, set forth heretofore by the
Frobenii, and Episcopii, but more lately at Paris by Nivellius, Petrus Nannius,
an eloquent man, being his Interpretour: as an oration against Idols: of the
Incarnation of the Word: an Epistle against Heretics to Epictetus Bishop of
Corinth: an Exposition of Faith: four Orations against the Arians: a double
Apology for his flight against the Calumnies of the Arians: of diverse questions
of the Scripture to Antiochus, and many others of the same Argument, which our
Divines usually object against the Neorians, and Vbiquitarians.

The life of S. Anthony the Abbot is fathered on him, but there are in it many
things fabulous, which savor not of the gravity and simplicity of S.
Athanasius. Most true it is, (...) Defects.
that both S. Athanasius, and those ancient Fathers were too fervent in
commending the sign of the Cross, and the miracles wrought by that sign, and
by Martyrs, thinking by this means to authorize the Evangelicall Doctrine.
While we give these cautions touching the blemishes of the Fathers, we are not
liable to that censure which the Papists lay upon us, derived from the
Authority of the same Father, who in his first Oration complains that the
Arians accused the Fathers: for he speaks not there of all the writings of the
Fathers, but of the Nicene Creed gathered out of the Scriptures by the Fathers
of that Council to confute the Arians. For he there diligently admonishes us
to try the Spirits, which may be easily done by those who are conversant in the
Scriptures.

There are some memorable speeches of Athanasius to be observed; Memorable
sayings of his.
First, against the Lutherans, out of the second Oration against the Arians.
Nunquam populus Christianus ab Episcopis suis, sed a Domino, in quem creditum
suit, nomen accepit. Ne ab

Apostolis quidem appellationes adepti sumus, sed a Christo. Illi qui aliunde
originem suae fidei ducunt, ut haeretici merito authorum suorum cognomenta
praese ferunt: The Christian people never took their Name from the Bishops,
but from the Lord, in whom they believed. Neither have we our appellations
from the Apostles, but from Christ himself. They who derive their Faith from
any other Original, as heretics, deservedly bear the surnames of their
Authors. Then against the Vbiquitaries upon that saying, Omnia mihi tradita
sunt, etc. All things are given me. Tradita sunt illi omnia, ut medico, qui
sanaret morsum serpentis, ut vitae, qui vivificaret, ut luci illuminanti (id
est, ratione officii) Dedit, inquit, Deus, ut quemadmodum per eum facta sunt
omnia, ita in eo omnia refici possint. Quid quod filio Dei quaedam tradita sunt
quae non habeat, ut homo fieret: All things are given him as a Physician that
should heal the biting of the Serpent; as to the life that quickens, as to a
light illuminating (this is spoken in regard of his office) God, says he,
has granted that as by him all things are made, so by him all things may be
refreshed. What if we say, that some things are given to the Son of God that
he had not before, that he should be made man? Moreover, against Schwenckfeld
in the same Treatise; Vtrumque de Christo est credendum, illum esse Deum, et
omnia creasse, et esse hominem, et ita creatum, et creaturam, qualis est homo.
Hominum enim proprium est creari: Both, says he, are to be believed of Christ,
that he was a God, and created all things; and that he was a man, and so
created, and a creature, such as manis: for it is proper to men to be created.
Also against the Papisticall canonization of impious men, in his Epistle, To
all the godly founded, and sanctified in Christ. Hinc quoq, Heresis agnosci et
convinci potest, quod quisquis ipsis charus est, et eiusdem impietatis socius,
etiam si aliis delictis, et infinitis sceleribus obnoxious, et adversus se
habeat argument a scelerum suorum, probus apud eos, et in pretio habetur: quin
imo statim Imperatoris amicus efficitur, commendabilis scilicet sua impietate.
Qui vero little impietatem redarguit, et quae Christi sunt sincere procurant,
isti, tametsi puri in omnibus, modo crimen in eos confingatur, in exilium
abripiuntur: Hence may Heresy be known, and convinced, that whosoever is
dear to them, and a companion in the same Impiety, although he be guilty of
sundry crimes, and infinite vices, and has arguments against himself of his
own heinous acts, yet he is approved and had in great esteem amongst them,
yea, and is forthwith made the Emperors friend, and is commendable for his
Impiety. But those who reprove their wickedness, and teach the things
sincerely which are of Christ, such, though pure in all things, upon any
feigned crime laid to their charge, are presently hurried into banishment.

To Athanasius we may join Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine,
Eusebius.
who got the surname of Pamphilus from his friend Pamphilus the Martyr, and in
the Nicene Synod joined himself to the Orthodox, although in the beginning he
wavered a little, as says Sozomen. lib. 1. hist. cap. 20. He was very learned
in the Languages, History, and Philosophy. He wrote a History from the
Nativity of Christ to the time of Constantine the great inclusively, which
Socrates the Schooleman, and Hermias Sozomenus continued from Constantine to
Theodosius the first, and Honorius: and Evagrius to the time of Maurice the
Emperor; vulgarly called the Tripartite History. Eusebius wrote also a
Chronicle which is yet extant; and a book of Evangelicall demonstration, and
preparation; in which he compares the Evangelicall Doctrine with Philosophy,
and other Religions, and solidly demonstrates no Doctrine to be more perfect
than the Evangelicall, as also that in the Gospel many things better, and more
certain, are contained, than in any other Doctrine whatsoever.

He was suspected, His blemishes
indeed, by some to have privily favored Arius: but an Apology for him is
extant in Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 17. Yet in the beginning of the same History,
Socrates does not dissemble this fault of Eusebius, that writing the life of
Constantine, which is comprehended in four books, he lightly blamed the deeds
of Arius; and that he predicated the virtues of that Emperor, concealing his
vices; and that he studied more to render his Oration illustrious (wherein he
highly praised him) and to adorn it with Majesticall words, than diligently to
explain the things done. He had another blemish common with him and many
Greek Authors, which Bodin, not undeservedly, imputes to him in his method of
History; which is, that (retaining somewhat of the Grecian vanity) he relates
not a few fabulous things, which have little, or no appearance of Truth: As, of
an Epistle of Aglarus, King of the Edisseni, to Christ, and of Christ's answer
to him: of Saint John the Apostle, and a certain young man by him recalled
from the society of Thieves: also of the finding out of the Wooden Cross, and
of its virtue: of Saint Peter, who desired a certain kind of death, to wit,
Crucifying; and governd the Roman Church 25. years, which how far it is from
Truth, Calvin, amongst others, shows, lib. 4. Instit. cap. 6. sect. 14. But
as Gelasius admonishes in cap. 3. lib. 3. Irenaei, it is very likely those
great men were deceived by a certain vulgar opinion, not enquiring into things
diligently; neither could they imagine what Engines Satan was then preparing to
raise up the kingdom of Antichrist.

After Eusebius, Hilarious.
and Athanasius, (who died under Valentinianus in the year 379) Hilarious is
rightly placed. He was Bishop of the Picts in France, and lived in the time of
Constantine the son of Constantine the Great; and his life extended even to
the reign of Valentinian. Saint Hierom preferres him before other Doctors of
the Church, and, although younger, was his familiar friend. His style is such
(as rightly warnes Erasmus) that it is hard to be understood, easy to be
depraved: yet Saint Hierom calls him the Trumpet of the Latin tongue; perhaps
because he was the first that confuted the Arians in that Language. His works
are extant, published at Basil, anno 70. by Eusebius Episcopius, and are partly
controversiall, partly expository. He wrote 12. books of the Trinity against
the Arians; also an Epistle against Constantine being then dead, who was the
chief favourer of the Arian Faction; and against Auxentius the Millanist, a
fautor of the Arian party, as also of diverse Synods against the Arians; which
book he translated for the most part out of Greek from the Synodicall
decrees. His expository books are a Commentary upon Matthew, but a short one,
as also upon many Psalms, all which are comprehended in one Tome.

He has many faults: For, first, he has many hard, His blemishes
and unusual words; as disfrocit for degenerate; Zabolus for Diabolus, and
many more of the like kind. Next he affirms the holy Ghost to be from the
Father by the Son, lib. 10. de Trinit. and upon the 8. Psalm, he attributes
a soul, and a body to Christ, not subject to any molesting affections, and
averres, that thirst and hunger were not natural in him. He seems to maintain
the body of Christ to be borne, and brought forth by the Virgin Mary, not to
be made of her substance, lib. 10. de Trinit. In his commentary upon Saint
Matthew, he too much inclines to the Allegories of Origin.

Next Hilarious we may rightly place Saint Ambrose, S. Ambrose.
Bishop of Millan, who lived in the times of Valentinianus, Gratianus,
Theodosius, and Honorius, Emperors; and when he was Proconsul in Liguria in the
time of Valentinianus, he was called to the Bishopric of Millan with the full
consent of the people. It is reported that he baptized Saint Austine. He was
endued with great zeal, as appears in the Ecclesiastical story, and by his
demeanor in his Bishopric.

The writings of Saint Ambrose extant, His writings.
are divided into four Tomes, and are partly moral, as the three books of
the offices of a Christian; an institution, and exhortation to Virgins; of
Widows; of Repentance; of the worlds volubility; of the good we receive by
death: Also they are partly Doctrinall, Tom. 2. of the vocation of the
Gentiles; of faith to Gratianus; of the holy Ghost to the same; of Faith
against the Arians; of the Sacrament of the Dominicall Incarnation.

But it is to be observed, that the more learned have judged Saint Ambrose not
to be the Author of the Treatise of the calling of the Gentiles; 1. Because he
speaks no where so purely of the Predestination of God. 2. By reason there is
mention made of Pelagius, who lived after Saint Ambrose. 3. In that Saint
Augustine, who cites many things out of Saint Ambrose against Boniface the
Pelagian, mentions not this b^^ke, which inveighes most of all against the
Pelagians. 4. The dissimilitude of phrase. But it is certain the Author of
that book to have been a learned man, and well exercised in the Scriptures:
which makes Erasmus not unaptly wish, that many such were mixed with the works
of Saint Ambrose.

Amongst many excellent sayings contained in those books, these golden words
are extant, making directly against the Papists, lib. 1. cap. 5. where he
disputes the reason why to one man grace is given, to another denied. Quid
Calumniamur, inquit, iustitiam occultam, qui gratias debemus misericordiae
manifestae? Laudemus, et veneremur quod agitur, quia tutum est nescire quod
tegitur. Hic nec praeterita, nec futura merita censeri possunt: vilesceret
Redemptio Christi, neo misericordiae Dei humanarum operum praerogativa
succumberet, si iustificatio quae fit per gratiam meritis praecedentibus
deberetur: ut non munus largientis, sed merces esset operantis: Why do we
calumniate, says he, the hidden Justice, who owe thanks for the manifested
Mercy? Let us praise and adore what is done, because it is safe not to know
what is hid. Here, neither past, nor future merits are to be reckoned. The
Redemption of Christ would be abased, neither would the prerogative of humane
works give place to the mercy of God, if Justification, which is by grace,
were due to precedent merits: so that it should not be the gift of the
distributer, but the reward of the worker. The Writings of Saint Ambrose are
partly also Homileticall, as Tom. 3. Orations, Epistles, Sermons: partly again
Expository: as Tom. 4. lib. The works of the six days
Hexaemeron, and a Treatise of the Patriarchs, which belong to Genesis. He
wrote also copiously on the 119. Psalm; and of the Sacraments of the Church;
also a gloss upon Saint Luke; and Commentaries upon the Epistles of Saint
Paul. Where again it is to be noted against the Papists, that S. Ambrose upon
the fourth Chapter to the Romans, uses the particle (only) when he averreth
Gratiam Dei solam fidem poscere ad salutem: The grace of God does require faith
only to salvation. Saint Augustine quotes his Commentaries upon Esaias, and the
48. Psalm, but they are not extant.

By reason of his ignorance in the Greek, His defects.
and Latin Tongues, he erred often in his Expositions, which is common to him,
together with Saint Austin, and some others. But although he be over-vehement
in the commendations of Virginity, yet is that memorable against the Papists,
which he writes in his first book of Virgins, Non debere imperari
virginitatem, nec necessitatem imponendam, nec castam esse quae metu cogitur:
Virginity, says he, ought not to be commanded, neither of necessity to be
imposed; nor is she chaste, who is compelled by fear.

In his books of the Sacraments there are some things ambiguous, othersome
superstitious: as of Unction in Baptism, which notwithstanding was not done
altogether without cause by those of riper years: also of water to be mixed
with the Wine in the Cup at the Lords Table. Yet is it remarkable against the
Papists, that in his book of Sacraments he only acknowledges two, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord. And when, lib. 6. he disputes how the bread is made
the body of the Lord, he speaks nothing at all of Transubstantiation, but
he confesses, that there seems to be a similitude only, not true flesh and
blood, and that we must believe the operatory word of Christ, that is, the
efficacious; that the Sacrament is taken outwardly, Grace and Virtue inwardly.
He plainly distinguishes bread from Grace; Tu, inquit, qui accipis panem, in
illa alimento Divinae participas Substantiae; quia idem Christus est particeps
corporis, et Divinitatis: Thou, says he, who take bread, in that
nourishment participatest of the Divine Substance, because the same Christ is
partaker of a body, and Divinity: which is as much to say; we communicate the
whole Christ, and communicating his flesh, have communion also with God.

Neither did the Greek Churches want excellent Doctors; Basilius Gregorius
Nazianzenus.
for in those times, namely, under Valentinian, Basilius Magnus, of Caesaria
Cappadocia, and Gregory, Bishop of Nazianzena were famous, of whom as yet some
worthy monuments are extant. We link them together, because they were
companions in Studies, and most intimate friends. Yet Gregory lived longest,
even to the year 400. and wrote a Monody, or Funeral Oration, which contains
the life of S. Basil. There are extant of this S. Gregory, eloquent Orations,
and Epistles, as also Greek Poems, which are in the hands of all men. There
lived also in those times Gregorius Nissenus, brother of Basilius, who wrote
eight books of Man. There is a learned Epistle extant written to him by S.
Basil, of the difference between the Essence and Subsistence.

Moreover, Saint Basil.
S. Basil, as he himself somewhere writes, was diligently instructed in the
Christian Religion from a child. He was endued with so much Eloquence, that
Erasmus doubts not to call him the Christian Demosthenes. The worth ^ sayings
of S. Basil.
Amongst others, that saying which is extant in his Sermon of Humility is
eminent, and is often cited by our Divines against the Papists: Haec est
perfecta, et integra gloriatio, quando non propter iustitiam suam aliquis
^ffertur; sed agnoscit sibi deesse veram iustitiam: fide autem sola in Christum
iustificari: This is, says he, perfect and entire glory, when a man is not
puffed up with his own Justice, but acknowledges himself to want true
Justice, and that Justification is only by faith in Jesus Christ. Also in his
Epistle of the sacred Scripture to Eustathius the Physician; Non consuetudinem,
sed sacras Scripturas nermam debere esse: The sacred Scriptures, and not
Custom, ought to be our rule. Also in his definitions, quaest. 98. Eos qui
praesunt, extra Scripturae Canonem nihil praecipere debere, ne falsi Dei testes
et sacrilegi inveniantur: They, says he, who rule the people, ought to command
nothing beyond the Canon of the Scriptures, lest they befound false witnesses
of God, and sacrilegious. And in his Epistle of Apostasy to the Bishops of the
West, he complains, Semen Apostasiae spargi in illis ipsis Ecclesiis inquibus
Evangelii doctrina primum per orbem manavit: that the seed of Apostasy was sown
in those very Churches, whence the Doctrine of the Gospel was first spread
through the world. His works extant at this day are comprehended in three
Tomes, and are either doctrinall; as Hexameron, or of the world made in six
days; eleven Homilies; of the Divinity of the Son, and that the holy Ghost
is not a creature, against Eunomius. Where is to be understood, that there were
three Families of the Arians. Arius held the Son to be equal to the Father,
but by grace, not by Nature. The Macedonians, companions of the Arians,
affirmed the Son to be like the Father, but not the holy Ghost. Eunomius
held the Son to be totally unlike the Father, because the creature can by no
means be like the Creator. Saint Basil also wrote Sermons of the humane
generation of Christ; also of Baptism. Or his works are expository; as
Sermons upon some of the Psalms; a gloss upon the whole Psalter, and the
sixteen first Chapters of Esaias. Other of his works are Moral; as his Sermons
against drunkenness; of Wrath; of Humility; of Envy: Also his Sermons called
Asceticos, or of the manners of Monks, and of those who aspire to an Angelical
Life. The errors of S. Basilius, His blemishes
are, that he too Hyperbollically extols fasting, and a Monkish life; though,
indeed, he describes such Monks as peculiarly exercise themselves in piety,
and good works; to whom the Monks of our times are as much unlike as Crows
to Swans.

By the singular providence of God it came to pass that the heresies of the
Arians, and Pelagians beginning to spring up, in the same time, almost, there
arose famous Doctors to confute them. ^ieronymus.
For Hieronymus Stridonensis Pannonius lived in part of the time of Saint
Ambrose and Saint Basil. He was brought up at Rome, and was famous in the year
390. He traveled over the greatest part of Europe to confer with learned
men, and at length chose himself a place of abode in Iudaea, in the fields of
Bethlem, where he wrote many of those things which at this day we enjoy. He
is painted with a Cardinals Hat, whereas he rather led a Monasticke life, and
those red Hats were given in ages long after to some certain Priests of the
Roman Church by Pope Paul the second, ann. 1460. as Platina testifies. The
style of S. Hierome is elegant; for he was learned, and a great Linguist. He
wrote many things, whereof some are Expositions upon the Psalms, and upon the
greater and the lesser Prophets: also upon Saint Matthew, and some Epistles of
Saint Paul; as to the Galatians and Ephesians. For the Commentary (which goes
under his name) upon the Epistle to the Romans, savours too much of
Pelagianisme, which he ever opposed. Other of his writings are Controversiall
and Apologeticall: as against Helvidius; concerning the perpetual Virginity of
the Virgin Mary, against Iovinianus and Vigilantius: Also against the
Pelagians, and an Apology against Ruffinus. Some again are Paraeneticall, or
instructive; as of the life of Clergy men, and concerning the Institution of a
mother of the Family.

He seems to have a wit somewhat Arrogant and fiery; His errors.
which appears not only by his sharp writings and Epistles against Saint
Austin, but also that sometimes he accuses the Apostle Saint Paul himself of
rudeness of style, and ignorance in the Greek tongue. Beza often complains
of his wresting the Scriptures, especially against Wedlock. See the
Annotations of Beza on 1 Cor. 7. 1 Timothy 3. 1 Pet. 3.

But it is remarkable, that although he was an enemy to Wedlock, yet in his
Age both Bishops and Priests were married; for so he writes in cap. 6. ad
Ephesians. Legant haec Episcopi, et Presbyteri, qui filios suos saecularibus libris
erudiunt: Let those Bishops, and Priests, says he, read these things, who
instruct their children in secular books. But he often with too much
bitterness inveighes against Vigilantius, and Iovinianus, for contending with
him, that Wedlock, and single Life were of equal merit; as also that the
Rewards of the Just were alike in that life; and that no choice was to be made
of Meats, if they were received with thankes-giving; that the ashes of Martyrs
were not to be adored, nor the Vespers to be celebrated at their Scpulchers;
that the Saints deceased pray not for us. He contended unseasonably with Saint
Austin concerning Saint Peter, that he never erred, and that he was
reprehended by Saint Paul, not seriously, but in jest, Gal. 2.

How much the state of the Church was disturbed in those Times, appears by
that Learned book of Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, which he wrote against 80
Heresies, which work is worthy the perusal for the variety of story contained
in it. Then also lived Theodoret, Theodoretus.
Bishop of the City Cyrus in Persia, who wrote five books of the history of
the Church; and Polymorphum, where in three Dialogues most worthy the reading,
he defends the truth of both Natures in Christ against the Heretics of his
time.

In the time of Arcadius, Chrysostomus.
and Honorius, Emperors, lived Johannes Chrysostomus, whose Eloquence and
Zeal far exceeded his knowledge in the Scriptures. Wherefore he excels more
in morals than in Doctrines and Expositions: For oftentimes he philosophizeth
too subtly. Yet is he often cited by our Divines in the interpretation of
Greek words, especially in the Epistles of Saint Paul. Vulgarus Theophilactus
was afterward his imitator, and abreviator, Theophilactus.
but an Author less pure.

It was reprehensible in Saint Chrysostom, that he was too chollericke, The
errors of S. Chrysostom
and free of speech, by which he incurred the great displeasure of many.

Aurelius Augustinus, S. Augustinus.
by Nation an African, ought not to be accounted the last amongst the Doctors
of the Church. He was instructed in Rhetoric at Carthage, and was a follower
of the Maniches nine years together. He relates a great part of his own life
in his Confessions. Afterward being often admonished by Saint Ambrose, or
rather converted by God upon the abundant tears and prayers of his mother, he
turned into the right way, and succeeded Valerius, Bishop of Hippona in Africa,
about the year 390. He sustained many sharp Conflicts with the Maniches,
Arians, Donatists, and Pelagians, whom he confuted by learned writings; and
personally, by word of mouth. He dyed a little before the first Ephesine
Council, when Hippone was besieged, in the year of his Age, 76.

Gregory 1. Bishop of Rome had his works in so great esteem, that he thus
writes, lib. 8. epist. 38. Si delitioso cupitis pabulo saginari, B. Augustini
opuscula legite, et ad comparationem siligimis illius nostrum furfur em non
quaeratis: If you desire, says he, to be fatned with delicious fa^^* read the
works of Saint Austine, and having ^^sted his flower, you will not seek after
our Branne. Which is to be noted against the Papists, who prefer that Gregory
the first before all others.

The works of Saint Austine are distributed into ten Tomes; The works of S.
Austin.
some of them are Philosophical, and of no great moment; as of Grammar,
Rhetoric, Logic, Music; of Order; of the quantity of the soul. In his
books of Confessions, wherein he describes his own life, he often uses too
much simplicity and copiousnesse, yet may they be read cursorily. But the
Students in Divinity meaning to read Saint Augustine, ought to begin at his
Doctrinals; and first at his four books of Christian Doctrine, in which he
instructs a future Divine. Next, he must read his Enchiridion to Laurentius,
and the book of Faith to Peter; of the spirit, and the letter, and of the
Ecclesiastical opinions. The Epistles of Saint Augustine, and the books of
the City of God, are of a mixed kind, partly. Doctrinall, partly Historical,
but full of various learning. Thence let him proceed to his Polemicall, or
Controversiall, which he wrote against the Maniches, the Arians, Donatists,
etc. His expository books, as upon the Psalms, and Saint John's Gospel,
contain more piety than solid Interpretation; partly by reason of his small
insight in the Hebrew and Greek Tongues; partly because in those
Interpretations he accommodated his writing to those times, as also that
sometimes he makes digressions; but his Commentary on Saint John is excellent
above the rest.

The Palmary, or Masterpiece of Saint Austin, was, that above all the other
Fathers, and almost alone, being provoked by the Pelagians, he discusseth
diligently the Doctrine of Original sin, and Predestination.

But as in Saint Austin it is very laudable that he only of all the Ancients,
His errors.
wrote books of Retractations (for in his seventh Epistle he professes
himself to be of their number who write by profiting, and profit by writing)
so there remain some things which require a censure. Yet is there no doubt but
many things are inserted in his works, of which he is not the Author. For he
being yet alive, sixteen Articles were falsely fathered on him, to which he
replied. But chiefly this was his error, that as he wrote much, so he often
varies, nor is always consonant to himself. He has also many Acurologia's,
as Danaeus, a most learned Divine, observes in his Annotations upon the
Enchiridion of Saint Austin. Then he erred, in that he precisely included the
salvation of Infants in the sacrament of Bap^isme. But whereas in some places
he calls the Eucharist a Sacrifice, he thus interprets himself, lib. 10.
Civit. Dei cap. 20. that it is the Sacrament of the Sacrifice of Christ. In
another place he seems to affirm, that the pious souls of the deceased are
helped by the Alms and prayers of the living, but without the warrant of the
Word of God; especially in his book entitled, The ^are for the dead, where he
handles this question, Whether or no it profits to be b^ried near the
Monument of any Saint. But that Book (as Calvin admonishes, lib. 3. Instit.
cap. 5. Sect. 10.) conteines so many doubts, that the coldness of it is able
to extinguish the heat of any foolish zeal, and there is no doubt but that
Book has been depraved by many Monkish additions; for in another place, as
lib. 2. question. Evangeli^. c^p 38. he affirms, Nullum auxilium a justis
praeberi defunctorum animabus: that the souls of the deceased receive no help
from just men.

Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria flourished about the year 433. Cyrillus.
in the reign of Theodosius the younger. He expelled the Jews out of his
Diocese, and killed not a few of them in the Synagogues by the hands of his
Soldiers. Being much incensed against Nestorious, he excommunicated him by his
own proper authority, which was not approved of by the Fathers, although he
defended a good cause, and that Nestorius was a little after condemned in the
Ephesine Council. Cyrillus wrote in Greek, and many things which are extant
in Latin. They were published at Basil, apud Hervag. anno 66. with an
addition. In the first Tome are found Commentaries upon Leviticus, in which he
insists too much upon the Anagogicall sense. He also wrote Commentaries upon
Saint John, but imperfect. His second Tome is Doctrinall, as the book which he
calls a Treasure. There, in 14. books he defends the Consubstantiallity of
the Son, and the holy Ghost against the Arians. In the third Tome, he
disputes against Julian for the Christian Religion; also touching the right
Faith to Theodosius, and the Queen. The fourth Tome conteines Epistles,
Homilies, and an Apology to Theodosius; also an Exposition of the Nicene
Creed, and Synodicall Epistles, together with other things against the
Nestorians. The fifth Tome is a Commentary upon Esaias, not long since added to
his Works, and Translated by Laurence Humfre an Englishman.

Vigilius Bishop of Trent flourished in those times, Vigilius
of whose Works but a few are extant, printed at Colen in Octavo: as a
disputation against the Arians, and five books against Eutyches, both pious and
learned, which are often objected against the Vbiquitaries.

The Hearers of Saint Austin who retained his Doctrine were anno 440.
Primasius, who wrote upon all the Epistles of Saint Paul. Primasius. Prosper.
Prosper Aquitanic. anno 454. Helychius anno 490. Helychius. Fulgentius.
he wrote upon Leviticus. Fulgentius a Bishop in Africa about the year five
hundred, under Thrasymund King of the Vandals; he wrote three books of
diverse questions to Monimus, seven books to King Thrasymund, and other things
worthy the reading. His Works were most accurately Printed at Antwerpe by
Plantin, anno 74.

After the time of Saint Austin, and his Disciples* the purity of Doctrine
began with the Roman Empire very much to decline, by reason of the accumulated
superstitions of the Munkes; wherefore the succeeding Fathers cannot be in the
same esteem with the first, and more ancient; yet had the following their
peculiar gifts, not to be contemned, and wrote many things which are read with
great profit. Leo 1.
Leo the first of that name, Bishop of Rome about the year 444. in the time of
Attila. He was the Author of gathering together a Synod against Eutyches, and
Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, who would oppress Flavianus an orthodox Bishop
of Constantinople. His Works; as his Sermons and Epist. are imprinted at Colen
by Birkmannus Amongst his Epistles that to Flavianus against the Blasphemies of
Eutyches is most eminent, the authority of which Epistle was of great force in
the Chalcedonian Council, wherein amongst the rest this speech is remarkable,
Agit vtraque forma, id est, natura cum alterius communione quod proprium est,
verbo operante quod verbi est, and carne exequente quod carnis est: unum horum
coruscat miraculis, alterum succumbit inivriis. Non est ejusdem naturae flere
Lazarus, and resuscitare. Either form works that which is proper to it with
the communion of the other, the word working what is of the word, and the flesh
executing what is of the flesh. The one of these shines with Miracles, the
other is subject to injuries. To bewail Lazarus, and to raise him proceed not
from the same nature. This saying also is memorable, and makes against the
Papists, Sermon. 2. de Petro, on that place of Matthew 16. Tu es Petrus; thou art
Peter, etc. Soliditas ejus fidei quae in Apostolorum principe laudata est
perpetua est. Haec fides diabolum vincit, portaeque inferi adversus eam
praevalere non possunt. The solidity, says he, of that faith which is praised
in the chief of the Apostles is perpetual. This Faith shall vanquish the
Devil, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against it.

About the year 591. Greg. 1.
Gregory the first lived, Bishop of Rome, surnamed the great, who in his youth
was a Munke of the Benedictine Order. He instituted the Mass, and most of the
Psalmodies which are in the Papacy. His Works are extant printed at Basil by
the Frobenij, anno 51. Stella a Venecian Priest, who wrote his life, says, he
was a most humble man, and the first of the Popes that out of his humility
would be called the servant of servants. Nullum, inquit, ex successoribus
habuit, aequalem, aut pa^em. None of his successors, says he, were equal, or
like to him. He labored much to call the Goths to the true Faith. He wrote
moral Expositions upon Job; also on the seven Psames which we call
Poenetetiall; and upon Ezechiel; the Books of the Kings; and forty Homilies
upon the Gospels. In his Expositions he is pure enough Tom. 1. l. 25. c. 15. he
writes thus, Sciunt, inquit, pij quod omnis justitia humana injustitia esse
deprehenditur si divinitus districte iudicetur: The godly know, says he, that
all humane Justice appears injustice if it be strictly examined from above. In
his Epistles also are found many excellent admonitions, as that which he writes
in his second Tome to Serenus the Massilliensian Bishop, Ad nos per venit quod
fraternitas vestra quosdam imagenum admiratores adspiciens, easdem Ecclesiae
imagenes confregit. Eum quidem Zelum ne quid manu factum adorari possit
laudavimus, sed frangere easdem non debuisse judicamus. Idcirco enim pictura in
Ecclesijs adhibetur, vt hi qui literas nesciunt saltem in parietibus videndo
legant. It is told that your Fraternalshippe seeing certain admirers of Images
has broken the said Images belonging to the Church. We commend that zeal,
indeed, which would have nothing made by hands to be adored; but we judge that
you ought not to have broken them, for therefore are Pictures admitted into
Churches, that they who are ignorant of good letters may read by looking on the
walls. He wrote a Treatise of the Pastoral Cure, not unprofitable; but in his
Dialogues he seems to dote in relating I know not what feined Miracles; as
Stephano cuidam Presbytero Diabolum coactum obedire ad extrahendas caligas: The
dotage of S. Gregory.
Bonifacium quendam orando duodecim aureos a Maria imputrasse. Fortunatum
quendam signo crucis equum furiosum mansuetum reddidisse. That the Devil by
constreint obeyed one Stephan a Priest to pull off his hose. That one Boniface
by prayer obtained twelve crowns from the Virgin Marie. That one Fortunatus
made a fierce horse tame with the sign of the Cross. Concerning the fire of
Purgatory he writes doubtfully, lib. 1. Dial. 10. Qualis hinc quisque
egredietur talis in judicio praesentabitur. Sed de quibusdam levibus culpis
Purgatorium esse ignem ante judicium credendum est. Such as every one departs
hence, such shall he be presented at the day of judgment. But it is to be
believed that there is a Purgatory fire before the day of Judgment for some
light crimes. Tome 2. ep^st. 58. lib. 4. he complains grievously that the
peace of the whole Church is disturbed by one John Bishop of Constantinople,
by assuming the name of Universal Bishop. And lib. 7. epist. 39. to Mauritius
the Emperor, he thus writes; Ego fidenter dico, quod quisquis se universalem
Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocare desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit. I confidently affirm, says he, that whosoever calls, or
desires to call himself an universal Priest, is by this his pride marked for
a forerunner of Antichrist: Yet for all this, presently after Gregory Phocas
successor of Maurice, in the year 660. granted to Boniface the third, that
Rome should be the head of all other Churches. Yet all the Churches never
simply consented to it, especially the Greek, and the Frence.

In the year 727* in the time of Leo Isaurus Iconomachus, Damascenus.
Johannes Damascenus lived. At first he was Secretary to the Duke of the
Sarazens, but after that he became a Munke. His chief writings are four
Books of the Orthodoxe Faith, which Faber Stapulensis translated out of
Greek. Lib. 1. he discourses of the Essence of God, and of the three Persons.
Lib. 2. of the works of God; of the Angels, of Man, of the Fabricature of the
World. Lib. 3. of the dispensation of the mystery of our Salvation; where he
learnedly disputes of the union of Natures, and the actions Theandricall; also
of the twofold Will of Christ: but he adds many things supersticious, as of
the adoration of Images, etc.

Anno 1116. Bernhardus.
Saint Bernhard Abbot of Clarovall was in great repute, for his sanctity of
life and Doctrine, and was admitted to compose differences between Kings and
Princes. At that time there was such a disturbance of all things, as says
Calvin lib. 4. instit. cap. 7. Sect. 22. that it was not much unlike our times,
if we consider the Papacy. But Saint Bernhard makes grievous complaints and
admonitions of the corruption of the Papal Court in his Book of Consideration
to Pope Eugenius. Many excellent sayings also of his are to be read, in
Sermonib. in Cantic. Cantecor. and on the 91 Psalm; which Sermons are worthy
the perusal; yet many things fabulous are intermingled, as of Saints, and he
numbers the washing of feet amongst the Sacraments.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Writers, commonly called SCHOOLMEN.
THe labor would be infinite to number all the Scholasticall Authors; it
suffiseth us to show the chief, whose Monuments are extant. There were after
those times also some Bishops, though not so famous, Isidorus.
yet not unlearned, as anno 630. in the time of Heraclius Isidorus Bishop of
Hispalia, who wrote holy Expositions upon Books, Beda.
and some Books of Etymologies. Also Beda an English Priest who in the time of
Justinian the second, anno 690. wrote upon the New Testament, as also a learned
Book of Times. Anno 834. in the reign of Ludovicus pius, Haimo
Haimo Bishop of ^abberstat wrote upon the Epistles o^ Saint Paul, and many
other things. Anno 856. Rabanus
lived Rabanus Maurus, who being first made Abbot of Fulda, was afterward
Bishop of Men's. He is reported to have written the gloss commonly called the
Ordinary. There is a saying of his memorable in cap. 2. Epist. Iacobi. Abraham
per opera quae fecit iustus non fuit, sed sola fide: oblatio autem ejus opus,
and testimonium fuit fidei. Abraham was not just by the works that he did, but
by faith only; but his oblation was a work, and testimony of his Faith.

But it is to be observed that the zeal, and diligence of the Bishops
decreasing, and their wealth and dignity augmenting, the privilege of
Teaching, and Writing was conferred on certain Munks and Priests called School
Doctors, because they taght most in the Schools, Before this time the Doctrine
of Saint Austin, and his manner of teaching was for the most part received; but
about the year 1200. the School Divinity began to spring up, which
afterward degenerated from its first simplicity, and purity, and fell upon
many unprofitable, and doubtful questions, full of Philosophy call subtilties,
together with definitions, and sentences accommodated to the corruptions of
those times. Lanfrancus.
The chief of these were Lanfrancus Monachus Papiensis, who opposed himself
against Berengarius, Albertus Magnus. Peter Lombard
Albertus Magnus, and Peter Lombard. Then also did Gratianus gather the Decrees
of the Popes into one* Uolume, and without judgment; insomuch, that the Gloss
sweats in reconciling the contradictions. Peter Lombard about the year 1150.
wrote four Books of Sentences, collected out of all the Fathers, as the
foundation, and compendium of all Scholasticall Divinity; which with some are
of great value, yet has he cited many things amiss out of the Fathers, and
omitted not a few necessary* Many things there are in him, which if rightly
understood, and explained make against the Papists, especially where he treats
of the Supper of the Lord. He that would know the defects of Lombard, let him
peruse the notes of Danaeus in lib. 1. sentent. But like as Lombard did not
well in that he would confirm the opinions of Christian Religion rather by the
Authorities of the Fathers then by the Testimonies of the Scriptures, so, he
is more tolerable far then the other Schoolmen, who acknowledge Aristotle
for their Master, and attribute more to his authority then to the Scriptures.
Among others of that time William Occam was famous anno 1030. who defended the
right of the Emperor against the Pope very learnedly.

Question. Whether therefore did Tertullian against Hermogin rightly call the
Philosophers Patriarks of Heretics, and lib. de praescript* he terms the
Logic which the Heretics learnt out of Aristotle the subverter of Truth, and
the turne-coat artificer of building, and destroying?

Answer. These are to be understood secundum quid of Chrisippean Sophismes, and
such Logicians as Eutydemus in Plato who instantly denied what he formerly
granted. Next of those who make Philosophy a Mistress, and a Lady in Divine
matters, who ought to be the Waitingmade; the imbecility of reason in Divine
things being not only apparent, but its Impotency.
Adunamia, 1 Corinthians. 12. Yet are not Philosophy and Reason to be rejected, but
God is to be invoked that he will give us the spirit of wisdom, whereby the
eyes of our minds may be illuminated, that we feign not false Principles, and
involve our selves and others in ambiguities, and subtilties of words, as in
times past the Valentinians did, and many of the Schoolmen do, which Abbot
Trithemius acknowledges when he says, Ab hoc tempore Philosophia secularis
sacram Theologiam f^cdare coepit: from this time, says he, secular Philosophy
began to pollute sacred Divinity.

But to return to Peter Lombard. It is not to be expressed how many of his
successors have, I cannot say explained, but inuolv'd his books of Sentences,
as amongst the rest, Bonaventura, Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Occam,
Durandus, and innumerable others, the last whereof was Thomas Caietanus, who
lived in the time of Luther. The Disciple of Albertus Magnus, was Thomas
Aquinas, commonly called the Angelical Doctor, who lived in the year 1270. In
him two things are laudable: First, that he argued very methodically.
Secondly, that as well in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, as in
his Summa Theolog. he has disputed more tolerably of Justification, and
Predestination, than any of the rest. But he is much to be blamed in this,
that he imployd the whole strength of his wit in defending Transubstantiation,
though most unhappily, and with many contradictions.

Not long after lived Johannes Scotus, Johannes Scotus*
surnamed Duns, a Franciscan, who opposed Thomas, whence sprung the two sects,
Thomists, and Scotists, of which the first were called Nominall, the latter
Real; because the one concluded the names only, the other the things
themselves also to be comprehended under the predicaments.

But it is to be noted, Another Scotus
that there was another Johannes Scotus long before those times, anno 874. a
man most learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues, who governed the School at
Oxford, and at length was murdered by his Scholars with Penneknives, because
his opinion of the Lords Supper was no way pleasing to the Monks.

The last Age of the Schoolmen from the Council of Constance to the time of
Luther, was not more happy, but more audacious, and infinitely ignorant,
although some were more enlightened with knowledge than others. The chief of
these were Johannes Capreolus, Johannes Gerson, Chancellor of Paris;
Capreoius. Gerson. Biel Petrus de Alliaco.
Gabriel Biel, Tubinga, Petrus de Alliaco, Cardinalis Cameracensis, who wrote
questions upon the book of Sentences of Peter Lombard, where, amongst others,
this saying of his concerning the Eucharist is observable: Communem Sententiam
esse, panem Transubstantiari: licet id non sequitur evidenter ex Scriptura, sed
ex determinatione tamen Ecclesiae. Alia opinio est quod substantia panis
remanet: valde enim possibile est substantiam panis coexistere substantiae
corporis; nec est magis impossible duas substantias coexistere quam duas
qualitates. Possibile, inquam est Corpus Christi assumere corpus perunionem, et
ille modus non repugnat rationi, nec authoritati Biblicae: It is the common
opinion, says he, that the bread is Transubstantiated; although that
evidently appear not by the Scripture, yet by the determination of the Church
it does. Another opinion is, that the substance of the bread remains: for it
is very possible that the substance of the bread may coexist with the substance
of the body: neither is it more impossible that two substances should coexist,
than two qualities. It is possible, I say, the body of Christ may assume
another body by union, and that manner is neither repugnant to reason, Whence
Luther derives his opinion of the Lords Supper.
nor the authority of the Bible. Which opinion though Lanfrancus had long
before refuted as not agreeable to the words of Christ, yet Luther embraced it,
as himself confesses, lib. de captivitate Babylonic.

This was the Scholasticall Divinity full of sharp and subtle questions,
contentions, and contradictions: While some made it a question whether or no
the Virgin Mary were conceived in Original sin? the maintainers of which
Tenent were the Dominicans; the Opposers, the other Monks. Others demanded
whether or no the Pope were simply a man, or in part a god, and whether he
were above a Council or no. Of which times Peucerus rightly admonishes us in
Chronic. speaking of the times of Frederic 2. and Charles 4. Duplex, inquit,
genus hominum exortum est quo Satan papatum fulcivit; Canonistarum, qui
collectis variis decretis, et Canonibus, tyrannidem pontificiam stabiliverunt,
et novum forum constituerunt: et Scholasticorum, quorum Theologia ex male
detortis Scripturae, et patrum Sententiis, i^sque confusis, tum Platonicis, et
Aristotelicis disputationibus, et Pontificum placitis consuta, sacra Biblia, et
praecipua doctrinae de vera Dei invocatione, de vero usu Sacramentorum, de
fide, justificatione, veris cultibus, atque etiam patrum vetustiorum Scripta de
cordibus, et manibus hominum excussit: Two sorts of men, says he, then arose,
by which Satan supported the Papacy: First; the Canonists, who by a collection
of various decrees, and Canons, strengthened the Pontifical Tyranny, and
erected a new Court. The Schoolmen next, who (by composing their Divinity out
of ill-wrested sentences out of the Scriptures, and the Fathers, and those
confused with Platonicall and Aristo ellicall Disputations, and Ordinances of
the Popes) have forced the holy Bible out of men's hearts and hands, together
with the chief heads of Doctrine touching the true Invocation of God, and the
true use of the Sacraments, Faith, Justification, true Worships; and not only
these, but the writings also of the most ancient Fathers.

Yet did God stir up some in several Ages, who abhorred those subtilties,
and betook themselves to his Law and Testimonies; although (as those times
were palpably dark, and obscure) they could not free themselves from Errors
and Superstition. Nicholas de Lyra.
One of these was Nicholas de Lyra, 1320. who wrote upon the old and new
Testament, and on the third to the Galatians. He affirms Faith alone to
justify. Another was John Witcliffe, I^h^nnes Witcliffe.
an Englishman, anno 1364. who discovered many errors and superstitions of the
Papacy, whose Doctrine afterward John Husse embraced, and Hierome of Prage,
John Husse. Hierome of Prage
who were both burned in the Council of Constance. But at length by the Divine
Providence it came to pass, anno 1577. that the sincere and incorrupt Doctrine
of the Gospel, and the whole method of Teaching was instituted and reformed by
those great men, Luther, Philip Melancthon, Zwinglius, Bucerus, Oecolampadius,
Calvin, and others, so that it is most true which Cyprian writes, lib. 1.
epist. 4. In plerisque Famulis suis dignatur Deus ostendere ^edintegrationem
Ecclesiae, et post longas pluvias serenitatem: God vouchsafes, says he, in
most of his servants to show the redintegration of his Church, and after much
^aine, serenity.

Laus, et Gloria sacrae Trinitati.
FJNJS.

