THE HISTORY OF FOVRE-FOOTED BEASTS.

Describing the true and lively figure of every Beast, with a discourse of
their several Names, Conditions, Kinds, Virtues (both natural and
medicinal) Countries of their breed, their love and hate to Mankind, and the
wonderful work of God in their Creation, Preservation, and Destruction.

Necessary for all Divines and Students, because the story of every Beast is
amplified with Narrations out of Scriptures, Fathers, Philosophers, Physicians,
and Poets: wherein are declared diverse Hyerogliphicks, Emblems, Epigrams, and
other good Histories, Collected out of all the Volumes of CONRADVS GESNER, and
all other Writers to this present day. By EDWARD TOPSELL.

The Gorgon


LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard, 1607.

TO THE REVEREND AND RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL RICHARD NEILE, D. of DIVINITY, Deane of
Westminster, Master of the SAVOY, and Clearke of the King his most excellent
Majesty's Closet, all felicity Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.
THe Library of English Books, and Catalogue of writers, (Right Worthy and
Learned DEANE, my most respected PATRON) have grown to the height, not only
of a just number, but almost innumerable: and no marvel, for God himself has
in all ages preserved lerning in the next place to life; for as life is the
Ministerial Governor and moouer in this world, so is learning the Ministerial
Governor and moouer in life: As an Interpretor in a strange Country is
necessary for a traveler that is ignorant of Languages (or else he should
perish,) so is knowledge and learning to us poor Pilgrims in this our
Perigrination, out of Paradise, unto Paradise; whereby confused BABELS tongues
are again reduced to their significant Dialects, not in the builders of BABELL
to further and finish an earthly Tower, but in the builders of JERUSALEM, to
bring them all to their own Country Which they seek, and to the desired rest
of souls. Literae obstetrices artium quarum beneficio ab interitur vndicantur.
As life is different and diverse, according to the spirit wherein it is seated,
and by which it is norished as with a current; so also is Learning, acording to
the taste, use, and practice of rules, Canons, and Authors, from whom as from a
Fountain it takes both beginning and increase: even as the spirit of a
Serpent is much quicker then the spirit of an Ox; and the Learning of
Aristotle and Pliny more lively and light some then the knowledge of other
obscure Philosophers, unworthy to be named; which either through envy or Non
proficiencye durst never write, Si cum hac exceptione detur sapientia vt illam
inclusam tenea^, nec enuntiem, reijciam. Nullius boni sine socio iucunda est
possessio. And therefore I say with Petrus Blesen: Scientiarum generosa
possessio in plures dispersa, non perditur, and distributa per parts,
minorationis detrimentum non sentit: sed eo diuturnius perpetuata senescit, quo
publicata foecundius se diffundit.

The greatest men stored with all helps of Learning, Nature, and Fortune, were
the first writers who as they did excel other men in posessions and wordly
dignity, so they manifested their Virtues and Worth in the aedition of
excellent parts of knowledge, either for the delight or profit of the world,
according to the Poets profession:

Aut prodesse volunt aut delectari poetae,
Aut simul and iucunda and idonea dicere vitae,
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
Yet now of late days this custom has bin almost discontinued to the
infinite prejudice of sacred inviolable Learning and Science, for Turpis sepe
fama datur minoribus, (as Ausonius wrote in his time) for indeed the reason is
pregnant: Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat,
Res angusta domi.
But yet the great Rectour or Chauncellor of all the Academyes in the world
Jesus Christ, In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, the
Master of that College wher^in he was but a Servant or Steward, That was
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, ( I mean Moses) the first
writer, the first Author, the first c^^mender of knowledge, and the first
ordainer of a lawful Commonwealth, and ruler of Church and state, has not
leaft our age without some monuments of great Princes, Earls, Lords and Knights
for the Ornament and honor of learning, who for general and particular causes
and benefits have added their names to the society of writers, and divulged
their works in print, which are likely to be remembered to the worlds end. Such
are our most temperate, Just, Wise, and Learned King and Sovereign. The Right
Noble, and Honorable Earl of Surrey, long ago departed out of this earthly
Horizon. The now living Earls of Dorset, Northampton, Salisbury, and many
Knights, Sir Phillip Sidney, Sir George Moore, Sir Richard Bartlett, Sir
Frauncis Hastinges, and others. But of Aarons, and such as sit at the Helm of
the Church, or are woorthily advanced for their knowledge in learning and
state, I mean both Bishops and Doctors, almost innumerable of all whom I can
s^y no more, if I were worthy to say any thing, then apply unto them
particularly that which was said of one of the greatest scholars and Divines
that ever England had. Bish. Iuel.
-- Dic obsecro sancta
Posteritas, nec enim mihi fas est dicere: tantum
De tantis tacitum, aut tantos audire iuuabit.
Then why should I presume, being every way the least and meanest of all other,
now the third time to publish any part of my conceived studies for the age
present and succeeding, and so to have my name enrolled amongst the benefactors
and Authors of Learning. -- Non omnia grandior aetas,
Quae fugiamus habet; seris venit vsus ab annis.
Alas sir, I have never abounded in any thing, except want and labor, and I
thank God that one of these has bin prepared to feed the other, therefore I
will not stand upon any man's objections, who like Horses as it is in the fable
being led empty, well fed, and without burden, do scorn the laden Ass, adding
misery to his load, til his back was broke, and then was al laid upon the
pampred disdainful Horse: even so, these proud displeasing spirits are eased
by the labors of us that bear their burdens, and if they content not
themselves with ease, but will also sit in the seat of the scornful let them
remember, that when our backs be broke, they must take up the carriage. But
pardon me (I beseech you) if by way of Preface I open my heart unto your Worcester:
who is better able then ten thousand of the Momusses, and more charitably
generous in receiving such gifts with the right hand (as these are) although
they were given with the left; for seeing I have chosen you the patron of this
work, I vvil breefely declare and open my mind unto you concerning the whole
Volume, sparing any other praises of your demerits then those which by
Martial are ascribed to Regulus, which I will without flattery or fear of
the envious thus apply unto you: Cum sit Sophiae par fama and cura deorum [SSS.
Trinitatis]
Ingenio pietas nec minor ipsa tuo.
Ignorant meritis dare munera, qui tibi librum
Et qui miratur [Nejile] Thura dari.
So then leaving these peroations, I vvil endeavor to prove unto you that this
work which I now publish and divulge unto the world, under the patronage of
your name is Divine, and necessary for all men to know; true, and therefore
without slander or suspicious scandal to be received; and that no man ought
rather to publish this unto the World, then a Divine or Preacher. For the
first, that the knowledge of Beasts, like as the knowledge of the other
creatures and works of God, is Divine, I see no cause why any man should
doubt thereof, seeing that at the first they were created and brought to man as
we may read Genesis 1.24, 25. and all by the Lord himself, so that their life and
creation is Divine in respect of their maker, their naming divine, in respect
that Adam out of the plenty of his own divine wisdom, gave them their several
appellations, as it were out of a Fountain of prophecy, foreshewing the
nature of every kind in one elegant and significant denomination, which to the
great loss of all his children was taken away, lost, and confounded at Babel.
When I affirm that the knowledge of Beasts is Divine, I do mean no other thing
then the right and perfect description of their names, figures, and natures,
and this is in the Creator himself most Divine, and therefore such as is the
fountain, such are the streams yssuing from the same into the minds of men. Now
it is most clear in Genesis how the Holy Ghost remembers the creation of al
living creatures, and the Four-footed next before the creation of man, as though
they alone were appointed the Vshers, going immediately before the race of men.
And therefore all the Deuines observe both in the Haebrew, in the Greek and
Latin, that they were created of three several sorts or kinds. The first
Iumentum, as Oxen, Horse, Asses and such like, Quia hominum iuuamenta. The
second, Reptile quia hominum medicina. The third, Bestia 1: a vastando, for
that they were wild and depopulators of other their associats, rising also
against man, after that by his fall he had lost his first image and integrity.
Now were it not a knowledge Divine, why should the holy Scripture relate it,
and divide the kinds? Yea, why should al holy men take examples from the
natures of Beasts, Birds, etc. and aply the^ to heavenly things, except by the
ordinance of God they were both allowed and commanded so to do; and therefore
in admiration of them the Prophet David cries out, Quam magnifica sunt opera
tua domine, omnia in sapientia fecisti. The old Manichees among other
blasphemies accused the creation of hurtful, venomous, ravening, and
destroying Beasts, affirming them to be made by an evil God, and also they
accused the creation of Mice and other unprofitable creatures, because their
dullness was no kinder to the Lord, (but like cruel and covetous misers, made
no account of those beasts, which brought not profit to their purse. You know
(Right Learned D.) how that grave Father answers that calumny, first affirming
that the same thing which seemed idle to men, was profitable to God; and the
same that appeared ugly to them, was beautiful to him, Qui omnibus vtitur ad
gubernationem vniuersi. He therefore wisely compares a fool that knows not the
use of the creatures in this World, to one ignorant that comes into the
workehouse of a cunning man, viewing a number of strange tools, and having no
cunning but in an Axe or ae Rake, thinks that al those rare inventions of a
wise Workman are idle toies: and whilst thus he thinks, wandering to and
fro, not looking to his feet, suddenly falls into some furnace in the same
Workhouse, or chance to take up some sharp tool whereby he is vvounded, then
he also thinks that the same are hurtful and dangerous. Quorum tamen vsum
quia nouit artifex, insipientiam eius irridet, and verba inepta non curans
officinam suam constanter exercet. But we that are ashamed to deny the use of
instruments in the shops of rare Artisans, but rather admire their invention,
yet are not afraid to condemn in Gods storehouse sundry of his creatures, which
are rare inventions, although through folly we be vvounded or harmed by them,
and therefore he concludes that al beasts are either vtilia, and against them
we dare not speak; or pernitiosa, whereby we are terrified, that we should not
love this perilous life, or else they are superflua, which to affirm were
most ridiculous: for as in a great house all things are not for use, but some
for ornament, so is it in this World, the inferior palace of God. Thus far
Austen. Therefore I will conclude this first part, that not only the knowledge
of the profitable creature is divine, and was first of all taught by God, but
also of the hurtful: For a wise Man says Solomon, sees the Plague (by the
revelation of God) and hides himself from it. And John Bap: Quis vos docuit
ab ira ventura fugere. These things have I principally labored in this
Treatise, to show unto men what Beasts are their friends, and what their
Enemies, which to trust, and which avoid, in which to find norishment, and
which to shun as poison. Another thing that persuades me in the necessary use
of this history, that it was divine was the preservation of al creatures
living, which are engendered by copulation (except Fishes) in the arc of Noah:
unto whom it pleased the creator at that time to infuse an instinct, and bring
them home to man as to a fold: surely it was for that a man might gain out of
them much divine knowledge, such as is imprinted in them by nature, as a tipe
or spark of that great wisdom whereby they were created. In mice and
Serpents a foreknowledge of things to come, in the Aunt and Pismire a
providence against old age; in the Bear the love of young: in the Lion his
stately pace; in the Cock and sheep, change of weather; as S. Basil in his
Hexameron, etiam in Brutis quidam futuri sensus est, vt nos presenti vitae non
addicti simus, sed de futuro saeculo omne studium habeamus.

For this cause there were of beasts in holy scripture three holy uses, one for
sacrifice, another in vision, and a third for reproof and instruction. In
Sacrifices were the clean beasts, which men were bound first to know, and
then to offer; for it is unreasonable that those things should be sacred at the
Lords altar, which are refused worthily at private men's Tables. Now although
we have ^o use of sacrificing of Beasts, Nam sicut bruta pro peccatis
immolabantur, ita iam vitia pro corporibus. Yet we have use of clean Beasts
for food and nourishment, and therefore for the enriching of the minds and
Tables of men, it is necesary to know not only the liberty that we have to
eat, but also the quality and nutriment of the Beast we eat, not for any
Religion, but for health and corporal necessity. This point is also opened in
this story, and the other of Sacrifice, wherein I have not omitted to speak of
the Divine use of every Beast, both among the Jews, and among the profane
Gentiles. Now for the second holy use of Beasts in visions, the Prophet Daniels
visions, and Ezekiels, and S. John's in the Revelation do testify of them,
whereby the most Deuines have observed how great Princes and kingdoms after
they have shaken off the practice of Justice and piety, turn Tyrants and
ravening Beasts. For so man being in honor understands not, but becomes
like the Beasts that perish, and so as Dionisius says by visions of beasts,
Infima reducuntur per media in suprema. Now there were as S. Augustine says,
three kinds of visions, Sensibiles, intellectuales, and imaginariae: the first
were most pregna^t, because to the understanding and conceiving, a man never
lost his senses, and therefore God did suddenly create savage Beasts both of
natural and extraordinary shapes, whereby he showed to his servants the
Prophets, the ruin or vprising of beastly states and kingdoms. And not only
thus, but also in heaven (as Saint John says) there are four Beasts full of
eyes before the throne of God: both which must needs magnify the knowledge
that we may have of these Quadrupedes; for seeing God has used them as
Sacraments or Mysteries to contain his will, (not only in monstrous
treble-headed, or seuen-horned-shapes) but also in pure ordinary, natural lims
and members: how shall we be able to guess at the meaning in the secret, that do
not understand the revealed? And what use can we make of the invisible part of
that Sacrament, where we know not the meaning of the visible? Does the Lord
compare the Devil to a Lion; evil Judges to Bears; false prophets to Wolves;
secret and crafty persecutors to Foxes; open enemies in hostility to wild
Boares; Heretics and false Preachers to Scorpions; good men to the Fowls of
Heaven, and Martyrs to Sheep, and yet we have no knowledge of the nature of
Lions, Wolves, Bears, Foxes, Wilde-Bores, or Scorpions. Surely when Solomon
says to the sluggard go to the Pismire, he wills him to learn the nature of
the Pismire, and then according thereto reform his manners: And so all the
world are bid to learn the natures of all Beasts, for there is always something
to be learned in them, according to this saying of Saint Basil. A deo nihil non
prouidum in naturae rebus est, neque quicquam pertinentis, ad se curae expers,
and si ipsas animalium parts consideraueris, inuenies quod neque superfluum
quid conditor apposuit, neque necessaria detraxit. Then it being clear that
every beast is a natural vision, which we ought to see and understand, for
the more clear apprehension of the invisible Majesty of God, I will conclude
that I have not omitted this part of the use of Beasts, but have collected,
expressed, and declared, what the vvriters of all ages have herein observed.

Now the third and last holy use that is made of Beasts in Scripture, is for
reproof and instruction; so the Lord in Job. Ch, 38, and 39. mentions the
Lion, the Raven, the Wilde-Goats, the Hindes, the Hinde-Calues, the
Wilde-Asses, the Unicorn, the Ostriche, the Stork, the Puissant-Horse, the
Hawk, the Eagle, the Vulture, the Whale, and the Dragon, that is, the Fowls,
Fishes, Serpents, and Four-footed-Beasts: Al which he reckons as known
things to Job, and discourses of as strange things in their natures as any we
have inserted for truth in our History, as may appear to any man whatsoever,
that vvil look studiously into them.

Shall I add heereunto how Moses, and all the Prophets, Saint John Baptist,
our most blessed Savior, saint Paul, and all the Writers since his time (both
ancient and latter) have made profession of this part of Divinity; so that he
was an unskillful Divine and not apt to teach, which could not at his fingers
end speak of these things: for (says our Savior) If I tell you earthly
things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe when I tell you heavenly things?

Solomon, as it is witnessed in holy Scripture, wrote of Plants, of Birds, of
Fishes, and Beasts, and even then when he stood in good favor with God,
therefore it is an exercise of the highest Wisdom to travel in, and the
Noblest minds to study in: for in it as I will show you (with your good
patience for I have no other Praeface) there is both the knowledge of god and
man. If any man object Multa multi de musca de apicula de vermiculo, pauca de
Deo, I will answer with the words of Theodorus Gaza: Permulta enim de Deo is
tractat, qui doctrina rerum conditarum exquisitissima, conditorem ipsum
de^larat, neque musca, neque vermiculus omittendus est vbi de mira solertia
agitur. Whereunto Saint Austen agrees when he says, Maiestatem diuinam aeque
in formicae membris atque magno inuento tranante fluuium. And for the
knowledge of man, many and most excellent rules for public and priuaete
affairs, both for preserving a good Conscience and avoiding an evil danger,
are gathered from Beasts: It were to long to run over all, let me (I beseech
you) be bold to reckon a few which descend from nature our common parent, and
therefore are neither strained, counterfeit, inconstant, or deceiptfull; but
free, full of power to persuade, true, having the seal of the highest for
their evidence; constant and never altered in any age: faithful, such as have
been tried at fi^e and Touchstone.

Were not this a good persuasion against murder, to see all beasts so to
maintain their natures, that they kill not their own kind. Who is so
unnatural and unthankful to his parents, but by reading how the young
Storkes and Wood-peckers do in their parents old age feed and nourish them,
will not repent, amend his folly, and be more natural? What man is so void of
compassion, that hearing the bounty of the Bone-breaker Bird to the young
Eagles, will not become more liberal? Where is there svch a sluggard and
drone, that considers the labors, pains, and travels of the Emmet,
Little-bee, Field-mouse, Squirrell, and such other that will not learn for
shame to he more industrious, and set his fingers to work? Why should any man
living fall to do evil against his Conscience, or at the temptation of the
Devil, seeing a Lion will never yield: Mori scit vnici nescit; and seeing the
little Wren does fight with an Eagle, contending for Sovereignty? would it not
make all men to reverence a good King set over them by God? Seeing the Bees
seek out their King if he loose himself, and by a most sagacious
smelling-sence, never cease till he be found out, and then bear him upon their
bodies if he be not able to fly, but if he die they all for sake him. And what
King is not invited to clemency, and dehorted from tyranny, seeing the king of
Bees has a sting, but never uses the same?

How great is the love and faithfulness of Dogs, the meekness of Elephants,
the modesty or shamefastness of the adulterous Lioness, the neatness and
politure of the Cat and Peacocke, the justice of the Be which gathers from
all flowers that which serves their turn, and yet destroys not the flower.
The care of the Nightingale to make her voice pleasant, the chastity of a
Turtle, the Canonical voice and watchfulness of a Coeke, and to conclude the
vtility of a Sheep: All these and ten thousand more I could recite, to show
what the knowledge of the nature of brutish creatures does work or teach the
minds of men, but I will conclude this part with the words of S. Ierom
against Iouinian. Ad Herodem dicitur propter malitiam. Ite and dicite vulpi
huic. Luke 13. ad Scribus and Pharisaeos genimina viperarum Mat. 23. ad
libidinosos equi hinme^tes inproximoru^ foeminas. Ier. 5. de voluptuoso nolite
mittere margaritas vestras ante porcos. De impudentibus, neque sanctum date
canibus Mat, 7. de infidelibus Ephesi cum bestiis, pugnaui in similitudine
hominum, And thus far S. Ierom: whereby we may boldly auerre by way of
induction; that wherein the knowledge of God, the knowledge of man, the
precepts of Virtue, the means to avoid evil are to be learned, that Science
is Divine and ought of all men to be inquired and sought after: and such have I
manifested in this history following.

Now again the necessity of this History is to be preferred before the
Chronicles and records of al ages made by men, because the events and accidents
of the time past, are peradventure such things as shall never again come in
use: but this shows that Chronicle which was made by God himself, every
living beast being a word, every kind being a sentence, and al of them together
a large history, containing admirable knowledge and learning, which was, which
is, which shall continue, (if not for ever) yet to the worlds end. Et patris,
and nostras, nouumque prematur in annum
Membranis intus positis delere licebit
Quod non aedideris.
The second thing in this discourse which I have promised to affirm, is the
truth of the Hystory of Creatures, for the mark of a good writer is to follow
truth and not deceiuable Fables. And in this kind I have passed the straightest
passage, because the relation of most things in this Book are taken out of
Heathen vvriters, such as peradventure are many times superstitiously
credulous, and have added of their own very many rash inventions, without
reason, authority, or probability, as if they had been hired to sell such
Fables: For, Non been conducti vendunt periuria testes. I would not have the
Reader of these Histories to immagine that I have inserted or related all that
ever is said of these Beasts, but only so much as is said by many, For in
the mouth of two or three witnesses stands every word: and if at any time I
have set down a single Testimony, it was because the matter was clear and
needs not farther probation, or else I have laid it upon the credit of the
Author with special words, not giving the Reader any warant from me to believe
it.

Besides I have taken regard to imitate the best Writers, which was easy for
me to do, because Gesner relates every man's opinion (like a common place or
Dictionary, as he professes;) and if at any time he seemed obscure, I turned
to the Books which I had at hand to guess their meaning, putting in that
which he had left out of many good Authors, and leaving out many magical
devises. Now although I have used no small diligence or care in collecting
those things which were most essential to every Beast, most true without
exception, and most evident by the Testimony of many good Authors, yet I have
delivered in this treatise many strange and rare things, not as fictions, but
Miracles of nature, for wisemen to behold and observe to their singular
comfort, if they love the power, glory, and praise of their maker, not
withholding their consent to the things expressed, because they entreat of
living things made by God himself. Si ergo quaerimus quis fecerit deus est, Si
per quod, dixit fiat, and facta sunt: Si quare fiat, quia bonus est. Nec enim
author est excellentior deo, necars efficacior dei verbo, nec causa melior, quam
vt bonum crearetura deo bono, and this Plato said was the only cause of the
worlds creation, vt a deo bono opera bona fierent.

Now I do in a sort challenge a consent unto the probability of these things
to wise and learned men, although no belief. For Fides, is credere
inuisibilia; but consensus is a cleaving or yielding to a relation until the
manifestation of another truth; and when any man shall justly reprove any thing
I have written for false and eroneous, I will not stick to release the Readers
consent, but make satisfaction for usurpation. But for the rude and vulgar sort
(who being utterly ignorant of the operation of Learning, do presently condemn
al strange things which are not ingraue^ in the palms of their own hands, or
evident in their own herds and flocks): I care not, for my ears have heard
some of them speak against the History of Sampson, where he tied firebrarnds
to the tails of Foxes, and many of them against the miracles of Christ. I may
remember you ( R.W.) of a Country tale of an old Mass Priest in the days of
Henry the eight, who reading in English after the translation of the Bible,
the miracle of the five loaves and two Fishes, and when he came to the verse
that reckons the number of the ghuests or eaters of the banquet, he paused a
little, and at last said, they were about five hundred: The clarke, that was
a little vviser, vvhispered into the priests ears that it was five thousand,
but the priest turned back and replied with indignation, Hold your peace
sirrah, we shall never make them believe they were five hundred.

Such Priests, such People, such persons I shall draw upon my back, and
although I do not challenge a power of not erring, yet because I speak of the
power of God, that is vnlimitable, I will be bold to auerre that for truth in
the Book of creatures (although first observed by Heathen men) which is not
contrary to the book of Scriptures.

Lastly, that it is the proper office of a Preacher or Divine to set forth
these works of God, I think no wise man will make question, for so did
Moses, and David, and Solomon, and Christ, and S. Paul, and S. John, and S.
Ireney, S. Gregory, S. Basil, S. Austen, S. Ierom, S. Bernard in his
enarrations or Sermons upon the Canticles, and of later days Isidorus, The
Monks of Messuen, Geminianus, and to conclude that ornament of our time
Ieronimus Zanchius. For how shall we be able to speak the whole Counsel of
God unto his people, if we read unto them but one of his books, when he has
another in the world, which we never study past the title or outside;
although the great God have made them an Epistle Dedicatory to the whole race
of mankind.

This is my endeavor and pains in this Book, that I might profit and delight
the Reader, whereinto he may look on the Holiest days, (not omitting prayer
and the pub^icke service of God) and pass away the Sabbaoths in heavenly
meditations upon earthly creatures. I have followed D. Gesner as near as I
could, I do profess him my Author in most of my stories, yet I have gathred up
that which he let fall, and added many pictures and stories as may apeare by
Conference of both together. In the names of the Beasts, and the Ph^sicke I
have not swarued from him at all. He was a Protestant Physician, (a rare thing
to find any Religion in a Physician although Saint Luke a Physician were a
writer of the Gospel.) His praises therefore shall remain, and all living
creatures shall witness for him at the last day. This my labor whatsoever it
be, I consecrate to the benefit of all our English Nation under your name and
patronage, a public professor, a learned and reverend Divine, a famous
Preacher, observed in Court and Country, if you will vouchsafe to allow of my
labors, I stand not upon others, and if it have your commendation, it shall
incorage me to proceed to the residue, wherein I fear no impediment but ability
to carry out the charge, my case so standing that I have not any access of
maintenance but by voluntary* benevolence for personal pains, receiving no
more but a laborers wages, and but for you, that had also been taken from me:
Therefore I conclude with the words of Saint Gregory to Leontius, Et nos bona
quae de vobis multipliciter praedicantur addiscentes, assidue pro gloriae
vestrae incolumintate omnipotentem valeamus dominum deprecari.

Your Chaplain in the Church of Saint Buttolphe Aldergate. EDWARD TOPSELL.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF DOCT. CONRADVS GESNERVS before his History of
Foure-footed-Beastes, concerning the vtility of this STORY.
ALL PHILOSOPHY (most worthy accomplished men,) is in every part excellent
good, most beautiful, and most worthy of the love and honor of all mortal
men, which are her Clyents and Loue^s, (as all wise and excellent men have
judged) in every age. But because the wits of men do differ, as education,
conversation, custom, and the profit of life and living, and peradventure many
other causes, do make many varieties of opinions in us, which do possess
human minds; with very many preiudices, not only in learning and religion,
but almost in every thing; from hence therefore it comes to pass, that some
do follow one part of learning which they altogether propounded to themselves,
or for the occasion, and profit of the present estate of their affairs.

So is it with me, that I even from a child, being brought up of a kins-man
(practitioner of Physic) have tasted from my youth the love of that
profession: And although I had a little conceived the knowledge of diverse
things in the increase of my age, yet I left off the study of physic, (more
then was meet,) because I would not continue over long therein; yet afterward
I returned again unto the former study thereof, the care of househould affairs
requiring the same at my hands. But when I considered the great affinity of
this Science with natural Philosophy, and that not any one can be accounted an
excellent or learned Physician, which has not drawn (as it were from a
Fountain) his first instruction from books of nature; I diligently began to
peruse the writings of Philosophers, which have disputed or debated of things
pertaining to nature: In which those things did chiefly delight me, which did
handle or entreat concerning metals, plants, and living creatures, and that
for two causes. First of all, because there may be had of those things a more
true and certain knowledge then of imperfect or mixed bodies or Meteours, and
certain other things, too learned or curious or far removed from sense, or
such like, that a man can never hope for any sufficient knowledge of them, by
any reason or sense.

Afterward because their knowledge and contemplation did not only pertain
to physic, but also to minister and to govern every thing peculiar, as other
arts which were much more profitable and necessary.

Therefore I spent much time in this study, so that in spared or borrowed
hours, and as often as I did desire to recreate my self from other studies or
businesses, I very desirously turned to them many years, accepting them for my
only pleasures and joys, which hours the common sort of men, and even very
many learned men, do idly abuse in walking, playing, and drinking.

And although I have considered and observed very many things concerning
Plants, and other things, not seen and considered before me, or at leastwise
brought to light of no man before, therefore it would seem less necessary at
this present to write of them, seeing that many do even to this day write
learnedly and profitably concerning plants; Geor: Agricola, a man worthy of
great praise, has most learnedly and profitably written concerning metals:
wherefore I applied my mind to the History of foure-footed-beastes handled
lightly in our age, and only in parts. But when that I saw I should profit
but little, except I should adioyn the Histories of those that have travailed
in other countries, to these private studies, and gathering of our own. I went
first of all to some points of the Germans, (but not many) and by and by after,
I did add thereunto mine own travails into Italy, not only for this cause,
but for the honor of my Bybliothaeca, that I might reckon up all kind of
writers therein for the further honor thereof: But if I had met with any
Mecoenas, or had had further ability, or my fortunes greater, I had travailed
further, both by Sea and land, into far remote places, for the enlarging of the
story both of beasts and plants, for the benefit of all posterity, although I
am in my self a very weak and sickly man. But because that was not lawful, by
reason I wanted sufficient means, I have done that which I could, and have got
also some friends unto me out of diverse regions or parts of Europe, with whom
after I communicated my purposes, they returned unto me sundry discriptions of
strange beasts, and the modern names of vulgar beasts in many languages, with
their pictures and the true forms. In the mean time I did not only sit still
and turn over books, but gave my self diligently to enquire of every
Countryman or trauailer, a particular and exact observation of the nature of
every beast: and for this cause I conferred with strangers of other nations,
which by any occasion either were resident among us, or passed accidentally
through our country, and made of their relation the most diligent notes that I
could gather, conferring them with old writers, and comparing one with
another, till I had digested the perfection of my intented story, and the
method thereof for the drawing of it into a perfect body.

And thus by little and little the work or volume increased, not only by my
great travail and pains, but also to my great cost and charge, considering my
poor and needy estate: when I thought that it was grown great enough (for if
all things grow infinite and endless) then I disposed it to be printed and
published to the world, least that by defering the diuulgation thereof under
color to learn more things, that might happen to me, which befalls all men
(namely Death) and so I should by my own modesty or backewardnesse, not only
overthrow my own labors, but also deprive well deserving men, of the
universal benifit to be reaped by this story. Then I determined first of all
to begin with the story of foure-footed-beasts, such as are not generated in
parts and imperfectly as it were in an Egg, but perfectly and totally together
in the dams belly, because they were not only the most worthy, principal, and
excellent, among all the creatures of this World next unto men, but also,
because their natural parts of body and disposition, do most of all resemble
mankind. And of the residue, namely, such as are conceived out of Eggs, either
foure-footed, or Birds, or Fishes, or Serpents, or reptiles, (if God permit) we
will entreat perticularly in another Tome by itself. And thus much for the
order, increase, occasion, and edition of this work.

The first benifit of this story to physic.
But some man will inquire the cause and reason of so great a labor and study,
and demand of me what fruits, profit, and benefit, can come by this History?
To whom I make this answer: First, the knowledge of this natural part of
Phylosophye, is very necessary and profitable to Physic, and that many ways;
First, for that many beasts are used for meat, nourishment, and medicine, and
for that cause are not only applied outwardly, but inwardly to the body of man:
and then more particularly, because about four-footed-beasts which breed in
their own kind, for because of the similitude they carry with mankind in body
and affections, they suffer many diseases in common with us, which are cured by
every heard-man and leach in the fields: and also the beasts themselves do
offer many profitable medicines for the cure of men; which the skilful
Physician must borrow from them, if he will be perfect in his art, and
conscionable in his profession. But if that a man be wounded or poisoned by
serpents, Lyzards, creeping creatures, or by the bitings of any
foure-footed-beast in his madness, or by fishes, or by eating them in meat,
wherein the Physicians skill is required, to show the cause and cure of such a
wound, where shall he find better direction, then to be informed of the
particular venom that lies hid in every beast by nature, which thing we have
endeavored to explain in this our Treatise. Moreover there are many necessary
observations about meat, drink, sleep, watching, quietness, and
perturbation of affections in men, and other natural motions whereby health is
to be preserved, the perfectest rules and examples thereof are to be drawn
from bruit beasts, unto the use of men.

And I have proved by the inspection into this knowledge, that herein is laid
the largest foundation of Medicine, either by drawing it from those things
which do naturally flow and fall from the beasts, or that which they suffer and
endure, or else from those things which they have observed to be in them; for
it more safe and without impiety, to make trial of a new Medicine upon a
beast, rather then upon a man. And lastly, seeing diverse Medicines arise out of
every part of every beast almost, all which we have recited in one place
Methodically together, and part after part, hereby the Physician shall reap
this commodity, that when he has any beast in his hand, by looking into this
work he shall find what part he ought to reserve for medicine, and also to
what sickness it is to be applied. And after the same manner may every man
choose his meat, and know by this treatise what is most, and what is least
nourishable, and agreeable to the nature of man. And if it pleased me to
rehearseal that comes into this catalogue about vtility of beasts, I would
show you how many arts and occupations of men, do raise maintenance and
sustentation from beasts, both to sell them for money, and also to take them for
meat: as the Fishermen which follow the waters, taking for food such fishes as
by the ordinance of God, are ordained for that purpose.

They which are Grasyers and keep cattle of all sorts, live upon their
changing, fatting, feeding, and selling. Those which make Butter and Cheese,
whereof there are many in the Mountains of Heluctia, live only upon that
labor, and therefore the knowledge of Kye, Oxen, Asses, Elkes, Reyners,
Camels, and diverse other beasts, is most necessary for these men, from whom
they draw Milk, and therefore good to maintain and preserve their health.
There be some Horse-leaches, Cowe-leaches, Oxe-leaches, and such like for this
purpose. There be that live only upon the Marchandizes of their skins, as
Tawyers, Glouers, Curriers, Shoomakers, and Breast plate-makers of Leathers,
Sadlers, Leather-sellers, Purse-makers, and such like.

Some again have an Art to dress the skins with their hair and wool upon
them, for garments. Some live by keambing, shearing, spinning, clothing, and
making sundry necessaries out of wool, Goats hair, and Camels hair. For the
use of the cattle alive, I might be endless to show all, first the husbandmen
use Oxen and Asses, the use of Horses and Mules, both for travail and plowing,
and carriage. The Art of riding commendable for all sorts of men, both in peace
and war, not only for great Princes and Monarchs, but for every Citizen:
many things are used for buildings which cannot be drawn or brought together,
but by Oxen, Horses, Mules, Asses, Camels, Elephants, Reyners, Elkes, and such
like. Who knows not the use of Dogs, for they keep Houses, and cattle,
and they attend, guard, and defend men: they hunt wild beasts, they drive them
away, or kill, or retain them to the hand of man, that he may be conqueror of
them. In fine, the knowledge of beasts is profitable to many arts, sciences,
and occupations, which may be better perceived, by the particular practice and
application of him that is studious thereof, then by any other means.

But in the work it self, it shall be manifested what use and commodity arises
out of every beast, what remedies, or Medicines, what for garments, what for
meat, what for carriage, what for prognostication of evil weather, what for
pleasure and pastimes; so as we shall not need to prosecute these parts in this
present Epistle.

Also there want not instructions out of beasts, by imitation of whose
examples, the lives and manners of men are to be framed to another and a better
practice, which thing is manifested by learned and wise men, but especially by
Theodorus Gaza, who discourses thereof in his Praeface upon the books of
Aristotle, of the parts of creatures; whose words we will recite in the
Epistle to our Reader.

But if I should show at large and copiously, how many things may be collected
out of the knowledge of beasts for familiar and household affairs, I might be
infinite: but seeing I have already showed how necessary they be for
husbandry, for meat, for carriage, and such like, it must be understood that
all those commodities belong to this part of Occonominall profit.

The like I may say of the pleasure in their contemplation; for although all
their vtilities cannot be known, and in many things they are not beneficial
to men, yet if a man be skilful and have any understanding, he shall be much
delighted by looking into the natures of beasts, by consideration of the many
and infinite differences among them, whether he respect their body, or their
minds, or their actions: for what is more wonderful then the voice or
extemporall song of many Birds, who although they be far distant and remote
from us, and will not abide our presence for natural fear of death, yet is not
the eleborate devise of musical and artificial numbers, measures, and voices
of men comparable unto them. Pliny that Star and ornament of his time, spends
a great deal of labor in the admiration of the Nightingale. And what man
withal his wit, can sufficiently declare and proclaim the wonderful
industrious minds of the little Emmets and Bees, moved almost with no bodies,
being silly things, and yet endued with noble and commendable qualities, in
deformed members; so that I might conclude, that there is not any beast which
has not only something in it which is rare, glorious, and peculiar to
himself, but also something that is divine.

Wherefore I may seem a fool, to handle these things in a Praeface which are
copiously discoursed in the whole work. Aristotle makes it a true property of
a Noble, liberal, and well governed mind, to be more delighted with the rare,
pleasant, and admirable qualities of a beast, then with the lucre and gain that
comes thereby.

For it is a token of a filthy, beastly, illiberall, and wretched mind, to love
no more then we can reap commodity by. There be very many things which do not
yeald any profit to the possessors or owners, but only please them, and allure
their minds by outward form and beauty, so do the most precious stones, as
Adamants, Topazyes, Iacynthes, Smaradgs Chrysolytes, and many such other
things; by the wearing whereof, no man is delivered either from sickness or
peril (although some superstitious persons put confidence in them for such
virtues) but have crept into the favor and treasures of men, only because
like earthly stars they shine and glitter in the eyes of men, resembling the
resplendant glory and light of heavenly bodies, and other use they have none:
and in the mean time, he that should prefer free-stones fitted and squared for
buildings, or else Whet-stones, or Mil-stones, and such like, which are most
necessary for private use and commodity, yet do they seem vile in comparison
of others; and that should prefer all of them before one of the other, he
should be acounted no wiser then Aesops Cock: and if he should but equal them
in price and estimation in like sort, he should be judged an egregious block
or fool; and yet the best of these are without life, without spirit,
immovable, and unworthy. For this cause there is none of the creatures but
deserve, a far more admiration and esteem; and among living creatures, all
those which contain noble spirits in base and vile bodies, without apt Organs
and instruments for the better moving of their bodies: For as in clocks we
admire the lesser more then the greater, so ought we to admire the lesser
narrow bodies endued with such industrious spirits, more then the greater,
broader, and larger beasts: for all workmen do show more art, skill, and
cunning in the small and little price of work, then the greater.

Solinus writes, that Alexander the great had Homers Illiads written in
Parchment, so close together, that it might be contained in a Nut-shell. The
like admiration was there of the exile and curious small works of Myrmicidas
the Milesian, and Callicrates the Lacedemonian, for they made Chariots so
small, that they might be covered with and under a fly, and in the brim
thereof they wrote two exameter verses in Golden letters. And of Callicrates,
Solinus writes, that he made little Emmets out of Iuory so artificially, that
it could not be discerned from the live ones: even so, nature has strove and
strained, to excel more in these vile creatures of no reputation, then in
greater and nobler creatures. There is nothing that consists of matter and
form, but that one of them is worthyer, and the other vile; and therefore the
body and the soul in man, have the respect of matter, and the soul is the
form, because of the power of moving* senses, and actions: wherefore when we
see all these powers, as it were predominant in a little creature that has
almost no body (as the outward proportion of Emmets and Bees) what shall we
think? but how admirably is it able to work without the matter in the form
alone, showing it in a kind of visible nakedness, to be seen without the help
of corporal Organs; and therefore they are not set before us like sports and
pastimes to rejoice at, but as honorable emblems of Divine and supernatural
wisdom. For if we admire the little body of a man, because he bears the
most glorious image of all things in his proportion, and the image of God in
his soul and mind, then certainly next to a man, we ought to admire these
beasts, which do so resemble man, as man does the eternal and living God,
creator of them and him. Pliny unskillfully calls nature the common parent of
al creatures, which indeed is the infinite majesty of God; yet he writes
effectually, that there was no living creature made only for this cause, that
it should eat, or that it should satiate and satisfy other, but also it was
ordained to be bred and brought forth for saving Arts; and therefore it is
ingrafted even in the bowels and intrals of deaf and dumb things.

Now for the creatures which are profitable to men, as sheep, Oxen, Horses, and
such like, when we look upon them, we cannot only admire the wisdom and
power of God in their creation, but also we ought to give hereby thanks to his
majesty for their creation and conservation in their several kinds and orders,
for the use and behoof of men. And for those things which are altogether
unprofitable to men, we ought to wonder as much at their vileness, as they
want of profitablenes: For those admirable gifts and powers are not common to
all little beasts, as we see they are in Elephants, Lions, Camels, and such
other, for then we should wonder at them the less; but yet in some of the little
ones there are far more excellent properties then in any of the greatest.
Consider with what art and indrustry the Be frames her Comb, and the Emmet
storeth her nest, and tell me if the wit and eloquence of man, be able
sufficiently to express and praise it? Beside, their perpetual concord,
diligence, and agreement in the administration, gathring, and spending of all
their store, inso much as either they seem to be derived from nature or else
from a deep reach of wit, reason, and understanding: neither are they the less
admirable if we grant that these vertures are not natural and proper, nor
proceeding from reason and will, for they are no less the strange or stranger
work of God: For what a Divine thing is it, that these beasts attain to that
upon a sudden, without instruction and teaching, and therefore by instinct and
a kind of revelation which men do not attain in long exercise, practice and
study? These are assuredly evident testimonies of divinity (for the Lord is
marvelous in all his works, either in nature, or reason and will, or contrary to
both, without al interceeding mean, for all these have dependence upon his
pleasure. For how can his Divine power, wisdom, and goodness, ever be absent
from the world, (I mean from man the prince of the world) when such excellent
gifts are made visible in little beasts, that every day perish and are
corrupted easily, and ingendered again by their own putrefaction, so as they
never fail in kind, even those that are so small and little in body, that they
can scarce be seen by the eyes of man? these things are to me unanswerable
arguments of the presence and power of God: for that they move and be in
action it proceeds of his power, in that they use their senses, and there by
follow and attain those things which are profitable to them, and avoid al
hurtful things contrary to their nature, because they build them houses and
places of habitation, make provision for their food and victuals it proceeds
of his wisdom; but in that they nourish their young ones, and love one
another in all outward appearance, living in flocks together, as if they had
knowledge of society, and consent unanimously to their work and labor, it is
likewise a token and visible emblem of his goodness. The first cause therefore
of these virtues, or whatsoever you will call them, Idea, or Original, must needs
be the absolute example of God the Creator.

And we must not suppose, that his most excellent Majesty has proponed these
patterns unto us by chance or rashly, without purpose of this end; that it
should be to us as clear as the light ( Omnia diuinitatis esse plena) that all
things are full of his Divinity: seeing that a Sparrow lights not on the
ground without his will: And the poet said: God is in the midst of Beasts,
Men, Markets, and Sea.

And here I cannot contain my self from relating the words of Aristotle, for
I trust that no man will blame me, if I allege and write any thing truly and
fitly, although it be in another man's words: for it is not to be regarded who
says, but what is said or spoken.

Thus therefore he writes: Among those creatures which are less acceptable to
our senses, nature which is the common mother of all, has ordained many
delights and pleasures in them, for men which understand their cause or can
reason of their Natures liberally: for this thing is absurd and far from all
reason, that because we cannot look upon the images and upper faces of
creatures and natural things, painted and framed, without we also behold in
them the wit and Art of the Painter, and that therefore we can take less
pleasure in the work, for the Worke-mans sake.

For if we can attain to the true causes, we shall no less kiss and embrace
the contemplation of the very actions of natural things, with wonderful
diligence and alacrity: and for this cause it is a base thing to despise the
nature and constitution of the smaller and viler beasts, fit for Boys and
childish minds; for there is not any work of nature, wherein there is not some
wonderful thing, therefore that is true which Heraclitus said to them that
followed him unto a hot-house, wherein he sat to warm his body, and when he
perceived that they were afraid to come in, he cried out unto them, that they
should abstain and forbear to enter boldly, because Ne hinc quidem loco
desunt dij immortalis: That even in this place you shall find the immortal
Gods.

And this rule must be followed in looking into the nature of Beasts: for we
ought to enter into their consideration without fear or blushing, seeing the
operation of nature is every where very honest and beautiful, for therein is
nothing done inconsideratly, and without a true end, but all things advisedly
for a certain and determinat purpose, and this purpose does always contain both
goodness and honesty.

But if any man be so Barbarous, as to think that the beasts and such other,
creatures, cannot afford him any subject worthy of his contempaltion, then
let him think so of himself likewise; for what ignoble baseness is there in
blood, flesh, bones, veins, and such like? Does not the body of man consist
thereof? And then how abominable art thou to thy self, that do not rather
look into these which are so near of kind unto thee?

And I may add as much of them, that reason of matter without form, or use
form without matter, as of a house without the sides, or of a vessel without
the best part; and and so is he that looks upon one part of nature and not
the whole: or on those things which cannot be severed from the substance, Thus
far Aristotle, whose words I have expressed at large, because as we have
borrowed all his substance, and inserted it into our discourse, so I thought it
not good to omit his preface.

Seeing these things are thus, we cannot but think that every story of a
beast is like a several Hymn, to praise the Divine wisdom and goodness, from
which as from a pure euer-springing-fountaine, proceed and flow all good,
beautiful, and wise actions: First, thorough the heavenly spirits and degrees
of Angels and celestial bodies: afterward thorough the minds of men, beginning
at the highest, and so proceeding to the lowest, (for even in men the gifts
and graces of God differ,) and from men to other creatures that have life or
sense; as to plants and inanimate bodies, so as the inferiors do always so
compose themselves to the imitation of the superiors, even as their shadows
and resemblaunces.

And in these does Divinity descend, first to supernatural things, and then to
things natural: and we must turn sail and ascend first by things natural,
before we can attain and reach things supernatural. In the mean time
Divinity it self remains one and the same, without change and alteration,
notwithstanding the manifold increasings and decreasings of all these
creatures, which it uses but as Glasses and Organs; and according to the
diversity both of matter and form, it shines and appears in one and other
more or less, even as we see in our own bodies, whose soul is disseminated
into every part and member, yet is there a more lively representation thereof
in one part and member, then in another, and the faculties more visibly and
sensibly appear in the upper then in the nether parts; But yet with this
difference, that the soul is so joined to the body, as with a kind of Sympathy
it suffers harm and joy with the subject wherein it is circumscribed, but
none of these things do happen to the Divinity: for it is so communicated to
creatures, as it neither is any part or matter, or form of them; nor yet can
be affected by any thing the creature suffers, nor yet included in the
creature; but yet is in all, and over all, and without all, and above all,
compassing, filling, and surpassing heaven and earth: infinite and impossible,
and concluding the whole World, visible and invisible.

And truly these things surpass all the wit of man, for we are not able with
thought, and much less with words, to express it, and yet we ought not to be
deterred for any cause from the consideration and contemplation thereof, but
rather after we have waded in the same, with all humility to acknowledge his
power, and to view all the helps for our infirmitimes: to admire his wisdom,
and endeavor thereby to amend our ignorance and increase our knowledge: and in
conclusion, to beat down our pride and malice, by praising and extolling his
grace and goodness. For being thus affected and conversant, in beholding these
nether and backer parts of God, confessing with thanks giving that all these
things do proceed from his Divinity, we cannot stay but ascend up higher,
to the worker himself, using all things in this life but as Pricks and
Spurs, for occasion and admonitions to think upon and reverence the prime
Author.

For we have continual need in this World to be put in mind and incited to
the study and contemplation of heavenly things: and so we shall leave all
these things behind us after this mortal life ended, and by the help of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who by his only death has prepared for us a
way to the kingdom of ineffable glory, where we shall partake with the
forepartes, and most clear revelation of the unspeakable majesty of God for
this is the end of our life, for which we were created, and also the scope and
conclusion of all natural knowledge of the works of God.

And least that any man should think that these things are ours, or the
heathen Phylosphers sayings, and cannot be defended out of the sacred and
supreme Testimony of holy Scriptures, I will also add some few sayings
recorded in the book of God. First of all therefore, when in the beginning of
the World God was about to create man, who was to use al things, and to behold
them in this World as it were in a Theater, he created all kind of Beasts and
creatures before man, that he might bring him into a house furnished and
adorned with all things necessary and delectable: Afterward he brought into
his presence all the creatures to be named by him, which the Scripture
records for excellency sake, (for it is no doubt but he named all things
that should continue to the Worlds end) yet expressly there is no mention but
of living creatures, as Fishes, Fowls, Cattle, and creeping things; that so
they might be submitted and vassalaged to his Empire, authority, and
government: which thing least it should seem but a proud conjecture, it is
again repeated in the blessing that God pronounces to man and all his
posterity; and again after the flood unto Noah and his Childeren. Every beast
(says God) shall be afraid of you, both the Beasts of the earth, and the
Fowls of heaven, and what soever is bred in the earth, or brought forth in the
Sea; all are yours, whatsoever lives and moves it is permitted to you for
meat.

And before when the flood was at hand, God commanded Noah to suffer all
beasts that could not live in the Water to enter the Arc, and of Fowls and
clean Birds seven of a kind, of impure, couples; to the intent that as for man
they were at first created, and produced out of the earth, so he would that
man should concerue their kinds, without contempt of them that were unclean
beasts.

Furthermore in the book of Kings, we read of Solomon, that God gave him such
wisdom, that he excelled all the wise and learned men of the world, and among
other fruits and tokens of that wisdom there is remembered his parables three
thousand, his verses above five thousand, his History of plants from the high
Caedar, to the Hysope stalk, and lastly his discourse of Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, and creeping things. What is man (says David) that thou should so
remember him, or the son of man, that thou should visit him. Thou have set
him over the works of thy hands, and have set all things under his feet: Oxen
sheep, Fowls, Fishes, and whatsoever moves in the Waters. And the same King
and prophet in another place. Psalm. 148. Praise the Lord, Dragons and all
deepes, ye wild beasts and creeping creatures. But how can Beasts praise the
Lord? Or how could they understand the Prophets exhortation? Surely, therefore
we are commanded to praise God for them, confessing his goodness and wisdom
in all these beasts which he produced for the ornament of this present world.

And because of these creatures the works of God, the Apostle S. Paul in the
Epistle to the Romans, Chapt. 2. tells the Ethinckes that they are
inexcusable before God, for that they knew him by the creatures of his works,
and yet did not glorify him as God, neither were grateful: For the invisible
things of God, as his eternal power and wisdom are seen by the creation of
the World. And lastly in the History of Job. Chapter 38, 39. you shall find a large
discourse to Job from the Lords own mouth, concerning many beasts. And these
things may be spoken, concerning the excellency and dignity of the History of
beasts, whereunto I will add some examples of the most famous men and Kings of
the world, to show what account they made of this learning: and so I will
conclude this Praeface.

First what account hereof was made by Alexander the great, may be gathered by
that which Pliny writes, for he says, that he being enflamed with the desire
to know the beasts and natures of creatures, appointed Aristotle (that infinite
learned man) to write his books of creatures, commanding many thousands, both
in Asia and Graecia, which exercised Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, or that kept
Parkes, Herds of cattle, Fish Ponds, or any cages or other places and groves
for Birds, to be at the command of the said Aristotle if need were, to supply
his desires in the knowledge of beasts; So that whatsoever was known in the
whole world, might not be unknown to him: by whose helps (Pliny affirms,)
that he wrote first the volumes, which he says he had abridged, to show to
the World in a short view the fruits of those desires, of the most Noble
among all Kings.

When Aristotle had finished this story and offered the same to King Alexander,
he offered him for his pains four hundred tallents; saying that it was a
Kings gift to reward such a knowledge; wherein, beside other parts of learning,
Riding, Hunting, Hawking, and Fishing, which were Princely sportes were
deciphered. But if Alexander were now alive, he would wonder, that among
innumerable other princely bounties which he conferred and bestowed upon the
World, there should be none that so increased his honor and continues his
fame, as this one work, although it be contemned among many vulgar, base
minded men; for he overcame almost all the kingdoms of the world, and builded
great Cities, but his own kingdom soon after becam distracted, and rent in
four pieces, and so deuolued, one part to the Romans, and other parts to other
Kings, the Cities are either overthrown, or the names changed, or inhabited
by Barbarous people, altogether unlearned, that do not so much as now remember
or acknowledge who was there first founder.

Also there have perished the books of many writers that compiled his History,
and set forth his valiant acts and renowned fortunes, so that of many, there
scarce remains one or two. But the History of beasts and other creatures,
which was made at his cost and charges, has run through many ages and been
preserved for a thousand and nine hundred years, to the great glory and
commendation both of the King, and the writer Aristotle.

And he is not more honored for his liberality toward the Philosopher for his
work among posterity, but also the fruit and vtilitye thereof to all ages,
has been greater then any that arose from the kingdoms that he got, or the
battles that he wan; for how can posterity account that beneficial to them,
which the men of that age found by experience to be so hurtful and full of
calamity?

Many thousands of men perished only for the pleasure of one ALEXANDERS
ambitious desire of raygning, many Commonwealths were changed, Regions and
countries wasted, and many public and private miseries followed, as is usual
where war ouerturneth kingdoms. Therefore I say again, he never did any
thing in all his life, whereby he wan so great fame and renown, then by being
first of all the occasion to Aristotle, to undertake the labor, and then
afterward a liberal rewarder thereof.

Petrus Gillius writes, that all the stories of creatures were either compiled
by Kings, or else dedicated to Kings; for to omit others who were diligent in
herds, and curious enquirers into the natures of beasts, Iuba, Hieron,
Attalus, Philometor, and Archelaus, wrote many things of the force and nature
of creatures. Opp^anus Anazarbensis (a most learned Poet) when he had finished
his poems of the creatures, he dedicated them to Antoninus, the Son of the
Emperor Seuerus; for which, he was bidden to ask what he would: and whereas
he was but a banished man, he asked liberty to dwell again at home in his own
Country, which he not only obtained, but also received for every verse a piece
of Gold worth a Noble, and there were in his two poems, about five thousand and
eight hundred verses: for which cause the learned Poet in joy of such a
reward, wrote his verses in Gold, because he said he would have it worthily
called a Golden Poem. Of this kind he wrote two, one of hunting, and another of
fishing.

C. Plinius Secundus wrote a story of the World, wherein he writes but
briefly of all things in the World, and yet largely and copiously of plants
and beasts, and so dedicated it to the Emperor Vespasian, for which he was
always dear and familiar unto him. Auicen being an excellent Physician and a
counselor of estate to Vzirus a King of Persia, for which dignity many called
him a Prince, yet he disdained not to write of beasts, and to interpret
Aristotle in many of those books. And this is no marvel that so many of the
ancientes did thus magnify the knowledge of all kinds of creatures, seeing as
Varro writes, they were almost all Sheapheards, Goate-heardes, Neat-heards,
and therefore they said that their flocks had Golden fleeces, for the commodity
they found in them, as Atreus at Argos, and Aeetes at C^lchos. Who is he but he
knows that the Roman people had their original from Sheapheards? Who knows
not that Faustulus the Nurse of Romulus and Remus, was a Sheapheard? And this
was an argument hereof, because that they builded their city for Sheapheards,
that they appointed amercements by Oxen and Sheep, and that they stamped their
Money with such pictures: and how many names are there among the Romans derived
from cattle and sheep, as Ouinius, Caprillus, Equitius, Taurus, and sur-names
also, as Annij, Caprae, Statilij Tauri, and Pomponij Vituli.

We read in holy scripture that Abraham was only rich in cattle, and that
King David did keep his fathers flock, and hereunto also belongs, that the
most wise and great men among the ancients were students in Anatomy, and the
dissection of parts of men's bodies, instituting children therein from their
first learning of letters; Now no man think that they fetched this knowledge
from the parts of men's bodies at the beginning, but from beasts, as Dogs,
Apes, Swine, and such other, wherewithal they were exercised as in rudiments
and grounds, that they might be more prompt, ready, and experienced in the
bodies of men. And among other Marcus the Roman Emperor was most skillful and
studious in this science of Anatomy, and the Egyptian Kings did the like with
their own hands. Boethus, and Paulus Sergius, two Roman Consuls, and other
principal men, were auditors to Galen. Thus far Conradus Gesner. In the next
Epistle he discourses to the reader of his method and order observed in his
books, and also of other necessary things belonging to this History, which I
have thought good also to insert into this place.

CONRADVS GESNERVS to the Reader.
I Have now sufficiently in my Epistle Dedicatory expressed by what occasion I
came unto this work, how much I have labored in it, to show what fruits may
be had out of it, and with how great study, both Kings, and Princes, as also
many great and most learned men have reverenced the history of Creatures; the
rest of which, I have thought good to impart unto the Reader in the beginning
of my work, which I will severally propose: neither did it becomme to be more
large in a dedication, being made unto the principallest men of our
Commonwealth. And because the greatness of the Book before it be read of any
man, may seem to blame me to be too tedious, I will excuse it before I entreat
of anything.

Therefore first of all it is no marvel though it be a great volume, in which
I have labored to insert with diligent study, the writings of all men
concerning all Foure-footed-liuing-beasts: and also the sayings of old and
later Philosophers, Physicians, Gramarians, Poets, Hystorians; and lastly of
all kind of Authors: not only of those which have set forth their works in
Latin, or Greek, but of every one also which have set down their works in
Germany, France, Italy, and England: And most diligently of the sayings of
those which have written something of purpose concerning living creatures, but
with the lesser care of other, which have only in the mean time remembered
some sayings of the same, as Hystorians, and Poets.

I have put down also many proper observations, and have gathred together many
things, now and then by asking questions, without reproach of any man, learned
or unlearned, Citizens, or strangers, Hunters, Fishers, Fawkconers,
Shepherds, and all kind of men. Also I have not known any thing out of the
writings of learned men, of many Nations, which they have given to me, but I
have expressed the same. The forms also of every living creature in this work,
have increased the volume, but chiefly the first Book (which is al
Foure-footed-beastes living alike) has out of measure increased it, because
this kind of living creature, may be more familiarly known, and more profitable
to man, chiefly to those of our Nation or Country: And also many have written
little and reasonable books of each of them, as the horse-leaches of horses,
in Greek and Latin, and the later writers in other languages, and so forth.

Also many have declared diverse things concerning Dogs, and the bringers up
also of cattle, and herds of Beasts, Goats, Sheep, and Sowes, have pronounced
many country observations, both in Greek and Latin. Some man may happen to
say, that I ought not to make a Hystory out of all Books, but only from the
best; but I will not despise the writings of any man, seeing there is made no
book so bad, from whence there cannot be some good sentence gathered out, if
any man do apply his wit thereto. Therefore although I have not ouer-skipped
any kind of writer, yet I did it not rashly, for I have picked out no few
observations of good moment from barbarous and obscure writers in diverse
languages, so that I would not be judged a negligent person to give credit to
every thing, nor arrogant or vnmoddest, to despise the studies or labors of any
man.

Those things truly which I thought were false or any way absurd, I either
altogether omitted them, or so placed as I may convict them: or if at any time
I have not done it, it was either thorough lack of knowledge, or for some
other cause, which fault I think is very seldom committed, (except it be in
those things which do belong to Physic, where we have related very often
many things both false and s^perstitious, as happily an Amulet or preseruative
against enchauntment is, and many other things which are of the same kind, that
the good sayings of learned men may be easily known) of the name of the
Author, and as much of every thing as shall be thought worthy to be believed,
let the Reader judge, for I do not promise my own Authority every where, but
am satisfied to recite the words and sentences of other writers. Wherefore I
have been very diligent, least at any time I should omit the name of an
Author, although it were in small matters, and also those which were commonly
known, because there should remain no doubt or scruple of any thing: The
words also and sayings of every Author, shall be compact together, if any man
should be desirous to imitate or follow them.

Therefore I have been more copious, that I might not only profit in the
knowledge of words, but also have sufficiently ministered a work, or writing of
words and speeches, for those which are desirous either to dispute, or write an
Oration either in Greek or Latin.

But it could not be done more commodiously, that all things might be written
purely in Latin, seeing that I have recited almost in the same words certain
things taken out of those which were rude or barbarous; chiefly because if any
thing should be obscure or doubtful: but the rest which were written of them,
I have altered to a moderate use of the Latin tongue; not because I could not
do it better, but rather because such an elocution does seem to adorn such
Authors. But those sentences which I have writ or coppied out of good and
Latin Authors, I have not altered any thing of them.

And truly of my own style, or manner of writing, I can say no other then
this, that I have had a great care, although I could not pronounce it eligantly
and wisely, nor after the imitation of the ancient writers, notwithstanding I
have pronounced it competently, and plainly in Latin. Neither was it
idleness to frame such a style or manner of writing, seeing that I was most of
al busied in those things, as well mutable as innumerable and in a manner I have
written those things which if they had been gathered together I had put to
press many years before.

The cause why I did neglect it was the fear least any thing should be left
out, and not very much to seek more matter, but for the most part the
inscription was the cause, and the order and care that I had, least any thing,
should be repeated in vain: Moreover also because that the Argument did not
require a grave or excellent manner of style or speech, but a manifest and mean
style, and most commonly a Gramarian, that is to say, fit for interpretation.

For I would not only recite the words of the Authors, but oftentimes also
where it was needful, I did add thereto the exposition or declaration; so
that this volume may not only be a history of living creatures, but also an
exposition of the place of al those which have written something of living
creatures. For those which do undertake to make any book, must chiefly beware
of two things, that the words and meaning of the Author be declared and put
together like places of the rest, the latter whereof I have accomplished in
this work by great labor, because the sayings both of other Authors, as well
as of one, concerning the same matter in diverse places are compiled together,
and it would be a matter of less value to declare in more words the words of
the Authors, when they among themselves have so diligently gathered together
the places, that they must bring them to mutual light.

Notwithstanding if so be that it seems a work to declare the words and
sentences of the Authors; I have done it for my own help, and for others,
and also in causes comprehended in other sentences as they so call them, yet it
does happen that I am freed by their nature from too dark a style, from every
affectation or curious desire, of that thing which nature has not given, I
leave that care to those with whom words rather then matter are entertained.

But that I may repeat more copiouslie in few words their sayings, that this
book may But that I may repeat more copiously in few words their sayings that
this book may not be to large, therefore first of all I will entreat of that
which is perfected by a number of Authors, and afterward of that which I have
sundry times added thereto, because of my own declaration.

This book might be much shorter, if I had not touched the love of learning,
in which I confess I have been too tedious and although this my diligence may
be unprofitable to some, yet I hope it will be pleasant and acceptable to the
Grammarians and others, but truly it has cost me great labor and many
nights watching. I call that the love of learning whatsoever it is, that does
belong to a Grammarian, and diversities of languages, proverbs, or common
sayings, semblables, tales, or fables, wherein brute Beasts are fained to
speak, the sayings of Poets, and lastly that which does belong rather to
words, then to the matters themselves.

This and such like I have done for the most part, The Reader must note that
all th^se following are spoken of his latin discorse
having made a several Chapter of those ^^nges which belong to every living
creature, even to the eight or last Treatise, yet notwithstanding sometimes
they have got in by stealth in the former Chapters, partly because I was
invited by a small occasion, and with a certain desire of the same, to change
my purposes and partly because that the light of the Authors should seem to
bring profit to the places fitly recited or openly read, that else where, as
well as in the second chapter, I have oftentimes also alleged somewhat more of
Grammarians, Physicians, and other matters.

In the third Chapter wherein I did entreat of the meats and diseases of
living creatures, I oftentimes turned more copiously to entreat of the plants
by the which they were wholesomely nourished, or happily by the strength of the
taste of them were hurt, or else killed: and after the same manner also in the
first Chapter if there were any such roots that the living creatures should
perish by them thrown by the Hunters with some meat. But I have professed and
confessed in that love of learning, that I was wont to name those plants, and
sometimes to write of many things which have had their name after a certain
manner from some living creature.

The seventh Chapter entreats of the remedies of living creatures, and of
curing the hurts which they were wont to receive by biting, or by a stroke, or
by eating of meat. I do very often esteem much of many things written in the
desire of dignifieng medicinal matters. It is seen where the places of
Authors being depraved and renewed, have allowed occasion of digressing. To be
short, wheresoever any rare thing, or that which is declared to others did
offer it self, which being unfolded should seem to dignifie and honor common
learning, I have been alured contrary to my institution, for the declaring
thereof: For when as being a child I was educated in the Greek and Latin
studies of Gramer and conference, and as yet being a young man had begun to
profit therein: until grown unto full age, I came to riper profession of
Philosophy, especially natural and Medicinal, (although out of the same I have
not a little increased my love unto learning, and made it more firm and
solid, and very greedily have exercised my self in reading of diverse matters)
I could do somewhat more in the explications of matters and sayings, then I
persuaded my self, the rude multitude would regard, especially in the age of
inferior students, and in the studies of those which are busied in other
matters. Wherefore I have written more freely and often more copiously of many
things. I have reprehended the ancient and the later (not with any intent to
obscure others, and advantage my own,) but sincerly and simply, as much as in
me lies that I might advance common studies. But if no man do disalow their
books (whom in no order but as any thing which comes into their minds;)
expound the words and sayings of diverse Authors in both tongues, as among
ancient Writers, Macrobius, Gillius, Cassidorus, and whosoever have written
diverse things, (many whereof I have declared in the second part of my
Bybliotheca:) and amongst the latter many others, as most especially Guilielmus
Budaeus, Coelius Rhodiginus and Chalcagninus, Polittanus, Erasmus Rotorodamus,
etc. but as it were best of all by deserts, whatsoever any good man or meanly
learned does think of them.

I do not see by what right this our labor may be dispraised, wherein many
things truly spoken of by others, but disordredly, many things by me being
first delivered, I have so orderd and disposed that in a manner every thing may
be set in his own proper place. As for all the chapters which we have set down
are not only of them, but every chapter has his several part and certain
order both the former and the latter, one Method and that continual of the
middle part being throughout the whole work. And because sometime it did
happen that something might seem to be referred out of those, which I had
directed into diverse other places, least I should be too tedious in repeating
the same, and therefore for the most part I remitted it from one place, to one
Author; unless all the story might be repeated in few words.

These and certain other things (as the words of diverse Authors, and variety
of style) an unequal, interrupted and a cumbersome work, (as I may so call it)
and (as some perchance will object they have stored it alike with dissolute
marks or purposes: which fault though I should understand, I have
notwithstanding refused to commit, whiles that it should so profit: but this
shall be, (howsoever blemished it is) much less, if any may guess with
himself that I have composed al these things not by that order that they should
be known by continual seriousness of reading of studious men: but so to have
tempered them that whatsoever any man shall desire concerning any beast, that
being presently found he may read it by it self, and well understand it.
Therefore if any man will use this work only at seasonable times, who has
used dictionaries and such like common books, he shall be able to do these
things profitably but if he shall not remember the order in the prescribed
manner, let him take counsel of the table Alphabeticall, which we will
publish in the end of this our work, but if nothing prevail, in the mean
time as we are all subject to Censure through the Readers infirmity, the same
in a manner, Pliny in the History of nature has ordained: for in his Praeface
to Vespasian he writes; because we must says he) spare your labors for the
common good, what may be contained in all my Books, I have joined to this
Epistle, and have done my greatest endeavor with the diligentest care, that thou
should have these Books not to be read over again, and thou by this shall
be the occasion that other may not read them over again: but as every one
shall desire any thing, that he may only seek that, and know in what place he
may find it, Valerius Soranus did this before me in his books which he
inscribed Epopcido^ These things Pliny.

They which desire to profit in this Art of Grammar, and to get the use of some
tongue unto themselves, who with a compounded Method (as they call it) deliver
their art from letters and sillables, to the sayings, and eight parts of
speech, and last of all speech it self, and having come unto the Sintaxis,
does desire the knowledge of art, in the mean time notwithstanding he does not
neglect the profit of Lexicons (wherein all sayings and speeches are numbered,
far otherwise then in the precepts of art, where neither all things severally,
nor in any good order are rehearsed) not that from the beginning he may read
through the end, which would be a work more laboursome then profitable, but
that he may ask counsel of them in due season.

In like manner he that is desirous to know the History of beasts, and will
read it through with continual seriousness, let him require the same of
Aristotle, and of other likewise that have written, and let him use our volume
as a Lexicon, or as my own Onomasticon. For it is not unknown unto me that
Aristotle does teach in his book, entitled the parts of beasts, that it
makes much (to the description of Philosophy) and that it is more learned so
to write concerning beasts, that as well the parts, as the effects might also
be handled common to more, their History being unfolded by certain common
places: First by prosecuting those things which are most common, and somewhat
unto things that are less common lastly by loking back and descending into
those things, which only shall be proper unto certain kinds and vulgar
shapes: for if in all beasts any man would seuerrally consider the parts and
effects, there will many things fall out by the way to be considered, and
inquired after, which (he says) will be very absurd, and also prove too
tedious. This discommodity, although I should well understand, yet I would
notwitstanding severally prosecute the History of beasts, which thing is to be
handled in our time wherein the names of very many are not understood, I should
judge would be more profitable, and I should think it less absurd, that
somethings should more often be sought after, being ordained for the order of
the same, that this work might rather serve for inuestigation then continual
reading: I have not notwithstanding even in all Beasts placed every thing which
is incident to every kind, both for as much as certain things are known to
some men, as most common parts of Foure-footed-Beastes, as also if any man
shall doubt in some things, he may refer himself into the places of
Aristotle, wherein those things are handled generally: and perhaps we also at
sometime or other will according to the kinds and shapes of Foure-footed-Beastes
discourse of somewhat more particular.

And because I had determined, it was more commodious for a History to be made
by us concerning all Beasts, even in that name or title which not Phisically,
or only Philosophically, but Medicinally, and also grammatically concerning
one thing: Neither does it want the exampls of learnedmen, for scarce the one
or the other as Theophrastus and Ruellius have delivered any thing concerning
plants, according to that Method, which in common parts and effects has
manifested all plants of the earth, but very many have described several
plants severally, and in times past out of our age (especially Physicians)
Ruellius for the most part labored in both, (as Galen also) but only in
describing of aptness.

Indeed I confess, that I could be far more brief in many more things
(although my purpose remain) above all other things, even that exquisite
desire of my diligence had delighted me, when that same saying of Liuy came
into my mind, in a certain volume, beginning after this manner: Now sufficient
glory was gotten for him, and he could cease himself, unless his mind should
be daily fed with work, although (as Pliny says) the greater should the
reward be for the love of work (which better became him not to have composed
it to his own,) but to the glory of the Roman name, and not to have
perseuered only to please his own mind, but to have set forth the same to
the profit of the people of Rome.

I would have you judge, that I have not kept back or stayed my course in these
my labors, not only for favoring my self, or getting glory to my self,
(although Liuius did so) but rather to make the truth more plain pertaining to
Histories, or to the people of Rome: Notwithstanding I think that he spoke more
modestly, least if he should have spoken after that manner which Pliny does
require, he should be judged to have been more arrogant) as one which should
foretell any thing to the worthyest people of the whole World, or any thing of
the honor of the Conqueror of those Nations, he would say that they must come
from him. Likewise although this work (what soever it is) do not desire to be
done wholly for my self, but for the governors and rulers, of the commonwealth,
and to the governors of the university or Academy, which have favored me even
from a Child of their own liberality, and do still continue their favor unto
me, and do exhort me to finish those things which I have begun already: and if
there should arise any fame or renown from thence, it should chiefly light
upon them: Yet least I should be deceived, I willingly hold my peace, and the
rest I leave to judgment, whyther any thing may happen from this work so
praiseworthy and of excellent fame, and yet not unworthy of praise, for to
the Senate, and to the university I owe much time, with many names of worth to
those most excellent men of learning, and other different virtues.

But least happily I be held too tedious, while I excuse the largeness of the
work, although (by the way I have handled some other things all under one)
that I might show certain commodities arising from them, and also I might
excuse our style. I will proceed and go forward to the rest.

And although from our foresayings it may be sufficiently manifested of our
exceeding great labor, and also the greatness of the volume, as well as the
variety and difficulty of things, therein expressed, may boldly speak for me,
yet I will a^^e thereunto very many things if thereby the censures of learned
men do happen more reasonable, benign and favorable, and do advertise and
admonish me that I have offended at any time, I will subscribe and follow their
opinions, but for the Censures of unlearned I little regard. For I have
endeavored my self with great and painful labor, although they are not
correspondent in all things, that they may merit pardon: and (as he says) in
a great work it is thought lawful to break much sleep.

Pliny does write that he has finished his natural or lawful History from a
hundred of choice or curious Authors, and has added too very many matters,
which either they have not known, or afterward had been devised or invented
in their life time: neither do we doubt (says he) but that there are many
things which also we have ouerskipped.

I desire also that the same may be understood of this our volume, although it
is not only made ready and fit to me by a hundred Authors, but also by many
others as you may easily count or reckon by the Catalogue of them, which I have
also set down. But first of all what labor and pains it was to read all
things diligently and with judgment, afterward to take and choose things, to
reduce and restore them to their own orders again: and again confer and
compare them while you are writing the work, as if many should have said one
thing, being plainly expressed of Authors, and changed by other names: others
stealing privily by names suppressed.

But how hard and tedious a labor it is, so to confer the whole writings of
Authors, to reduce all of them as it were into one body, that nothing may be
omitted, nor any thing unadvisedly repeated, no man does understand, except he
be learned: truly this does so happen only in comparing or conferring two or
three books, but most of all in conferring of very many Books as we have
done: and that so diligently, as heareafter there shall be little need of
looking into other Authors concerning those matters. But he which will have
this volume ought to persuade himself that he has all things concerning
those matters written at large, that is to say, one book for a Library, one
more excellent then many others. When Peeter Gillius before us had done thus,
but in few Authors; the Graecians (says he) which have written concerning
Beasts, we have not only made Latins which was very easy, but also imitating
Dionysius Cassius who translated Mago, we allowed both order and judgment.

But I should more justly speak these things concerning our selves who have
followed an order far more commodious, and have conferred many more Writings
of Authors, both others (as I have already said) as also for all the most part
translated out of the Graecians, and from others, and from Gillius himself.

Therefore I have more often set down the Graecians sayings, where either the
interpreters did seem to err, or the words or locutions did contain some
rare or excellent things or peculiar to the matter. I have also translated many
my self, either that were not as yet translated, or that I would translate a
Grecian saying discretly, and then dispute the matter with the interpreter.
But of the Germans French, and Italians I have translated certain into Latin:
I have sustained much watchful labor in reading, gathring, conferring, and
writing over those works and stories many years: which truly what and how
many they have been, cannot easily be believed, unless of expert men:
although I cannot easily see any man should assay the like matter, to bring
into one uniform body all the sayings of all writers, as many as could be had
of one argument: for I have known certain men who out of many things have
written some, out of all, none. Wherefore I can say that of my labors which
Aristides spoke concerning the elegance of the City of Smyrna, which was, that
no man except he which shall see it will be drawn to believe it: That which
appertains to the style, although in the precedent sayings I have spoken
certain things incidently digressing from the matter, here I will very
privately and warily add some things.

Therefore I have used a mean phrase or speech, in no man's wisdom too fine
or curious, most chiefly for the causes above declared: For in those writings
wherein the knowledge of things is sought (as Massarius says in the like
argument) is not the comeliness of a famous or eloquent Oration, but to
express a sound and perfect truth. But such works are neither capable of wit,
as I may say with Pliny, which was otherwise very mean or moderate to use it:
neither do they allow of excess, either in Orations, or speeches, or
wonderful chances or adventures, or diverse events, or other pleasant things,
or in any delectable or friendly things. Let the nature of things be declared
in a barren or fruitelesse argument, that is to say the life of them, and this
was base also on his part, by putting to many things with rusticall and
strange denominations, yea also Barbarous, even with the Praeface of estimation
and reputation: And so far forth Plinius. But if that most learned man, and the
most eloquent by the judgment of all men, and which has drawn or sucked out
the cleanenesse or pureness of the Latin tongue with Milk, and the use of
other commodities, and whereupon the desire of wit might much encourage him,
being helped or pricked forward by Mecaenas his governor Vespasianus, (of the
penuriousnesse, and baseness of the phrase, almost in the like argument) does
desire, to frame or make an excuse so much the more warily should I do this for
many causes, which I will not express because I may not be to long. Wherefore
some things are repeated hear and there in, diverse places of this work, I
gave a reason even before, truly because the order appointed of us did so
require, and the division of chapters and parts in every one of them, that it
may not be written with negligence, but rather with exact, and curious
diligence.

But certain things are repeated sometimes in the same place, which may seem
to be beside the purpose being known or perceived; but if every man would
consider it distinctly, he would easily understand how little it wear either
in matter or words: for sometimes the peculiar or vulgar speech, or the
eloquency of words did cause that I should do so, that it might have that
which might be imitated in speaking, if any man would labor or endeavor,
either to speak or write any thing of the same matter. Parentheses also do
belong to the style as the Grammarians call them, which are very many every
wherein the whole work, and that for many causes: either because the reading or
gathering is variable or unlike, or the manner of writing did disagree, or
because our correction or others was added thereto, or that I might translate
it, or that I might fill or finish it if any thing should be wanting, or that I
might add thereunto that which might delight the eloquency thereof, or do
something peculiar to the matter present, if the Latin should seem not
sufficiently translated of them: And lastly simply to a more intelligible
understanding of those things with which they are mingled. As much as belongs
to the right form of writing, I have not always written the same terms, or
names after the same manner, but according to the Authors I have very oftentimes
changed, whose words I did rehearse or recite. This is of the style and
elocution.

That which do belong to these things, and to the truth and certainety of
them, I do not promise my credit in very many of them, but yet am well pleased
to put down the names of the Authors, with whom let those things remain. And
truly the greatest part of them do merit faith or credit, which are
fortified, or defended by the consent of many learned men, even now in many
ages, as also that in this favor or benefit, very many of the Authors named of
us, and happily some of them are repeated not with any great fruit or profit,
and yet are not to be misliked. Therefore it is more worthy to be believed,
if one matter may be spoken in the same words of many witnesses.

I confess that there are some vain glorious things, but they are not many,
(as Gillius says in his translation of Aelianus) which we have added or put to
this work, but they are recompensed, and amended with a great number of other
grave and learned translations: and as if Fathers and Grandfathers should
delight of a Mold in the joints or knuckle of their Children, that is to say,
Fools which do not weigh or value other men's works.

As for slanderers I do not care: for those men are the best as Cato declares,
which are skillful or experienced in true praise. Which thing if I have not
done to the full, and ample (also I used the same words which Massarius writ
in his translation of Fishes) let not my study be blamed which truly is most
vehement, and ardent in the same, because at this time I could do no more.

Let the indifferent Readers judge, how confused a matter I took upon me to
handle, neither did I ever think that I should have brought it to so good a
pass. But how much before time we have done in helping or succoring good Arts,
let others also do as much, which afterward have clattered out of measure.
For neither will we bear an evil discontented mind, if they bring their
helps or labors of other skillful men, to this exceeding great and hard
labor which we have undertaken, and shall go beyond or excel us.

They report that Paedarotus that singular or excellent man, who when he was
not chosen in the number of three hundred men, which order did show or
represent dignity or estimation among the Lacedaemonians, went away merry and
laughing, and being called back again of Ephorus the Historian, being
demanded why he laughed, answered: because truly I rejoiced that our city
had 3. hundred Citizens better learned then my self. Furthermore although I
have manifested hitherto almost all the writings of al things concerning
Foure-footed-Beastes which have come to my hands, and have comprehended or
compassed them in our works or Stories: Notwithstanding for all that, I
desired to have some superfluous or unprofitable Books heareafter of other
things, but I never thought I should have brought it pass; for it is equity
and reason that all things should stand in their proper place and dignity, that
all may profit which will, which thing I do altogether desire.

For somethings for antiquity sake do deserve, to be warily observed, other
some also for their Phylosophicall Method, and Method partaining to Logic, or
some matter differing from ours; othersome for eloqution, and othersome for all
these causes, wherefore we have principally observed the Graecians, favoring
their language and speech. There are some which have published (says Gillius)
in their writings all the nature which is comprehended or contained in Four
footed-Beastes, as Aristotle, Pliny, and other ancient Writers: Moreover the
controversy or labor of whom, I dare not say was manifestly finished or
performed, although many excellent things were begun of them concerning
foure-footed-Beasts. For truly me thinks that such scrupelous Authors have
perfectly distinguished so many things of the signification and nature of
Foure-footed-Beastes, that there is left no more room in any place, for idle
or negligent men to make a new description or invention. It is manifest also
that Aristarchus and Solinus did no other thing in two and forty year, then
mark and consider the manner and fashion of them, and so committed them to
writing.

It is a hard thing (as I may speak with Pliny) to offer or commit nouelty to
old or ancient things, and to give authority to things not seen before, and
to give credit to things decayed or grown out of use, and to bring to light
obscure or difficult things, and to give reputation to things full of
disdain, and credit to things doubtful: but to give credit to the nature of
all things, and all things belonging to their nature.

Therefore I have not desired to have followed altogether that which is
excellent and sumptuous. Truly the peculiar cause of them is in men's desires,
who because they would please every one, have esteemed or set more by
painfulness passed over and allowed, then to help forward vtility or
commodity newly found out. For what is more commendable from all the labor of
learning, then to undertake or enterprise so bountiful and commendable a
charge, or business, then of renewing old and ancient things which were
forgotten, or rather to restore things from Death, or ruin which were sold
thereto, and to restore the names of things, and things by their names? Great
favor ought to be given to those also which do regard the common ways, and
do spread, stengthen, defend, cleanse, expound, declare, pollish, or finish,
make perfect, and lastly do so rule and train them, that they may be tractable
to all trauelers thereby; and to all labering beasts whatsoever they are, whose
helps we use in Carts, or Wagons, and may perform and accomplish them
without danger, or any impediment or hinderance, although they cannot sustain
or bear all hindrances, yet almost the greater part of them. Neither do they
deserve little praise or commendations in learning, which have so polished or
trimmed up some work undertaken for public profit, that to the rest or
remnant in the same argument, there shall be no complaint or little at all
hereafter, of the difficulty thereof, which therefore if it be in my
instruction, I shall be very glad, seeing that I did desire to follow it: if
not, something that I have performed on the great part is, that the learned men
stirred up in this business by us, may not quit or absolve that which is left
behind.

Therefore most excellent and indifferent Reader, favor ye this labor some,
honest, pleasant, profitable, and variable work: and give the greatest thanks
to God, and I beseech you that if you proceed any further in this mortal life
because it does not profit to be idle, that you rather bestow some time in
the searching out of nature, and that you make a gratfull Solemnization and
setting forth of Gods works before any other things, which either labor or
immoderate desire may set out to our exercises and endeavors, we may be
exercised also in holiness and Godliness, and may communicate and consvlt
things requisite, with great labor and diligence to the Ages to come.
Therefore in the mean time I beseech all good and painful men, that if there
be any of them which have something to the finishing up of this work, to bring
it, although it be of never so little moment, as are the shapes and forms of
every kind of Foure-footed-Beastes, or Historyes, that is to say; whatsoever
it is that can lead us more amply to know the nature of them: or blaming those
things in which we have erred, which truly I which I am the man think there
are many, yet I do not doubt but that they may wittily and favorably
communicate with ours, and may as it were make famous this public work,
being placed in the middle, which thing also is profitable and excellent to
them, and delectable to me, and continually to all learned men heareafter.
That there has been a partaker, or companion of this excellent work he shall
be in advancement.

If I shall be admonished of my error in few things, nay only in one thing, I
presently will correct it without envy or malice: or will put thereto some new
matter, either to the second volume of the rest of Foure-footed-Beasts, or
otherwise in the addition: And least I should seem ungrateful to those which
have contributed or bestowed something to this, contrary to the love which I
should always bear to them, if no other benefit shall be rendered to them, as
our estate is but mean, yet at leastwise I will declare my mind in a friendly
commemoration to a number of their names in their Catalogue, by whom I have
profited.

But if any, either through a destitute or forsaken occasion, or for any other
cause or disposition, are forced to write or send something to us, and also
shall desire publicly to correct some of our errors which we have committed,
which I know many can do gravely, and also learnedly, and I desire that they
may do it, and entreat of them that they write learnedly and modestly, and to
do it so, that the common wealth pertaining to learning, may rather advance and
premote him, then either to wrong his credit or renown, or any cause of
blaming or rebuking us, as it becomes men of courage, truly to see into it.
I am always ready to amend my own, from any just correction or blame, but not
deprive any man of his own praise. For I hope (without offense be it spoken
here) that this our labor or pains shall remain to the worlds end, not
through the merit or desert of our learning, (which is but small) but through
our diligence, which has joined together most diligently and exactly, so many
and great labors and stories, from a number of Authors, as it were into one
treasury or Storehouse.

Farewell
TO THE LEARNED Readers.
AFter I had expressed these two Epistles of Conradus Gesner* in the former
whereof, he declares to the Statesmen of Zuricke the vtility of the story,
and in the latter his excuses or reasons of his method in his latter works: I
thought good also to follow him in his Apology of the Authors, out of whose
writings he had taken any part of his story: Although I have not nor could not
observe his words, method, form, and matter in all things in this my English
collection, not only because his purpose was to gather all that had been
written of every beast, and to leave the same (as he professes) like a
Dictionary, for the private use of learned men, but also because my purpose
was, to show to every plain and honest man, the wonderful works of God in
every beast in his vulgar toongue, and give occasion to my loving friends and
Countrymen, to add of themselves, or else to help me with their own
observations upon these stories: yet forasmuch as I must acknowledge him my
Author, by the help of whose eyes I have seen almost all that I have wrote,
I will say as he does out of Plinius Secundus, Est enim benignum vt arbitror
and plenum ingenui pudoris, fateri per quos profeceris non vt plerique quos
attigi, fecerunt. That is, It is a sign of a good nature replenished with all
modesty; to confess the Authors of all ones profit, and not to do as many
have done, into whose writings I have looked, for by comparing them to the
ancient, I found that they had translated many things word for word, and
never named them truly: indeed it is a sign of a vile and ill mind or wit,
rather to adventure to be taken with theft, then to pay that which was lent
him, although he know usury will not be required.

Therefore we will confess all to be other men's, and begin with the
Catalogue of such Writers as he names, and has already expressed; and because
I know none but learned and studious men will look after them, I will after
his manner express them in the Latin, and save the labor of translation:
Adding thereunto such Authors as I have inserted into this story, either
English or Foreign: And whereas I have taken many things out of those Writers
named by him which he omitted, I will not derogate from his labor, but suffer
them to go as they were; and therefore to begin with Conradus Gesner, I will
say of him, as was said by him of another: Nulla ferent tantum saecula futura
v^rum, and the residue follow Alphabetically.

The Catalogue of the Authors which have wrote of Beasts
HEBREW AVTHORS.
VEtus Testamentum cum annotationibus Seb. Munsteri. Eiusdem Munsteri
Dictionaria, Hebraicolatinum, and quadrilingue. Epistola presbyteri Ioannis, vt
vocant, hoc est Aethiopiae regis ad Pontificem Romans de rebis Aethiopicis.
Arabicos, hoc est ex Arabica lingua translatos, nominabo inferius inter
obscuros.
GREEK AVTHORS.
Actuarij liber de Serpentibus and venenis, breuiter ex Dioscoride contractus
est. Ada mantij Physiognomica. Aescuyli tragoediae. Aetij non omnia, sed
pleraque euolui and excerpsi: tegrum vero librum 13. qui est de venenis and
venenatis animalibus. Aeliani historia animalium, Petro Gillio interpret, cum
eiusde^ additionib. ex Oppia-Plutarcho, Porphyrio, and Helidorio, vt libri
titulas habet. Sic autem Aeliani omnia adiecta su^t, vt nihil ad rem pertinens
omit teretur: nam si quando stilus luxuriari videbatur, and leuiter euagari,
aut hominem cum brutis conferendo reprehendere, (quod saepius facit, ut qui
professione rhetor fuerit) plerunque contraximus. Pius^em variae historiae
libri 14. Pius^em de instruendis aciebus liber. Alexa^dri Magni epistola ad
Aristotelem derebus Indicus Cornelio Nepote interpret. Alexandri
Aphrodisiensis problematum libri 2 Alexander Trallianus medicus. Ammonicus de
differentijs vocum. Annomus Periplus. Apollonij Argonautica, cum Scholijs.
Apostolij Byzantij paroemiae. Appianus historicus. Aratus, cum Scholijs.
Arislides rhetor. Aristophanis comoediae, cum Scholijs. Aristotelis libri
integri, quod particulares historias ateinet, De historia, de generatione and
de partibus animalium. Physiognomica. De mirabilibus. De coloribus. Parua
naturalia, vt voc^nt. Problemata. In c^teris libris, aut nullam aut rarissimum
vllius animantis nomen occurret Michaelis Ephesij Scholiain libros, de
generatione, quae Ioannis Philoponi nomine publica ta sunt. Ni^hus scribit
Michaelis Ephesij Scholia in libros de generatione extare, expositionem non
extare. Ari^ni Periplus Euxini Ponti. Eiusdem Periplus rubri maris. Eiusdem de
rebus gestis Alexandri historiae. Eiusdem Indica. Athenaei Dipnosophistae.
Biblia sacra, hoc est vetus and mouu^ Testamentum Graecae. Callimachi poemata
quaedam. Cl. Galeni libri: alij quide^ multi sparsim a nobis cogniti: integri
vero propter animalium historiam, qui sequuntur. Libri de simplicium,
facultatibus. De antidotis. De theri^c^ ad Pis^nem. De cibis honi (...)
facultati^^ (...) libritros, quoru^ (...), Cu^ ars medica circa nullas (...).
Secundus^ad Solonem, (...) Tortius ^^ieno a^s^^iptus incipit: (...). (...)
^isulus ^is^oricus. ^^s ^tius de vitis philosophorum. Dion historicus.
Dionisyus Afer de situ orbis, and Eustathius interpretes. Dioscorides.
Epigramatum Graecorum authors diuersi. Epistolarum Graecarum authors diuersi,
quos Aldus olim vno volumine coniunxit. Etymologicon. Euripidis tragoediae.
Eustathius in priores quinque Iliadis libros. Geoponicorum, id est, de re
rustica ad Constantinum Caesarem librorum authors di uersi. Heliodori
Aethiopicae historiae libri december. Heraclidis discriptiones Rerum pub. Heroditi
historiae. Hesiodi poemata, cum Scholijs. Hesychij Lexicon. Hippiatri Graeci,
Absyrtus, Hierocles, Pelagonius and alij vno volumine coniuncti. Hippocrates:
praecipue libri de natura muliebri, de morbis muliebribus, de internis
affectionibus. Homerus, cum Scholijs. Josephus. Ioannis Tzetzae varia historia.
Julius Pollux. Lucianus. Lycophron cum Scholiaste. Nicandri Theriaca and
Alexipharmaca, cum Scholijs. Nicolai Myrepsi medicamenta composita secundum
genera, Leonhardo Fuchsio interpret. Oppiani libri de piscibus, and de
venatione. In eiusdem libros de aucupio paraphrasis Orpheus. Ori vel Hori
Hieroglyphica. Palaephatus de fabulis. Paulus Aegineta medicus Succidanea cum
eiusdem, and cum Galeni operibus con^ungi solita. Pausaniae libri de regionibus
Graeciae. Philes qui de animalibus senarios iambicos con didit, omnia ab
Aeliano mutuatus. Philostrati Icones. Eius^em libri de vita Apollonij.
Phurnutus de dijs. Pindarus cum Scholijs. Plato. Plutarchi vitae, and alij
varij libelli integri vero. Vtrum terrestria aut aquatilia animalia sint
sapientiora. Gryllus, vel quod bruta ratione vtantur. Liber de Iside and
Osiride. Causae naturales. Polyaeni strategemata. Polybius historicus.
Procopius Gazaeus sophista in octateuchum vteris Testamenti. Q. Calaber poeta.
Theophrasti opera. Theocritus. Xenophontis opera diuersa. De venatione. De re
equestri. Hipparchi^us.
LATIN AVTHORS.
Ael. Lampridius. Ael. Spartinus. Alb. Tibullus. Ammianus Marcellinus. Aulus
Gellius. Aulus Persius. Aur. Cornelius Celsus. Cael. Apicius de re culinaria.
C. Iul Caesar. C. Julius Solinus. C. Plinii Secundi Historia mundi. C.
Suetonius Tranquillus. C. Val. Catullus. Decius Ausonius. Fl. Vegetius Renatus
de re militari. Eiusdem Mulomedicina. Fl. Vopiscus historicus. Gratii liber de
venatione. Iul. Capitolinus historicus. Iunius Iunenalis poeta Satyricus. L.
Annaeus Seneca. L. Apuleius. L. Iunius. Moderatus Collumela de re rust. and
hortensi. Macrobius Ambrosius Aur. Marcellus medicus Empiricus, quem
simpliciter Marcelli nomine citato inter remedia ex animalibus intelligi volo,
non Marcellum Vergilium illum nostri seculi qui Dioscoridem transtulit, and
annotamentis illustrauit. M. Actius Plautus Comicus. M. Annei Lucani Pharsalia.
M. Aurelii Olympii Nemesiani poetae de venatione liber. M. Cato de re rust. M.
Manilii Astronomicon libri. M. Terentius Varro de re rust. Idem de lingua Lat.
M. Valerii Martialis epigrammata. M. Vitruu^us de architectura. Nonius
Marcellus de lingua Lat. Palladius de re rust. Pomponius Mela. P. Vergilii
Maronis Bucolica and Aeneis. Eiusdem Georgica. P. Ouidit opera. Eidem falso ad
scripta, Philomela de vocibus animalium, and Pulex. Eiusdem Halieutica. Quintus
Horatius Flaccus. Q. Serenus Samonicus. Seruius in Virgilium. Sextus Platonicus
de remediis ex animalibus, Sexti Aurelii Propertii Elegiae. Sextus Pompeius
Festus de lingua Lat. Sexti Iulii Frontini Strategamata. Silius Italicus Poeta.
Statius Papinius Neapol Poeta. Titi Calphurnii Siculi Bucolica. T. Liuius
Historicus. Valerius Maximus. Aesculapius nescio quis, ex animalibus remedia
descripsit quae pleraque, eadem apud Sextum Platonicum reperio. Alberti Magni
de animalibus libri, innumeris erroribus inquinati, ita vt Niphus totidem fere
errores in esse sribat quot verba. Alexander quidam author obscurus, ab alijs
eiusdem farinae authoribus citatur, ipse non vidi: vt and Rodolphus in
Leuiticum. Arnoldus de Villa noua, in ijs quae de animalibus scribit, vt in
libro de theriaca, Arabum eorum ve interpretu^ tum nomina tum errores sequitur.
Bartolemaei Anglici de proprietatibus rerum libri. 19. Auerrois libros
Aristotelis de generatione and de partibus paraphrastice reddidit, licet meo
iudicio perperam interpretetur Niphus, Ego cum ex his scriptis nihil egregii
sperarem, neque apud nos reperirem. accersere nolui. vt neque Auicennae de
animalibus libros, in quibus pleraque omnia Aristotelis esse puto: and si quid
praeter illa adiectum est, in Alberti luc^brationibus, (quibus nos vsi sumus,)
contineri. Auicennae opera medica. De eiusdem libris animalium in Alberti Magni
mentione iam dixi. Elluchasem Elimithar Medici de Baldath Tacuini. Ferdina^dus
a Ponzeto Cardinalis, de venenis. I^cobus Dondus Patauinus, quem vulgo
Aggregatorem vocant. Iorac^^ cuiusdam liber de animalibus ab Alberto Magno
saepe citatur, (ab alijs obscuris.) ^it autem eu^ frequentur falsa scribere.
Kirandes etiam nescio quis and ab Aggregatore and alijs recentioribus, in
remedijs praecipue ex animalibus subinde citatur. Matthaei Syluatici Pandectae
Medicinales. R. Moses. Petrus Aponensis venenis. Rasis in libro desexaginta
animalibus. Semeryo^ vel Haren Semeryo^, ab Alberto Magno in historia animaliu^
frequentur citatur. Serapio. Vincentij Belluacensis de animalibus libri. 7.
nempe decimus septimus Speculi naturalis cu^ sex sequentibus Speculi
doctrinalis etia^ libro decimo sexto rursus de ijsdem breuiter agit. Liber de
natura rerum auth^ris innominati, passim apud recentiores illos quorum impurus
sermo Latinis est, citatur, Vincentium, Albertu^ ex quibus nos omnia quae no^
prorsus absurda erant mutuati sumus. Andreae Bullunensis Glossemata in
Auicennam vtilia sane and erudita, quamuis dictionis non admodum purae fuit
enim linguae Arabicae peritus, ita vt orthographiae etia^ scriptarum abeo
dictionum mayor sit habenda fides, quam ab alijs quorum plerique misere illam
corruperunt. Lauren. Russius Hippiacrita peritissime scripsit, quanquam stilo
non satis Latino. Isidorus Etymologici sui libro 12 de animalibus quaedam
scripsit non inutilia: meretur autem medium fere locu^ ni fallor, inter
classicos and barbaros authors. Vt and Monachi illi quorum commentarij in
Mesuen ante annos circiter octo Venetiis excusi sunt. Eiusdem ordinis fuerint
and Petri Crescentiensis de re Rust libri. Aeneae Syluij Asiae and Europae
descriptio. Alexandri ab Alexandris IC. Neapolit. Dies geniales. Alexandri
Benedicti Veronensis de mo^bis curandis opus. Aloisij Cadamusti nauigatio.
Aloisij Mundellae Epistolae medicinales. Americi Vesputij nauigationes. Andreae
Alciati Emblemata. Andreae Vesalij opus Anatomicum. Angelia Politiani opere.
Antonij Musa Brasauoli libri de medicamentis visitatis simplicibus and
compositis. Antonius Thylesius. Augustini Niphi commentarij in libros
Aristotelis de animalium historia, generatione, and partibus. Eiusdem de
augurijs liber. Baptistae Fierae Mantuani coena. Baptistae platinae Cremonensis
de honesta voluptate and valetudine libri. Bassianus Landus Placentinus de
humana historia. Belisarius Aquiuiuus Aragoneus Neritinoru^ dux de venatione,
ex Oppiano fere. Eiusdem de aucupio liber. Brocardus ^rnachus de Terra sancta.
Caelij Calcagnini opera. Coelij Rhodigini Antiquaru^ lectionum volumen: quod
frequentissime in opere nostro Caelii simpliciter nomine citatur Coelius
Aurelianus Siccensis. (hic pertinet ad ordinem veterum.) Coelij Secundi
Curionis Araneus. Caroli Figuli dialogi, alter de mustelis, alter de piscibus
in Mosella Ausonij. Caroli Stephani scripta de vacabulis rei hortensis,
Seminarij and Vineti. Christophori Columbi Nauigatio. Christophori Oroscij
Hispania Annotationes i^ Aetiam and eius interpretes. Desiderij Erasmi Rot.
opera. Eiusdem Chilia des adagiorum Erasmus Stella de Borussiae antiquitatibus.
Francisci Marij Grapaldi Parmensis de partibus aedium libri. 2. Tractat autem
de animalibus libri primi capitibus, 6.7.8.9. Francisci Massarii Venetiin nomum
Plinii de naturali historia Castigationes and Annotationes. Francisci Nigri
Bassianatis Rhaetia. Franciscus Robortellus Vtinensis. Gabrielis Humelbergii
commentarii in Samonicum, in Sextum de medicinis animaliu^, and in Apicium.
Gasparis Heldelini ciconiae encomium. Georgii Agricolae libri de metallis. De
ponderibus and mensuris. Eiusdem liber de animantibus subterraneis. Georgii
Alexandrini priscaru^ apud authors rei rusticae enarratio. Guileilmi Budaei
Commentarii linguae Graecae. Eiusdem Philologia. Gul. Philandri Castilionij
Galli in Vitruui^^ annotationes. Guilielmi Turneri Angli liber de auibus.
Giberti Longolii dialogus de auibus. Hermolai Barbari Castigationes in Plinium.
Corol^arium in Dioscoridem. * Physica. Hieronymi Cardani de subtilitate libri.
Hieronymi Vidae poema de bombycibus. Iacobi Syluii libri de medicamentis
simplicibus deligendis and praeparandis. Iani Cornarii Annotationes in Galenu^
de co^p. pharm secundum locos. Ioachimi Camerarii Hippocom^s, Rhetorica.
Ioachimi Vadiani Commentarii in Melam. Io. Agricolae Ammonii de simplicibus
medicamentis libri. 2. Io. Boemus Aubanus de moribus omnium gentium. Io.
Brodaei annotationes in epigrammata Graeca. Io. Fernelius Ambianus de abditis
rerum causis. Io. Cufnerus medicus Eermanus. Io. Iouinianus Pontanus. Io.
Manardi Ferrariensis epistolae medicinales. Io. Rauisii Textoris Officina. Io.
Ruellii historia plantarum. Io. Vrsint prosopopoeia animalium carmine, cu^
annotationibus Ia^. Gliuarii. Iodoci Vuillichii Annotationes in Georgica Ver
gilii. Iulianus Aurelius Lessigniensis de cognominibus deorum gentilium.
Lazarus Bayfius de re vestiaria, de re nautica, de vasculis. Leonelli Fauentini
de Victoriis, de medendis morbis liber. Lilii Gregorii Giraldi Syntagmata de
diis. Ludouici Vartomanni Romani patritii Nauigationum libri VII. Marcelli
Vergilii in Dioscoridem Annotationes. Marci Pauli Veneti de regionibus Orientis
libri 3. Matthias a Michou de Sarmatia As^ana atque Europaea. Medicorum
recentiorum cum alioru^, tum qui parum Latin de curandis morbis singulatim
scripserunt libri diuersi. Michael Angelus Blondus de canibus and venatione.
Nicolai Erythraei Index in Vergilium. Nicolai Leoniceni opera. Nicolai Leonici
Thomaei Varia historiae. Nicolai Perotti Sipontini Cornucopiae. Othonis
Brunfelsii Pandect ae medicinales. Paulus Iouius de piscibus. Idem de
Moschouitarum legatione. Petrus Crinitus. Petri Gallissardi Araquaei pulicis
Encomium. Petri Gillij Galli Additiones ad Aeliani libros de animalibus a se
translat^s. Eiusdem liber de Gallicis nominibus piscium. Petri Martyris Oceanae
decades, de nauigationibus noui Orbis. Phillippi Beroaldi Annotationes in
Columellam. Pinzoni nauigationes: and Magellani ad insulas Moluchas. Polydorus
Vergilius de Anglia. Idem de verum inuentoribus. Raph. Volaterranus. Robertus
Cenalis de ponderibus and mensuris. Roberti Stephani Appendix ad Dictionarium
Gallicolatinum. Scribonius Largus. Sebastiani Munsteri Cosmographia
vniversalis. Sebastiani Sigmarij cicadae Encomium. Strozij poeta, pater and
filius. Theodosius Trebellius Foroiuliensis, concinnanator Dictionarij quod
Promptuarium inscripsit. Valerius Cordus de medicamentis compositis apud
Pharmacopolas vsitatis.
GERMAN AVTHORS.
Balthasaris Steindel Dilligensis Opsatytica. Eberhardus Tappius Lunensis de
accipitribus. Eiusdem prouerbia Germanica cum Latinis and Graecis collata.
Hieronymi Tragi historia plantarum. Ioannis Eliae scripta de uocabulis
venatorijs in libro eius de scientia scribarum publicorum. Io. Stumpsii
Chronica Heluetiae. Michael Herus de quadrupedibus. Olai Magnitabula and
libellus de insulis and regionibus Oceani Septentrionalis Europaei. Varij
libelli Hippiatrici Medicinales, and alij, partim excusi, partim manuscripti.
ITALIAN AVTHORS.
Francisci Alunni (non Arlunni, vt saepe scripsimus in hoc Opere) Ferrariensis
Fabrica mundi. Petri Andreae Matthaeoli Senensis commentatarij in Dioscoridem.
Terrae Sanctae descriptio Authoris innominati.
FRENCH AVTHORS.
Gulielmus Tardiuus de accipitribus and canibus venaticis. Andrae Furnerij
liber de decoratione humanae naturae. Io. Goeurotus, de Conseruatione vita.
Thomae Eliotae Dictionarium Anglicolatinum. Sigismundi Gelenij Lexicon
simphonum Latinae, Graecae, Germanicae, and Illyricae linguarum.
CATALOGUS DOCTORVM VIRORVM, QVI VT OPUS hoc nostrum and rempub. literariam
illustrarent, vel aliunde imagines animalium, aut nomina descriptiones
miserunt: vel praesentes communicarunt. Horum nonnulli supeirus quoque nominati
sunt, quod insuper scriptis eorum publicatis adiutus sim.
AChillis P. Gassarus medicus Germanus. Alexander Peijer Scaphusianus. Aloisius
Mondella Brixiensis medicus. Andreas Martinus Rostochiensis. Antonius Eparchus
Corcyraeus, Graecae linguae professor Venetijs. Antonius Musa Brasauolas
illustrissimi Ferrariae ducis Herculis Estensis archiatros. Antonius Stuppa
Rhaetus. Arnoldus Peraxylus Arlenius Germanus. Bartolmaeus a Castromuro
canonicus Curiensis in Rhaetia. Caelius Secundus Curio Italus. Caelius Sozinus
Senensis. Caspar Hedio ecclesiastes Argentinensis. Christophorus Clauserus
Tigurinus archiatros Cornelius Sittardus medicus Germanus. Dominicus
Monthesaurus medicus Veronensis. David Chytraeus. Aegidius Flecherus. Edw:
Wootonus. Flortanus Susz Rolitz a Varshania Polonus. Franciscus Belinchettus
merchator Bergomensis. Ge. Agricola consul Kempricij. Ge. Fabricius poeta,
Scholae rector Misen^. Gisbertus Horstius Amsterodamus medicus Romae. Greorgius
Mangolt Constantiensis. Guilielmus Gratarolus Bergomensis medicus. Gulielmus
Padeais D. medicinae. Gulielmus Camdenus Clarentius. Guilielmus Turnerus Anglus
medicus. Henricus Stephanus Roberti filius, Parisiensis. Hieronymus
Fracastorius Veronensis medicus. Hieronymus Frobenios Basiliensis typographus
Hieronymus Tragus Germanus. Johannes Caius D. medicinae. Io. Altus Hessus. Io.
Culmannus Goppingensis. Io. Dernswam Germanus. Io. Estwycus Anglus. Io.
Falconerus medicus Anglus. Io. Kentmannus Dresdensis medicus. Io. Oporinus
Basiliensis typographus. sannae. Io. Ribittus sacrarum literaru^ interpres
Lau-Iustinus Goblerus I.C. and principi Nassauiensi a consilijs. Lucas Gynus
medicus Italus. Michael Alysius Gallus Trecensis medicus. Nicolaus Gerbelius
Phorcensis I.C. Petrus Dasypodius Grcaearum literarum professor Argentorati,
praeceptor meus. Petrus Gillius Gallus. Petrus Merbeliu, Germanus, Corolo V. a
consiliis Mediolani. Petrus de Mesnil Gallus. Petrus Paulus Vergerius, olim
episcop. Iusti^opolitanus. Sebastianus Munsterus Hebraicae linguae professor
Basileae Sigismundus Gelenius Bohemus. Simon Lithonius Valesius. Theodorus
Bibliander sacrarum literarum apud nos professor. Tho. Bonham D. medici. Thomas
Gybson Anglus medicus. Valentinus Grauius vir doctus and senator Misenae.
Vincentius Valgrisius Germanus, typographus Venetiis. ALexandri Myndij liber de
animalibus. and historia inmentorum, memorantur ab Athenaeo. Antipatri librum
de animalibus citat Plutartarchus in libro de causis not. probl. 38.
Antiphorhetor scripsit de pauonib. Athenaeus. Archestratus de varijs animalibus
ad cibu^ aptis, eorumque ad gulam and voluptatem apparatu carminibus scripsit,
quae persaepe recitat Athenaeus. Caeclus Argiuus de piscibus scripsit carmine,
Athenaeus. Callisthenis librum tertium de venatione citat Plutarchus in libro
de fluuijs. Epicharmus Syracusanus pecudum medicinas diligentissime
conscripsit* Collumella. Leonides Byzantius scripsit de piscibus oratione
soluta, Athenaeus. Numenij librum Theriacum citant Scholia in Nicandrum.
Numenius Heracleotes de piscibus poema condidit, Athenaeus. Petri Ophiaca
adducit Soholiastes Nicandri. Pancratius Arcas Halieuticha reliquit carmine:
item Posidonius Corinthius, Athenaeus: Seleucus Tartensis Halieutica aedidit
prosa, Athen. Sostratus scripsit natura animaliu^, vt Athenae. and Nicandri
Scholiastes citant. Eiusdem secundu^ de venatione librum citat Stobaeus in
Sermon quo Venus vituperatur Strato Lampsacenus Physicus scripsit de
generatione animalium, item de animalibus, de quibus dubitatur, and de
fabulosis animalibus Laertius. Theophrastus Eressius (Laertio test) scripsit
de diuersitate vocis animalium eiusdem generis lib. 1. De animalibus quae
sapere dicu^tur, vnum. De his quae in sicco morantur du os. De animalibus,
septem. De his quae colores immutant vnu^. De his quae latibula faciunt vnu^.
De antomatis (sic puto vocat, que non ex coitu, sed ex putredine nascuntur)
animalibus vnum. Compendij ex Aristotele de animalibus libros 6. De animaliu^
prudentia and moribus vnu^. De fructibus and animalibus versus mill centu^ and
octoginta duos. Horu^ nonnullos etia^ Athenaeus citat, nempe tous peri zoon
peri ton en to zero di^tribonton zoon peri ton pheleuonton pe^i ton
metaballonton tas scroas: item peri ton da keton kai bleticon. Xenocratis
librum de vtilitate quae ab. animalibus capitur citat Galenus. lib. 10. c. 4.
de simplicibus. Augustinus Niphus in praefatione co^mentariorum quos in
Aristotelis de animalibus libros aedidit, complures alios authors veteres,
quoru^ libri de animalibus scripti no^ extent, enumerat mutuatus ex Indice
Plinij qui loco primi libri habetur. Authors enim aliquot quos octauo
praecipue libro Plinius nominat tanqua^ omnes de animalibus simpliciter
scripserint a Nipho numera^tur, cum illi obiter tantu^ in operibus suis velres
gestas vel rem rustica^ continentibus, animalium quoru^da^ miminerint. Iuba,
Hieron* Attalus, Philometer and Archelaus reges de vinaturaque animaliu^
diligenter perscripseru^t Gillius. Ego regum istorum nomina citari quide^ apud
Plinium reperio, de animalibus vero ex professo eos scripsisse nusqua^ legere
memini. Hiero quidem, Philometer, Attalus and Archelaus de cultura agri
scripseru^t, vt refert Plinius 18.3. Iuba vero tum alia, tum de Arabia sieve
Arabica expeditione, eodem test 6.27. and 12.14. in quibus libris multa eos de
animalibus scripsisse conijcio, ex professo nusquam.
An English Table expressing the name of every Beast in such sort as it is
recited in this History, referring every Beast to his proper head and kind by
the Page.
A.
ANtalope. 1 Ape vulgar. 2 Ape Munkey. 6 Ape Martine. 7 Ape Callitriche. 8 Ape
Prasian. 9 Ape Baboun. 10 Ape Tartarine. 12 Ape Satyr. 13 Ape Monster. 15 Ape
Noruegian 16 Ape Pan. 16 Ape Sphinx. 17 Ape Sagoni. 18 Ape called Bear ape. 19
Ape called Foxe-ape. 19 Ass. 20 Hinnus. 29 Innus. ibid. Ginnus. ibid. Mannus.
ibid. Mannulus. ibid. Befi. ibid. Burdones. ibid. Wild Ass. 30 Scythian
Asses. 31 Indian Asses. 32 Axis and Alborach. 32
B.
Badger, Brocke, or Gray. 33 Bear. 35 Beauer. 44 Bison. 50 Scotian Bison. 52
Bonassus. 53 Buffe. 56 Bugle. 57 Affrican Bugill. 59 Bull. 61 Ox. 67 Cow. 71
Calfe. 88
C.
Cacus. 91 Camels. 93 Camel Dromedary 97 Camelopardall. 100 Allocamell. 101
Camp. 102 Cat. 102 Wild cat. 107 Colus. 108 Cony. 109 Indian Pig-cony. 112
D.
Dear. Fallow Dear. 113 Roe Bucke. 114 Tragelaphus. 118 Heart and Hind. 121
Dictyes. 37
Dogs. Dogs. 137 Greyhound. 144 Hound. 149 Bloud-Hound. 150 Spanniel. 153
Mungrels. 154 Mimicke or Island Dog. 161 Little Maelitaean Dogs. 161 The
Harier. 165 The Terriar. 165 The Gasehound. 167 The Leymmer. 168 The Tumbler.
168 The Theeuish Dog. 169 The Setter. 169 The Water spanniel. 170 The Fisher.
171 The Sheapheards Dog. 172 The Mastiue or Bandog. 173 The Butchers Dog. 174
Curs of all sorts. 177

E.
Eale. 190 Elephant. 190 Elk^. 211
F.
Ferret. 217 Fitch or Pool-cat. 219 Fox. 220 Crucigeran Fox. 222
G.
Gennet Kat. 228 Goats. Goats vulgar. 230 Mambrine Goats. 235 Deere-Goates.
143 Wild Goat. 144 Kyd. 147
Gulon. 161 Gorgon. 162
H.
Hare. 164 Hedghog. 177 Horse. Horse vulgar. 281 Stallions and Mares. 295
Hunting Horses. 321 Running or race Horses. 322 Geldings. 324 Carreering
Horses. 324 Pack Horses. 325 Wild Horses. 325 Hippelaphus, 236 Sea Horse. 328
Hyaena. Hyaena vulgar. 436 Papio or Dabuh. 439 Crocuta. 440 Mantichora. 441

I.
Ibex. 445 Ichneumon or Pharoes Mouse. 449
L.
Lamia or Phayrye. 452 Lion. 454 Linx. 488
M.
Marten or Marder. 495 Mole. 498 Mice. Vulgar Mouse. 503 Rat. 519 Water Rat.
520 A^pine Mouse. 521 Dormouse. 526 Hamster Mouse. 529 Norician Mouse. 532
Pontique Mouse. 532 Flying Mouse. 533 Shrew or Erd Shrew 534 Wild field Mouse.
542 Wood Mouse. 544 Hasell Mouse. 545 Lascett Mouse. 546 Sorex. 546 Indian
Mouse. 548
Musk cat. 551 Mule. 556
N.
Neades. 567 Ounce. 568 Orynx. 570 The Otter. 571
P.
Panther. 575 Poephages. 587 Porcupine. 588 Reiner or Ranger Rhinocerot 595
S.
Su, and Subus. 660 Arabian Sheep 600 Ram 631 Weather Sheep 638 Lamb 640
Musmon 642 Strepsiceros 655 Squirrell 657 ^etulian Squirrell 659 Vulgar Swyne
562 Wild Boar 694
T
Tatus 705 Tiger 707
V
Unicorn 711 Vre-Oxe 721 Libian Vre-Oxe 724 Indian Vre-Oxe 744
W
Weasell 725 Wolf 734 Sea Wolf 746
Z
Zebell or Saball 75^ Zibet or Ciuet cat 756
Another Alphabeticall Table directing the Reader to the story of every Beast.
A.
AFfrican Bugill. 59 Alborach. 32 Alpine Mouse. 521 Antalope. 1 Ape vulgar. 2
Arabyan Sheep 600 Ass. 20 Axis 32
B
Baboun. 10 Badger, Brocke, or Gray. 33 Bear 55 Bear ape. 19 Beauer. 44 Befi.
29 Bison. 50 Bloud-Hound. 150 Bonassus. 53 Buffe. 56 Bugle. 57 Bull. 61
Burdones. 29 Butchers Dog. 174
C.
Cacus. 91 Calse. 88 Callitriche. 8 Camels. 93 Camelopardall. 100 Camp. 102
Carreering Horses. 324 Cat. 102 Cow. 71 Colus. 108 Cony. 109 Crucigeran Fox.
222 Crocuta. 440 Curs of all sorts. 177
D.
Dabuh or Papio. 439 Deere-Goates. 143 Dictyes. 136 Dogs. 137 Dormouse 526
E.
Eale. 190 Elephant. 190 Elke. 211
F.
Fallow Dear 113 Ferret. 217 Fieldmouse 542 Fisher dog. 171 Fitch or Pool-cat.
219 Flyeng Mouse 533 Fox. 220 Foxe-ape. 19
G.
Gasehound. 167 Gennet Kat. 228 Geldings. 324 Greyhound. 144 Ginnus. 29 Goats
vulgar. 230 Gorgon. 162 Gulon. 161
H.
Hare. 164 Harier. 165 Heart and Hind. 121 Hamster mouse 529 Hasell mouse. 547
Hedghog. 177 Hinnus. 29 Hippelaphus, 236 Horse vulgar. 281 Hound. 149 Hunting
Horses. 321 Hyaena vulgar. 436
I.
Ibex. 44^ Ichneumon 449 Innus. 29 Indian Ass. 32 Indian Pig cony. 112 Indian
mouse. 548 Indian Vre-Oxe 724
K
Kidde 147
L.
Lamb 641 Lamia or Phayrye. 452 Lascet Mouse 546 The Leymmer. 168 Lion. 454
Linx. 488 Lybian Vre-Oxe. 724
M.
Mungrels. 154 Mambrine Goats. 235 Mantichora. 441 Martenor Marder. 495 Martine
Ape. 7 Mares see Stallions Mannus and Mannulus. 29 Mastiue dog. 173 Maelitaean
Dogs. 161 Mimick or Getulian Dog. 161 Mole. 498 Monster. 15 Mouse Vulgar. 503
Mule 556 Munkey. 6 Musk-cat. 551 Musmon 642
N
Neades. 567 Noruegian mouse 532 Noruegian Ape 16
O
Oryx. 570 Otter 571 Ounce 568
P
Pack Horses. 325 Pan Ape. 16 Panther 575 Poephagus 587 Pontique Mouse. 532
Pocuspine 885
R
Ram. 631 Rat. 519 Reyner or Ranger 612 Rhinoceros 595 Roe Bucke. 114 Running
or race Horses. 322
S
Ape Sagoin. 18 Satyr Ape. 13 Sphinx. 17 Scythian Asses. 31 Scotian Bugle. 52
Sea Horse. 328 Sea Wolf 759 Setter Dog. 169 Sheapheards Dog. 172 Shrew mouse
534 Sheep 598 Sorex 546 Spanniel. 153 Squirrels 657 Stallions and Mares. 295
Strepsiceros. 655 Swyne. 562 Tartarine. 12 Tatus. 705 Terriar. 165 Tiger. 707
Theeuish Dog. 169 Tumbler. 168
V.
Unicorn 711 Ure Ox. 721
W.
Water spanniel. 170 Water rat Weasell 725 wild Bore 694 Wild cat. 107 Wild
Goat. 144 Wild Horse. 325 wild mice 544 wild field-mice 542 Woodmouse 545
Wolf 734
Z.
Zebell or Sable 755 Zibet or Ciuet Kat. 756
FINIS.
THE
THE ANTALOPE.


THE Antalope, called in Latin Calopus, and of the Graecians Analopos or
Aptolos: Of this Beast there is no mention Suidas and the Epistle of Alexander
unto Aristotle, interpreted by Cornelius Nepotius. They are bred in India and
Syria, The country of their abod and Breed.
near the River Euphrates, and delight much to drink of the cold water
thereof: Their body is like the body of a Roe, and they have horns growing
forth of the crown of their head which are very long and sharp; so that
Alexander affirmed they pierced through the sheeldes of his Soldiers, and
fought with them very irefully: at which time his company slew as he traveled
to India, eight thousand, five hundred, and fifty; which great slaughter may be
the occasion why they are so rare and sildome seen to this day, by cause
thereby the breeders and Osier, or small trees, whereby it comes to pass
that many times their necks are taken in the twists of the falling boughs,
whereat the Beast with repining cry, bewrays himself to the Hunters, and so
is taken. The virtues of this Beast are unknown, and therefore Suidas says an
Antalope is but good in part.

OF THE APE.


AN Ape called in Latin Simia, and sometimes Simim and Simiolus; Cycero.
Claudian. Martial. Horace.
of the Greek word Simos (Viz:) signifieng, the flatnesse of the Nostrils, for
so are an Apes: and called of the Haebrewes Koph, and plurally Kophin; as is by
S. Ierom translated, 1 King. 10.22. From whence it may be probably coniectured,
came the Latin words Cepi and Cephi, for Apes that have tails. Of the name
Sometimes they are called of the Bogiah, and of the Chaldees Kophin. The
Italians Samada Maionio, and Bertuccia, and a Munkey Gatto Maimone. The
ancient Graecians Pithecos and the later Mimon, and Arkobizanes, by reason of
his imitation. The Moors Bugia, the Spaniards Mona, or Ximio, the French
Singe, the Germans Aff, the Flemishe Simme or Schimmekell, the Illirians
Opieze, and generally they are held for a subtle, ironical, ridiculous and
unprofitable Beast, The small use of apes.
whose flesh is not good for meat as a sheep, neither his back for burden
as an Asses, nor yet commodious to keep a house like a Dog, but of the
Graecians termed Gelotopoion, made for laughter.

Athanaeus.
Anacharsis the Philosopher, being at a banquet wherein diverse iesters were
brought in Apes made for laughter.
at the sight whereof he laughed heartily; and being demanded the cause why
he laughed not before, answered; that men do but feign merriments, whereas
Apes are naturally made for that purpose. Moreover Apes are much given to
imitation and derision, and they are called Cercopes, Qualities of apes.
because of their wicked crafts, deceipts, impostures and flatteries: wherefore
of the Poets it is fained that there were two brethren most wicked fellows,
that were turned into Apes, and from their seat or habitation came the
Pithecusan Islands, which Virgill calls Inarime: for Arime was an old
Hetrurian word for an Ape, and those Islands being the seats of the Varinus,
Docibility of apes.
Giants (who being by God overthrown for their wickedness) in derision of them
Apes were planted in their rooms. Apes have been taught to leap, singe,
drive Wagons, reigning and whipping the Horses very artificially, and are very
capable of all human actions, having an excellent memory either to show love
to his friends, or hateful revenge to them that have harmed him, but the
saying is good that the threatening of a flatterer, and the anger of an Ape are
both alike regarded. Hurts received by apes.
It delights much in the company of dogs and young Children, yet it will
strangle young An History.
and getting into the house when the Nurse was gone, took the child out of
the Cradle, and setting water on the fire, when it was hot, stripped the Child
naked, and washed the child therewith until it killed it.

The countries where Apes are found, are Lybia and all that desert Woods
betwixt Egypt, Aethiopia and Libia; and that part of Caucasus which reaches
to the red Sea. Countries breeding Apes.
In India they are most abundant, both Read, black, green, dust-colour, and
white ones, which they use to bring into Cities (except Red ones, who are so
venereous that they will ravish their Women) and present to their Kings, which
grow so tame, that they go up and down the streets so boldly and ciuilly as
if they were Children, Book of Voyages.
frequenting the Market Alexander standing upright, that he deemed them at
first to be an Army of enemies, and commanded to join battle with them,
until he was certified by Taxilus a King of that Country then in his Camp,
they were but Apes.

In Caucasus there are trees of Pepper and Spices whereof Apes are the
gatherers, Labor of Apes.
living among those trees: for the Inhabitants come and under the trees make
plain a plotte of ground, and afterward cast thereupon boughs and branches of
Pepper and other fruits, as it were carelessly; which the Apes secretly
observing, in the night season they gather together in great abundance all the
branches laden with Pepper, and lay them on heaps upon that plot of ground,
and so in the morning come the Indians and gather the Pepper Basman subject to
the great Cham of Tartaria, are many and diverse sorts of Apes, very like
mankind, which when the Hunters take, they pull off their hairs al but the
beard and the hole behind, and afterward dry them with hot spices, and
poudering them, sell them to Merchants, who carry them about the world,
preswading simple people that there are men in Islands of no greater stature.
To conclude, Diversity of apes.
there are Apes in Trogloditae which are maned about the neck like Lions, as
big as great Bel-weathers. So are there some called Cercopitheci, Munkyes,
Choeropitheci, Hog-Apes, Cepi, Callitriches, Marmosits, Cynocephali, of a Dog
and an Ape, Satyrs, and Sphinges, of which we will speak in order for they
are not all alike, but some resemble Chymaera.
as for a Chymaera which Albertus makes an Ape it is but a figment of the
Poets. The same man makes Pigmaees a kind of Apes, and not men, but Niphus
proves that they are not men because they have no perfect use of reason, lib.
7.1. de animal.
no modesty, no honesty, nor justice of government, and although they speak
yet is their language imperfect; and above all they cannot be men because they
have no Religion, Pygmaeys.
which ( Plato says truly) is propper to every man. Besides, their stature
being not past three four, or five spans long, their life not above eight
years, and their imitation of man, do plainly prove them rather to be Apes
then men: and also the flatnesse of their Noses, Onesicritus.
their Combats with Cranes and Partridges for their eggs and other
circumstances I will not stand upon, but follow the description of Apes in
general. Apes do outwardly resemble men very Vesalius shows, that their
proportion differs from man's in more things then Galen observed, as in the
muscles of the breast, and those that move the arms, The anatomy of apes.
the elbow and the Ham, likewise in the inward frame of the hand, in the
muscles moving the toes of the feet and the feet and shoulders, and in the
instrument moving in the sole of the foot, also in the fundament and
mesentary, the lap of the liver, and the hollow vain holding it up, which me^
have not; yet in their face nostrils, ears, eyelids, breasts, arms, thumbes,
fingers and nails, they agree very much. Their hair is very harsh and short,
and therefore hairy in the upper part like men, and in the nether part like
Beasts: they have teeth before and behind like me^, having a round face, and
ey-lids above and beneath, which other Quadrupedes have not. Politianus says
that the face of a Bull or Lion is more comely then the face of an Ape, which
is liker a man's. They have two Dugs, their breasts and arms like men, but
rougher, such as they use to bend as a man does his foot. So their hands,
fingers and nails, are like a man's but ruder and nimbler, and nature having
placed their Dugs in their breast, gave them arms to lift their young ones up
to suck them: Their feet are propper and not like man's, having the middle one
longest, for they are like great hands, and consist of fingers like hands,
but they are alike in bigness, except that which is least to a man is greatest
to an Ape, whose

They use their feet both for going and handling; the nether parts of their
arms, and their thighs are shorter then the proportion of their elbowes and
shins: they have no Nauel, but there is a hard thing in that place; the upper
part of their body is far greater then the nether, like other Quadrupedes,
consisting of A porportion between five and three: by reason whereof they grow
out of kind, having feet like hands and feet. They live more downward then
upward, like other four footed Beasts, and they want Buttocks (although
Albertus says they have large ones) they have no tail, like 2. legged
creatures, or a very small sign thereof. The genitall or privy place of the
female is like a Woman's, Arabian Seraph, which are higher before then behind,
and that Ape whose meat goes forward by reason of the heat of heart and
Liver, is most like to a man, in standing upright: their eyes are hollow, and
that thing in men is accounted for a sign of a malicious mind, as little eyes
are a token of a base and abject spirit. Men that have low and flat Nostrils
are Libidinous as Apes that attempt women, and having thick lips the upper
hanging over the nether, they are deemed fools, like the lips of Asses and
Apes. Albertus says, he saw the heart of a Male Ape, having 2. tops of snarp
ends, which I know not whether to term a wonder or a Monster. An Ape and a
Cat have a small back, and so has a weak hearted man, a broad and strong

The disposition of Apes
And as the body of an Ape is Ridiculous, by reason of an indecent likeness and
imitation of man, so is his soul or spirit; for they are kept only in rich
men's houses to sport An History.
was seen by a Countreyman, and thinknig him to be a man in the water, gave
him his hand to save him, yet in the mean time asked him what Country man he
was, who answered, he was an Athenian: well, said the man, do thou know
Piraeus (which was a port in Athens) very well, Places of their abode.
said the Ape, and his wife, friends and children, where at the man being moved
did what he could to drown him. They keep for the most part in Caves and
hollow places of hills, in rocks and trees, feeding upon Apples and Nuts, but if
they find any bitterness in the shel, they cast all away. They eat Life and
pick them out of heads and garments. Food of apes.
They will drink wine till they be drunk, but if they The manner of taking
Apes.
which the Ape espying, comes and anointeth her eyes therewith, and so being
not able to see, does the hunter take her. If they lay shoes they are leaden
ones, to heavy for them to wear, wherein are made such devises of Ginnes, that
when once the Ape has put them on, they cannot be gotten off without the help
of man: So likewise for little Bags made like Breeches, wherewithal they are
deceived and taken. Procreation of apes.
They bring forth young ones for the most part by twins, whereof they love the
one and hate the other; that which they love they bear in their Arms, the
other hangs at the dams back, and for the most part she kills that which
she loves, by pressing it to hard: afterward, she sets her whole delight
upon the other.

The Egyptians when they discribe a father leaving his inheritance to his son
that he loves not, picture an Ape with her young one upon her back. The male
and female Secrets in their nature.
which in that kind have tails; but they leap and rejoice at the change: for
as other Beasts so do these, fear the defect of the stars and planets. They
are full of dissimulation, and imitation of man, they readiler follow the evil
then the good they see. their imitation.
They are very fierce by nature, and yet tamed forget it, but still remain
subject to madness. their love.
They love Conies very tenderly, for in England an old Ape (scarce able to go)
did defend tame Conies from the Weasell, as Sir Thomas Moore reported. their
^eere.
They fear a shel fish and a snaile very greatly, as appears by this History.

an antiquity.
and refreshed with Wine and water. Cardane reports that it was an ancient
custom in former time when a parracide was executed, he was (after he was
whipped with bloody stripes) put into a sack, with a live Serpent, a dog, an
Ape and a Cock: by the Serpent was signified his extreme

A Lion rules the beasts of the earth, and a Dolphin the beasts of the sea,
when the Dolphin is in age and sickness, she recouereth by eating a sea-ape: and
so the Lion by eating an ape of the earth, and therefore the Egiptians paint a
Lion eating an ape, to signify, the medicin of apes.
a sick man curing himself. The heart of an ape sod and dried, whereof the
weight of a groat drunk in a draught of stale Hunny, sod in water, called
Mellicraton, strengthens the heart, emboldneth it, and drives away the pulse
and pusillanimity thereof: sharpeneth ones understanding,

THE MVNKEY.
THe Munkey called in Greek Cercopithecos, and so in Latin Cercopithecus,
Their names
that is a tailed Ape* not to destinguish it from all other Apes, but from
other vulgar and common Apes, for there be Apes with tails besides a Munkey,
but not so often seen. It is thought of some that the Hebrew Zijm signifies a
Munkey, other Ochim. Esa. 13. Babell shall be destroyed, Munster.
and the fearful beasts Zijm shall lie there, and Ochim shall fill their
houses. Which Ochim, Albertus. Generation of a munkey.
is interpreted Munkeys, but not generally, wherefore there is an opinion that
this kind of Ape is generated of a wilde-cat very like an Ape, and an Ape,
having two black spots on the cheeks, a long tail, and black at the end
thereof, it is called of the Italians, Gatto maimone, of the French Marmot of
Marmona: that is the Ape of a male, for Mona signifies an Ape, of the Germans
Meerkatz, that is the cat of the sea, of the Illirians Morska, Maris-mona.
and Koozka, as for Mammonet, it is a beast less then an Ape; of the Celts it
is Abranas. Inclination of Munkeys.
They are very sportful, and given to imitate the actions of men like apes, it
being a question, whether dogs, Elephants, or Munkeys, have the most
understanding among Brutes, and as was said before, when the Moon wayneth, it
is heavy and dull, Secrets of Munkeys nature.
but in the new Moon, ioccond and pleasant. Betwixt the Mammonets and Apes is
Mammonet being the weaker, yet the wiser and craftier creature, Contention.
is much more courageous in fight then an ape. These Munkeys o^ all things most
abhor a crocodile, The fear of a Munkey.
for at the sight of the skin a far off, it has bin seen how the fearful
creature has run through fire and water, crying and trembling for the
natural dread thereof.

Ioh. Leo. Affrican. The country of their abod and Breed.
They are bred in the hills of constance, in the woods of Bugia and Mauritania.
In Aethiopia, they have black heads, hair like asses, and voices like to
other. In India they report that the Munkeys will clime the most steep and
high rocks, and fling stones at them that prosecute to take them. When the
king of Ioga in India for religion goes on Pilgrimage, he carries with him
very many Munkeys. In like sort Munkeys are brought calechut and Prasia: and
not far from Aden a city of Arabia is a most high hill, Heart of Munkeys.
abounding in these beasts, who are a great hinderance to the poor vintagers
of the country of calechut, for they will climb into the high palm trees, and
breaking the vessels set to receive the Wine, pour forth that lickquor they
find in them: Their food.
they will eat herbs and grain, and ears of grass, going together in great
flocks, whereof one ever watches at the utmost bounds of their camp, that he
may cry out when the husbandman comes, and then al flying and leaping into
the next trees escape away: the females carry their young ones about with them
on their shoulders, and with that burden leap from tree to tree.

There be of this kind of Munkeys two sorts, one greater the other lesser,
Diversities of Munkeys.
as is accounted in England, and Munkeys are in like sort so divided, that
there be in all four kinds differing in bigness, whereof the least is little
bigger then a squirrell, and because of their marvelous and diverse mowings,
mouings, voices, and gestures, the Englishmen call any man using such
Histrionical actours a Munkey.

The only difference betwixt these and other Apes aforesaid, is their tail;
Solinus. Their anatomy and parts.
they differ Mammonents are less then an Ape, V^ss^^us. Mammonets.
brown on the back, and white on the belly, having a long and hairy tail, his
neck almost so big as his body, for which cause they are tied by the hips that
they slip not collar. They have a round head, a face like a man, but black and
bald on the crown, his nose in a reasonable distance from his mouth like a
man's, and not continued like an Apes, his stones greenish blew like a Turkey
stone. They are caught after the manner of Apes, and being tamed and taught,
they conceive and work very admirable feats, and their skins pulled off them
being dead are dressed for garments. The foolish Arabians dedicated Memnonius
cercopithecus unto heaven, and in all afflictions implored his aid. Festus.
another kind
There is one other kind of Munkeys, corcolipis.

THE CEPVS OR Martine Munkey.
THE Martine called cepus of the Greek word, The names.
Kepos which Kebos, and some translate Caebus, some Cephus or Cepphus or more
barbarously celphus, the latins sometimes Ortus, Diodorus. Siculus.
for indeed this kind of ape in his best estate is like * a garden set with
diverse flowers, and therefore the best kind of them is discerned cepus is
derived of the Haebrewe Koph and Kophin signifying apes in general, as is
before said, but yet this kind is destinguished from other by strabo, Aelianus,
and Pliny: although Aristotle does make no difference betwixt this and another
ordinary Munkey.

The games of great Pompey first of all brought these Martines to the sight of
the Romans, and afterward Rome saw no more, Pliny. The first knowledge of
M^rtins.
they are the same which are brought out of Aethiopia, and the farthest Arabia,
their feet and knees being like a man's, and their forefeet like hands, their
inward parts like a man's, so that some have doubted what kind of creature this
should be, which is in part a man, and yet a Foure-footed beast: it having a
face like a Lion, Their country of breed. Strabo.
and some part of the body like a Panther, being as big as a wild goat or
Roe-bucke, or as one of the dogs of Erithrea, and a long tail, the which such
of them as have tasted flesh will eat from their own bodies. Their anatomy.
Strabo. Scaliger.
Concerning their coulor, howsoever they are not all alike, for some are black
with white spots, having a greater voice then others, some yellow, some
Lyon-tauny, some golden yellow, and some cole-black: yet for the most part, the
head and back parts to the tail, are of a fiery color, with some Their color.
a white snowt, and certain golden strakes like a collar going about the neck,
the inferior parts of the neck down to the breast and the forefeet are white,
Aelianus.
their two dugs as big as a man's hand can gripe, are of a bluish coulor, and
their belly white, their hinder legs black, and the shape of their snowt like
a Cynocephale, which may be the difference betwixt Aelianus and Strabo, their
cepus, and Aristotle's Cebus, for nature many times brings forth like beasts
which are not of the same kind. Cay.
In England there was a Martine that had his back and sides of a green coulor,
having here and their white hair, the belly chin and beard (which was round)
white, the face and shins black, and the nose white, being of the lesser kind,
for in bigness it exceeded not a coney. Their disposition.
Some of them in Aethiopia have a face like a Satyr, and other members,
Prasian Apes. This Martine did the Babilonians, inhabiting near Memphis, for
the strangenes, the coulor, and shape thereof, worship for a God. They are of
evil disposition like Apes, and therefore we will spare both their pictures
and further description, finding very little of them in Histories worth
commemoration.

The Ape CALITRICH.
THE Calitrich so called by reason of his the name.
and may be termed in English a bearded Ape, Pliny. Country of breed.
will live no other where then in Ethiopia and India, which are easy to take,
but very hard to bring away alive into these countries. their parts and
coulor.
They differ in appearance from all other Apes, having a long beard and a large
tail, hairye at India all white, Albertus.
which the Indians hunt with darts, and being tamed, they are so apt to play,
Erasmus.
that a man would think they were created for no other purpose, whereupon the
Graecians use in proverb, an ape having

Of the Prasyan Apes.
MEgasthenes (says Aelianus and Strabo) writes of Apes in Prasia a Region in
India, Their resemblance.
which are noe less then great Dogs, and five cubits high, having hayr like
a man coming forth of their forhead, and beardes, Martines before mentioned,
seem to be affianced to these. Aelianus. Place of their abode.
These Prasyan apes live in Mountains and Woods, and yet are they not wild,
but so tame that oftentimes in great multitudes they come down to the Gates
and suburbs of Latagis, Their food.
and being filled return again to their home and usual places of harbor in
great moderation, doing no harm to any thing.

Peter Martyr tells this story of one of these, that he being like to a great
Munkey, Lib. 9. Oceanae Decad. 3.
but having a longertayle, by rolling over and over three or four times
together takes such strength, that he leapeth from bough to bough, and tree to
tree, as if he flewe. An archer of that Sea-voyage hurt one of them with an
arrowe, the wounded Beast presently leapeth to the ground and sets upon Pet.
Martyr.
he drew his sword and struck off one of his arms, and so at last with much
adoo took the maimed beast, who being brought to the Navy, and accustomed to
the society of men, began by little and little to wax tame.

While he was in the ship bound with chains, other of the company having
been on land to forage, brought out of the Marshes a Bore, which Bore was
showed to the Munkey; at the first sight The hatred of these apes.
the raging Munkey leapeth upon the Bore, and windeth his tail round about the
Bore, and with the one arm which he had left, caught him, and held him so
fast by the throat, that he stifled him.

There is another kind of Munkey, for stature, bigness and shape like a man,
for by his knees, secret parts, and face, you would judge him a wild man, such
as inhabit Numidia, His love
and the Lapones, for he is altogether ouergrowne with hair; no creature
except a man can stand so long as he, he loves women and children dearly, like
other of his own kind, and is so venereous, that he will attempt to ravish
women, whose Image is in the former Page described, as it was taken forth of
the book of the description of the holy Land.

Of the Cynocephale or Baboun.


CYnocephales, are a kind of Apes, whose heads are like Dogs, and their other
part like a man's; wherefore Gaza translateth them Canicipites, (to wit)
Dog-heads. In the French, German, and Illyrian tongues, they are called of some
Babion, and Babuino in Italian, is a small kind of Ape: Aristotle. Pliny.
but Aristotle says, that a Cynocephale is bigger then an Ape: Description.
In English they are called Babouns.

There are many kinds of Baboons, whereof some are much given to fishing,
Arrianus.
so that they will tarry a whole day in the deep hunting for fish, and at
length Orus says) which kind, Prester John ad Romans pontif
the Egiptians Emblematically use to paint, when they will decipher a Sacrifice.
Some there are which are able to write, and naturally to discern Letters; The
industry of Babouns.
which kind the old Egyptian Priests bring into their Temples, and at their
first entrance, the Priest brings him a writing Table, a pensil and ink,
that so by seeing him write, he may make try all whether he be of the right
kind, and the beast quickly shows his skill: wherefore in ancient time, they
were dedicated to Mercury, the fained god of learning. Orus.


a secret in their nature.
The reason why the Egyptians do nourish them among their hallowed things is,
that by them they may know the time of the coniuction betwixt the Sun and
Moon; Baboun neither will look up or eat, but cast his eyes to the ground, as
it were lamenting the rauishment of the Moon with disdainefull passion: In
like manner the female who moreover, at that time sends forth blood out of
her womb of conception, whereupon the Aegiptians signify by a Baboun the
Moon, the rising of the Moon, by his standing upright holding his hands up
toward heaven, and wearing a crown on his head, because with such gestures
does that Beast congratulate her first appearance.

Another cause why they bring them into their Temples is, because of the
holiness of circumcision, Circumcision natural in Babouns.
for it is most true (though strange) that they are brought forth circumcised,
at the least wise in some appearance; whereunto the Priests give great heed
to accomplish and finish the work begun. The Aegiptians also paint a Baboun
sitting, Orus.
to signify the Equinoctium, for in every Equinoctium they bark or howl
twelve times in one day, and so many times make water: Another secret.
wherefore the Egyptians also upon their Hydrologies or Conduits did grave a
Baboon, out of whose yard or privy part issued forth water; A Wonder
till all perish and be consumed. Orus.


The West region of Lybia and Aethiopia have great store of Cynocephals,
Baboons, and Acephals, beasts without a head, whose eyes and mouth are in their
breasts. Herodotus. The country of their abod and Breed. Strabo.
In like sort in Arabia, from Dira Southward in a promontorie, there are many
Baboons, and in the continent called Dachinabades beyond Barygaza, and the
Eastern Mountains of the Mediterranean region; and those which Apollonius saw
betwixt the rivers Ganges, and Hyphasis, seem to be of this sort, in that he
describes them to be black haird, Dog-faced, Arrianus
and Aelianus seems to be deceived, in saying, that there are men
Cynoprosopoi, Dog-faced, whereas it is the error of vulgar people, to think
that babouns are men, differing only in the face or visage.

Concerning their members or parts in several, they are black and hairy, rough
skinned, Their anatomy and parts. Albertus.
red and bright eyes, along Dogs face, and teeth stronger and longer then
Dogs: the face of a Lion must not be attributed to this beast, nor yet a
Satyrs, though it be more like. It has a grim and fearful face, and the
female has naturally her womb cast out of her body, and so she bears it
about all her life long: their voice is a shrill whizing, for they cannot
speak, and yet they understand the Indian language, Their voice. Aelianus.
under their beard they have a chin growing like a Serpents, and bearding about
the lips like a Dragon; their hands are armed with most strong nails, and
sharp, they are very swift of foot, Their love and food
Walnuts and Nuts, as well as men, finding the meat within, though the shel be
unprofitable: they will also drink wine and eat flesh, sod, roasted, or
deliciously dressed, Their actiuity in swimming.
and they will eat Venison, which they by reason of their swiftnes take easily,
and having taken it tear it in pieces and roast it in the Sun, they can swim
safely over any waters, and therefore among he Aegiptians they signify
swimming.

Their nature in particular.
they are so vnapeasable. The Latins use them adiectiuely to signify any
angry, stubborn, Their love of garments.
froward, or ravening man. They will imitate all human actions, loving
wonderfully to wear garments, and of their own accord they cloth themselves
in the skins of wild beasts they have killed, they are as lustful and
venereous as goats, attempting to defile all sorts of women, and yet they love
little children, and their females will suffer them to suck their breasts if
they be held to them, and some say they will suck women's breasts like little
children. There was such a beast brought to the French king, his head being
like a Dogs, and his other parts like a man's, having legs, hands and Arms
naked like a man's, and a white neck, he did eat sodde flesh so mannerly and
modestly, An History. lib. de naturae rerum.
taking his showing himself well pleased with those that sport with him. The
Nomades, people of Aethiopia, and the nations of Menitimori live upon the milk
of Cynocephals, keeping great herds of them, and killing all the males, except
some few preserved for procreation.

A TARTARINE.
THere was at Paris another beast called a Tartarine, and in some places a
Magot (much like a Baboun, Theod. Beza.
as appears by his natural circumcision) being as great as a Greyhound,
and walked for the most part on two legs, being clothed with a soldiers coat,
and a sword girded to his side, so that the most part thought him to be some
Monster-little-man, Munkey kind or the Baboon, his voice was like the squeeking
of a Mouse, but his aspect and countenance was fierce, truculent, and fearful,
as his image is here deciphered.

THE SATYR.
AS the Cynocephall or Baboun-Apes have given occasion to some to imagine
(though falsely) there were such men, so the Satyrs a most rare and seldom
seen beast, Superstitious error of Satyrs.
has occasioned other to think it was a Devil; and the Poets with Onocentaure
and wild Ass, and other snapes, it being also probable, that Devils take not
any daenomination or shape from Satyrs, but rather the Apes themselves from
Devils whom they resemble, for there are many things common to the Satyre-apes
and deuilish Satyrs, as their human shape, their abode in solitary places,
their rough-hayre, and lust to women, wherewithal Stathes, signifying the
yard or virile member: Their name.
and it is certain that the devils have excercised their praestigious lust, or
rather their imagination of lust upon mankind, whereof comes that distinction
of Fauni, that some are Incubi defilers of Women, and some Succubi defiled by
men. Peradventure the name of Satire is more fitly derived from the hebrew
Sair. Esa. 34. whereof of the plural is Jeirim, Esa. 13. which is interpreted
monsters of the Desert, or rough hairy Fawnes; and when issim is put to seir,
it signifies Goats.

The Chaldaeans for seirim, render schedin; that is, evil devils: and the
Arabians lesejathin, that is satanas: the Persyans Deuan, the Illyryans Deuadai
and Dewas: the Germans Tenfel. They which passed through the world and
exercised dancing and other sports for Dionisius, were called Satyrs, and
sometimes Tytiri, because of their wanton songs; sometimes Sileni (although
the difference is, that the smaller and younger beasts Satiri, the elder and
greater Sileni:) Also Bacchae and Nymphae, wherefore Bacchus is pictured riding
in a chariot of Vinebranches, Silenus ridinge beside him on an Ass; Gyraldin.
and the Bacchae or Satyrs shaking together their staulkie Iauelines and
Paulmers. By Scirti, and the anticke or satyricall dancing sicinnis, and they
also sometimes sicinnistae; sometimes Aegipanae: wherefore Pliny reports,
Grapaldin
that among the western Ethiopians, there are certain little hills full of
the Satirique Aegipanae, Atlas amongst the Moors, whereof there was no
footing, remnant, or appearance to be found in the day time.

The Satyrs are in the Islands Satiridae, which are three in number, Ptol: 2,
7. Countries of breed.
standing right over against India on the farther side of Ganges; of which
Euphemus Car rehearses this history: that when he sailed into Italy, by the
rage of wind and evil weather they were driven to a coast vnnauigable, where
were many desert Islandes inhabited of wild men, satirian Islands, where we
saw the inhabitants red, and had tails joined to their back not much less
then horses. These, being perceived by the Mariners to run to the ships and
lay hold on the women that were in them, the ship-men for fear, Their lustful
disposition.
took one of the Barbarian women and set her on the land among them, whom in
most odious and filthy manner they abused, not only in that part that nature
has ordained, but over the whole body most libidinously, whereby they found
them to be very bruit beasts.

There are also Satires in the Eastern mountains of India, Pliny
in the country of the Cartaduli, and in the province of the Comari and
corudae, but the Cebi spoken of before bred in Ethiopia, are not Satyrs
(though faced like them:) nor the Prasyan Apes, Paul. venet.
which resemble Satyrs in short beards. There are many kinds of these Satyrs
better distinguished by names then any properties natural known unto us.
Diversity of kinds.
Such are the Aegipenae before declared, Nymphs of the Poets, Fawnes, pan and
sileni, which in time of the Gentiles were worshipped for gods; and it was one
part of their religion, Pliny
to set up the picture of a Satyr at their doors and gates, for a remedy
against the bewitching of envious persons; and the statue of Priapus in the
agalma of a Satyr in their gardens: for which cause, we read of many pictures
made of Satyrs. Pliny.
Antiphilus made a very noble one in a Panthers skin, calling it Aposcopon,
that is, Wri-faced. Another Painter of Aristides, painted it crowned with a
drinking cup, signifiyng thereby the beastlines of drunkards. Miron had one
painted hearing and admiring pipes, Hermolaus.
and another called Periboetos at Athens, as is reported, and that Praxitelus
was wonderfully in love therewith; whereupon being at supper with Phryne the
noble harlot, who had begged of him the best piece of work he had, consented,
with this condition, that he would not tell her which he loved best: whereupon
she, to satisfy hirselfe, privily suborned one of his slaves, to come in at
supper time, and tell him his house and most of his goods were burned, whereat
being amazed, demanded if Cupid and the Satyr were safe, by which she knew the
best piece, and asked cupid, refusing the Satyr. Pliny.
Protogenes had one painted holding pipes in his hand, and was called
Anopauomenos: and Timanthes had painted cyclops sleeping in a little tablet,
with Satyrs standing beside him, measuring with a iauelyn the length of his
thumb.

Satyrs have no humain conditions in them, nor other resemblance of men beside
their outward shape: Mela. Resemblance of Satyrs.
though Solinus speak of them like as of men. They carry their meat under their
chin as in a storehouse, and from thence being hungry they take it forth to
eat, making it ordinary with them every day which is but annual in the
Formicae lions; being of very unquiet motions above other Apes. Their provision
of food.
They are hardly taken, except sick, great with young, old, or asleep: for
Sylla had a Satyr brought him which was taken a Apollonia, Their tak^ng
in the holy place Nymphaeum, of whom he (by diverse interpreters) demanded many
questions, but received no answer, save only a voice much like the neiyng of a
horse, whereof he being afraid, sent him away alive. Philostratus teleth another
history, how that Apollonius and his colleagues supping in a village of
Ethiopia, beyond the fall of Nilus, they heard a sudden outcry of women calling
to one another; some saying, Take him, others, Follow him: likewise provoking
their husbands to help them: the men presently took clubs, stones, or what
came first to hand, complaining of an injury don unto their wives. Now some ten
months before there had appeared a fearful snew of a Satyr, raging upon
their women, and had slain two of them, with whom he was in lou: the companions
of Apollonius quaked at the hearing hereof, and Nilus one of them swear love)
that they being naked and unarmed, could not be able to resist him in his
outrageous lust, but that he would accomplish his wantonness as before: yet said
Apollonius, there is a remedy to quail these wanton-leaping beasts, which men
say Midas used (for Midas was of kindred to Satyrs, Taming of Satyrs
as appeared by his ears.) This Midas heard his mother say, that Satyrs loved
to be drunk with wine, and then sleep soundly, and after that be so moderat,
mild and gentle, that a man would think they had lost their first nature.

Whereupon he put wine into a fountain near the highway, whereof when the
Satyr^ had tasted he waxed meek suddenly, and was overcome. Now, that we
think not this a fable (says Apollonius) let us go to the governor of the
Town, and inquire of him whether there be any wine to be had that we may offer
it to the Satyr, whereunto all consented, Egyptian earthen vessels with wine
and put it into the fountain where their cattle were watered: this don,
Apollonius called the Satyr, secretly thretning him, and the Satyr enraged
with the savor of the wine came; after he had drunk^ thereof, Now said
Apollonius, let us sacrifice to the Satyr for he sleeps, and so led the
inhabitants to the dens of the Nymphs, distant a furlong from the town and
showed the^ the Satyr, saying; Neither beat, curse, or provoke him
henceforth, and he shall never harm you. It is certain, that the devils do
many ways delude men in the likeness of Satyrs, Pausanias. Macrobius.
for when the drunken feasts of Bacchus were yearly celebrated in Parnassus,
there were many sightes of Satyrs, and voices, and sounding of cymbals heard:
yet is it likely that there are men also like Satyrs inhabiting in some desert
places; for S. Ierom in Paul the Eremite, reports there appeared to S. Antony
an Hippocentaure, such as the Poets describe and presently he saw in a rocky
valley adioining, Men like Satyrs
a little man having crooked nostrils, horns growing out of his forhed, and the
nether part of his body had Goats feet: the holy man not dismayed, taking the
shield of faith, and the breast plate of righteousness, like a good souldior
of Christ, preased toward him, which brought him some fruits of palms as
pledges of his peace, upon which he fed in the journey; which saint Anthony
perceiving, he asked him who he was, and received, this answer; I am a mortal
creature, one of the inhabitants of this Desert, whom the Gentiles (deceived
with error) do worship and call Fauni, Satyrs, and Incubi: I am come in
embassage from our flock, entreating that thou would pray for us unto the
common GOD, who came to save the world: the which words were no sooner ended,
but he ran away as fast as any foul could fly. And least this should seem
false, under Constantine at Alexandria, there was such a man to be seen alive,
and was a public spectacle to all the World, the carcass whereof after his
death was kept from corruption by heat, through salt, and was carried to
ANTIOCHIA that the Emperor himself might see it.

Albertus. Two b^aste^ like Satyrs taken.
for there were two of those found in the woods of Saxony toward Dacia, in a
desert, the female whereof was killed by the darts of the hunters, and the
biting of Dogs, but the male was taken alive, being in the upper parts like a
man, and in the nether parts like a Goat, but all hairy throughout: he was
brought to be tame, and learned to go upright, and also to speak some words,
but with a voice like a Goat, and without all reason: he was exceeding lustful
to women attempting to ravish many of what condition soever they were, and of
this kind there are store in Ethiopia.



THE FIGVRE OF ANOTHER MONSTER.
THE famous learned man George Fabricius, Another monster like a Satyr.
showed me this shape of a monstrous beast that is fit to be joined to the
story of Satyrs. There was (said he) in the territory of the Bishop of
Salceburgh, in a forest called Fannesbergh, a certain foure-footed beast, of
a yellowish-carnation color, Color and nature.
hundred thirty, whose image being here so lively described, may save us
further labor in discoursing of his maine and different parts and proportion.

OF THE NORVEGIAN MONSTERS.
Hoct. Boet.
WHen as certain Ambassadors were sent from James the fourth of that name king
of Scotland, among whom was James Ogill that famous scholar of the University
of Abberdon, they no sooner took shipping and hoysted sail, but there
suddenly arose such a tempestuous storm, that Norway: and there going on
shore, they were very strangely affrighted, to see (as to them it appeared)
certain wild, Monsters lik Men
monstrous-men, running on the tops of the mountains. Afterward, they were
told by the inhabitants that they were beasts (and not men) which did bear
mortal hatred to mankind, although they could not abide the presence of a man's
countenance, Hatred to mankind
yet in dark nights, when the reverent visage of human creatures are
covered, they will come down by troops upon the villages, and except the
barking of dogs drive them back they break open doors, and enter houses,
killing and devouring who soever they find; for their strength is so
irresistable and great, that they can pull up by the roots a tree of mean
stature, The great strength of these beasts.
and tearing the boughs from the body, with the

Of the AEGOPITHECVS.
Diverse shaps in apes.
Under the Equinoctial toward the East and south, there is a kind of Ape called
Aegopithecus, an Ape like a Goat. For Arctopitheci, and some like Lions,
called Leontopetheci, The description of Pan.
and some like Dogs, called Cynocephali, as is before expressed; and many
other which have a mixed resemblance of other creatures in their members.
Amongst the rest is there a PAN; who in his head, face, horns, legs, and from
the loins downwarde resembles a Goat, but in his belly, breast, and arms, an
Ape; such a one was sent by the king of Indians to Constantine, Nicephorus
Calisthius
which being shut up in a Cave or close place, by reason of

OF THE SPHINGA Or SPHINX.
THE Sphinx or Sphinga is of the kind of Apes, having his body rough like
Apes, but his breast up to his neck, Pliny. calisthius. The description.
pilde and smooth without hair: the face is very round yet sharp and piked,
having the breasts of women, and their favor or visage much like them: In that
part of their body which is India and Ethyopia. Aelionus. Country of breed.
In the promontory of the farthest Arabia near Dira, are Sphinges and certain
Lions called Formicae, so likewise they are to be found amongst the
Trogladitae. lions-formic^
As the Babouns and Cynocephals are more wild than other Apes, Pliny.
so the Satyrs and Sphynges are more meek and gentle, for they are not so
wild that they will not be tamed, Their nature
nor yet so tame but they will revenge their own harms: Albertus.
as appeared by that which was slain Thebanes. They carrye their meat in the
storehouses of their own chaps or cheeks, Manner of carrieng their meat.
taking it forth when they are hungry, and so eat it: not being like the
Formicae, for that which is annual in them, is daily and hourly amongst
these.

The name of this Sphynx Hermolaus.
binding, Of the name and notation thereof
as appears by the Greek notation, or else of delicacie and dainty nice
Varrianus
loosnesse, (wherefore there were certain common strumpets called Sphinctae,
and the Megarian Sphingas, was a very popular phrase for notorious harlots)
has given occasion to the Poets, to faigne a certain monster called Sphynx,
which they say was thus derived. Hydra brought forth the Chimaera, Chimaera by
Orthus the Sphinx, and the Nemoean Lion: now this Orthus was one of Geryons
Dogs. Hesiod.
This Sphinx they make a treble-formed monster, a Maidens face, a Lions legs,
and the wings of a foul, Ausonius. The description of the Poets Phinx.
or as Ausonius and Varinus say, the face and hand of a maid, the body of a
Dog, the Sphincian mountain; propounding to all trauailers that came that
way an Aenigma or Riddle, The Riddle of the Sphinx
which was this: What was the creature that first of all goes on four legs;
afterward on two, and lastly on three: and all of them that could not dissolve
that Riddle, she presently slew, by taking them and throwing them down
headlong, from the top of a Rock. At last Oedipus came that way and declared
the secret, that it (was a Man) who in his infancy creeps on al four,
afterward in youth, goes upright upon two legs, The solution of the Riddle by
Oedipus
and last of all in old age takes unto him a staff which makes him to go
as it were on three legs; which the monster hearing, she presently threw down
her self from the former rock, and so she ended. Whereupon Oedipus is taken
for a subtle and wise opener of mysteries.

But the truth is, Palaephatus. The true History of Sphinx
that when Cadmus had married an Amazonian woman called Sphynx, and with her
came to Thebes, and there slew Draco their King and possessed his kingdom,
afterward there was a sister unto Draco called Harmona, whom Cadmus married,
Sphynx being yet alive: She in revenge (being assisted by many followers)
departed with great store of wealth into the Mountain SPHINCIVS, taking with
her a great Dog which Cadmus held in great account, and there made daily
incursions or spoils upon his people: Now aenigma in the Theban-language,
signifies an inrode or warlike incursion, wherefore the people complained in
this sort. This Grecian Sphinx robs us, in setting upon with an aenigma,
but no man knows after what manner she makes this aenigma.

Cadmus hereupon made proclamation, that he would give a very bountiful
reward unto him, that would kill Sphinx, upon which occasion the CORINTHIAN
Oedipus came unto her, being mounted on a swift courser, and accompanied with
some Thebans in the night season, slew her. Other say, that Oedipus by
counterfaiting friendship, slew her, making show to be of her faction; and
Pausanias says, that the former Riddle, was not a Riddle, but an Oracle of
Apollo, which cadmus had received, whereby his posterity Theban kingdom; and
whereas Oedipus, being the son of Laius a former king of that country, was
taught the Oracle in his sleep, he recovered the kingdom usurped by Sphinx
his sister, and afterward unknown, married his own mother Iocasta. But the
true moral of this poetical fiction, is by that learned Alciatus in one of
his emblems deciphered, that her monstrous treble-formed-shape, signified her
lustful pleasure under a Virgins face, her cruel pride under the Lions
claws, her winde-driuen lenitye under the Eagles or birds feathers, and I
will conclude with the words of Suidas concerning such monsters, Suidas
Meaning this Poetical Sphinx
that the Tritons, Sphinges, and centaures, are the images of those things,
which are not to be found within the compass of the wholeworld.

The true Sphinx first described, is of a fierce though a tameable nature, and
if a man do first of all perceive or discern of these natural Sphinges,
before the beast discern or perceive the man, he shall be safe; but if the
beast first descrie the man, then is it mortal to the man. The nature of the
Sphinx.
These Sphinges were of great account for their strangeness: with their image
did Augustus sign all his grauntes, Sue^onius. The use of Sphinges. Herodotus.
Pausanias.
libels, and Epistles: afterward he left that, and signed with the Image of
Alexander the great, and last of all with his own. Syclis the king in the
city of the Boristhenites, had a fair house, about which there were sphinges
and Gryphins wrought out of white stone. At Athens, in the Temple Parthenona,
there is described the contention betwixt Pallas and Neptune, about the earth,
and the image of Pallas made of Yuory and gold, has in the midst of her shield
the picture of a sphinx. Amasis the king of Egypt, built in the porch of
Pallas, an admirable work called Sai: where he placed such great colosses and
Andro-sphinges, that it was afterward supposed he was buried therein, Horodotus.
and was lively to be seen imputrible. To conclude, the Egyptians in the
porches of their Temples painted a Sphinx, whereby they insinuated that their
divine wisdom was but dark and uncertain, and so covered with fables, that
there scarce appeared in it any sparkles or footsteps of verity.

Of the SAGOIN, called Galeopithecus.
This figure of the Sagoin, I received Peter cordenberg, a very learned
Apothecary of Antwerpe, which is three times as big as my pictur and John say
that famous English Doctor has advertised me, that it no way resembles the
Sagoin it self, which is not much greater than a Rat, a little conny, The
quality.
or a young Hedghog: for he had seen several ones of that bigness, of a
gryseld color, a neat beard, Color
and somewhat ash-colored, a tail like a Rat, but hayry; the feet of a
Squirrell, the face almost like a Martine, or Satyr, a round ear but very
short and open, Parts
the hair black at the root, and white at the end, and in other conditions
like a Munkey. They are much set by among women, and by the Brasilians where
they are bred and called Sagoines, it being very propable that they are
conceived by a small Ape and a Weasell, for in that country by reason of the
heat thereof, there are many such unnatural commixtions. Procreation of
Sagoines
Their meat
apples, sweet-grapes, dried in the sun, figs, or pears. There was one of
them at Antwerpe sold for fifty crowns: The price of a Sagoin
in France they call a Sagoni a little beast not much bigger than a Squirrell,
and not able to endure any cold. Some other affirm that a Sagoin is a bearded
creature, but without a tail, of an ash color, not much bigger then a fiste,
but of this beast there is not any author writes more then is already
rehearsed.

OF THE BEAR-APE ARCTOPITHECVS.
THere is in America a very deformed Haut or Hauti, Theuetus. Of the name
and the Frenchmen Guenon, as big as a great Affrican Monkey. His parts
His belly hangs very low, his head and face like unto a childs, as may be
seen by this lively picture, and being taken it will sigh like a young child.
His skin is of an ash color, and hairie like a Bear: he has but three claws
on a foot, as Americans call Amahut, and thereof this beast is called Haut.
Their tail is about three fingers long, having very little hair thereon, it
has been often tried, that though it suffer any famine, it will not eat the
flesh of a living man, and one of them was given me by a Frenchman, which I
kept alive six and twenty days, and at the last it was killed by Dogs, and
in that time when I had set it abroad in the open air, I observed, that
although it often rained, A secret in Nature.
yet was that beast never wet. When it is tame it is very loving to a man, and
desirous to climb up to his shoulders, which those naked Amerycans cannot
endure, by reason of the sharpness

Of the Simivulpa, or Apish FOX.
THose which have trauay led the contry of Payran do affirm, Pisonius.
Gillius. The description.
that they have seen a four-footed beast called Simivulpa, in Greek
Alopecopithecos, and in German Fuchssaff: in the forpart like a Fox, and in
the hinder part like an Ape, except that it had man's feet and ears like a Bat,
Description.
and underneath the common belly, there was a skin like a bag or scrip,
wherein she keeps, lodges, and carries her young ones, until they are able
to provide for themselves, without the help of their damme: neither do they
come forth of that receptacle, except it be to suck milk, or sport
themselves, so that the same vnderbelly is her best remedy against the furious
Hunters and other ravening beasts, to preserve her young ones, for she is
incredibly swift, running with that carriage as if she had no burden. It has
a tail like a Munkey: there was one of them with three young Whelps taken,
and brought into a ship, but the whelps dyed quickly: the old one living
longer, was brought to Syuill, and afterward to Granado, where the King of
Spain saw it, Cardan report of a beast called Chiurca, in Hispania noua, and
Stadinius of a Seruuoy in America: but I conjecture that the former is this Fox
ape, Aelianus.
called in Greek Alopecopithecos, and of the Germans Fuschsaffe, the latter
the Female Cynocephall, which carries her womb wherein lie her young ones
without her belly. a miraculous thing of a fish
There is a fish called Glaucus, whereof the male swalloweth up all the young
ones when they are endangered by other, and afterward yields them forth
again safe and sound.

OF THE ASS.


THe Ass is called in Latin Asinus, in Greek Oros and Killos, by reason of
his labor in bearing burdens, and of some Megamucos because of his unpleasant
voice: Of the name and the reasons thereof.
Of other Cochutons, or Canthon, from whence comes Cantharus, that is, a
Scarabee or Fl^e, bred of the dung of Asses. The Haebrues call it Chamor,
Deuteron. 5. Persyans Care, the latter Haebrues do indifferently take Gajedor,
Varinus.
Tartak, and caar for an Ass: the Italyans Lasino, the Spaniardes Asno,
Epethites of in Ass.
the French Vng asne, the Germans Esel, Mul, Mulle-resel, and the Illyrians
Osel; the which beast is entitled or phrased with many epithites among Poets;
as, slow, burthen-bearing, back-bearing, vile, cart-drawing, mill-labouring,
sluggish, crooked, vulgar, slow-paced, long-eared, blockish, braying, idle,
deuill-haired, filthy, saddle-bearer, slow-foot, four-foot, unsavory, and a
beast of miserable condition; beside many other such titles in the Greek. Yet
this silly beast has among the Astronomers found more favor, for in the sign
Cancer there are two stars called the two Asses, placed there as some say, by
Bacchus, Pliny. Asses in celestial signs. Hyginus.
who in his fury which Juno laid upon him, travailing to the Dodanaean Temple
of Apollo to recover his wits, by the counsel of the Oracle, came to a certain
lake of water, over which he could not pass; and meeting there two Asses,
took one of them, upon whose back he was safely carried over dri-foote.
Afterward, when he had recovered his wits, in thankfulness for that good
turn, he placed the two Asses among the stars.

Numb. 22
yet holy Writ teaches us, that an Ass saw an Angel, and opened his mouth in
reproof of his master Balaam: and our most blessed Savior rode on an Ass to
Jerusalem to show his humility: and Sampson out of the iaw-bone of an Ass,
quenched his thirst. Morals of the discourses of asses.
Apuleius in his eleven books of his golden Ass, takes that beast for an
Emblem, to note the manners of mankind; how some by youthful pleasures become
beasts, and afterward by timely repentant old age, are reformed men again:
Some are in their lives Wolves; Proclus.
some Foxes, some Swine, some Asses, and so other may be compared to other
beasts: and as Origin says, only by pleasure is a man a horse or Mule, when a
beastly soul lives in a human shape. This world is unto them an enchanted
cup of Circes, Beroaldus
wherein they drink

Asses are bred in Arcadia, wherefore prouerbially, Countries breeding asses.
the best Asses are signified by the Arcadian Ass, and the greatest Asses by
the Acharnican Ass. In Timochain of Persya, are very beautiful Asses, whereof
one has been sold for thirty pounds of silver. Paul vene^* Pondera:
Likewise in Rea, in Italy, in Illiria, Thracia and Epirus, there are Asses but
very small ones, although all other cattle there are very large. In India,
among the Psillians, they are not greater then Rams, and generally all their
cattle are of a very small growth. In Scythia, Pontus, Aelianus.
Celta, and the regions confining them, are no Asses bred, by reason of
extremity of Misia there are also asses, but their flanks are crooked and
indented as if they were broken; whereupon a prouerbiall common speech arises
(one having a broken flank) for a Missian Ass.

Asses are engendered both by their own kind and also by horses, for they
choose stallions and put them to their Asses, who have large bodies, well set
legs, strong necks, Their breed.
broad and strong ribs, brawny and high creasts, thighs full of sinews, and
of black or flea-bitten color (for a Mouse-colour is not approved) wherefore
he that will have a good flock of Asses, must look that the male and female
be sound, and of a good age, that they may breed long time, and out of a good
seminary, as of Arcadia or Rea: Palladius.
for as the best Lampreyes are in Sicilia, and the delicate fish Helops, in
Rhodos and not else where; so are best Asses in these forenamed places. When
they make choice of a Stallion, Absirtus.
although it prove not, until three years, or three and a half. Aristotle
Pliny.
Men say that Anna the father in law of Esau, did first invent the copulation
of horses and Asses together: for as a horse does cover a she ass, so an
ass will cover a Mare, and an ass will sooner fill the lust of a Mare, then a
horse.

If a horse cover a female ass which has been entered by a male ass, he
cannot alter the seed of the ass: but if an ass cover a Mare which a horse
formerly entered, Pliny
he will destroy the seed of the horse, so that the Mare shall suffer
abortment, Leonicen^^
by reason that the seed genitall of an Ass is more frigide then a horses: The
Mares of Elis cannot Pliny Aristotle
which affirm that an ass cannot conceive for so many years, as she has
eaten grains of barley corn defiled with women's purgation, but this is
certain, that if an ass conceive not at the first loosing of her teeth, she
remains barren. They are not coupled in generation in the Spring aequinoctium
like Mares and other beasts, but in the Summer Solstice, by reason of their
cold natures, that they may bring forth their young ones about the same time,
for in the twelfe month after their copulation, Aristotle Varro.
they render their foles. If the males be kept from labor they are the worse
for generation, wherefore they are not to be suffered idle at that time, but it
is not so with the female, she must rest, that the Fool may be the stronger:
but presently after she is covered she must be coursed and driven to and fro,
or else she will cast forth again the received seed. Pliny


The time that she goes with young is according to the male kind by which she
is covered, for so long as the male lay in the belly of his damme, so long will
the Ass carry Hippothela, Pliny
that is, a Horse-suckling, and Mares will not be covered by Asses, except by
such an one as was a horse-suckling. A she-asse will engender till she be
thirty years old, which is her whole life long, Aelianus.
but if she conceive often, she will quickly be barren: whereof their keepers
must take such care, that they cause them to be kept from often copulation.

They will not fool in the sight of man, or in the light, but in darkness;
they bring colostracion or Beestings.

Touching their several parts, Aelianus.
they have teeth on either chap like a man and a horse, an Ass and a Mule
have 36. teeth, and joined near together: the blood of Asses and Bulls is the
thickest of all other, Ab^ertus.
as the blood of man is the thinnest: His head is great and his ears long and
broad: both male and female loose their fore-teeth in the thirtith month of
their age, Pliny.
and the second to the first, in the sixth month, their third and fourth teeth
are called Gnomons, that is, Regulars, because by them there is a tried rule to
know their age; and those teeth also they lose in the sixth month. The heart of
an Ass is great, as all other fearful beasts have: The belly is uniform as
in other beasts that have a solid or whole hoof. It wants a gall, and has
two vdders betwixt the thighs, the forpart Plutarch. Pliny. Joan: A^o^ach.
and the hinder part near the loins is stronger. The hoofes are whole and not
parted: the Stygean water is so cold that nothing can hold it, except the hoof
of an ass or Mule; although Aelianus affirm, that it cannot be contained but
in the horns of Scythian asses. Their tails are longer by one joint then a
horses (though not so hairy.) They are purged with monthly courses more then
sheep or Goats, and the urine of the female is more thin than the males. If an
Ass was hindered by any disease from making water, (...)
certain superstitious persons for the ease of the beast, muttered this charm:
Gallus bibit and non meijt, myoxus meijt and non bibit: that is, The Cock
drinks and makes not water,
The Dormouse makes water and never drinks.


They will eat Canes or Reeds, Their meat.
which to other beasts is almost poison: wherefore in old time an Ass was
dedicated to Bacchus as the canes were sacred unto him; and at the time of their
copulation they give them herb Basil to stir up their lust: They will be
satisfied with any never so base food, as chafe, whereof there is abundance in
every country, young thorns and fruits of trees, twigges of Osier, Philemon
died with laughing when he saw an ass eat figs.
or a bundle of boughs to browse upon: insomuch as Q. Hortensius was wont to
say, that he had more care that his Barbels should not hunger in his
fish-pools, then his Asses in Rosea: but the young ones newly weaned must be
more tendered, for they must be fed with hay, chafe or barley, Val: Man:
green corn, or barley bran. Asses will hardly drink but at watering places
in their folds, or such as they have been accustomed withal, and where they
may drink without wetting their feet; and that which is more strange, they
cannot be brought to go over hollow bridges, through which the water appears
in the chinks of the plankes, and when in travail they are very thirsty, they
must be unladen and constrained to drink: yea, Herodotus African shepheardes,
which never drink. When they sleep they lie at length, and in their sleep
conceive many forceable dreams, as appears by the often beating back their
hinder legs, which if they strike not against the vain air but against some
harder substance, they are for ever utterly lamed.

When the Asses of Thuscia have eaten Hemlocke, or an herb much like unto it,
Mathaeolus.
they sleep so long and strangely, that oftentimes the countrymen begin to
fleay them, and on the sudden their skins half taken off and the other half
on, they awake, braying in such horrible manner, that the poor men are most
dreadfully affrighted therewith. Their voice is very rude and fearful, as the
Poet said: and therefore the Graecians to express the same have feigned many
new words and call it Ogkethmos, as the Latins Rudere, that is, to utter forth
a voice in a base and rude manner. The Poets feign, that at that time when
Jupiter came to war with the Gyantes, Eratosthenes
Bacchus and Vulcan, the Satyrs and Sileni assisted and attended him, being
carried upon Asses. When the time came that the battle began, the Asses for
very fear brayed most horribly, whereat the Gyantes not being acquainted with
such strange and unknown voices and cries, took them to their heels and so
were overcome.

In the sacrifices of the Goddess Vacuna, an Ass was feasted with bread, and
crowned with flowers, hung with rich Jewels and Peytrels, Ovid.
because (as they say) when Priapus Vesta being asleep, she was suddenly
awaked by the braying of an Ass, and so escaped that infamy: And the
Lampsaceni in the disgrace of Priapus did offer him an ass. But this is
accounted certain, that among the Scythians by reason of cold, an Ass is
never heard nor seen; and therefore when the Scythians set upon the Persyans,
their horses will not abide the braying of Asses, Lanctantius.
wondering both at the strangeness of an Asses shape, and rudeness of his cry:
wherefore there are certain birds, resembling in their chattering the braying
of Asses, and are therefore termed Onocratuli.

When an ass dies, out of his body are engendered certain Flies, called
Scarabees. They are infested with the same diseases that horses be, and also
cured by the same means (except in letting of blood) for by reason their
veins be small and their bodies cold, A good horse leach is a good asseleach.
Vegetius.


Asses are subject to madness when they have tasted of certain herbs growing
near Potnias; as are Bears, Horses, Leopardes and Wolves: they only among al
other hairie beasts are not trobled with either tikes, or lice, but principally
they perish by a swelling about the crown of their pasterne, or by a Catarhe
called Malis, which falling down upon their liver they die, but if it purge out
of their nostrils they shall be safe: and Columella writes that if sheep be
stabled where Mules or Asses have been housed, they will incur the scab: There
is great use made of the skins of Asses, for the Germans do make thereof a
substance to paint and write upon, which is called Eselshut. The Arabians
Mesha, made of Asses and Goats hair, whereof the inhabitauntes of their
deserts make them tents and fackes. It is reported that Empedocles was called
Colysanemas, because when the Agrigentines were trobled with winds by hanging
about their city innumerable Asse-skins, he safe-guarded them from the
winds: whereupon some have thought (but falsely) that there was some secret in
asses skins, against outrageous Tempests.

P^^ny.
The bones of Asses have been used for pipes, the Artificers make more
reckoning of them then of the bones of Hearts, and therefore Esop in Plutarch
wondereth that so gross and dull a creature, should have such shrill and
musical bones; and the Busirites called the Philosophers Naucratites, because
they played music upon Asses bones, for they cannot abide the sound of a
trumpet, because it resembles the voice of an Ass, who is very hateful to
them for Typhons sake.

Macenas allowed the flesh of young Asses to be eaten, preferring it before the
flesh of wild asses, and this custom also prevailed at Athens, where they did
eat the flesh of old Asses, which hurts the stomach, having in it no good
juice or sweetness, and is very hard to be digested. In like sort about the
coasts of Alexandria, men use to eat the flesh G^l^nus.
which begetting in their body much melancholic and adusted humor, causes
them to fall into the Elephantia or spotted leprosy.

Asses are tamed at three years old, and taught for those businesses which
they must be applied unto, some for the mill, some for husbandry and the
plough, some for burdens and carriage, some for the wars, and some for
draught. Merchants use Asses to carry their wine, oil, corn, and other things
to the seaside; wherefore the country man makes principal account of this
beast for his carriage too and fro, being fit to carry both on his neck and on
his back: Co^l^mella
with them they go to market with their wares, and upon them bring home their
household necessaries. Tarde costas agitator aselli,
Vilibus aut onerat pomis, lapidemque reuertens,
Incussum, aut atrae massam picis uerbe reportat.
They grind in their milles and fetch home their corn, they plough their
land, as in Campania, Lib^a and Batia, where the ground is soft, and in
Bizantium that fruitful country, Pliny. Mulis^quis (...) in familia sunt.
which repayeth the husbandmans labor with increase of an hundred and fifty
times more then the seed, and where in drie-weather their ground is not arable
with the whole strength of Bulls, yet after a little rain, one Ass in one end
of a yoke, and an old woman at the other end, do easily draw the plough, and
open the earth to sow their seed: wherefore cato said merrily, that Mules,
Horses and Asses, keep no holli-daies, except they be such Asses as keep
within doors. Ad haec v^ehi cula non ninua pondere tr^hit.
In like sort they draw from place to place the carts of Bakers, or carts laded
with any other carriage, if it be not ouergreat.

The people carmani (by reason they want horses) use Asses in their wars, so
also do the Saracori, who never use them in milles or any such base works, but
upon them under take all their martial perils. Strabo.
There was a custom amongst the cumani, that when a woman was taken in
adultery, Aelianus.
she was led to the market, and there set upon a bare stone, afterward she was
set upon a bare Asses back, and so carried throughout the city, then brought
back again to the former stone for a public spectacle to all the city,
Su^^as
whereby she remained infamous all her life after, and was called Onobatis,
that is; one that had ridden an Ass: and the stone whereupon she stood, was
accounted an unlucky, and an odious place for all posterity. In like sort among
the Parthians it was held a disgraceful thing to ride or be carried upon a
bare Asses back. Anatolius
The dung of Asses is precious for H^n^ caput Ar (...) nudum c^ie sertur (...),
T^^henus finisse Tages in ^^mute ruris
or she-asse that has been covered in copulation, with persuasion that the
gardens will be the more fruitful.

Asses are of very foolish conditions and slender capacity, but yet very tame,
not refusing any manner of burden although it break his back: being loaded
it will not out of the way for any man or beast, and it only understands the
voice of that man, with whom it is labored, knowing also the way whereunto it
is accustomed. Ammonianus was in such love with an Ass, and holding him of so
great capacity, that he had one continually to hear his Lectures in
Phylosophie. Gallen affirms, that an Ass understands genus species and
indiuidium, S^nda^,
because if you show him a Camel that never saw one before, he is terrified
and cannot endure his sight: but if he have been accustomed to such a sight, if
you show him never so many, he is not moved at them. In like sort, he knows
men in general, being not afraid of them, but if he see or hear his keeper,
he knows him for his keeper or master.

There was a cunning player in Africa, in a city called Alcair, Leo Affric:
who taught an Ass diverse strange tricks or feats; for in a public
spectacle, turning to his Ass (being on a scaffolde to show sport) said; The
great Sultan purposes to build him a house, and shall need all the Asses of
Alcair to fetch and carry wood, stones, lime, and other necessaries for that
business: presently the Ass falls down, turns up his heels into the air,
groneth, and shuts his eyes fast, as if he had been dead: while he lay thus,
the player desired the beholders to consider his estate, for his Ass was dead,
he was a poor man, and therefore moved them to give him money to buy another
ass. In the mean time having gotten as much money as he could, he told the
people he was not dead, but knowing his masters poverty

Then said the player again, our Sultan has commanded that to morrow there
be a great triumph without the city, and that all the Noble women shall ride
thither upon the fairest asses, and this night they must be fed with Oats,
and have the best Water of Nilus to drink: At the hearing whereof, up starteth
the ass, snorting and leaping for joy: then said the plaier, the governor of
this town has desired me to lend him this my ass for his old deformed wise
to ride upon, at which words the ass hangs down his ears, and
understanding An asses Woman, an asses Woman, and so the player went unto
another town.

Such things do serve to teach us that asses are not altogether indocible,
besides in their own nature they know how to refresh themselves in their
Weariness by wallowing Aelianus.
they naturally look for the herb Citterach or Finger-ferne to cure them.
When the asses of Maurusium are bound to a journey, they set forward so fast,
Aelianus
that a man would think they rather flewe then ran, but being ouerwearied
they are so abased that they send forth tears, and then are they drawn at
Horses tails to their iourneyes end.

The ass is never at peace with the Cro, because it longs for the asses
eyes; likewise the bird Salem, for when the ass comes to the thorns to rub
himself where the said bird builds her nest, the ass spoyleth it,
wherefore the said bird makes continual assault upon him. In like sort the
Colota or Stellio, for it sleeps in the maungers, and

The Woolfe is also an enemy to the ass, for he loves his flesh, and with
small force does he compass the destruction of an ass, for the blockish ass
when he sees a wolf, Aelianus*
lays his head on his side, that so he might not see, thinking that because
he sees not the Wolf, the Wolf cannot see him; but the wolf upon this
advantage sets upon the beast on the blind side, and easily destroys the
couragelesse ass. Another argument of an asses stupidity, is that he cares
not for his own life, but will with quietness starve, if meat be not laid
before him. Wherefore it is apparent that when a dull scholar not apt to
learn is bid to sell an ass to signify his blockishnes, is no vain
sentence; Aristo^^^
therefore they which resemble asses in their head, round forehead, or great
face, are said to be blockish; in their fleshy face, fearful; in broad or
great eyes, simple; and like to be stone persons in scripture is deciphered in
an Ass. Thirdly, impudency and shamelessness, because an Ass will not for any
stripes forsake his own ways.

Fourthly, the Jewish people, who like Asses could not understand evident truth
of Christ in the plain text of Scripture, wherefore our savior secretly
vpbraided their dulnes, when he rode upon an Ass. Fifthly, the Egyptians by an
Ass, noted a man without all divine knowledge; wherefore they used to take an
Ass and follow him with all despite, beating him from place to place till he
brake his own neck; for they believed, that an ass was possessed of a
devil. Sixthly, Indocibility, by an ass bridled. Seventhly, the snares of
flatterers; for their priests set an ass between flowers and oyntmentes,
neither of both pertaining to an asses skill, teaching thereby, how mighty men
fall by

Touching such medicinal virtues as have been tried and found to be in the
several parts of Asses, by learned and approved writers, now in the conclusion
of this historye they shall be briefly remembered, and so this narration be
finished.

A draught or two of the same water whereof an Ass or an Ox has drunk, will
ease Marcellus Pliny.
and the brain of an ass steeped in sweet water and infumed in leaves, whereof
taken for certain days, half an ounce, eases the falling evil: the number
of which days cannot be less then thirty, but this is very ridiculous, that
if a man hurt by a scorpion, Pliny.
do whisper his harm in the ear of an ass, presently the hurt cease. When
one is vexed with a quotidian fever, with three drops of blood out of the vain
of an Asses ear, put into eighteen ounces of water and drunk by the patient,
eases that pain.

The liver of an ass burnt, drives away venomed things, and the same dried
and beat to powder; Haly.
helps the cough and shortness of breath, and roasted to be eaten, if it be
eaten Opponax, and instilled into the mouth forty days together, defends
infants from the aforesaid sickness. Pliny.
Also the heart of a male black ass, eaten with bread at the evening, in the
first or second day of the moon, is good against the falling evil. The liver
dried with parsely, and three walnuts cleansed from the pill and put into honey,
is marvelous good for one that is liver sick, Marcellus
the ashes of it mixed with oil, takes away Wens; and the ashes of the liver
and the flesh is good against the chapping, Auicen.
clefts, or slifters in the body, which come by cold: but Dioscorides; whom I
rather follow, attributes both these virtues to the ashes of the hoof. He
which is sick of the milt, may be help with the old milt of an ass, if he
eat thereof every day dried and fasting, he shall find case by it within three
days. The Sextus
makes the dugs full of milk, so also does the spleen, Rasis.
and the spleen with sewet of a bear, and oil made as thick as honey, by
anointing the eyelids therewith, restores the hairs which are wanting. The
reins ineretatrated, Marcellus.
bruised, and put into new pure wine, do help the bladder, and stay the
incontinency of the urine. The same dried, burned, and beaten into very small
powder, whereof a nut shell full put into two cups of pure wine and drunk off,
cures the strangury.

Pliny
It is thought that with the powder of the Asses genitall, the hair may be made
grow thicker: and the same beaten with lead and oil, and anointing the head
where gray hairs are shaven off, keeps it from more graye hairs. The stones
of an Ass

The blood of an ass staieth the flux of blood coming from the skin or films
of the brain; and two or three drops of the same drunk with wine, cures a
quotidian fever: Eseulapius. Pliny.
the self same thing is reported of the blood let out of the vein in the
ear. The blood of the foale of an Ass with wine, cures the Kings evil. The
froath or scum of Nitre with the fat of an Ass or the fat of a Sow, cures
the bitinges of Dogs: Dioscorides
and if there be any scarres in the body, the fat makes them of the same
color with the residue of the body: And if one vexed with the falling evil,
be anointed with the suet or fat of an Ass it will ease them very much,
likewise the marrow of Asses helps the scabs from a man, and with the suet
the places infected with Catthars, Leprosies, or Scarres, Rasis.
receive their former color: and the skin laid upon young infants, Pliny
makes them without Heron wrapped in an Asses skin, be bound to ones
forehead, it provoke sleep.

A palsy man will fall down if he taste of the perfume made of the hairs of
an Ass or Mule. The ashes of the hairs of Asses, stays bleeding; Trallianus.
and the same has the more force if they be of a male, and be mixed with
vinegar and laid in wool to the issue bleeding. The bones of an Ass broken
and sod, Pliny.
are very sovereign against the venom of a sea-Hare-fish. The poulder of an
Asses hoof drunk a month together, two spoonfuls at a time, helps the
falling evil very greatly: and the same mixed with oil, Galenus.
helps the kings evil; and being put upon Kibes or Chil-blanes, cures them.
The hoofs of Asses burned and beaten to poulder, given to them that have the
falling evil in drink, Myrepsus.
Aetius.
for it will kill the living young ones.

The dust thereof with the milk of an Ass, by anointing cures the scars and
webs of the eyes, and as Marcellus says, only the parings of an Asses hoof
scraped and mingled with a woman's milk; and they say, that if an Epilectick
man wear a ring made of an asses hoof wherein is no blacknes, it will preserve
him from falling. The poulder of an asses hoof burned and beaten, laid in
vinegar and made in little bals, and one of them put into the mouth and there
held, helps the loosnesse and pain in the teeth. Galen.
There Lichen, which if it be burned and beaten and put into old oil, will
cause hairs to grow out of baldnes, and it is of such force, that if it be
applied to a woman's cheek, it will produce the same effect, and mingled with
vinegar, it raises up the lethargike man.

And if a man take the ring-wormes growing naturally on Asses legs, Marcellus
and shredding them into powder put them in vinegar, it staieth all pain in
the head, which makes one sleepy. The flesh of Asses sod in pottage helps
them that have the Phthisis or disease of the Lungs, and there are some which
prescribe the taking of Asses flesh, or the blood of Asses mingled with vinegar
to be taken forty days together against the falling evil. Pliny.
The milk of an ass mingled with honey and drunk, loosneth the belly, and
therefore Hypocrates gave it for a gentle purgation being moister then any
other kind of milk, and fitter to Archigenes
and fasten them that are loose, being very good to wash the teeth withal.
Galen gave asses milk mixed with honey, to one in a consumption when he came
newly from a bath, and therefore it is given in fevers hecticks and all
consuming diseases because the substance of it is fitter for detersion then
nutriment: when the breasts are in pain, by drinking asses milk they be help,
and the same mingled with honey, causes women's purgation, by drinking asses
milk an exulcerat stomach is relieved: likewise all other pains in the
stomach, which come of sadness or sorrow, sighing, and desperation: Pliny.
and Heraclides gave asses milk with anniseed to one that had his lights
stopped, and it is likewise commended against the cough, extenuation, spitting
of blood, dropsy and hardness of the spleen, but it is not good for a

It is also privately used against eating of morture, white lead, sulphur, and
quicksiluer; and when a man's meat does not neither nourish nor digest, let
him drink Asses milk safely, and it is also good to gargarize in sore
chappes or throats. Likewise in a sever when there is no headache. (...).
The ancient in old time gave Asses milk to children before meat, Galenus.
and for want thereof Goats-milke: for sore mouths, it must be gargarized. It
is very profitable against the collicke and bloody Flixe, if honey be put
thereunto; the loosnes or desire of stool is taken away by drinking Asses
milk: the whay or milk of an Ass did Hyppocrates prescribe against the
consumption of the raynes or back, and the same with a root of a pomgranat
against the loosenes and other diseases of the belly to be drunk.

Pliny
Also there are examples where the whay of Asses milk have helped the gowt,
both in hand and foot: sweet water with Asses milk is wholesome against poison
of Hen-bane, and other poisons, Pliny.
but it must be used new or else soon after warmed: This milk will wake
women's skins whiter, Pliny.
wherefore, Poppea, the wife of Domitius Nero carried about with her in

The urine with the own dung, heals straight shooing, scabs in a man, and
the roughness of the nails. It takes away the scurffe of Oxen. It is given
in drink, to cure them that have ache in their raines, and with Pepper-wort it
is profitable against suppurations and apostems in the flesh. Dioscorides
If any be hurt by the stars, wash them in asses stale, mingled with
Spiknard: Galen.
the same force has it against corns and all hardness or thickenesse of
skin. The dung of asses new with oil of Roses, Pliny.
distilled warm into the ears, helps deasenes, and pushes or sudden
boyles of the head, are cured with the joyce of asses dung, and of sea-oynions
beat to powder, Marcellus
and the fat of beef, laid to the boyles like a plaster: both the dung of
asses and horses either raw or burnt mingled with Vinegar, restrayneth
bleeding Dioscorides
used like a plaster, being new and mingled with vinegar, and for the bleeding
at the nose, snuff in the ashes of asses dung burnt to powder. The dung of
asses cures the Piles, Aetius.
and the same dried and moistened in wine being drunk of cattle which are
stung with scorpions, cures them if it be at grasie; and it is found true by
long experience, that the dung of an ass rubbed, in quantity two sponfuls, and
taken every day, delivers one from the falling evil. Et miceus prodest ex
vhere succus asellae.
Si tepedo infundas ac mello piperque.
This is good against the gall and running over thereof, if it be mingled with
warm wine, Syrians call the dung of a young Foale which it first casts up
after the foaling, Polean; and give it against the sickness of the milk. In
sapa decoctum colo megnopere prodest. The same is good against the collicke and
the bloody flixe. The juice of asses dung, asses milk, and sweet wine,
anointed on the sick member, cures the gowt: and the same stays the flowers
of women with child, the juice hereof cures the closing up of the eyes in
the night. The skin wherein the young foale lies in the dammes belly being
smelled unto, by him that has the falling evil, it eases him. Anaxilaus has
reported, that if the excrements of a Mares copulation be burned, there will
appear monstrous shapes of Horses heads. If a horse have a web in his eye,
mingle together the milk of an ass, the blood of a Dove, and the dew of
Cabadges, and anoint him therewith: and there be some

OF THE HINNVS, Jnnus, and GINNVS, Mannus mannulus Befi and Burdones, etc.
THere is no language beside the Greek that have any words to express these
beasts, and the Latins have derived these terms from them. These are beasts
of a small size as dwarfes among men, and therefore seldom seen in these
parts of Hinni, Caelius Rh^d-Collumella
are conceived of a horse, and a she ass, who although they take their
denomination from the male, yet do they more resemble the female. In ancient
time, the males which were conceived of a horse and a she Ass, were called
Hinnuli, Pliny.
and likewise of an Ass and a mare, Muli, so are the young ones of little
goats, Deer, Hermol^us.
hares, and other like: although some take Innuli for the young hearts, and the
Hinni and Hinnuli for the breed of a horse and an Ass; so that there
appears two kinds, Varro.
and both of them transplanted out of other.

The Hinnus is less then the Mule, but more ruddie, having ears like a horse,
and a mane Nonius.
and are brought up like little horses, whose age is discerned by their teeth,
and they are sometimes procreated of a horse and a Mule, and because of their
aptnes to bear, Perot.
they are called Burdones, or else of Bardus by reason of their folly and
slownes.

Manni and Mannuli are very little low horses, being very gentle and easy to
be handled, Porp^yrius
being called also among the Ciuilians, Burdi. There is in France not far
from Gration polis, a kind of Mules which in the country speech are called
Iumar, being bred of an Ass and a Bull, and in the Heluetian alps beyond
Curia, about the town Speluga, I have bin sincerely informed, that there was a
horse conceived of a bull and a mare, and therefore Scaliger says, that such a
foale is called Hinnulus, whereof he reports he had seen Sire was a bull:
and some say, that this kind want their upper teeth: and their vnderchappe
does in a deformed manner stretch forth it self beyond the upper, as it is
in many fishes, being called of the Gabala and Aruerni, Befi: And at this day
there is in the court of France a certain beast which in the former part is
like an ass, and in the hinder a sheep. Auerg^e and Lodoue Nauert.
In Ferraria among other strange beasts, they nourish dwaruish Asses, of whom
Martial made a Dislichon to this effect, that they are not so high as a man,
when he sits on the ground. His tibi de mulis non est metuenda ruina:
Altius in terris pene sedere soles.
Innus, and Ginnus, or Hinnus, they are conceived by a Mule and a Mare, which
are very small by reason of some disease the damme that bears them has in
her belly: the word Inis signifying a young or new borne Nephew, and is
attributed to this kind of beasts, because they never exceed the quantity of
young foles. Both the Mule and the Burd^ remain barren and never conceive,
Albertus. Promptuat.
these neighe like a horse, and that brayeth like an ass. A Musimon is a short
horse, ass, or Mule.

OF THE WILD ASS.
A Wild Ass, called of the Latins Onager, of the Haebrewes Arod and Ere, and
as Sebastian Munster affirms Meroda and Arda; In the German tongue it may be
termed Ein Waldesell, and the young ones are called Lalisions. Dum t^ner est
Onager solaque lalisio matre:
Pascit hoc infans sed breue nomen habet. Martial.

These wild Asses are not Elks, as some have reported of Elks, nor that Oryx
which the ancient writers do constantly affirm to live in a continual
thirst, as for the most part wild Asses do. Of these Asses are great store in
Phrygia, Lycaonia, Country of breed.
and Africa, and it is said, that the Saracen king of Tunis in Affricke, sent
unto Ferdinand king of Naples, a goodly great wild Ass, such an one as has
not been seen in this part of the world.

Apollonius affirms, that he saw wild asses in great plenty beyond Catadupa
in Egypt, so are there many in Ca^da, an Island near Creet: In Persis, in
Asia, in Madera, and Abasia, Arabia desert, Mauritania, and Armenia. Callistus
reports that there are such wild Aequinoctiall toward the East and South, of
wonderful stature, Pliny.
their skin (beside the usual manner) being of diverse colors, interlined
variably with white and black, and the Zones and strakes discending from the
top of the back unto the sides, and there divided by their winding and
turning, make the folds appear of admirable variety.

These Asses love the highest Mountains and rocks, as holy scripture
teaches, Ier. 14. The asses stood in the high places and drew in the wind like
Dragons: which words gave occasion to some to imagine, that wild asses would
quench their thirst with the wind without water: whereas it is the manner of
all wild beasts, in extremity of thirst, to gape wide and greedily draw in
the cold refreshing air; and they will not drink but of pure Licia never go
over the mountain that divides them from Cappadocia.

They engender among themselves, Their copulation.
their females being much more lustful then the males, and therefore do the
males observe and watch them with a ielous eye toward their own soles,
especially after they have conceived; and the female as warily avoideth the
sight of the male, especially at the time of her foling: for if she bring forth
a female, the male receives it with all love, joy, and welcome; but if a male,
then does he with O my husband why is thy aspect so irefull? Why are thy eyes
now become so bloody, which even now were as white as light? Do thou look
upon the face of that monster Medusa? Which turns men into stones, or do
thou look upon some new hatched horrible Dragon,

These wild Asses have good and strong hoofes, their swiftnes is compared to
the wind, and in the time that they are hunted, they cast backward with their
heels stones with such violence, as they pierce the breasts of them that
prosecute them if they be not very wary. They are of a large, broad, tall, and
beautiful body; long ears, and a silver color, (that is as I guess) a bright
cloud-colour, for it is but vain to imagine, that an Ass can be all white,
for then were all the ancients deceived, which with one voice affirm, that he
has a black list on the back, at either side whereof are two white lines.
Aelianus Albertus. Oppianus.


Their food is only grass and herbs of the earth, whereby they grow very
fat, their heart being the fattest part of their body, and they will not abide
any flesh-eating-beaste, Varro.
for being tamed they never grow wild again as other beasts will, and they
easily grow tame. It is observed that the same being tamed, is most tame which
before time was most wild. They love figs and meal above all things,
wherefore the Armenians use to take a certain black fish bred in their waters
which is poison, Aelianus.
and covering it with meal the wild asses come and lick thereof, and so are
destroyed. The best of them are generated of a Mare and a wild Ass tamed, for
they are the swiftest in course, of hardest hoof, a lean body, but of a
generous and vntierable stomach. The Indian wild Asses have one horn in their
foreheade, and their body all white, but their head is red: So is there
another India very like a wild ass, which the inhabitants eat (as we have
read) about the streights of Magellana: When these Asses are hunted with dogs,
they cast forth their sime or dung, with the savor whereof the Dogs are
stayed while it is hot, Phyles.
and by that means the beast escapes danger: but the Asses of Mauritania are
very short winded, Pliny.
and subject to weariness and stumbling, for which cause they are more easily
taken, and the best of all are not so swift as a Barbary-horse; besides their
nature is, when they see a man, to stand stone still, crying, braying, and
kicking, till you come at them, Aelianus.
and when one is ready to take them, they take their heels and run away. The
inhabitants of Arabia desert, by many gins and other deceitful devises take
them, and on horseback follow them till they tire or can strike them with
their darts. Their flesh being hot, does

Pliny teaches, Medicine^.
that there is more virtue in the wild Asses milk and bones against venom and
poison, then in the tame. Likewise, in the heel of an Ass, Milk.
is a principal remedy against apostemations and bunches in the flesh, if it
be applied to the inner part of the thighe. The gall, draws out botches and
must be anointed upon impostumate scars. It is used also in emplasters
against Saint Antonies fire, the leprosy, Pliny
and swelling in the legs and guts. The fat with oil of herb- Mary by
anointing the raines and the back, helps and eases that pain which was
engendered by wind. The spleen dried Galen affirms, that the urine breaks
and dissolueth the stone in the bladder. The ashes of the hoof helps the
falling evil, and mingled with oil, cures the kings evil, and the loosenes
of the hair The marrow eases the gowt, and the dung mixed with the yolke of
an Egg and applied to the forehead, stays bleeding: also the same curleth
the hair if it be mingled with an Oxes gall and dried: put into wine and
drunk, cures the sting of a scorpion: and Zor an Haebrew affirms very
constantly, that if a man look into an Asses eye, it preserves the sight, and
hinders the Water that descends into the eye.


THe Asses of Scythia have horns wherein it is reported that the Stygean Water
of Arcadia may be contained, Aelianus.
although it will eat through all other vessels be they never so hard.
Sosipater brought of them to Alexander the great, who admiring the rareness,
would not put them to any private use but sent them to Delphos, to be offered
to Pithias; but that these can be properly called Asses, no man can defend,
L^b. 4
although Herodotus also affirm, that among the Affricans called Aratours,
there be asses with horns.

Of the Indian Asses.
IT is questionable whether the Monoceros, commonly called a Unicorn, the
Rhinoceros, the Oryx, and the Indian ass be all one beast or diverse; for the
Unicorn and Rhinoceros have the same things attributed to them in stories, and
differ in very India, both Aristotle, Pliny, and Aelianus, jointly agree, that
they differ from all other whole-footed beasts, because they have one horn in
the forehead, and so also have the Rhinoceros, Monoceros, and Orix, but the
Indians call a Unicorn, Cartazono; and the horn so highly prized at this day, is
thought to be of the Rhinoceros, but Aelianus and Philes acknowledge no other
Unicorn then the Indian Ass, who in bigness equalleth a horse among the
Indians, being all white on the body, but purple headed or red (as some say,)
black eyes, but Volaterranus says blew, having one horn in the forehead a
cubit and a half long, whose upper part is red or bay, the middle black, and
the nether part white, wherein India use to drink, adorning it for that
purpose with sundry bracelets, precious stones, and works of gold, holding for
truth that all those which drink in those horns, shall be freed from annoyance
of incurable diseases, as conuulsions, the falling evil, and deadly poisons.

These wilde-asses exceed all other, both in stature of body, and also swiftnes
of foot, for at the first, they set forth very gently, and afterward speed
their journey with better pace, so that it is very hard for any to follow them,
but impossible to ouergo them. The males take great pains in keeping their
young ones, whom they continually watch and hide in the most remote and desert
places they can find. When they are hunted, they keep their weak young ones
behind them, and fight for them very furiously, neither

They fight with their heels, but their teeth are most dangerous, for what
they apprehend in them they bring it clean away: and because of this rage,
those which are of any years, can never be tamed. The great king of India does
once every year appoint all manner of fights both of men and Beasts, wherein
are wild Bulls, tame Rams, these wild Asses with one horn, Hyaenaes and
Elephants. To conclude, it is but a fable of Volaterranus,

Of the Alborach and Axis.
THere are two other beasts to be added to the end of this rank, namely, the
Alborach among the Turks, being a fair white beast like an Ass, whereupon the
turkish priests blasphemous idolaters, persuade the silly pilgrims of Mecha,
that Mahomet was carried up to heaven. The Axis of which Pliny speaks, is a
wild beast, having a skin like the Hinnulus aforesaid, but spread over with
whiter India, Bellonius affirms, that he saw two of them in the Castle of
Cair, a male and a female, and either sex wanted horns, having long tails
down to their mid-legs like dear, and differ very little from dear, saving in
their large white spots and yellow color, yielding a much more clear sounding
voice then a dear, and the female thereof is smaller then the male. This beast
is by idolatrous people dedicated to their drunken God Bacchus.

OF THE BADGER, OTHER WISE called a Brocke, a Gray, or a Bauson.


THe Badger could never find a Greek name, although some through ignorance
have foisted into a Greek dictionary Melis, whereas in truth that is his
Latin word, Mele or Meles, and so called, because above all other things, he
loves Taxus, Tassus, Taxo, and Alber. Magnus dax^s. But whereas in the
scripture some translate Tesson, Tahas, or Tachasch; and plurally Techaseim,
Badgers, yet is not the matter so clear, for there is no such beauty in a
badgers skin, as to cover the Arc, or to make princes shoes thereof:
therefore some Haebrews say, that it signifies an Ox of an exceeding hard
skin. Onkelus translateth it Sasgona, that is, a beast skin of diverse
colors, Symcehus, and Aquila a iacinct color, which cannot be; but the
Arabians Darasch, and the Persians Asthak, yet it may be rather said, that
those skins spoken of Exodus 25. Numb. 4 Ezekiel. 26. be of the Linx, or some
such other spotted Tachasch comes near Those, signifying a kind of Wolf not
hurtful to men, being rough and hairy in winter, but smooth in summer.

The Italians call a Badget Tasso, the Rhetians, Tasch: the French Tausson,
Taixin, Tasson, Tesson, and sometime Grisart, for her color: sometimes
Blareau, and at Parris Bedouo. The Spaniardes, Tasugo, Texon, the Germans
Tachs, or Daxs, the Illyrians Gezwecz.

Badgers are plentiful in Naples, Sicilly, Lucane, and in the Alpine and
Heluetian coasts, so are they also in England. In Lucane there is a certain
wild beast, resembling both a bear and a Hog, not in quantity, but in form
and proportion of body; Country of breed. Caelius Curio.
which the refore may be fitly called in Greek Suarctos, for a Gray, in short
legs, ears, and feet, is like a bear, but in fatnes like a swine. Therefore
it is observed, that there be two kinds of this Canine, the other, a hog in his
cloven hoof, and is called Swinish: also these disso^^^ the fashion of their
snowt, Diversity of kinds.
one resembling the snowt of a Dog, the other of a swine, and in their mear,
the one eating flesh and carrion like a Dog, the other roo^s and fru^^ like a
hog, as both kinds have been found in Normandy and other parts of France and
(...). This beast diggeth her a den or cave in the earth and there lives,
neue^ coming forth but for meat and easement, which it makes out of his den:
when they dig their den, after they have entered a good depth for avoiding the
earth out, one of them falls on the back, and the other lays all the earth
on his belly, and so taking his hinder feet in his mouth, draws the
belly-laden-badger out of the cave, A secret in their manner of digging.
Isidorus. Albertus.
which disburdeneth her carriage, and goes in for more till all be finished and
emptied. The wily Fox never makes a Den for himself, but finding a badgers
cave, in her absence, lays his excrement at the hole of the den, the which
when the Gray returns, if she smell (as the savor is strong) she forbeareth
to enter as noisome, and so leaves her elaborate house to the Fox. These
badgers are very sleepie, especially in the day time, and stir not abroad,
but in the night, for which cause they are called Lucifuga: that is; Their meat
Auoyders of the light. They eat honey, and worms, and hornets, and such like
things,

They are in quantity as big as a Fox, but of a shorter and thicker body;
their skin is hard, but rough and rugged, their hair harsh and stubborn, of an
intermingled grisard color, sometime white, sometime black, his back covered
with black, and his belly with white, his head from the top thereof to the
ridge of his shoulder, is adorned with strakes of white and black, being
black in the middle and white at each side. He has very sharp teeth, and is
therefore accounted a deepe-biting beast. His back is broad, his legs (as some
say) longer on the right side then on the left, and therefore he runs best
when he gets to the side of a hill, Cardanus.
or a cart-road-away. His tail is short but hairy, and of diverse colors,
having Zibethus: his forelegs being a full spanne long, and the hinder legs
shorter short ears and little eyes, a great bladder of gall, a body very fat
betwixt the skin and the flesh, and about the heart; and it is held that this
fat increases with the Moon, and decreaseth with the same, being none at all
at the change: his forelegs have very sharp nails, bare and apt to dig
withal, being five both before and behind, but the hinder very short ones and
covered with hair. His savor is strong, and is much troubled with lice about
his secrets, the length of his body from the nose which hangs out like a
hogs nose to the tail or rumpe, is some thirty inches and a little more,
the hair of his back^ three fingers long, his neck is short and a like a
Dogs: both male and female have under Her defense against Hunters and their
Dogs.
but not inwardly in the male. If she be hunted out of her den with hounds,
she biteth them greeuouslie if she lay hold on them, wherefore they avoid her
carefully, and the hunters put great broad collars made of a Graies skin
about their Dogs neck, to keep them the safer from the Badgers teeth: her
manner is to fight on her back, using thereby both her teeth and her nails,
and by blowing up her skin above measure after an unknown manner, she
defends her self against the strokes of men and the teeth of Dogs:
wherefore she is hard lie taken, but by devises and ginnes for that purpose
invented; with their skins they make quiuers for arrows, and some shepherds
in Italy use thereof to make sacks, wherein they wrappe themselves from the
injury of rain. Badg^ eaten. Platina.


In Italy and Germany they eat Grayes flesh, and boil with it pears, which
makes the Medicine made of Bad.
The flesh is best in September if it be fat, and of the two kinds, the
swinish badger is better flesh then the other. There are sundry virtues
confected out of this beast; for it is affirmed, that if the fat of a badger
mingled with crudy honey, Gratius
and anointed upon a bare place of a horse, where the former hairs are
pulled off, it will make new white hairs glowe in that place: Brasanolus.
and it is certain (although the Graecians make no reckoning of Badgers
grease) yet it is a very sovereign thing to soften, and therefore Serenus
prescribes it to anoint them that have fevers or inflammations of the body,
Albertus.
Nec spernendus adeps dederit* quem hestia melis. And not to be despised for
other cures: as for example, the easing of the pain of the raines

The ashes of a badger is found to help the bleeding of the stomach, and the
same sod and drunk, preuenteth danger by the biting of a mad dog: and
Brunfelsius affirms, that if the blood of a badger be instilled into the
horns of cattle with salt, it keeps them from the murrain, and the same
dried and beat to powder does wonderfully help the leprosy. The brain sod
with oil eases all aches, the liver taken out of water, Bottillus.
helps swellings in the mouth; and some affirm, that if one wear sole^ made
of Badgers skins in their Shoes, it gives great ease unto the gowt. The
biting of this beast is venomous, because it feeds upon all venomous meats
which creep upon the earth, Brasanolus.
although Arnoldus be of a contrary judgment: and of this beast I can report
no other thing worth the noting, save that the Noble family of the Taxons in
Ferraria, took their name from this creature.




A Bear is called in the Haebrew Dob, and plurally Dobi^^, of the Arabians
Dubbe, of the Chaldeans Duba, Aldub and Daboube; Of the name
of the Graecians Arctos, of some Dasyllis, because of the roughnes of his
hair, of other Beiros, and Monios signifies a solitary Bear. The Latins
call him Vrsus, which some conjecture to be tanquam orsus, signifieng, that it
is but begun to be framed in the dammes belly, and prefected after the
littering thereof. The Italians call it Orso, so also the Spaniards; the
French, Ours, the Baer, and Beer: the Bohemians Nedwed, the Polontans Vuluuer:
and the attributes of this beast are many among authors, both Greek and
Latin: Epithites of the bear
as Aemonian bears, armed, filthy, deformed, cruel, dreadful, fierce,
greedy, Callidonian, Erymanthean, bloody, heavy, night-ranging, lybican,
menacing, Numidian, Ossaean, headlong, ravening, rigide and terrible bear; all
which serve to set forth the nature hereof, as shall be afterward in
particular discoursed.

First, Of the kind; of Bears Agricola. Albertus.
therefore concerning several kinds of bears, it is observed, that there is
in general two; a greater, and a lesser; and these lesser are more apt to
clime trees then the other, neither do they ever grow to so great a stature as
the other. Besides there are Bears which are called Amphibia; because they
live both on the land and in the sea, hunting Otter or Beauer, and these are
white colored. In the Ocean Islands toward the North, there are bears of a
great stature, fierce and cruel, who with their forefeet do break up the
hardest congealed yse on the sea, or other great Waters, and draw out of those
holes great abundance of fishes: Ol^uis.
and so in other frozen seas are many such like, having black claws, living
for the most part upon the seas, except tempestuous weather drive them to the
land.

In the Eastern parts of India there is a beast in proportion of body very
like a Bear, yet endued with no other quality of that kind, (being neither so
wild, nor ravenous, nor strong) and it is called a Formicarian Bear, A
Formicarian Bear. Cardanus.
for God has so provided, that whereas that country is abundantly annoyed
with the Emmets or Ants, that beast does so prey

Bears are bred in many countries, as in the Heluetian alpine region, where
they are so strong and full of courage, Country of breed.
that they can tear in pieces, both Oxen and Horses, for which cause the
inhabitants study by all means to take them. Likewise there are Bears in
Persia, which do raven beyond all measure, and all other; so also the bears
of N^midia, Marcellinus.
which are of a more elegant form and composition then the residue; Profuit
ergo nihil, misero quod communius vrsos:
Figebat Numidas and Albena nudus arena.
And whereas Pliny affirms, that there are no bears in Afric, he mistook
that country for Creet, and so some say, that in that Island be no Wolves,
vipers, or other such venomous creatures, whereof the Poets give a vain
reason, because Jupiter was borne there: but, we know also, that there be no
bears bred in England.

In the country of Arabia, from the promontory Dira to the South, are bears
which live upon eating of flesh, Volaterran^
being of a yellowish color, which do far excel all other bears, both in
actiuity or swiftnes, and in quantity of body. Among the Roxolani and
Lituanians, are bears, which being tamed are presents for princes. Aristotle
in his wonders reports, a secret in the natures of Bears.
that there are white bears in Misia, which being eagerly hunted, do send
forth such a breath, that putrifieth immediately the flesh of the Dogs, and
whatsoever other beast

Thracia also breeds white Bears, and the King of Aethiopia in his Haebrew
Epistle which he wrote to the Bishop of Rome affirms, that there are Bears
in his country: In Musconia are Bears, both of a snow white, yellow, and
dusky color, and it has been seen that the Noble women's chariots drawn by
six horses, have been covered with the skins of white bears, from the
pasterne to the head: and as all other creatures do bring forth some white,
and some black, so also do Bears, who in general do breed and bring forth
their young in all cold countries, some of a dusky and some of a brown black
color.

A Bear is of a most venereous and lustful disposition, Lust of bear
for night and day the females with most ardent inflamed desires, do provoke
the males to copulation; and for this cause at that time they are most-fierce
and angry.

Phillippus Cosseus of Constance, did most confidently tell me, that in the
Mountains Sauoy, a Bear carried a young maid into his den by violence,
Gillius. A History
where in venereous manner he had the carnal use of her body, and while he
kept her in his den, he dailye went forth and brought her home the best
Apples and other fruits he could get, presenting them unto her for her meat
in very amorous sort; but always when he went to forage, he rouled a huge
great stone upon the mouth of his den, that the Virgin should not escape
away: at length her parents with long search, found their little Daughter in
the Bears den, who delivered her from that savage and beastuall captivity.
Time of their copulation.


The time of their copulation is in the beginning of winter, although sometime
in Summer, (but such young ones seldom live) yet most commonly in February or
January.

Immediately after they have conceived, they betake themselves to their dens,
Pliny.
where they (without meat) grow very fat (especially the males) only by
sucking their forefeet. When they enter into their den, they convey
themselves in backward, a secret
that so they may put out their footsteps from the sight of the hunters. The
males give great honor to the females great with young, during the time of
their secrecy, so that, Honor to the female.
although avoiding of cold.
lying for the most part three or four months together and never see the
light, whereby their guts grow so empty, that they are almost closed up and
stick together.

When they first enter into their den, they betake themselves to quiet and
rest, sleeping without any awaking, for the first fourteen days, so that it
is thought an easy stroke cannot awake them. But how long the females go with
young is not certain, Time of bearing the young bears.
some affirm 3. months, others but 30. days, which is more probable, for wild
beasts do not couple themselves being with young (except a Hare and a Linx)
aad the bears being (as is already said) very lustull, to the intent that
they may no longer want the company of their Pliny precisely affirms, The
bigness of a beare-whelpe.
that they litter the thirtith day after their conception; and for this cause,
a bear brings forth the least whelpe of all other great beasts, for their
whelps at their first littering are no bigger then rats, nor longer then ones
finger. And whereas it has been believed and received, that the whelps of
bears at their first littering are without all form and fashion, and nothing
but a little congealed blood like a lump of flesh; which afterward the old
one frames with her tongue to her Pliny, Solinus, Aelianus, Orus, Oppianus,
and Ovid have reported, yet is the truth most evidently otherwise, as by the
eye witness of Ioachimus Rhetichus, and other, Bears not so imperfect as some
have reported
is disproued: only it is litterd blind without eyes, naked without hair, and
the hinder legs not perfect, the forefeet folded up like a fist, and other
members deformed by reason of the imoderate humor or moystnes in them which
also is one cause, why the womb of the bear cannot retain the seed to the
perfection of her young ones.

Number of young one^
They bring forth sometimes two, and never above five, which the old bear
dailye keeps close to her breast, so warming them with the heat of her body
and the breath of her mouth, till they be thirty days old; at what time they
come abroad, being in the beginning of May, which is the third month from the
spring. The old ones being almost dazzled with long darkness, coming into light
again seem to stagger and reele too and fro, and then for the straightness
of their guts, by reason of their long fasting do eat the herb Arum, commonly
called in English Wake-Robbin or Calues-foot, being of very sharp and tart
taste, Remedy in Nature.
which enlarges their guts, and so being recovered, they remain all the time
their young are with them, more fierce and cruel then at other times. And
concerning the same Arum, called also Dracunculus and Oryx, there is a
pleasant

There was a certain cow-heard in the Mountains of Heluetia, which coming
down a hill with a great caldron on his back, he saw a bear eating of a root
which he had pulled up with his feet; a fabulous tale yet vulgarly believed.
the cowheard stood still till the bear was gone, and afterward came to the
place where the beast had eaten the same, and finding more of the same root,
did likewise eat it; he had no sooner tasted thereof, but he had such a desire
to sleep, that he could not contain himself, but he must needs lie down in
the way and there fell a sleep, having covered his head with the caldron, to
keep himself from the vehemence of

The meat of Bears.
The ordinary food of Bears is fish: for the Water-beare and others will eat
fruits, Apples, Grapes, Leaves, and Pease, and will break into bee-hiues
sucking out the honey; Horat: Vespertinus circumgemit vrsus ouile.
Likewise Bees, Snayles, and Emmets, and flesh if it be lean or ready to
putrify; but if a Bear do chance to kill a swine, or a Bull, or Sheep, he
eats them presently, whereas other beasts eat not herbs if they eat
flesh: likewise, they drink water, but not like other beasts, neither sucking
it or lapping it, but as it were, even bitinge at Of the quantity and parts of
Bears.


Some affirm, that Bears do wax or grow as long as they live, that there
have been seen some of them five cubits long; yea I my self saw a Bears
skin of that length, and broader then any Oxes skin.

The parts or members.
The head of a Bear is his weakest part (as the hand of a Lion is the
strongest) for by a small blow on his head he has often been stricken dead,
the bones of the head being very thin and tender: yea more tender, then the
beak of a Parrot. The mouth of a Bear is like a Hogs mouth, but longer;
being armed with teeth on both sides, like a saw, and standing deep in his
mouth, they have very thick lips, for which cause, he cannot easily or
hastily with his teeth break asunder the hunters nets, except with his

His neck is short, like a Tigers and a Lions, apt to bend downward to his
meat, his belly is very large, being uniform, and next to it the intrals as
in a Wolf: It has also four speanes to her Paps. The genitall of a Bear
after his death waxes as hard as horn, his knees and elbowes are like to an
Apes, for which cause they are not swift or nimble: his feet are like hands,
and in them and his loins is his greatest strength, by reason whereof, he
sometimes sets himself upright upon their hinder legs: the pasterne of
his leg being fleshy like a cammels, which makes them unfit for travel,
they have sharp claws, but a very small tail as all other long hayred
creatures have.

They are exceeding full of fat or Larde-greace, which some use
superstitiouslie beaten with oil, a superstitius use of Bears larde or fat.
wherewith they anoint their grape-sickles when they go to vintage, persuading
themselves that if no body know thereof, their tender vine branches shall
never be consumed by catterpillers.

Other, attribute this to the virtue of Bears blood, and Theophrastus
affirms, that if bears grease be kept in a vessel, at such time as the
bears lie secret, A secret.
it will either fill it up, or cause it to run over. The flesh of bears is
unfit for meat, Meat of bears flesh.
yet some use to eat it, after it has been twice sodde; other eat it baked in
pasties, but the truth is, it is better for medicine then food. Theophrastus
likewise affirms, that at the time when bears lie secret, their dead flesh
increases which is kept in houses, another secret
but bears forefeet are held for a very delicate and well tasted food, full
of sweetness, and much used by the German Princes.

The skins of Bears are used in the far Northern regions for garments in
the Winter time, which they make so artificially, The skins.
covering themselves with them from the crown of the head to the feet, that
(as Munster affirmed) some men deceived with that Lapponia to be hairy all
over* The soldiers of the Moors wear garments made of Lions pardals, and
bears skins, and sleep upon them; and so is it reported of Herodotus
Megarensis the Musician, who in the day time wore a Lions skin, and in the
night lay in a Bears skin.

The constitution of the body of a Bear is beyond measure Phlegmatique,
because he fasteth in the Winter time so long without meat: His voice is
fierce and fearful in his rage, but in the night time mournful, being given
much to ravening. If a Bear do eat of Mandragoras, he presently dies,
except he meet with Emmets, by licking of whom he recouereth: so likewise, if
he be sick of a surfeit.

Taking of Bears.
so that some are killed in the Mountains by poison, the Country being so
steep and rocky that hunters cannot follow them; some taken in ditches of the
earth and other ginnes. Oppianus relates, that near Tygris and Armenia, the
inhabitauntes use this Stratigem to take Bears.



When a Bear is set upon by an armed man, he stands upright and takes the
man betwixt his forefeet, but he being covered all over with iron plates can
receive no harm, and then may easily with a sharp knife or dagger pierce
thorough the heart of the beast.

Poland, that when the Sarmatians find a bear, they inclo^^ the whole Wood by
a multitude of people, standing not above a cubit one from another, then cut
they down the outmost trees, so that they raise a Wall of wood to hemme in the
Bears; this being effected, they raise the Bear, having certain forkes in
their hands made for that purpose, and when the Bear approaches, they (with
those forkes) fall upon him, one keeping his head, another one leg, other his
body, and so withforce muzzle him and tie his legs, leading him away. The
Rhaetians use this policy to take Wolves and Bears: they raise up great posts,
and cross them with a long beam laded with heavy weightes, unto the which
beam they fasten a cord with meat therein, whereunto the beast coming, and
biting at the meat, pulls down the beam upon her own pate.

The inhabitants of Heluetia hunt them with mastiffe Dogs, because they
should not Sarmatians use to take Bears by this slight; under those trees
wherein bees breed, they plant a great many of sharp pointed stakes, putting
one hard into the hole wherein the bees go in and out, whereunto the Bear
climbing, and coming to pull it forth, to the end that she may come to the
honey, and being angry that the stake sticks so fast in the hole, with
violence plucketh it forth with both her forefeet, whereby she loses her
hold and falls down upon the picked stakes, whereupon she dies, if they
that watch for her come not to take her off. There was reported by Demetrius
Ambassador at Rome, from the King of Musco, A History
that a neighbor of his going to seek honey, fell into a hollow tree

But if there be no tree wherein Bees do breed near to the place where the
Bear abides, then they use to anoint some hollow place of a tree with honey,
whereinto Bees will enter and make honey combs, and when the Bear finds them
she is killed as aforesaid. In Norway they use to saw the tree almost asunder,
so that when the beast climbeth it, she falls down upon piked stakes laid
underneath to kill her: And some make a hollow place in a tree, wherein they
put a great pot of Water, having anointed it with Herus.
at the bottom whereof are fastened certain hooks bending downward, leaving
an easy passage for the bear to thrust in her head to get the honey, but
impossible to pull it forth again alone, because the hooks take hold on her
skin: this pot they bind fast to a tree, whereby the Bear is taken ^liue
and blind folded, and though her strength break the cord or chain where
with the pot is fastened, yet can she not escape or hurt any body in the
taking, by reason her head is fastened in the pot.

Poli^^.
To conclude, other make ditches or pits under Apple trees, laying upon their
mouth rotten sticks, which they cover with earth, and straw upon it herbs,
and when the bear comes to the Apple tree, she falls into the pit and is
taken.

The herb Wolfebanie or Libardine is poison to Foxes, Wolves, Dogs, and
Bears, Alpine Rhaetians affirm. There is one kind of this called Cyclamine,
which the Valdensians call Tora, and with the juice thereof they poison their
darts, whereof I have credibly received this story; That a certain Valdensian,
seeing a wild bear having a dart poysond here with, did cast it at the bear
being far from him, and lightly wounded her, it being no sooner done, but the
bear ran too and fro in a wonderful perplexity through the woods, unto a
very sharp cliffe of a rock, where the man saw her draw her last breath, as
soon as the poison had entered to her heart, as he afterward found by opening
of her body. The like is reported of henbane, another herb: But there is a
certain black fish in Armenia full of poison, with the powder whereof they
poison figs, Aelianus
and cast them in those places where wild beasts are most plentiful, which

Concerning the industry or natural disposition of a bear, it is certain
that they are very hardly tamed, and not to be trusted though they seem
never so tame; for which cause there is a story of Diana in Lysias, that there
was a certain bear made so tame, that it went up and down among men and
vvoulde feed^ with them, taking meat at their hands, giving no occasion to
fear or mistrust her cruelty: on a day, a young maid playing with the Bear,
lasciuiously did so provoke it, that he tore her in pieces; the Virgins
brethren seeing the murder, with their Darts slew the Bear, whereupon
followed a great pestilence through all that region: and when they consulted
with the Oracle, the pain in God gave answer, that the plague could not
cease; until they dedicated some virginnes unto Diana for the Bears sake that
was slain; which some interpreting that they should sacrifice them: Embarus
upon condition the priest-hoode might remain in his family, slew his only
daughter to end the pestilence, and for this cause the virgins were after
dedicated to Diana before their marriage, when they January, otherwise they
could not be married: yet bears are tamed for labors, and especially for
sports among the Roxolani and Libians, being taught to draw water with wheels
out of the deepest wels; likewise stones upon sleds to the building of walls.
Albertus.


A prince of Lituania nourished a Bear very tenderly, feeding her from his
table with his own hand, for he had used her to be familiar in his court, and
to come into his own chamber when he listed, so that she would go abroad into
the fields and woods, returning home again of her own accord, and would with
her hand or foot rub the Kings chamber door to have it opened, when she was
hungry, it being locked: it happened that certain young Noble men conspired
the death of this Prince, A History
and came to his

There is a fable of a certain wild bear of huge stature, Caelius
which terrified all them that looked upon her, the which Pythagoras sent for,
and kept to himself, very familiarly using to stroke and milk her; at the
length when he was weary of her, he whispered in her ear and bound her with
an oath, that being departed she should never more harm any living thing, which
says the fable, she observed to her dying day. These bears care not for any
thing that is dead, and therefore if a man can hold his breath as if he were
dead, they will not harm him, which gave occasion to Esope to fable of two
companions and Esop.

They will bury one another being dead, as Tzetzes affirms, and it is
received in many Nations, that children have been Nursed by bears: Parris
thrown out of the city, Varrinus.
was nourished by a Bear. There is in France a Noble house of the Vrsons,
whose first founder is reported to have been certain years together
nourished by a bear, and for Vrson: and some affirm, that Arcesius was so
being deceived by the name of his mother who was called Arctos, a bear: as
among the Latins was Vrsula. And it is reported in the year of our Lord
1274. that the Concubine of Pope Nicholas (being with child as was supposed)
brought forth a young Bear, which she did not by any unlawful copulation with
such a beast, but only with the most holy pope; Sebast. fra^k:
and conceived such a creature, by strength of imagination, lying in his
palace, where she saw the picturs of many bears; so that the holy father
being first put in good hope of a son, and afterward seeing this monster (like
himself Revel. 13.) for anger and shame defaced all his pictures of those
beasts. There is a mountain called the mountain of bears in Cyzicus,
Chersonesus and Propontus; so called, because as some have affirmed, Helice and
Cynosura were turned into bears in that place, but the reason is more
probable, because it was full of bears, or else because it was so high that it
seemd to touch the Beare-starre.

There is a constellation called the bear in the figure of seven Stars like
a Carte, whereof four stand in the place of the wheels, and three in the
room of Horses. The Septentrions call them Triones, Higinus.
that is yoked Oxen. But there are two bears, a greater and a lesser. The
greater is called Callisto after the name of Lytaons daughter, who reigned in
Arcadia, whereof many give diverse reasons. For they say Callisto was a
companion of Diana, and used to hunt with her being very like unto her, and
one day Jupiter came to her in the likeness of Diana and deflowred her, and when
she was with child, Diana asked her how that happened, to whom Callisto
answered, that it happened by her fact: wherewith the Goddess being angry,
turned her into a bear, in which shape she brought forth Arcas, and they both
wandering in the woods, were taken and brought for a present unto Lycaon her
father; And upon a day the bear being ignorant of the law, entered into the
temple of Jupiter Lycaeus, and her son followed her, for which the Arcadians
would have slain them Jupiter in pity of them took them both into heaven
and placed them among the stars.

Other say that Callisto was turned into a bear by Juno, whom afterward Diana
slew, and coming to knowledge that it was Callisto, she placed her for a sign
in heaven, which is called Vrsa Maiore, the great bear; which before that time
was called Hamaxa: but the reason of these fables is rendered by Palaephatus,
because that Callistus going into a Bears den was by the bear devoured, and
so her foolish companions seeing none come forth but the Bear, fondly
imagined that the Virgin was turned into a bear.

There is another constellation next to the great Bear, called Arctophylax,
Boots, or the little bear, in whose girdle is a bright star called
Arcturus, and from this constellation Artique and Antarctique pole. Other
affirm, that the two Bears were Helice and Cynosura, the two Nurses of
Jupiter, because sometime they are so named; the cause whereof is apparent in
the Greek tongue, for Helice is a star, having as it were a tail roled up,
and cynosura, a tail at length like a Dog. They are also nourished for
sport, for as their bodies do in one sort resemble Apes, so do also their
dispositions being apt to sundry gestures and pastimes, lying upon their
backs, and turning their hands and feet, rock themselves upon them as a
woman rocketh her child in a cradle; but principally for fight: for which
occasion they were preserved of old time by the Romans: For when Messala was
Consul, Aenobarbus Domitius presented in one ring or circle, an hundred
Bears, and so many hunters with them.

Rabido nec proditus ore:
Fumantem nasum viui tentaueris vrsi,
Sit placidus licet, and lambat digitosque manusque:
Si dolor et bilis, si just a coegerit ira,
Vrsus erit vacua dentes in pelle fatiges.
They will not willingly fight with a man, although men may do it without
hurt, for if they anoint or sprinkle the mouths of Lions or Bears with
Vitrioll or copperas, it will so bind their chappes together, that they shall
not be able to bite, which caused Martial to write thus: Praeceps sanguinea
dum se rotat vrsus arena,
Splendida iam tecto cessent venabula ferro:
Deprendat vacuo venator in aere praedam,
Implicitam visco perdidit ille fugam:
Nec volet excussa lancea torta manu,
Si captare feras aucupis art placet.
Alexander had a certain Indian dog given unto him, to whom was put a bore and
a bear to fight withal, but he disdaining them, would not once regard them,
but when a Lion came, Fight of Bears.
he rose up and fought with him. Bears, they will fight with Bulls, Dogs, and
horses: when they fight with bulls, they take them by their horns, and so
with the weight of their body, they weary and press the beast, until they
may easily slaie him: and this fight Rhinoceros set on by a bear in a public
spectacle at Rome, did easily cast him off from the hold he had on his horn.
She does not adventure on a wild bore, except the bore be a sleep or not
seeing her. There is also a mortal hatred betwixt a horse and a bear, for
they know one another at the first sight; and prepare to combat, which they
rather act by policy then by strength: The bear falling flat on his back,
the horse leaping over the bear, which pulls at his guts with her forefeet
nails, and is by the heels of the horse wounded to death, if he strike the
bear upon his head. Also bears fear a sea-calfe, and will not fight with
them if they can be avoided, for they know they shall be overcome.

Great is the fiercenes of a bear, as appears by holy scripture Osee 13. I
will meet them as a bear robbed of her whelps (says the Lord) and will
tear in pieces their froward heart: And Ch^sai tells Absalon. 2. Sam. 17.
Thou know that thy father and the men that be with him be most valiant and
fierce like a she bear robbed of her Whelps: for a she bear is more
courageous then a male.

Taifah, who are given unto a sodomiticall buggery, to commit uncleanness man
with man, and especially with young boys; but if any of them take a wild
bore, or kill a Bear, he shall be exempted from this kind of beastly
impudicitie. Heliogabalus was wont to shut up his drunken friends together,
and suddenly in the night would put in among them Bears, Wolves, Lions, and
Leopards, muzled and disarmed, so that when they did awake, they should find
such chamber fellows, as they could not behold (if darkness did not blind
them) without singular terror; whereby many of them fell into swoundes,
sickness, ecstasy, and madness.

Vitoldus King of Lituania, kept certain Bears of purpose, to whom he cast
all persons which spoke against his tirranie, putting them first of all into a
Bears skin; Aeneas Sil^
whose Alexander Phaeraeus, deal with his subjects, as is reported by Textor
Valentintanus, the Emperor nourished two bears deuourers of men, one of them
called golden Mica, the other Innocentia; which he lodged near his own
chamber: at length after many slaughters of men, he let Innocentia go loose in
the wooddes for her good deserts, in bringing so many people to their funerals.

There are many natural operations in Bears. Pliny reports, that if a woman
be in sore trauile of childbirth, let a stone or arrow which has killed a
man, a bear or a bore, Secrets observed of Bears.
be thrown over the house wherein the Woman is, and she shall be eased of her
pain. There is a small worm called Voluox, which eats the vine branches
when they are young, Collumella
If the blood or grease of a Bear be set under a bed, it will draw unto it all
the fleas, and so kill them by cleaving thereunto. But the virtues medicinal
are very many: Arnoldus. Virtues medicinal.
and first of all, the blood cures all manner of bunches and apostems in the
flesh, and brings hair upon the eyelids if the bare place be anointed
therewith.

The fat of a Lion is most hot and dry, and next to a Lions, a Leopards; next
to a Leopards, a Bears; and next to a Bears, a bulls. The later Physicians use
it to cure conuulsed and distracted parts, spots, and tumors in the body. It
also helps the pain of the loins, if the sick part be anointed therewith,
and all ulcers in the legs or shinnes, when a plaster is made thereof with
bole-armoricke. Also the ulcers of the feet, mingled with allome.

The liver of a sow, a lamb, and a bear put together, and trod to powder under
ones shoos, eases and defends cripples from imflamation: the gall being
preserved and warmed in water, delivers the body from cold, when all other
medicine fails. Some give it

OF THE BEAVER. Male and Female.
A Beuer is caled in Greek Castor, Of the name
in Latin Fiber, in Italian Biuaro or Biuero, and Il castoreo, S^^^taticus.
in Spanish castor: Bieure, and some time castor, in Illyrian, Bobr, in
German Biber, all which words at the first sight seem to be derived from
the Latin: There is no certain word for it in Hebrew: in Arabia it is called
Albednester: it is also called in Latin canis Ponticus, but canis fluuatilis
is another beast, as we shall manifest in the succeding discourse of an Otter:
and the reason why in Latin it is called Fibar is, The notatio^ of Fibutirom
^^t Latin.
because (as Varro says) it coueteth the sides, banks, or extremities of the
river, as the fibrae, and the skirts of garments fimbriae: The notatio^ of the
Greek word Castor
but the reason why the Graecians call it Castor, is not as the Latins have
supposed, because it biteth off his own stones, quasicastandro seipsum, as
shall be manifested castrando, because for the stones thereof it is hunted and
killed, or rather of Gaster signifieng a belly, for that the body is long and
almost all belly; or rather because of the color and ill savor thereof

This Beauer is no other Aristotle calls Latax, What matter (...).
and it differs from an Otter only in the tail. Some compare a Beauer with a
Badger, but they attribute to him a longer body and smoother hair, but shorter
and softer than a Badgers: their color is somewhat yellow and white, aspersed
with ash color, which stand out beyond the shorter hayres, double their
length: they are neat and soft like unto an Otters, and the hairs length of
the one and others color, is not aequall. Albertus prefers; and Siluius
affirms, that his long hayres are like a Dogs, Country of breed.
and the short ones like an Otter. They are most plentiful in Pontus, for
which cause it is called canis Ponticus; they are also bred in the Ryuers of
Spain, and in the river Marne in France, Padus in Italy, in Sauoy, in the
Rivers Isara and Rhoan, and in the camargo, and in Heluetia, near Arula, Vrsa
and Limagus: Albertus.
Likewise throughout all Germany, Polonia, Sclauonia, Rushia and Prussia: and
there are Beuers in the woods of Mosco and Lituania, of excellent perfection
and stature above others, having longer white hairs which glister above other.
These beasts live both in the water and on the land, for in the day time they
keep the water, They are la^d and water bea.
and in the nigh^ they keep the land, and yet without water they cannot live,
for they do participate much of the nature of fishes, as may be well considered
by their hinder legs and tail.

Their quantity is not much bigger then a country Dog, their head short,
their ears Their several parts, Siluius. Bellouius.
the under teethe standing out beyond their lips three fingers breadth, and the
upper about half a finger, being very broad, crooked, strong and sharp,
standing or growing double very deep in their mouth, bending compass like the
edge of an Axe, and their color yellowish red, wherewith they defend themselves
against beasts, take fishes as it were upon hooks, and will gnaw insunder trees
as big as a man's thigh: they have also grinding teeth very sharp, wherein are
certain wrinckles or foldes, so that they seem to be made for grinding some
hard substance, for with them they eat the rindes or bark of trees; wherefore
the bitinge of this beast is very deep, being able to crash asunder the
hardest bones, and commonly he never loses his hold until he feels his
teeth gnash one against another. Pliny and Solinus affirm, that the person so
bitten cannot be cured, except he hear the crashing of the teeth

They have certain hairs about their mouth, which seem in their quantity or
bigness to be rather horn they are so hard, but their bones are most hard of
all and without marrow: Their forefeet are like a Dogs, and their hinder like a
Gooses, made as it were of purpose to go on the land, and swim in the water;
but the tail of this beast is most strange of all in that it comes nearest
to the nature of fishes, being without hair and covered over with a skin like
the scales of fish, it being like a soale, and for the most part six fingers
broad and half a foot long, which some have affirmed the beast never pulls
out of the water; whereas it is manifest, that when it is very cold or the
water frozen he pulls it up to his body, although Agricola affirm, that his
hinder legs and tail

This tail he uses for a stern when he swimmeth after fish to catch them.
There has been taken of them whose tails have waied four pound weight, and
they are accounted a very delicate dish, for being dressed they eat like
Barbles: they are used by the Lotharingians and Sauoyens for meat allowed to be
eaten on fish-daies, although the body that bears them be flesh and unclean
for food. Bellonius.
The manner of their dressing is, first roasting, and afterward seething in an
open pot, that so the evil vapor may go away, and some in pottage made with
Saffron; other with Ginger, and many with Brine: it is certain that the tail
and forefeet taste very sweet, from whence came the Proverb, That sweet is that
fish, which is not fish at all.

These Beasts use to build them Caves or Dens near the Waters, so as the
Water may come into them, Their building of Dens.
or else they may quickly leap into the water, and their wit or natural
Albertus. Olaus mag:
because there have been some such taken, that had no hair on their backs:
but were pilled, which being espied by the hunters, in pity of their slavery,
or bondage, they have let them go away free.

These beasts are so constant in their purpose, that they will never change the
tree that they have once chosen to build withal* how long time so ever they
spend in biting down the same, it is likewise to be observed, that they never
go to the same, during the time of their labor but in one and the same path,
and so in the same, return to the water again. When they have thus brought
their wood together, then dig they a hole or ditch in the bank side, Albertus.
where they underset the earth to bear it up from falling, with the aforesaid
a secret
and so they proceed, making two or three rooms like several chambers, one
above another, to the intent that if the water rise they may go further, and
if it fall they may descend unto it. And as the husbandmen of Egypt do observe
the buildings of the Crocodile, so do the inhabitants of the country where
they breed, observe the Beauers, that when they build high, they may expect an
inundation and sow on the Mountains, and when they build low, they look for
a calm or drought, and plow the valleys. There is nothing so worthy in this
beast as his stones, for they are much sought after and desired by all
Merchants, so that they will give for them any great price.

There is both in Male and Female, certain bunches under their belly as great
as a gooses egg, which some have unskillfully taken for their coddes, and
between these is The Cods or stones of the beast Rondoletius.
and afterward therewith annointeth every part of her body that she can reach
with her tongue. Now it is very plain that these bunches are not their coddes,
for these reasons; because that there is no passage either of the seed into
them, or from them into the yard: Besides, their stones are found within their
body; neither ought this to seem strange, seeing that Hares have the like
bunches, and also the Moschus or Musk-cat: the female has but one passage for
all her excrements, and to conceive or bring forth young ones.

It has been an opinion of some, that when a Beauer is hunted and is in
danger to be The Beauer does not bite off her own stones.
knowing that for them only her life is sought, which caused Alciatus to make
this Emblem.

Et pedibus segnius, tunuda and propendulus aluo,
Mordicus ipse sibi medicata virilia vellet:
Huius ab exemplo disces non parcere rebus,
Hactamen insidias effugit art fiber:
Atque abijcit sesegnarus ob illa peti
Et vitam vt redimas hostibus era dare.
Teaching by the example of a Beauer, to give our pursse to thieves, rather
then our lives, and by our wealth to redeem our danger, for by this means the
Beauer often escapes. There have been many of them found that wanted stones,
which gave some strength to this error, but this was exploded in ancient time
for a fable; and in this and all other honest discourses of any part of
Philosophy, the only mark whereat every good student and professor ought to
aim, must be verity and not tales: wherein many of the ancient have greatly
offended (as is manifested by Marcellius Virgilius) especially Plato: and this
poison has also crept into and corrupted the whole body of religion. The
Egyptians in opinion of the aforesaid Castration, when they will signify a man
that hurts himself, they picture a Beauer biting off his own stones. Herus.
an Emblem.
But this is most false, as by Sertius, Plinius, Dioscorides, and Albertus, is
manifested: first, because their stones are very small, and so placed in their
body as are a Boares, and therefore impossible for them to touch or come by
them: Secondly, they cleave so fast unto their back, that they cannot be taken
away but the beast must of necessity loose his life; and therefore ridiculous
is their relation, who likewise affirm, that when it is hunted (having
formerlie bitten off his stones, that he stands upright and shows the
hunters that he has

These Beauers eat fish, fruits, and the bitter rhindes of trees, Their food
which are unto them most delicate, especially Alderne, Poplar, and Willowe;
whereupon it is prouerbiallie said, of one that serves another for gain: Sic
me subes quotidie vt fiber salicem, you love me as the Beauer does the Willow,
which eats the bark and destroieth the tree.

They are taken for their skins, tails, and cods, and that many ways; Their
cause of taking
and first of all when their caves are found, there is made a great hole or
breach therein, wherinto is put a little dog, which the beast espying, flies
to the end of her den, and there defends her self by her teeth, till all
her structure or building be rased, and she laid open to her A secret.
some affirm that she rouzeth up her body and by the strong savor of her
stones she drives away the Dogs, which may be probable if the stones could be
seen. These dogs are the same which hunt wild foul and Otters.

It is reported that in Prussia they take them in bow-nets, baited with the
rind of trees, Agricola.
where into they enter for the food, but being entrapped cannot go forth
again. They cannot diue long time under water but must put up their heads for
breath, which being espied by them that beset them, they kill them with
gunshot, or pierce them with Otter-speares, so that one would think seeing
such a one in the water, that it was some hairy kind of fish; and his nature
is, if he hear any noise to put his head above water, whereby he is discovered
and loses his life. His skin is precious in Polonia either for garment

The medicinal virtues of this beast are in the skin, the urine, the gall and
the cods: The medicinal virtues; Albertus. Aetius.
and first, a garment made of the skins is good for a paralitick person, and
the skins burned with dry Oynions and liquid pitch, stays the bleeding of
the nose, and being put into the soles of shoes eases the gowt. The urine
preserved in the bladder, is an antidot against poison, and the gall is
profitable for many things, Pliny
but especially being Castoreum, Pliny.
and therefore we will in this discourse use that word for expressing the
nature, qualities, remedies, and miraculous operation thereof, wherefore they
must be very warily and skilfully taken forth, for there is in a little skin
compassing them about a certain sweet humor (called Humor Melleus) and with
that they must be cut out, the utter skin being cut asunder to make the more
easy entrance, and the Apothecaries use to take all the fat about them, which
they put into the oil of the Castoreum, and sell it unto fisher men to make
bait for fishes. The females have stones or Castoreum, as well as the males,
but very small ones. Now you must take great heed to the choice of your Beauer,
and then to the stones which must grow from one root conjoined, otherwise they
are not precious, and the beast must neither be a young one nor one very old,
but in the mean betwixt both, being in vigor and perfection of strength.

The Beauers of Spain yield not such virtuous castoreum as they of Pontus, and
therefore if it be possible, Hermolaus. The corrupting of Castoreum.
take a Pontique Beauer, next one of Gallatia, and lastly of Affrique. Some do
corrupt them putting into their skin gum and Ammomacke with blood, other
take the raines of the beast, and so make the castoreum very big, which in it
self is but castoreum. You may know if it be mingled with Ammoniacke by the
taste, for although the color be like, yet is the savor different. Platearius
shows, that some adulterate castoreum, by taking of his skin, or some cod
newly taken forth of another beast, filling it with blood, sinnewes and the
powder of castoreum, that so it may not want his strong smell or savor: other
fill it with earth and blood; other with blood, rozen, gum, sinnewes and
pepper, to make it taste sharp: but this is a falsification discernable, and of
this sort is the castoreum that is sold at Venice, as Brasouala affirms: and
the most of them sold at this day are bigger then the true castoreum, for the
just weight of the right stones is not above twelve ounces and a Grammarians
affirm; yet I have smelled of it dried, which was not unpleasant, and things
once seasoned with the savor thereof, will ever taste of it, although they have
not touched it, but lie covered with it in the same box or pot; and therefore
the castoreum of Persia is counterfeit, which has no such smell, for if a man
smell to the right castoreum, it will draw blood out of his nose.

After it is taken forth from the beast, it must be hung up in some place to be
dried in Persians affirm, that their castoreum will hold his virtue ten years;
which is as false as the matter they speak of is counterfeit. Archigenes wrote
a whole book of the virtue of this castoreum, whereunto they may resort, that
require an exact and full declaration of all his medicinal operations: it
shall only be our purpose, to touch some general heads, and not to enter into
a particular discovery thereof.

Being so dried as is declared, it must be warily used, for it falls out
herein as in other medicinal subjects, that ignorance turns a curing herb
or substance, into a venomous and destructive quality; therefore we will first
of all set down the dangers to be avoided, and afterward some particular
cures that come by the right use of it. Therefore The dangers in the use of
Castoreum. Seruius.
whereunto if a woman with child do smell, it will kill the child unborn
and cause abortement: for a vvomans womb is like a creature, nourished with
good sauors, and destroyed with evil: therefore burning of feathers,
shoo-soles, woollen clothes, pitch, Galbanum, gum, onions, and garlike is
noisome to them. It may be corrupted not only as is before declared; but also,
if it be shut up close without vent into pure aner, when it is hanged up to be
dried, or if the bag be kept moist, so that it cannot dry; and it is true (as
Auicen says) that if it be used being so corrupted, it kills within a days
space, driving one into madness, making the sick person continually to hold
forth his tongue, and

But there is also a remedy for it being corrupted; namely, Asses milk
mingled with some sharp sirrop of Citron, or if need require, drink a dram of
Philons Antidot at the most, or take butter and sweet water which will cause
vomit, and vomit therewith so long, as you feel the savor of the stone, and
afterward take sirrop of Limmons or citrons: and some affirm upon experience,
that two penny weight of Coriander-seed, scorched in the fire, is a present
remedy for this evil. And it is more strange, that seeing it is in greatest
strength, when the savor is hottest, which is very displeasing to a man's nature
in outward appearance, yet does it never harm a man taken inwardly, (being
pure and rightly compounded] if the person be without a fever, for in that case
only it does hurt inwardly, otherwise apply it to a moist body lacking
refrigeration, or to a cold body wanting chamelaeon, but with this difference,
against the scorpion Dipsas and cerastes, with Opponax, or wine made of Rue,
and against other serpents with wine simply. Take of every one two drams, for
a cold take it a scruple and a half in four cups of wine, used with Ladanum,
it cures the Fistula and ulcers, Castoreoque graui mulier sopita recum bit.
provoke neezing by smelling to it, procures sleep, they being anointed
with it: maiden-weed and conserve of Roses, and being drunk in Water, helps
Frenzy, and with the roses and Maiden-weed aforesaid, eases headache: Being
laid to the head like a plaster, it cures all cold and windy affections
therein, or if one draw in the smoke of it perfumed, though the pain be from
the mothers womb, and given in three cups of sweet vinegar fasting, it
helps the falling sickness, but if the person have often fits, the same given
in a glister, gives great ease: Then must the quantity be two drams of
castoreum, one sextary of honey Rue or wine* sod in Rue, so also all heart
trembling, ache in the stomach, and quaking of the sinews. It being infused
into them that lie in Lethargies with vinegar and conserve of roses does
presently awake them, for it strengthens the brain, and moves sternutation.
It helps oblivion coming by reason of sickness, the party being first purgd
with Hiera Ruffi* castoreum* with oil bound to the hinder part of the head,
and afterward a dram drunk with Mellicrate, also taken with oil, cures all
conuulsion proceeding of cold humors, if the conuulsion be full and perfect,
and not temporal or in some particular member, which may come to pass in any
sickness.

The same mixed with honey helps the clearnes of the eyes, and their
inflammations: Hippocrates sent unto the wife of Aspasius [complayning of the
pain in her cheek and teeth] a little castoreum with pepper, aduising her to
hold it in her mouth betwixt her teeth. A perfume of it drawn up into the head
and stomach, eases the pains of the lights and intrals, and given to them
that sigh much with sweet vinegar fasting: it recouereth them. It eases the
cough and distillations of rhewme from the head to the stomach, taken with the
juice of black Popye. It is preseruative against inflammations and pains in the
guts or belly] although the belly be swollen with cold Oxycrate, it eases the
colicke given with annisse beaten small, and two spoonfuls of sweet water: and
it is found by experiment, that when a horse cannot make water, let him be
covered over with his cloth, Vegetins.
and then put underneath him a fire of coals, wherein make a perfume with
that castoreum till the horses belly and cods smell thereof, then taking away
the coals, walk the horse up and down covered, and he will presently stale.

To soften the belly they use Castoreum with sweet water two drams, and if it
be not forcible enough, they take of the root of a set cucumber one dram, and
the some of salt Peter two drams. It is also used with the juice of Withy and
decoction of Vinegar applied to the rains and genitall parts like a plaster
against the Gonorrhaean passion. It will stir up a woman's monthly courses, and
cause an easy travail, two drammes being drunk in water with Penny-Royall.
And if a Woman with child go over a Beauer, she will suffer abortment, A
secret
and Hypocrates affirms, that a perfume made with Castoreum, Asses dunge, and
swines grease, opens a closed womb.

There is an Antidot called Diacostu, made of this castoreum, good against the
Megrim, Myrepsus: against the impotency of the tongue, trembling of the
members, and other such infirmities. These virtues of a Beauer thus described,
I will conclude this discourse with a History of a strange beast like unto
this: related by Dunranus campus-bellus (a noble kni.) who affirmed, A
miraculus history of a Monster.
that there are in Arcadia, seven great Lakes, some 30. miles compass, and
some less; whereof one is called Garloil, out of which in Anno 15.0 about the
midst of Summer, in a morning, came a Beast about the bigness of a water dog,
having feet like a Goose, who with his tail easily threw down small trees,
and presently with a swift pace he made after some men that he saw, and with
three strokes he likewise overthrew three of them, the residue climbing up into
trees escaped, and the beast without any long tarrying, returned back again
into the water, which beast has at other times been seen, and it is Hector
Boethius.

OF THE BISON.
Of the name
A Bison called of some Latins though corruptly Vrson, and Veson, of the
Graecians Bisoon, of the Lituanians Suber, of Zuber, from whence some Latins
derived Zubro, for a Byson. Of the Germans Visent, and Vaesent, and Wisent: a
beast very strange as may appear by his figure prefixed* which by many authors
is taken for Vr.^^, some for a Bugle, or wild Ox, other, for Rangifer, and
many for the beast Tarandus a Buffe. By reason whereof there are not many
things, which can by infallible collection be learned of this beast among the
writers; yet is it truly and generally held for a kind of wild Ox, Places of
their breed.
bred in the Northern parts of the world for the most part, and never tamed, as
in Scythia, Moscouia, Hercynia, Thracia, and Brussia. But those Lapponia,
Philostephan: The reason of their nam.
and the Dukedom of Angermannia, are more truly said to be Vrt, as in their
story shall be afterward declared Their name is taken from Thracia, Varinus.
Stephanus a secret in the la^e Dicaea
which was once called Bistonia, and the people thereof Bistones, from Bisto
the son of Cicas and Terpsicores; and thereof came Bistonia Grues, cranes of
Thracia, and Bistonia L^eus, for the lake or sea of Dicaea, near Abdera, where
never living thing, or other of less weight was cast in, but it presently
sunk and was drowned.

This Bison is called Taurus Paeonicus, the Paeonian-Bull, whereof I find two
kinds, one of greater, Seural kinds
and another of lesser size, called the Scotian or calydonian Bison, whereof
you shall see the picture and qualities at the foot of this history.

The greater is as big as any Bull or Ox, being maned about the neck and
back like a the great Bison
his horns great and very sharp, yet turning up toward his back and at the
points hooked like the wild goats of the alps, but much greater: they are black
of color, The several parts.
and with them through the admirable strength of his neck can he toss into The
strength of this beast.
They are as big as the Dextarij which are the greatest Stallions of Italy.
Their face looks downewarde, and they have a strange strength in their
tongue, for by licking they grate like a file any indifferent hard substance,
the quantity of Bisons. The strength of their tung.
but especially they can therewith draw unto them any man or beast of inferior
condition, whom by licking they wound to death.

Moschus or Musk-cat, and their mane reaches over their shoulders, shaking it
irefully when he brayeth; their face or forehead very broad, especially betwixt
their horns, for Sigismund king of Polonia, having killed one of them in
hunting, stood betwixt his horns, with two other men not much lesser in
quantity then himself, who was a goodly well proportioned and personable
Prince.

There are two bunches on his back, the former near his shoulders, which is
the higher, and the other near the rumpe, which is somewhat lower. I have seen
the horns of a Byson, which was in the hands of a Goldsmiths to lip with
Silver and Gilt, that it might be fit to drink in: it did bend like the talant
of an Egle or Gryphin, or some ravenous bird. The flesh in Summer time is most
fat, but it tastes so much of wild-garlicke, The flesh of this beast. Bonarus.
Baro.
a secret in the inward heat of this beast.
if the Hunter do not presently after the fall of the beast, separate from it
the intrals: and which is most strange of all, being pierced alive with any
hunting spear, dart, or sword, the weapon by the heat of the body is made so
weak and soluble, that it comes forth as flexible as lead: and to conclude,
it is a most noble and fierce spirited beast, never afraid, or yielding till
breath fails, neither can he be taken with any nets or ginnes, until they
be their hu^ting.
and skillful men, or else that sport will be their own undoing and overthrow.
Sigism: baro.


Therefore when they go to hunt this Byson, they choose a place replenished
with larg trees, neither so great that they cannot easily wind about them, nor
so little that they shall not be able to cover their bodies from the horn or
tongue of the beast: behind which the hunters place themselves out of sight:
and then the Dogs rouse up the beast, driving him to that place where the
hunters stand, whom the beast first espieth, to him he makes force, who must
warily keep the tree for his shield, and with his spear wound him where he
can, who will not fall without many mortal strokes, but wax more and more
eager, not only with horn but with tongue, for if he can but apprehend any
part of the hunters garment with his tongue, he loses no hold but draws
him unto him, and with his horn and feet kills him: but if the fight be
long, and so the hunter wearied and out of breath, then does he cast a red cap
unto the beast, who makes at it with head and feet, never leaving till it be
in pieces; and if another come to help him as hunters must, if they will
return alive, then shall he easily draw the beast to combat, and forsake the
first man, if he cry Lu-lu-lu.

In Phoci^ is How Bisons are taken alive
Pausanias shows how these Bysons are taken alive, in this sort. The hunters
(says he) choose out some steep and slippery down hill, whereupon they lay
skins of beasts newly taken off, and if they want such, then anoint they old
skins with oil, and so leave them spread upon those sleeping or bending
passages: then raise they the beasts, and with dogs and other means on
horseback drive them along to the places where they laid their hides, and as
soon as they come upon the skins they slip and fall down, rolling headelong
till they come into the valleys, from whence they constrain them back again
some other way, three or four times a day, making them fall down the hills as
aforesaid, and so wearying them with continual hunting, and fasting. At the
last they come unto them, when they are no more able to rise for faintnes, and
give them pine-Aples taken out of the shells, (for with that meat are they
delighted) and so while they eagerly feed and ly weary on the ground, the
medicines not known,
they intoile them in bands and manacles, and lead them away alive: The
medicines coming from this beast may be coniectured to be more forcible, then
of common and ordinary oxen, but because they were not known to the Grecians
and Arabians, and we find nothing recorded thereof: we will conclude the story
of this great Bison; with a good opinion of the virtues, though we are not able
to learn or discover them to others.

Of the White SCOTIAN Bison.


IN the Woods of SCOTLAND, called Callendar or Caldar, Places where these Bisons
abide.
and in ancient time CALIDONIA, which reaches from Monteth and Erunall, unto
Atholia and Loquhabria, there are bred white Oxen, maned about the neck like a
Lion, but in other parts like ordinary and common Oxen. This wood was once full
of them, but now they are all slain, The nature of this Bison.
except in that part which is called Cummirnald. This beast is so hateful and
fearful of mankind, that it will not feed of that grass or those calidonian,
or Scotian BISON.

BONASVS, the figure of the head
THis beast is called in greek Bonassos, Of the name
and in Latin Bonnassus, and is also called Monops, or Monopios, and once in
Aristotle Bolinthus. The Bohemians Loni, now the Germans and Maene or Mane,
from whence comes this word Monapios, The reason of the name Monapios
which signifies a maned Ox. This Bison is the greatest beast, bull or Ox,
though it be shorter in length, yet are the sides larger and broader then all
other. Places of their breed.
They are bred in Paeonia in the mountain Messapus, not in Lydia and Phrygia,
as Solinus Albertus have delivered; being deceived, because the Peonians were
joined with the Medians, which they derive from Madi a people of Asya, whereas
the Peonians and Medi in Pliny, (as is observed by Hermolaus in his
castigations of Pliny) are a people of Thr^cia, in EVROPE; so called of Paeon
the son of Endimion and brother of Epeus, Pausanias
who was seated near the river AXIVS in Macedonia: for it was agreed betwixt
the two brethren striving for the kingdom, that he which was out run by the
other, should yield the kingdom in quietness to his brother.

The head of this beast is like the head of an Ox or Bull, His parts
his horns bending round to the sides of the cheek, by reason whereof he has
no defense by them, neither can a man Aristotle
from his eyes down to his shoulders in length like a Horses, but the hair
thereof is much softer, and lies more smoothly, the uppermost hairs being
harsher, and the undermost softer like wool. Their color betwixt red and ash
color, but black and yellow appears not in them; They have no upper teeth,
in this point resembling an Ox and other horned beasts: their horns being in
compass about nine inches and somewhat more, are very smooth and black like
varnish. Their voice is like the voice of an ox, their legs all hairy, and
their feet cloven, their tail too short for the other members of the Body
like a Bugles, His flesh and disposition to anger.
their back stretched out at length, is as long as a seat for seven men,
their flesh is very sweet, for which cause he is much sought for in hunting,
he will with his feet dig up the ground like an ox or bull in his rage, when
he is once stroke he flies away, His fight in flyeng.
fighting with his heels backward, and whereas nature has denied him the
benefit of horns which other beasts have, so that he is only adorned and
not armed by those weapons, like a soldier that cannot draw forth his sword:
she has given him the secret operation of his dung: The secret operation of
his dung.
which in his chase he casts forth of his body so plentifully, The reason of
the heat and operation of their excrement.
as the Cuttell-fi^h, for when in chase the intrals are heated, and the passage
somewhat restrained, so that the holding in of breath breeds more wind in the
guts, it may very naturally chance, the excrement being with the enclosed
wind and heat sent forth by violent eruption that it may fly far backward, and
also burn as aforesaid. These Their place and succor for caluing
and before that time comes she chooses a place, which she walleth in with
the abundance of her own dung, so high as it may cover her young one, for
there is no beast that is naturally so full of excrement as a bonassus. Their
ears are very broad as the Poet says, Patutae camuris sub cornibus aures,
broad ears, under crooked winding blunt horns, the skin is so large, that
it has covered a good part of a house, the inward color whereof is like the
earth whereon the beast did use to feed. That excellent Physician of England
John Cay, did send me the head of this beast, with this description, in an
Epistle saying.

I Send unto thee the head of a great wild beast, the bare mouth and the bones
supporters The relation of John Cay a Doctor of Physic in England
and therefore bearing up some like heavy burden, the horns are recurued and
bending backward, so that they do not spire directly downward but rather
forward, though in a crooked manner, which because it could not appear forward,
as they do when the Beast is alive, therefore they are described turning on
the one side: the space betwixt the horns or breadth of the forehead is three
Roman palms and half, the length of the horns, three palms one finger and a
half, and their compass where they are joined to the head, is one foot, one
palm and a half. In the castle of warwick where are preserved the armor and
spear of one Earl Guy of Warwick a most valiant strong man, I have seen the
head of a beast not unlike to this, saving that if the bones whereon the
horns grow should be joined together, then would the horns be Couentry,
being in the lowest part three foot broad and two fingers, and four foot long
and two palms: and the compass of the arme-hole wherein the shoulder is
joined, is three foot and one palm, and the whole compass of them both in
breadth and length, is eleven foot one palm and a half.

In the chapel of the said great Guy, distant from Warwick about one thousand
paces, [or a mile] there hangs a ribbe of this beast [as I suppose] the
compass whereof in the smallest place is three palms, and in length it is
six foot and a half, the ribbe is dry and Guy, other say, by tradition of
their elders, that it is a piece of a wild Cow remaining near Couentry, and
did much harm to many people: which latter opinion I embrace taking it for a
Bonasus, who in most things is like a cow, and therefore some affirm it is an
Indian Cow [but ignorantly] because any thing that is not common is usually
attributed to some strange countri-breed [with an addition to that it most of
all resembles.] The shape of these horns are here following discribed. Thus
far D. C^^.



Whereunto I assent holding his conjectures to be very probable, until by the
diligent

OF THE BVFFE.
A Buffe is called in Greek Tarandos, and in Latin Tarandus, Of the name and
kind of Buffes.
which some have corrupted barbarously, terming it Parandrus Pyradus, and I
conjecture that it is the same beast, which the Polonians call Tur or Thuro;
howsoever other confound this Tarandus with another beast, called Rangifer; and
some with a kind of Vrus, which have many properties in common with a Buffe,
yet my reason, why the Polonian Tur can be no other then a Buffe, is because
the head and mouth differs from those beasts, and also by cause this is
taken in Sarmatia, where the common people call it Daran or Darau, although the
later writers call it Duran and Daran, and translate it a Bonnasus, which Daran
is easily derived from Tarandus or Tarandos.

Also that the Polonion Tur should not be a Buffe, all that can be objected,
is, that the Horns thereof are cragged or braunched, which thing Pliny
attrybuteth to a Buffe* whereunto I answer, that the ancients did confound a
Buffe with an Elke, and a Rangifer; for in the description of an Elke they
vary* diverse times mistaking one for another, by reason that they wrote
altogether by report, none of them being seen in their contries, and therefore
may easily be deceived in a Buffe, as well as in an Elke. The chief authors
of this opinion have been Sir Thomas Eliot, and Georgius Agricola, with whom I
will not contend* nor with any other man that can give better reason: for Pliny
makes a Buffe to be a beast proportioned betwixt an Heart and an Ox, of which
sort is not a Rangifer, as shall be manifested; and if it be* yet can it never
appear that a Rangifer does change color like a Buffe, as also we will make
more evident: So then, distinguishing a Buffe from a Rangifer, and presuming
that the Polonian THVRO or Tur is a Buffe, we will proceed to his description.

Pliny The several parts. Siluius. Hesychius
The head of this beast is like the head of a Heart, and his horns branched or
ragged; his body for the most part like a wild Oxes, his hair deep and
harshe like a Bears, his hide is so hard and thick* that of it the Scithians
make breast-plates, which no dart can pierce through. His color, for the most
part like an Asses, but when he is hunted or feared, he changes his hew into
whatsoever thing he sees; as among trees he is like them: among green boughs
he seems green; a miracle in his color.
amongst rocks of stone, he is transmuted into their color also; as it is
generally by most writers affirmed: as Pliny and Solinus among the ancient;
Stephanus and Eustathius, among the later Writers.

This indeed is the thing that seems most incredible, but there are two
reasons which draw me to subscribe hereunto: first, because we see that the
face of men and beasts thorough fear, joy, anger, and other passions, do
quickly change; from ruddy to white, from black to pale and from pale to ruddy
again. Now as this beast has the head of a Heart, so also has it the fear of
a Heart, but in a higher degree; and therefore by secret operation it may easily
alter the color of their hair, as a passion in a reasonable man, may alter
the color of his face.

The same things are reported by Pliny of a beast in INDIA called Lycaon, as
shall be afterward declared; and besides these two, there is no other among
creatures covered with hair, that changes color. Another reason forcing me
to yield herunto is, that in the sea, a Polypus-fish, and in the earth among
creeping things, a Chamaeleon, do also change their color in like sort and
fashion: whereunto it may be replied, that the Chamaeleon and Polypus-fish, are
pilled or bare without hair, and therefore may more easily be verse-coloured;
but it is a thing impossible in nature, for the hair to receive any tincture
from the passions: but I answer, that the same nature can multiply and diminish
her power in lesser and smaller Beasts, according to her pleasure, and
reserueth an operation for the nails, and feathers of Birds, and finnes and
scales of Fishes, making one sort of diverse color from the other: and
therefore may and does as forcibly work in the hairs of a buffe, as in the
skin of a Chamaeleon; adding so much more force to transmute them, by how
much farther off they stand from the blood, like as an Archer, which sets
his arm and bow higher to shoot farther, and therefore it is worthy
observation, that as this beast, has the best defense by her skin above all
other, so she has the wakest

These Buffes are bred in Scithia, and are therefore called Tarandi Scithic;
Countries of Buffes.
they are also among the Sarmatians, and called Budini, and near Gelonis, and
in a part of Poland, in the Duchy of Mazauia, betwixt Oszezke and Garuolyin.
And if the polonian Thuro before mentioned, have a mane [whereof I am ignorant]
then will I also take that beast: for a kind of Bison. In phrygia, there is a
territory called Tarandros, Stephanus
and peradventure this beast had his name from that Country, wherein it may be
he was first discovered and made known.

The quantity of this beast, exceeds not the quantity of a wild Ox, The
quantity or stature of a Buffe.
whereunto in all the parts of his body he is most like, except in his head
face, and horns: his Legs and The hide is most profitable to man
hides are found, for the thinnest and most unprofitable skins of beasts,
are in the whot and warmer parts of the world: and God has provided thick,
warm, most commodious, and precious couers for those beasts that live farthest
from the Sun. Whereupon many take the hides of other beasts for Buffe, for
being tawed and wrought artificially they make garments of them, as it is
daily to be seen in Germany.

Of the vulgar Bugill.
Bubalus, and Buffalus: The several names
in French Beufle: in Spaninsh, Bufano: in German, Buffell: and in the Illirian
tongue, Bouwoll. The Haebrewes have no proper word for it, but comprehend it
under To, which signifies any kind of wild Oxen; for neither can it be
expressed by Meriah, which signifies fatted oxen; or Bekarmi, which signifies
oxen properly; or Iachmur, which the Persians call Kutzcohi, or Buzcohi, and is
usually translated a wild-asse. For which beast, the Haebrewes have many
words: neither have the Graecians any proper word for a vulgar Bugill, for
Boubalos and Boubalis, are amongst them taken for a kind of Roe bucke. The
original of the term Bubalus
So that this Bubalus Affrique, taken up by the Italians, and by them
attributed to this beast, and many other for whom they knew no proper names.
For in the time of Pliny, they use to call strange beasts like Oxen or Bulls,
Vri; as now a days (lead with the same error, or rather ignorance] they call
such Bubali or buffali. The true effigies of the vulgar Bugill, was sent unto
me by Cornelius Sittardus, a famous Physician in Norimberge; and it is pictured
by a tame and familiar Bugill, such as lives among men for labor, as it
seems to me. For there is difference among these beasts, [as Aristotle has
affirmed] both in color, mouth, horn, and strength.

This vulgar Bugill, Of the vulgar Bugill and her parts
is of a kind of Wild Oxen, greater and taller then the ordinary Oxen, their
body being thicker and stronger, and their lims better compact together: broad
and curled with hair, his horns more flat then round, very long, bending
together at the top, Pollonius. Use of their horns
as a Goats do backward: insomuch as in creete, they make bovves of them: and
they are not for defense of the beast, but for distinction of kind and
ornament. His neck is thick and long, and his rump or nether part of his
back is lower then the residue, descending to the tail. His Legs are very
great, broad and strong, but shorter then the quantity of his body would seem
to permit. They are very fierce being tamed, but that is corrected by putting
an Iron ring through his Nostriles, Erasmus.
whereinto is also put a cord, by which he is lead and ruled, as a horse by a
bridle (for which cause in Germany they call a simple man ouerruled by the advice of another to his own hurt, a Bugle, lead with a ring in his Nose.)

His feet are cloven, and with the foremost he will dig the earth, and with the
hindmost fight like a horse, setting on his blows with great force, and
redoubling them again if his object remove not. His voice is like the voice of
an ox; when he is chased he runs forth right, Albertus. The manner of his
sight
sildome winding or turning, and when he is angered he runs into the Water,
wherein he covers himself all over except his mouth, to cool the heat of
his blood; Nature of their breeding places Pet. crscent.
for this beast can neither endure outward cold nor inward heat: for which
cause, they breed not but in hot countries, and being at liberty are sildome
from the waters. They are very tame, so that children may ride on their backs,
but on a sudden they will run into the Waters, and so many times indaunger
the childrens lives.

Of their yo^g ones and milk.
Their love to their young ones is very great, they always give milk from their
copulation

Albertus. Their strength in labor
They are very strong, and will draw more at once then two horses; wherefore
they are tamed for service, and will draw Wagons and plowes, and carry burdens
also, but they are not very fit for carts: yet when they do draw, they carry
also great burdens or loads tied to their backs with ropes and wantyghtes.
Pet. crescent.
At the first setting forward, they bend their Legs very much, but afterward
they go upright, and being ouerloden they will fall to the earth, from which
they cannot be raised by any stripes until their load or Use of their hydes
Bellonius.
Solinus reports, that the old Britons made boats of osier twigs or reeds,
covering them round with Bugils skins, and sailed in them: and the
inhabitants of the kingdom of a Caraiani, make them bucklers and shields of
Bugils skins, which they use in Wars, the flesh is not good for meat,
which caused baptista Fiera to make this poem: Bubalus hinc abeat, neue intret
prandia nostra
Non edat hunc quisquam: sub iugo semper eat.


For they engender melancholy and have no good taste, being raw they are not
unpleasant

The medicines made of this beast are not many: with the horns or hoofes they
make rings to wear against the cramp, The physic made out of Bugils
and it has been believed [but without reason] that if a man or a woman wear
rings made of the horns and hoofes of a bugill in the time of carnal
copulation, that they will naturally fly off from their fingers; whereas this
secret was wont to be attributed to rings of Chrisolyts or Smaragde stones. To
conclude, some teach husbandmen to burn the horns or dung of their bugils on
the windye side of their corn and plants, to keep them from cankers and
blasting: and thus much of the vulgar bugill, called bubalus recentiorum: whose
beginning in this part of the world is unknown, although Italy and other parts
of Europe they are now bred and fostered.

OF THE AFFRICAN BVGILL.
BEllonius reports, that he saw in Cair a small beast which was in all things
like a little Ox, of a beautiful body, full of flesh, well and neately
limmed, which he could take for no other then the Affrican Ox, or Bugill of
the old Graecians, which was brought out of the kingdom of Asamia unto the
city Cair. It was old, and not so big Roe; The country of this beast.
he never in all his life took more pleasure to behold a beast, then in
viewing the excellent beauty of every part in this creature. His hair was
yellowish, glistering as if it had been combed and trimmed by the art of a
Barber: under his belly it was somewhat more red and taunty then upon his
back. His feet in all things like a vulgar Bugils, his Legs short and
strong, the neck short and thick, whereon the dewe-laps of his crest did
scarce appear. His head like an Oxes, and his horns growing out of the crown
of his head, black, long, and bending like a half Moon; whereof he has no
use to defend himself, or annoy another, by reason their points turn inward.
His ears like a cowes, and shoulder blades standing up a little above the
ridge very strongly. His tail, to the camelopardals, from whence hangs some
few black hairs, twice so great as the hairs in a horses tail. His voice
was like an Oxes, but not so strong and loud: to conclude therefore, for his
description, if a man conceive in his mind a little yellow neat Ox, with
smooth hair, strong members, and high horns above his head, like a half
Moon, his mind cannot err from the true and perfect shape of this beast.
There was such a one to be seen of late at Florence, under the name of an
Indian Ox, saving his head was greater and longer, his horns not high nor
bending together, but standing upright and a little wreathing into spires above
their root, and the hinder part of the back much lower then the shoulders, but
it may be the obseruer of this beast failed and took

This creature or Affrican Bugill, must be understood to be a Wild beast, The
nature of this beast.
and not of a tame kind, although Bellonius expresses not so much. Leo in his
description of Affrique, relates a discourse of a certain beast called Laut
or Daut, who is less then an Ox, but of more elegant feature, in his Legs,
white horns, and black nails, which is so swift, that no beast can outrunne
it except a Barbary horse: it is taken most easily in the Summer time: with the
skin thereof they make targets and shieldes, which cannot be pierced by any
Weapon, except Gunshot: for which cause they fell them very dear; which is
coniectured to be the Bugill that Bellonius describes, although it be not
just of the same color, which may vary in this beast as well as in any other,
and I have a certain Manuscript without the authors name, that affirms there
be bugils in Lybia, in likeness resembling Rhene, which is very fierce and of a
white Color.

There is a horn in the towne-house of Argentine four Roman cubits long, Of
a strange horn in Argentine.
which is coniectured to be the horn of some Vrus [or rather as I think of
some Bugill] it has hung there at the least two or three generations, and by
scraping it I found it to be a horn, although I forgot to measure the compass
thereof, yet because antiquity thought it worthy to be reserved in so honorable
a place for a monument of some strange beast, I have also thought good to
mention it in this discourse: as when Phillip King of Macedon, did Orbelus, and
conse cated the horns thereof in the Temple of Hercules, which were fifteen
yards or paces long for posterity to behold.

The Picture of the Affrican Bugill described in the former page.


OF THE BVLL.
A Bull is the husband of a Cow, and ringleader of the heard, [for which cause
Homer compares Agamemnon the great Emperor of the Grecian Army to a Bull]
reserved only for procreation, and is sometimes indifferently called an Verg:
Pingue solum primus extemplo mensibus anni,
fortes inue^ tant houes.


The Haebrewes call him Tor, or Taur; which the Chaldes call Abir for a strong
Ox: so the Arabians Ta^^; the Graecians Tauros; the Latins Taurus, the
Itallians Toro, the French Toreau, the Germans ein Stier, ein vuncherstier, das
vucher, ein mummelstier, ein hagen, The true aetymology o^ the name Taurus.
and ein hollen; the Illirians Vul and iunecz: by all which several
appellations it is evident, that the name Taurus in Latin is not derived from
Tannouros, the stretching out the tail, nor from Gauros, signifieng proud; but
from the haebrew Tor, which signifies Taurot, and that word Taurus among the
Latins, has given denomination to men, stars Mountains, Ryuers, trees,
ships, and many other things, which caused Ioachimus Camerarius to make thereof
this aenigmaticall riddle. A Riddle up on the word Taurus.


Maechus eram regis: sed lignea membra sequebar,
Et Cilicum mons sum: sed mons sum nomine solo
Et vehor in coelo: sed in ipsis ambulo terris.
That is in diverse senses, Taurus was a Kings Pander, the root of a tree, a
Mountain in cili^ia, a Bull, a Mountain in name, a Star or sign in heaven,
and a River upon the earth* so also we read of Statilius Taurus, and Pomponius
vitulus, two Romans. It was the Trogloditae, and that adulterer which ravished
Europa, was Taurus the King of Creete; or as some say, a King that came in a
shipp, whose ensign and n^me was the Bull; and other affi^me, that it was
Jupiter in the likeness of a Bull, because he had so defloured Ceres when he
begat Proserpina, and afterward defloured Proserpina his daughter, in the
likeness Achelous did fight with Hercules for Deianeira the Daughter of Oeneus
king of Calydon, finding himself to be too weak to match Hercules, turned
himself suddenly into a Serpent, and afterward into a bull; Hercules seeing
him in that proportion, speedily pulled from him one of his horns, and gave it
to Copia the Cornucopia. Afterward, Achelous gave unto Hercules one of the
Horns of Amalthea, and so received his own again, and being overcome by
Hercules, hid himself in the river of Thoas, which after his own name bending
forth into one horn or crook, was called Achelous. By these things the Poets
had singular intentions to decipher matters of great moment under hidden and
dark Narrations.

But there are four reasons given, why rivers are called Taurocrani: that is,
bul-heads. Reasons why rivers are called Taurocrani.
First, because when they empty themselves into the Sea, they roar or bellow
like bulls, with the noise of their falling water: secondly, because they furrow
the earth like a draught of oxen with a plow, and much deeper. Thirdly, because
the sweetest and deepest pasturs unto which these cattle resort, are near the
rivers. Fourthly, because by their crooking

The strength of the head and neck of a bull is very great, The strength and
several part of Bulls.
and his forehead seems to be made for fight: having horns short, but strong
and piked, upon which he can toss into the air very great and weighty beasts
which he receives again as they fall down, doubling their elevation with
renewed strength and rage, until they be utterly confounded. Their strength in
all the parts of their body is great, and they use to strike backward with
their heels: yet is it reported by caelius Titormus a Neat-heard of Aetolia,
The prodigious strength of tritormos.
that being in the field among the cattle, took one of the most fierce and
strongest bulls in the heard by the hinder leg, and there in despite of the
bull striving to the contrary, held him with Milo Crotoniates, he lifted up
his hands to heaven, crying out by way of interogation to Jupiter; and
saying: O Jupiter, have thou sent another Hercules amongst us? Whereupon came
the common proverb of a strong armed man: This is another Hercules. The like
story is reported by Suidas of Polydamas, who first of all slew a Lion, and
after held a bull by the leg so fast, that the beast striving to get out of
his hands, left the hoof of his foot behind him.

The Epithites of this beast are many among writers, as when they call him
br^^^n-footed, wild, cheerful, sharp, plower, warrior, horne-bearer,
blockish, great, glistering, fierce, valiant, and louring, which seems to be
natural to this beast; insomuch as the Grammarians derive Toruitas, grimnes or
lowering from Taurus a Bull, whose aspect carries wrath and hatered in it:
wherefore it is proverbially said in Westphalia, of a lowering and scouling
countenance, The several parts.
Eir sich als ein ochs der them, fleschouwer Entloffen is it: That is, he looks
like a bull escaped from one stroke of the butcher. Their horns are lesser but
stronger then Oxen or kie, for all beasts that are not gelded, have smaller
horns and Guers, and in some places the gal is called Mammacur. They are
plentiful in most countries as is said in the discourse of Oxen, Countries of
their best breed.
but the best sort are in Epirus, next in Thracia, and then Italy, Syria,
England, Macedonia, Phrigia, and Belgia: for the bulls of Gallia are impaired by
labor, and the bulls of Aethiope are the Rhinocerotes, as the bulls of the woods
are Elephants.

Their time of copulatio^.
They desire the Cow at eight months old, but they are not able to fill her
til they be two years old, and they may remain tolerable for breeders until
they be 12. and not past. Their food for procreation
or barley, if their pasture be not good. The best time to suffer them with
their females, is the midst of the spring, and if the bull be heavy, take the
tail of a heart and burn it to powder, then mo^sten it in wine, and rub
therewith the genitals of a bull, and he will rise above measure into lust.
Wherefore, if it be more then tolerable, it must be alayed with oil. The
violence of a bull in the act of copulation is so great, that if he miss the
females genital entrance, Quintilius
he wounds or much harmeth her in any other place, sending forth his seed
without any motion except touching, and a Cow being filled by him, he will
never after leap her, during the time she is with calfe: wherefore the
Egiptians decipher Epictetus saying of Sustine and Abstine: that is: Bear and
Forbear, was emblematicaly described by a bull having his knee bound and tied
to a cow in the hand of the neat heard, with this subscription. Hard fortune
is to be endured with patience, and happiness is often to be feared, for
Epictetus said bear and forbear, we must suffer many things, and withhold our
fingers from forbidden fruits, for so the bull which swayeth rule among
beasts, being bound in his right knee, abstaineth from his female great with
young.

When they burn in lust, their wrath is most outrageous against their
companions in the same pasture, with whom they agreed in former times, and then
the conqueror coupleth with the cow: The fight or combat of Lul^es.
but when he is weakened with generation, the beast that was overcome, Oppianus
as follows. One that is the chiefest rules over all the other heard, who
tremble at the sight and presence of this their eager King, and especially the
Kye knowing the insulting jealousy of their raging husband. When the herds of
other places meet together, beholding one another with disdaineful
countenances, and with their loughing terrible voices provoke each other,
puffing out their flaming rage of defia^ce, and dimming the glistering light
with their often dust-beating-feet into the air, who presently take up the
challenge and separate themselves from the company, joining together at the
sound of their own trumpets-loughing-voice, in fearful and sharp conflicts,
not sparing, not yelding, not retiring, til one or both of them fall wounded to
the earth: sometimes their blows to ring betwixt heaven and earth, until one
of them be vaquished and overthrown.

The poor ouercommed beast, with shame retyreth from the heard, and will no
more appear until he be enabled to make his party good against his triumphant
aduersarye: then he feeds solitary in the woods and mountains, for it is
prouerbially said to signify a single and unmarried life, abijt taurus in
siluam: that is, the bull is gone to the wood to live solitarily without his
female, often exercising himself like a studious champion against the day of a
new combat, and when he finds his strength increased, and his courage armed
for the day of battle, then roareth he in the woods and Mountains, to provoke
his

The very same is in other words described by Virgill: Bulls are enemies to all
Beasts that live upon pray, as Bears, Lions, and Wolves: when they fight with
wolus they wind their tails together, and so drive them away with their
horns; Georg. 3 Their enmity to other beasts.
when the bear fights with an ox; she falls on her back watching
opportunity to take his horns with her forefeet, which if she catch, with the
weight of her body she wearieth the beast, who is

The voice of a bull is sharper and shriller then is the loughing of a cow,
they are most courageous that have short and thick necks, and in their
greatest wildnes, if their right knee can be bound, they will not stir, or if
they be tied to a wild fig tree, Horus Apollo A secret in the taming of a
Bull.
which is so

Out of the hides of bulls, especially their ears, necks, and genitals, Their
hide^
is most excellent glue confected, but for the most part it is corrupted; by
seething with it old leather of shoes or boots: but that of Rhodes is
without all fraud, fit for Physicians and painters, and evermore the whiter the
better, for that which is black is good for nothing: wherefore that which is
made out of bulls hydes, is so white, that it sends forth a brightness, whose
virtuous coniuction in conglutination is so powerful, that it is easier to
break a whole Pliny] indebted to Dedalus the first author thereof. They used
it in instruments of music, and such other tender and precious actions.

The gall of an ox put upon copper or brass, makes it glister like Gold; Of
the Gal.
for which cause it is used by players, to color their counterfeit crowns.
The flesh of a bull is good for meat, but yet not so good as an ox or cow; Of
the flesh.
yet did the Egyptians abstain from eating cowes flesh, and not from the flesh
of bulls.

These beasts are used in some places to plow, in some to fight, and it is
reported by Elianus, that Mythridates King of Pontus, beside his guard of men,
had also a guard of a bull, a horse, and a Heart, which he tamed with his own
hands; so that when his followers were a Leo Affric^
he will presently loose his eye sight, and that in the Lake Asphaltites there
can no living creature abide and yet many bulls and camels swim therein safely.
It is but fabulous that there were Bulls in Colchis which did breath out fire,
except by that fiction the poets understood, the beastly rage of the rich
inhabitants. The sacrificing of Bulls.
Touching the sacrificing of bulls, it was also the custom of the old
Egyptians to sacrifice a Bull unto Epaphus: and their manner was, first of all
to try him whether it were fit for sacrifice, by laying meal before them,
whereof if they refused to taste, they were adjudged not apt for the Temple.

The Druidae call a general sacrifice Viscum, whereby they affirm all
greeuances may be cured. Caelius. G^raldus. Pliny
First they prepared a banquet with sacrifice under some tree, then brought they
two white bulls fastened together by the horns, and then they gave a drink to
any barren creature, Woman or bruit beast, holding religiously, that by that
drink they should be made fruitful and free from al poison: Unto so great a
height did the folly of blind Ionians did best comfort themselves in their
sacrifices where the Bull before his death did lough at the Altar: Pausanias.
and the Messenians did bind their bull which was to be sacrificed to the Ghosts
of Aristomene, unto certain Pillars in his sepulcher: if therefore the Bull did
shake the pillar while he leaped to and fro to get liberty, they took it for a
good sign or Omen, but if it stood imouable, they held it a mournful and
lamentable thing.

It is likewise reported by Varinus that when Agamemnon ignorantly killed one of
the hearts of Diana in Aulis, she was so wroth, that she stayed the winds from
blowing upon his navy, Agamemnons blood, therefore Ulysses was sent away to
fetch Iphigenia, the dau. of Agam: from her mother clitemnaestra, under
pretense to be married to achilles; but when she was ready to be sacrificed,
the goddess took pity on her, and accepted a bull in her steed, which ought
not to be thought incredible* seeing that in holy scripture a Ram was
substituted in the place of Isaac.

They were wont also to sacrifice a bull to Neptune, and to all the rivers,
because of that affinity which they held a bull has with all Waters: and to
apollo, according to this virgilian Taurus Neptuno Taurum tibi pulcher apollo.
But unto Jupiter it was unaccustomed to be offered, perhaps because he had
often shevved himself in that likeness, to ravish and defloure Women.
Proverbs of a Buli.
There be certain proverbs of a bull, which are not altogether impertinent in
this place. First, it is commonly said, that he may bear a bull that has
born a calfe* whereby is meant, that he may be more subject to filthiness in age,
which was so in youth. Quartilla was a woman of most vilde reputation for
uncleanness, because she said, that when she was little, she lay with little
ones like her self, and when she grevv bigger, Like the Engl^^^ ^r^uerb (...)
sky fall we shall have (...).
she applied her self to the pleasure of elder men, growing in filthiness as
she had increased in years. Likewise they were wont to say of an absurd or
impossible thing, that if a bull could reach his head over taygetus, he might
drink of the river Eurota, and apothegme of Geradas, when his host upon a
time did ask him what punishment the Lacedaemonians had appointed for
adulterers, he answered there were no adulterers in Lacedemon, and therefore
the punishment and question were fri^olous? his host replied; but if there
should be an adulterer there, what punishment would they appoint for him?
Marry [said Geradus) he should pay such a bull as would reach over taygetus to
drink of the Water Eurota; whereat the host laughed demanding where such a
bull could be found? then said Geradas, and where can you find an adulterer in
Lacede non, so putting off one absurdity with another. And thus much of the
natures and properties of a bull in general. In the next place before this
beast be turned into the Woods, we vvil describe his medicinal virtues, and so
let him

The powder of a bulls horn drunk in water stays a flux of blood and the
loosnes of the bell^ Sextus and Eseulapius say, The medicines o^ Bulls
that if a bulls horn be burned in a place where serpents abide i^ drives the
navvay The blood of bulls mingled with barley flovver, drives away hardness in
the flesh, and being dried cures apostems in every part of the body. It takes
away spots in the face, and kileth serpe^ts: It is commended warm against the
gou^, especially in horses. It is not good for to drink, beause it is easily
congealed, except the little veins be taken out. It is accounted among the
chiefest poisons, and therefore it is thought by Plutarch, that Anniball
poisoned himself by drinking Bulls blood, being thereunto persuaded by his
Servant, for so dyed Themistocles: and Psammenitus King of Egypt, taken by
Cambises, was constrained to drink the blood of a Bull; whereupon immediately
he gave up the ghost. For remedy hereof, it is good to beware of vomitting,
because the blood congealed in the stomach into lumps, stops the throat;
wherefore all those things which dissolve Milk in the stomach, are also
medicinable against the blood of Bulls. In these cases let the party be first of
all purged by glister or otherwise, and then annoint the stomache and belly
with barley meal and sweet Water, Lupines, Oxymell, and nitre, are Sovereign
in this, as all Physicians know. The dry leaves of Neppe or Calamach is
profitable against this Malady; so also are ashes made of the lees of wine
burned.

The fat of a Bull is profitable to many things. First therefore, it must be
plucked out warm from the raynes of a Bull and washed in a River or brook of
running Water, Dioscorides.
pulling out the skins and tunicles, then melt it in a new earthen pot,
having cast among it a little salt, then set in fair cold Water, and when it
begins to congeale, rub it up and down in the hands, wringing out the
water, and letting it soke in again, until it appear well washed; then boil
it in a pot with a little sweet wine and being sodden let it stand all night:
if in the morning it savor strong, then pour in more Wine,

The fat kall about the gutts melted in a frying pan, and anointed upon the
genitals and breast, helps the Dysenterie. The marrow of a Bull beaten and
drunk, cures the pain in the small of the belly: and Rasis says, that if it
be melted at a fire, and mingled with one fourth part of Myrrh and oil of
bays, and the hands and feet be therewithal anointed and rubbed, morning
and evening; it helps the contractions of the Nerves and sinnewes.



With the gall of a Bull, and the white of an Egg, they make an eye-salue, and
so anoint therewith dissolved in water four days together; but it is thought
to be better with honey and balsam: and instilled with sweet new wine into the
ears, it helps away the pains of them, especially running-mattry ears,
with woman's or Goats milk. It being taken with honey into the mouth, helps
the cliftes and sores therein; and taken with the water of new coloquintida and
given to a woman in travel, causes an easy child birth. Galen was wont to
give of a bulls gall the quantity of an almonde, with two spoonefuls of wine,
called [ Vinuus Lynghatum] to a Woman that has her child dead within her
body, which would presently cause the dead Embrion to come forth. The genital
of a red bull, dried to powder and drunk of a Woman, to the quantity of a
golden Noble, it makes Nitre takes away scabs and Leprosies.

Of another Beast called Buselaphus.
THere was (says D. cay) a cloven footed beast brought out of the deserts of
Mauritania into England, of the bigness of a hind, in form and countenance
betwixt a hind and a cow, The description of this strange beast
and therefore for the resemblance it bears of both, I will call it
Buselaphus, or Boniceruus, or Moschelaphus, or a cow heart; having a long and
thin head and ear, a lean and slender Leg and Shinne, so that it may seem
to be made for chase and celerity. His tail not much longer then a foot, The
name.
but the form thereof very like a cowes, and the length like a hearts, as if
nature seemed to doubt whether it The several parts.
but in his forehead standing up like a Star; and so also about the horns
which were black and at the top smooth, but downward rough with Wrinkles
meeting on the contrary part, and on the nearer side spreading from one
another, twice or thrice their quantity. These horns are in length one foot
and a hand breadth, but three hand bredthes thick at the root, and their
distance at the root was not above one fingers breadth, so arising to their
middle, and a little beyond where they differ or grow asunder three hands
breadth and a half; then yield they together again a little, and so with
another crook depart asunder the second time, yet so, as the tops of the
horns do Pausamas.
and yet cheweth the cud, it has two vdders under the belly like a heyghfer
that never had calfe, it is a gentle and pleasant beast, apt to play and sport,
being not only swift to run, but light and active to leap: It will eat any
thing, either bread, broth, salted or pouldred beef, grass or herbs, and
the use hereof being alive is for hunting, and being dead the flesh is sweet
and pleasant for meat.

OF THE OX and COVV.
WE are now to describe those beasts which are less foreign and strange, and
more commonly known to all nations, then any other foure-footed Beast: for
howsouer Bugils, Buffes, Lions, Bears, Tigers, Beuers, Porcupines and such
other, are not always found in every nation, yet for the most part are Oxen,
Kine, Bulls, and Horses, by the providence of Almighty God, disseminated in all
the habitable places of the world: and to speak the truth, Oxen and Horses
were the first riches, and such things wherein our Melampus who opened an
oracle to Nelens that sought out the lost Oxen of Iphiclus. And Erix king of
Sicily, so much loved the Oxen that Hercules recovered from Geryon, that when
he was to contend with Hercules about these, he rather yielded to depart from
his kingdom then from his cattle: and Julius Pollux affirms, that there was
an ancient coin of money, which was stamped with the figure of an Ox, and
therefore the crier in every public spectacle made proclamation, that he
which deserved well, should be rewarded with an ox, [meaning a piece of money
having that impresse upon it: which was a piece of Gold compared in value to
an English Rose-noble,] and in my opinion the first name of money among the
Latins is derived from Cattle for I Pecunia, Pl^^y.
then from Pecus, signifying al manner of catell: howsoever it is related by
some Writers, that on the one side of their coin was the kings face, and on
the other an oxes picture; and that Seruius was the first that ever figured
money with Sheep or oxen. Miron the great painter of Eleutheris, and disciple of
Agelas, made an heighfer or Cow of brass, which all Poets of Greece have
celebrated in sundry Epigrams, because a calfe came unto it to suck it, being
deceived with the proportion, and Ausonius also added this following unto the
said calfe and cow, saying: Vbera quid pulsas frigentia matris Ahenae:
O vitula? and succum lactis ab aere petis?
Whereunto the brazen cow is caused to make this answer following; hunc quoque
praestarem, si me pro part parasset:
Exteriore Miron, interiore Deus.
Whereby he derideth their vain labors, which endeavor to satisfy themselves
upon men's devises, Valia.
which are cold and comfortless without the blessing of almighty God. To begin
therefore with these beasts it must be first of all remembered, that the name
bos Of the name Bos.
is the most vulgar and ordinary name for Bugles, bulls, cowes, Buffes, and
all great clouen-footed-horned-beasts; although in proper speech, it signifies
a beast gelded or libbed of his stones: and Boas signifies a huge great
Serpent whereof there was one found in Italy, that had swallowed a child whole
without breaking one of his bones, observing also in oxen the destinction of
years or age: which gives them several names, for in their young age they
are called calves, in their second age Steeres, in their third Oxen, and the
Latins add also a fourth which they call V^tuli old oxen. These are also
distinguished in sex, the Male calfe is Vitulus, the Female Vitula, likewise
Inueucas a Steer, and Inueuca an heighfer, Bos an ox, and Vacca a cow, Taurus
a Bull Taura a barren cow, and Horda a bearing or fruitful cow: of whom the
Romans observed Hordicalia, wherein they sacrificed those cattle. The Latins
have also Vaccula and Bucula for a little cow, Vaccula nonnunquam secreta
cubilia captans Virg:
And again Aut bucula coelum.


And Bucalus or Bos Nouellus for a little ox. Schor in Haebrew signifies a
Bull or ox, Bakar herds, or a cow. Thor in the Chalday has the same
signification with Schor, and among the latter Writers you may find Tora a
masculine, and Torata a feminine, for a Bull and a cow, accustomed to be
handled for labor. The Graecians call then bous and boes, the Arabians bakar:
and it is to be noted that the holy scriptures distinguish betwixt tzon,
signifieng flocks of sheep and Goats, and bakar for herds of cattle and
Neat: and Me^a is Mara* signifies to feed fat. Egela is interpreted Ierem:
46. for a young cow; and the Persians Gosalai: It is very probable that the
Latin Vacca is derived from the haebrew bakar, as the Saracen word baccara; so
in Haebrew Para is a cow, and Par a Steer, and ben bakar the son of an ox,
or calfe: and whereas the Haebrews take Parim, for oxen in general, the chaldees
translate it Tore, the Arabs Bakera, the Persians Nadgaeah, or Madagaucha, the
Itallians call it bue, the French beuf, the Spaniard buey, the Germans Ochs
and Rind, the Illirians wull. Of the name of a Cow.
The Italians call a cow Vacca at this day, the Gaecians bubalis, and Damalis
or Damalai [for a cow which never was covered with Bull, or tamed with a yoake]
and Agelada. The French Vache, the Spaniardes Vaca, the Germans; Ku, or Kuhe;
and the citizens of Altina, ceua: from which the English word cow seems to
be derived, the Latin word is a young heighfer, which has ceased to be a
calfe.

There are oxen in most part of the world, which differ in quantity, nature,
and manner, The diversity of Oxen in all cu^tries.
one from another, and therefore do require a several tractat. And first,
their oxen of Italy are most famous, for as much as some learned men have
a^firmed, that the name Italia, Varro.
was first of all derived of the Greek word Italous, signifieng oxen; because
of the abundance bred and nourished in those parts, and the great account
which the ancient Romans made hereof, Oxe^ of Italy
appears by notable example of punishment, who banished a certain country
man for killing an ox in his rage, and denying that he eat thereof, as if he
had killed a man: likewise in Italy their oxen are not all alike, for they of
campania are Vmbria, are of great bodies, yet white and red colored. In
hetruria and Latinui, they are very compact and well set or made, strong for
labor, but the most strong are those of Apennine, although they appear not
to the eye very beautiful.

The Egyptians which dwell about Nilus have oxen as white as snow, and of
exceeding high and great stature, (greater then the Oxen of Graecia) yet so
meek and gentle, Aristotle Oppianus. Aonia. Aelianus Leo Affric:
that they are easily ruled and governed by men. The Aonian Oxen are of diverse
colors, intermingled one within another, having a whole round hoof like a
horse, and but one horn growing out of the middle of their forehead.

The domestical or tame Oxen of Affrique are so small, that one would take
them for calves of two years old, Affrica^ oxen
the Affricans (says Strabo) which dwell betwixt Getulia and our coast or
country, have Oxen and horses which have longer lips and hoofes then other,
and by the Graecians are termed Mecrokeilateroi.

The Armenian Oxen have two horns, Armenian Oxen. Aeliantus.
but vvinding and crooking to and fro like Boeotia, near the city Tanagra
[called once Poemandra] by reason of their famous cattle, Varinus. Baeotia^ oxen
the which Oxen are called coprophaga, by reason that they will eat the dung
of man; so also do the Oxen of ciprus to ease the pains of their small guts.
The caricians in a part of Asia are not pleasant to behold, having shaggye
hair, and bounches on either shoulders, Caricia^ oxe^.
reaching or swelling to their Necks; but those which are either white, or
black, are refused for labor.

Epirus yields also very great and large oxen, which the inhabitants call
Pyrhicae, Epirus.
because Pirrhus: howsoever, other say that they have their name of their
fiery flaming color; they are called also Larini of a village Larinum, or of
Larinus, a chief Neat-heard: of whom Ahaeneus makes mention, who received
this great breed of cartel of Hercules when he returned from the slaughter of
Gerion: who reigned about Ambracia and Ampholochi, where through the fatness
of the earth and goodness of the pasture they grow to so great a stature:
other call them cestrini, I know not for what cause, yet it may be probable
that they are called Larini, Pliny Aristotle Theodore^.
by reason of their broad Nostriles, for Rines in Greek signifies Nostrils:
but the true cause of their great bone and stature is, because that neither
sex were suffered to couple one with another, until they were four years
old at the least, and therefore they were called Atauri, and Setaeuri, and
they were the proper goods of the King: neither could they Epirus, by reason
that the whole country is full of sweet and deep pastures.

All the oxen in Eubaea are white at the time of their caluing, Eubaea Aelianus.
and for this cause the poets call that country Argiboeon. If that oxen or
swine be transported or brought into Hispaniola, Hispaniola Oxen. Pet* Martyr
they grow so great, that the oxen have been taken for Elephantes, and their
swine for Mules, but I take this relation to be hyperbolical.

There are Oxen in India which will eat flesh like Wolves, and have but one
horn and whole hoofes: some also have three horns, there be other as high as
Cammels, Rasis. Indian oxen C. Tesias Solinus. Pliny. Aelianus.
and their horns four foot broad. There was a horn brought out of India to
Ptolmy the second, which received three Amphoraes of water, amounting the least
too thirty english Indians, both Kings and people make no small reckoning of
these beasts, [I mean their vulgar Oxen] for they are most swift in course,
and will run a race as fast as any horse, so that in their course you cannot
know an Ox from a horse; waging both Gold and Silver upon their heads; and the
Kings themselves are so much delighted with this pastime, that they follow in
their Wagons, and will with their own mouths and hands provoke the beasts
to run more speedily: and herein the Ox exceeds a horse, because he will
not accomplish his race with sufficient celerity, except his rider draw blood
from his sides with the spur, but the oxes rider need not to lay any

Among the Indians there are also other oxen which are not much greater then
great Goats, who likewise in their yoaks are accustomed to run many races,
which they perform with as great speed as a Getican horse: A^^^anus.
and all these running Oxen must be understood to be wild Oxen. Leuctria^ oxe^
Garamantae.


There be Oxen in Leuctria [which Aristotle affirmeth] have their eats and
horns growing both together forth of one stem. The Oxen of the Garamants,
and all other Neat among them, feed with their necks doubled backward, for by
reason of their long and hanging horns, they cannot eat their meat, holding
their heads directly straight: The self same is reported of the beasts of
Trogloditae: Solinus. Herodotus.
in other things, they differ not from other oxen, save only in the hardness
of their skin, and these oxen are called Opisthonomi. Bangala. Aristotle


In the province of Bangala, are oxen [saith Paulus Venetus] which equal the
Elephant in hight. The oxen in Mysia have no horns, which other affirm also
of the Scithians, whereof they assign this reason, because the universal bone
of the skull has no Comissure or joint opened, and cannot receive any humor
flowing unto it, by reason of the hardness resisting, and the veins belonging
to this bone are weaker and smaller then in other; for which also they are more
unfit to convey nourishment to the place: and so the neck of these beasts,
must needs be more dry and less strong, because the veins are very little.
The oxen have bunches growing on their backs like Cammels, and upon them do
they bear their burdens, being taught by the discipline of men, to bend on
their knee to receive their load.

Aelianus. Nomadian Oxen.
Among the Nomades [which winter their cattle about the Marshes of Maeotia]
there

Aelianus. Oppianus. Phrygian and Erythrean Oxen.
There be oxen in Phrigia and Erithrea which are of a flaming red color, of a
very high and winding neck, their horns are not like any other in the world,
for they are moved with their ears turning in a flexible manner sometime one
way and sometime another.

Aelianus Oxe^ of Syria
The Syrian Oxen called Poellei are of great strength, having a broad forehead,
strong horns, and fearful or courragious aspect, being neither too fat or
too lean of their bodies; and they are used both for War and also for running.
The oxen of the Belgian Fresland and Holland, are also of very great stature,
for it has been found by good experience, that one of them has waighed
sixteen hundred pounds Troy weight: Belgian oxen Guicciardine
and when the Earl of Hoochstate was at Machlin in Fresland, there was
presented unto him a great ox which being killed, waighed above two thousand
five hundred twenty and eight pound. The which thing being so strange as the
like had not been beforetime observed; to the intent that succeeding ages
might not mistrust such a memorable report, the said Earl caused the full
Picture of the said ox, to be set up in his Palace with an inscription of the
day and year when this ox was delivered and killed.

OF COVVES.
Having thus noted briefly the countries wherein oxen are bred and nourished
with their several forms: it must be also observed, that Kyne or cowes which
are the Female of this kind, are likewise found in all the places aforsaid with
correspondent and semblable quantities, qualities, members, parts, and other
accidents to such creatures appertayning; excepted always Italy, Milk of kine
in Italy
are about Altinas a city of the Venetians, near Aquileia, which Kyne are of
the smalest body, and yet the greatest laborers, who are not yoaked or coupled
together by their Necks as in other countries, but only by their heads.

The Cowes of Arabia have the most beautiful horns by reason of abundance of
humors which flow to them, Arabian Cowes.
feeding them continually with such generous liquor as naturally does increase
them.

The Pyrrheaen Kye are not admitted to the Bull till they be four year old at
the least, Pyrrhecan Cowes.
which thing causes them to grow to a very high and tall stature: whereof
there were ever four hundred kept for the Kings store.



These Kye do give at one time seven or eight gallons of Milk, of Wine
measure, and they are so tall, that the person which milketh them must stand
upright, or else stoop very little: Phaenitian Cowes. Aelianus
neither ought this seem incredible, for it is evident that the cowes of the
Phanitians were so high, that a very tall man could not* Milk them execept he
stood upon a footestoole.

The manner is in Germany and Heluetia, that about April some take Kye to
hire, which have none of their own, Hiring of Cowes in Germany and Heluetia.
and other buy Kye to farm them out to other: and the common price of a cow
for six months is paid in butter, and is rated of seventy five pounds,
twelve ounces to the pound; which payment is due to the owner, or money to that
value: Other again, buy Kye and let them forth to farm, reserving the calfe
to C^uae of Altinas in Italy, are of little bodies, but yet very full of Milk.

The use of Cow-milke.
The principal benefit of cowes Milk is for making of Butter, for the Milk it
self, the Cheese and Whay, are not so fit for nourishement of man, as are
those of sheep; and the reason is, because the Milk of Kye is fattest of all
other; and therefore the name of Butter, Pet* Crescent Aristotle Marc: Virg:
Food for Cows giving milk.
which is in Greek Boutyros and Boutyron, and Butyrum in Latin, is derived
Trifolie* or three leaued-grasse: and Medica which [is a kind of clauer-grasse]
Vetches, pulse and Beans, for Beans have a great virtue to multiply Milk:
likewise I have seen bundels of Hemlocke, or an herb much like unto it,
[which we call harts-tongue] given to milch Kye.

There is an herb much like crow-foote, called of the Germans Butterbloumen,
and in English Butter-flower, which is used to color Butter, for thereby is
the whiteness thereof taken away: they will not eat wal-wort or night-shad
[commonly called deaths herb] but if they eat herbs whereupon falls an
Hony-dew, then will their Milk be wonderful Palladius.
and therefore the lakes which are heated and made to some by the rain, are
most wholesome to them, and do greatly help to ease their burden and pains in
that business.

Pausanias reports a wonder in nature, of the Ryuers Milichus and Charadrus,
running through the city Patrae, that all the Kye which drink of them in the
spring time, do for Torona.] They are also purged of their mensterua in
greater measure, then either Goats or sheep, which especially come from them
a little before or after they have been with the Bull; howsoever Aristotle
says, that they come from them after they have been five months with calfe,
and are discerned by their urine; for the urine of a cow is the thinnest of all
other.

Aelianus
These beasts are very lustful, and do most eagarly desire the company of
their male, which if they have not within the space of three hours after they
mourn for it, their lust aswageth till another time. In a village of Egypt
called Schussa (under the government Hermopolites) they worship Venus under the
title Urania in the shape of a cow, parswading themselves, that there is great
affinity betwixt that Goddess and this beast; for by her mournful voice she
gives notice of her love, who receives the token many times a Mile or two
off, and so presently runs to accomplish the lust of nature: and for this
cause do the Egyptians Picture Isis, with a Cowes horns, and likewise a Bull,
to signify hearing. The signs of their bulling [as it is tearmed] are their
cries, Signs of a cowes desire to the Bull.
and disorderly forsaking their fellows, and resisting the government of their
keeper. Likewise, their secret hangs forth more then at other times, and they
will leap upon their fellows as if they were males: besides after the manner of
mares, they oftener make water then at other times.

The most cunning heardmen have means to provoke them to desire the bull,
Secrets to provoke lust in cattle
if they be slack, first of all they withdraw from them some part of their meat,
(if they be fat,) for that will make them fitter to conceive: then take they the
genitals or stones of a bull, and hold it to their nose, by smelling whereof
they are provoked to desire copulation; and if that prevail not, then take the
tendrest part of Shrimps, which is their fish, and beat them in Collumella
after they have been well washed until it work upon her: And some affirm,
that the tail of an Eele put into her has the same virtue; other, attribute
much force to the wild willow, to procure lust and conception.

They are a great while in copulation, Signs at the copulation to know whither
the calfe will be Male or Female.
and some have gessed by certain signs at the time of copulation, whether the
calfe prove male or female; for say they, if the bull leap down on the right
side of the cow, it will be a male, if on the left, it will be a female, which
conjecture, is no longer true, then when the cow admits but one bull, and
conceiueth at the first conjunction, for which cause the Egyptians decipher a
woman bringing forth a maiden child, by a bull

They are not to be admitted to copulation before they be two year old at the
least, or if it may be four; yet it has been seen, that a heighfer of a
year old has conceived, and that another of four months old has likewise
desired the Bull; but this was taken for a monster, and the other never thriued.

One bull is sufficient for fifteenekie, although Varro says, that he had two
bulls for threescore and tenkie; and one of them was two year old, the other
one. The best time for their copulation is about the time of the Dolphins
appearaunce, and so continues for two or three and fourtye days which is
about June and Iulye, for those which conceive at that time, will bring forth
their young ones in a most temperate time of the year:

They go with calfe ten months, except eighteen or twenty days; Aristotle
but those which are calued before that time, cannot live: and a cow may bear
every year [if the country wherein she lives be full of grass, and the
calfe taken away from her at fifteen days old.]

And if a man desire that the calfe should be a male, Means to cause the calf
at the time of copulatio^ to be either male or fem.
then let him tie the right stone of the Bull at the time of copulation; and
for a female bind the left: Others work this by natural observation; for
when they would have a male, they let their cattle couple when The length of
their age.
both for themselves, and to increase milk for the young ones.

They bear not but in their right side, although they have twins in their
belly, which happens very sildome, and the beast immediately after her
delivery, must be norished with some good meat, for except she be well fed,
she will forsake her young to provide for her self: therefore it is requisite
to give her vetches, Millet-seede, and milk mingled with water, and scorched
corn; and unto the calves themselves, dried Millet in milk, A secret in
copulation.
in the manner of a mash: and the kie must also be kept up in stables, so as
they may not touch Albertus) that a beast so dry as is a cow, can be
increased in moisture, which stirs up the desire of procreation, except
also there be a mutation in the air unto abundance of moisture. And to conclude
this discourse of a cow, in ancient time they were wont to call light women
heighfers, harlots, and kine, by the reason of two famous harlottes of Athens,
Cuina and Salamachha, and from this came the fiction of Io, whose fable is at
large prosecuted by Ovid, how she being the daughter of Inachus, was in a
darkness brought upon her by Jupiter, by him ravished, which mist being espied
by Juno, she descended to the earth, and Jupiter fearing his wives iealousy
turned the said Io into a heighfer, from which shape she was afterward
delivered and married to Osiris the king of Egypt, and after her death was
worshipped by the Egyptians for a god, and called Isis, unto who^ they
sacrificed Geese which were called Sacra Isiaca. (...) the chois (...).
let them be young, not past their first or second calfe, their color black or
red, sildom brown, or white, bright colored, specialy red, brown legs,
blackish horns smooth and beautiful, high foreheades, great eyes and black,
hairy and grisle ears, flat Nostrils like an Apes, but open and wide, their
backebone bending somewhat backewarde, black lips, long and thick necks,
most broad fair crests discending from the neck, well ribbed, a great belly,
the back and shoulders very broad, the Buttockes broad; with a long tail
hanging down to their heels, and their nether part in many places crisped or
curled, well set and compacted legs rough and short: straight knees, and their
bunches hanging over: their small feet, not broad but round, standing in good
distance one from other, not growing crooked or splay-footed, and their hoofes
smooth and like one another

The description of Oxen (...) common.
To begin therefore with their description, because among folded beasts they
are of most dignity and worth, especially in Italy, where the bounds of their
best privileged and flourishing cities, were first of all declared and laid
out, by the plowing together of an Ox and a Cow in one yoke, Mago
Carthaginensis teaches, that the time to provide or buy oxen, is best in the
time of March, because then in their lean bodies, they which sell (...) best
to provide Oxe^
they may be the more easily tamed, before their flesh increase their strength.

Their notes or marks must be these, let them be young, having square and
great lims, a sound body, thick and short, having his muscles standing up red
and round, and all his body smooth, Outward marks of good Oxen.
his horns black, strong, and large, without crooking or winding, after the
fashion of a half moon, great and rough ears, their eyes and lips black,
broad Nostrils and flat upward, a long thick and soft neck, his crest
discending down to the knee, a great breast, large shoulders, big belly, long
straight sides, broad loins, a strait back discending a little, and a round
pair of buttockes, straight, sound and sinnewy, Their seurall parts.
for copulation weakeneth the brain, only a Bull has a stronger forehead then
an ox, because the humor that should grow forth into horns, is hardened under
the bone: and the horns of kie which are also bigger then a Bulls; may thorough
heat be made flexible with wax or water, and bend every way: and if when they
are thus made soft, you do slit or cut them into four, that is, every horn
in twoe, they will so grow afterward, as if every beast had four horns, and
sometime thorough the thicknes of their scull, closing up the part where the
horn should grow, The reason why some Oxen are polled.
and the smalnes of their veins in that place to feed the horns, there come
no horns at al, but remain pouled; And it is reported that they have a little
stone in their head, which in the fear of death they breath out. Their teeth
do al touch one another, and are changed twice, Aelianus
they chew the cud like sheep, wanting a row of their upper teeth, that is
four of them, Aristotle
their eyes are black and broad, and their heart full of sinnewes, yet
without any bony substance, although Pliny affirms that sometimes in the
hearts of oxen and horses are found bones.

Their crest called Palea comes of Pilus their hair, and it is nothing else
but long Pliny The parts of a Cow different from Oxen.
A cow has two vdders under her loins with four speans, like a goat and a
sheep, because the concoction and juice of their meat may better descend to the
lower parts then to the upper: their navel is filled with many veins, their
hair short and soft, their tail long, with harder hair then in the other
parts of the body; their melt is long and not round, their rains are like the
raines of a sea-calfe, and by reason of their dry bodies they grow very fat,
and this fat will not easily be dissolved, Galen.
but their manner of feeding maintains their strength, for they which eat
much are slow in the chewing, and speedy in the concoction, for they do
better preserve their fat which eat slowly, then those that eat hastily and
with more greediness.

The manner how Oxen feed fat.
that some oxen will eat flesh and tear wild beasts in pieces; and the people
of Prasias give to their yoaked or working oxen fish, Herodotus.
and also in the province of Aden, where their horses, sheep, and oxen, eat
dried fish, by reason that the abundance of heat does dry up their pasture:
Paul. venet.
neither is any thing so plentiful among them as fish: the like is reported of
the people Horotae, and Gedrusii, and of Mosynum a city of Thracia, and in
Frisland; in the province of Narbon, there is an herb growing in waters, which
is so much desired of their cattle, that they will thrust their heads into the
water above their ears, to bite that to the roots: and the Oxen of the
Northern Ocean Islands of Germany do grow so fat, that they are endangered to
die thereby.

The most common food for oxen, is the same that is already specified in the
former

The like may be added of Boughs, of Laurel, helm, and other leaves, and
also nuts and Acornes, but if they be not wearied and fed with Acornes till
they loath them, they will fall into scabs. In March and April give Bos ad
acervum, that is [an ox to a whole heap,] to signify such men as live in all
plenty and abundance. The like care must be had of their drink, for the
Neat-heard Crathis and Sibaris, that the cattle which drink of their water
do turn white, whatsoever color they had in former times.

The time of Oxens age
They will live in strength and perfection twelve years, and their whole life
is for the most part but twenty, Kie live not so long, the means to know their
age is by their teeth and their horn, for it is observed that their teeth grow
black in their age, and their horns wax more circled as they grow in years,
although I dare not affirm that every circle betokens a years grows, [as
some have written] yet I am assured the smooth horn shows a young beast.
Moreover, although kie will endure much cold and heat both in Winter and
Summer, yet must you have more regard to your Oxen, and therefore it is
required that they in the Winter cold weather be kept dry and housed in stals,
which must be of convenient quantity, so as every ox may be lodged upon
straw, the flooer made higher under their forefeete then their hinder, so as
their urine may pass away and not

But all the diet and food that the wit of man can ordain, will do them no
manner of good if regard be not had to their bodily health, the med^ins to
preserve an Ox in strength.
and preservation of strength, for which cause they must receive an ordinary
medicine every quarter of the year, that is; in the end of the spring, Summer,
Autumn, and Winter: which in some places is thus made and given in potion,
they take o^ Cypres, and Lupine-leaues an equal quantity, beat them small, then
set them in water in the open air a day and a night, and afterward give unto

Paxamus.
In other places they give them to prevent sickness, a raw Egg, a handful of
salt in a pint of wine: and other put into the meat of oxen, the foame of new
oil mingled with water, first a little at once until they be accustomed unto
it, and afterward more, and this they do every fourth or fifth day. Cato
recites a certain vow or prayer, which the old idolatrous Romans were
wont to make for the health of their cattle, Vows and superstitious medicines
for the cure of Cattle.
to Siluanus Mars, which was on this manner First, they take three pound of
green wheat, and of Larde 4. pounds, and four pound and a half of fleshy
sinnewes, and three pintes and a half of wine, then put them into earthen pots
with honey, and put in the wine by it self, and this they did yearly, but no
woman might know how it is made, or be present at the time of the Pliny
calls Daps, that was made in the spring time when the peare-tree did
blossom, the manner whereof was thus. They did offer to Jupiter Dapalis a bowl
of wine, on the same day the heard-men and herds make their sacrifice saying
in this manner, O Jupiter Dapales, I offer unto thee this cup of wine, in the
behalf of my self, family and cattle, if thou will perform that unto them
which belongs to thee, be good to this wine beneath, be good to this my
sacrifice: Afterward the party washed his hands, and then drank the wine
saying; O Jupiter Dapales be good to this my sacrifice, be good to this
inferior wine, and Vesta: the sacrifice being ended he took Millet-seed,
Lentils, oxipanum, and garlic: Thus far Cato, wherewith if any reader be
offended, let him remember to pity such poor remedies, and commend his
cattle to the true God, that saves man and beast. The Druides of the Gauls,
called a certain herb growing in moist places Samolum: which being gathered by
the left hand of them that were fasting, they gave it for an Antidot to oxen
and swine. And Galen tells of another superstitious cure for oxen, when a man
took the horn of a Heart, and laid it upon the chapel of Pan, and set upon
it a burning candle which must not be forgotten, but always thought upon in the
day time, The discovery of ^he sickness of Cattle and the perticu^^r cure
thereof.
calling upon holy Demusaris, which foolish people have thought as it were by
a witchcraft, to cure the evils of their cattle.

But to let pass these and such like trifles, let us follow a more perfect
description and rule to cure all manner of diseases in this cattle, whose
safeguard and health next to a man's, is to be preferred above all other: and
first of all the means whereby their sickness is discovered may be
considered, as all Lassitude or wearisomnesse thorough over much labor, which
appears by forbearing their meat, or eating after another fashion then they
are wont, or by their often lying down, or else by holding out their tongue,
all which and many more signs of their diseases, are manifest to them that
have observed them in the time of their health, and on the other side it is
manifest, that the health of an ox may be known by his agility, life and
stirring, when they are lightly touched or pricked, starting, and holding their
ears upright, fullness of their belly, and many other ways.

There be also herbs which increase in cattle diverse diseases, as herbs
bedewed with Honey brings the Murrain, the juice of black Chamaeleon kills
young kie like the chine, black Helebore, Aconitum, or Wolfe-bane, which is
that grass in cilicia, which inflameth oxen, herb henry, and others: It is
also reported by Aristotle, that in a piece of Thricia, Media, there is a place
almost thirty furlongs in length, where naturally grows a kind of barley,
which is good for men, but pernicious for beasts. The like may be said of
Aegolothros, Orobanche and Aestur, but I will hasten to the particular
description of their diseases.

In the first place is the Malis or Glaunders already spoken of in the story
of the Ass, The diseases which infeit Oxen and Kye
which may be known by these signs, the oxes hair will be rough and hard, his
eyes and neck hang down, matter running out of the nose, his pace heavy,
chewing his cud little, his backe-bone sharp, and his meat loathsome unto him:
for remedy hereof, take sea-onoyns or Garlic, Lupines or cypres, or else the
foame of oil. And if a Beast care Farciminous, wherein the whole body breaks
forth into matry bunches and byles, and appear healed til they break forth in
other places, the fifth Subtereutanrus, when under the skin there runs a
humor that breaks forth in many places of the body: the sixth a Subrenall,
when the hinder legs halte by reason of some pain in the loins, the seventh a
Maunge or Leprosy,

The remedies against the last seven are thus discribed by Columella. First
take Oxipanum and sea-holy roots mingled with fennel-seede and meal of beaten
wheat rath-ripe: put them in spring water warmed with honey nine spoonfuls at a
time, and with that medicine anoint the breast of the beast, then take the
blood of a sea-snaile, and for want thereof, a common snaile, and put it into
wine, and give the beast in at his nose, and it has been approved to work
effectual. It is not good at any time to stir up Oxen to running, Cursus
bonu^ ant ciet aluu^ aut febrim inducit.
for chasing will either move them to loosenes of the belly, or drive them into
a fever, the now the signs of a fever are these: an immoderat heat over the
whole body, especially about

If an Ox in his meat taste of hens doung, his belly will presently be
tormented, and swell unto death if remedy be not given: for this mallady, take
three ounces of parsley seed, a pint and a half of Cummin, two pounds of
honey, beat these together and put it down his throat warm, then drive the
beast up and down, as long as he can stand, then let as many as can stand about
him rub his belly, until the medicine work to purgation: and Vegetius adds,
that the ashes of Elm wood well sod in oil, and put down the beasts throat,
cures the inflammation of hen-dung. If at any time it happen, that an ox get
into his mouth and throat a horse-leech, which at the first will take fast
hold, and suck the place she holds [be it mouth or throat] till she have killed
the beast: if you cannot take hold on her with the hand, then put into the oxes
throat a Cane, or little hollow pipe, even to the place where the leech
sucketh, and into that pipe put warm oil, which as soon as the leech
feels, she presently leaves hold.

It fortuneth sometimes that an ox is stung or bitten with a Serpent, Adder,
Viper, or

For the scabs, take the juice of Garlic, and rub the beast all over; and
with this medicine may the biting of a Wolf or a mad dog be cured: although
other affirm, that the hoof of any beast with Brimstone, oil, Water, and
Vinegar, is a more present remedy; but there is no better thing then butter
and stale Urine: When they are vexed with worms, pour cold water upon them,
afterward anoint them with the juice of onions mingled with salt.

If an ox be wrinched and strayned in his sinnewes, in travel or labor, by
stumping on any root or hard sharp thing, then let the contrary foot or leg
be let blood, if the sinnews swel: If his neck swell let him blood, or if his
neck be vvinding and vveake [as if it

When an ox hangs down his ears and eats not his meat, he is troubled
with a Cephalalgie: that is, a pain in his head: for which, sees Thyme in
wine, with salt and Garlic, and therevvith rub his tongue a good space;
also raw barley steeped in Wine, helps this disease. Sometime an ox is
troubled with madness, for which men burn them betwixt the horns in the
forehead, till they bleed, sometime there is a Fly which biting them
continually, drives them into madness; for which they are wont to cast
Hellebore through their ears, wherein let it remain til the next day at the same
hour. All the evils of the eyes are for the most part cured by infusion of
honey, and some mingle therevvith Ammoniacke, Salt, and Boeticke. When the
pallat or roof of their mouth is so swelled that the beast forsakes meat, and
bends one the one side, let his mouth be pared with a sharp instrument, or
else burned or abated some other way, giving them green and soft meat til the
tender sore be cured: but when the cheeks swell, for remedy thereof, they
sell them away to the butcher for slaughter: it falls out very often that
there grow certain bunches on their tongues, which make them forsake their
meat, and for this

When their veins in their cheeks and chaps swell out into ulcers, they
soften and wash them with vinegar and lees, till they be cured. When they are
liuer-sicke, they give them Rubarbe, Mishroms, and Gentian, mingled together.
For the cough and short breath, they give them twigs of vines, or Juniper
mingled with salt; and some use Betony.

There is a certain herb called Asplenon or Citterach, which consumes the
Melts of Oxen, found by this occasion: in creete there is a River called
Protereus, running betwixt the two cities Gnoson and Gortina, on both sides
thereof there were herds of cattle, but those which fed near to Gortina had
no Spleen, and the other which fed near to Gnoson were full of Spleen: when
the Physicians endeavored to find out the true cause hereof, they found an
herb growing on the coast of Gortina, which diminished their Spleen; and for
that cause called it Asplenon. But now to come to the diseases of their breast
and stomach, and first of al to begine with the cough, which if it be new, may
be cured by a pint of Barley Meal with a raw Egg, and half a pint of sod
wine: and if the cough be Bole-worts, sees them together till they be soft,
and then give them to the beast with vinegar.

But if the crudity cause his belly to stand out and swell, then pull his tail
downewarde with all the force that you can, and bind thereunto Mother-wort,
mingled with salt, or else give them a glister, or anoint a Woman's hand with
oil, and let her draw out the dung from his fundament; and afterward cut a
vain, in his tail with a sharp knife. When they be distempered with choler,
burn their Legs to the hoofes with a vvhot Iron, and afterward let them rest
upon clean and soft straw: when their guts and intrals are payned they are
eased with the sight of a Duck or a Drake.

cypres aples and so many gauls, mingle and beat them with their weight of
old cheese in four pints of the sharpest Wine you can get, and so divide it
into four parts, giving to the beast every day one quantity. The excrements of
the belly do deprive the body of all strength and power to labor; wherefore
when they are troubled with it, they must rest, and drink nothing for three
days together, and the first day let them forbear meat, the second day give
them the tops of wild Olyues, or in defect thereof, canes, or reeds; the
stalks of Lantiske and Myrtill; and the third day a little Water, and unto
this some add dried Grapes in six pintes of sharp Wine, given every day in
like quantity. When their hinder parts are lame through congealed blood in
them, whereof there is no outward appearance, take a bunch of Nettles with
their roots and put it into their mouths, by rubbing

When Oxen come first of all after Winter to grass, they fall grasse-sicke,
and piss blood; for which they sees together in water barley, bread, and
larde, and so give them altogether in a drink to the beast: some praise the
kernels of Walenuts put into Eggeshels for this cure, and other take the bloody
water it self and blow it into the beasts Nostrils; and heard-men by
experience have found, that there is no better thing then hearb-Robert, to stay
the pissing of blood: they must also be kept in a stall within doors, and be
fed with dry grass and the best hay. If their horns be anointed with wax,
oil, and pitch, they feel no pain in their hoofes; except in cases where any
beast treads

Now to return to the taming and instruction of Oxen. It is said that Busiris
King of Egypt was the first that ever tamed or yoaked Oxen, having his name
given him for that purpose. Oxen are by nature meek, gentle, slow, and not
stubborn; because being deprived of his genitals he is more tractable, and for
this cause it is requisite that they be alwaie used to hand, and to be
familiar with man, that he may take bread at his hand, and be tied up to the
rack, for by gentleness they are best tamed, being thereby more willing and
strong for labor, then if they were roughly yoaked or suffered to run wild
without the society and sight of men. Varro says, that it is best to tame them
betwixt five and three year old, for before three it is to soon, because they
are too tender; and after five it is too late, by reason they are too vnwealdy
and stubborn.

But if any be taken more wild and unruly, take this direction for their
taming: first, if how to tame or yoke wild Oxen.
join them together [a wild and a tame] and if you please, you may make a
yoke to hold the Necks of three oxen; so that if the beast would rage and be
disobedient, then will the old one both by example and strength draw hlm on,
keeping him from starting aside, and falling down. They must also be accustomed
to draw an empty cart, waine, or sled through some town or village, where
there is some concourse of people, or a plow in valloed ground or sand, so as
the beast may not be discouraged by the weight and strength of the business,
their keeper must often with his own hand give them meat into their mouth,
and stroke their Noses, that so they may be acquainted with the smell of a man;
and likewise put his hand to their sides, and stroke them under their belly,
whereby the beast may feel no displeasure by being touched. In some countries,
they wash them all over with Wine for two or three days together, Rasis.
he will presently wax tame: but to this I leave every man to his particular
inclination for this business; only, let them change their oxens sides, and
set them sometime on the right side, and sometime on the left side, and beware
that he avoid the Oxes heel, for if once he get the habit of kicking, he will
very hardlye be refrained from it again. He has a good memory, and will not
forget the man that pricked him whereas he will not stir at another, being
like a man in fetters, who dissembleth vengance until he be released, and then
paieth the person that has grieved him.

The understanding of Oxen.
These beasts do understand their own names, and distinguish betwixt the voice
of their keepers and strangers. They are also said to remember and understand
numbers, for the King of Persia had certain Oxen, which every day drew water
to Susis to water his Gardens, Guidus.
their number was an hundred vessels, which through custom they grew to
observe, and therefore not one of them would halt or loyter in that business,
till the whole was accomplished: Aelianus
but after the number fulfilled, there was no goad, whip, or other means,
could once make them stir, to fetch another draught or burden. They are said
to love their fellows with whom they draw in yoke most tenderly, whom they
seek out with The love of oxen to their yoke fellow
It is likewise observed in the licking of themselves against the hair, (but
as Cicero says) if he bend to the right side and lick that, it presageth a
storm; but if he bend to the left side, of the licking of Oxen, natural
observations.
he foretells a calmy fair day: In like manner, when he lowgheth and
smells to the earth, or when he feeds fuller then ordinary, it betokens
chang of weather: but in the Autumn, if sheep or Oxen dig the earth with their
feet, or lie down head to head, it is held for an assured token of a tempest.

Their aptnes to go astray.
They feed by companies and flocks, and their nature is to follow any one
which straieth away; for if the neat-heard be not present to restrain them,
they will all follow to their own danger. Being angered and provoked they will
fight with strangers very irefully, The anger of Oxen and kye.
with vnapeaseable contention: for it was seen in Rhaetia, betwixt Curia and
Velcuria some strong herbs, as garlike and such like, that the savor may
auert that strife They which come about Oxen, Bulls, and bugils, must not wear
any red Garments, Gillius Oxen provoked by colors.
by cause their nature ryseth and is provoked to rage, if they see such a
color.

There is great enmity betwixt Oxen and Wolves, for the Wolf [being a
flesh-eating-creature] lies in wait to destroy them; and it is said, that
there is so great a natural fear in them, that if a Wolves tail be hanged in
the rack or manger where an Ox feeds, he will abstain from eating. This
beast is but simple, though his aspect seem to be very grave; and thereof came
the proverb of the Oxen to the yoke, Rasis.
which was called Ceroma; wherewithal Wrastlers and Prize-players were
anointed, but when a foolish Bos ad ceroma.

Again the folly of this beast appearerh by another Greek proverb, which
says, that An Ox raises dust which blinds his own eyes: to signify, that
foolish and indiscrete men stir up the occasion of their own harms. The
manifold Epithets given this beast in Greek and Latin by sundry authors, do
demonstratiuely show the manifold conditions of this beast; as that it is
called a Plower, Wild, an earth tiller, brazen footed, by reason of his hard
hoofes [ Cerebrons] more brain then wit; horned, stubborn, horne-striking,
hard, rough, untamed, deuourer of grass, yoake-bearer, fearful, ouertamed,
drudges, vvry-faced, slow, and ill favored, with many other such notes of
their nature, ordination, and condition.

Tractats; The natural uses of the several parts of Oxen.
the one natural and the other morral. That which is natural, contayns the
several uses of their particular parts: and first for their flesh, which is
held singular for norishment, for which cause, after their labor which
brings leanness, they use to put them by for sagination, or [as it is sayd]
in English for feeding, which in all countries has a several manner or
custom. How to fatte^ cattaile.
Sotion affirms, that if you give your cattle when they come fresh from
their pasture, Cabbage leaves beaten small with some sharp vinegar poured
among them, and afterward chafe winowed in a siefe, and mingled with branne
for five days together, it will much fatten and increase their flesh, and the
sixth day ground barley, increasing the quantity by little and little for six
days together.

Varro affirms, Arcadia: A strange report of a fat Cow, if true.
Kye will also grow fat when they are with calfe especially in the midst of
that time. The Turks use in their greatest feasts and Marriages, to roast or
sees an Ox whole, putting in the oxes belly a whole Sovv, and in the Sowes
belly, a Goose, and in the Gooses belly an Egg, to note forth their plenty in
great and small things: but the best flesh is of a young ox, and the worst of
an old one, for it begets an ill juice or concoction, especially if they
which eat it be troubled with a cough or reumy fleame, or if the party be in
a consumption, or for a woman that has ulcers in her belly, the tongue of an
ox or cow salted and slit asunder, is accounted a very delicate dishe, which
the priests of Mercury

The horns of oxen by art of man are made very flexible and straight whereof
are made combs, hasts for knives, and the ancients have used them for cups to
drink in, and for this cause was Bacchus painted with horns, and Crater was
taken for a cup, which is derived of Kera a horn: In like manner the first
Trumpets were made of horns as Virgill alludeth unto this sentence, Rauco
strepuerunt cornua cantu, and now a days it is become familier for the
carriage of Gun-pouder in war. It is reported by some husbandmen, that if
seed be cast into the earth out of an Oxes horn (called in old time
cerasbola) by reason of a certain coldness, it well never spring up well out
of the earth, at the least not so well as when it is sowed with the hand of
man. Their skin is used for shoes, Garments, and Gum, because of a spongy
matter therein contained, also to make Gun-pouder, and it is used in navigations
when a shot has pierced the sides of the ship, Ajax, was nothing else but a
shield made of an Ox hyde, so many times laid one piece upon another, which
caused Homer to call it Sacos heptaboeion.

Of the teeth of Oxen I know no other use but scraping and making Paper smooth
with them; their gall being sprinkled among seed which is to be sown makes
it come up quickly, and kills field-mise that taste of it, and it is the
bayne or poison of those creatures: so that they will not come near to it, no
not in bread if they discern it; and birds if they eat corn touched with an
Oxes gall put into hot water first of all, and the lees Angia; which Angia was
so rich in cattle, that he defiled the country with their dung, whereupon
that proverb grew: when Hercules came unto him he promised him a part of his
country to purge that stable, Hercules undertaking the labor turned a River
upon it, and so cleansed all. When Angia saw that his stable was purged by art,
and not by labor, he denied the reward; and because Phyleus his eldest son
reproved him for not regarding a man so well deserving, he cast him out of his
family for ever.

The manifold use of the members of Oxen and Kye in medicyne, now remains to
be briefly touched. The horn beaten into powder, cures the cough, especially
the types or point of the horn, which is also received against the ptisicke,
or short breath made into pills with Honey. The powder of a Cowes horn mixed
with vinegar, helps the morphew, being washed or anointed therewith. The
same infused into the Splenet^cke man for three days together, the medcins of
the several parts of oxen and Kye
it wonderfully works upon that passion: powder of the hoof of an Ox with
water put upon the kings evil helps it, and with Water and Honey it helps
the apostemes and swelling of the body: and the same burned and put into
drink, and given to a Woman that lacks Milk, it increases milk and
strengthens her very much. Other take the tongue of a cow, which they dry so
long till it may be beaten into powder, and so give it to a woman in white wine
or broth. The dust of the heel of an ox or ancle bone, taken in Wine and put
to the gummes or teeth do fasten them, Rasis.
and remove the ache away: The ribs of oxen beaten to powder do stay the
flux of blood, Fu^nerius.
and restrain the abundance of monthly courses in women. The

Where a man biteth any other living creature, sees the flesh of an ox or a
calfe, and after five days lay it to the sore, and it shall work the ease
thereof. The flesh being warm laid to the swellings of the body, eases them:
so also do the warm blood and gall of the same beast.

The broth of beef heals the loosnesse of the bellye, coming by reason of
choler; and the broth of cowes flesh, or the marrow of a cow, heals the
ulcers and chinkes of the mouth. The skin of an ox [especially the leather
thereof] worn in a shoe, burned and applied to pimples in the body or face,
cures them. The skin of the feet and Nose of an ox or sheep, sod over a
soft and gentle fire, until there arise a certain scumme like to glue from
it, and afterward dried in the cold, windye air, and drunk, helps [or at
least] eases burstnesse very much.

The marrow of an ox, or the sewet, helps the straynes of sinnewes if they
be anointed therewith. If one make a small candle of paper and cowes marrow,
setting the same on

Arcadians refused all medicine, only in the spring time when their beasts did
eat grass, they drank cowes Milk, being persuaded, Pliny A History
that the virtue and vigor of al good herbs and fruits were received and
digested into that liquor; for they gave it medicinally to them which were
sick of the Prisicke, of consumption, of an old cough, of the consumption of
the raynes, of the hardness of the belly, and of all manner poisons which
burn inwardly; which is also the opinion of all the Greek Physicians: and the
shell of a Walnut sod in cow-milke and laid to the place where a serpent has
bitten, it cures it, and stays the poison.

The same being new and warm Gargarized into the throat, helps the
soreness of Mummie, and harts-suet clarified in a Cup of new Milk, and it
has been proved very profitable.

Where the pains of the stomach come by sadness, Melancholy, or desperation,
drink Cow-milke, Woman's Milk, or Asses-milke, wherein a flint-stone has
been sodden. When one is troubled with a desire of going often to the stool,
and can egest nothing, let him drink cow-milke and Asse-milke sod together;
the same also heated with gads of Iron or Steel, and mingled with one fourth
part of water, helps the bloody flix; mingled with a little Honey and a Bulls
gall, with cummin and gourds laid to the Navel: and some affirm, that
cow-milke does help conception, if a woman be troubled Hipocrates must be
continually observed, that it be not used with any sharp ot tart liquor, for
then it curdleth in the stomach, and turns into corruption. The whay of
cow-milke mingled with Honey and salt, as much as the taste will permit and
drunk, looseneth the hardness of the Belly.

The marrow of a cow mingled with a little meal, and with new cheese,
wonderfully stays the bloody flixe. It is affirmed, that there is in the head
of an ox, a certain little Tophus found, being of no weight, which is
accounted very profitable to Wommen in hard travails of childbirth. The Liver
of an ox or cow dried, and drunk in powder, cures the flux of blood. The
gall of a cow is more forcible in operation then all other beasts gals
whatsoever. The gall of an Ox mixed with honey, draws out any thorn or point
of a needle or other Iron thing out of the flesh where it sticks. Likewise it
being mingled with alome and Myrrh as thick as honey, it cures those evils
which creep and annoy the privy parts; laying upon it afterward Beetes sod in
Wine.

It will not suffer the Kings evil to grow or spread it self if it be laid
upon it at the beginning. The hands washed in an oxes gall and water, are made
white how black soever they were before time; and if pur-blind eyes be
anointed with the gal of a black cow, one may read any writing the more
plainly: there is in the gal of an ox a certain little Alcheron, [and some
Guers and Nassatum] which being beaten and held to ones Nose, it clears the
eyes, and makes that no humor do distill to annoy them: and if one take
thereof the quantity of a lintell seed, with the juice of Beetes, it is
profitable against the falling evil. If one be deaf or thick of hearing, take
the gal of an ox and the urine of a Goat; or the gall of a Goose: likewise,
it eases the headache in an Ague, and applied to the temples provoke
sleep, and if the breasts of a woman be anointed therewith it keeps her milk
from curdling.

The melt of an ox is eaten in honey for easing the pains of the melt in a
man, and with the skin that a calfe cast out of his dammes belly, the ulcers in
the face are taken away: and if twenty heads of Garlic be beaten in an oxes
bladder, with a pint of vinegar and

The urine of an Ox causes a cold stomach to recover, and I have seen that
the urine of a cow, taken in Gargarizing, did cure intolerable ulcers in the
mouth. When the be has tasted of the flower of the corne-tree, she presently
dies by looseness of the belly, except she taste the urine of a man or an Ox.

There are likewise many uses of the dung of Oxen made in Physic, whereof
authors are full, but especially against the gout, plastering the sick member
therewith whot and newly made: and against the Dropsy, making a plaster
thereof with Barley meal and a little Brimston aspersed, to cover the belly of
a man: And thus much for the natural properties

The morral and external use of Oxen both for labor and other industry.
The moral uses of this beast, both in labor and other things does declare the
dignity and high account our forefathers made hereof, both in vintage,
harvest, plowing, carriage, drawing, sacrificing, and making Leagues of truce
and peace; in so much as, that if this failed, al tilage and vintage must in
many places of the world be utterly put down; and in truth, neither the Fowls
of the air, nor the Horse for the battle, nor the Swine and Dogs could
have no sustenance but by the labor of Oxen: for although in some places they
have Mules, or Cammels, or Elephants, which help them in this labor, yet can
there not be in any Nation a neglect of Oxen; Varro.
and their reverence was so great, that in ancient time when an offender was
to be fined in his cattle [as al amerciaments were

It is some question among the ancients, who did first join Oxen together for
plowing: Heraclides
some affirming, that Aristeus first learned it of the Nymphs, in the Island
Co: and Diodorus affirms, that Dionisius Son of Jupiter, and Ceres or
Proserpina, did first of al invent the plow. Some attribute it to Briges the
Athenian, other to Triptolemus, Osiris, Habides a King of Spain; and Virgill
affirms most constantly, that it was Ceres as appearreth by this verse; Prima
Ceres ferro mortales vertere terram,
Instituit, etc.


Whereunto agrees Sernius: but I rather incline to Josephus, Lactantius, and
Eusebius, who affirm; that long before ceres was borne, or Osiris, or
Hercules, or any of the residue, their was a practice of plowing, both among
the Haebrewes and the Egyptians; and therefore as the God of plowing called by
the Romans Iugatinus (because of yoaking Oxen) was a fond aberration from the
truth, so are the residue of their inventions, about the first man that tilled
with Oxen: seeing that it is said of Cain and Noah, Augustinus
that they were husbandmen and tilled the earth. The Athenians had three
several plow-feastes which they observed yearly, one in Scirus, the other in
Rharia, and the third under Pelintus: and they called their marriage feasts
plow-seasons, because then they endeavored by the seed of man to multiply the
world, in procreation of children, as they did by the plow to increase food in
the earth.

The Graecians had a kind of writing called Boustraphedon, which began,
turned, and ended as the Oxen do in plowing a furrow, continuing from the left
hand to the right, Tarquinius, betwixt the Romans and the Gabij, the which
was hanged up in the Temple of Jupiter, as Dionisius and Pompeius Sextus
affirm (in the likeness of a buckler or shield:) and the chief heads of that
peace remained legible in that hide, unto their time, and therefore the
ancients called the Oxes hide a shield, in regard that by that conclusion of
peace, they were defended from the wars of the Gabij.

And there were certain people called Homolotti by Herodotus, who were wont
to strike up their leagues of peace after War and contention, by cutting an
Ox into small Iugera from this occasion, as Eustathius, and varinus report. A
History
When Sychaeus the husband of Dido, who was Daughter of Agenor and sister to
Pigmalion, wandered too and fro in the world with great store of treasure, he
was slain by Pigmalion secretly, in hope to get his wealth: After which time,
it is said that he appeared to his wife Dido, bidding her to save her life
from her cruel brother; who more esteemed money then nature, she fled into
Lybia, taking with her some Tyrians, among whom she had dwelled, and a Iarbas
King of Nomades, to give her but so much land as she could compass in with an
oxes hide, which with much ado she obtained, and then did cut an Oxes skin
into small and narrow thongs or listes, wherewithal she compassed in so much
as builded the large city of carthage, and first of all was called the new
cittye, and the castle thereof Byrsa; which signifies a Hyde.

Eustathius also reports another story to the building of this city, namely
that it was called carthage of one of the Daughters of Hercules, and that when
Elisa and the other companions of Dido came thither to dig for the foundation
of the city, they found an Oxes head, whereupon they were discouraged to build
there any more, supposing that Omen betokened evil unto them, and a perpetual
slavery in labor and misery, such as Clemens
Among the Egyptians they paint a Lion for strength, an Ox for labor, and a
horse for magnanimity and courage, and the Image of Myrtha which among the
Persians signifies the Sun, is pictured in the face of a Lion holding the
horns of a striving Ox in both hands, whereby they signify that the Moon
does receive light from the Sun, Gyraldus
when she begins to be separated from her beams.

There is in the coasts of Babylon a gemme or precious stone like the heart
of an Sarcites, which represents the flesh of an Ox. Pliny.
The auncientes had likewise so great regard of this Beast, that they would
neither sacrifice nor eat of a laboring Ox; wherefore Hercules was condemned
when he had desired meat of Theodomantis in Dyropia for his hungry companion
the Son of Hyla, because by violence he took from him one of his Oxen and
slew him. A crowned Ox was also among the Romans a sign of peace, for the
Soldiers which kept the Castle of Anathon near the river Euphrates against
Iulianus and his Army, when they yielded themselves to mercy, Marcellus
they descended from the Castle, driving before them a crowned Ox: from this
manifold necessity and dignity of this beast came the Idolatrous custom of the
Heathens and especially the Egytians, for they have worshipped him instead of
God calling him Apis and Ephaphus: Idolatry committed with Oxen and Kye, of the
choice of Apis.
whose choice was on this sort. He had on his right side an exceeding splendant
white spot, and his Horns crooking together like the new Moon, having a
great bunch on his tongue, which they call Cantharus: neither do they suffer
him to exceed a certain number of years or grow very big, for these causes
they give him not of the water of Nilus to drink, but of another consecrated
well, which hinders his growth: and also when he is come to his full age,
they kill him, by drowning Memphis. And the Egyptians did account him a blessed
and happy man, out of whose fold the Priests had taken that Oxe-God. He has
two Temples erected for him, which they call his chambers, where he gives
forth his augurisms, aunswering none but children and youths playing before
his Temples: and refusing aged persons especially Women, and if any not sacred
happen to enter into one of his Temples, he dies for it, and if into the other
it fore-sheweth some monstrous curssed event, as they fondly imagine.

The manner of his answers is privately to them that give him meat, taking it
at their hands, and they observe with great religion that when Germanicus the
Emperor came to ask counsel of him, he turned from him and would not take
meat at his hand, for presently after he was slain. Once in a year they
show him a Cow, with such marks as he has, A history
and always they put him to death upon the same day of the week that he was
found, and in Nilus near Memphis there was a place called Phiala where were
preserved a Golden and a silver dish, which upon the birth or caluing days of
Apis, they threw down into the river and those days were seven, wherein they
affirm that never man was hurt by Crocodils. The Egyptians do also consecrate
an Ox to the Moon, and a Cow to Urania. It is reported that Mycerinus K. of
Egypt, fell in love with his own Daughter: and by violence Herodotus a history
she not able to endure the conscience of such a fact, hanged her self:
whereupon the King her impure father, did bury her in a wooden Ox, and so
placed her in a secret place or chamber, to whom daily they offer many odours,
but the mother of the maiden did cut off the hands of those Virgins or women
that attended on her Daughter and would not rescue her from so vile a contempt.
There were also many other picturs of Oxen, Of the pictures of Oxen.
as in corcyra and Eretria, and most famous was that of perillus which he made
and presented to Phalaris the Tyrant of Agrigent, showing him, that if he
would torment a man, he should put him into that Ox set over a fire, and his
voice of crying should be like the loughing of a Heighfer, which thing being
heard of the Tyrant to show his detestation of more strange invented torments
then he had formerly used, he caused Perillus Ovid to write thus.

Et phalaris Tauro violentus membra perilli:
Torruit, infoelix imbuit author opus.
When an Ox or a Cow in ancient time did die of themselves, (Viz:) if it were
an Ox, they buried him under the walls of some City, leaving his Horns
sticking visibly out of the earth, to signify the place of his burial, for
when his flesh was consumed, they took it up again, and buried the bones in
the Temples of Venus in other places: but the body of a dead cow they cast
into some great River near adjoining. The Poets have fained Minotaurus, having
in part the form of a man, and in part the form of a Bull; and they say that
Pasiphae the Daughter of the son and wife of Minos King of creet fell in love
with a Bull, Of the monster minotaurus
and by the help of Dedalus she was included in a wooden heifer covered with a
cows hide, and so had copulation with the bull, and so came that monster minos
included in a laborinth, and constraind the Athenians who had slain his son
Androgeus to send every year seven young men, and 7. maids to be given to
that monster to feed upon, for he would eat man's flesh. At last Theseus
son of Aegeus, king of Athens came into that laborinth, and slew that
Minotaure, and by the help of Ariadne escaped out of the laborinth. Other
relate the story in this manner; that when the Cretensians would have expelled
Minos from his kingdom, he vowed that whatsoever likeness first appeared
out of the sea for sign of victory unto him, he vowed sacrifice it to the
gods, if he did enjoy his regiment: and thereuppon a goodly Bull came unto
him out of the sea, wherewithal he was delighted: But after he had recovered
his kingdom in quiet, he kept that Bull in his own hands and sacrificed
another, and that by this Bull was the Minotaure begotten on his wife Pasiphae.
But the truth is, that when Minos was in danger to loose his kingdom, one
Taurus, a valiant Prince and Captain, came with a Navy of good soldiers,
and established him in quiet. Afterward falling in love with Pasiphae king
Minos wife, he lay with her in the house of Daedalus: which Daedalus wrought
with the Queen to give him his pleasure, and that the Minotaure was a monster
in Creete that had the face of an Ox, and the other members like a man, such
an one was seen in Aristotle's time. Although other take it for a fiction;
because the Romans had it pictured in their ensigns of war, until Caius
Marius altered it to an Eagle, which remains to this day. Alciatus yields
this reason why the Romans gave such an arms, to signify that secrecy
becomes a captain, and that proud and crafty counsels do hurt the authors of
them.


Depictum Romana phalaux in praelia gestat
Nosque monent debere ducem secreta latere.
Gnosiacis clausit Daedalus in latebris
Semiuiroque nitent signa superba boue:
Consilia authori cognita techna no^ent.
It is reported also, that when Cadmus went from Delphos to Phocis, an Ox did
direct him in the way and was his guide; which Ox was bought out of the
herds of Pelagon, having in both his sides a white spot: it must needs be
understood of the moon, for Cadmus flying by night having the moon to shine
upon him (which is hyeroglyphically deciphered

It cannot be denied that the prime institution of sacrifices, was from, by,
and for the ordinance of god, to teach the world to woorship him in blood for
sin, which could not be expiated but by the blood of the only immaculate son
and lamb of god; and therefore I will but remember how corruption polluted that
ordinance, which was purely without idle ceremonies instituted by the
everlasting god; and yet was by man's invention made wretched,

To begin therefore with the original of that heathenish and paganish
sacrifice, instead of god the only true and divine essence, to whom al
sacrifice and divine worship was due, and whose creatures both men, oxen, and
all other living and visible things are, they offered unto all the hoasts of
heaven, the sun, and stars, the heathen gods Jupiter, Mars, Minerua, Pandrisus,
and others: and if the sacrifice were costly and sumptuous, it was called
Hecatombe. Now before their sacrifice they made prayers, burnd incense, for
odors presented Prothymes (as they were termed) certain preparations and cakes
made of barley and salt, Vlochytae.) After which, the priest turned him
sometimes to the right hand, and sometimes to the left, and then began to take
the gristle hairs growing on the Oxes forehead betwixt his horns, making a
taste of them, and casting them in the fire to begin the sacrifice. Then did he
give into the hands of the people standing by, little pots of wine likewise, to
taste for sacrifice, and then he which killed the beast drew his knife, or
axe, or cleauer, from the head to the tail of the beast. Now in every
sacrifice they had burning torches, which were lawful for none to carry but
for men, and not women, then the priest commanded to kill the sacrifice, which
sometime they did by knocking him on the head if the beast were to be
sacrificed to hell, and those that weere therein, for they sacrificed a barren
Cow, or a black Sheep to those ghostes. But if the sacrifice were for
heaven, and to the powers thereof, they lifted up his head and cut his
throat: then put they under him their Sphagian vessels to receive his blood,
and when the beast was fallen down, they flayed off his skin.

Then did the Priest or Flamen divide the intrals, that so he might m^^e his
augurisme (the bowels being proved at the altar.) Having looked into the bowels,
they took out of every Spartanes overcame their enemies by stratagem, they
sacrificed to Mars an ox, but when by open force, they sacrificed a cock, for
they esteemed more of an unbloody then a bloody victory. When a man sacrificed
a Cow to Minerua, he was bound to sacrifice a Sheep and an Ox to Pandrysus.

When the Locrensians in a public spectacle would make a sacrifice, they
wanted an Ox, for which cause they gathered together so many sticks of small
wood, as made the image of an Ox artificially conjoined together, and so
setting it on fire burned it for an offering: whereupon a Locrensian Ox, was
an ironicall proverb for a sacrifice of no weight or merrite. It is also
reported that an Heyfer being brought to the altar of Minerua to be sacrificed
did there Calue, wherefore the Priests would not meddle with her, but let her
go away free, because Minerua was the goddess of procreation; holding it an
impious thing to kill that in sacrifice which had brought forth a young one
at the altar: to conclude, as Vegetius says, that on a time Justice was so
offended with men because they imbrewed every altar with the blood of Oxen and
cattle, that therefore she left the earth,

OF THE CALFE.
The definition and name
A Calfe, is a young or late enixed Bull or Cow, which is called in Ebrew Egel
or Par: and sometimes Ben-bakar, the son Rabbi Solomon, and Abraham Esra,
expound Egel, for a Calfe of one year old. The Sarazens of that word call a
Calfe Hesel. The Grecians Moschos, whereof is derived Moscharios, but at this
day they call him Mouskari, or Moschare. The Italians Vitello, the French Veau,
the Spaniardes Ternera of teneritudo, The etymology of Vitulus.
signifying tenderness, and sometimes Bezeron and Vezerro, the Germans Ein
Kalb, the Flemmings Kalf, and the Latins Vitulus, of the old word Vitulor,
signifying to be wanton, for Calves are exceedingly given to sport and
wantonness; or as other Italous came Vitulus, and therefore the Latins do not
always take Vitulus for a young or newe-foaled beast, but sometime for a Cow,
as Virgill Aeclog.

Ego hanc vitulam (ne forte recuses.)
Bis venit ad mulctram binos alit vbere fortus. Depono.
And this word (like the Greek Moschos) signifies male and female: whereunto
by diverse authors both Greek and Latin, are added diverse epithites by way of
explication, both of the condition, inclination, and use of this young beast;
calling it wild, ripe for the temples, unarmed, weak, sucklings, tender,
wandering, vnhorned, and such like. The epithits of a Calfe.
And because the Poets feign that Io was turned into a Cow, and that the violet
herb was assigned by Jupiter for her meat, they derive viola, a violet, from
Vitula a Calfe, by a kind of grecian imitation.

It is also certain that the honor of this young beast has given
denomination to some men, as Pomponius Vitulus, and Vitulus Niger Turamius,
Varro. Men named after calves
and Vitellius was derived from this stem or theme, although he were an
Emperor. The like may be said of Moschos in Moschus a Sophiste that drank
nothing but water, and there was another Moschus a gramarian of Syr^^use, whom
Athaeneus does record was a familiar of Aristarchus, and also of another, a
poet of the Bucolickes; and this serves to show us, that the love our
ancestors bare unto cattle, appeered in taking upon them their names, and
were not ashamed in those elder times, wherein wisdom and invention was most
pregnable, to glory in their herds from which they received maintenance. But
to the purpose, that which is said of the several parts of an Ox and a Cow,
belongs also to a Calfe; for their anatomy differs not, because they are
conceived and generated by them, and in them: and also their birth and other
such things concerning A secret by the hoof.


It is reported by an obscure author, that if the hoof of a Calfe be not
absolved or finished in the dammes belly before the time of caluing, it will
dye. And also it must be observed, that the same diseases which do infeste and
harm an Ox, do also befall Calfes, to their extreme peril: but they are to
be cured by the same forenamed remedies. And above the residue, these young
beasts are trobled with worms, The diseases of a calfe
which are ingendered by crudity, but their cure is to keep them fasting till
they have well disgested their meat, and then take lupines half sod, and
half raw, beaten together, The cure of worms
and let the juice thereof be powered down his throat; otherwise, take dry
figs and fitches beaten together with Santonica, called Lauender cotton, and
so put it down the Calves throat as aforesaid, To choose calu^ for stor
or

Post partum carain vitulos traducitur omnis
Et quos aut pecori malint submittere habendo.
Continuoque notas and nomina gentis inurunt,
Aut aris scruare sacris aut scindere terram
Et campum horrente fractis inuertere glebis.
And all these things are to be performed immediately after their weaning: and
then in the next place you must regard to gelde the males, which is to be
performed in June, or Magus says in May, or at the farthest let them not be
above a year old, for else they will grow very deformed and small: but if you
libbe them after two years old, they will prove stubborn and intractable,
wherefore it is better to gelde them while they be young ones, which is to be
performed not with any knife or iron instrumente, The libbing of calves.
because it will draw much blood, and in danger the beast thorough pain, but
rather with a cloven reed or stick, pressing it together by little and little:
but if it happen that one of a year or twoe years old be to be libbed, then
you must use a sharp knife, after you have pressed the stones into the coddes,
and cut them out at one stroke, and for stanching of the blood, Aristotle
sotion. varro
let the cod, and the ends of the veins be seared with an hot iron, and so the
wound is cured

And now the time for the effecting hereof, is best in the waine of the moon,
either in the spring or autumn; but it is good to leave as many of the veins
and nerves of the virile member untouched and whole as may be, that so he may
not loose any condition of a male, except the power of generation. And if the
wound be overmuch given to bleed, lay upon it ashes with the spume of silver,
which is apt to stanch blood in all green wounds; and that day let him not
drink and eat but a very little meat: Palla^tus. souon. Coll^mella
for three days after give him green tops or grass, soft and easy to chewe,
and at the third days end, annoint the wound with liquid pitch, ashes, and a
little oil, which will sooner cure the scar and keep the flies from stinging
or harming it. If at any time a cow cast her calfe, you may put unto her
another calfe, that has not suck enough from his own Damme; and they use in
some countries to give their calves Wheate-branne, and barley-meale, and tender
meat, Varro.
especially regarding that they drink morning and evening. Let them not lie
together in the night with their Danime, but asunder, until their sucking
time, and then immediately separate them again, unless the cow be well fed
when the calfe sucketh, Food for Calves
her ordinary food will yeald no great trybute of Milk; and for this cause,
you must begin to give the calfe green meat betimes. Afterward being
weaned, you may suffer those young ones to feed with their Dams in the Autumn,
which were calued in the spring. Then in the next place, you must regard the
taming of the beast, being ready for labor, which is expressed in the former
treatise of an Ox.

Sacrifices of Calves.
The ancients called Victoria by the name of the Goddess Vitula, because they
sacrificed unto her calves, which was termed a Vitulation: and this was usual
for victory and plenty, as is to be seen at large in Giraldus, Macrobius,
Nonius, Ovid, and Virgill: but the heathens had this knowledge, that their Gods
would not accept at their hands a lame calfe for a sacrifice, Pliny Coelius
although it were brought to the altar, and if the tail of the calfe did not
touch the joints of his hinder legs, they did not receive him for sacrifice.
And it is said Aemilius Paulus, when he was to go against the Macedonians, he
sacrificed to the Moon in her declination eleven calfes. Josephus A wonder.
It is very strange, that a calfe being ready to be sacrificed at the Temple of
Jerusalem, brought forth a Lamb which was one foreshewing sign of Ierusalems
destruction. But Aristole declares, that in his time, there was a calfe that
had the head of a child, Monsters of calves.
and in Luceria a Town of Heluetia, was there a calfe which in his hinder
parts was a Heart.

Nioivillagag
When Charles the fifth went with his Army into Affrique and arrived at Larghera
a Noble city of Sardinia, there happened an exceeding great wonder, for an Ox
^rought forth a calfe with two heads, and the Woman that did owe the Ox,
presented the calfe to the Emperor, and since that time I have seen the
picture of a more strange beast calued Bonna, in the Bishopric of Colen,
which had two heads, one of them in the side not bigger then a Hares head, and
two bodies joined together; whereof the hinder parts were smooth and bald, but
the tail black and hayrie: it had also seven feet, whereof one had three
hoofes, this Monster lived a little while, and was brought forth in An: 1552.
the 16. day of May, to the wonder and admiration of all them, who either knew
the truth, or had seen the picture.

Butchers are wont to buy calves for to kill and sell their flesh, for in all
creatures, the flesh of the young ones are much better then the elder, The
flesh of calves
because they are moist and soft, and therefore will digest and concocte more
easy: and for this cause Kids, Lambs, and Calves, are not out of season in
any time of the year; and are good from fifteen days Fiera to make this
Distichon: Assiduos habeant vitulum tua prandia in vsus
cui madida and sapida iuncta tepore caro est.


And principally the Germans use the chawtherne, the head, and the feet, for
the beginning of their meals, and the other parts either roasted, or baked,
and sometime sod in broth, and then buttered, spiced and sauced, and eaten
with Onyons.

Pliny. Of the medicines.
The Medicines arising from this beast, are the same that come from other his
fires before spoken off, and especially the flesh of a calfe does keep the
flesh of a new wound, (if it be applied thereunto) from swelling, and being
sodden it is precious against the bitings Marcellus
and make the patient drink of the broth: and the same broth is Sovereign
against all the bitings of Serpents. The horns of a Calfe sodde soft, are
good against all intoxicate poison, and especially Hemlock. The poulder of a
Calves thigh drunk in Woman's Milk, cures all filthy running ulcers, Pliny
and out of the brain of a calfe they make an ointment, to loosen the
hardness of the belly. Nicander
The marrow softneth all the joints, drives away the bunches arising in the
body; having an operation to soften, fill, dry and heat. Take Oil, Wax,
rust, and the marrow of a Calfe, against all bounches in the face: and calves
marrow with an equll quantity of whay, Rasis.
Oil, Rose-cake and an Egg, do soften the hardness of the cheeks and
eyelids, Marcellus
being laid to for a plaster: and the same mixed with Cumin, and infused into
the ears, heals the pains of them; and also eases the ulcers in the mouth.

The marrow with the sewet composed together, cures all ulcers and corruptions
in Pliny.
and likewise the vlcerous sores in the head. The same mixed with the fat of a
Goose, Marcellus
and the juice of Basil or wild Cumyn; and infused into the ears, helps
deafness and pains thereof. The fat taken out of the thigh of a Calfe, and
sod in three porringers of water and supped up, is good for them that have the
flux: and the dung of a calfe fried in a pan, laid to the buttocks and
secrets, does wonderfully cure the bloody flixe: Leonellus
also laid to the raines, provoke urine, and sod with rue, cures all the
inflammations in the seat of a man or woman. The sewet of a calfe with nitre
aswageth the swelling of the cods, pliny.
being applied to them like a plaster: and the sewet alone, does cure the
pieling of the Nails. The liver with sage leaves cut together, and pressed to
a liquor, being drunk, eases the

With the dung of calves they perfume the places which are hurt with Scorpions,
and the ashes of this dunge with vinegar, stays bleeding: Marcellus
magnifieth it above measure, for the cure of the gout, to take the fime of a
calfe which never eat grass, mixed with lees of vinegar, and also for the
deafness of the ears, (when there is pain with all) take the urine of a Bull,
Goat, or calfe, and one third part of vinegar well sod together, Fullonia,
then put it into a flagon with a small mouth, and let the neck of the patient
be perfumed therewith.

Of the supposed Beast CACVS.
THere be some of the late writers, which take the cacus spoken of by Virgill
in his eight book of Aeneids, to be a wild Beast, which Virgill describes in
these words: Hic spelunca; fuit vaslo submota recessu:

Ora virum tristi pendebant pallida tabo.
Ore vomens ignes magna se mole ferebat,
nequeunt expleri corda tuendo
Pectori semiferi atque extinctus faucibus ignes,
Semihominis caci: facies quam dira tegebat
caede tepebat humus foribusque affixa superbis:
Huic monstro-vulcanus erat pater, etc.


That is, cacus was half a beast and half a man, who had a cave in the earth
against the Sun, his Den replenished with the heads of men, and he
himself breathing Vulcan. And there be some that affirm this Cacus, to have
wasted and depopulated all Italy, and at length when Hercules had slain
Geryon, as he came out of Spain thorough Italy with the Oxen which he had
taken from Geryon, Cacus drew diverse of them into his Cave by their tails: but
when Hercules missed daily some of his Cattle, and knew not which way they
strayed, at last he came to the Den of Cacus: and seeing all the steps
stand forward by reason the Cattle were drawn in backward, he departed; and
going away, he heard the loughing of the Oxen for their fellows, whereby he
discovered the fraud of Cacus: whereupon he presently ran and took his
club, the monster being within his Cave, closed up the mouth thereof with a
wonderful great stone, and so hid himself for fear: but Hercules went to the
top of the Mountain and there digging down the same, until he opened the
Cave, then leaped in suddenly and slew the Monster, and recovered his Oxen.

But the truth is, this forged Cacus was a wicked servant of Euander, which
used great cacus, for Ca^os in Greek signifies evil. He was said to breath
forth fire because he burned up their corn growing in the fields, and at last
was betrayed of his own sister; for which cause she was deified, and the
Virgins of Vesta made Sacrifice to her: and therefore it shall be idle to
prosecute this fable any farther (as Albertus Magnus does) it being like the
fable of Alcida, which the Poets feign was a bird of the earth, and being
invincible burned up al Phrygia, and at last was slain by Minerua.

OF THE CAMEL.
ALthough there be diverse sorts of Camels, according to the Of the name
The Haebrewes call it Gamal; the Chaldaeans Gamela, and Gamele: The Arabians,
Gemal: Gemel A^^egeb: Algiazar. The Persians, Schetor: the Saracens, Shymel;
the Turks call a company of Camels travailing together, Corauana. The Italians
and Spaniardes call a Camel Camello, the French chameau, the Germans
Ramelthier, all derived of the Latin Camelus, and the Greek camelos. The
Illyrians, artemidorvs. The Etymology of the word. Horus
Vuelblud: and the reason of the name camelos in Greek is, because his burden
or load is laid upon him kneeling or lying, derived (as it may seem) of
camptein Merous, the bending of his knees and slownesse of pace; wherefore a
man of a slow pace, was among the Egyptians deciphered by a camel. For that
cause, there is a Town in Si^^ called Gangamela; that is, the house of a
camel, erected by Darius the Son of Histaspi^, allowing a certain provision
of food therein for wearied and tired camels. The epithites given to this beast
are not many among Authors, for he is termed by them rough, deformed, and
thirsting; as Iuuenall.

Deformis poterunt immania membra, camel: And Persius in his fifth Satyr
says; Toll recens primus piper e sitiente camelo. There are of them diverse
kinds, according to their countries wherein they breed: as in India, The kinds
of Camels.
in Arabia, and in Bactria: All those which are in India, are said by Didimus
to be bred in the Mountains of the Bactrians, and have two bunches on their
back, and one other on their breast, whereupon they lean: they have sometimes
a Bore for their fire, which feeds with the flocks of she-camels; for as
Mules and Horses will couple together in copulation, so also will Bores and
camels: and that a camel is so engendered sometimes, The generation of Bactrian
Camels.
the roughnes of his hair like a Boares or Swines, and the strength of his
body, are sufficient evidences; and these are worthily called Bactrians,
because they were first of all conceived among them, having two bunches on
their backs; whereas the Arabian

The parts and color of these camels.
Ptolomeus Lagi brought two strange things into Egypt, a black camel, and a
man which was the one half white and the other half black in equal
proportion, the which caused the Egyptians to wonder and marvel at the shape
and proportion of the camel, and to laugh at the man: whereupon it grew to a
proverb, a Camel among the Egyptians, The several parts of a camel, Pliny
for a matter fearful at the first, and ridiculous at the last.

The head and neck of this beast is different in proportion from all others,
yet the Ethyopians have a beast called Nabim, which in his neck resembles a
Horse, and in his head a Camel. They have not teeth on both sides, although
they want horns (I mean both the Arabian and Bactrian Camel:) whereof
Aristotle disputes the reason; in the third Book of the parts of creatures,
and fourteenth chapter. Their necks are long and nimble, whereby the whole body
is much relieved; and in their neck toward the nether part of their throat,
there is a place called Anhar, wherein a Camel does by spear or sword,

Siluaticus.
His belly is variable, now great, now small like an Oxes; his gall is not
distinguished within him like other beasts, but only carried in great veins,
and therefore some have thought he had none, and assigned that as a cause of
his long life. Betwixt his thighs he has two vdders, Aristotle Pliny.
which have four speanes depending from them like a Cowes. His genital part is
confected, and stands upon a sinnew, insomuch as there of may a stringe be
made, for the bending of the strongest bow. The tail is like the tail of an
Ass, hangging down to their knees, they have knees in every leg, having in
their former legs 3*bones, and in the hinder four. They have an ancle like an
Oxes, and very small buttockes, for the proportion of their great body: their
foot is cloven, but so, that in the under part it has but two Fissures or
cleftes, opening the breadth of a finger, and in the upper part four

Auicenna affirms, that he had seen Camels with whole feet, like a Horses,
but their feet (although fleshy) are so tied together with little lunges, that
they never wear; and their manner of going or pace is like a Lions, so
walking, as the left foot never outgoeth the right, whereas all other beasts
change the setting forward of their feet, and lean upon their left feet while
they remove their right; but these alter step after step, so as the left foot
behind, follows the right before, and the hinder foot follows the left
before. Those Camels which are conceived by Bores are the strongest, and fall
not so quickly in

Camels love grass (called Schoennanthi) and especially Barley, which they eat
up wonderful greedily until all be in their stomach, The food of Camels
and then will they chewe thereupon all the night long: so that the greatness
of their belly to lodge their meat in before concoction is better then the
benefit of their upper teeth, because he can ruminate and chaw it so often as
he pleases. There is a certain herb, which has a seed like a myrtle seed,
that is poison to worms, Siluaticus.
and this seed is food for Cammels; wherewith they grow fat. It is
therefore called Camell-thorne, and Astergar in the Aarabian tongue. In the
province of Aden both Sheep, Oxen, Horses, and Camels, eat a kind of fish,
and them better being dry and stale, Paul. venet. Philostratus Calius.
then new and fresh, by reason the immoderate heat in that region, burns
Their drink must not be clear.
They will endure thirst for three or four days together, but when they come
to drink, they suck in above measure, recompensing their former thirst, and
providing against that which is to come, and of all kinds the Bactrians are
least trobled with thirst.

They stale from one side to another, otherwise then any other beasts do: this
beast is very hot by nature, and therefore wanton and full of sport and wrath:
braying most fearfully when they are angered. They engender like Elephants and
Tigers, that is; the female lying Their procreation
When they are to engender, they go unto the secretst places they can find,
herein excelling in modesty the ancient Massagetes, who were not ashamed to lie
with their wives in the open field, and public view of one another, where as
brute beasts by instinct of nature, make the procreation of their kind to be
a most secret-shamefull-honest action.

At the time therefore of their lust, they are most unruly and fierce,
yiedling to none, no not to their own keepers: the best time of their
copulation is in September, for in Arabia, they begin to engender in the third
year of their age, and so within ten or eleven months after she is delivered
of young, being never above one at a time for twins come not in her great
belly; so she goes a year before she conceive again, although her young be
separated or weaned, before which time they do not commonly. Caelius. Auicen.
Unto their former modesty for their copulation, we may add another divine
instinct, and most true observation about the same, for the male will never
cover his mother, or his sister: wherefore it is sincerely reported, that when a
certain Camel-keeper [desirous to try this secret] having the male, son to
a female which he also kept, he so covered the female-mother-Camell

These camels are kept in herds and are as swift as horses, according to the
measure of The pace and agility of camels
when they go to fetch the gold which is said to be kept by the Formicae
Lions, which are not much bigger then Foxes: Herodotus.
yet many times do these Lions overtake the camels in course and tear the
riders in pieces They have been also used for battle or war [by the Arabians
in the Persian war:] but their fear is so great of an Horse, that (as
Xenophon says) in the institution of cyrus, when the armies came to join,
neither the camel would aproach to the Horse, or the horse to the camel;
whereupon it is accounted a base and unprofitable thing for a man to nourish
camels for fight, yet the Persians for the fight of Cyrus in Lidia, ever
nourished camels and horses together, to take away their fear one Of the labor
and employment of Camels.
Therefore they are used for carriage which they will perform with great
facility, being taught by their keepers to kneell and lie down to take up
their burdens, which by reason of their height a man cannot lay on them;
always provided, that he will never go beyond his ordinary lodging and
baiting place, or endure more then his usual burden; and it has been seen
that one of these Bactrian camels, has carried above ten Minars of corn, and
above that a bed with five men therein. Pliny.
They will travel in a day above forty ordinary miles, for as Pliny says,
that there was from Thomna to Gaza sixty and two lodging places for camels,
which was in length one thousand, five hundred, thirty and seven miles.

They are also used for the plough in Numidia, and for this cause are yoaked
sometimes Heliogabalus like as the Tartarians, Diodorus
yoaked them together not only for private spectacles and plays, but also for
drawing of wagons and chariots. When they desire to have them free and strong
for any labor in the field, or war, they use to geld both the male and the
female, the manner whereof is in this sort. The male by taking away his
stones, and the female by searing her privy parts within the brimme and laps
thereof with a hot iron, which being so taken away, they can never more join
in copulation, and these are more patient in labor and thirst, and likewise
better endure the extreamitie of sand in those parts, Pliny.
having this skill that if the mists of rain or sand, do never so much obscure
the way from the rider, yet does she remember the same without all staggering.

O^ the use of th^^r natural p^^ts.
The urine of this beast is excellent for the use of fullers, of the hair
called Buber or camels Wool, is cloth made for apparel, (called camelotta
or camels hair,) and the hair of the caspian camels is so soft, that it may
be therein compared with the softest Milesian Wool, Aelianus.
whereof their Princes and priests make their garments: and it is very
proable, that the garments of Saint John Baptist was of this kind. In the
city of calacia ch^m and in the province of Egrigaia, is cloathe made of the
hair of camels, Baytius.
and wh^^e wool (called Zambilotti) showing most gloriously, but the best of
this kind are in the land of Gog and M^gog.

The flesh of a camel not to be eaten. Diodorus Leo Affric:
It is forbidden in holy Scripture to eat a Camel, for although it chew the
cud, yet is not the hoof altogether cloven: and besides, the flesh thereof is
hard of disgestion, and the juice thereof very naught, heating the body above
measure; yet many times have men of base condition and minds eaten thereof, as
in Arabia, and in the kingdom of Fezzen: and Athaeneus affirms, that the
king of Persia was wont to have a whole Camel roasted for his own table at his
royal feastings: and Heliogabalus likewise caused to be prepared for himself
the heels of Camels, and the spurs of cocks and Hens, pulled Lampridius.
and whole Ost^iches and Camels; saying, (though falsely) that God commanded
the Jews to eat them. Camels milk is wholesome for meat, because it is
thinnest of all other, and because thereof it breeds fewer obstructions, and
is good for softening of the belly: for the natural disposition of this beast,
it is partly already related, whereby the singular use thereof may be
collected: yet there are certain proverbs and stories thereof, farther
express^ing their qualities.

A history of their natural dispo^^ion. Caelius
It is disdaine^ull, and a discontented creature: whereupon it is fained of the
Poets, that they besought Jupiter to give them Horns, with which petition he
was so offended, that he took from them their ears, and ther^ore in that,
those are reproved, which are so far in love with other things they want, that
they deserve to loose the things they have. Likewise Justinian had found the
Treason of Arsaces the Armenian, Caelius.
he caused him to ride thorough the city upon a Camel, to be shamed for his
offense, Solinus.
although in former times it was a kind of triumph and honor to be carried upon
a Camel, lead thorough a city.

In the lake of Asphaltites wherein all things sink that come in it, many
Camels and Bulls swim thorough without danger. The Arabians sacrifice a camel
to the unknown God, because camels go into strange countries, and likewise
sacrifice their Virgins before they be married, Sacrifices of Idolatry Gyraldus.
Aelianus. Of the ^eare and hat^ed of cam^ls. Herodotus S^l^^us. Po^phyrius The
^en^th of their life Pliny.
because of the chastity of this beast, and the Sagarentes with great
observance, Minerua.

These Beasts are hated of Horses and Lions, for when Xerxes trauaild over the
river Chidorus, through Paeonia and Crestonia, in the night time the Lions
descended into the camp and touched no creatures therein, except the camels,
whom they destroyed for the most part.

A camel will live in the soil wherein he is bred fifty or an hundred years,
and if he be translated into any other Nation he falls into madness, or
scabs, or the gowt, and then they live not above thirty years. There is a kind
of grass that grows by the high ways in the country of Babylon, that
kills Camels when they taste thereof.

The medicines in the bodies o^ camels. Ponzet^us Card^^alis Auicen^^.
There are also medicinal properties in camels, for by reason he is of a hot
and dry sod in three cups of the best honey, it cures the dimnes of the eyes,
and auoydeth the flesh that grows in them: and if the hairs of a Camels
tail be wound together like a string, and tied to the left arm ( Pliny
affirms) they will deliver one from a quartan Ague. Marcellus


The milk of camels newly delivered of young, helps obstructions, and all
shortness of breath, and is also good against the Dropsy and hardness of the
melt. Also when one has drunk poison, this is a good. Antidote and amendeth
the temper of the body. The fime of Camels dried to dust with oil, will cr^spe
or curle the hair, and stay bleeding at the nose, and the same hot, is good
against the Gout.



Of the Camel DROMEDARIE.
A Camel is called of the Graecians Dromos, by reason of the The description
of a D^omedary, and the Etymology of his name,
first in the shape, for she has but one bunch on the back, and many Nations,
as the Italians, French, Germans, and Spaniards, use the word Dromedary, only
without addition; The Graecians never name it without the addition of a camel.
Therefore this is a kind of camel of less stature, but much swifter; for
which cause, it is derived from running. Didymus. Isidorus.
A It cheweth the cud like a Sheep, and the other camel: History.
the French king had sent him from the great Turk two of these, white
colored, and I my self have seen one of Bactrians an hundred: Aelianus.
they were used for drawing of Charriots, and great presents for Princes, and
when they go to war every one carries two Archers, which fit upon him,
back to back, shooting forth their darts, one against the front of the enemy,
Diodorus
and the other against the prosecutours and followers.

They are able to go an hundred miles in a day, bearing a burden of 15.
hundred weight, Terence did significantly describe a good servant by the name
of Dromo, derived from Dromas a runner: and for the conclusion of the History
of these two sorts of camels, I will here add the relation and memorable
observations of Johannes Leo Afer, in his ninth book of the description of
Affricke, in his own words following.

A Camel is a gentle and pleasaunt-tame beast, whereof there are plenty in
Africa, A relation of Ioh. Leo Afer, out of his ninth Book of the description
of Affricke.
especially in the deserts of Lybia, Numidia, and Barbary: by which the
Affricans fetch Merchandise from far, which the greatest prince or Nobleman
cannot without them, by reason of the drought of those places. And of these
kind of creatures, there are to be seen in all parts of the world, both in
Asia, Affricke, and Europe, for the Tartarians, Cordians, Dalemians, and
Turconians use them in Asia, and the Turkish princes convey all their carriages
upon them in Europe: Likewise do all the Arabians in Affricke. But it must be
observed, that the Affrican Camels, are much more worth then the Asian, for
they can endure travail for fortye and fifty days together, with very little
or no meat, except sometimes in the evening when they are unloaded, they go to
the hedges, thorns, and other green places, and there eat any small thing
they meet withal, as

But the Asians, must always carry prouender to sustain their beasts, never
travailing but they have one camel laden with meat, for the other laden with
carriage, and so endure a double charge: and when the Affricans go to any
Martes or fayres being to return empty and unloaded, they take no thought for
their Camels food. Of these camels there be three kinds, one of them called
Hugiun, (being broad and tall) and therefore apt to

Another kind of their camels they call Bechetos, such as have two bunches, one
for burden, and the other for a man to ride upon: and the third sort are
called Ragnahil, which are of lower stature and leaner bodies then the residue,
unfit for burden, and therefore are used for the saddle, by all the Noble men
of Numidia, Arabia, and Libia: being able to run an hundred miles a day, and
performing long iourneyes with little or no prouender: for the King of Tombuto
being to send to Dara, or Selmessa, (which is distant from Ragnahils, within
the space of eight days.

In the beginning of the spring they are most frolic and unruly, because
then they incline to generation: at which time, they rage and fall upon many
that come unto them, and especially those from whom they have received blows,
remembering at that time, and requiting their former injuries, upon such as
wronged them, whom if they can take in there mouth, they lift them up into the
air, and then cast them down again under their feet, and tread upon them, in
which distemperd venerous fury, they remain forty days.

They can easily endure thirst, five, nine, or fifteen days, in necessity;
neither will their

I have also seen in Alcair, a camel, that could dance at the sound of a
Timbrell, being thereunto taught when he was young by this means; first he was
brought into a room like a stable, the pauement whereof was made hot by a fire
vnderdeath it, and without doors stood a musician playing on his timbrell, the
camel not for love of the music, but for the Thus far Leo Afer.

Of the two sorts of Camelopardals.


THis beast is called in Haebrew Zamer. Deuteronomy. 14. which the Arabians translate
Saraphah, and sometime Gyrapha, Gyraffa, and Zirafa, the Chaldaeans Deba, and
Ana, the Persians Seraphah, Of the name
and the Septuagiot Graecians, Camelopardalis, which word is also retained by
the Latins, whereunto Albertus adds Oraflus, and Orasius. The Ethyopians call
it Nabin, Iuli. Capital.
from whence comes Anabula, and Pausanias translateth it an Indian Sheep, so
indeed Anabula may be Englished a wild Sheep. Pliny.


A History. Isidorus.
There were ten of these seen at Rome, in the days of Gordianus the Emperor,
and before that time, Caesar being Dictatour. And such an one was sent by the
Sultan of Babylon to the Emperor Frederick, so that it is without question
that there is such a beast, which is engendered of a Camel and a female Libard,
or Panther as Horace says: Diuersum confusa genus pathera camelo.

The generation and description.
But the same which the Latins call Panthera the Graecians call Pardalis. The
head thereof is like to a camels, the neck to a Horses, the body to a Hearts;
and his cloven Hoof is the same with a cammels: the color of this Beast is
for the most part Red and white, mixed together, therefore very beautiful to
behold, by reason of the variable and interchangeable skin, being full of
spots: but yet they are not always of one color. He has two little horns
growing on his head of the color of iron, Leo Affric: Oppiamus. Heliodorus.
his eyes rolling and frowing, his mouth but small like a Hearts, his tongue is
nere three foot long, and with that he will so speedily gather in his meat,
that the eyes of a man will fail to behold his have, and his neck diversely
colored, is fifteen foot long, which he holds up higher then a Camels, and
far above the proportion of his other parts. His forfeete are much longer then
his hinder, and therefore his back declineth toward his buttocks, their
manner of going.
which are very like an asses. The pace of this beast differs from all other
in the world, for he does not move his right and left foot one after another,
but both together, and so likewise the

These beasts are plentiful in Ethiopia, India, and the Georgian region,
which was once called Media. Likewise in the province of Abasia in India, it is
called Surnosa, The countris breeding these beasts.
and in Abasia Surnappa, and the latter picture here set down, was truly taken
by Melchior Luorigus at Constantinople, in the year of salvation 1559. By the
sight of one of these, sent to the great Turk for a present: which picture and
description, was afterward sent into Germany, and was imprinted at Norimberge.
It is a solitary beast and keeps altogether in woods, if it be not taken
when it is young: Their natural disposition and mildness.
they are very tractable and easy to be handled, so that a child may lead
them with a small line or cord about their head, and when any come to see
them, they willingly and of their own accord, turn themselves round as it
were of purpose to show their soft hairs, and beautiful color, being as it

The skin is of great price and estimation among merchants and princes, and
it is said that underneath his belly, the coulourable spots are wrought in
fashion of a fishers net, The skin.
and the whole body so admirably intercouloured with variety, that it is in
vain for the wit or art of man, once to go about or endeavor the aemulous
imitation thereof. The tail of this beast is like the tail of an Ass, and I
cannot judge that it is either swifte for pace, or strong for labor, and
therefore well termed a wild Sheep, because the flesh hereof is good for
meat, and was allowed to the Jews by God himself for a clean beast.




SCaliger affirms, that in the land of the Giants, there is a beast which has
the head, neck, and ears, of a Mule, but the body of a Camel; wherefore it
is probable, that it is conceived by a Camel and a Mule: the picture whereof
is before set down, as it was taken from the sight of the beast, and
imprinted with a description at Middleborough in the year 1558. which was
never before seen in Germany, nor yet spoken by the Pliny.

They said that it was an Indian Sheep, out of the region of Peru, and so was
brought to Antwerpe, six thousand miles distant from that nation. It was about
Theodoric Neus, a citizen of the nether Colen. It was a most gentle and meek
beast like the Camelopardall, not past four year old: wherefore I thought
good to express it in this place, because of the similitude it has with the
manners of the fourmer beast, although it want horns and differ in some other
members.

Of another Beast called Camp.
DIodorus Siculus makes relation, that when Dionisius with his Army travailed
Zambirra a city of Lybia, where he slew a beast bred in those parts called
Camp, which had before that time destroyed many men, which action did purchase
him among the inhabitants a never dying fame, and that therefore there might
remain a continual remembrance to all posterity of that fact, he raised up
there a monument of the slain beast to stand for evermore.

OF THE CAT.
Of the name
A Cat is a familiar and well known beast, called of the Haebrewes Catull, and
Schanar, and Schunara; of the Graecians Aeluros, and Kattes, and Katis, of the
Saracens, Katt, the Italians Gatta, and Gotto. The Spaniards, Gata and Gato,
the French, Chat; the Germans, Katz; the Illyrians, Kozka; and Furioz, (which
is used for a Cat by Albertus Magnus) and I conjecture, to be either the
Persian, or the Arabian word. The Latins call it Feles, and sometimes
Murilegus, and Musio, because it catches Myse, but most commonly Catus, which
is derived of Cautus, signifying wary: Ovid says, The nature and etymology of
a Cat.
that when the Gyantes warred with the Gods, the Gods put upon them Apollo
lay for a spy in the likeness of a cat, for a cat is a watchful and warye
beast, sildome overtaken, and most attendaunt to her sport and prey; according
to that observation of Mantuan: Non secus ae muricatus, ille, inuadere pernam,
Nititur, hic rimas oculis obseruat acutis.
And for this cause did the Egyptians place them for hallowed Beasts, Their use
among the Egyptians
and kept them in their Temples, although they alleged the use of their
skins for the cover of shieldes, which was but an unreasonable shift, for the
softness of a cats skin is not fit to defend or bear a blow: It is known
also, that it was capital among them, to kill an Ibis, an Aspe, a Crocodill, A
history.
a Dog, or a Cat: insomuch as, that in the days of King Ptolaemey, when a
Coelius
it fortuned that a Roman unawares killed a cat, which being by the multitude
of the Egyptians espied, they presently fell upon the Ambassadors house, to
raze down the same, except the offender might be delivered unto them, to
suffer death: so that neither the honor of the Roman name, nor the necessity
of peace, could have restrained them from that fury, had not the King himself
and his greatest Lords come in person, not so much to deliver the Roman
Cat-murderer, as to sauegard him from the peoples violence; and not only the
Bubastum: (which was a burying plas for cattes near the Altar) wherein may
appear to al men, in what miserable blindness the wisest men of the world,
(forsaking, or deprived of the true When they thought to be wise, they becam
fools.

Once cattes were all wild, but afterward they retired to houses, Of the
tameing of Cattes and their countries.
wherefore there are plenty of them in all countries: Martial in an Epigram,
celebrated a Pannonian cat with this distichon:
Mauult haec dominae mittere dona pudens.
The Spanish black cats are of most price among the Germans, because they
are nimblest, and have the softest hair fit for garment. The best cats


A cat is in all parts like a Lioness, (except in her sharp ears) wherefore
the Poets feign, that when Venus had turned a cat into a beautiful woman
(calling her Aeluros) who forgetting her good turn, contended with the
goddess for beauty: in indignation whereof, she rerurned her to her first
nature, only making her outward shape to resemble a lion, which is not
altogether idle, but may admonish the wisest, that fair and foul, men and
beasts, hold nothing by their own worth and benefit, but by the virtue of
their creator:

Cats are of diverse colors, but for the most part gryseld, like to congealed
yse, which comes from the condition of her meat: her head is like unto the
head of a Lion, Sipontinus
except in her sharp ears: Of the several parts.
her flesh is soft and smooth: her eyes glister above measure, especialy when a
man comes to see a cat on the sudden, and in the night, they can hardly be
endured, for their flaming aspect. Wherefore Democritus describing the persian
smaradge says that it is not transparent, but fills the eye with pleasant
brightness, such as is in the eyes of Panthers and cats, for they cast forth
beams in the shadow and darkness, but in the sunshine they have no such
clearnes, and thereof Alexander Aphrodise gives this reason, both for the
sight of Cattes and of Battes, that they have by nature a most sharp spirit of
seeing.

Albertus compares their eyesight to carbuncles in dark places, because in
the night, they can see perfectly to kill Rattes and Myce: the root of the
herb Valerian (commonly Phu) is very like to the eye of a Cat, and wheresouer
it grows, if cats come thereunto, they instantly dig it up, for the love
thereof, as I my self have seen in mine own Garden, and not once only, but
often, even then when as I had caused it to be hedged or compassed round about
with thorns, for it smells marvelous like to a cat.

The Egyptians have observed in the eyes of a cat, the increase of the
Moone-light, for with the Moon they shine more fully at the full, and more
dimly in the change and wain, and the male cat-doth also vary his eyes with the
Sun; for when the sun arises, the apple of his eye is long; Gillius.
toward noone it is round, and at the evening it cannot be seen at all, but
the whole eye shows alike.

The tongue of a cat is very attractiue, and forcible like a file, attenuating
by licking the Pliny.
for which cause, when she is come near to the blood, so that her own spittle
be mingled therewith, she falls mad. Her teeth are like a saw, and if the
long hairs growing about her mouth (which some call Granons) be cut away, she
loses her courage. Her nails sheathed like the nails of a Lion, striking
with her forefeete, both Dogs and other things, The game and food of cats.
as a man does with his hand.

This beast is wonderful nimble, setting upon her prey like a Lion, by
leaping: and therefore she hunteth both rats, all kind of Myce, and Birds,
eating not only them, but also fish, wherewithal she is best pleased. Having
taken a Mouse, she first plays with it, and then deuoreth it, but her
watchful eye is most strange, to see with what pace and soft steps, she takes
birds and flies; and her nature is to hide her own dung or excrements, for she
Pliny. A secret.
to smell the presence of her mortal foe.

To keep Cats from hunting of Hens, they use to tie a little wild rue under
their wings, and so likewise from Doue-coates, if they set it in the windows,
they dare not approach unto it for some secret in nature. Some have said that
cats will fight with Serpents, and Toads, Of their love and hatred
and kill them, and perceiving that she is hurt by them; she presently drinks
water and is cured: but I cannot consent unto this opinion: it being rather
true of the Weasell as shall be afterward declared. Ponzettus shows by
experience that cats and Serpents love one another, for there was (says he) in
a certain Monastery, a Cat norished by the Monks, and suddenly the most parts
of the Monks which used to play with the Cat fell

Aelianus.
Cats will also hunt Apes, and follow them to the woods, for in Egypt certain
Cattes set upon an Ape, who presently took himself to his heels and climed
up into a tree, after when the cattes followed with the same celerity and
agility: (for they can fasten their claws to the bark, and run up very
speedily:) the Ape seeing himself ouermatched with number of his adversaries,
leaped from branch to branch, and at last took hold of the top of a bough,
whereupon he did hang so ingeniously, that the Cats durst not approach unto him
for fear of falling, and so departed.

The nature of this Beast is, to love the place of her breeding, The love of
home.
neither will she tarry in any strange place, although carried very far,
being never willing to forsake the house, for the love of any man, and most
contrary to the nature of a Dog, who will travail abroad with his master;
and although their masters forsake their houses, yet will not these Beasts
bear them company, and being carried forth in close baskets or sackes, they
will yet return again or loose themselves. A Cat is much delighted to play
with Albertus. A way to make Cats keep home.
for they cannot endure to have drops of rain distill into them and therefore
keep themselves in harbor. Nothing is more contrary to the nature of a Cat,
then is wet and water, and for this cause came the Proverb that they love not
to wet their feet. It is a neat and cleanely creature, oftentimes licking her
own body to keep it smooth and fair, having naturally a flexible back for
this purpose, and washing her face with her fore feet: A coniecturall secret.
but some observe, that if she put her feet beyond the crown of her head,
that it is a presage of Their copulation.
They desire to lie soft, and in the time of their lust (commonly called
cat-wralling) they are wild and fierce, especially the males, who at that
time (except they be gelded) will not keep the house: at which time they have
a peculiar direful voice. The manner of their copulation is this, the Female
lies down and the Male stands, and their females are above measure desirous
of procreation, for which cause they provoke the male, and if he yield not to
their lust they beat and claw him, but it is only for love of young and not
for lust: Aristotle
the meal is most libidinous, and therefore seeing the female will never more
engender with him, during the time her young ones suck, he kills and eats
them if he meet Aelianus.
for when she is deprived of her young, she seeks out the male of her own
accord,) for which the female most warily keeps them from his sight. During
the time of copulation, the female continually cries, whereof the Writers give
a double cause; one, because she is pinched with the talants or claws of the
male in the time of his lustful rage, and the other, because his seed is so
fiery whot, that it almost burns the females place of conception. When they
have litered or as we commonly say kittened, they rage against Dogs, and will
suffer none to come near their young ones. The best to keep are such as are
littered in March, Choice of young Cats.
they go with young fifty days, and the females live not above six or seven
years, the males live longer especially if they be gelt or libbed: the reason
of their short life is their

They cannot abide the savor of ointments but fall mad thereby; Gillius
Caelius alu. Mundell^ Their diseases.
they are sometimes infected with the falling evil, but are cured with Gobium.
It is needelesse to spend any time about her loving nature to man, how she
flattereth by rubbing her skin against ones Legs, how she whurleth with her
voice, having as many tunes as turns, for she has one voice to beg and to
complain, another to testify her delight and pleasure, another among her own
kind by flattring, by hissing, by puffing, by spitting, insomuch as some have
thought that they have a peculiar intelligible language among themselves.
Therefore how she beggeth, plays, leapeth, looks, catches, tosseth with
her foot, rises up to strings held over her head, sometime creeping,
sometimes lying on the back, Coelius was wont to say, The hurt that comes by
the familiarity of a cat.
that being free from his Studies and more urgent weighty affairs, he was not
ashamed to play and sport himself with his Cat, and verily it may well be
called an idle man's pastime. As this beast has been familiarly nourished of
many, so have they paid dear for their love, being requiret with the loss of
their health, and sometime of their life for their friendship: and worthily,
because they which love any beasts in a high mesure, have so much the less
charity unto man.

Therefore it must be considered what harms and perils come unto men by this
beast. It is most certain that the breath and savor of cats consume the
radical humor and destroy the lungs, Ahynzoar.
and therefore they which keep their cats with them in their beds have the
air corrupted and fall into fever hectickes and consumptions. Alex, benidict.
There was a certain company off Monks much given to nourish and play with
Cattes, whereby they were so infected, that within a short space none of them
were able either to say, read,

The like may be said of the flesh of cats, ^^ cats flesh
which can sildome be free from poison, by reason of their daily food eating
Rats and Mice, Wrens and other birds which feed on Ponzettus. Alexander.
stops the animal spirits, that they cannot pass into the ventricle, by
reason whereof memory fails, and the infected person falls into a phrenzy.
The cure whereof may he this, take of the Water of sweet Marioram with Terra
lemnia the wait of a groate mingled together, and drink it twice in a month,
putting good store of spices into all your meat to recreate the spirits
withal, let him drink pure Wine, wherein put the seed of Diamoschu. But a
cat does as much harm with her venomous teeth, therefore to cure her biting,
they prescribe a good diet, sometime taking Honey, turpentine, and Oil of Roses
melt together and laid to the wound with Centory: sometime they wash the wound
with the urine of a man, and lay to it the brains of some other beast and

Mathaeolus
The hair also of a cat being eaten unawares, stops the artery and causes
suffocation: and I have heard that when a child has gotten the hair of a cat
into his mouth, it has so cloven and stuck to the place that it could not be
gotten off again, and has in that place bred either the wens or the kings
evil: to conclude this point it appears that this is a dangerous beast, and
that therefore as for necessity we are constrained to nourish them for the
suppressing of small vermin: so with a wary and discret eye we must avoid
their harms, making more account of their use then of their persons.

In Spain and Gallia Narbon, they eat cats, but first of al take away their
head and tail, and hang the prepared flesh a night or two in the open cold
air, to exhale the savor Perottus.
that he has eaten with Cats: likewise the familiars of Witches do most
ordinarily appear in the shape of cats, which is an argument that this beast
is dangerous in soul and body. It is said that if bread be made wherein the
dung of cats is mixed, it will drive away Rats and Mice. But we conclude the
story of this beast with the medicinal observations, and tarry no longer in the
breath of such a creature compounded of good and evil. It is reported that the
flesh of cats salted and sweetened has power in it to draw wens from the body,
and being warmed to cure the Hemorrhoids and pains in the raines and back,
according to the verse of vrsinus: Et lumbus lumbis praestat adesus opem.

Galenus. The medicinal virtues of a cat.
Aylsius prescribes a fat cat sod for the gout, first taking the fat, and
annoynting therewith the sick part, and then wetting Wool or Towe in the
same, and binding it to the offended place.

For the pain and blindness in the eye, by reason of any skins, Webs, or
nails, this is an approved medicine. Take the head of a black Cat, which has
not a spot of another color in it, and burn it to powder in an earthen pot
leaded or glazed within, then take this poulder and through a quill blow it
thrice a day into thy eye, and if in the night time any heat do thereby annoy
thee, take two leaves of an Oak wet in cold water and bind them to the eye,
and so shall all pain fly away, and blindness depart although it has oppressed
thee a whole year, and this medicine is approved by many Physicians both
elder and later.

The liver of a cat dried and beat to poulder is good against the stone: Galen.
the dung of a female cat with the claw of an Oule hanged about the neck of a
man that has had seven Sextus
a neezing poulder made of the gall of a black cat, and the weight of a groate
thereof taken and mingled with four crowns weight of Zambach, helps the
conuulsion and wrynesse of the mouth: Aetius. Rasis. Albertus Pliny.
and if the gall of a Cat with the black dung of the same cat, be burned in
perfume under a woman travailing with a dead child, it will cause it presently
to come forth: and Pliny says that if a pin, or thorn, or fish bone, stick
in ones mouth, let him rub the outside against it with a little cats dung, and
it will easily come forth. Given to a Woman suffering the flux, with a little
Rozen and Oil of Roses, it stays the humor; and for a Web in the eye of an
horse evening and morning, blow in the poulder of cats dung, and it shall be
cured.


ALl Cats at the beginning were Wild, and therefore some do interpret ijm.
Esaias. 34. for wild cats; and the Germans call it Bonumruter, that is, a
tree-rider, because she hunteth Birds and fowls from tree to treee. The
Spaniard calls it Gato-montes, and in some places of France it is called
chat-caretz. There are great store of them in Heluetia, especially in the
Woods, and sometime near the Waters, also being in color like tame cats but
blacker, such as in Englang is called a Poolcat. I saw one of them, which was
taken

They abound in Scandinauia, where the Linxes devour them: otherwise they are
hunted with Dogs, or shot with Gunnes, Olaus mag:
and many times the country men seeing one in a tree, does compass it about
with multitude, and when she leapeth down kill her with Neuersianus: Felemque
minacem Arboris in trunco,
Longis perfigere telis.


In the province of Malabar, these cattes live upon trees, because they are not
swift to run, but leap with such agility, that some have thought they did
fly: and verily they do fly, for they have a certain skin, which when they
lie in quiet, cleaves or shrinketh up to their bellies, but being stirred, the
same spreads from their forefeet to their hinder, like the Wing of a Bat; by
virtue whereof, they stay up themselves in the air, passing form tree to tree
like a foul: as also does the Pontique mouse, as shall be declared afterward.

Scithia and Moscouia, where their women are clothed with the furre of cats,
but especially for buskins and sleeves with their hair turned inward, not only
against cold but for medecin, against contracted sinnewes, or the gout. The
fat of this beast is reserved by some for heating, softening, and displaying
tumors in the flesh: and whatsoever Rasis or any other said of the house Cat
before in the medicinal parts, that also appertains to this, except as in
all other, so it falls forth heerin, that the virtues of the wild kind is
more effectual then the tame.

There are some among the Rhaetians and Germans, which eat the flesh heerof
accounting it delicate, having first cut off the head and tail: they cannot
abide the fume of rue, or of bitter almonds; there is nothing memorable, in the
nature of this beast that I can learn, except that which is related by Aetius,
that when men are bitten by Crocodils, this beast by a natural instinct hating
a Crocodill, will come about the wounded persons, otherwise fearing the
presence of man.

We may heerunto add the beast which is bred in Armerica called Heyratt,
spoken of by Theuetus: which name signifies a beast of Honey, and the reason
is, because it desires honey above measure, for it will climb the trees, and
coming to the caves of Bees, it will with such dexterity, take out the Honey
with their nails, that it neither hurts the Bees or receives harm by them.
It is about the bigness of a Catte, and of a Chesse-nut color.

OF THE COLVS.


The name.
THere is among the Scithians and Sarmatians a foure-footed Colus, and of some
Sulac in Latin; of the Polonians Sothac, Of the color.
of the Moscouites Seigak, of the Tartarians Akkijk and Snak, of the Turks
Akomi, being in quantity and stature betwixt a Ram and a Heart, and dusky
white colored, a miraculous (...) in her (...). ^^^bo. lib. 7.
but the young ones yellow: of a singular swiftness and celerity in course.
Her manner is to drink by the holes in her Nostrils, whereby she shuffeth up
abundance of Water and carries it in her head, so that she will live in dry
pastures remote from all moisture a great season, quenching her thirst by that
Cisterne in her head.

Of the countries of their breed.
They are most plentiful to be found in Tartaria, in Pontus, where are so many
plains Moscouia, in Podocia, Of their hunting and taking.
and about the River Neprus, and Boristhenes: they can never be taken but by
werisomnesse; wherefore if men follow them with Pipes and Timbrels, playing
upon them, they so weary themselves with leaping and running to and fro, being
compassed in by multitudes of men, that they fall down for weakness, and so
are taken. They live in flocks together, sometimes five hundred; and after
Easter in the spring, two hundred in a troop: having a Snout like a Hogs, they
endure much hunger but no cold.

In March they dig up with their Horns, a certain root, whereof they eat,
Of their procreation.
and presently their lust for generation increases unto rage; insomuch that
for satisfieng thereof they continue in that act both male and female, until
they lose al strength of body, lying half dead on the earth by the space of
24. hours, not able to go or stand: during which time, they are often taken
alive, but when they come again to themselves, they rather die then endure to
be tamed.

The flesh of them is very sweet and wholesome, they conceive and bring forth
for Craconian shillings; yet I know no other use of them, but either to make
hafts for knives, or else horns for Spectacles.

This beast lives altogether in the plains, except in snow, and then he
runs into the Woods; where he may be taken more easily, and killed with the
stroke of a Staff. Mat: michon
When the Tartarians know in what plains they lie, their King comes and with
a multitude of men compasses them and wearieth them by music as aforesaid.
All this was related to me, by one that had killed of them above two hundred
with his own hand, (says that right honorable and most learned Gentleman
Johannes Bonarus Baoron of Balszee a Polonian.)




AMong the diverse kinds of Hares, conies have the third rank, being therefore
called in Latin Lepusculi (as it were little hares) and sometime Leberidae as
it were a Leueret or young Hare, as well as Cuniculus: whereof the reason is,
that it makes holes in the earth, Strabo Or the name
for Cuniculus was a Latin word for a hole or cave in the earth, before it was
taken for a cony* Scaphan in the singular, and Schephanim in the plural Leuit.
11. and Psalm. 104. is taken in Haebrew for a cony or conies, and not for a
Hedg-hog, as the Septuaginta translate, or for a Porcaspine, although they live
also in caves and secret places of the earth; Platina. Hermolaus. Polibius
Grapaldus The etymology of the name.
and therefore Choerogrillus or Choerogillius or Choerogryllinus cannot signify
a cony: as the Septuagints translate Scaphan, but a Hedg-Hog, as the word
derived from the face of Scaphan is joined with a Hare, because it is a beast
near of kind unto it, for it is evident, that both of them chew the cud,
howsoever a cony has not a simple cloven foot into two parts. A cony also is
called Adapes, because of the roughnes of his feet; The Chaldee calls it
Thapsa, the Arabians Vebar, the Persian Beganzerah, and the Arabians following
sometime the Greek, call it Alraneb, that is, Hares. The Graecians call it
vulgarly Skele and Dasipos Couniclos, Scunax, and Lagis, Georychios a Hare
digging, living in the earth. The Italians call it conigli, the French counin;
the ^paniards coneio; the Germans, Kinnigle or Kunel, and sometime Kunlein; the
Illyrians Kralik or Krolijk.

Their count. Munsterus
There are few countries wherein conies do not breed, but the most plenty of
all is in Dicaearcha, or as it is now called Puteoli in Italy. Likewise in all
Spain, especially in those parts near unto Lombardy, Athaeneus.
whereupon Appius in Varro did write to one of his acquaintance which had
tarryed long in Spain, that he thought he was there following or hunting of
conies, because as their multitude is great, so it would ask long time to take
them. Among the Baleares are also great store of conies, Pliny.
and once they so abounded there, that the people were constraind to entreat at
the hands of Augustus, a military company of Pioners to destroy them, and when
camillus was besieging the city Veij in Italy, he learned of the conies, which
had undermined a whole city in Spain, V^rro.
likewise to take and overthrow that city by their example of undermining,
whereupon Martial said: Monstrauit tacitas hostibus ille vias. Vegetius says,
that the proverb cuniculos agere took his beginning, when one by secret
underminings and not by open violence overthrows a Town or nation. There are
also says Albertus great store of wild conies in Bohemia, so like a Hare as
one beast may be like another, save only they seem stronger, and are shorter
and lesser-which thing caused Baptista Fiera to write thus: credideram leporem
sic forma simillima fallit,
Ambo super foetant, dente vel aure pares.
Pet. Matyr likewise affirms in his Ocaean Decades, that in curiana a region
of the new found world, are conies for color, quantity, and hair, like
Hares, which the inhabitants call Vitias, Their parts and members.
and there are two little Islands caled cuniculariae, which seem to be
denominated of corsica and Sardinia. For their several parts, they are most
like unto a Hare, except in their head and tail which is shorter, and their
color which is always brighter, Agricola. Aelianus. The use of their skins
crescennensis
and less brown and sandy: or else sometimes conies are white, black, gryseld,
tauny, bluish, yellow-spotted, ash-colored, and such like. And Alysius says,
that in some places, they are also green, and their skins are of great use
through the world, especially in all the North and East for garments, facings,
and linings. The gray and yellowish are the worst, but the white and black are
more precious, especially of the English, if the black be aspersed with some
white or silver hairs: and in their use the Buckes are most durable, yet
heavier and harsher. The belly is most soft, gentle, and easy, and therefore
more The use of their flesh. Pliny.
although of less continuance. Their flesh is very white and sweet, especially
of the young ones, being about fourteen or twenty days old, and some have
devised a cruel delicate meat, which is to cut the young ones out of the dams
belly, and so to dress and eat them, but I trust there is no man among
christians so inhumanely gluttonous, as once to devise or approve the sweetness
of so foul a dish: but the tame ones are not so good, for in Spain, they will
not eat of a tame cony, because every creature does partake in taste of the
air, wherein he lives, and therefore tame conies which are kept in a close and
unsweet air, by reason of their own excrementes, cannot taste so well, or be
so wholesome as those which run wild in the mountains and fields, free from
all infection of evil air,

They love above all places the rocks, and make Dens in the earth, The
places of their abod
and whereas it is said, Psalm. 104. that the stony rocks are for the cony, it
is not to be understood as though the feet of the cony could pierce into the
rock, as into the earth, and that she diggeth her hole therein as in looser
ground; but that finding among the rocks holes, already framed to her hand, or
else some light earth mingled therewith, she more willingly enters thereinto,
as being more free from rain and floods then in lower and softer ground: for
this cause they love also the hills and lower grounds and woods where are no
rocks, as in England

In their copulation they engender like Elephants, Tigres, and Linxes, that is,
Their copulation and procreation. Tho. Gypson.
the male leapeth on the back of the female, their privy parts being so framed
to meet one another behind, because the females do render their urine backward:
their secrets and the seed of the male are very small. They begin to breed in
some countries, being but six months old, but in England at a year old, and
so continue bearing every month, at the least seven times in one year, if
they litter in March, but in the winter they do not engender at al; and
therefore the authors say of these and Hares, that they abound in procreation,
by Tho. Gypson.
at the least for six hours after she cannot suckle them, greatly desiring to
go to the Bucke, and if she be not permitted presently, she is so far
displeased, that she will not be so inclined again for 14. days after.

I have bin also credibly informed by one that kept tame conies, that he had
Does which littered three at a time, and within fourteen days after, they
littered four more. Their ordinary number in one litter is five, and sometimes
nine, but never above: and I have seen that when a Do has had nine in her
belly, two or three of them have perished and been oppressed in the womb by
suffocation. The males will kill the young ones, if they The cruelty of the
males and of some females.
covering the nest or litter with gravel or earth, that so they may not be
discovered: there are also some of their females very unnatural, not caring
for their young ones, but suffer them to perish, both because they never provide
a warm littour or nest for them, as also because they forsake them being
littered, or else devour them. For the remedy of this evil, he that loves to
keep them for his profit, must take them before they be delivered, and pull
off the hair or flesh underneath their belly, and so put it upon their nest,
that when the young one comes forth, it may not perish for cold, and so the
dam will be taught by experience of pain to do the like herself: Thus far
Thomas Gypson an English physician. For Conies you may give them Vine-leaues,
Fruits, Herbs, Grass, Bran, Their meat and food
Oatmell, Mallows, the parings of Apples; likewise Cabadges, Apples
themselves, and the danger in their meat and drink
oats and chafe, being given to them thrice a day: when they eat greenes they
must not drink at all, for if they do, it is hazard but they will incur the
Dropsy: and at other times they must for the same cause drink but little, and
that little must be always fresh. It is also dangerous to handle their young
ones, in the absence of the dam, for her jealousy will easily perceive it,
which causes her so to disdain the^, that either she biteth, forsakes, or
kills them. Foxes will of their own acord hunt both Hares and conies, to kill
and eat them. Albertus the medicines in a Cony.


Touching their medicinal properties, it is to be observed that the brain of
conies has Marcellus says. The fat is good against the stopping of the
bladder and difficulty of urine being anointed at a fire upon the hairy place
of the secrets (as Alex. Benedictus affirms.) Other things, I omit concerning
this beast, because as it is vulgar, the benefits thereof are commonly known.

Of the Indian little Pig-Cony.


I Received the picture of this Beast from a certain Nobleman, my loving
friend in Paris, whose parts it is not needful to describe, seeing the image
it self is perspicuous and easy to be observed. The quantity of this beast
does not exceed the quantity of a vulgar Coney, but rather the body is
shorter, yet fuller, as also I observed by those two, which that noble and
learned Physician Ioh. Munzingerus sent me. It has 2.

Their flesh is sweet for meat, of a yellowship color, like the Lard of Swine,
and therefore not so white as is our vulgar Cony: they do not dig like other
Coneys, and for the Munzingerus aforesaid; for thus he writes.

ONe of the males is sufficient in procreation for seven or nine of the
females, and by that means they are made more fruitful, but if you put them one
male to one femal, then will the venereous salacity of the male procure
abortment. It is affirmed, that they go threescore days with young before they
litter, and I saw of late one of them bear 8. at one time in her womb, but
three of them were stifled. They bring forth in the winter, and their whelps
are not blind as are the conies. They are no way so harmefull as other Peter
Martyr, whose nature except in their abundant suprefaetation comes nearer to
Hogs then Conies.

OF THE FALLOW DEAR, commonly called a Bucke and a Do.


THere are some beasts (says Pliny) which nature has framed to have horns
grow out of their head, like fingers out of a hand, and for that cause they are
called Platicerotae: the name.
such is this vulgar fallow Dear, being therefore called ceruus palmatas, that
is a palmed Heart, by reason of the similitude the horn has with the hand and
fingers. The Germans call this beast Dam, and Damlin, and Damhirtz. The
Italians Daino, and Danio; the French, Dain, and Daim. The Spaniards Gamo, and
Cortza; the Craecians vulgarly at this day Agrimi, and Platogna, and Aristole
Prox: The Latins Dama, Gaza
and Damula, becuse ( ae manu) that is, it quickly flies from the hand of man,
having no other defense but her heels; and the female proca, and the Polonians
Lanij. It is a common beast in most countries, being as corpulent as a Heart,
but in quantity resembles more a Roe, except in color.

(...).
The males have horns which they loose yearly, but the females none at al:
their color diverse, but most commonly branded, or sandy on the back, like
the furrow of a new plowed field, having a black struck down all along the
back, a tail almost as long as a Calves, their bellies and sides spotted with
white, which spots they loose in their old age, and the females do especially
vary in color, being sometimes all white, and therefore like unto Goats,
except in their hair which is shorter. The horns of this beast are carried
about every where to be seen, and therefore this is also likely to be the same
beast which Aristotle called Hippelaphus as some would have it; yet I rather
think that Hippelaphus was like to that rare seen horse which Francis the
first of that name king of France, had presented unto him for a gift: What
Hippelaphus is
which was engendered of a horse and a Heart, and therefore can Hippelaphus,
signifieng a Horsse-hart.

In the blood of these kind of Dear are not strings or Fibers, wherefore it
does not congeale as other does, Aristotle A secret in the blood.
and this is assigned to be one cause of their fearful nature; they are also
said to have no gall: in their horns they differ not much from a Hearts
(except in quantity) and for their other parts they much resemble a Roe-bucke:
their flesh is good for nourishment, but their blood does increase above
measure melancholy, which caused Hiera to write thus of it, after his discourse
of the Roe.

Damula aduslam^gis si matris ab vbere repta est,
Haic prio^ in nostro forte erit orbelecus:
For the preparation or dressing of a Bucke, we shall say more when we come to
the description Albertus translateth the word Algazell a fallow Dear, and
says that the flesh thereof is very hurtful, being cold and dry and brings
the Hemmorhoides if it be not well seasoned with Pepper, Cinnamon, mustard
seed, and honey, or else Garlic, which caused Iuuenall to cry out upon the
excess of richmen for their feasts and delicate fare, being compared with the
ancients which lived upon fruits, in these words following as they are left in
his eleventh Satyr.

Olmi ex quauis arbore mensa fiebat,
At nunc diuitibus caenandi nulla voluptas:
Nil Rhombus nil dama sapit putere videntur
Vnguentum atque rosae, etc.
The dung or fime of this Beast mingled with oil of Myrtles, increases hair,
and amendeth Of the medicines
If the tongue hereof be perfumed under a leech or ticke that sticks in the
throat of man or beast, it causes the leech to fall off presently; and the
powder of such a tongue helps in a Fistula, some of the late writers do
prescribe the fat of a moul, of a Dear, and of a Bear mingled together to rub
the head withal for increase of memory.

Of the second kind of Dear the ROE-BVCKE.
THere is so great difference among writers about the name of this beast, that
The several names.
or observe by my self. To begin The representation both of Male and Female.
therefore with the Haebrew as the fountain of all the residue, they call it
Zebi, and the feminin hereof Zebiah, and therefore in Deuteronomy. 14, it is permitted
to the Jews to eat: and the plural of the Masculine is Zebaim, and of the
feminine Zebaoth. Thabia, which in the Acts of the Apostles cap. 9. is called
Tabitha, and is interpreted Dorcas, a Roe: and sure it is probable that the
Haebrewes so call a Roe, because of the outward beauty thereof, being full of
spots upon a ground or skin of another color, showing with great delight
pleasant to the beholders, which caused Martial to write this Disticon;
Delitium paruo donabis dorcada nato,
Iactatis solet hanc mittere turba togis.
The Persians call this beast Ahu. The Arabians, Thabiu, which comes near to
the chaldee word, the Germans Reeh or Rech, and the male Rech-bocke, and the
female Rech-geise The Illyrians Serna or Sarna; the French Chireau, and
eheureulsauuage. The Spaniard, Zorito, or cabronzillo-montes, the Italians
capriolo, and cauriolo for the male, and capriola, and cauriola for the female.

The Graecians Dorcas as the Septuagints do every where translate, which Strabo
terms corruptly Zorces, also Dorx Kemas, Nebrous, and vulgarly at this day
Zarkadi; and Dorcalis Dorcadion, for a little Roe. The Latins do also use the
word Dorcas in common with the Graecians, and beside caprea and capreolus for
a little Goat, for I do not think that any learned man, can find any
difference betwixt caprea and capreolus, The reason of the latin name.
except in age and quantity. The reason of these two latter names is, because
of the likeness it has with a Goat, for Goats as we shall show in their
description have many kinds distinguished from one another in resemblaunce, but
in the horns a Roe does rather resemble a Heart, for the female have no horns
at all.

These beasts are most plentiful in Affricke, beyond the Sea of carthage, but
they are of another kind then those which Aristotle denied to be in Africa:
there are also in Egypt, Auicen. The Countries breeding Roes. Marcellus
Albertus. Pliny. Strabo Their nature and several parts.
and in Germany, and in the Heluetian Alps. Likewise in catadupa beyond Nilus,
in Arabia, in Spain, and in Lycia: and it is to be observed that the Lycian
Roes do never go Aelianus does deliver these things of the Lybian Roes,
which for the color and parts of their body may seem to belong to all. They
(says he) are of an admirable velocity or swiftnes, but yet inferior to the
Lybian horses, their belly is parted with black strakes and drops, and the
other parts of their body are of a red yellowish color, they have long feet,
but longer ears, their eyes black, and their horns are an ornament to their
heads.

Their swiftness does not only appear upon the earth but also upon the
Waters, for with their feet they cut the waters when they swim as with oars;
and therefore they love the lakes and strong streams, breaking the floods to
come by fresh pasture, as sweet rushes and Bul-rushes. Their horns grow only
upon the males, and are set with six or seven branches, S^^rpsius
but the females have none, and therefore also they differ in horn from the
fallow-deere: so as they cannot be called Platycerotae, for their Horns are
not palmed like a hand, Albertus
and although they be branchy, yet are they shorter: they differ not much from
the common Dear, but in their horn: and whereas the horns of other beasts
are hollow toward the root, whereunto enters a certain bony substance, the
horns of these (as also of the vulgar Bucke and the Elke) are solid, without
any such emptiness; only, they Pliny. P^^^anias. Vi^ll^^us. E^^chach. Of
their eie-sight.
It has also been believed, that a Roe does not change her horns, because
they are never found; whereas in truth, they fall off yearly as does a Hearts,
but they hide them, to the intent they should not be found.

It has likewise been thought, a Roe was called in Greek Dorcas, because of
the quicknes of her sight, Origin super ca^t. Tex^or.
and that she can see as perfectly in the night as in the day; and not only
for her self, but the learned Physicians have observed, a certain viscous
humor about her bowels, which being taken forth and anointed upon a man's
eyes, which are dark, heavy, pliny.
and near blind, it has the same effect to quiken his eie-sight. It is also
said of them that they never wink, no not when they sleep, for which conceit,
their blood is prescribed for them that are pur-blind. The tail of this beast
is shorter and lesser then is the fallow-Deeres, Cardanus


The place of their aboade
They keep for the most part in the Mountains among the rocks, being very
swift, and when they are pursued by Dogs, ( Martial says) they hang upon the
rocks by their horns to deceive the dogs, after a strange manner ready to fall
and kill themselves, and yet have no harm, whether the Dogs dare not approach
as appears in this Epigram: Pendentem summa capream de rupe videbis
Casuram speres, decipit illa cones:
yet this does better agree with the wild Goat then with the Roe, as shall be
manifested in due time.

Their concord with other beasts Columello
Aelianus says, that the Cynoprosopy, men with Dogs faces live upon the flesh
of Roes and Bugles, in the wilderness of Egypt: and also it is usual to
conclude them in Parks, Varro bought of Piso, it was seen how at the sound of
a Trumpet, both Roes and Boares, would come to their usual places for meat:
and although they be naturally very wild, yet will they quickly grow tame and
familiar to the hand of man, for Blondus did nourish many at Rome. Being wild
they are hunted with Dogs, shot with Guns, taken in nets, of their taking.
but this falls out sildome, because they live most among the rocks.

They are most easily taken in the woods. When they are chased, they desire to
run against the wind, because the coldness of the air refreshes them in
their course, and therefore they which hunt them place their Dogs with the
wind, for sometimes against the hunters minds, Bellisarius
do what they can to the contrary, she takes her course that way: but

Cresconius The use of their flesh.
They are very good meat (as Philostratus affirms) and that the Indians
dress at their feasts whole Lions and Roes for their ghests to eat, and the
Sophists in their banquet which is described by Athaeneus, had Roes therein: and
therefore Fiera prefers it before the fallow-deere, alleging the agreement
that is betwixt it and the body of man, being dressed according to Art.

Hic optata feret nobis fomenta calore, Simion Sethi Auicenna. Tr^^^anus

Vda leui modicis mox que coquenda focis.
And therefore also affirms, that it excels all wild beasts whatsoever,
being not Timpanie, and therefore they are best at a year old or under.
Likewise, their broth with Pepper, Loueage, seed of Rue, Parsley, Honey,
Mustardseed and Oil; Apicius
and for sauce to the meat they take Pepper, Rue, Honey melted, and an onyon:
sometime also they sees the hanches or hippes, and make Pasties of the sides
and ribs. It is a Beast full of fear, and therefore the flesh thereof
although it be very dry; Of the disposition and passion.
yet will it engender some melancholy; of the fear Martial says thus: Tam
despar aquilae columba non est.
Hec dorcas rigido fugar leoni.
As the Dove from the Eagle, and the Roe from the Lion, which afterward grew
unto a Proverb. It has also some Epethets among Authors, which do confirm
their disposition full of fear: as flying, weak, wanton, and such like; yet
will they fight one with another so fiercely, that sometime they kill each
other.

They fear also the Wolfes, whereof came the proverb, Their enemies in nature.
that first of all the Roes will Diana, for the Saphriae Women in Patras, did
lay upon her great altar whole Hearts, Bores, Roes and other beasts alive: and
the Coptitae did eat the Males; Sacrifices of Roes.
but religiously worshipped the females, not daring to eat them, Pausanias.
Aelianus
because they believed that Isis loved them dearly.

Of these Beasts came the Islands Capreae beyond Surrentum into Campania, where
Tiberius had a famous Castle, and was ennobled by his presence; but since the
decay thereof, it is now celebrated for the multitude of quails that are found
therein. The medicines arising from a Roe. Marcellus


The remedies or medicines coming from this Beast are these: first, the flesh
of them eaten, is good against all pains in the small guts, for it dries and
stays the belly. Pliny Hiaena, and seven hairs thereof with the genitall of
a Heart, betyed in a piece of a Roes skin, and hanged about a Woman's neck, it
makes that her womb shall suffer no abortements; but these things are
triuiall, and not to be believed but at pleasure. I know that the tail of a
Dragon tied to the Nerves of a Heart in a Roes skin, the sewet of a Roe with
Goose-grease, the marrow of a Heart and an onyon, with Rozen and running lime,
do wonderfully help the falling evil, (if it be made into a plaster.)

Sextus says, that if one give the brain of a Roe drawn or pressed through a
ring to Hypocrates did prescribe, it must be kept in a silver pipe or box.

For the tingling of the ears, take with this gall the Oil of Roses, with the
juice of an Onyon beaten together, and instilled warm into the ears for a
present remedy: so also, with the oil of Roses only, it helps the pain in
the teeth, and with the honey atticke, all swellings and pains in the jaws or
chappes, putting thereto Myrrh, saffron, Sextus
and Pepper. The same gall with a little hoggs-bread, and the poulder of burnt
Alumme with Anyse seed, made into a suppository, procures loosenes, if the
party have not the Hemerrhoides.

Also the gaull taken with honey and the juice of Eglantine, Aetius.
cures the exulceration of the virile member by annoynting it. The Spleen
being drunk, helps windiness, and

Against the laundise they take the dung of a Roe dried and sifted, and drink
it in wine: Galen.
the same also so drunk, cures the Ague: and because the Roe-bucke does
wonderfully love his female, there be some that affirm, that if a woman eat
the bladder of a Roe, it will likewise make her husband to love her exceedingly.

OF THE FIRST KIND OF TRAGElaphus which may be called a Deere-goate.


Plinyus.
THere is another kind so like a Dear (although conceived of a Bucke-Goate and
a female Heart) that I cannot but express the figure and brief narration
thereof in this place. of the generation of this beast.
It is like a Dear (except the beard and the bristles growing about the
shoulders) and Pliny affirms that they are found about the river Phasis, in
Arabia and Arachotae, which is a City of India so called of Arachotus a river
issuing from Caucasus which the Tragelaphos, Athenaeus The countries of this
beast and the name heerof.
and the Germans ein Brandhirse, and some think this beast to be mentioned by
the name of Ako in Deuteronomy. 14. This doubtless is the same beast which Aristotle
calls Hippelaphus, because he attributes the self same things to it that
Pliny ascribes to this, both for the beard, the bristles, and deep hair
about the shoulders, which hangs down like the mane of a horse.

The similitude both in proportion and quantity holds with a Heart in the
feet which are cloven, and that the female thereof does want horns. The
horns of the male are like the horns of a Roe. Therefore howsoever some have
imagined that there is no such Beast to be found in the world, they are rather
to be pitied then confuted, for it is not to be doubted, that neither the
ancients nor other ever have seen all the diverse and maruailous shapes of
Beasts, which are to be found in many remote and far distant places of the
world, especially in Arabia and India, where are many deserts; and therefore
the reason why they affirm this, is because they never saw any such, and so it
is to be understood: for the rare pictures of these beasts called in ancient
time Canathra, Zenophon. Plutarch. Coelius
whereupon children were Georgius Fabritius which sent me this Picture, does
among other things write unto me very probably that this kind is only
distinguished from other inform, name, and strength, and not in kind: and this
being more strange and less known among men, was called by the Graecians
Tragelaphus, being greater then the vulgar Dear, deeper haired, and blacker in
color, Of the parts.
and this (says he) is taken in the ridings or forests of Misena, bordering
upon Bohemia, and the common sort of hunters hold opinion, that by reason it
loves to lie where Coals are made, Of the countries of this beast.
and in their dust, feeding upon such grass as grows in those places, that
therefore the Germans call it Brandhtrze, and so the Foxes which resemble them
in color, are called Brandfusche.

It is for certain that these are greater and stronger then Hearts, Agricola Of
their strength and color.
their upper part of the back being black, and the nether near the belly
not White (as in a Heart) but rather blackish; but about his genitals very
black. I have seen the horns to have seven spires or branches, growing out
of one of them, being palmed at the top. These are like to those which are
called Achaeines in Greek, by reason of their pain and sorrow: and Kummerer
in Germane, by cause they live in continual sorrow for their young ones, while
they are not able to run out of their dens, belike fearing by some instinct
of nature, A secret in their pa^sion.
least their tender and weak age, should betray them to the hunters, before
they be able to run

THE FIGVRE OF ANOTHER Tragelaphus or Deere-goate, expressed by BELLONIVS.
THere is another Tragelaphus (says he) whereof I find no name among the
French: it wants a beard, The description of his several parts.
and the Hair thereof resembles an Ibex-goate (whose description follows
afterward among Goats:) the horns hereof are like a Goats, but more crooked
and bending, compassing behind Pygargus, or Musmon, of which I shall speak
afterward.

John Cay, which as he writes unto me, was brought in the year 1561. out of
the Country of Mauritania, which was clouen-footed and lives for the most
part in the Mountain parts of that Country, being in quantity betwixt a
fallow-deere and a Heart, the body more like a Heart, and the side branded and
hanging down: a shorter and thick neck, the color in the Winter black, and
red, set one with A secret in the hoof.
and contrary in the hinder: and the inward cloue thereof is longer and
greater, and the outward smaller and shorter, so as on either side you would
think one of them was the hoof of a Goat, and the other of a Heart, both of
them hollow and without soales; whereof I can give no other reason, then the
pleasure of nature, which has so provided, that whereas this beast lives
among the rocks, and sharp places of the Mountains, his foote-steps are by
his hollow hoofes more firm and stable, because by that means, the stones and
sharp pointed rocks enters into them to stay them up from slyding: but it is
more strange in the females hoofes, for they have upon the top and upper face
of them three or four pleasant impressions (as it were of carved or imbrodered
flowers, if a man mark them earnestly,) which I think are given unto them only
for

Either sex loose every year their hoofes, and Hearts do their Horns, that
nature may show their resemblance in their feet to a Heart, as he does in their
head to a Goat. His ear is short like a Goats, but his eye, genitall, stones,
and tail, like a Hearts, though somewhat shorter. The horns like a Rams,
crooked and distinguished in the middle, by a black line all their length,
which is two Roman feet and one finger, and in compass at the root, one
foot, one palm, and a half, standing one from another, where they differ most
not above one foot, three palms, one finger and a half. The rugged circles
going about them, toward the top are bunchy, and toward the bottom or root
they are low, with beaten notches or impressions.

Their quantity in length and breadth.
They are not at the top distant one point from another, above one foot and a
palm. The length of their face, from the Crown to the tip of the Nose, one
foot, and three fingers: the breadth in the forehead where it is broadest, two
palms and one finger.

The height of this beast not above three foot and a half, except where his
mane stands, and the whole length here of from the crown of the head to the
tail is four feet and a half and two fingers.

It has only teeth beneath on the nether chap, and those in number not above
six, neither did I observe any defect in them. It cheweth the cud like other
clouen-footed beasts. The Nostrils are black, from whom the upper lip is
divided by a long perpendicular line. It is a gentle, pleasant and wanton
beast, in the disposition, Of the description of this beast.
rather resembling a Goat then a Heart, desiring the steepest and slipperyest
places whereon it leapeth, and from whence (it is reptored) that it does cast
down it self headlong upon the horns naturally, that by them it may break
the violence of his fall or leap, and then stays his body upon the
sore-knees.

It will run apace, but it is most excellent in leaping, for by leaping it
ascends the highest Mountains and rocks. The females are greater then the
males, but not in Barbary-Deere. Thus far Doctor Cay.




THe male of this beast is called in Haebrew Ajal Deuteronomy. 14. The names of a Heart.
and the Arabians do also retain that word in their translations, the
Persians call him Geuazen, the Septuagints Elaphos, the Graecians at this day
Laphe Pelaphe, and Saint Ierom for the Latins Ceruus, the Chaldees Aielah, the
Italians Ceruo, the Spaniards Cieruo, the French Cerf, the Germans Hirtz of
Hirs and Hirsch, the Plimmings Heart, the Polonians Gelen, Ielijelij. The female
or Hind likewise termed in Haebrew Aial, and sometime Alia and Aielet, The
names of a Hind
the Latins and Italians Cerua, the Spaniards, Cierua the Germans Hind and
Hindin, and the Germans more specially Hin and Wilprecht, the French Biche,
and the Polonians Lanij. The young faunes or calfes of this Beast they call in
Latin Hinnuli, the Graecians Anebros, the Haebrewes Ofer, the Germans
Hindcalb. The nams of a hinde-calfe


Also it is not to be forgotten, that they have diverse other names to
dinstinguish their years and countries, as for example: when they begin to
have horns, which appear in the second year of their age like Bodkins
without branches, which are in Latin called Subulae, Aristotle. Pliny. O^
Spittards and Subulous.
they are also called Subulones for the similitude they have with bodkins, and
the Germans call such an one Spirzhirtz which, in English is called a Spittard,
and the Italians corbiati, but the french have no proper name for this beast
that I can learn until he be a three yearing, and then they call him ( ein
Gabler) which in Latin are called Furcarij. And indeed I was once of this
opinion that these Subulones were only two-yearing Hearts, Sauoyen of Segusium,
Of Brocardes.
who did assure me from the mouths of men traind up in hunting wild beasts from
their youth, that there are a kind of Subulones which they call also Brocardi
with straight and vnforked horns except one branch, in the mountain of Iura
near the lake Lemanus, and that these also do live among other Hearts, for
there was seen near a monastry called the Roman Monastery by certain
hunters, in the year 1553. a vulgar Heart with branched horns, and his female,
and likewise with a Subulon or Brocarde, which when in pursuit he was
constrained to leap from rock to rock, to get to the Water, he brake his
leg and so was taken. These Brocards are as great in quantity as other vulgar
Hearts, The quantity of Brocards.
but their bodies are leaner and they swifter in course.

Of their horns.
They have but one branch growing out of the stem of their horn, which is not
bigger then a man's finger, and for this cause in the rutting time, when they
join with their Brocard the shield-bearer to the residue, for by him they are
deliuerd being hunted: for whereas it is the nature of the vulgar Heart, to get
into ditches, and hide himself in hollow places when he hears the hounds,
this beast never coueteth any secret place to cover himself, but runs still
in the sight of dogs, who leave the other that hide themselves, because they
keep this on foot: and so when the hunters are passed by the lurking hearts,
they return back again, being safe both from nets and dogs, while the poor
Brocard is chased unto death.

These being old, are also known by their teeth and horns, for they never
change them, Brocard, except they be constraind, and as it were ravished
against their will, from whence it comes that they are so rare and seldom
bred: their flesh is much sweeter then the vulgar hearts.

The figure of the face and horns.
I have therefore here expressed the figure of the head of this beast with
his horns, which is also called Anamynta or a Burgundian Brocard, whose horns
are at the longest about

The reason why I call this Burgundian heart or Subulon Anamynta, is because it
not only wants the manifold branches of vulgar Hearts, but that also which
is called Amynta.

There are another sort of Hearts called Achaini bred in Creet near Achaea,
Aristotle. Of the Achaian hearts.
whereas in all other parts of creet there are no Hearts, whereof it is affirmed
by Gaza that there was one of them which had a bough of green Iuy growing in
his horns, it was coniectured that when it was young, some sprig of that Iuy
was taken in a slifter of the horn, Gaza. a miracle in the horn of this
beast. Athaeneus.
which by reason of some nourishment it found in the horn natural to that tree
being like a rockye substance, it there grew to more perfection. These are also
called Spathenae, although that term be also given unto vulgar Hearts to
signify their full age, yet some are of opinion that this Achaenie Heart was
but an invention or figment made in bred, for there was in ancient time a kind
of loaf called Achaines in the likeness of a Heart.

John The picture of another face and horns.
Cay, another head out of England which he coniectureth to be the head of the
palmed Bucke, as it was called by Julius capitolinus, which I do not take to
differ from the fallow Deer: and yet because this seems to be of the most
excellent kind, I have thought good to express it in this place, being far
different from all other horns of this kind of Beasts, and more

Hearts are bred in most countries, Of the regions breeding Hearts. Solinus.
but the ancients do celebrate and prefer those of Britain before other,
where they are of diverse colors both white and black, as Pausanias affirms.
In Oedor a region of Asia, toward the Northern Ocaean, they ride upon Hearts;
likewise there are ^arts in Scythia: and the people called Meditae which are
subject to the kings of Tartaria, creet except in the region of the cydonites*
there are also in the woods of Helvetia, but not so many as in time past
because Democraties do not nourish game and pleasures like unto Monarchies, and
therefore they are daily killed by the vulgar sort, there being no law against
it.

The Hearts of Hellespont, and about Arginussa have one of their ears slit or
cut asunder, Aelianus. Aristotle A secret in the ears of Hearts. Amianus. A
hystory.
by nature in their dams belly, and therefore they never go over the Mountains
into other Dora in Assiria, near the banks of Euphrates, where are many
flocks of Hearts, of whom many times some are slain with Darts, and others as
they swim away to their accustomed solitudes are oppressed in the water by the
weight of Oars, and so taken. They are for the most part sand-coloured, and
intermingled with some white spots, especially the Hinds and their calves, and
sometimes milk-white, Pollux. Varinus. Of the color. Aristotle Buellius,
Philostratus. a history. Plutarch. Gellius.
which happens unto them by some defect in their nourishment before they be
calued: and for natural imbecility, so have I seen white Bears, Hares,
Quails, Partridges, and Swallows.

When Appolonius and his Colleagues traveled by Paraca a city of India, they
suddenly heard a noise like the sound of a pipe, and while they looked about to
see what it signified, Sertorius that Noble Captain, whereby he led his army,
as they were persuaded by it, who affirmed that it was a Spanish Prophet or
wizard given to him by a certain Lusitanian whom he took in an Island of
Portugal; saying moreover that she was inspired by Diana, and that she had
authority from that Goddess to admonish him, and make the hearts of his
soldiers cleave fast unto him, and therefore if at any time he miscarried in
his proceedings, he could easily pacify them from mutinies, in saying; that
his heart set him upon that enterprise, so putting off the fault cunningly from
himself to the beast for fear of defection, wherefore also these were used in
the Bacchanals of Cracouia, and their flesh being softer, is peculiarly termed
by the French Venaison. Of their horns, and the beauty of them.
These do excel all other in the beauty of horns, which are very high, yet
grow they not to their bones or skalps, but to their skin, branching forth into
many spieres, being solid throughout, and as hard as stones, and fall off once
every year, but if they remain abroad in the air, where some wind and rain
fall upon them, so as now they are wet, and anon dry again, they grow as light
as any vanishing or softer substance Amynterai, and the Latins Adminicula,
because they first come forth: and I have heard that there were Hearts horns in
an Apothicaries shop of Antwerp, which had every one fifteen branches upon
one stem, which if it be true, it goes beyond al experience. Every year in
the month of April they loose their horns, and so having lost them, The time
of loosing their horns. Pliny.
they hide themselves in the day time, inhabiting the shadowy places, to avoid
the annoyance of flies, and feed only during that time in the night. Their new
horns come forth like bunches at the first, and afterward by the increase of
the Suns heat, they grow more hard, covered with a rough skin, which the
hunters for honors sake call a Velvet head, and as that skin dries, they
daily try the strength of their new head upon Morchi and Kolben: these being
taken from the beast are accounted among great noble men a delicate dish of
meat. Cyprius is said to have a Heart with four horns, Aeliaenus a history of
a Heart with 4. horns.
which was called Nicocreos, and by him dedicated to Apollo, which I do
therefore remember in this place, because it is seldom seen that a Heart can
bear naturally above two horns. Authors do generally affirm, that when a Heart
Procles their Tyrant, the Oracle answered that he should go to that place where
Hearts cast their horns: whereby it was gathered, that he should be slain and
buried in the earth, and this caused the proverb: Vbi cerui abijciunt cornua,
to signify a desperate business: yet could it not be agreed, whether the Heart
make more account of his right horn or his left, and therefore Aristotle
affirms, Whether the right or left horn be most precious.
that the left horn is never found; and Pliny, that the right horn is never

This difference may be reconciled with ease, for right and left are so termed
for three causes, or three manner of ways. First, properly in all creatures,
according to the beginning of motion. Secondly, for similitude or likeness,
as the right and left side of Images, statues, etc. Thirdly, improperly when
the right side of one thing stands against the left side of another, being
opposite, as when two men stand face to face, and by this reason may the left
horn of Aristotle, and the right horn of Pliny signify all one thing: but we
know that the horns of hearts are found yearly both in fields and woods.

The wild Hearts of Sarmatia near Turkey, have the greatest horns of all
other, Of the horns of Turkey Hearts.
for it has been proved that one pair of them have waighed forty pounds Troy
weight and above: and there they loose their horns in March, neither do they
fall off together, but first one, and then the other, and after there first
falling, it is manifest that a certain worm gets on them and makes upon
them many circles and little furrows whereby the root or basis being
weakened, the horn grows very white in that place, Bonarus
and yet not without some apperaunce of blood remaining which cleaves to it,
from the first falling off: for, when the head of this Beast is disarmed, there
yssueth blood from the scul, and in Orus The reasons why Hearts and Dear loose
their horns yearly.
the horns are perfect, and therefore the Egyptians to describe a
long-liued-man, picture a Heart loosinge his horns every year and new coming
in their place. If any man be desirous to know the reasons, why only beasts of
this kind loose their horns in this manner, I will not spare my pains to set
down the best which Authors have rendered for this wonder of nature.

First, because of the matter whereof they consist, for it is dry and earthy
like the substance of green leaves, which fall off yearly, wanting glewing or
holding moisture to continue Democritus and other (as Gillius and Aelianus)
give other reasons, but because they seem to be far fetched, I will omit them.
A natural secret of gelded Dear. Aristotle. Pliny. Solinus.
Yet by Caesar, Maximilian, and Zenodotus, who affirm upon their knoledge that
hinds in some countries have horns like the males: as likewise it is observed
in the Elephants of India, and for this cause the Poets expressed the hind
which nourished Telephus with horns, and that which Hercules took with Golden
horns, and it is for certain, that in Ethyopia and Lybia, both sexes have
horns.

The face of this beast is fleshy, his Nostrils flat, and his neck very long;
his ears, The several parts.
some greater, and some smaller, but in the mount Elaphus and Hellespont, they
are slit. It is observed, Aristotle.
wherewith they grind their meat, and besides two other much greater in the
male then in the female, and they bend downward to bite withal. Aristotle.
All these beasts have worms in their heads bred underneath their tongue in a
hollow place, where the neck-bone is joined to the head, which are not bigger
then such as Flies blow in rotten flesh. They are engendered together one with
another, and they are in number twenty, as some would have it, but I was given
to understand by one that saw a head of this beast dissected, wherein were
many more Worms, and not contained in one place, but spread all over the

The breast is by the Frenchmen called peculiarly Hampan, his blood is not like
other beasts, for it has no Fibers or small veins in it, and therefore it is
hardly congealed. His heart is very great, as it so falls out in all
fearful beasts, having in it a bone like a a cross as shall be afterward
manifested. His belly is not of one fashion as it falls out in all other
which chew the cud.

He has no gall, which is one cause of the length of his life, and therefore
also are his bowels so bitter that the Dogs will not touch them, except they
be very fat. The Achaian Hearts are said to have their gall in their tails, and
other say that Hearts have a gal in their ears. Aristotle pl^n^.
The Hearts of Briletum and Tharne have their raines Quadrupled or foure-fould.
The genitall part is all neruy, the tail small, and the Hind has vdders
betwixt her thighs with four speanes like a cow. Of their dis^osi^ion. Pli^y.
A s^c^et to cu^^ poison.
Both male and female are woonderfully swift and subtle as shall be showed in
the discourse of their hunting. They are also apt and cunning to swim, although
in their swimming they see no land, yet do they wind it by their noses. They
chew the cud like other beasts. It is reported that when a Heart is stung
Elaphoscum: (that is, as some call it Hearts eye, others Hart-thorne, or grace
of God, others wild Ditany,) it presently cures the wound and expels the
poison; the same virtue they attribute to Polypodye, against the wound of a
Dart.

of their food ^^agus
Having thus entered into mention of their food, it is to be farther observed,
that the males of this kind will eat Dwall or nightshade which is also called
Deathes-hearbe, and they also love above all other food wild Elder, so as in
the Summer time they keep for the most part in those places where these
plants grow, eating the leaves only, and not the boughs or sprigs: a secret
in the Hind How Hearts draw serpe^ts out of their holes and wherefore they eat
and devour the^.
but the Hind will eat neither of both, except when she bears a male in her
belly, and then also by secret instinct of nature, she feeds like a male.
They will also eat Serpents, but whether for hatred to them, or for medicine
they receive by them, it is questionable. A Heart by his nose draws a Serpent
out of her hole, and therefore Gramarians derived Elaphos a Heart, from Elanein
tous opheis, that is, of driving away Serpents.

I cannot assent to the opinion of Aelianus, that affirms the Serpents follow
the breath of a Heart like some Philtre or amorous cup; for seeing that all
Authors hold an hostility in natures betwixt them, it is not probable that the
Serpent loves the breath of a beast, unto whose whole body he is an enemy,
with a perpetual antipathy. And if any reply, that the warm breath of a Heart
is acceptable to the cold Serpent, and that therefore she follows it, as a
Dog creeps to the fire, or as other beasts the beams of the Sun, I will
not greatly gainsay it, seeing by that means it is most clear, that the
breath does Pliny has taught) but rather from her ordinary expiration,
inspiration, and respiration. For it cannot be, that seeing all the parts of a
Serpent are opposite to a Heart, that there should be any love to that which
kills her.

For my opinion I think that the manner of the Hearts drawing the Serpent out
of her Den is not as Aelianus and Pliny affirms, by sending into the cave a
warm breath which burns and scorcheth the beast out of her den, but rather
when the Heart has found the Serpents nest, she draws the air by secret and
violent attraction out from the Serpent, who to save her life follows the
air out of her den, as when a vessel is broched or vented, the wine follows
the flying air, and as a cupping-glasse draws blood out of a Aelianus
affirms.

Unto this opinion both Oribasius in his commentaries upon the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates and Gumterius his restorer do jointly agree: but the Serpent being
thus drawn forth, adds greater force to her poison, whereupon the
prouerbiall admonition did arise. Cane ne incideris in serpentem, cum extracta
a latebris anhelitu cerui, effugerit, tum enim propter, Aelianus.
iracundiam vehementius ei venenum est, that is, Beware thou meet not with a
Serpent drawn out of her hole by the breath of a Heart, for at that time by
reason of her wrath, her poison is more vehement. After this self same manner
do the sea-Rams, draw the Subterranean Rocks, for by smelling they prevent
the air that should come unto them for refrigeration.

O^pianus. Gillius. The fight betwixt Hearts and Serpents
There is many times strange conflicts betwixt the Heart and the Serpent, thus
drawn forth, for the Serpent seeing her adversary lifts her neck above the
ground, and grasheth at the Heart with her teeth, breathing out very bitter
hissings: on the contrary, the Heart deriding the vain endeavor of his weak
adversary, readier to fight then powerful to harm him, suffers him to
embrace both his neck and Legs with his long and thin body, but at an
instant teareth it into an hundred pieces. But the most strange combats are
betwixt the Hearts and Serpents of Libia, where the hatred is deeper; and the
Serpents watch the Heart when he lies a sleep on the ground, and being a
multitude of them, set upon him together, fastening their poysonfull teeth in
every part of his skin; some on his neck and breast; some on his sides and
back, some on his Legs, and some hang upon his privy parts, biting him with
mortal rage, to overthrow their foe.

The poor Heart being thus oppressed with a multitude, and pricked with
venomous pains assayeth to run away, but all in vain, their cold earthy
bodies and winding tails, both ouercharge his strength, and hinder his pace:
he then in a rage with his teeth, feet,

The Heart thus having eased himself by the slaughter of some, (like an
Elephant) at the sight of their blood, be stirs himself more busily in the
eager battle, and therefore treads some under foot in the blood of their
fellows, others he pursues with tooth

It is no less strange that Hearts will eat Serpents; but the reason is,
Etymologus. Varinus.
for medicine and cure; for sometimes the pores of his body are dulled and shut
up; sometimes the worms of his belly do asend into the roof of his mouth,
while he cheweth his cud, and there cleave fast: for remedy whereof the Heart
thus affected, runs about to seek for Serpents, Isidorus.


Pliny says, that when the Heart is old, and preceiueth that his strength
decays, his hair change, and his horns dry above custom, that then for
the renewing of his strength, he first deuoureth a Serpent, and afterward
runs to some Fountain of water and there drinks, which causes an
alteration in the whole body; both changing the hair and horn: and the Writer
of the Gloss upon the 42. Psalm, which begins, Like as the Heart desires
the Water springes so longs my soul after God; confirms this opinion.

Vincentius Belluacensis affirms, that Hearts eat Serpents, for to cure the
dimnesse of their eyesight. But for the ending of this question, we must
consider that there are two The several kinds of hearts
does presently kill her by stamping her under feet, this eats that Serpent,
and runs to springing Water, after that he feels the poison to make his
body swell, and then by drinking does vomit forth the poison, and in the mean
time loses both hair and horn; yet the Monks of Mesaen affirm, that the
Heart thus poisoned does only cover her body in the cold water and not drink
thereof, for that were exitiall unto her, but she sends forth certain
tears, which are turned into a stone (called Bezahar) of which shall be more
said hereafter. The other kind of Hearts when he finds a Serpent, kills
it, and does not eat it, and immediately after the victory returns to feed
in the Mountains.

Hearts are opposed by Wolves, The enemy beasts to Hearts.
for many Wolves together does overcome a Heart and therefore it is but a fable
of Strabo, that the Wolves and hearts live tame together in the Woods of the
Veneti. These kind of Wolves are called Thoes, and they especially fear these
Wolves when they have lost their horns, and feed only in the night season,
Vincentius.
which caused Ovid to write thus; Visa fugit nymphe: veluti perterrita fuluum,
Cerua lupum, etc.


They are afraid also of the first and second kind of Eagles, for with their
wings they raise much dust about the Hearts, Albertus
and then they being half blind, the Eagles pal out their eyes, or else so
beat their feathers about their faces, that they hinder their sight, and cause
them to fall down headlong from the Mountains: Aristotle Of the fear of
hearts.
they fear also the ganning of Foxes, and the Lynxes do likewise lie in wait
to hurt them. These are above al other fourefooted Beasts both ingenious and
fearful, who although they have large horns, yet their defense against other
foure-footed Beasts is to run away: For this cause, in ancient Cantharion,
which Cantharion was a Spartan fugitive, that first ran to the enemy, and
afterward from them came back again to Sparta. C^^^tus. Nebendi^us
And Martial thus descibeth Alchaeus, who being overcome by Phillip King of
Macedon ran away like a Heart: Trux spiritus ille philippi,
Ceruorum cursu praepete lapsus abit.


The epithets of a Heart.
The Epithets expressing the qualities of this Beast are many: as nimble, or
agile, winged, or swift-paced, full of years, quick-footed, horned, wandering,
fearful, flying, fugitive, A kind of auda^ions hearts Schneberg:
light, wood-hunter, wild, and lively. There are of them very audations, for
they will set upon men as they travail through the Woods: and it is observed,
that the wrathful Heart has few bunches on his horn, neither is it so long as
others, but bunched at Pliny.
yet all of them being pressed with dogs or other wild beasts, will fly unto
a man for succor.

It is reported by Phillip Melauchton, that in Locha (a town of Saxony) there
was a Heart, which before rutting time would every year leap over the Walls,
and run over rocks and Mountains, The subtilty of a Heart, and their
instruction and use.
and yet return home again, until the time that Duke Frederick dyed, and
then the Heart went forth but never returned again. The male when he feels
himself fat, lives solitary and secret, because he knows the weight of his
body will easily betray him to the hunters if he be hunted and pursued. The
female commonly calueth near the high ways, of purpose to avoid noisome
beasts to her young one, who do more avoid the sight of man then her self.
Also it is reported, that Mithredates had a Aristotle
a Horse, and a Heart, for his guard beside men, who would not be bribed to
suffer Traitors to kill him being a sleep. Moreover it is said of Ptolaemeus
Philadelphe, that having a hind calfe given unto him, he brought it up so
familiarly tame, and accustomed it to words, Isidorus. The several kinds of
hearts a secret against poison Solinus
that at length it seemed to understand the Greek language: And Aelianus
affirms as much of the hearts of India, for that language.

When they are wounded with a Dart, and having gotten it out of their body by
eating Dittany, they most carefully avoid the Sunbeams, least they shine
upon the green wound, for then it will hardly be cured: but above al other
arguments of their understanding, none is more firm and evident, then their
swimming; for the hearts of Amanus, Libanus, Aelianus.
and Carmell (Mountains of Siria) when they are to swim over the Sea, to the
fruitful Ciprus, they come down to the Seashore, and there they tarry til
they perceive a prosperous Wind, and a calm Water; which happening, the
Captain or leader of them does first of all enter into the Water, and so the
next follows, laying his head upon the Captains buttockes, Of the swimming
of hearts T^^tzes Gillius. Oppianus.
and so consequently all the residue resting their heads upon the president. In
the hindmost are the youngest and weakest, that so the violence of the floods
being broken by the stronger which go before, the more infirm which follow
may pass with less difficulty. Thus sail they along without star or compass
to direct them, except their own sense of smelling, using their Legs for
oars, and their broad horns for sails. And if the foremost be weary, then
slippeth he back to rest his head upon the hindmost, and so likewise the
second and third, as they feel themselves Pliny Solinus. Their love on music.
the residue do ever after yield obedience to him. In like sort do the Hearts
of Epirus swim to Corcyra, and of Cilicia to the Island Curiadactes.

They are deceived with music, for they so love that harmony, that they
forbear their food to follow it. Also it is amazed at any strange sight, for
if a hunter come behind a Horse or a Bullock, laying over his back his bow
and arrows, they stand staring upon the new-formed Beast, until the Dart do
end their lives. Their rage in rutting time.


At the time of their lust or rutting, they are above measure fierce, fighting
naturally for the female, and sometimes wounding one another to death; and this
falls out most commonly in the latter end of August, at which time Arcturus
rises with the sun, Solinus Oppianus.
and then it is most natural for the Hindes to conceive. In some places in
October their lust arises, and also in May; and then whereas at other times
the Males live apart from the Females, they go about like lascivious wooers,
seeking the company of their femals, Venus.

The Males in their raging desired lust, have a peculiar voice, Budaeus
which the French call by a feigned word Reere, and the Germans Brulen, and the
Latins term Rancere; and the Beasts so affected Ololygones. When they find
they Females, the are received with fear, then in short space one male will
cover many females, continuing in this carnal appetite a month or two: their
females do sildome admit copulation, Their copulation. Aristotle
being herein like unto Cowes, by reason of the rigor of the males genitall:
and therefore they sink down on their Buttockes when they feel the genitall
seed, as it has been often observed in tame Hearts, and if they can the
females run away, the males striving to hold them back with their
forefeete: but surely heerin they differ from all other: Aristotle
it cannot well be said that they are covered standing, lying, or going, (but
rather running) for so are they filled with

When one month or six Weeks of their rutting is past, they grow tame again,
laying aside all fierceness and return to their solitary places, digging
every one of them by himself a several hole or Ditch, wherein they lie, to
aswage the strong savor of their lust, for they stink like Goats, and their
face begins to Wax blacker then at other times; and in those places they
live, until some shewers distill from the Clouds; after which, they return
to their Pasture again, and live in flocks together as before.

The female being thus filled, never keeps company with the male again
until her burden be delivered, which is, eight months; for so long does she
bear her young: The chast^y of hinds and the time they go with young.
Aristotle pliny.
Seselis, or Siler of the Mountain; and whereas she never purges until that
time, then she emptieth her self of pituitous and flegmatike humors.

Then go they to the places near the high ways, and there they cast forth
their calfe, (for the causes aforesaid) being more afraid of Wild Beasts
then men, whom she can avoid by flying: which when they have seen, they go
and eat the Seselis aforesaid, and the skin which comes forth of their
own Womb covering the young one, Cicero
finding in it some notable medicine, which the Graecians call Chorion, and not
the herb Arum, and this she does before she lie down to give her young one
suck, (as Pliny affirms.)

Pliny. Aristotle
covering them, and if they be stubborn and wild, beating them with their
feet until they lie close and contented. Oftentimes she leads forth her
young, teaching it to run and leap over Bushes, stones, and small shrubs,
against the time of danger; Aelianus. The manner how the hind educateth her
calfe. Solinus.
and so continues all the Summer time, while their own strength is most
abundant: but in the Winter time, they leave and forsake them, because all
Hearts are feeble in the Winter season.

They live very long, as by experience has been often mentioned; The time of
their life. Aristotle Caelius Hesiodus.
not only because they have no gall (as the Dolphin has none) but for other
causes: also some affirm, that Virgill agrees in these verses; Terbinis
deciesque super exit in annos,
Iusta senescentum quos implet vita virorum
Hos nonies superat viuendo garrula cornix
Et quater egreditur cornicis saecula ceruus
Alipedum ceruum ter vincit cornus: at illum,
multiplicat nouies Phaenix reperabilis ales: that is,
As the life of a man is threescore and six, so a Raven does live nine times
so many years (Viz:) 528. years. The Heart lives four times the age of the
Raven (Viz:) ^112. years. The Crow exceeds the Heart three times (:Viz) 6336.
but the Phoenix which is repaired by her own ashes, surmounteth the Crow nine
times, and so lives 57524. years. The which I have set down (not for truth)
but for report, leaving every reader to the chiefest matter of credit, as in
his own descretion he conceiueth most probable.

But it is confessed of all, that Hearts live a very long life: for Pliny
affirms, that an hundred years after the death of Alexander Magnus, there
were certain taken alive which had about their Necks Golden Collars, A history
Solinus
with an inscription that they were put on by Alexander.

In Calabria (once called Iapygia and Peucetia) there was a collar taken off
from the neck of a Heart by Agathocles King of Sicily, Aristotle
which was covered with the flesh and fat of the Heart; and there was written
upon it, Diomedes Dianae: whereby it was coniectured, that it was put on by him
before the siege of Troy: for which cause, the King brought the same and did
offer it up in the Temple of Jupiter.

The like was in Arcadia, when Arcesilaus dwelt in Lycosura; for he confidently
affirmed, Pausanius.
which was dedicated to Diana, having this inscription in her Collar: Nebros
eoon ealoon ota es Ilcon en Agapenor. When Agapenor was in Troy, then was I a
young calfe taken. By which it appears, that a Heart lives longer then an
Elephant, for indeed as they live long before they grow to any perfection,
their youth and weakness cleaving fast unto them, Columello
so is it given to them to have a longer life, for continuance in ripeness and
strength of years.

Solinus. The sickness of Hearts
These Beasts are never annoyed with fevers, because their flesh allayeth all
aduentitiall and extraordinary heat. If he eat Spiders he instantly dies
thereof, except he eat also Wild Iuy or Sea-crabs. Likewise, Nauew-gentill
and Oleander, kill the Heart. When a Heart is in his chase, Gillius. Lullius
Aristotle. pliny.
he is greatly pained in his bowels, by reason that the skin

There is a kind of thorn called cactus, wherewithal if a young one be
pricked in his legs, his bones will never make Pipes: Besides, these Beasts
are annoyed with Scabs and ytches in their head and skin, termed by the
French by a peculiar name ( Froyer) I will not stand upon the idle conceit of
Albertus, that waspes and Emmets breed in the heads of Hearts, Bl^^dus The use
of the several parts.
for he mistaketh them for the worms before mentioned.

The skins of this beast are used for garments in some Countries, and in most
places for the bottoms of Cushions, and therefore they chase such as are killed
in the summer time, when they are fat and most spotted; and the same having
their hair pulled Pliny and Sextus affirmed, Hesichius Varianus
that if a man sleep on the ground having upon him a Hearts skin, Serpents
never anoy him: whereof Serenus mado this verse: Aut tu ceruina per nocttem in
pelle quiescis: and the bones of young ones are applied for making of Pipes. It
is reported, that the blood of Hearts burned together with herbe-dragon, or
chanes, orgament, and mastick have the same power to draw Serpents out of their
holes, which the Hearts have being alive: and if there be put unto it wild
Pellitory, it will also distract and dissipate them again.

The marrow of a Heart has the same power against Serpents, by oynment or
perfumed upon coals; and Nicander prescribes a certain oynment to be made of
the flesh Dioscorides
of the marrow of a Heart, and Oils of Roses, against the bitings of Serpents.
The fat of a Heart has the like effects that the marrow has. Achilles that
Noble soldier, was said never to have tasted of Milk, but to be nourished
with the marrow of Hearts, by Chiro, as is affirmed by Varinus and Etymologus.
The like operation has the tooth (as Serenus says) Aut genere ex ipso dentem
portabtis amicum: If the the seed of a young Hinde-calfe, be drunk with
veniger, it suffers no poison of Serpents to enter into the body that day.

The perfume of the horn drives away Serpents and noisome flies, especially
from the young Calves, or from horses if Women's hair be added thereunto,
Aclianus. Varro. Palladius Rasis. Gillius Pliny. Solinus. Albertus Cardanus.
with the hoof of the Heart. And if men drink in pots wherein are wrought
Hearts horns, it will weaken all force of venom. The Magicians have also
devised, that if the fat of a Dragons heart be bound up in the skin of a Roe,
with the Nerves of a Heart, it promises victory to him that bears it on his
shoulder, and that if the teeth be so bound in a Roes skin, it makes ones
Master, Lord, or all superior powers, exorable and appeased toward their
Orpheus in his book of stones, commands a husband to carry about him a
Hearts horn, if he will live in amity and concord with his wife: to conclude,
they also add another figment to make men invincible.

The head and tail of a Dragon, with the hairs of a Lion taken from between
the brows, and his marrow, the froath or white-mouth of a victorious Horse,
the nails of a Dog, and the Nerves of a Heart and a Roe, bound up altogether
in a Hearts skin: and this is as true as the wagging of a Dogs tail does
signify a tempest. To leave these trifles scarce worthy to be rehearsed, but
only to show the vanity of men, given over to lying devises; let us come to
the other natural and medicinal properties not as yet touched.

The use and benefit of the flesh.
the which thing is by Blondus attributed also to the flesh of the females with
young, I know not how truly; but I am sure that I have known certain Noble
women, which every morning did eat this flesh, and during the time they did
so, they never were troubled with Ague: and this virtue they hold the
stronger, if the Beast in dying, have received but one wound.

The flesh is tender, especially if the beast were libbed before his horns
grew: Pliny Solinus. lib 3. de alim:
yet is not the juice of that flesh very wholesome, and therefore Galen
advises men to abstain as much from Hearts flesh, as from Asses, for it
engendereth melancholy, yet is it better in Summer then in Winter. Simeon Sethi
speaking of the whot Countries, forbids to eat them in Summer, because then
they eat Serpents and so are venomous; which falls Auicenne proves, that by
eating hereof men incur the quartane Ague; wherefore it is good to powder them
with salt before the dressing, and then seasoned with pepper and other things,
known to every ordinary cook and woman, they make of them pasties in most
nations.

The Heart and brain of a hare or Cony have the power of triacle for expelling
of evil humors, but the liver is intolerable in food: the horns being young
are meat for Ferdinand, that caused the young ones to be cut out of the Dams
belly and baked in pastils, for his Liquorous Epicureall appetite.

The whole nature and disposition of every part of this beast, is against
poison and venomous things (as before recited. The medicines of a Heart and his
several parts. Pliny Dioscorides, Solinus
) His blood stays the looseness of the belly and all fluxes, especially
fried with oil, and the inferior parts anointed therewith, and being drunk
in Wine it is good against poisoned wounds, and all intoxications.

The marrow of this beast is most approueable above other, and is used for
sweet odor, against the gout, and heat of men in consumptions, and all
outward pains and Serenus comprised in one sentence saying: Et ceruina potest
mulcere medulla rigorem,
frigoris.
Likewise the fat and marrowe, mollifieth or disperseth all bunches in the
flesh and old swellings; all ulcers except in the shinnes and legs, and with
Venus-nauill the Fistula, mattery ulcers in the ears with Rozen, Pitch,
Goose-greace, and Goat-sewet, the cleaving of the lips: and with Calves sewet
the heat and pain in the mouth and jaws. It has also virtue being drunk in
warm water, to aswage the pain in the bowels and small guts, or bloody flixe.
Sextus


The gall of a Bull, Oil of bays, Butter, and this marrow, by annoynting,
cures pain in the knees and loins and other evils in the seat of a man, in
the hipps, and in the belly when it is costiue: It procures flowers of Women,
cures the gout, pimples in ones face, and ringwormes. Absyrtus prescribes it
to be given in sweet Wine with wax, unto a horse for an old cough proceeding
of cold, after purging and heating, by holding the Horses tongue in ones hand
while the medicine is thrust down his throat.

The same in sheeps Milk with rubricke and soft Pitch, drunk every day or
eaten to your meat, helps the ptisicke, and obstructions. Anatolius
approved, bean meal sifted and sod with Hearts marrow to be given to a horse
which stalleth blood, Marcellus
for three days together. Also mingled with the poulder of Oyster-shels, it
cures kibes and chilblanes. A woman perfumed with the hairs of this beast, is
preserved from abortements; and the same perfume helps the difficulty of
urine, and little pieces cut off from the hide with a pummise put in wine, and
rubbing the body, helps the holy-fire. The powder of the bones burned, is an
antidote against the falling evil* and the dispersing of the melt; and the
bones beaten to poulder, stays the flux of the belly.

It were endless to describe all the virtues ascribed to the horn; and
therefore I will content my self with the recital of few. Pliny and Solinus
prefer the right horn, Aristotle

Take the horn and cut it into small pieces, then put it into an earthen pot
anointed within with dirt, and so set it in a furnace until it become White,
then wash it like a mineral and it will help the runnings and ulcers in the
eyes: and the same also keeps the teeth white, and the gums sound. The young
horns while they be soft being eaten, are an antidote against henbane, and
other poysonfull herbs. The right horn hid by Pliny.
The Hearts horn has power to dry up all humors, Sextus
and therefore it is used in eye salues: and Orpheus promises to a bald man
hair on his head again, if he annoint it with oil and poulder of this horn:
likewise the same with the seed of black myrtle, Marcellus
Butter and Oil, restrains the falling away of the hair being anointed
upon the head after it is newly shaven: with vinegar it kills ringwormes.
Sextus
The same burned in the sun, and afterward the face being rubbed and washed
therewith thrice together, takes away pimples-spots out of the face: the
poulder drunk in wine or anointed on the head kills lice and nits: the same
with vinegar, Marcellus
wine, or oil of roses, anointed upon the forehead, eases the headache if
it proceed of cold.

Galenus
A perfume made of this horn with Castoreum, and lime, or Brimstone, causes a
dead Sereneus said: Quod vero assumpsit nomen de dente fricando
Ceruino ex cornu cinis est.


Galen prescribes the poulder of this horn for the Iaundise, and for him that
spitteth bloody matter, and to stay vomit being taken in a reere Egg. It
comfort also a rheumatike stomach, and it is tried to cure the Kings evil:
it pacifieth the melt, dries the Spleen, drives all kind of Worms out of
the belly, being drunk with Honey, and eases Cedar: beside many other such
properties.

The tears of this beast after she has been hunted with a Serpent, are
turned into a a stone (called Belzahard, or Bezahar) of which we have spoken
before: and being thus transubstantiated do cure all manner of venom (as
Auenzoar, and Cardinal Ponzetti affirm) after many trials, and Serenus also
expresses in this distichon: Seminecis cerut lachryman miscere liquori
Conuenit, atque artus illine miscere calentes.
The liver of this beast helps all sores in the feet, being worn in the
shoes, the same dried to powder with the throat or windpipe of the beast, and
mingled with Honey, and so eaten helps the Cough, Ptisicke, sighing, and short
breathing. Pliny and Sextus affirm, that when a Hind perceives her self to
be with young, she deuoureth or eats up a certain stone, which is afterward
found either in her excrements or ventricle, and is profitable for all Women
with child and in travel, for by that only fact, the Hind is Venice, Aetuis.
holding it at a great price: but Brasauola affirms, that he opened the
hearts of two Hearts, and found in them a little gristle not much unlike to a
cross, whereof the one being of a Beast new killed, was very soft, but the
other was much harder, because the beast was slain about six days before.

This bone is in the left side of the Heart, upon which, the Spleen moves and
sends forth her excrements by vapors, which by reason of their drines are
there turned into a bone, and being first of all of the substance of the
Hearts blood; and it is good Plateri^s.


The skinny seed of the hind-Calfe, is above all other commended against
poison, and the bitings of Serpents and of mad Dogs; likewise it stays al
fluxes of blood, and spitting of blood, and egestion of blood: and it being
eaten with Beets and Lentils, is profitable against the pain of the belly. The
genitall part and stones, are wholesome (being taken in wine) against all
bitings of Vipers, Adders, and Snakes, and the same virtue has the natural
seed supped up in a rere Egg.

The genitall has also a virtue to increase lust in every creature, it being
either dried and drunk; or else bound fast to their privy parts. Likewise
being washed in water,

The dung of Hearts cures the dropsy, especially of a Subulon or young Heart:
the urine eases the pain in the Spleen, the wind in the ventricle and
bowels, and infvsed into the ears, heals their ulcers. In the tip of the
tail lies poison, which being drunk, causes ecstasy and death, if it be not
help by a vomit made of Butter, Annise, and oil of Sesamine, or as Cardinal
Ponzettus says, that the Hearts eye is an Antidote to this evil: It may be
known by a yellowish-greene-colour, and therefore it is called the gall, for
nature has appointed that place to receive all the venom of the whole Body.
Of the hunting and taking these beasts.




This is a beast standing amazed at every strange sight, even at the hunters
bow and Arrowe, coming behind a stalking Horse (as is already declared*) and
moreover, like as Egyptians decipher a man overthrown by slattery, by painting
a Heart taken by music: and Varro relates upon his own knowledge, Horus. A^
hi^ ogli^^^^ll emblem.
that when he supped in his Lordship bought of M. Piso, the Pastor or
Forrester after supper, took but a Harp in his hand, and at the sound
thereof, at innumerable flock of Hearts, Boares, and other fourefooted beasts
came about their Cabanet, being drawn thither only by the Music; insomuch
as he thought he had been in the Roman Circus or Theater, beholding the
playing spectacles of all the Affrican beasts, when the aedilian Officers have
their huntings: The like is also reported by Aelianus, saving that he adds,
that no toil or engine is so assured or unavoidable to draw these beasts
within a laborinth as is music, whereby the Hunter gets as it were the
Heart by the ear, for if through attention he hold down his ears as he
Aelianus.
It is reported that they are much terified with the sight of red feathers,
which thing is affirmed by Ausonius in these verses: An cum fratre vagos dumeta
perauia ceruos
Circundas maculis, and multa indagine pennae.


And Ovid also saying: N^c formidatis ceruos includite pennis.

And Lucan also: -- Sic dum pauidos formidine ceruos
Claudat odoratae metuentes era pennae.


Of which thing the Hunters make an advantage, for when they have found the
beast, they set their nets where they imagine the beast will fly, and then
one of them shows to the beast on the other side, Zenophon^
the red feathers hanging on a rope, which scarreth them in have into the
Hunters nets, as S. Ierom testifies in one of his dialogues saying: Et
pauidorum more ceruorum, dum vanos pennarum euitatis volatus fortissimis
retibus implicamini. And you says he (speaking to the Luceferian heretics)
run away from the vain shaking of feathers, like the fearful Hearts, while
in the mean time you are inclapsed in unavoidable and inextricable nets. And
this caused Seneca to write, that the babe fears a shadow, Vmbria metaiter ab
infaucibus a feris rubeus penna.
and wild beasts a red feather.

Many times the young Calfe is the cause of the taking of his damme: for the
Hunter early in the morning before day light, watches the Hind where she
lays her young one, until she go and refresh her self with pasture; when
he has seen this, then does he let loose his Dogs, and makes to the place
where the Hind Calfe was left by his mother.

The seely Calfe lies immovable as if he were fastened to the earth, and so
never stirring, but bleating and braying suffers himself to be taken,
except there be rainie weather, for the impatience of cold and wette will
cause him to shift for himself: which if it fall out, the Dogs are at hand
to overtake him, and so being taken is committed to the keeper of the nets.

The Hind both hearing and seeing the thr^ldome of her pore son, comes to
relieve him without dread of hounde or Hunter, but all in vain, for with his
darte he also possesses himself of her* but if the Calfe be greater and so
be able to run with the damme among the heardes, they are most hard to be
taken, for in that age they run very fast, and the fear of Dogs increases
their agilitie, insomuch as to take them among the herds is impossible every
one fighting for them.

But the only way is to single one out of them from the flock and so follow him
until he be weary, for although he be very nimble, yet by reason of his tender
age, his limbs are not able to continue long. The elder Hearts are taken in
snares and gins laid in ditches and covered with leaves, whereby the feet of
this beast are snared in wood; this kind is dedescribed Zenophon and Pollux,
and is called in Greek Podestrabe, in Latin Pedica, of which also the Poets
make mention, as Virgil: Tunc gruibus pedicas and retia ponere ceruis. And this
kind is better described by Gratius, with whose words I will pass it over as
a thing out of use.

Nam fuit and laqueis aliquis curracibus vsus.
Ceruin^ issere magis conterere neruo
Quidque dentatas iligno robere clausit:
Saepe habet imprudens alieni lucra laboris
Fra^^ tegit insidias habitu mentita ferino
Venator pedicas, tu dissimulantibus armis.
Their manner is when they are chased with Dogs to run away with speed, yet
oftentimes stand still and look back, not only to harken to the hunter, but
also to rest themselves, for in their chase they are ever troubled in their
belly (as is before declared,) and

But heerin the subtility of this beast appears, Albertus.
that when he is hunted he runs for the most part to the high ways, that so
the savor of his steps may be put out by the treadings of men, and he avoid
the prosecution of the Hound. Their swiftnes is so great, that in the
Champaigne and plain fields they regard not Dogs, for which cause in France
Zenicum or Toca, and it is a kind of Aconite or Wolfe-bane, which has power
to corrupt and destroy agility of body, and to stay celerity, and for their
hunting in France by Dogs, it is most excellently described by Budaeus and
Robertus Stephanus in his French dictionary.

This wild, deceitful and subtle beast, (say they) by windings and turnings
do often deceive their hunter, as the Hearts of Meandros flying from the
terrible cry of Dianaes hounds, wherefore the prudent hunter must frame his
Dogs, as Pithagoras did his Scholars, ( Lu^ers qui ne parlent point) with
words of Art, to set them on, and take them off again at his pleasure;
wherefore he must first of all compass in the beast, ( En son giste) in her
own lodging, and so raise her up in the fight of the dogs, that so they may
never loose her

Neither must they set upon every one, either of the heard, or that wandereth
solitary alone, nor yet a little one, but partly by aspect or sight, and partly
by their footings in the soft earth, and also by their dung ( Les fumees) they
judge of their game, for a good woodman must not stick to gather up the Deeres
excrement or soil, and keep them ( la trompe) in his hunting horn: such
things must the kings huntsmen and forresters observe, as also the quantity of
his bed or lodging when they find it, being thus informed of their game then (
Discoupler les chieus) they take off their Dog couplings, and some on
horsback, other on foot follow the cry with greatest art, observation, and
speed, remembering and preventing ( Cerf ruze) the subtle turninges, and
headinges, of the Heart, straining with all dexterity to leap hedge, pale,
ditch, and rocks; neither fearing thorns, woods, Cheuaux de relatis) and
leaping on him with speed, until he see ( un grand cerf l'escuyer du grand
cerf) the great Heart having ten speeres on his horns, and his little
squier-hart to attend him, which the Dogs once perceiving, only follow the
great Heart, taking for a prohibition to follow anio other.

The Dogs are animated by the winding of horns, and voices of the hunters,
like soldiers to a battle by the voice of a trumpet and other instruments:
but sometimes the crafty great beast sends forth his little squire to be
sacrificed to the Dogs and hunters instead of himself, lying close in the
mean time, then must the retreat be sounded, and ( Rompre le chieus) the dogs
be broken off and taken in ( Le limter) that is, leame again until or the
sight of the executioner to a condemned caitife, yet still he strives until
wearied and breathless, he be forced to offer up his blood and flesh to the
rage of all the obseruant pedissequants of the hunting goddess Diana.

The vulgar sort call an old Heart a subtle and cunning Beast, but the nobles
call him ( cerf sage) a wise Heart, who to avoid all his enemies runs into
the greatest herds, and so brings a cloud of error upon the Dogs, to keep
them from any further prosecution: Sometime also beating of some of the heard
into his own footsteps, that so he may more easily escape and procure a
laborinth to the Dogs, and then after a little while he betaketh himself to
his heels again, running still with the wind, not only for refrigeration,
but because he may the more easily hear the voice of his pursuers, whether

At last, being (for all this) found out again by the observance of the
hunters, and skill of the Dogs, he flies into the heardes of Cattle, as
Kye, Oxen, or Sheep, leaping upon an Ox, and laying his body or the forepart
thereof upon him, as a ryder upon a Horse, that so touching the earth only
with his hinder hoofes, to leave a very small or no sent at all behind for the
Hounds to discern.

The chief huntsman or seargeant of the hounds unto Jews the twelfth, called
( lo grand veneur) affirmed, that on a time they having a Heart in chase,
suddenly the hounds fell at a fault, so as the beast was out of sight, and not
a Dog would once stir his foot; whereat all the hunters were amazed, like as
in some iugling Appollonian trick, as though

There was a great whit-thorne which grew in a shadowie steep place as high as
a tree, and was environed with other small shrubs about it, into the which the
said heart leapt, and there stood aloft the boughs spreading from one another,
and there he remained, whether because he could not get off again, or else for
that he was stifled in that place, but surely he was there thrust thorough and
so dyed, and so had they all rather perish any

Yet their manner is, that when they see themselves every where intercepted, to
make force at him with their horns that comes first unto him, except he be
prevented by some sword or spear; which being done, the hunter with his horn
sounds the fall of the beast, and then every one approaches, luring with
triumph for such a conquest, of whom the skilfullest opens the beast, giving
unto the hounds such parts as belongs to them, for their encouragement
against another time; and for that purpose the hunters dippe bread in the
skin and blood of the beast, to give unto the hounds their full satisfaction:
and many such other things may the reader desirous of this knowledge find in
the Authors aforesaid, to whom I will commend him rather, then spend more
time in this Actaeon did by his own Dogs: and therefore Alciatus does fitly
compare together hunters and receivers of theeus and robbers, calling them new
Actaeons; who after they had received horns, must be destroyed by their own
Dogs which they have nourished. The best use of these beasts is to keep them
tame as in Heluetia, where they hunt seldom, and to make good use of them for
norishment rather then for sport, as it is reported of a holy man, who kept a
hind so familiar with him* that in the wilderness he lived upon her milk.

Concluding this discourse with the words of the poet, for the instruction of
Dogs to

Veloces Spartae catulos, acremque molossum,
Pasce sero pingui etc. And again.
montesque peraltos
Ingentem clamore premes ad retia ceruum.
Confertoque agmine cerui
Torpent mole noua, and summis vix cornibus extant.
Hos non immissis canibus, non cassibus vllis,
Punicaeue agitent pauidos formidine pennae:
Sed frustra oppositum trudentes pectore montem.
Comminus obtruncant ferro, grauiter que tudentes
Caedunt, and magno laeti clamore reportant.

HErodotus in his fourth book affirms, that among the Affrican Shepherds
toward the East, there are bredde in Bassaria Hystriches wild Rams, Thoes
and Dyctyes, of which last there is not any mention among all other writers,
except in Varinus and Hesychius, who affirm that among the Lacedaemonians a
Glead or Kite was called Dyctis, but this spoken of Herodotus I conjecture to
be some four-footed beast, being led with no other reason then that the other
with whom he places it, are generaly known to be creaturs of that kind and
nature: wherefore I thought good to express the name of it in this place,
desiring the reader to accept so much thereof as is already known, and to
search farther for the description Africa.

OF THE DOG In general.
A Dog is called in Haebrew Keleb, and Lamas according to Munster: in Caldee
Kalba; in Arabique Kalbe, in Persia Sag; The name and deriration thereof.
The Saracens Kep or Kolph: the Graecians Kuon because of his love to man, and
vulgarly at this day Skilos and Skule: the Spaco, the Germans Hund, the
Italians Cane; The French Chien, the Spaniardes Perro or cauendo, because his
barking is as loud as an Artificial song; also Catellus, the Illyrians Pes or
Pas, and the Latins Canis.

There is no region or country in the world, The countries and diversities of
Dogs.
where these are not bred in some store, as shall be declared afterward in the
particular discourse of every kind of Dogs. For as shall be manifested more
at large, there are Dogs very great, some for hunting, some for War and
defense, some for the Bore, Bull, or Bear, some for the Hare, Cony, or
Hedgehog: again some are smaller which are called Hounds, Braches, Beagles,
Shepheardes Dogs, House-curres, Spagnels both for the Water and Land: and
some foysting Dogs for the pleasure of

In the first place there are to be handled the nature of Dogs in general,
The general nature of dogs.
wherein they agree, and their common properties of nature, such as are not
destroyed in the destinction of kinds, but remain like infallible and
invariable truths in every kind and country of the world. To begin with that
which is outward, it is to be observed that Dogs are generally rough, Their
outward parts. Aristotle Albertus A secret in the brain.
and their hair indifferently long (which in winter they loose every year) is
a sign of a good constitution; but if it grow over long, the mangie scab will
follow: the outward proportion of the head alters as the kind alters, being
sometime like a Lion, sometime like a Hedgehog, some long with a broad snowt,
and sometime with a piked snowt, but the brain decreaseth and increases with
the moon, there is no commissure

The best Dogs have flat Nostrils, yet round, solid, and blunt, the mouth is
long and slit, their teeth like saws, as it is in fishes and Serpents: those
which are called Canyne before, Pliny.
are only changed, as it also falls out in a Lion, and these they loose or
change both males

Aristotle. Pliny.
The breast of a Dog is narrow and piked, his ventricle small and narrow, for
which cause he never eases his bodily excrements without pain, his bowels are
like a Lions: He has a long spleen like a man, and a Hog: his yard and
stones hang outward between his hinder legs, a base natured curre strikes
his tail betwixt his legs, his fore-legges bend like the arms of a man, and
he uses them in stead of Arms, having five distinct fingers, Aristotle.
Blondus. Pliny.
commonly called claws upon each foot before, and four upon each foot
behind, which also have straight nails upon them, and that which hangs
higher upon the leg is crooked.

The parts of a female dog
The females, because they bring forth many whelps at a time, have underneath
their Galen.
to an Emmets, it is moist: Again, in respect of a man it is hot, in respect
of a Lion it is cold.

The voice of Dogs. Pliny.
The louder and shriller voice of a Dog, is called barking, the lower and
stiller, is called whining, or fawning: It was a monstrous thing, that a Dog
should speak, and a serpent bark, as it is believed in antiquity both came to
pass, when Tarquinius was driven out of his kingdom. It is not causeless
that the barking of Dogs, has attributed unto Arremidorus
so likewise if they fawn and claw upon a man.

Among the precedent tokens of Caesar's death, they set down in certain
verses, the howling voices of Owls, the weeping drops of the Iuory tree, and
the continual barkings of Dogs, as follows: Tristia nulle lotis stygius
dedit omnia bubo.
mill locis lachrymauit ebur.
Inque foro circunque domos and templa deorum
Nocturno vl^lasse canes ferunt: etc.
The Egyptians signify these things by a Dog, a Scribe, a Prophet, a spleen,
smelling, laughing, and neezing. A Scribe, because as the Dog is silent more
then he barketh, O^us. Emblematicall descriptions.
so must a perfect Scribe meditate more then he speaks: for to bark at every
one were to pleasure none, and to speak continually, were a sign of madness:
Again, a Prophet because a Dog does most eagerly behold, and admire
constantly all holy actions, and so ought Spleen because a Dog has little
or no spleen, and thereof comes his madness and death; whereof also it
comes that the servants which have the charge of Dogs, being with them in
their sickness and latter end, for the most part prove splenaticke. Smelling,
neezing, and Laughing, because the spleenaticke can do none of all these, but
of this more afterward.

The voice of a Dog, is by the learned, interpreted a railing and angry
speech: whereof comes that Canina facundia among Authors, for railing
eloquence. It is the nature of a Dog when he makes water, to hold up his
leg, if he be above six months old, or have been at procreation, the females
do it for the most part sitting, The making of urine. Aristotle. Pliny.
yet some of Albertus The factions of Dogs for their own ease.
they relieve themselves by tumbling and rolling too and fro: when they lie
down they turn round in a circle, two or three times together, which they do
for no other cause, but that they may the more commodiously lie round, and from
the wind.

They sleep as does a man, and therein dream very often, The sleep of Dogs.
as may appear by their often barking in their sleep: but it must be
diligently regarded of them that love to keep Dogs, that they permit them
not to sleep much, especially after their meat when they are young, for as
they are very whot, so in their sleep does their heat draw much pain into
their stomach and ventrickle. The time of their copulation is for the most part
at a Their copulation and lyming Columella
howbeit they are not to be suffered, because it weakeneth their bodies, and
dulleth in them all generosity: therefore, after one year they may safely be
suffered to come together, and not before: Neither is it material, whether in
Summer or Winter, but it is best in the beginning of the spring, but with this
caution, that Whelps of a litter or of one and the same Bitch, be never
suffered to couple; for nature reioyseth more in variety.

For then they grow salt and begin to be proud; yet in ancient time, Aristotle
for the more ennobling of their race of Dogs, they did not suffer them to
engender till the Male were four year old, and the female three: for then
would the Whelps prove more strong and lively. By hunting, labor, and
travail, the males are made more fit for generation, Tardinus
have continued in procreation till they were twentye year old, but this
exceeded* all natural reason. When they begin to be proud if you give them
leaven mingled with milk and salt, they will not straye and range abroad: at
the time of their copulation, they cleave together for a certain space as if
their hinder parts were glewed, The time of a Bitches whelping and bearing her
young. Aristotle
and so they are filled at one time. They bear their young the fifth part of
the year, that is about two months and odd days, but this reconing is not
general, for some kinds bear their young three months, and some more. They
bring forth many at a time sometime five, seven, nine, or

Albertus relates that he saw a Bitch of the Mastiue kind, which brought forth
at three litters fifty Whelps, that is nineteen at the first, eighteen at
the second, and thirteen at the third: but sometime she brings forth but one,
which is a good argument to prove that she is filled at the first lyming. They
are purged of their mensturous fluxes seven or fourteen days before they
grow proud, and again, at their time of littering; at other times they suffer
none.

The first they cast forth of their Womb is commonly a Male, which resembles
the father, Aristotle The h^st (...) is a male.
the other Males and females as it happens, (but it is accounted a prodigious
thing to litter all males or all females) wherein nature yields an excellent
argument of divine providence, for the first borne of all kinds has more
resemblance of the father then of the mother. They are also Whelped blind, and
so remain for nine or ten days, The blindness of Whelps.
because through their multitude they cannot be perfected in the Dammes
Bellye, which does not happen to Beasts which bear single, as sheep and
Goats. Aelianus A ^ecret in ^he^ food.
but they find it out by their nose and avoid it. It is good to let the
Whelps suck two months before they be weaned, and that of their own Damme,
for it is not so good for them to suck another, and in the mean time exercise
them to Cancer, at which time it is good to let them grow lean according to
the verses of Nemesian.

Consuetam minuisse saginam
Prosuerit, tenuesque magis retinere cibatus,
Ne grauts articulos deprauet pondere molles
Nam tum membrorum nexus nodosque relaxant. And afterward when they are six
months old amend their diet again that they may grow strong.
Tunc rursus miscere sero Cerealia dona
Conueniet, fortemque dari de frugibus escam.
Tardinus
They will not eat bucke-mast wherewithal Hogs grow fat, for that breeds
in them the pain of the head. Athenaeus
By eating the excrements of men they incur many diseases: they are made
drunk by the Herb Oenutt^as Crows be, they cannot endure Wine, but bread
sopped in Wine they devour, dried flesh and bread in Milk is their safest
food, if Cummin be now and then mixed in their bread, they are not much
troubled with wind in their bellyes. If you put a little Oil in their Water to
drink or lap, they will prove more able and swift to run. If he refuse and
loath his meat, take a little whot bread and give it him before meat, a remedy
for loathing meat.
or dip broune bread in vinegar and so press or squise the liquor thereof into
his nose, and it will ease him.

There is much a do to chose a Whelpe under the Damme that will prove the best
in Of the cho^^e o^^generous whelpe.
Some observe that which sees last, and take that for the best; other remove
the Whelps from the kennell and lay them several and apart one from the
other, then watch they which of them the Bitch first takes and carries into
her kennell again, and that they take for the best, or else that which
vomitteth last of all. Some again give for a certain rule to know the best,
that the same which waigheth least while it sucketh will prove best according
to the verses of Nemesian.

Pondere nam catuli poteris prependere vires
Corporibusque leaves, grauibus prenoscere cursu.
But this is certain that the lighter whelpe will prove the swifter, and the
heavier will be the stronger: Other make this experiment, first they compass
in the Puppies Tardinus
then set they them on fire about the whelps, and that puppy which leapeth over
first, they take for the best, and that which comes out last they condemn
for the worst. As Soon as the bitch has littered it is good to choose them you
mean to preserve, and to cast away the refuse, keep them black, or broun, or
of one color; for the spotted are not to be accounted of. And thus much of the
outward parts and the choice of Dogs. The manifold attributes of Dogs
among all Writers, do decipher unto us their particular nature; as that they
are called sharp, bitter, fierce, subtle, sounding, bold, Of the nature and
inward qualities of Dogs.
cared for attention, affable, swift, speedy, Clamorous, wild, faithful,
horrible, rough, fasting, cruel, ungentle, unclean, hurtful, biting, filthy,
smelling, sent-follower, watchful, mad, hoarse, and quicke-nosed; beside
many such other both among the Greeks and Latins. And likewise you shall
read of many particular Dogs, and their names appellatiue, both in Greek
and Latin, which may be remembered also in this place, to show what reconing
all ages have made of this beast: for it is necessary, that as soon as Scylax,
Spoude, Alke, Rome, Lacon, Acalanthis, Agree, Labros, Hylactor, Alleus, Argus
(one of Ulysses Dogs) Asbolus, Augeas, Aura, Bria, Polis, Bremon, Katnon,
Can^^che, Happarus, Charon, Chorax, Harpia, Lycitas, Chiron, Lycisca, Arcas,
Dromas, Gnome, Eba, Hybris, Hyleus, Maira, Melampus, Orne, Lethargos, Nape;
beside infinite other among the ancients: but among the later writers, Turcus,
Niphus, Falco, Ragonia, Serpens, Ichtia, Pilaster, Leo, Lupus, Stella, Fulgur,
Bellina, Rubinum, Satinus, and Furia: so that every Nation, and almost every
man has a proper and peculiar name for his Dog, as well as for his Ox.

There is not any creature without reason, more loving to his Master, Of the
love of a Dog.
nor more serviceable Pliny Plutarch Homer A secret to pacify an angry Dog.
Aelianus
yet herein appears their Noble spirit, for if any fall, or sit down on the
ground and cast away his weapon, they bite him not; taking that declining for
submissiue pacification. They meet their master with reverence and joy,
crouching or bending a little, (like shamefast and modest persons:) and
although they know none but their master and familiars, yet will they help any
man against another Wild beast. They remember voices, and obey their leaders
hissing or whisling.

There was a Dog in Venice which had been three years from his Master, a
history of a dogs memory.
yet Gillius K^amides a secret in the fear of a dog
is most full of stomach and courage; yet the tongue or skin of an Hyaena (by
natural instinct) makes him run away: sometimes they will agree with
Wolves, for they have engendered together, and as the lute-strings made of a
Wolf and a Lamb cannot agree in music, but one of them will break, so also
will a Dogs and a lambs.

Aelianus thinks that Dogs have reason, The reason of Dogs.
and use logic in their hunting for they will cast about for the game, as a
disputant does for the truth, as if they should say either the Hare is gone on
the left hand, or on the right hand, or straight forward, but not on the

There is a Nation of people in Ethiopia (called Nubae) which have a Dog in
such admirable estimation, that they give unto him the honor of their King;
Solinus Aelianus Pliny. Giraldus The honor done to dogs
for they have no other in their religious processions, and gesticulations,
dumble-idle-gods, to carry about with them two Dogs, one Hawke, and one Ibis,
and these they call four leters: by the two Dogs, they signify the two
Hoemishpheres which continually watch and go over our heads; by the Hawke, the
sun; for the Hawke is a whot creature, and lives upon destruction: by the
Ibis, the face of the Moon; for they compare the black feathers in this bird
to her dark part, and the white to her light: Other by the Dogs, do
understand the two Tropicks, which are (as it were the two porters of the sun
for the South and North; by the Hawke, they understand the equinoctial or
burning line, because she flies high: by the Ibis, the Zodiac: and indeed
those painters which could most aritificially decipher a Nicias) were greatly
reverenced among the Egyptians.

The like folly (or impious beastliness) was that of Galba, who forsook the
presidents of his predecessors in stamping their coin with their own image,
and imprinted thereupon his sealing ring, Coelius
left him by his forefathers, wherein was engraven, a dog bending upon his
female. I know not for what cause, the star in the midst of heaven whereunto
the sun comes about the Calends of July, was termed Canis (a Dog) and
the whole time of the appearance of that star, which is about thirty days,
should be called Dog days; but only because then the heat of the Sun
does torment the bodies of men twice so much as at other times: whereupon they
attribute that to the star (which they call Sirius) which rather is to be
attributed to the Sun during that time every year.

Others fable, Varinus
that there is another star close to him (called Orion,) who was an excellent
Canis beside him was his hunting dog: but by this star called of the
Egyptians Solachin, and of the Graecians Astrocynon, Hesychius Arnobius
comes that Egyptian Cynicke year which is accomplished but once in a 1460.
years. Unto this star were offered many sacrifices of Dogs in ancient
time whereof there can be no cause in the World, as Ovid well notes in these
verses: Pro cane sidereo canis hic imponitur arae:
Et quare fiat nil nisi nomen habet.


As among the Carians, whereupon came the proverb of Caricum Sacrificium, for
they sacrified a Dog in stead of a Goat, Pliny
and the young Puppyes or Whelps were also accounted

The Romans and Graecians had also a custom to sacrifice a Dog in their Lycaan
and Lupercall feasts, which were kept for the honor of Pan, who defended their
flocks from the Wolf, Plutarch
and this was performed in February yearly, either because that the Dogs were
enemies to Wolves, or else for that by their barking, they draw them away in
the night time from their City: or else, because they reckoned that a dog
was a pleasing beast to Pan, who was the keeper of Goats: so also the Graecians
did offer a dog to Hecata who has three heads, one of a Horse, another of a
dog, and the third head in the midst of a wild man: and the Romans to
Genetha, for the safe custody and welfare of all their household affairs.

Their household Gods (called Lares) were pictured and declared to the people
sitting in Dogs-skinnes, and Dogs sitting beside them, either because they
thereby signified their duty to defend the house and household, or else as
Dogs are terrors to thieves and evil beasts, so these by their assistance
were the punishers of wicked and evil persons: or rather that these Lares were
wicked spirits pryeng into the affairs of every private household, P^stus
Coelius
whom God used as executioners of his wrathful displeasure, upon godless men.

There were Dogs sacred in the Temple of Aesculapius, because he was
nourished by their milk; and Jupiter himself was called Cynegetes, that is, a
Dogge-leader; because he taught the Arcadians first of all to hunt away noisome
beasts by the help of Dogs: so also they sacrificed a Dog to Mars, because
of the boldness of that creature. To conclude, Arnobius Gyraldus
for they joined the shapes of men and Beasts together (says Arnobius) to
make Gods Omnigenumque deum monstra and latrator Anubis, such were their
Cynocephali, Ophiocephali, Anubis, Hecata, that is as much to say, as half
men, half Dogs, half Serpents, but generally all Monsters: and for the many
imaginary virtues the ancients have dreamed to be in Dogs, they also in many
places have given unto them solemn funerals in their hallowed Coemiteries, and
after they were dead, they ceased not to magnify them, as Alexander, Of
dishonor and ignobility of Dogs.
which built a City for the honor of a Dog.

All this notwithstanding, many learned and wise men in all ages have rekconed a
Dog but a base and an impudent creature, for the Flamen Dialis of Jupiter in
Rome, was commanded to abstain from touching of Dogs, for the same reason,
that they were prohibited and not permitted to enter into the castle of Athens
and Isle of Delos, because of their public and shameless copulation: and
also, that no man might be terrified by their Marcellus
Arripit vt lapidem catulus, morsuque fatigat,
Nec precussori mutua damna facit.
Sic plerique sinunt reros clabier hosts,
Et quos nulla grauant noxia dente petant.


Likewise men of impudent wits, shamlesse behauiors in taking and eating meat,
were called Cynicks; for which cause Athenaeus speaks unto Cynicks in this
sort: You do not O Cynici lead abstinent and frugall lives but resemble
Dogs: and whereas this foure-footed beast differs from other creatures in
four things, Porphyrius
you only follow him in his viler

The impudency of a Dog is eminent in all cases to be understood, Homer Horace
for which cause that audatious Aristogiton son of Cidimachus was called a
Dog, and the furies of ancient time were figured by black Dogs, and a Dog
was called Erinnis: Cerberus himself with his three heads signified the
multiplicity of Devils, that is, a Lions, a Wolfes, and a fawning Dogs, one
for the earth, another for the Water, and the third for the air: for which
cause Hercules in slaying Cerberus, is said, to have overcome all temptation,
vice, and wickedness, for so did his three heads signify: other by the three
heads, understand, the three times; by the Lion, the time present; by the
wolf, the time past; and

It is delivered by authors, that the root of Oliander, or else a Dogs tooth
bound about the arm, do restrain the fury and rage of a Dog: also there is
a certain little bone in the left side of a Toade (called Apocynon) for the
virtue it has in it against the violence of a Dog: It is reported by Pliny,
that if a live Rat be put into the pottage of Dogs, after they have eaten
thereof they will never bark any more, and Aelianus affirms so much of the
Weasils tail, cut off from him alive, and carried about a man: also if one
carry about him a Dogs heart, or Liver, Constantius
or the skin wherein Puppies lie in their dams belly (called the Secundine)
the like effect or operation is attributed to them against the violence of dogs.

Nylus about the bigness of a Bean, at first sight whereof a dog will run
away. Such as these I saw at Lions in France, which they called Sea-beanes,
Stobaeus
and they prescribed them to be hanged about a Nurses neck to increase her
milk: but to conclude the discourse of the baseness of a Dog, those two
proverbs of holy Scripture, one of our Savior Mat. 7. Give not that which is
holy to Dogs; and the other of Saint Peter 2. Epistle Cap. 2. the Dog is
returned to the vomit, do sufficiently convince, that they are emblems of
vile, cursed, railing, and filthy men; The use of their parts.
which esteem not holy things, but eat up again their own vomits.

The skins of Dogs are dressed for gloves, and close Boots, the which are
used by such as have vlcerous and swelling Legs or Limbs, for by them the
aflicted place receives Blondus.
it is not exasperated with Woollen. The Turks color their Dogs tails
withred, and it is a custom of Hunters to take Dogs and tie them in the Woods
unto trees by their stones, for by crying they provoke the Panther to come unto
them.

It is not to be doubted but that the flesh of dogs, is used for meat in
many places although the opinion of Rasis be true and consonant to reason, that
all devouring Creatures, as Dogs, Foxes, and Wolves; have no good flesh for
meat, because they engender melancholy; and yet Galen thinks, that it is
like to the flesh of a Hare, especially young Whelps were held among the
Romans a delicate meat, and were used by their priests; and among Whelps
they attrybuted most virtue to their flesh which were eaten before they did
see, Oppianus The flesh of Dogs eaten.
for by them came no evil humor at al, as is often set down in Plautus.
Instaurion^.


Peter Martyr and Scaliger do affirm, of Cozumella, and Lucatana, and other
Islands of the new World, that the people there do eat a kind of Dog which
cannot bark: Corsica, which are fierce, angry, Wild, cruel, audatious,
dissemblers, active and strong, do also seed upon Dogs both wild and tame:
and it is thought that their meat is a little furtherance to their
inclination, for such is the natural disposition of Dogs: and Sciltbergerus,
in the book of peregrinations affirms also, that the Tartarians in Ibissibur
do after the same manner feed upon the flesh of Dogs: from hence it
comes, that men resemling a Dog in a plain forhead and narrow, are said to
be foolish; in a smooth and stretched out, flatterers; those which have great
voices like a Ban-dog, are strong; they which rail much (like often barking
Dogs) are of a doggish, angry, disposition. He which has a great head like a
Dog is witty; Admantius
he which has a little head like an Asses is blockish, they which have fiery
eyes like Dogs, are impudent and shameless: Thin lips with narrow Carnarius
observes, vain glorious braggarts. A wide mouth, betokens a cruel, mad,
and wicked disposition; a sharp nose, an angry mind: as a round, blunt, and
solid Nose, signifies a Lions stomach and worthiness. A sharp chin, vain
babbling and wantonness; they which are small in their girting stead about
their Ioynes, do much love hunting.

Stobaeus in his wicked discourse or dispraise of women affirms, that the
cursed, sharp, smart, curious, daynty, clamorous, implacable and
wanton-rowling-eyed Women, were derived from Dogs: and Hesiode to amend the
matter says, when Jupiter had fashioned Mercury to infuse into him a Canine
mind, and a clamorous inclination: but the Proverb of Solomon Cap. 30.
concludes the excellency of a Dog saying: There be three things which go
pleasantly, and the fourth orders his pace aright: The Lion, which is the
strongest among Beasts, and fears not the sight of any body: Munsterus
a hunting Dog strong in his loins, a Goat, and a King against whom there is
no rising up: by all which is deciphered a good King; for the Lion ryseth not
against beasts, except he be provoked; the Dog rises not against his friends,
but wild beasts; and the he-Goat goes before his flock like a guide and
keeper.

OF THE GREY-HOVND,
AMong the diverse kinds of hunting Dogs, the Greyhound or Grecian Dog, The
name of a greyhound
called Thereuticos or Elatica (by reason of his swiftness,) strength, and
sagacity to follow and devour wild beasts of great stature, deserves the
first place; for such are the conditions of this Dog, as Plato has observed,
Gratius; Siccanis illa suos taciturna superuenit hosts. Like to the Dogs of
Acarnania which set upon their game by stealth. Of these are the greatest dogs
of the world, which in this place are briefly to be remembered.



These have large bodies little heads, beaked noses, but flat, broad faces
above their eyes, Oppianus Their description. Plutarch
long necks but great next to their bodies, fiery eyes, broad backs, and most
generous stomachs, both against al wild beasts and men also. Their rage is so
great against their prey, that sometimes for wrath they loose their eie-sight.
They will not only set upon Bulls, Boars, Their desire of fit game.
Mantuan notes in this verse; Et Truculentus Helor certare leonibus audens.
The greatest dogs of this kind are in India, Scithia, and Hircania, Countries
of Greyhounds.
and among the Scithians they join them with Asses in yoke for ordinary
labor. The Dogs of India are conceived by Tigres, for the Indians will take
diverse femals or Bitches, and fasten them to trees in woods where Tygres abide:
whereunto the greedy ravening Tiger comes, Generation by Tygres. Aristotle
and instantly deuoureth some one or two of them, if his lust do not restrain
him, and then being so filled with meat (which thing Tigers sildome meet
withal) presently he burns in lust and so lymeth the living Bitches, who are
apt to conceive by him: which being performd he retireth to some secret place,
and in the mean time the Indians take away the Bitches, of whom come these
valourous dogs, which retain the stomach and courage of their father, but the

Of this kind were the Dogs given to Alexander by the King of Albania, Pliny. A
history of Alexanders dogs.
when he was going into India, and presented by an Indian, whom Alexander
admired, and being desirous to try what virtue was contained in so great a
body, Gillius Aelianus Pliny. Strabo Pollux.
caused a Boar and a Heart to be turned out to him, and when he would not so
much as stir at them, he turned Bears unto him, which likewise he disdained
and rose not from his kennel; wherewithal the king being moved, commanded the
heavy and dull beast (for so he termed him) to be hanged up: his keeper the
Indian informed the king that the dog respected not such beasts, but if he
would

Immediately a Lion was put unto him, at the first sight whereof he rose with
speed (as if never before he saw his match or adversary worthy his strength)
and bristling at him, made force upon him and the Lion likewise at the Dog,
but at the last, the Dog took the Chappes or snowt of the Lion into his
mouth, where he held him by maine strength until he strangled him, do the
Lion what he could to the contrary, the King desirous to save the Lions life,
willed the Dog should be pulled off, but the labor of men and all their
strength was too little to loosen those irefull and deep biting teeth which he
had fastened. Then the Indian infourmed the King that except some violence were
done unto the Dog to put him to extreme pain, he would sooner die then let
go his hold; whereupon it was commanded to cut off a piece of the Dogs
tail, but the Dog would not remove his teeth for that hurt: then one of his
legs were likewise severed from his body, whereat the Dog seemed not
apalled; after that another leg, and so consequently all four, whereby the
truncke of his body fell to the ground, still holding the Lions snowt within
his mouth, and like the spirit of some malicious man choosing Indian perceiving
in the K. to mitigate the Kings sorrow, presented unto him four other Dogs
of the same quantity and nature, by the gift whereof he put away his passion,
and received reward with such a recompense as well beseemed the dignity of
such a King, and also the quality of such a present.

Pliny reports also that one of these did fight with singular courage and
policy with Albanian Dogs. The Arcadian Dogs are said to be generated of Lions.
Pollux The Alb^^ian Dogs Solmus. Seneca
In Canaria one of the fortunate Islands, their Dogs are of exceeding stature.

The Dogs of Creete are called Diaponi, and fight with wild Boares: the Dogs
of Epirus called Chaonides of a City Chaon, are wonderfully great and fierce;
they are likewise called Molosssi, of the people of Epirus so termed, these are
feigned to be derived of the Dog of Cephalus, The Dogs Molosse of o^ Creet.
Aristotle. Albertus Varinus.
the first Greyhound whom stories mention: and the Poe^s say, that this
Greyhound of Cephalus, was first of all fashioned by Vulcax in Monesian brass,
and when he liked his proportion, he also quickened him with a soul, and gave
him to Jupiter for a gift, who Europa, she also to Minos, Minos to Procris,
and Procris gave it to Cephalus: his nature was so resistable, that he ouertook
all that he hunted, like the Teumesian Fox. Therefore Jupiter to avoid
confusion, turned both the incomprehensible beasts into stones. This Moloskus
or Molossus Dog, is also framed to attend the folds of Sheep, and does defend
them from Wolves and thieves, whereof Virgill writes thus: Veloces Spartae
catulos acremque Molossum
Pasce fero pingui nunquam custo dibus illis
Nocturum stabulis, furem incursusque luporum
Aut imparatos a Tergo horrebis Iberos.


These having taken hold, will hardly be taken off again, like the Indians
and Prasian incommodestici, that is, modi nescij such as know no mean, which
caused Horace to give counsel to keep them tied up saying.

Teneant acres tora molossos. The people of Epirus do use to buy these Dogs
when they die, and of this kind were the Dogs of Scylla, Pollux.
Nicomedes, and Eupolides. The Hircanian Dogs are the same with the Indian.
The Poeonian, Persian, and Median, are called Syntheroi, that is companions,
bost of hunting, and fighting, as Gratius writes: Indocilis dat proelia medus.

The Dogs of Locus and Lacaene are also very great and fight with Bores.
There are also a kind of people called Cynamolgi, Xenophon. ^e^^as
near India, so called because for one half of the of people that live upon
the m^^^ of Dogs
which descend from the Woods and Mountains of India unto them yearly, from
the Summer solstice to the middle of Winter, in great numbers of swarms like
Bees returning home to their Hiues and Hony-combes; These cattle set upon the
people and destroy them with their Horns, except their Dogs be present with
them, which are of great stomach and strength, that they easily tear the Wild
cattle in pieces, and then the people take such as be good for meat to
themselves, and leave the other to their dogs to feed upon: Aelianus
the residue of the year they not only hunt with these Dogs, but also milk
the females drinking it up like the milk of sheep or Goats. These great dogs
have also devoured men, for when the servant of Diogenes the Cynike ran away
from his master, being taken again and brought to Delphos, for his
punishment he was torn in pieces by Dogs. Aelianus Dogs deuourers of men.
Euripedes also is said to be slain by dogs, whereupon came the proverb C^^os
Dike, a Dogs revenge: for King Archelaus had a certain dog which ran away from
him into Thracia, and the Thracians Valerius m^^
laid a punishment upon them for that offense, that by a certain day they
should pay a talent; the people breaking day, suborned Evripides the Poet (who
was a great favorite of the Kings) to mediate for them, for the release of that
fine; whereunto the king yealded: afterward as the said king returned from
hunting, his dogs straggling abroad, met with Euripedes and tore him in pieces,
as if they sought revenge on him, for being bribed against their fellow which
was slain by the Thracians. But concerning the death of this man, it is more
probable that the dogs which killed him, were set on by Aridaeus and Cratenas,
two Thessalian poets his emulatours and corriuals in poetry, which for the
advancement of their own credit, cared not in most savage and Barbarous manner,
to make away a better man then Actaeon, Thrasus, and Linus; of Thrassus Onid
writes thus; Praedaque sis illis quibus est laconia Delos
Aute diem Raptonon ade unda Thraso.


And of Linus and Actaeon in this manner; Quique verecunda speculantem membra
Dianae,
Quique Crotopiaden diripuere Linum.
Lucian that scoffing Apostata, who was first a Christian and afterward
endeauored all his wit to rail at christian religion, even as he lacerated and
rent his first profession, so was he rent in pieces by dogs; and Heraclitus the
Philosopher of Athens, having been long sick and under the hands of
Physicians, he oftentimes anointed his body with Bugils-sewet, and Ranisius
and for the desire of the fat tore his body in pieces. I cannot here forget
that memorable story of two christian Martyrs, Gorgonius and Dorotheus, which
were put to death under Diocletian in the ninth persecution, and when they were
dead, Ranisius Text
their carkases were cast unto hungry dogs of this kind, kept for such
purposes, yet would not the dogs once so much as stir at them, or come near
to touch them; and because we may judge that the ravening nature of these
creatures was restrained by divine power, we also read that when Benignus the
Martyr, by the commandment of Aurelian, was also thrown alive to be devoured
of these dogs, he escaped as free from their teeth, as once Daniell did from
the Lions den. I may also add unto these the dogs of Alania and Illiria,
called Mastini, who Anthologius speaks off, that leaped into the sea after a
Dolphin, and so perished; or that called Lidia, slain by a Boar; whose
epitaph Martial made as follows: Amphitheatrales inter nutrita magistros
Lydia dicebar, domino fidissima dextro
Nec qui Dictaea Cephalum de gente secutus.
Non me longa dies, nec inutilis abstulit aetas.
Fulminea spumantis apri sum dente perempta,
Nec quaerar inferras quamuis cito rapta per vmbras.

Qui non Erigones mallet habere Caenem
Lucifera pariter venit ad aestra deae
Qualia Dulychio fata fuere cani
Quantus erat Calydon aut Erymanthe tuus,
Non potui fato nobiliore mori.
There be in France certain great Dogs (called Auges) which are brought out of
great Britain, The French Dogs.
to kill their Bears, Wolves, and wild Boares; these are singularly swift and
strong, and their leaders, the better to arm them against the teeth of other
beasts, cover some of their parts with thick cloutes, and their necks with
broad collars, or else made of Badgers skins. In Gallia Narbon, they call them
Limier, and the Polonians call all great made Dogs for the Wolf and such like
beasts, ( Vislij:) and peculiarly for the Bear and Bore, Charzij, for Hares
and foul, Pobicdnizcij, and Dogs of a middle scantling beetwixt the first and
the second psij.

Greyhounds are the least of these kinds, and yet as swift and fierce as any
of the residue, The qualities and parts of a good Greyhound Pliny. Xenophon.
The best Greyhound has a long body, strong and reasonable great, a neat
sharp head, and splendent eyes, a long mouth, and sharp teeth; little ears
and thin gristles in them, a straight neck, and a broad and strong breast, his
forelegs straight and short, his hinder legs long and straight, broad
shoulders, round ribs, fleshy buttockes, but not fat, a long tail, strong and
full of sinnewes, which Nemesian describes elegantly in these verses.

-- Sit cruribus altis
Costarum sub fine decenter prona carinam:
Renibus ampla satis validis diductaque coras
Sit Rigidis multamque gerat sub pectore lato
Quae sensim rursus sicca se colligat aluo;
Cuique nimis molles fluitent in cursibus aures
Elige tunc cursu facitem facilem facilemque recursis
Dum superant vires, dum loeto flore iuuentus.
Of this kind, that is always the best to be chosen among the whelps, which way
gheth lightest: for it will be soonest at the game, and so hang upon the
greater beasts hindering their swiftnes, Bellisarius.
until the stronger and heavier dogs come to help: and therefore besides the
marks or necessary good parts in a Greyhound already spoken of, it is
requisite that he have large sides, and a broad midriffe or filme about his
heart, that so he may take his breath Pollux.
and on the right hand if he be on horseback.

The time of teaching a greyhound.
The best time to try them, and train them to their game is at twelve months
old, howbeit some hunt them at ten months if they be males, and at 8. months
if they be females, yet is it surest not to strain them or permit them to run
any long course till they be 20. months old, according to the old verse,
Libera tunc primum consuescant colla ligari:
Iam cum bis denos phoebe repauerit ortus,
Sed paruos vallis spatio septoue nouelli
nec cursus virtute parem etc.
Keep them also in the leame or slip while they are abroad until they see
their course, I mean the Hare or Dear, Aristotle Xenophon.
and losen not a young Dog, til the game have been on foot a good season, least
if he be greedy of the prey he strain his lim still they break. When the Hare
is taken, divide some part thereof among your Dogs, that so they may be
provoked to speed by the sweetness of the flesh.

The time of engendring.
The Lacedemon greyhound was the best breed, they were first bred of a Fox and
a dog, and therefore they were called Alopecides, these admit copulation in the
eight month of their age, and sometime in the sixth, and so continuing bearing
as long as they live, bearing their burden the sixth part of a year, that is,
about sixty days, one or two more or less, and they better conceive and are
more apt to procreation while they are kept in labor, Pliny. Aristotle.
Lacedemon Dogs differ in one thing from all other Dogs whatsoever, for
whereas the male outliueth in vulgar dogs of all countries the female, in
these the female out-liueth the male, yet the male performs his labor with
more alacrity, although the female have the sharper sense of smelling.

The noblest kind of dogs for the Hare keep home, unless they be led abroad,
and sildome bark: they are the best which have the longest necks, for which
cause, Albertus.
they use this artificial invention to stretch their necks; they dig a deep
hole in the earth, wherein they set the Greyhounds meat, who being hungry
thrusts down his head to take it, but finding it to be past his reach,
stretches his neck above the measure of nature, by custom whereof, his neck
is very much lengthned. Other place the Greyhound in a ditch, An invention to
make a Greyhound have a long neck.
and his meat above him, and so he teaches upward, which is more probable. It
is the property of these Dogs to be angry with the lesser barking Curs, and
they will not run after every trifling beast, by secret instinct of nature,
discerning what kind of beast is worthy or The diet of a good Greyhound.
They are norished with the same that the smaller hunting dogs are, and it is
better to feed them with milk then whay. There are of this kind called Veltri,
and in Italian Veltro, which have been procreated by a Dog and Leopard, and
they are accounted the swiftest of all other. The greyhounds which are most in
request among the Germans are called Windspill, alluding to compare their
swiftnes with the wind, the same are also called Turkischwind and H^tzhund, and
Falco a Falcon, is a common name whereby they call these Dogs. The French
make most account of such as are bred in the mountains of Dalmatia, or in any
other mountains, especially of Turkey, for such have hard feet, long ears, and
bristle tails. There are in England and Scotland, two kind of hunting dogs,
and no where else in all the Ane Rache, and this is a foot smelling creature,
both of wild beasts, Birds, and Fishes also, which he hid among the Rocks,
the female hereof in England is called a Brache. The second kind is called in
Scotland a Sluth-hound, being a little greater then the hunting hound, and in
color for the most part brown, or sandy-spotted. The sense of smelling is so
quick in these, that they can follow the footesteps of theeus, and pursue them
with violence until they overtake them; and if the thief take the water, they
cast in themselves also, and swim to the other side, where they find out again
afresh their former labor, until they find the thing they seek for: for this
is common in the borders of England and Scotland, where the people were wont to
live much upon theft, and if the dog brought his leader unto any house, where
they may not be suffered to come in, they take it for granted, that there is
both the stolen goods and the thief

THE HVNTING HOVND OF Scotland called Rache, and in English a HOVND.


THE SLVTH-HOVND OF Scotland, called in Germany a Schlatthund.


THE ENGLISH BLOVD-HOVNDE.


WE are to discourse of lesser hunting Dogs in particular, as we find them
remembered in any Histories and descriptions, Poets or other Authors, according
to the several Countries of their breed and education; and first for the
British Dogs, their nature and

The virtue of smelling called in Latin Sagacitas, is attributed to these as
to the former hunting Hound, of whom we will first of all discourse, and for
the qualities of this sense which makes the Beast admirable, Plautus seems
to be of opinion, that it received this title from some Magitians or sage
wisards (called Sagae) for this he says; in Cureull. What smelling or sagacity
in Dogs is.
speaking of this beast: Canem hanc esse quidem Magis par fuit: nasum aedepoll
sagax habet: It is also attributed to Mise, not for smelling, but for the sense
of their palate or taste; and also to Geese: In a Dog it is that sense which
searches out and descryeth the roustes, fourmes, and lodgings of Wild Beasts,
as appears in this verse of Liuius Andronicus:
Dirige odoriesquos ad certa cubilia canes.


And for this cause it has his proper Epithets as Odora canum vise, promissa
canum vis, and naribus acres, and vtilis: Pincianus called this kind Plaudi,
for so did Festus before him, and the Germans, Spurhund, and Leidthund,
Iaghund, because their ears are long, thin, and hanging down, and they differ
not from vulgar dogs in any other outward proportion, except only in their cry
or barking voice.

The nature of these is, being set on by the voice and Words of their leader,
to cast about for the sitting of the Beast, and so having found it, with
continual cry to follow after it till it be wearied, without changing for any
other, so that sometime the hunters themselves Bell^sari^
except in their hunting chase; and then they follow their game through woods,
thickets, thorns, and other difficult places, being always obedient and
attentive to their leaders voice, so as they may not go forward when he
forbids, nor yet remain near to the Hunters, whereunto they are framed by
Art and discipline, rather then by any natural instinct.

The White Hounds are said to be the quickest-sented and surest nosed, and
therefore best for the Hare: the black ones for the Boar, and the red ones
for the Heart and Roe: but heereunto I cannot agree, because their color
(especially of the two later) are too like the game they hunt, although there
can be nothing certain collected of their color, yet is the black hound
harder and better able to endure cold, then the other which

It is questionable how to discern a hound of excellent sense, yet (as Blondus
says) the square and flat Nose is the best sign and index thereof: likewise a
small head, The choice of a hound of the best nose.
having all his Legs of equal length, his breast not deeper then the belly, and
his back plain to his tail, his eyes quick, his ears long hanging, but
sometime stand up: his tail nimble, and the beak of his Nose always to the
earth, and especially such as are most silent or bark least.

Zenophon. Omni bonus Oppianus
they show their game. Now you are to observe, the diverse and variable
disposition of Hounds in their findidg out the beast: some, when they have
found the footesteps go forward without any voice or other show of ear or
tail. Again, another sort when they have found the footings of the beast,
prick up their ear a little, but either bark or wag their tails; other will
wag their tail but not move their ears, other again wring their faces and
draw their skins through over much intention, (like sorrowful persons) and so
follow the sent holding the tail immovable.

There be some again which do none of these, but wander up and down, barking
about (as they term it) take up any false scent for the truth, or which is
more reprehensible, never forsake the high ways, and yet have not learned to
hold their peace: unto these also you may add, those which cannot discern the
footings or prickings of the Hare, yet will they run speedily when they see
her, or else at the beginning set forth very hot, and afterward tire, and give
over lazily; all these are not to be admitted into the kennell of good hounds.

But the good and aproued hounds on the contrary, when they have found the
Hare, make show thereof to the hunter, by running more speedily, and with
gesture of head, eyes, ears, and tail, winding to the Hares muse, never give
over prosecution with a gallant noise, no not returning to their leaders, least
they loose advantage: these have good and hard feet, Quae laus prima canum?
quibus est audacia praeceps:
Quae nunc elatis rimantur naribus auras:
Et perdunt clamore feram, domiunque vocando
Insequitur tumulosque ^anis camposque per omnes.
Venandi sagax virtus viresque sequendi,
Et nunc demisso quaerunt vestigia rostro.
Increpitant quem si collatis effugit armis,
Noster in art labor positus, spes omnius in illa etc.
And therefore also it is good oftentimes to lead the hounds to the mountains
for exercise of their feet, when you have no Hare or other beast.

And whereas the nature of this Hare is, sometimes to leap and make headings,
sometime to tread sof^ly without any great impression in the earth, or
sometimes to lie down and ever to leap or iumpe out and in to her own form
or sitting, the poor hound is so much the more busied and troubled to retain
the small savor of her footings which she leaves behind her: for this cause
also it is to be noted, that the hound must be help no^ only with the voice,
^he best (...) o^ hunting.
eye, and hand of the hunter, but also with a seasonable time, for in frosty
weather the savor congealeth and freezeth with the earth, so as you cannot
hunt with any certainty until a thaw thereof, or till the sun arise.

Likewise if rain fall betwixt the going of the Hare and the hunting time, you
cannot hunt till the water be dried up, for the drops disperse the scent of the
Hare and the dry weather recollecteth it again. The Summer time also is not
for hunting, by reason the heat of the earth consumes the savor, and the
night being then but short, the Hare trauaileth but little, feeding only in
the evening and morning. Likewise the fragrancy of every green herb yields
such a savor, as does not a little obliterate and ouersway the savor of the
beast: and therefore Aristotle in his wonders, shows that in Aetna in the
summer time, there are such plenty of sweet smelling flowers especially of
violets, which overcome the Nostrils of the hounds, so as in vain they follow
the Hare. The best time therefore for hun^ing with these hounds is the Autumn
or fall of the leaf, because The first training of hounds.
is to take a live Hare and trayle her after you upon the earth, now one way,
now another; and so having drawn it a convenient space hide it in the earth;
afterward set forth your hound near the traile, who taking the wind runs
to and from through Woods, fields, pastures, path-wayes, and hedges, until he
find which way the Hare is gone, but with a soft and gentle pace, until at
length coming near the lodged Hare, he mendeth his pace and bestirreth
himself more speedily, leaping upon his prey like some serpent, or as an arrow
shot out of a bow, and so tearing it in pieces or killing it with joy, loadeth
himself with his conquest and brings it to his master with triumph, who
must receive both dog and it, with all tokens of love into his own bosom,
Nemesian to write thus; Quia freta si Morinum dubio refluentia ponto
O quanta est merces and quantum impendia supra
Protinus, haec vna est catulis iactura Britannis
Veloces, nostrique orbis venatibus aptos.


There are diverse Country Dogs like unto these, as the Geloni and Gnosij, Of
the hou^ds of sundry countries.
which caused Ovid to reckon and call Ichnobates one of Actaeons Dogs Gnosius:
whom Oppianus compares to the Polipus fish, which smelling in the waters the
leaves of Olives, by the sent is drawn to the land to eat them. The Spanish
Dogs whom the French call Espagneulx, have long ears, but not like a Braches,
and by their noses hunt both Hares and Conies, they are not rough but smooth
haired. The Tuscan Dogs are commended by Nemesian, notwithstanding, they are
not beautiful to look upon, having a deep shaggy hair, yet is their game
not unpleasant.

Soepe Canum forma est illis licet obsita villo,
Haud tamen in iucunda dabunt tibi munera praeda.

Quin et Tuscorum non est extrema voluptas.
The Vmbrian Dog is sharp nosed, but fearful of his sport, as Gratius
expresses.

Aut exigit Vmber: nare sagax e call feras,
At fugit aduersus idem quos efferent hosts
Tanta foret virtus; and tantum vellet in armis.
The Aetolian Dogs have also excellent smelling Noses, and are not slow or
fearful, whom Gratius expresses as follows: Aetola quaecunque canis de
stirpe malignum:
Seu frustra ruinis properat furor et tamen illud

Et clangore citat, quos nondum conspicit apros, officium, etc.
The French Dogs are derived or propagated of the Dogs of great Britain,
and are swift and quike sented, but not all, for they have of diverse kinds as
Gratius expresses in these words: Magnaque diuersos extollit gloria celtas.
They are very swift and not sharp nosed, wherefore they are mingled in
generation with the Vmbrian Dogs, and therefore he celebrateth in many
verses, the praise of the first Hunter (as he takes him.) Hagno Baeonius and
his Dog Metagon: and afterward the Dog Petronius, but it may be, that by
Metagon, he means the dogs of Lybia, because there is Petronius the dogs of
Italy, for Petronia is a river that falls into Tiber.

The Gramarians call a Dog engendered of a hound and an ordinary French Dog,
Vertagus a tumbler: because he sets himself to hunting, and brings his
pray to his master, whereupon Martial made this Distichon: Non sibi, sed
domino venatur vertagus acer
Illaesum leporem qui tibi dente feret.
Such be also other smelling Dogs, called in the German tongue (Lochhundle)
that is Terriors or Beagles: these will set upon Foxes and Badgers in the
earth, and by biting expel them out of their Denns; whereof Aristotle
reports a wonder, that one of them Boeotia, and there made so great anoyse by
barking, that the hunters went also into the cave, where they saw many strange
things which they related to the chief magistrate.

The water Spagnell.


Unto all these smelling Dogs, I may also add the water Spagnell, called in
French Barbeti, and in Germany ( Wasserhund:) who is taught by his master to
seek for things that are lost, (by words and tokens) and if he meet any
person that has taken them up, he cease not to bay at him, and follow him
til he appear in his masters presence. These also will take water-foule, and
hunt Otters and Beauers (although hounds also will do the same and watch the
stroke of a gunn when the fouler shoots, and instantly run into the water for
the dead foul, which they bring to their Master. They use to sneare their
hinder parts, that so they may be the less annoyed in swimming; whose figure
is in the bottom of the former page described.

I may here also add the Land-spaniell, Vogel-hund, a foul hound, although
all birds little fear Dogs except the Bustard, who has a heavy body, and is
not able to fly far: yet are these taught by Falconers to retriue and raise
Partridges, for they first Pobicuitzij) and a poet describes them thus: Stroza.
Nare sagax alius, campisque vndisque volucres
Quaerit and aduncus huc indefessus and illinc
Discurrit.


Of the mixed kind of Dogs called in English Mangrels or Mongrels.
THose we call Mangrels which though they be on both sides, propagated by
Dogs, yet are they not of one kind: for as once dogs coupled with Asses,
Leopards, Lions, Tigres, Apes, or any such beasts, according to the old verse;
Cani congeneres lupus, vulpes, Hyaena Tygris So now it is ordinary for the
greyhound to couple with the mastiue, the hound with the Greyhound, the
mastiue with the Shepherds dog, and the shepherds dog with any other cur or
Beagle, of these kinds we will now speak in order. And Monophyli, that is, one
single kind, and so hereby they added some qualities to their kind which they
wanted before either in strength of body, or craft of wit: for they derive both
of these from their sires, Commixtio^ of kinds in procreation. Pliny.
wherefore Oppianus declares that in the Commixtion of dogs, the ancients
coupled together these kinds, the Arcadians with the Eleians, the Cretensians
with the Paeonians, the Carians, with the Thracians, the Lacedaemonians with the
Tyrrhenian, the Sarmatian with the Iberian, and the Gallican dogs with the
Vmbrian, because they want the quick sense of smelling: according to these
verses: Quondam inconsultis matter dabit vmbrica Gallis
Sensum agilem, traxere animos de part Gelonae
Hyrcano, and vanae tantum Calydoniae linguae
Exibit vitium patre emendata Molosso
These dogs so generated are peculiarly termed in Greek Hybris and Hybrida as
Porphyrius writes. The French Wolves were wont to have a dog for their captain
or leader, and it is ordinary for wolves and dogs to couple together as by
experience it has bin observed: And it is certain that mastiue dogs had their
first beginning from this copulation, wherefore Virgill calls one of these
dogs Lycisa, Referensque lupumtoruo ore Lycisca. The dogs which are bred of
Thoes, are commended for their rare qualities and understanding parts in the
time of wars, by Hagnon Boeotius in these verses; Hic and semiferam thoum de
sanguine prolem
Seu norit voces, Seu Nudi ad pignora martis
Ee subiere ascu, and paruis domuere lacertis
vulpina specie.
Hircania do of themselves run into the Woods, (like adulterers) and seek
out the Tygres to engender with them, which thing Gratius remembers elegantly
in many verses: -- Vltroque grauis succedere Tigrini
Ausa canis, maiore tulit de sanguine fortum
Excutiet silua magnus pugnator adepta:
In the rank of these Mangrels, I may add in the next place those Dogs, Of
Dogs defenders and attenders on men. Blondus.
called by the the Graecians Symmaschi, and Somatophylakes, because they attend
upon men in their trauelles and labors to defend them, and are taught to fight
for them, both against men and other beasts; wherein they are as ready both to
take knowledge of violence offered to Canes socij defensores, sociable dogs; of
which there be two sorts, the first, is lesser, being of rough and long curled
hair, his head covered with long hair, Aelianus
of a pleasant and tractable disposition, never going far from his master,
such was the Dog of Tobit, and the Dog of Codrus the Poet, called Chiron, where
of Iuuenall makes mention; whose benevolence and ready mind toward their
keepers and norishers may appear by this story of Colophonius.

Upon a season he with a Servant, and a Dog, A history of the rare trust of a
Dog and and care to keep his masters goods. Tzetzes.
went to a certain Mart to buy merchandise, and as they travailed, his Servant
which carried the purse, diuerted a little out of the way, to perform the work
of nature, and the dog followed him: which being done, he forgot to take up
the purse of money that had fallen from him to the ground in that place,

Their watchful care over their masters may appear also by these stories
following, Aelianus. Tzetzes.
for the dogs of Xantippus followed their master to the ship, at what time he
was forewarned by the Oracle to depart out of Athens, by reason of the Persians
war in Greece, and so they sailed with him to Salamine; and as they sailed, by
the way he commanded one of them to be cast into the sea, who continued
swimming after the ship until he died, for which cause his master buried him.

Galon the Syracusan, in his sleep had a fearful dream that he was
stricken with fire from heaven, and with impression of fear, cried out very
lamentably; Asclepiades. Aelianus Pollux.
his dog lying beside him, and thinking that some peril or thief was doing
violence to his master, he presently leaped up to the bed, and with
scratching and barking awaked him, and so was he delivered from a horrible
fear* by the barking of his Dog.

The Tyrians which have the best and the first purple in the world, are said in
History to have it by the first occasion of Hercules dog. Hercules falling in
love with a Nymph called Tyro, and traveling toward her with his dog, he saw
the purple fish creeping upon a stone, the hungry dog caught the fish to eat
it, and having devoured it, his lips were all dyed or colored with the same:
when the virgin Nymph saw that color upon the dogs lips, she denied the love
of Hercules, except he could bring her a garment of that color, whereupon the
valiant man knowing by what occasion the dogs lips received such a tincture,
went and gathered all the purple fishes and Worms he could find, and
pressing their blood out of them, therewithal colored a garment and gave it
to the Nymphe; for reward whereof, he possessed the virgin, being by this
means the first inuentor of the Phoenissian

Among these are to be remembered those loving Dogs, who either have fought
for their masters and so defended them, Of fighting Dogs defending Men
Aelianus. Tzetzes.
or else declared them that murdered their keepers, or that which is more
admirable, leaped into the burning fires which consumed the dead bodies of
their norishers. Such an one was the dog of Caluus, who being slain in a
certain civil war at Rome, and his enemies coming about him to cut off his
head, his poor dog interposed his body betwixt the blows, and would not
suffer any foe once to touch his masters carcass, until by more then six
hundred soldiers the dog was cut in pieces, so living and dying a most
faithful companion and thankful friend to him that fed him.

The like was in a dog of Darius the last king of the Persians, after he was
slain by Besus and Narbazanes in the battle against Alexander, and so did the
dog of Silanion fight for his Master against thieves, Pliny*
and when he was slain, he departed not from the body, but kept it warily
from Dogs, Birds or wild Beasts, sitting upon his privy parts, and covering
them until the Roman captains came and buried it.

Tzetzes.
But most admirable was the love of a certain dog to his master punished with
death for the fact against Germanicus. Among other this dog would never go from
the prison, and afterward when his masters dead body was brought in the
presence of many Romans, the cur uttered most lamentable and sorrowful cries;
for which cause one of the company threw unto him some meat, to see if that
would stop his mouth, and procure silence but the poor dog took up the meat
and carried it to his masters mouth, not without the Tiber, the poor dog
leaped in after it, and endeauored by all the means his weakness could afford,
to keep it from sinking, in the presence of an inumerable multitude, which
without tears could not look upon the loving care of this brute beast.

The dogs of Gelon, Hieron, Lysimachus, Pyrrhus king of Epirus, Polus the
Tragoedian, and Theodorus, leaped into the burning fires which consumed their
masters dead bodies. Nicias a certain hunter going abroad in the woods,
chanced to fall into a heap of burning coals, having no help about him but
his dogs, there he perished, yet they ran to the high ways and ceased not
with barking and apprehending the garments of passengers, to show unto them
some direful event: and at last one of the trauailers followed the Marius
Caesarinus, for by their howling they procured company to draw him out of a
deep Cave, whereinto he was fallen on horseback, and had there perished
(being alone) except his hounds had released him. But that dogs will also
bewray the murderers of their friends and masters, these stories following,
may evidently manifest. Dogs detectors of murders


As King Pyrrhus by chance travailed in his country, he found a dog keeping a
dead corpse, Plutarch.
and he perceived that the dog was almost pined, by tarrying about the body
with out all food, wherefore taking pity on the beast, he caused the body to
be interred, and Pyrrhus mustred his soldiers, and every one appeared in his
presence, the dog also being beside him, he saw the murderers of his master,
and so not containing himself with voice, tooth, and nail, he set upon them:
the king suspecting that which followd, examined them if ever they had seen or
known that dog, they denied it, but the k. not satisfied, charged them that
surely they were the murderers of the dogs master, (for the dog all this
while remained fierce against them) and never barked before their appearance,
at the last their guilty consciences brake forth at their mouths and tongues
end, and so confessed the whole matter.

The like was of two French Merchants which travailed together, Blondus
and when they came into a certain wood, one of them rose against the other
for desire of his money, and so slew him and buried him. His dog would not
depart from the place, but filled the woods with howlings and cries; the
murderer went forward in his journey, the people and inhabitants near the
said wood, came and found both the murdered corpse and also the dog which they
took up and nourished til the fair was done and the merchants returned, at

To conclue this discourse with one memorable story more out of Blondus, who
relates that there was a certain maid near Paris, who was beloved of two
young men; one of them on a day took his staff and his Dog and went abroad
(as it was thought of purpose to go to his love) but it happened that by the way
he was murdered and buried, and the dog would not depart from the grave of his
master: at the last he being missed by his father and brethren, one of them
went also to seek him and see what was become of him,

A Combat.
and so the man presently made force at the dog, who leaping up to the face of
the murderer took him fast by the throat, and overthrew him, whereat the
wretch amazed, cried out, saying, take pity on me you reverend fathers, and
pull off the dog from my throat, and I will confess al, the which they
performed and he likewise declared the cause and manner of the whole murder,
for which thing he was deservedly put to death. And thus far of the lesser
sociable dogs, now follows the second kind of the greater.

The greater sociable Dogs of defense are such as soldiers use in wars,
Blondus. The greater sociable dogs or defenders
or else are acustomed to keep houses or cattle. This kind ought to be
horrible, fierce, strange and

Such an one was the Dog of Phaereus the tyrant of Thessalye, Blondus. Of
defe^ding dogs.
being a very great and fierce beast, and hurtful to all, except them who fed
him daily. He used to set this Dog at his chamber door to watch and guard him
when he slept, that whosoere was afraid of the Dog, might not aproach near
without exquisite torments. Angcas gave one of these to the Poet Eupolis, who
taught him by many signs and gestures for the love of his meat, to observe
his servant Ephialtes, if at any time he stole money from him. And at the last,
the wily Dog observed the servant so narrowly, that he found him robbing his
masters coffers: wherefore he instantly fell upon him and tore him in pieces.
The which Dog afterward died for sorrow of his masters death; whereupon
Aelianus says that the place of his death in A^gina was called the place of
mourning, to the day of his writing.

Nicomedes king of Bythinia had one of these Molosssian great Dogs, which he
norished very tenderly, Tzetzes. A^rianus.
and made it very familiar with him self: it fell out on a time, that this
king being in dalliance with his wife Ditizele in the presence of the Dog, and
she again hanging A cruel murder of a Q. by a Dog.
for sorrow whereof he soon after died; but the Queen was most nobly buried,
at Nicomedia in a golden sepulcher: the which was opened in the reign of the
Emperor Michaell, son of Theophilus; and there the woman's body was found
whole and not putrified, being wrapped in a golden vesture, which taken off,
and tried in furnace, yielded above an hundred and thirteen pounds of pure gold.

When a Dragon was setting upon Orpheus, as he was occupied in hawking, by his
Dogs his life was saved and the Dragon devoured. And when Caelius one of the
Senators Placentia being sick, was set upon by certain lewd fellows, he
reeceiued no wound till his Dog was slain.

A most memorable story of the dog of Rhodes
There was never any thing more strange in the nature of Dogs, then that which
happened at Rhodes besieged by the Turk, for the Dogs did there descerne
betwixt Christians and Turks; for toward the Turks they were most eager,
furious, and unappeasable, but toward Christians although unknown, most
easy, peaceable and placidious, which thing caused a certain Poet to write
thus: His auxere fidem quos nostro fulua sub aere
Arua, and Carpathij defendit littora ponti.
Pectora thoracum tunica sacrumque profano
Miratur, nutritque Rhodos, custodibus illis
It noctes animosa Phalanx innexa trilici
Seligit, and blande exceptum deducit ad vrbem.


There were two hundred of these Dogs which brought the king of Garamants
from banishment, Aelianus.
rescuing him from all that resisted. The Colophonian and Castabalensian or
Caspian Dogs fought in all their battles: Textor.
so likewise the Cimbrian, Hircanian, and Magnesia^ Dogs: Pliny. Pet. Martyr.
these also the Spaniards used in India to hunt out the naked people, falling
upon them as fiercely as ever they would upon Bores, or other wild beasts,
being pointed unto Vaschus the Spaniard caused Paera an Indian Lord, Deserved
punishment of unnatural copulation
and three other his wicked companions to be cast unto Dogs for their
unnatural lust: but the inhabitants of Caramair and Carib, do drive away the
Dogs, for through their admirable actiuitie in casting darts, they pierce
the Dogs ere ever they come near them with poisoned arrows. And thus much
for the great warlike defensive Dogs.

The Shepherds Dog.
In the next place follows the Shepherds Dog, called by Virgill, Pecuarius
Canis: and this cannot properly be termed a dumb keeper, for there is no
creature that will more stir, bark, and move noise, then one of these
against thief or wild beast. They are also

But yet that he be strong, quick, ready, and understanding, both for brauling
and fighting, so as he may fear away and also follow (if need be) the ravening
Wolf, and take away the prey out of his mouth; wherefore a square proportion
of body is requisite in these beasts, and a tolerable lightness of foot, such as
is the village dog, used only to keep houses, and hereof also they are the
best, who have the greatest or lowdest barking voices, Columella.
and are not apt to leap upon every stranger or beast they see, but reserve
their strength till the just time of employment.

They approve also in this kind above all other, the white color; because in
the night time they are the more easily discernd from the Wolf, or other
noisome beast; Blondus.
for many times it falls out that the Shepherd in the twy-light, Fronto.
strikes his Dog insted of the Wolf: these ought to be well faced, black or
dusky eyes, and correspondent Nostrils Strabo
and bring him up continually

They use also to cover their throat and neck with large broad collars,
pricked through with nails, for else if the wild beast bite them in those
places, the dog is easily killed: varro Fronto. Ths love of dogs to the
cattle they attend.
but being bitten at any other place he quickly auoideth the wound. The love of
such to the cattle they keep is very great, especially to sheep; for when
Publius Aufidius Pontianus, bought certain flocks of Sheep in the farthest
part of Vmbria, and brought Shepherds with him to drive them home; with whom
the dogs went along unto Heraclea, and the Metapontine coasts, where the
drouers left the cattle; the dogs for love of the Sheep yet continued and
attended them, without regard of any man, and forraged in the fields for Rats
and Mice to eat, until at length they grew weary and lean, and so returned
back again Vmbria alone, without the conduct of men, to their first masters,
being many days journey from them.

It is good to keep many of these together, at the least two for every flock,
that so when one of them is hurt or sick, the herd be not destitute: and it is
also good to have these male and female, yet some use to geld these, thinking
that for this cause they will the more vigilantly attend the flock: howbeit I
cannot assent hereunto, because they are too gentle and less eager when they
want their stones. They are to be taken from their dam at two months old, and
not before: and it is not good to give them hot meat, for that will increase
in them madness, neither must they taste any of the dead carcasses of the
Cattle, lest that cause them to fall upon the living; for when once they have
taken a smatch of their Xenophon a complaint of the sheep to the shepherds
concerning these dogs: we marvel (said the sheep) at thee, that seeing we yield
thee milk, lambs, and cheese, whereupon thou feedest; A pretty fable of the
Sheep and the Dog.
nevertheless thou give unto us nothing but that which grows out of the
earth, which we gather by our own industry; for perrill of death, whereunto the
sheep yielded, and not replied to the reasonable answer of so unreasonable a
beast, and this complaint you must remember was uttered when Sheep could
speak, as well as men, or else it notes the foolish murmuring of some vulgar
persons, against the chief ministers of state, that are liberally rewarded by
the princes own hands, for their watchful custody of the commonwealth, and
thus much for the shepherds Dog.

OF THE VILLAGE DOG
THis village Dog ought to be fatter and bigger then the Shepherds Dog, of
an elegant, square and strong body, being black colored, The color of this
Dog.
and great mouthed, or barking bigly, that so he may the more terrify the
Thief, both by day and night, for in the night the beast may seize upon the
robber before he discern his black skin, and therefore a spotted, branded,
party-colored Dog is not approved. His head ought to be the greatest part of
his body, having great ears hanging down, and black eyes in his head, a
Blondus commends in this kind, such as sleep with one eye open and the
other shut, Of mariners dogs on shipboard
so as any small noise or stir wake and raise him. It is not good to keep
many of these cursed Dogs together, and them few which be kept must be tied
up in the day time, that so they may be more vigilant in the night when they
are let loose. There Croatian Dog, resembling a Wolf in hair and bigness,
and such as are very watchful, according to the saying of the Poet.

Exagitant and lar, and turba Dianiae fures
Peruigilant que lares peruigilant que canes.
Vegetius
And such also they nourish in Towers and Temples; in Towers, that so they may
descry the approaching enemy when the Soldiers are asleep: for which cause,
Dogs seen in sleep, A^temdorus
signify the careful and watchful wife, servants, or Soldiers, which
foresee dangers and preserve public and private good.

There was in Italy a Temple of Pallas, wherein were reserved the axes,
instruments, and Diomedes and his colleages, Aristotle. ^r^ldus (...) keepers
(...). D^^^ Chriso.
the which temple was kept by Dogs, whose nature was, as the Author says)
that when Graecians came to that Temple, they would fawn upon them as if they
knew them; but if any other country men came, they showed themselves Wild,
fierce, and angry against them. The like thing is reported of a Temple of
vulcan in Aetna, wherein was preserved a perpetual and unquenchable fire, for
the watching whereof, were Dogs designed; who would fawn and gently flatter
upon all those which came chastely and religiously to worship there, leading
them into the Temple like the familiars of their God; but upon wicked and evil
disposed leude persons, they (...)
And by the like instinct, Scipio Affricanus was wont to enter into the
Capital, and command the Chapel of Jupiter to be opened to him, at whom no
one of the keeper-Dogs would ever stir, which caused the men-keepers of the
temple much to marvel, whereas they would rage fiercely against all other:
whereupon Stroza made these verses, falsely imputing this daemonicall illusion
to divine revelation.

Quid tacitos linquam quos very haud niscia Crete
Nec semper mendax, ait aurea templa tuentes
Parcereque haud vlli solitos, (mirabile dictu)
Docta Tyanei Aratos senioris ad ora
Non magico Cantu sed quod diuinitus illis
Insita vis omnio virtutis gnara latentis.
The like strange thing is reported of a Temple or Church in Cracouia,
Schneb^rg*
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, wherein every night are an assembly of dogs,
which unto this day (says the Author) meet voluntarily at an appointed hour,
for the custody of the Temple, and Antonius Schnebergerus for certain truth,
upon his own knowledge.




THere is also in England two other sorts of dogs, John Cay.
the figure of the first is here expressed, being apt to imitate al things it
sees, for which cause some have thought, that it was conceived by an Ape, for
in wit and disposition it resembles an ape, The first generation of Mimicke
Dogs.
but in face sharp and black like a Hedghog, having a short recurued Canis
Lucernarius) these being brought up with apes in their youth, learn very
admirable and strange feats, The feats of dogs.
whereof there were great plenty in Egypt in the time of king Ptolomy, which
were taught to leap, play, and dance, at the hearing of music, and in many
poor men's houses they served instead of servants for diverse uses.

These are also used by plaiers and Puppet-Mimicks to work strange tricks,
for the sight whereof they get much money: Albertus
such an one was the Mimicks dog, of which Plutarch writes that he saw in a
public spectacle at Rome before the Emperor Vespasian. The dog was taught to
act a play, wherein were contained many persons parts, I mean the affections
of many other dogs: at last there was given him a piece of bread, wherein as
was said was poison, having virtue to procure a dead sleep, which he received
and swallowed; and presently after the eating thereof he began to reele and
stagger too and fro like a drunken man, and fell down to the ground, as if he
had bin dead, and so lay a Caesar and all other the beholders.

To this may be added another story of a certain Italian about the year 1403.
called Andrew who had a red Dog with him of strange feats, and yet he was
blind. For standing in the Market place compassed about with a circle of many
people, there were brought by the standers by many Rings, Jewels, bracelets and
pieces of gold and silver, and there Abbas Vrspergensis, whereupon the common
people said, the dog was a devil or else possessed with some pythonicall
spirit: and so much for this dog.

Strabo. O^ the Melitaean Dogs.
There is a town in Pachynus, a promontory of Sicily (called Melita) from
whence are transported many fine little Dogs called ( Melitaei canes) they were
accounted the Jewels of women, but now the said town is possessed by
Fishermen, and there is no such reckoning made of those tender little dogs,
for these are not bigger then common Ferrets, or Weasils, yet are they not
small in understanding, nor mutable in their love to men: for which cause they
are also nourished tenderly for pleasure; whereupon came the proverb Melitaea
Catella, for one norished for pleasure, and Canis digno throno, because princes
hold them in their hands sitting upon their estate.

Theodorus the tumbler and dauncer had one of these, which loved him so well,
that at his death he leaped into the fire after his body. Aelianus
Now a days, they have found another Blondus. The art of making of little
Dogs.
beside the Melitaeon Dogs, either made so by art, as enclosing their bodies in
the earth when they are Whelps, so as they cannot grow great, by reason of the
place, or else, lessening and impayring their growth, by some kind of meat or
nourishment. These are called in Germany* Bracken Schosshundle and
Gutschenhundle, the Italians Bottolo, other Nations have no common name for
this kind that I know. Martial made this Distichon of a little French dog; for
about Lions in France there are store of this kind, and are sold very dear;
sometimes for ten Crowns, and sometimes for more.

Delitias paruae si vis audire catellae
Narranti breuis est pagina tota mihi.
They are not above a foot* or half a foot long, and always the lesser the
more delicate them are taught to stand upright, holding up their fore legs like
hands, other to fetch and carry in their mouths, that which is cast unto them.

There be some wanton Women which admit them to their beds, and bring up their
young ones in their own bosoms, for they are so tender, that they sildome
bring above one at a time, but they loose their life. It was reported that when
Grego in Syracuse was to go from home among other Gossips, she gave her maid
charge of two things, one that she should look to her child when it cried,
the other, that she should keep the little dog within doors.

Publius had a little dog (called Issa) having about the neck too silver bells,
upon a silken Martial made this elegant Epigram, comprehending the rare voice
and other gestures in it; Issa est purior osculo columbae
Issa est earior indicis lapillis
Hanc tu, si queritur loqui putabis
Collo nexa cubat capitque somnos
Et desiderio coacta ventris
Sed blandopede suscitat toroque
Castae tantus inest pudor catellae
Pictam publius exprimit tabella

Aut vtramque putabis esse veram
Issa est blandior omnibus puellis,
Issa est delitiae eatella publij
Sentit tristitiamque gaudiumque
Vt suspiria nulla sentiantur
Gutta pallia, non fefallit vlla.
Deponi monet and rogat leuari
Hanc ne lux rapiat suprema totam.
In qua tam similem videbis issam
Issam denique pone cum tabella
Aut vtranque putabis esse pictam.
Marcellus Empiricus recites a certain charm, made of the rind of a wild
figtree, held to the Spleen or liver of a little dog, and afterward hanged up
in the smooke to dry, and pray that as the rind or bark dries, so the liver
or Spleen of the dog may never grow; and thereupon the dog, (says that
foolish Empericke) shall never grow greater, then it was at the time that the
bark was hanged up to drying. To let this trifle go, I will end the discourse
of these little dogs with one story of their love and understanding.

There was a certain noble Woman in Sicily, Aelianus A lamentable story of the
discovery of an adul^erer by a little dog.
which understanding her husband was gone along journey from home, sent to a
lover (I should say an adulterer) she had, who Aelianus to set forth a virtue
of these little Dogs, how they observe the actions of them that nourish them,
and also some descretion betwixt good and evil.

The Dogs of Egypt are most fearful of all other, and their custom is to
run and drink, or drink of the River Nilus running, for fear of the
Crocodils; Aelianus Solinus.
Whereupon came the Proverb, of a man that did any thing slightly or hastily,
Vt canis and Nilo bibit. Alcibiades had a Dog which he would not sell under 28.
thousand Sesterces, that is seven hundred French Crowns; it was a goodly and
beautiful Dog, yet he cut off his tail, whereof he gave no other reason, being
demanded why he so blemished his Beast, Pollux.
but only that by that fact he might give occasion to the Athenians to talk
of him.

Caramania can never be tamed, for their men also are wild and live without al
law and ciuility: and thus much of Dogs in special. In the next place I thought
good to insert into this story the treatise of English Dogs, Aelianus
first of all written in Latin by that famous Doctor in Physic John Cay,
and since translated by A. F. and directed to that noble Gesner, which is this
that follows, that so the reader may choose whether of both to affect best.

The Preamble or entrance, into the Treatise following.
I Wrote unto you (well beloved friend Gesner) not many years past, a manifold
history, containing the diverse forms and figures of Beasts, Birds, and Fishes,
the sundry shapes of plants, and the fashions of Herbs, etc.

I wrote moreover, unto you severally, a certain abridgement of dogs, which in
your discourse upon the forms of Turner, comprehending a Catalogue or
rehersall of your books not yet extant, you promised to set f^r^h in print, and
openly to publish in the face of the world among such your works as are not
yet come abroad to light and sight. But, because certain circumstances were
wanting in my breuiary of English dogs (as seemed unto me) I stayed the
publication of the same, making promise to send another abroad, which might be
committed to the hands, the eyes, the ears, the minds, and the judgments of
the Readers.

Wherefore that I might perform that precisely, which I promised solemnly,
accomplish

Of these three sorts of kinds so mean I to entreat, that the first in the
first place, the last in the last room, and the middle sort in the middle
seat be handled. I call them universally all by the name of English dogs, as
well because England only, as it has in it English Canes Venatici, hunting
dogs. But because we English men make a difference between hunting and
fowling, for they are called by these several words Venatio, and Aucupium, so
they term the dogs who^ they use in these sundry games by diverse names, as
those which serve for the beast, are called Venatici, the other which are used
for the fowl are called Aucupatorij.

The first kind called Venatici I divide into five sorts, the first in perfect
smelling, the second in quick spying, the third in swiftnes and quicknes, the
fourth in smelling and nimblenes, the fifth in subtility and deceitfulnes,
herein these five sorts excels.

Of the Dog called a Harier, in Latin Leuerarius.
THat kind of Dog whom nature has endued with the virtue of smelling,
whose property it is to use a lustines, a readiness, and a couragiousnes in
hunting, and draws into his nostrelles the air or sent of the beast pursued
and followed, we call by this word Sagax, the Grecians by this word Ichueuten
of tracing or chasing by the foot, or Rinelaten, of the nostrells, which be
the instruments of smelling. We may know these kind of Dogs by their long,
large and bagging lips, by their hanging ears, reaching down both sides of
their chaps, and by the indifferent and measurable proportion of their making.
This sort of Dogs we call Leuerarios Hariers, that I may comprise the whole
number of them in certain specialities, and apply to them their proper and
peculier names, for so much as they cannot all be reduced and brought under one
sort, considering both the sundry uses of them, and the difference of their
service whereto they be appointed. Some for the Hare, the Fox, the Wolf, the
Heart, the Bucke, the Badger, the Otter, the Polcat, the Lobster, the Weasell,
the Conny. etc. Some for one thing and some for another.



Of the Dog called a Terrar, in Latin Terrarius.
Sagaces.

Of the Dog called a Bloudhound, in Latin Sanguinarius.
THe greater sort which serve to hunt, having lips of a large size, and ears
of no small length, do not only chase the beast whiles it lives, (as the
other do of whom mention above is made) but being dead also by any manner of
blood shed) these Dogs with no less facility and easiness, then auidity and
greediness can disclose and bewray the same by smelling, applying to their
pursuit, agility and nimblenesse, without tediousness, for which
consideration, of a singular specialty they deserved to be called Sanguinarij
bloodhoundes. And albeit peradventure it may chance, (as whether it chances
seldom or sometime I am ignorant) that a piece of flesh be subtily stolen and
cunningly conuayed away with such prouisoes and precaueats, as thereby all
appearance of blood is either prevented, excluded, or concealed, yet these kind
of Dogs by certain direction of an inward assured notice and privy marcke,
pursue the deed dooers, through long lanes, crooked reaches, and weary ways,
without

Moreover, although they should pass over the water, thinking thereby to
avoid the pursuit of the hounds, yet will not these Dogs give over their
attempt, but presuming to swim through the stream, persevere in their pursuit,
and when they be arrived and gotten the further bancke, they hunt up and down,
to and fro run they, from place to place shift they, until they have
attained to that plot of ground where they passed over. And Aelianus in his
sixth Book, and xxxix. Chapter, To enthumaticon kai dialecticon, to be as it
were naturally instylled into these kind of dogs. For they will not pause or
breath from their pursuit until such time as they be apprehended and taken
which committed the fact.

The owners of such hounds use to keep them in close and dark channels in
the day time, and let them loose at liberty in the night season, to the intent
that they might with more courage and boldness practice to follow the fellon
in the evening and solitary hours

In the borders of England and Scotland, (the often and accustomed stealing of
cattle so procuring) these kind of Dogs are very much used, and they are
taught and trained up first of all to hunt cattle, as well of the smaller as of
the greater grouth; and afterward (that quality relinquished and left) they
are learned to pursue such pestilent persons as plant their pleasure in such
practices of purloyning as we have already declared. Of this kind there is none
that takes the Water naturally, except it please you so to suppose of them
which follow the Otter, which sometimes haunt the land, and sometime uses the
water. And yet nevertheless all the kind of them boiling and broyling with greedy
desire of the prey which by swimming passes through river and flood, plunge
amyds the water,

But this property proceeds from an earnest desire wherewith they be
inflamed, rather then from any inclination, issuyng from the ordinance and
appointment of nature. And albeit some of this sort in English be called
Brache, in Scottish Rache, the cause hereof rests in the she-sex and not in
the general kind. For we English men call Bitches belonging to the hunting
kind of Dogs, by the term above mentioned. To be short it is proper to the
nature of hounds, some to keep silence in hunting until such time as there
is game offered. Other some so soon as they smell out the place where the
beast lurketh, to bewray it immediately by their importunate barking,
notwithstanding it be far and many furlongs of, cowching close in his cabin.
And these Dogs the younger they be, the more wantonly bark they, and the more
liberally, yet, oftentimes without necessity, so that in them, by reason of
their young years and want of practice, small certainty is to be reposed. For
continuance of time, and experience in game, ministers to these hounds, not
only cunning in running, but also (as in the rest) an assured foresight what
is to be done, principally, being acquainted with their masters watchwords,
either in reuoking

Of the Dogs called the Gasehound, in Latin Agasaeus.
THis kind of Dog which pursues by the eye, prevails little, or never a
whit, by any benefit of the nose, that is by smelling, but excels in
perspicuity and sharpness of sight altogether, by the virtue whereof, being
singular and notable, it hunteth the Fox and the Hare. This Dog will choose
and separate any beast from among a great flock or heard, and such a one will
it take by election as is

Our country men call this Dog Agasaeum. A gase-hound, because the beams of
his sight are so steadfastly settled and immovably fastened. These Dogs are much
and usually occupied in the Northern parts of England more then in the Southern
parts, and in feeldy lands rather

Of the Dog called the Greyhound, in Latin Leporarius.
WE have another kind of dog, which for his incredible swiftnes is called
Leporarius a Greyhound, because the principal service of them depends and
consists in starting and hunting the Hare, which Dogs likewise

For it is a spare and bare kind of Dog, (of flesh but not of bone) some are of
a greater sort, and some of a lesser, some are smooth skinned, and some are
curled, the bigger therefore are appointed to hunt the bigger Beasts, and the
smaller serve to hunt the smaller accordingly. The nature of the Dogs I find
to be wonderful by the testimony of all histories. For, as John Froisart the
historiographer in his 4. lib. reports. A Greyhound of King Richard, the
second that wore the Crown, and bare the Scepter of the realm of England,
never knowing any man, beside the kings person, when Henry Duke of Lancaster
came to the castle of Flinte to take king Richard, the Dog forsaking his former
Lord and master came to Duke Henry, fawned upon him with such resemblances of
goodwill and conceived affection, as he favored king Richard before: he
followed the Duke, and utterly Richard himself evidently perceived, accounting
this deed of his dog a Prophecy of his overthrow.

Of the Dog called the Leuiner, or Lyemmer in Latin Lorarius.
ANother sort of Dogs be there, in smelling singular, and in swiftness
incomparable. Leuinarius, a Leuitate, of lightness, and therefore may well be
called a light-hound, it is also called by this word Lorarius, a Loro, a leame
wherewith it is led. This Dog for the excellency of his conditions, namely
smelling and swift running, does follow the game with more eagernes, and takes
the prey with a jolly quickness.

Of the Dog called a Tumbler, in Latin Vertagus.
THis sort of Dogs, which compasses all by crafts, frauds, subtilties and
deceiptes, we English men call Tumblers, because in hunting they turn and
tumble, winding their bodies about in circle-wise, and then fiercely and
violently venturing upon the beast, does suddenly gripe it, at the very
entrance and mouth of their receptacles, or closets before they can recover
means, to save and succor themselves. This Dog uses another craft and
s^btilty: namely, when he runs into a warren, or fetches a course about a
conyburrough, he hunts not after them, he fraies them not by barking, he makes
no countenance

These Dogs are somewhat lesser then the hounds, and they be lancker and
leaner, beside that they be somewhat prick eared. A man that shall mark the
form and fashion of their bodies, may well call them mungrel Greyhounds if
they were somewhat bigger. But notwithstanding they counteruaile not the
Greyhound in greatness, yet will he take in one days space as many Conies as
shall arise to as big a burden, and as heavy a load as a horse can carry, for
deceit and guile is the instrument whereby he makes this spoil, which
pernicious properties supply the places of more commendable qualities.

Of the Dog called the theeuish Dog, in Latin Canis furax.


Of gentle Dogs serving the hawk, and first of the Spaniell, called in
Latin Hispaniolus.
SVch Dogs as serve for fowling, I think convenient and requisite to place in
the second Section of this treatise. These are also to be reckoned and
accounted in the number of the Dogs which come of a gentle kind, and of those
which serve for fowling, there be two sorts, The first finds game on the
land, the other finds game


ANother sort of Dogs be there, serviceable for fowling, making no noise either
with foot or with tongue, whiles they follow the game. These attend diligently
upon their master and frame their conditions to such becks, motions, and
gestures, as it shall please him to exhibit and make, either going forward,
drawing backward, inclining to the right hand, or yealding toward the left, (In
making mention of fowls, my meaning is of the Patridge and the Q^aile) when he
has found the bird, he keeps sure and fast silence, he st^ieth his steps and
will proceed no further, and with a close, covert, watching eye, lays his
belly to the ground and so creeps forward like a worm. When he approaches
near to the place where the bird is, he lies him down, and with a mark of his
paws betrayeth the place of the birds last abode, whereby it is supposed that
this kind of dog is called Index, Setter, being indeed a name most consonant
and agreeable to his quality. The place being known by the means of the Dog,
the fowler immediately opens and spreedeth his net, intending to take them;
which being done the dog at the customed beck or usual sign

Of the Dog called the water Spaniell, or finder, in Latin Aquaticus seu
Inquisitor.
THat kind of dog whose service is required in fowling upon the water, partly
through a natural towardnes, and partly by diligent teaching, is endued with
that property. This sort is somewhat big, and of a measurable Gesner) I have
described and set him out in this manner, namely powled and notted from the
shoulders to the hindermost legs, and to the end of his tail, which I did for
use and customs cause, that being as it were made somewhat bare and naked, by
shearing off such superfluity of hair, they might atchiue the more lightness,
and swiftnes, and be less hindered in swimming, so troublesome and needelesse a
burden being shaken off. This kind of dog is properly called, Aquaticus, a
water spaniel, because he frequenteth and has usual recourse to the water
where al his game lies, namely water fowls, which are taken by the help and
service of them, in their kind. And principally ducks and drakes, whereupon
Inquis^tores, searchers, and finders. Although the Ducke otherwhiles notably
deceives both the Dog and the Master, by dyuing under the Water, and also by
natural subtilty, for i^ any man shall approach to the place where they build,
breed, and sit, the hens go out of their neasts, offering themselves
voluntarily to the hands, as it were, of such of all inconveniences which
might grow of their return, by using many careful and curious caueats, least
their often hunting bewray the place where the young duklings be hatched. Great
therefore is their desire, and earnest is their study to take heed, not only
to their brood but also to themselus* For when they have an inkling that they
are espied, they hide themselves under turfes or sedges, wherewith they cover
and shroud themselves so closely and so craftily, that (notwithstanding the
place where they lurk be found and prefectly perceived) there they will harbor
without harm, except the water spaniel by quick smelling discover their
deceiptes.


THe Dog called the fisher, whereof Hector Boethus writes, which seeks for
fish by smelling among rocks and stones, assuredly I know none of that kind in
England, neither have I received by report that there is any such, albeit I
have been diligent and busy in demanding the question as well of fishermen,
as also of hunts-men in that behalf, being careful and earnest to learn and
understand of them if any such were, except you hold opinion that the Beauer or
Otter is a fish (as many have believed) and according to their belief
affirmed, as the bird Pupine, is thought Aelianus and Aelius, call the Beauer
kunapotamion a water dog, or a Dog-fish, I know likewise thus much more, that
the Beauer does participate this property with the dog, namely, that when
fishes be scarce they leave the water and range up and down the land, making
an insatiable slaughter of young lambs until their paunches be replenished,
and when they have Sea Vele, makes a spoil of fishes between rocks and
banckes, but it is not accounted in the catalogue or number of our English
Dogs, notwithstanding we call it by the name of a sea Dog or a sea-Calfe. And
thus much for our Dogs of the second sort, called in Latin Aucupatorij,
serving to take foul either by land or water.

Melitaeus or Fotor.
THere is, besides those which we have already delivered, another sort of
gentle dogs in this our English soil but exempted from the order of the
residue, the Dogs of this kind does Callimachus call Melitaeos of the Iseland
Melita, in the sea of Sicily (which at this day is named Malta, an Iseland
indeed, famous and renowned, with courageous and puisaunt soldiers valliantly
fighting under the banner of Christ their unconquerable captain) where

These dogs are little, pretty, proper, and fine, and sought for to satifie the
delicatenes of dainty dames, and wanton women's wills, instruments of folly for
them to play and dally withal, to tryfle away the treasure of time, withdraw
their minds from more commendable exercises, and to content their corrupted
concupiscences with vain disport (A selly shift to shun yrkesome idleness.)
These puppies the smaller they be, the more pleasure they provoke, as more
meet play-fellowes for minsing mistrisses to bear in their bosoms, to keep
company withal in their chambers, to succor with sleep in bed, and nourish
with meat at bourde, to lay in their lappes, and lick their lips as they ride
in their Wagons, and good reason it should be so, for coursenesse with
finenesse has no fellowship, but featnesse with neatness has neighborhood
enough? That plau^ible proverb verified upon a Tyrant, namely that he loved
his Sow better then his son, may well be applied to these kind of people, who
delight more in Dogs that are deprived of all possibility of reason, then they
do in children that be capeable of wisdom, and judgment. But this abuse
peradventure reigns where there has been long lack of issue, or

The virtue which remains in the Spaniel gentle, otherwise called the
comforter.
NOtwithstanding many make much of those pretty puppies called Spanyels gentle,
yet if the question were demanded what property in them they spy, which
should make them so acceptable and precious in their sight, I doubt their
answer would belong a coining. But seeing it was our intent to travail in this
treatise, so, that the reader might reap some benefit by his reading, we will
communicate unto such conjectures as are grounded upon

Dogs of a course kind serving for many necessary uses, called in Latin
Canis rustici, and first of the Shepherds dog called in Latin Canis Pastoralis.
THe first kind, namely the shepherds hound is very necessary and profitable
Edgar, who to the intent that the whole country might be euacuated and quite
cleared from wolfes, charged and commanded the Welshmen (who were pestered
with these butcherly beasts above measure) to pay him yearly tribute which was
(note the wisdom of the king) three hundred Wolfes. Some there be which write
that Ludwall Prince of Wales paid yearly to Edgar three hundred wolfes in the
name of an exaction (as we have said before.) And that by the means hereof,
within the compass and term of four years, none of those noisome and
pestilent beasts were left in the coasts of England and Wales. This Edgar
wore the crown royal, and bare the Scepter imperial of this kingdom, about
the year of our Lord, nine hundred, fifty nine. Since which time we read that
no Wolf has been seen in England, bred within the bounds and borders of
this country, mary there have been diverse brought over from beyond the seas,
for greedines of gain and to make money, for gasing and gaping, staring, and
standing to see them, being a strange beast, rare, and seldom seen in
England. But to return to our shepherds Dog. This dog either at the hearing of
his masters voice, or at the wagging and whisteling in his fist, or at his
s^rill and horse hissing brings the wandering weathers and straying sheep,
into the self same place where his masters will and wish is to have them,
whereby the shepherd reapeth this benefit, namely, that with little labor and
no toil or moving of his feet he may rule and guide his flock, according to
his own desire, either to have them go forward, or to stand still, or to draw
backward, or to turn this way, or take that way. For it is France, as it is in
Flaunders, as it is in Syria, as it is in Tartaria, where the sheep follow the
shepherd, for here in our Country the shepherd follows the sheep. And
sometimes the straying sheep, when no Dog runs before them, nor goes about
and beside them, gather themselves together in a flock, when they here the
shepherd whistle in his fist, for fear of the dog (as I imagine) remembering
this (if unreasonable creatures may be reported to have memory) that the Dog
commonly runs out at his masters warrant which is his whistle. This have we
oftentimes diligently marked in taking our journey from town to town, when we
have hard a shepherd whistle we have rayned in our horse and stood still a
space, to see the proof and trial of this matter. Furthermore with this dog
does the Shepherd take sheep for the slaughter, and

Of the mastiue or Bandogge called in Latin Villaticus or Cathenarius.
THis kind of dog called a mastiue or Bandog is vaste, huge, stubborn, ougly,
and eager, of a heavy and bourthenous body, and therefore but little swiftness,
terrible, and frightfull to behold, and more fierce and fell then any Arcadian
cur (notwithstanding they are said to have their generation of the violent
lion.) Villatici, because they are appointed to watch and keep farm places
and country cotages sequestered from common recourse, and not abutting upon
other houses by reason of distance, when there any fear conceived of thieves,
robbers, spoylers, and nightwanderers. They are serviceable, against the Fox
and Badger, to drive Wild and tame Swine out of Meadows, pastures, glebelands
and places planted with fruit, to bait and take the Bull by the ear, when
occasion so requires. One Dog or two at the uttermost, sufficient for that
purpose be the Bull never so monstrous, never so fierce, never so furious,
never so stearne, never so untameable. For is is a kind of Dog capeable of
courage, violent and valiant, striking cold fear into the hearts of men, but
standing in fear of no man, insomuch that no weapons will make him shrink, nor
abridge his boldness. them to rebel against the regiment of their ruler, but
to keep them within the limits of loyalty. I read an history answerable to
this of the self same Henry, who having a notable and an excellent fair
Falcon, it fortuned that the kings Falconers, in the presence and hearing of
his grace, highly commended his majesty's Falcon, saying, that it feared not to
intermeddle with an Eagle, it was so ventrous a Bird and so mighty, which when
the king heard, he charged that the Falcon should be killed without delay, for
the self same reason as it may seem) which was rehearsed in the conclusion of
the former history concerning the same king. This dog is called in like manner,
Cathenarius, a Cathena, of the chain wherewith he is tied at the gates, in the
day time, least being lose he should do much mischief, and yet might give
occasion of fear and terror by his big barking. And Cicero in his Oration had
Pro. S. Ross. be of this opinion, that such dogs as bark in the broad day
light should have their legs broken, yet our country men, on this side the
Seas for their carelesnes of life setting all at cinque and sice are of a
contrary judgment. For thieves rogue up and down in every corner, no place is
free from them, no not the princes palace, nor the countreymans cotage. In the
day time they practice pilfering, picking, open robbing, and privy stealing,
and what legerdemaine lack they? not fearing the shameful and horrible death
of hanging.

The cause of which inconvenience does not only issue from nipping need and
wringing want, for all that steal are not pinched with poverty, some steal to
maintain their excessive and prodigal expenses in apparel, their lewdnes of
life, their hautines of heart, Salacones me galorrou^ton, vain glorious and
arrogant in behavior, whose delight depends wholly to mount nimbly on
horsse-backe, to make them leap lustilie, spring and prance, gallop and amble,
to run a race, to wind in compass, and so forth, living altogether upon the
fatnes of the spoil. Othersome there be which steal, being thereto provoked by
penury and need, like masterles men applying themselves to no honest trade, but
ranging up and down, impudently begging and complaining of bodily weakness
where is no want of ability. But valiant Valentine the Emperor, by holsom laws
provided that such as having no corporal sickness, sold themselves to begging,
pleaded poverty with pretended infirmity, and cloaked their idle and slothful
life with colorable

Alfredus likewise in the government of his common wealth, procured such
increase of credit to iust^ce and upright dealing by his prudent acts and
statutes, that if a man traueling by the high way of the country under his
dominion, chanced to loose a budget full of Gold, or his capcase farsed with
things of great value, late in the evening, he should find it where he lost it
safe, sound, and untouched the next morning, yea (which is a wonder) at any
time for a whole months space if he sought for it, as Ingulphus Croyladensis in
his history Oikouros.

Of the Latinists Canis Coltos, in English the Dog-keeper. Borrowing his name
of his service, for he does not only keep farmers houses, but also merchants
mansions, wherein great wealth, riches, substance, and costly stuff is
reposed. And therefore were certain dogs found and maintained at the common
costs and Capitolium, to give warning of thieves coming. This kind of dog is
so called, In Latin Canis Laniarius, in English the Butchers dog.

So called for the necessity of his use, for his service affoordeth great
benefit to the butcher as well in following as in taking his cattle when need
constrains, urges, and requires. This kind of Dog is likewise called, In
Latin Molossicus or Molossus

After the name of a country in Epirus called Molossia, which harbors many
stout, strong, and sturdy Dogs of this sort, for the Dogs of that country are
good indeed, or else there is no trust to be had in the testimony of writers.
This dog is also called, In Latin Canis Mandatarius a Dog messenger or Carrier.

Upon substanciall consideration, because at his masters voice and
commandment, In Latin Canis Lunarius, in English the Mooner.

Because he does nothing else but watch and ward at an inch, wasting the
wearisome night season without slombering or sleeping, bawing and wawing at the
Moon (that I may use the word of Nonius) a quality in mine opinion strange to
consider. This kind of dog is In Latin Aquarius, in English a water drawer.

And these be of the greater and the waighter sort, drawing water out of wels
and deep pits, by a wheel which they turn round about by the moving of their
burthenous bodies. This dog is called in like manner.

Canis Sarcinarius in latin, and may aptly be Englished, a Tynkers Curre.
Because with marvelous patience they bear big budgets fraught with Tinkers
tools, and metal meet to mend kettels, porrige-pots, skellets, and chafers,
and other such like trumpery requisite for their occupacion and loytering
trade, easing him of a great burden, which otherwise he himself should carry
upon his shoulders; which condition

In latin Canes defensores: defending dogs in our mother tongue. If it chance
that the master be oppressed, either by a multitude, or by the greater
violence Come-parcke, a perilous bottom, compassed about with Woods too well
known for the manifold murders and mischeeuous robberies their committed.

Into whose hands this passieger chanced to fall, so that his ill luck cost
him the price of his life. And that Dog whose syer was English, (which Blondus
registreth to have been within the banks of his remembrance) manifestly
perceiving that his master was murdered (this chanced not far from Paris)
by the hands of one which was a suitor to the same woman, whom he was a wooer
unto, did both bewray the bloody Butcher, and attempted to tear out the
villains throat, if he had not sought means to avoid the revenging rage of the
dog. In fyers also which fortune in the silence and dead time of the night or
in stormy weather of the said season, the older dogs bark, ball, howl, and
yell, (ye^ notwithstanding they be roughly rated) neither will they stay their
tongues till the household servants awake, rise, search, and see the burning of
the fire, which being perceived they use voluntary silence, and cease from
yolping. This has bin, and is found true by

There was no fainting faith in that Dog, which when his master by a mischance
in hunting stumbled and fell, toppling down a deep ditch being unable to
recover of himself, the dog signifying his masters mishap, rescue came, and
he was hailed up by a rope, whom the Dog seeing almost drawn up to the edge of
the ditch, cheerfully saluted, leaping and skipping upon his master as though
he would have embraced him, being glad of his presence, whose longer absence he
was loath to lack. Some Dogs there be, which will not suffer fiery coals to
ly scattered about the hearth, but with their paws will rake up the burning
coals, musing and studying first with themselves how it might conveniently be
done. And if so be that the coals cast to great a heat, then will they bury
them in A hundred bars of brass and iron boltes,
Make all things safe from startes and from reuolts.
When Ianus keeps the gate with Argos eye,
That dangers none approach, ne mischief nie.
As Virgill vaunteth in his verses, Then if his master bids him go abroad,
he lingereth not, but raungeth over all his lands there about, more diligently,
Iwys, then any farmer himself. And if he find any thing there that is strange
and pertaining to other persons

For there be some, which bark only with free and open throat but will not
bite, some which do both bark and bite, and some which bite bitterly before
they bark.

The first are not greatly to be feared, because they themselves are fearful,
and fearful dogs (as the proverb imports) bark most vehemently.

The second are dangerous, it is wisdom to take heed of them, because they
sound as it were, an Alarm of an afterclap, and these dogs must not be over
much moved or provoked, for then they take on outragiously as if they were mad,
watching to set the print

The third are deadly, for they fly upon a man without utterance of voice,
snatch at him, and catch him by the throat, and most cruelly bite out collops
of flesh. Fear these kind of Curres, (if thou be wise and circumspect about
thine own safety) for if they be stout and stubborn Dogs, and set upon a man
at a sudden unawares. By these signs and tokens, by these notes and arguments
our men discern the cowardly Curre from the coragious Dog, the bold from the
fearful, the butcherly from the gentle and tractable. Moreover they
conjecture that a whelpe of an ill kind is not worth keeping, and that no dog
can serve the sundry uses of men so aptly and so conveniently as this sort of
whom we have so largely written already. For if any be disposed to draw the
aboue-named services more patient? And thus much concerning English dogs, first
of the gentle kind, secondly of the courser kind. Now it remains that we
deliver unto you the dogs of a mungrell or currish kind, and then will we
perform our task.

Containing Curres of the mungrell and rascal sort, and first of all the Dog
called in Latin, Admonitor, and of us in English, Wappe or Warner.
OF such Dogs as keep not their kind, of such as are mingled out of


THere is comprehended, under the Curres of the coursest kind, a certain dog
in kitchen-seruice excellent. For when any meat is to be roasted, they go into
a wheel, which they turning round about with the weight of their bodies, so
dilligently look to their business, that no drudge nor scullion can do the
feate more cunningly. Whom the popular sort hereupon call Turnespets, being the
last of all those which we have first mentioned.

or Tympanista.
THere be also dogs among us of a mungrel kind, which are taught and excercised
to dance in measure at the musical sound of an instrument, as, at the just
stroke of the drumbe, at the sweet accent of the Citerne, and tuned stringes of
the harmonious Harp, showing many pretty tricks by the gesture of their
bodies. As to stand bolt upright, to lie flat upon the ground, to turn round as
a ring holding their tails in their teeth, to beg for their meat, and sundry
such properties, which they learn of their vagabundicall masters, whose
instruments they are to gather gain withal in City, country, town,

Of other Dogs, a short conclusion, wonderfully engendered within the coasts of
this country.
OF these there be three sorts. The first, bred of a bitch and a Wolf, called
in Latin Lyciscus. The second of a Bitch and a Fox, in Latin Lacaena. The
third of a Bear and a Bandog, Vrcanus.

Vnari.

Of the second sort we are not utterly void of some, because this our English
soil is not free from Foxes, (for indeed we are not without a multitude of
them, insomuch as diverse keep, foster, and feed them in their houses among
their hounds and dogs, either for so^e malady of mind, or for some sickness of
body) which peradventure the savor of that subtle beast would either mitigate
or expel.

The third which is bred of a Bear and a Bandog we want not here in England,
(A strange and wonderful effect, that cruel enemies should enter into the
work of copulation and bring forth so savage a curre.) Undoubtedly it is even
so as we have reported, for the fiery heat of their flesh, or rather the
pricking thorn, or most of all, the tickling Hircania, that Lions and dogs in
Arcadia, and that Wolves and Dogs in Francia, couple and procreate. In men and
women also lightened with the Lantarne of reason (but utterly void of virtue)
that foolish, frantic, and fleshly action (yet naturally sealed in us)
works so effectualy, that many times it does reconcile enemies, set foes at
friendship, unanimity, and atonement, as Moria mentions. The Vicane which is
bred of a Bear and a dog, Is fierce, is fell, is stout and strong,
And biteth sore to flesh and bone.
His furious force indureth long
In rage he will be ruled of none.
That I may use the words of the Poet Gratius. This dog exceeds all other in
cruel conditions, his leering and fleering looks, his stern and savage
vissage, makes him in sight fearful and terrible, he is violent in fighting,
and wheresoever he set his tenterhooke teeth, he takes such sure and fast
hold, that a man may sooner tear and rend him assunder, then loose him and
separate his chaps. He passes not for the Wolf, the Bear, the Lion, nor the
Bull, and may woorthelie (as I think) be companion with Alexanders Dog which
came out of India. But of these, thus much, and thus far may seem
sufficient.

A start to outlandish dogs in this conclusion, not impertinent to the
Authors purpose.
Use and custom has entertained other dogs of an outlandish kind, but a few
and the same being of a pretty bigness, I mean Island dogs, curled and rough
all over, which by reason of the length of their hair make show neither of
face nor of body. And yet these curs, forsooth, because they are so strange are
greatly set by, esteemed, taken up, and many times in the room of the Spaniell
gentle or comforter. The natures of Erromen allotrian paroromen suggeneis.
Outlandish toys we take with delight,
Things of our own nation we have in despite.
Which fault remains not in us concerning Dogs only, but for artificers
also. And why? it is manifest that we disdain and contemn our own workmen,
be they never so skillful, be they never so cunning, be they never so
excellent. A beggarly beast brought out of barbarous borders, from the
uttermost countries Northward, etc, we stare at, we gaze at, we muse, we
marvel at, like an Ass of Cumanum, like Thales with the brazen

The which default Hippocrates marked when he was alive, as evidently appears
in the beginning of his book Peri agmon, so entitled and named:

And we in our work entitled De Ephemera Britanica, to the people of England
have more plentifully expressed. In this kind look which is most blockish, and
yet most waspish the same is most esteemed, and not among Citizens only and
jolly Gentlemen, but among among lusty ^ordes also, and noblemen. Further I am
not to wade in the foorde of this discourse, because it was my purpose to
satisfy your expectation with a short treatise (most learned Conrade) not
wearisome for me to write, nor tedious for you to peruse. Among other things
which you have received at my hands heretofore, I remember that I wrote a
several description of the Getullian dog, because there are but a few of them,
and therefore very sildome seen. As touching dogs of other kinds you your
self have taken earnest pain in writing of them both lively, learnedly, and
largely. But because we have drawn this libell more at length then the former
which I sent you (and yet breefer then the nature of the thing might well
bear) regarding your most earnest and necessary studies.

A Supplement or Addition, containing a demonstration of
THe names contained in the general table, for so much as they signify nothing
to you being a stranger, and ignorant of the English tongue, except they be
enterpreted: as we have given a reason before of the Latin words, so mean we
to do no less of the English, that every thing may be manifest unto your
understanding. Wherein I intend to observe the same order which I have followed
before.

SAgax, in English Hund, is derived of our English word hunt. One letter
changed in another, namely T, into D, as Hunt, Hund, whom if you conjecture to
be so named Dog) because of the similitude and likeness of the words I will
not stand in contradiction (friend Gesner) for so much as we retain among us
at this day many Dutch words which the Saxons left at such time as they
enjoyed this country of Britain. Thus much also understand, that as in your
language Hund is the common word, so in our natural tongue ( Dog) is the
universal, but Hund is particular and a special, for it signifies such a dog
only as serves to hunt, and therefore it is called a Hund.

Of the Gasehound.
The Gasehound called in latin Agasaeus, has his name of the sharpenes and
stedfastnes

Of the Greyhound.
The Greyhound called Leporarius, has his name of this word Gre, which word
sounds, Gradus in latin, in English Degree. Because among al dogs these are
the most principal, hauying the chiefest place, and being simply and
absolutely the best of the gentle kind of hounds.

Of the Leuyner or the Lyemmer.
This dog is called a Leuyner, for his lightness, which in latin sounds
Leuitas. Or a Lorum: and wherefore we call him a Leuiner of this word
Leuitas: (as we do many things besides) why we derive and draw a thousand of
our terms, out of the Greek, the Latin, the Italian, the Dutch, the French,
and the Spanish tongue; (Out of which fountains indeed, they had their
Original issue.) How many words are buried in the grave of forgetfulness?
grown out of use? wrested awry? and peruersly corrupted by diverse defaults? we
will declare at large in our book entitled, Symphonia vocum Britannicarum.

Of the Tumbler.
Among hounds the Tumbler called in Latin Vertagus, which comes of this word
Tumbler, flowing first from the French fountain. For as we say Tumble, so they
Tumbier, reserving our sense and signification, which the Latinnists comprehend
under this word Vertere. So that we see thus much, that Tumbler comes of
Tumbier, the Vowell, I, changed into the Liquid, L, after the manner of our
speech. Contrary to the French and Liquid before a Vowell for the most part is
turned into another Vowell. As, may be perceived in the example of these two
words Implere and plano, for Impiere and panio, L, before, E, changed into I,
and L, before A, turned into I, also. This I thought convenient for a taste.

After such as serve for hunting, orderly do follow such as serve for hawking
and fowling, Among which the principal and cheifest is the Spaniell, called in
Latin Hispaniolus, borrowing his name of Hispania, wherein we Englishmen not
pronouncing the Aspiration H, nor the Vowell I, for quicknes and readiness of
speech say roundly a Spagnell.

Of the Setter.
The second sort is called a Setter, in Latin Index. Of the word ( Set) which
signifies in Locum disignare, the reason is rehearsed before more largely, it
shall not therefore need to make a new repetition.

Of the water Spaniell or Finder.
THe water Spaniell consequently follows, called in Latin Aquaticus, in
English a water Spagnell, which name is compound of two simple words, namely
Water, which in Latin sounds Aqua, wherein he swimmeth. And Spain,
Hispania, the Country from whence they came, not that England wants such kind
of Dogs, (for they are naturally bred and engendered in this country,) but
because they bear the general and Inquisitor, because that by serious and
secure seeking, he finds such things as be lost, which word Find in English
is that which the latins mean by this verb Inuenire. This dog has this name
of his property, because the principal point of his service consists in the
premises.

Now leaving the surueiwe of hunting and hawking dogs, it remains that we run
over the residue, whereof some be called, fine dogs, some course, othersome
mungrels Canis Melitaeus, because it is a kind of dog accepted among Gentiles,
Nobles, Lords, Ladies, etc. who make much of them, vouchsafing to admit them so
far into their company that they will not only lul them in their laps, but
kiss them with their lips, and make them their pretty play-fellowes. Such a
one was Gorgons little puppy mentioned by Theocritus in Siracusis, who taking
his journey, straightly charged and commanded his maid to see to his dog as
charily and warely as to his child: To call him in always that he wandered not
abroad, as well as to rock the babe asleep, crying in the cradle.

This puppitly and pleasant Curre, (which some frumpingly term fysting
hounds) serve in a manner to no good use, except (as we have made former
relation) to succor and Sicilia) as Aelianus in his 7. book of beasts, and 27.
chapter records.

Of dogs under the courser kind, we will deal first with the Shepherds Dog,
whom we call the Bandog, the Tydog, or the Mastiue, the first name is imputed
to him for service, Quoniam pastori famulatur, because he is at the Shepherds
his masters commandment. The second a Ligamento of the band or chain
wherewith he is tied, The third a Sagina, of the fatnes of his body.

For this kind of Dog which is usually tied, is mighty, gross, and fat fed. I
know this that Augustinus Niphus, calls this Mastinus (which we call Mastiuus
and that Albertus writes how the Lyciscus is engendered by a Bear and a
Woolfe. Notwithstanding the self same author takes it for the most part pro
Molosso. A Dog of such a country.

Of Mungrels and Rascals somewhat is to be spoken: and among these, of the
Wappe or Turnespet, which name is made of two simple words, that is, of Turn,
which in latin Vertere, and of spete which is Veru, or speed, for the English
word inclines closer to the Italian imitation: Veruuersator, Turnespit. He is
called also Waupe, of the natural noise of his voice Wau, which he makes in
barking. But for the better and readiner sound, the vowell u, is changed into
the consonant P, so that for waupe we say wappe. And yet I wot well that Nonius
borrows his Baubari of the natural voice Bau, as the Graecians do their
Bautein of wau.

Now when you understand this, that Saltare in latin signifies Dansare in
English. And that our Dog thereupon is called a Daunser, and in the latin
Saltator, you are so far taught as you were desirous to learn: and now I
suppose, there remains nothing, but that your request is fully acomplished.

Gesner) you have, not only the kinds of our country Dogs, but their names
also, as well in Latin as in English, their Offices, Services, Diversities,
Natures, and Properties, that you can demand no more of me in this matter. And
albeit I have not satisfied your mind peradventure (who suspectest al speed in
the performance of your request employed, to be mere delays) because I staid
the setting forth of that imperfect pamphlet, which five years ago I sent to
you as a private friend for your own reading, and not to be printed and so
made common, yet I hope (having like the Bear lickt over my young) I have
waded over in this work to your contentation, which delay has made somewhat
better and Deuterai phrontides, Of the diseases of dogs and their cures.
Blondus.
after wit more meet to be perused.

Pliny. Tardinus.
The small roots of Ellebor which are like to Onions, have power in them to
purge the belly of Dogs: Other give them goats-milk, or salt beaten small, or
Sea-crabs beaten small and put into water, or Staues-acre, and imediatly after
his purgation, sweet milk. If your dog be obstructed and stopped in the belly,
which may be discerned by his trembling, sighing, Albertus.
and remoouing from place to

The ancients have observed that Dogs are most annoyed with three diseases, the
swelling of the throat, the gowt, and madness; but the later writers have
observed many noisome infirmities in them. First, they are oftentimes wounded
by the teeth of each other, and also of wild beasts: for cure whereof, Blondus
out of Maximus writes these remedies following: First, let the sinnewes,
Fibers, or gistles of the wound be laid together, then sow up the lips or
upper skin of the wound with a needle and thread, and take of the hairs of the
dog which made the wound and lay thereupon, until the bleeding be stanched, and
so leave it to the dog to be licked; for nature has so framed the Dogs tongue,
that thereby

And if he cannot touch the sore with his tongue* then does he wet his foot in
his mouth, Albertus.
and so oftentimes put it upon the maime: or if neither of these can be
performed by the beast himself, then cure it by casting upon it the ashes of a
dogs head, or burned salt, mingled with liquid pitch powered thereupon. When a
dog returning from hunting is hurt about the snowt, Blondus.
by the venomous teeth of some wild beast, I have seen it cured by making
incision about the wound, whereby the poisoned blood is euacuated, and
afterward the sore was anointed with oil of Saint John's wort. Wood-worms
cures a dog bitten by serpents. Plinyus.
When he is troubled with ulcers or rindes in his skin, pieces of Pot-sheardes
beaten to powder and mingled with vinegar and Turpentine, with the fat of a
Goose; or else waterwort with new Lard, applied to the sore, eases the same:
and if it swel, anoint it with Butter.

For the drawing forth a thorn or splinter out of a Dogs foot, take
coltes-foote and Lard, or the powder there of burned in a new earthen pot, and
either of these applied to the foot, draws forth the thorn and cures the
sore: for by Dioscorides it is said, to have Vnguentum Egiptiacum, and the
juice of peach leaves: There are some very skillful hunters which affirm, that
if you hang about the Dogs neck sticks of Citrine, as the wood dries, so will
the worms come forth and die. Again for th^s evil they wash the wounds with
water, then rub it with pitch, time, and the dung of an Ox in Vinegar;
Tardinus.
afterward they apply unto it the powder of Ellebor. When a dog is troubled
with the maungie, itch, or Ring-wormes, first let him blood in his fore legs in
the greatest vein, afterward make an ointment of Quick silver, Brimstone,
nettle-seed, Albertus. Rasis
and twice so much old sewet or Butter, and therewithal all anoint him,
putting thereunto if you please decoction of Hops and salt water.

Some do wash maungy Dogs in the Seawater, and there is a cave in Sicily
(says Gratius) that has this force against the scabs of Dogs if they be
brought thither, and set in the running water which seems to be as thick as
oil. Phlegm or melancholy does often engender these evils, and so after one
Dog is infected, all the residue that accompany or lodge with him, are likewise
poisoned: for the avoiding thereof, you must give them Fumitory, Sorrel, and
whay sod together, it is good also to wash them in the sea, or in Smiths-water,
or in the decoction aforesaid.

For the taking away of warts from the feet of Dogs or other members, first
rub and friccase the wart violently, and afterward anoint it with salt, Oil,
Vinegar, and the powder of the rind of a Gourd, or else lay unto it Alloes
beaten with mustard seed, to eat it off,

Against Tikes, Lyce, and Fleas, anoint the Dogs with bitter Almonds, Staves
acre, or Roots of Maple, or Cipers, or froth of Oil and if it be old; and
anoint also their ears with Salt Water, and bitter Almondes, then shall not
the flies in the Summer time enter into them. If Bees, or Waspes, or such
Beasts sting a Dog, lay to the sore burned Rue, with Water; and if a greater
Fly, as the Hornet, let the Water be warmed. A Dog shall be never infected with
the Plague if you put into his mouth in the time of any common pestilence,
Blondus.
the powder of a Storks craw, or Ventrickle, or any part thereof with Water:
Gratius: Sed varij mitus nec in omnibus vna potestes,
Disce vices and quae tutela est proxima, tenta.
Woolfe-wort, Pliny.
and Apocynon, whose leaves are like the leaves of Iuye, and smell strongly,
will kill all Beasts which are littered blind; as Wolves, Foxes, Bears, and
Dogs, if they Chamaeleon and Mezereon, in water and oil, it kills Mice,
Discorides
Swine, and Dogs* Ellebor, and Squilla, and Faba Lupina, have the same
operation* There is a Gourd (called Zinziber of the Water) because the taste
thereof is like to Ginger, the Flower, Fruit, and Leaf thereof kills Asses,
Mules, Dogs, and many other Foure-footed beasts. The nuts Vomicae, are poison
to Dogs, except their care be cut presently and made to bleed. It will cause
them to leap strangely up and down, and kill him within two hours after the
tasting, if it be not prevented by the former remedy. Theophrastus Chrysippus
affirms, that the water wherein Sperrage been sodde given to Dogs, kills
them: the fume of Silver or Lead has the same opperation.

If a Dog grow lean, and not through want of meat, Albertus
it is good to fill him twice or thrice with Butter, and if that do not
recover him, then it is a sign that the worm under his tongue annoieth him,
(which must be presently pulled out by some Naule or Needle) and if that
satisfy not, he cannot live, but will in short time perish. And it is to be
noted, that Oaten bread leauened, will make a sluggish dog to become lusty,
agile, and full of spirit. Blondus.
Virgils verse; Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. For bewitching
spirit enters by the eye into the heart of the party bewitched: for remedy
whereof, they hang about the neck a chain of Corrall, as for holy herbs I
hold them unprofitable.

To cure the watery eyes of Dogs, take warm water, and first wash them
therewith, and then make a plaster of meal and the white of an Egg, and so
lay it thereunto. By reason Bribes and gifts blind the eyes of Judges,
Vnicentius.
even as a dumb dog turns away Correction. Some have delivered, that green
Crow-foote forced into the mouth of a Dog, makes him dumb and not able to
bark. When a Dog becomes deaf, the oil of Roses with new pressed wine
infused into his ears, cures him: and for the worms in the ears, make a
plaster of a beaten sponge and the white of an Egg, Tardinus.
and that shall cure it.

The third kind of Quinancy (called Synanche) kills Dogs, Pollux. Niphus.
because it blows up their chaps, and includes their breath. The cough is
very noisome to Dogs, wherefore their keepers must infuse into their Nostrils
two cups of wine, with bruised sweet Almonds: but Tardinus for this disease,
prescribes great parceley sod with Oil, Honey, and Wine, and so given to the
Dog. For the shortness of the breath, Blondus.
bore him thorough

If a bone stick in the mouth of a Dog, hold up his head backward, and power
Ale into his mouth until he cough, and so shall he be eased. When a Dog has
surfetted, and falls to loath his meat, he eats the herb Canaria and is
relieved (both against his surfeit and also the bitings of Serpents.) For the
worms in the belly, he eats wheat in the stalk. The gowt makes the Dogs
legs grow crooked, and it is never so cured, but that after a course or two
they grow lame again. When his skin flies from his nails, take meal and
water and bind them thereunto for a remedy; and these are for the most part,
those diseases wherewithal dogs are infected, and the other are either cured
by heat, or by eating of grass: and so for this part, I conclude both the
sickness and cure of dogs, with the Gratius: Mill tement pestes curaque
potentia mayor. Concerning the madness of dogs, and their venomous bitings, we
are now to speak: Of the biti^gs of mad dogs and their curs.
and first of al, no reasonable man ought to doubt, why the teeth of a mad dog
should do more harm then of a sound and healthy one; because in rage and
anger, the teeth of every beast and creature, receive venom and poison from
the head (as it is well observed by Aegineta) and so at that time fastening
their teeth, they do more harm then at other times. Against the simple biting
of a dog, it is sufficient to use but the urine of a dog, for there is not much
venom in those wounds, and the urine also will draw out the prickles of a
hedghog, because such wounds have in them but little poison. Also (as Aetius
prescribes) it is very Nitre, so as it may descend to the bottom of the
wound, and afterward lay unto it a new sponge wetted in the same Vinegar and
nitre, and let it be so continued for the space of three days, and by the
working thereof it shall be whole.

Also it is generally to be observed in all the bitings of men by Dogs, that
first of all it is requisite, that the wound be well rubbed over by the palm
of the hand with Vinegar, then pour into the wounds, vinegar mixed with water
or with nitre, laying also a sponge thereupon, and so bind it upon the place,
having first wetted the clothes wherewithal you bind it with the said vinegar
mixed, so let it remain bound up three days together, and afterward follow
the common course of curing, as in every vulgar wounds, or else, lay thereunto
pellitory of the wall, mingled and beaten with salt, changing it every day,
until the crust or upper skin thereof fall away.

It is also good sometimes the holes being small, to wet Lint in vinegar, and
to purge

Diverse Authors have also prescribed these outward medicines against the
bitinges of Dogs in general, namely Vinegar spunged, the lees of Vinegar, with
Nigella Romana, Venus hair, Alablaster, Brine with Lint, Garlic mixed with
honey and taken into the body, Lees of Wine, Almonds both sweet and bitter
mingled with Honey, dried Annisse-seeds

Leaving therefore the simple bitings of Dogs, let us proceed to the madness
of Dogs and their bitings, wherein the greater danger must be considered, with
greater circumspection of remedies. First therefore, the ancients have derived
Rabiem, of Rauiem, madness, Rabies comes of Rapiendo, because when a Dog
begins to be oppressed heerewith, he biteth, snatcheth, runs too and is
fro, and is carried from home and Master, to his own perdition: this by the
Graecians is called Lytta, and Cynolossos.

By this evil, not only Dogs perish, but all other creatures (except a Goose)
bitten by them: and a man does not escape without great peril. For Albertus
relates a story, of a man whose arm was bitten by a mad Dog, and after twelve
years the sore brake forth again, and he died within two days; and the
reason heerof was (as in all likelihood that of Coelius) that when one and the
same nature infecteth each other, as Dogs do Dogs, and

Hereof also it came to pass, that the Noble Lawyer Baldus, playing with his
Dog at Trent, Mathaeolus. A History of the death of Baldus.
was bitten by him in his lip, and neglecting the matter (because he never
suspected Mishal Ephes^us.


Also it has been observed, that sometimes a mad dog has bitten, Aug. Niphus
and there has followed no harm at all, whereof this was the reason, because
poison is not equally in all his teeth; and therefore biting with the purer and
wholsomer, the wound became not perilous.

A man bitten with a mad Dog, falls mad presently when he comes under the
shadow of a Corn-tree; as it is affirmed by most Physicians, Ponzettus.
for that shadow sets the poison on fire: but a man falling mad, of all
creatures auoydeth a Dog, and a Dog most of all falls upon men. There are
many things which engender madness in Dogs, as hot wheaten bread dipped in
beane-water, melancholy bred within them and not purged by Canaria or other
Herbs, the menstruous pollutions of Women, and the pain of his teeth. Their
madness is most dangerous in the Dog-daies, for then they both kill and perish
mortally, for at that time their spittle or foam, falling upon man's body,
Pliny. Do^ days most perilous for mad dog^
breeds great danger; and that if a man tread upon the Urine of a mad Dog,
he shall feel pain by it if he have a sore about him: from whence it came to
pass, that a stone bitten by such a Dog, was a common proverb of discord.
Also it is observed, that if a wound be dressed in the presence of man or
woman, which has been bitten by a mad Dog, that the pain thereof will be
increased: and which is more, that abortment will follow upon beasts with
young, or Eggs covered by the hen, by their presence: But for remedy, Pliny.
they wash their hands and sprinckle themselves, or the Beasts with that water,
whereby the evil is to

If the gall of a mad Dog, about the bigness of a Lentill seed be eaten, it
kills within seven days, or else does no harm at all, if it pass seven
days without operation. Bortrutius.
When a mad Dog had suddenly tore in pieces a garment about ones body, the
tailor or Bot^her took the same to mend, and forgetting himself, put on side
of the breach into his mouth to stretch it out to the other, and fell mad
immediately. Men thus affected, fear al waters, their virile member
continually stands, they suffer many conuulsions, and oftentimes bark like
dogs.

There was a certain Mason at Zuricke, who had his finger grievously bitten
with a mad Dog about July, whereunto he laid Garlic, Rue, and oil of
Scorpions* and so it seemed to be healed, wherefore he took no counsel of any
Phisiti^n. About August

When a Dog is mad it may be known by these signs, for he will neither eat
nor drink, Signs to kno a mad Do^*
he looks awry and more sadly then ordinary; his body is lean, he casts
forth thick fleame out of his Nostrils or mouth: He breathe^h gaping, and his
tongue hangs out of his mouth. His ears is limber and weak, his tail
hangs downward: his pace is heavy Bertrurius. Ponzettus.
he is fearful and runs into secret places from his whelps or fellows,
who often bark at him and will not eat of bread upon which his blood has
fallen. His eyes grow very red, he many times dies for fear of water: some
discern it by laying nuts or Grains of corn to the bitten place, and
afterward take them away and cast them to Hens or Pullen, who for hunger will
eat them, and if after the eating the foul live, the dog will not be mad; but
if it die, then for certainty the dog will fall mad.

The bodies of them that are thus wounded grow very dry and are pressed with
inward burning fe^ers, if by music and delightful sports they be not kept
waking; many times they die suddenly, or else recover for a small time, and then
fall into a relapsed malady.

Some give this to be the cause of their fear of Water, because their body
growing dry seems to forget all participation with humidity, but Rufus
affirms, this comes from melancholy, wherewithal these persons are most
commonly affected: which agrees with an imagination they have, that they see
Dogs in the water, and indeed it cannot be but their own countenance, which in
these passions is very red, does woonderfully afflict them: both in the water,
and in all looking glasses.

When a certain Philosopher (being bitten by a mad dog) entered into a bath,
and a strong apparition of a Dog presented it self unto him therein, Aetius.
he strove against this imagination with a singular confident courage to the
contrary, saying, within himself. Quid cani commune est cum balneo, what has
a Dog to do in a Bath? and so went in and ouercam his disease: which thing had
sildome chanced, that a man has recovered this malady after Eudemus and
Themiso, who obeying the request of a friend of his, entered likewise into the
Water, and after many torments was recovered.

To conclude, some men in this extremity suffer most fearful dreams,
profusion of seed, hoarsnes of voice, shortness of breath, retention of urine,
which also changes color, being sometimes black, sometime like milk,
sometime thick, sometime thin as water, rumbling in the belly, by reason of
crudity, rednes of the whole body, distention of nerves, heaviness of mind, love
of darkness, and such like. Yet does not this operation appear presently upon
the hurt, but sometimes at nine days, sometimes at forty days, sometimes at
half a year, or a year, or seven, or twelve year, as was has been already

The cure of mad Dogs either for preu^nting or ^ecouering. Pliny.
For the cure of these Dogs, and first of all for the preventing of madness,
there are sundry invented obsuerations. First, it is good to shut them up, and
make them to fast for one day; then purge them with Hellebor, and being purged,
nourish them with bread of barley-meale. Other take them when they be young
whelps, and take out of their tongue a certain little worm, which the
Graecians call Lytta; after which time they never grow mad or fall to
vomitting, as Gratius noted in these verses; Namque subit nodis qua lingua
renascibus haeret
Verunculum dixere, mala atque incondita pestis
Iam teneris elementa mali, causasque recidunt.
But immediately it being taken forth, they rub the tongue with salt and oil
Columella teaches Pliny.
that their Dogs could never afterward fall mad: whereunto Pliny agrees,
calling it a castration or gelding of the tail, adding, that it must be done
before the dog be forty days old* Some again say, that if a Dog taste of a
woman's milk which she gives by the birth of a boy, he will never fall mad.
Nemesian ascribes the cure heerof to Castoreum dried and put into milk, but
this is to be understood of them that are already mad, whose elegant verses of
the cause, beginning, and cure of a ruad dog, I have thought good

Exhalat seu terra siuus seu noxius aer
Causa male, seu cum gelidus non sufficit humor.
Torrida per venas concrescunt semina flammae.
Whatsoever it be he thus warranteth the cure. Tunc virosa tibi sumes,
multumque domabis
Castorea adtritu silicis lentescere coges.
Exebore huc trito puluis, lectore feratur
A^miscensque diu, facies concrescere vtrunque
Mox lactis liquidos sensim superadde fluores
Vt non cunctantes, haustos infundere cornu
Inserto possis, furiasque repellere tristes.


Armetia a ^ing of Valentia, Albertus
prescribes this form for the cure of this evil: let the Dog be put into the
Water* so as the hinderlegs do only touch the ground, and his forelegs be
tied up like hands over his head, and then being taken again out of the water,
let his hair be shaued off, that he may be pieled until he bleed: then
annoint him with oil of Beetes, and if this do not cure him within seven
days, then let him be knocked on the head, or hanged out of the way.

When a young male Dog suffers madness, shut him up with a Bitch; Blondus.
or if a young Bitch be also oppressed, shut her up with a Dog, and the one of
them will cure the madness of the other.

But the better part of this labor, is more needeful to be emploid about the
curing of men, or other creatures which are bitten by dogs, then in curing or
preventing that natural infirmity. Wherefore it is to be remembered, that all
other poisoned wounds are cured The cure of a man or be^st bitten by a mad
Dog.
which extract the venom out of the flesh and comfort nature; and by
cupping-glasses, or burning yrons (as Coelius affirms) upon occasion of a
miraculous fiction of the Temple door key of S. Bellinus, near Rhodigium; for
it was believed, that if a mad man could hold that key in his hand red whot, he
should be delivered from his fittes for ever.

There was such another charm or incantantion among the Apuleians, made in
form of a prayer against all bitinges of mad Dogs, and other poisons, unto
an obscure Saint (called Vithus) which was to be said three satterdaies in the
evening, nine times together, which I have here set down for no other cause
but to show their extreme folly. A foolish charm and prayer to vithus.
Alme vithe pellicane

Irasque canum mitigas
Rictusque canis luridos
Oram qui tenes Apulam.
Qui morsus rabidos leuas
Tu sancte rabiem asperam
Tu saeuam prohibbe luem.
I procul hinc rabies, procul hinc furor omnis abesto.
But to com to the cure of such as have bin bitten by mad dogs: First I will
set down some compound medicines to be outwardly aplyed to the body: secondly,
some simple or uncompounded medicines: In the third place such compounded and
uncompounded potions, as are to be taken inwardly against this poison. Discoride^


For the outward compound remedies, a plaster made of Opponax and pitch, is
much Menippus used, taking a pound of Pitch of Brutias, and four ounces of
Opponax (as Aetius and Actuarius do prescribe) adding withal, that the
Opponax must be dissolved in vinegar, and afterward, the Pitch and that vinegar
must be boiled together, and when the vinegar is consumed, then put in the
Opponax, and of both together make like taynters of splints and thurst them
into the wound, so let them remain many days together, and in the mean time
drink an antidot of sea-crabs and vinegar, (for vinegar is always precious in
this confection.) Other use Basilica, Onyons, Rue, Salt, ruste of Iron, white
bread, seeds of horehound, and triacle: but the other plaster is most
forcible to be applied outwardly, above al medicines in the world.

For the simple or uncompounded medicines to be taken against this sore, are
many: As Goose-grease, Garlike, the root of Wild roses drunk; bitter
almonds, leaves of Euphorbium; the hair of a man with vinegar, dung of Goats
with Wine, Walnuts with Honey and salt, poulder of figtree in a scarcloath,
Fitches in wine, Euphorbium; warm horse-dung, raw beans chewed in the mouth,
figtree leaves, green figs with vinegar, fennel stalks, Gentiana, dung of
pullen, the Liver of a Buck-goate, young Swallows burned to poulder, also
their dung; to urine of a man, an Hyaenas skin, flower-deluce with honey, a Sea
herb Kakille, Silphum with salt, the flesh and shells of snayles, leeke seeds
with salt, mints, the tail of a field-mouse cut off from her alive and she
^uffered to live, roots of Burres, with salt of the Sea plantine, the tongue
of a Ram with salt, the flesh of al Sea-fishes, the fat of a sea-calfe and
veruine, beside many other superstitious amulets which are used to be bound to
the Arms, necks, and breasts, as the Canine tooth bound up in a leaf and tied
to the Arm. A Worm bred in the dung of Dogs hanged about the neck, the
root of Gentian in an Hyaenaes skin, or young Wolfes skin, and such like;
whereof I know no reason beside the opinion of men.

The inward compound potions or remedies against the bitings of Dogs may be
such as these. Take Sea-crabs, and burn them with twigs of white vines, and
save their ashes, then put to them the poulder of Gentian root well cleansed,
and small beaten, and as often as need requires take two spoonefuls of the
first, and one of the second, and put them into a Cup of pure and unmixed wine,
and so drink it for four days together, being well beaten and stirred, so as
the Wine be as thick as a Cawdell; and there is nothing more forcible then
Sea-crabs, Hiera, Diascincum, poulder of Walnuts in warm rain Water, Triacle,
Castoreum, pills, spurge-seede, and a decoction of Indian thorn with veruine
given

First eating of garlike in our meat, drinking of wormwood, rams flesh burned
and put into wine and so drunk. There is an herb called Alysson, by reason of
the power it has against this evil, which being bruised and drunk, cures
it. The liver of a Boar dried and drunk in wine, has the same operation.
Jews lime drunk in water, leeks and onions in meat, dogs blood, the head, the
vain under the tongue (commonly supposed to be a worm,) and the liver of the
dog which has don the hurt, are also prescribed for a remedy of this evil:
but especially the liver or rennet of a young puppy, the rind of a Wild
figtree, a d^am of Castoreum with oil of roses Centaury, or Chamaeleon; the
root of a wild rose (called Cynorrhodon and Cynosbaton) Ellebor, the brain of
a hen drunk in some liquor, sorrel, Honey, mints, and plantine: but Pimpinella
Germanica is given to all cattle which are bitten by a mad Dog. Besides many
other such like, which for breuity sake I omit, concluding against all
superstitious curing by enchantments or supposed miracles, such as is in a
certain church of S. Lambert in a city of Picardye, where the mass priests,
when a man is brought unto them having this evil, they cut a cross in his
forehead, and lay upon the wound a piece of S. Lamberts stole burning, (which
they say (though falesely) is reserved to this day without diminution) then do
they sow up the wound again, and lay another plaster upon it, prescribing him
a diet; which is to drink water, and to eat hard Eggs, but if the party amend
not within forty days, they bind him hand and foot in his bed, and laying
Alysius, and it is worth the noting, how murder accompanies superstitious
humane inventions, and the vain presumptuous confidence of crosse-worshippers:
and thus much of the madness of dogs, and the cure thereof in men and beasts.

In the next place, the conclusion of this tedious discourse follows, which
is, the natural medicines arising out of the bodies of dogs, and so we will
tie them up for this time.

The natural medicines
Whereas the inward parts of men are troubled with many evils, it is delivered
for truth, that if little Melitaean Dogs, or young sucking puppies, be laid to
the breast of a child or man that has infectious passions or pains in his
entrals, the pain will depart from Serenus does express this very elegantly
saying; Q^in etiam catulum lactentem apponere membris
Conuenit, omne malum transcurrere fertur in illum.
Cui tamen extincto munus debetur humandi,
Humanos quia contactus mala tanta sequntur,
Et iunctus vitium ducit de coniuge coniux.


Amatus
If a Whelpe be cut asunder alive, and laid upon the head of a mad melancholic
Woman, it shall help her, and it has the same power against the spleen. If a
woman grow barren after she has borne children, Hippocrates
let her eat young Whelp-flesh, and Polypus fish Furnerius
Water destilled out of Whelps, causes that pieled or shaven places shall
never more have hair grow upon them.

With the fat of whelps, bowelled and sod til the flesh come from the bones,
and then taken and put into another vessel, and the weak, resolute, or
paralitike members being therewith anointed, they are much eased if not
recovered. Alysius says, he made experience of puppies sod alive in oil,
whereby he cured his gouty legd horses, and therefore it cannot choose but be
much more profitable for a man.

The skin of a dog held with the five fingers, stays distillations; it has
the same operation in gloves and stockins, and it will also ease both Ache in
the belly, head, and feet, and therefore it is used to be worn in the shoes
against the gout. Pliny.


The flesh of mad Dogs, is salted and given in meat to them which are
bitten by mad Dogs for a singular remedy. The blood is commended against all
intoxicating poisons Serenus to make these excellent verses: Infandum dictu
cunctis procull absit amicis
Sed fortuna potens omen conuertat in hosts
Vis indigna noue si sparserit ossa fragore,
Conuentet cerebrum blandi canis addere fractis

Saepius and succos conspergere pinguis oliui
Bis septem credunt reuatescere cuncta diebus.


The braine-pan or scul of a Dog cloue asunder, is aplied to heal the pain in
the eyes; that is, if the right eye be grieved, thereunto apply the right side
of the scull, if the left eye, the left side.

The virtues of a Dogs head made into poulder are both many and unspeakable*
by it is the biting of mad Dogs cured, it cures spots and bunches in the head,
and a plaster thereof made with Oil of Roses, heals the running in the
head: it cures also tumors in the privy parts, and in the seat, the
chippings in the fingers, and many other

The poulder of the teeth of Dogs, makes Childrens teeth to come forth with
speed and easy, and if their gums be rubd with a dogs tooth, it makes them to
have the sharper teeth: and the poulder of these Dogs teeth rubbed upon the
Gummes of young or old, caseth tootache and abateth swelling in the gummes.
The tongue of a Dog, is most wholesome both for the curing of his own
wounds by licking, as also of any other creatures. The rennet of a Puppy
drunk with Wine, dissolueth the Collicke in the same hour wherein it is
drunk: Rasis Sextus
and the vomit of a Dog laid upon the belly of a hydropick man, causes Water
to come forth at his stool. The gall heals all wheales and blisters after
they be pricked with a Needle, and mingled with Honey it cures pain in the
eyes, and Pliny. Aesculapius
reth all inward pains in them.

The Spleen drunk in urine, cures the spleenatick; the melt being taken from
the Dog alive, has the same virtue to help the melt of man. The skin of
Bitches wherein they conceive their puppies (which never touched the earth) is
precious against difficulty in childbirth, and it draws the infant out of the
womb. Dioscorid^^
The milk of a Bitches first whelping, is an antidote against poison, and the
same causes hair never to come again, if it be rubbed upon the place where
hairs are newly pulled off: Also infused into the eyes, drives away the
whitenes of them. Likewise there is no better thing to anoint the gums of
young Children withal, before they have teeth, for it makes them to come
forth with Ora ambusta cibo sanabis lacte canino.

The urine of a dog takes away spots and wartes, and being mingled with salt
of nitre, wonderfully eases the Kings evil. The dung of dogs (called by the
Apothecaryes Album Graecum) because the white is best, being engendered by
eating of bones, and therefore has no ill savor, Galen affirms that his
masters in Physic, used it against old sores, bloody flixes, and the
Quinensie, and it is very profitable to staunche the blood of Dogs, and also
against inflammations in the breasts of Women, mingled with turpentine. It was
well prescribed by Auicen, to expel congeled blood out of the stomach and
bladder, being taken thereof so much in powder as will lie upon a Golden Noble.

Of the Ethiopian Eale.
THere is bred in Ethiopia a certain strange Beast about the bigness of a
Pliny. Solinus
the tail of an Elephant, and horns above a Cubit long, which are mooueable
upon his head at his own pleasure like ears; now standing one way, and anon
moving another way, as he needs in fighting with other Beasts, for they
stand not stiff but bend flexibly, and when he fights, he always stretches
out the one, and holds in the other, of purpose as it may seem, that if one
of them be blunted and broken, then he may defend himself with the other. It
may well be compared to a Seahorse for above all other places it loves best
the Waters.

OF THE ELEPHANT.
The great v^^ of the consideration of an Elephant.
THere is no creature among all the Beasts of the world which has so great and
ample demonstration of the power and wisdom of almighty God as the Elephant:
both for proportion of body and disposition of spirit; and it is admirable to
behold, the industry of our ancient forefathers, and noble desire to benefit
us their posterity, by serching into the qualities of every Beast, to discover
what benefits

The first man in Europ possessour of elephants. Pausanius Plutarch.
Among all the Europaeans the first possessor of Elephants, was Alexander
Magnus, and after him Antigonus, and before the Macedonians came into Asia, no
people of the world except the Affricans and the Indians, had ever seen
Elephants. When Fabritius was sent by the Romans to King Pyrrhus in Embassage,
Pyrrhus offered to him a great sum of Fabritius, sending forth a terrible and
direful voice: whereat Fabritius laughing, perceiving the policy of the king
gently made this speech; Neque heri aurum neque hodie bestia me promouit. I was
neither tempted with thy Gold yesterday, nor terrified with the sight of this
beast too day: and so afterward Pyrrhus was overcome in War by the Romans, and
Manlius Curious Dentatus, Eutropius
Lucanae Bo^es, Oxen of the wood, about the 472. year of the City: and
afterward in the year of Romes building 502. when Metellus was high priest, and
overthrew the Carthagenian in Sicily, there were 142. Elephants brought in
ships to Rome and led in triumph, which Lucius Piso afterward, to take away
from the people opinions of the fear of them, caused them to be brought to the
stage to open view and handling, and so slain; which thing Pompey did also by
the slaughter of five hundred Lions and Elephants together: so that in the time
of Gordianus, Julius Capit:
it was no wonder to see thirty and two of them at one time.

An Elephant is by the Haebrewes called Behemah, by way of excellency, as the
Latins for the same cause call him Bellua, Of the several names in diverse
languages.
the Chaldeans for the same word, Deu. 14. translat Beira, the Arabians Behitz,
the Persians Behad, and the Septuagints Ktene, but the Graecians vulgarly
Elephas, not Quasi elebas, because they join copulation in the Water, but
rather from the Haebrew word Dephill; signifieng the Iuory tooth of an Elephant
(as Munster well observes.) The Haebrewes also use the word Schen for an
Elephants tooth. Moreover Hesychius called an Elephant in the Greek tongue
Perissas, the Latins do indifferently Elephas, and Elephantus; and it is said
that Elephantus in the Punicke tongue, signifies Caesar: whereupon when the
Graundfather of Julius Caesar had slain an Elephant, he had the name of Caesar
put upon him.

The original of the Caesar's
The Italians call this Beast Leofante, or Lionfante, the French Elephante, the
Germans Helfant, the Illirians Slon. We read but of three appellatiue names of
Elephants; that is of one, called by Alexander the great Ajax, because he had
read that the buckler of great Ajax was covered with an Elephants skin, about
whose neck he put a Golden collar and so sent him away with liberty. Antiochus
one of Alexander successors had two Elephants, one of them he likewise called
Ajax, in imitation of Alexander, and the other Patroclus, of which two this
story is reported by Antipater. That when Antiochus came to a certain foorde
or deep Water, Ajax which was always the captain of the residue, having
Patroclus gave the adventure, and passed over safely, and received from the
king the silver trappings and al other prerogatives of principality; the other
seeing it (which had always been chief till that time,) preferred death before
ignominy and disgrace, and so would never after eat meat but famished for
sorrow.

They are bred in the whot Esterne countries, for by reason they can endure no
cold, they keep only in the East and South. Countries of the breed of
Elephant^.
Among all, the Indian Elephants are greatest, strongest, and tallest, and
there are among them of two sorts, one greater (which are called Prasij)
Diodorus
called Taxilae.) They be also bred in Africa, in Lybia, much greater then a
Nysaean Horse,, Aelianu
and yet every way inferior to the Indian; for which cause, if an Affrican
Elephant do but see an Indian, he trembles, and labors by all means to get
out of his sight, Philostratus Solinus
as being guilty of their own weakness.

There are Elephants also in the I Will Taprobane, and in Sumatra, in Affrican.
They are bred in Lybia, in Aethiopia, among the Trogloditae, and in the
Mountain Atlas, Syrtes, Zames, Vertomannus
and Sala, the seven Mountains of Tingitania, and in the Country of Basman,
subject to the great Cham. Some Authors affirm, that the Affrican Elephants
are much greater then the Indian, Leo Afer Paul venetus
but with no greater reason then Columella Writes; that there be as great
beasts found in Italy as Elephants are: whereunto no sound Author ever

Of all earthly creatures an Elephant is the greatest: for in India they are
nine cubits high, The heigh and stature of elephants.
and five cubits broad; in Africa foureteen or fifteen full spans, which is
about eleven foot high and proportionable in breadth, which caused Aelianus to
Write, that one Elephant is as big as three Bugils; and among these the males
are ever greater then the females. In the kingdom of Melinda in Affricke,
there were two young ones, not above six months old, whereof the least was as
great as the greatest Ox, but his flesh was as much as you shall find in two
Oxen; the other was much greater.

Vartomannus The color and several parts.
Their color is for the most part mouse-colour, or black; and there was one
all white in Ethiopia: The skin looks pieled and scabby; it is most hard on
the back, but softer Of the use of his skin. Pliny.
for that evil does this beast feel in his great body, but always has
creuises in his skin, which by their savor do inuit the little flies to a
continual feast, but when by stretching forth they have received the swarms,
by shrinking together again, they enclose the flies and so kill them: so that
these creuises in his skin, are unto him insteede of a mane, tail, and hair:
yet there are some few hairs which grow scattering upon his hide, whereof
some have been brought out of America into Germany, which were two palms
long, but not so stiff as Swines.

Their skin is so hard and stiff, that a sharp sword or iron cannot pierce
it. Gillius
Their head is very great, and the head of a man may as easily enter into their
mouth, as a finger into the mouth of a Dog; but yet their ears and eyes are
not aequiualent to the residew of their proportion: for they are small, like the
wings of a Bat or a Dragon, those of the Ethiopian Sambri want ears
altogether. Their eyes are like the eyes of Swine, but very red, Pliny.
they have teeth of either side four, wherewith they grind their meat like
meal, and they have also two other which hang forth beyond the residue, in the
males downward, Vartomanus
of their teeth Aelianus
so that nature has armed both sexes with these, for their chiefest defense;
and with these the females are calued at the first, and endued from the mothers
belly, and appear so soon as they come forth: the males not so quickly, but
rather after the manner of bores and Sea-horsses, Gillius. Pliny.
they hang out of their mouths, and grow to be ten foot long, whereof they make
posts of houses in some countries, and call them Ebora, that is, young yuory:
which caused Martial to write thus; Grandia taurorum portant qui corpora quaeris

There is a certain book extant without the name of the Author, written of
Iudaea or the holy land, wherein the Author affirms that he saw an Elephants
tooth sold to a Venetian Merchant, for six and thirty Duccats, it being
fourteen spans long, and four spans broad, and it waighed so heavy, that he
could not move it from the ground.

Vartomanus also says, that he saw in the Isle of Sumatra, two Elephants
teeth, which waighed three hundred six and thirty pounds. This is certain, that
the teeth of those Elephants which live in the marshes and watery places, are
so smooth and hard, as they seem intractable, and in some places they have
holes in them, and again certain bunches as big

The Elephants of the mountains have lesser and whiter teeth, fit to be
applied to any work, but the best of all, are the teeth of the Campestriall
and field Elephants, Philostratus
which are whitest and softest, and may well be handles without all pain.
The teeth of the female are more precious then of the male, and these they
loose every tenth year; which falling off they bury and cover in the earth,
pressing them down by sitting upon them, and then heal them over with earth
by their feet, and so in short time the grass grows upon them: for, as when
they are hunted they know it is for no other cause then their teeth, so also
when they loose their teeth, they desire to keep them from men, least the
virtues of them being discovered, they which bear them should enjoy the less
peace

It is admyrable what devises the people of India and Africa have invented by
natural observation, to find out these buried teeth, The finding of hidden
teeth.
which unto us living in the remote parts of the world, we would judge
impossible by any ordinary or lawful course, except we should turn up the
earth of a whole country, or go to work by diabolical coniuration: Aelianus
yet have they found out this facile and ready course. In the woods or fields
where they suspect these teeth to be buried, they bring forth pots or bottels
of water, and disperse them here one, there another, and so let them stand,
and tarry to watch them, so one sleeps, another sings, or bestows his
time as he pleases, after a little time, they go and look in their pots and if
the teeth lie near their bottels, by an unspeakable and secret attractiue power
in nature, they draw all the water out of them that are near them, which the
watchman takes a wonderful natural secret
but if their bottels be not emptied, they remove to seek in another place.

These yuory teeth have been always of great estimation among all the Nations
that ever knew them, the Ethyopians paid for a tribute unto the king of Persia
every 3. year twenty or these teeth hung about with gold and Iet-wood. These
are sold by weight, and there be many which deceive the world with the bones of
fishes instead hereof, but the true yuory is paler and heavier, and falling
upon the ground will easily break, whereas the bones of Fishes are more
tenatious, light, and strong. It is like to the Chernites, wherein Darius was
entombed, and the Marble called Lapis Coraliticus Corrol stone: like unto this
is the Alagi stone, and the Paederos Jewel. With this yuory they made images
and statues for their idol Gods, as one for Pallas in Athens, for Esculapius
in Epidaurus of Venus under the name of Urania by Phidius, whereupon she was
called Elephantina, for Apollo at Rome: and therefore Pausanias wondereth at
the Graecians that spared no cost for the vain worship of their Gods, for
they bought of the Indians and Ethiopians yuory to make their images with more
pomp and ostentation: besides of yuory they make the Solomon as appears 3.
Reg. 10* had a throne of yuory covered all over with gold, for the costs and
charge whereof he could not expend less then thirty thousand talents.

The greatness of these appears by their use, for Polybius reports by the
relation of Galussa a Nobleman and a great traveler in Africa, that with
them they made posts for houses, (...)* Cenalis.
and racks to lay their cattels meat upon, and likewise folds to enclose them.
Apelles made an ink of Iuory which was called Elephantes ink, and he painted
therewith. It has bin affirmed by Aelianus and some writers following Pliny,
that these teeth are Horns, and that Elephants are hornd beasts, which error
rose upon the occasion of these words of Pliny; Plin^us. Whither Elephants have
horns.
Elephantos and arietes candore tantum cornibus assinulatis, in Santonum
littore reciprocaos: where Aelianus finding a resemblance betwixt Rams and
Elephants in their white horns, was contented to apply that name to them both,
which appertains only to one; for Pliny himself Lib. 18. shows his
meaning by another like speech, of the whetting their horns upon trees, and
Rhinocerotes upon stones: for except he had named horns in the first place it
might have been questioned whether Rhinocerotes had any horns, but rather
teeth in the second place.

But whatsoever were the words or opinion of Pliny, it is most certain, that
after Herodotus and other ancient writers, it is safer to call these teeth,
then horns; and I will breefely set down the reasons of Philostratus, that
will have them to be teeth, and afterward of Grapaldus, Aelianus, and
Pausanias, that would make them horns, and so leave the Fannae or Gang-teeth,
standing out of the mouth, fall off together, and are given for weapon and
defense to beasts, and such are an Elephants: Again, a horn has a certain
line or circle near the root, which is covered every year, but this comes
up like a stony substance, without all circle or cover, and therefore it cannot
be a horn. Moreover, those creatures are said to have horns, that have cloven
hooues, this has no cloven hoof, but only five distinct fingers upon a foot.
Lastly, all horned beasts have an empty hollownes in their horns, (except
Hearts) but this is sound and full thoroughout, except a little passage in the
middle

Now on the contrary, those which will have them Horns, make these arguments.
First, as the Elks have their horns grow out of their eyelids, the
Rhinocerotes or Ethyopian Bulls out of their nose, so as it is not unnatural
for the Elephant to have his horns grow out of his mouth. Again, horns fall
off and come again in old beasts, but teeth do not so, and therefore these are
horns and not teeth: the power of fire cannot alter teeth, but these teeth
break if you go about to change their proportion or figure, but horns of Oxen
and Elephants may be stretched, bended, altered, straightned, and applied to
what fashion so ever you will. Again, teeth grow out of the gummes and
cheeke-bone, as it is apparent, but horns grow out of the scull and Temples,
and so do the Elephants as by

The Poets have a pretty resemblance of dreams, comparing true dreams to
horns and false dreams to Iuory, because falshoode is ever more burnished,
then naked and ragged truth. And besides the eye of man is translucent, and
contains in it a horny substance, and by the eye we always receive the best
assurance, but by the mouth (signified by teeth) are many falsehoods vented: and
for that horns turn upward to heaven, the fountain of truth, but the teeth
of an Elephant grow downward toward the earth the mother of error. And for
this cause Aeneas by Virgil and Homer, is said to come in at the horny gate of
Somnus, and to go forth at the Iuory: Virgils verses are these: Sunt geminae
Somni portae quarum altera fertur,

His vbi dum natum Anchises, vnaque Sibillam; Cornea
Qua veris facilis datur exitus vmbris,
Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt in somnia manes,
Poesequitur dictis, portaque emittit eburna.


And here we will leave, and prosecute no further this discourse of their
horns and teeth, but proceed to the other outward parts of this beast.

The tongue is very small though broad, his truncke called Proboscis and
Promuscis, Aelianus.
is a Aristotle.
and when he feeds it lies open, like the skin upon the bill of a
Turkey-cock, to draw in both his meat and drink, using it for a hand, and
therefore improperly it is called a hand. For by it he receives of his keeper
whatsoever he gives him, with it he overthrows trees, and where soever he
swimmeth, through it he draws breath. It is crooked, gristly, and inflexible
at the root next to the nose: within, it has two passages, one into the
head and body by which he breaths, and the other into his mouth, whereby he
receives his meat: Gillius
and herein is the work of God most wonderful, not only in giving unto it
such a diverse proportion and anatomy, but also giving him reason to know
this benifite of it, that so long as he is in the water and holds up that
trunck, he can not perish.

Vartomannus
which twenty four men with a rope could not make to bend. With it he drives
away his hunters when he is chased, for he can draw up therein a great
quantity of water, and shoot it forth again, to the amazement and the
overthrow of them that persecute him. The Moors say that he has twoe hearts,
one where withal he is incensed, and another whereby he is pacified.

But the truth is, as Aristotle in the dissection of the heart observed,
there is a double ventrickle, and bone in the heart of an Elephant. He has a
Liver without any apparent gall, but that side of the liver being cut, whereon
the gall should lie, a certain humor comes forth like a gall. Wherefore
Aelianus says, he has his gall in his maw-gutte,

His Liver four times so great as an Oxes, and so all the residue except the
Melte: he has two pappes a little beside his breast under his shoulders, and
not between his hinder legs or loins, they are very small and cannot be
seen on the side. Aristotle.
The reasons hereof are given, first that he has but two pappes, because he
brings forth but one at a time, and they stand under his shoulders like an
Apes, because he has no hoofes but distinct feet like a man's, and also
because from the breaste flows more abundance of

The genitall part is like a Horses, but lesser then the proportion of his
body affoordeth: the stones are not outwardly seen, because they cleave to
his raines. But the Female has her genitall betwixt her thighs: the
forlegges are much longer then the hinder legs, and the feet be greater. His
legs are of equal quantity, both above and beneathe the knees, and it has
anckle bones very low. The articles do not ascend so high as in other
creatures, but kept low near the earth. He bends his hinder legs like a man's
when he sits, but by reason of his great weight he is not able to bend on
both sides together, (...) Gill^^s
but either leans to the right hand or to the left and so sleeps: It is
false that they have no joints or articles in their legs, for when they please
they can use, bend, and move them, but after they grow old, they use not to lie
down or strain them by reason of their great weight, but take their rest
leaning to a tree: and if they did not bend their legs, they could never go any
ordinary and stayed pace. Their feet are round like a horses, but so as they
reach from the middle every way two spans length, and are as broad as a
bushel, having five distinct toes upon each foot, the which toes are very
little cloven, to the intent that the foot may be stronger; and yet parted,
that when he treads upon

their inward natural parts
There is not any creature so capable of understanding as an Elephant, and
therefore it is requisite to tarry somewhat the longer in expressing the
several properties, and natural qualities thereof, which sundry and variable
inclinations, cannot choose but bring great delight to the reader. They have a
wonderful love to their own Country, so as although they be never so well
delighted with diverse meats and joys in other places, yet in memory thereof
they send forth tears, Aelianus Tzetzes. The Places of their abod
and they love also the waters, rivers, and marshes, Riparij such as live by
the rivers sides: although they cannot swim by reason of their great and heavy
bodies, until they be taught. Also they never live solitary but in great
flocks, except they be sick or watch their young ones, and for either of these
they remain aduenturous unto death, Pliny.
the eldest leads the herd, and the second drives them forward, if they meet
any man they give him way, and go out of his sight. Leo Afer:


Their voice is called by the word Barrire, that is to bray, and thereupon the
Elephants themselus are called Barri; Festus Philomelae avthor.
for his voice comes out of his mouth and nostrils together, like as when a
man speaks breathing; wherefore Aristotle calls it rawcity, or hoarsnes,
like the low sound of a Trumpet, this sound is very terrible in battles as
shall be afterward

They live upon the fruits of plants and roots, and with their truncks and
heads, overthrow the tops of trees, The meat of wild Eleph. Pliny. Solinus
and eat the boughs and bodies of them, and many times upon the leaves of
trees he deuoureth Chamaeleons, whereby he is poisoned and dies if he eat not
immediately a wild Olive. They eat earth often without harm, but if they eat
it sildome, it is hurtful and procures pain in their b^l^ies; so also they
eat stones. They are so loving to their fellows, that they will not eat their
meat alone, but having found a prey, they go and inuit the residue to their
feasts and cheer, more like to reasonable civil men, Aelianus. Hermolaus.
then unreasonable brute beasts. There are certain noble melons in Aethiopia,
which the Elephants being sharpe-smelling-beastes do wind a great way off, and
by the Aelianus Simocratus A secret. Pliny.
loathing to see their own shadow therein; and therefore when the Indians are
to pass the water with their Elephants, they choose dark and cloudy nights
wherein the moon affords no light. If they perceive but a mouse run over
their meat, they will not eat thereof, for there is in them a great hatred of
this creature. Also they will eat dried Phalacrus, A secret in a country of
India.
which signifies Balde, because of an herb growing therein, which causes
every living thing that eats thereof, to loose both horn and hair, and
therefore no man can be more industrious or wary to avoid those places, then
is an Elephant, and to bear every green thing growing in that place when he
passes thorough it. Aelianus


It will forbear drink eight days together, and drink wine to drunkenness
like an Ape. It is delighted above measure with sweet savors, ointments, and
smelling flowers, for which cause their keeps will in the Summer time lead
them into the meadows of flowers, where they of themselves will by the quicknes
of their smelling, Their love to sweet flowers. Aelianus.
choose out and gather the sweetest flowers, and put them into a basket if their
keeper have any; which being filled, like dainty and neat men, they also
desire to wash, and so will go and seek out water to wash themselves, and of
their own accord return back again to the basket of flowers, which if they
find not, they will bray and call for them. Afterward being led into their
stable, they will not eat meat until they take of their flowers and dress the
brimmes of their maungers therewith, and likewise strew their room or standing
place, pleasing

Their pace is very slow, for a child may overtake them by reason of their high
and larg bodies (except in their fear) and for that cause they cannot swim: as
also, Gillius. The shiping of Elephants
by reason that the toes of their feet are very short and finally divided. When
they are brought into a ship, they have a bridge made of wood, and covered with
earth, and green boughs are set on either side, so that they immagine they go
upon the land until they enter into the ship; because the boughs keep them
from sight of the Sea. They are most chaste, Aelianus.
and Venus not for any corporal lust, but for desire of heirs and successors
in their families, so do Elephants, without all unchaste and unlawful lust,
take their veneriall complements, for the continuation of their kind, and never
above thrice in all their days, either male or female suffer carnal
copulation (but the female only twice.) Yet is their rage great when the
female provoke them, and although they fight not among themselves for their
females, (except very sildome) yet do they so burn in this fury, that many
times they overthrow trees and houses in India by their tuskes, and running
their head like a Ram against them, wherefore then they keep them low and down
by subtraction of their meat, and also bring some stranger to beat them. There
was a certain cunning hunter sent into Mauritania by the Roman Emp* to hunt
and Aelianus.
which we saw in copulation with the other male: when he approached near, both
of them set themselves to combat, which they performd like some irresistable
waves of the Sea, or as the hills which are shaken together by an earthquake,
wherein each one charged the other most furiously for their love, to the terror
and admiration of all the beholders, and so at last becam both disarmed of
their teeth and horns by their often blows, before one had overcome the
other, and so at last by the hunters were parted asunder, being ever afterward
quiet from

The Indians separate the stables of the females far asunder from the males,
because at that time they overthrow their houses. They are modest and
shamefast in this action, The place and manner of their copulation Plinyus.
for they seek the Deserts, woods, and secret places for procreation, and
sometimes the waters, because the waters do support the Male in that action,
whereby he ascends and descends from the back of the female with more
ease: and once it was seen, that in Virgea (a Country of the Corascens) two
Elephants did engender out of India, otherwise they couple not out of their
own countries: When they go to copulation, they turn their heads toward the
east, but whether in remembrance of Paradise, or for the Mandragoras, or for
any other cause, I cannot tell: the female sits while she is couerd.
Albertus.
They begin to engender, the male at six, ten, twelve, fifteen or twenty
year old, the Solinus. The time of copulation Arrianus
and after the second copulation, he never more touches his female. At that
time the male breaths forth at his nose a certain fat humor like a
menstruous thing, but the female has them not til her place of conception be
opened: and always the day after her filling, she washes her self before she
return to the flock.

Aristotle. The time of their go^og with young
The time of their going with young is according to some two years, and according
to other three, the occasion of this diversity is, because their time of
copulation cannot certainly be known, because of their secrecy, for the
greater bodies that beasts have, they are the less fruitful. She is delivered
in great pain, leaning upon her hinder Legs. They never bring forth but one
at a time, and that is not much greater then a great cowcalfe (of three months
old,) which she nourishes six or eight year. As soon as it is Calued,
Diodonus Pogius. Aelianus.
it sees and goes, and sucketh with the mouth, not with the trunk, and so
grows to a great stature.

The females when they have calued are most fierce, for fear of their young
ones, but if a man come and touch them, they are not angry, for it seems they
understand that The love of the male to the female and of both to the Calfe.
Sometimes they go into the Water to the belly and there calue for fear of
the Dragon: the male never forsakes her, but keeps with her for the like
fear of the Dragon, and feed and defend their young ones with singular love
and constancye unto death: as appears by the example of one, that heard the
braying of her calfe fallen into a ditch and not able to arise, the female
ran unto it, and for have fell down upon it, so crushing it to death,
Tzetzes.
and breaking her own Neck with one and the same violente love.

As they live in herds, so when they are to pass over a river or Water, they
send over the least or youngest first, because their great bodies together
should not cause the deep Plutarch Aelianus Philostratus.
then they the elder and taller; and the females carry over their Calves upon
their snowts and long eminent teeth binding them fast with their trunks, (like
as with ropes or male girts that they may not fall) being sometime helped by
the male; wherein appears an admirable point of natural wisdom, both in
the carriage of their young and in sending of the lesser foremost, not only
for the reason aforesaid, but also because they being hunted and prosecuted, it
is requisite that the greatest and strongest come in the rear and hindmost
part, for the safeguarde of the weaker, against the fury of their persecutors,
being better able to fight then the foremost, whom in natural love and

Mutius which had been thrice Consul affirms, that he saw Elephants brought
on shore at Puteoli in Italy: they were caused to go out of the ship
backward, all along the bridge that was made for them, Tha bringing of
Elephants out of ships. A secret, if true.
that so the sight of the Sea might terrify them, and cause them more
willingly to come on land, and that they might not be terrified with the length
of the bridge from the continent. Pliny and Solinus affirm, that they will not
go on shipboord, until their keeper by some intelligible sign of oath, make
promise unto them of their return back again.

They sometime as has been said fight one against another, and when the
weaker is overcome, Aristotle. Of their fighting
he is so much abased and cast down in mind, that ever after he fears the

They are never so fierce, violent, or wild, but the sight of a Ram tameth
and dismayeth them, for they fear his horns; for which cause the Egiptians
picture an Elephant and a Ram, to signify a foolish king that runs away
for a fearful sight in the field. Gillius Aelianus Coelius Zoroastres. Their
fear of Rams, swine, and other beasts Volateranus
And not only a Ram, but also the gruntling clamor or cry of Hogs: by which
means the Romans overthrew the Carthaginians, and Pirrhus which trusted
overmuch to their Elephants. When Antipater besieged the Megarians very
straightly with many Elephants, the Citizens took certain Swine and anointed
them with pitch, then set them on fire and turned them out among the Elephants,
who crying horribly by reason of the fire on their bodies, so distemperd the
Elephants, that all the wit of the Macedonians could Iphicrates says, that
among the Hesperian or western Aethiopians, Lions set upon the young Calves of
Elephants and wound them: but at the sight of the mothers, which come with
speed to them, when they hear them cry, the Lions run away, and when the
mothers find their young ones imbrued in their own blood, they themselves are
so enraged that they kill them, and so retire from them, The cruelty of the
female to their wounded Calves. Solin^s. Stat. Seb^si.
after which time the Lions return and eat their flesh. They will not endure
the savor of a Mouse, but refuse the meat which they have run over: in the
river Ganges of India, there are blew Worms of sixty cubits long having two
arms; these when the Elephants come to drink in that river, take their trunks
in their hands and pull them off. There are Dragons among the Aethiopians,
which are thirty yards or paces long, these have no name among Indians also
there is an inbred and native hateful hostility betwixt Dragons and
Elephants: Aelianus
for which cause the Dragons being not ignorant that the Elephants feed upon
the fruits and leaves of green trees, do secretly convey them selves into
them or to the tops of rocks: covering their hinder part with leaves, and
letting his head and fore part hang down like a rope on a sudden when the
Elephant comes to crop the top of the tree, she leapeth into his face, and
diggeth out his eyes, and because that revenge of malice is to little to
satisfy a Serpent, she twineth her gable-like-body about the throat of the
amazed Elephant, and so strangleth him to death.

Again they mark the footsteps of the Elephant when he goes to feed, and so
with their tails, net in and entangle his legs and feet: when the Elephant
perceives and feels

Also it is reported that the blood of an Elephant is the coldest blood in the
world, and that Dragons in the scorching heat of Summer, cannot get any thing
to cool them, except

Of this blood comes that ancient Cinnabaris, Of Cinnabaris or the best red
color
made by commixture of the blood of Elephants and Draggons both together, which
alone is able and nothing but it, to make the best representation of blood in
painting. Some have corrupted it with Goats-blood, and call it Milton, and
Mimum, and Monochroma: it has a most rare and singular virtue against

These Serpents or Dragons are bred in Taprobona, in whose heads are many
precious stones, with such natural seals or figurative impressions, as if
they were framed by the hand of man, for Podisippus and Tzetzes affirm, that
they have seen one of them taken out of a Dragons head, having upon it the
lively and artificial stamp of a Chariot. The fight of Elephants. Pliny.


Elephants are enemies to wild Bulls, and the Rhinocerots, for in the games
of Pompey, when an Elephant and a Rhinoceros were brought together, the
Rhinoceros ran instantly and whet his horn upon a stone, and so prepared
himself to fight, striking most of all at the belly of the Elephant, because
he knew that it was the tenderest and most penetrable part of the body.

Rhinoceros was as long as the Elephant, but the legs thereof were much
shorter, and as the Rhinocerotes sharpen their horns upon the stones, so do
the Elephants their teeth upon trees: the sharpness of either yields not to
any steel. Aelianus Oppianus Strabo.
Especial the Rhinocerot teareth and pricketh the legs of the Elephant: They
fight in the woods for no other cause, but for the meat they live upon, but if
the Rhinocerot get not the advantage of the Elephants belly, but set upon him
in some other part of his body, he is soon put to the worst, by the sharpenes
of the yuory tooth which pierces through his more then buffehard-skinne (not
to be pierced with any dart) with great facility, being set on with the
strength of so able an adversary. The Tygre also fears not an Elephant, but
is fiercer and stronger, Eustathius
for he leapeth upon his head and teareth out his throat, but the Gryphins
which overcome almost all beasts, are not able to stand with the Lions or
Elephants.

The females are far more strong, cheerful, and courageous then the males,
and also they are apt to bear the greater burdens; but in War ^he male is
more graceful and acceptable, Vartomanus The conditions and courage of male and
female. Gillius
because he is taller, giving more assured ensigns of victory and fortitude:
for their strength is admirable, as may be coniecturd by that which is formerly
recited of their Vartoman affirms, that he saw three Elephants with their
only heads, drive a great ship out of the Seawater where it was fastened
unto the shore. When he is most loaded he goes surest, for he can carry a
wooden Tower on his back with thirty men therein, and their sufficient food
and warlike instruments.

The king of India was wont to go to war with 30000. Elephants of war, and
beside these he had also followed him 3000. Albertus The strength and burden
of an Eleph.
of the chiefest and strongest in India, which at his command would ouethrow
trees, Houses, Walls, or any such thing standing against him: and indeed upon
these were the Indians wont to fight, for the defense of their coast, and
country. The farthest region of that continent is called Partalis, inhabited by
the Gangarides and Calingae, the king whereof was wont to have seven hundred
Elephants to watch his Army, and there was no mean prince in all India which
was not Lord of many Elephants. Pliny. The keepers and maintainers of Elep.
Solinus
The king of Palibotrae kept in stipend, eight thousand every day, and beyond
his territory was the king of Modubae and Molindae, which had four hundred
Elephants. These fight with men, and overthrow all that come within their
reach, both with trunkes and teeth.

There were certain officers and guiders of these Elephants, which were called
Elephantarchae, who were the governors of sixteen Elephants, and they which
did institute and teach them Martial discipline, were called Elephanta gogi.
The military Elephant did carry 4. Pollux. The instruction of Elephants for war
Aelianus
persons on his bare back, one fighting on the right hand, another fighting on
the left hand, a third which stood fighting backward from the Elephants head,
and a fourth in the middle of these holding the raines and guiding the beast to
the descretion of the Soldiers, Indian which ruled them said, strike here on
the right hand, or else on the left, or refrain and stand still, no reasonable
man could yeald readier obedience. They did fasten by iron chains, first of
all upon the elephant that was to bear ten, fifteen, twenty, or thirty men,
on either side, two panniers of iron bound underneath their belly, and upon
them the like panniers of wood hollow, wherein they place their men at arms,
and covered them over with small boards, for the trunk of the elephant was
covered with a maile for defense, and upon that a broad sword, and two cubits
long: this (as also the wodden Castle or paniers aforsaid) were fastened first
to the neck, and then to the rumpe of the elephant. Being thus armed, Pyrrhus
first of all, produced elephants against the Romans in Lucania: afterward
Asdruball in Africa, Antiochus in the East, and Iugurtha in Numidia.

Against these new kinds of Castle-fighting and Souldier-bearing-beastes, on
the contrary they invented New kinds of stratagems, as is before set down,
and also new instruments of War, The fight against eleph.
for a Centuryon in Lucania with a new devised sharp sword, cut of the trunk
of this Beast: again other invented, that two armed Horses should draw a
chariot, and in the same armed men with Iauelins and sharp spears, the
speedy horses should withal force run upon the Elephants, and the speare-men
directing their course and Weapons some upon the beast, other upon the riders,
did not only wound the beast, but also by celerity of the horses, escape all
danger.

Other again sent against him armed Soldiers, having their Armor made full
of sharp pricks or piercing piked Nails, so that when the beast did strike
at them with his trunk, he received grievous wounds by his own blows.
Again there were certain young men Soldiers, armed with light armor, which
being mounted upon swift Horses, could cast Darts with singular facility, and
without the reach of the beast, many times wounding him with long spears, and
so by example of the Horsemen, the Vegetius.

At the last the fight with Elephants turned into a public game or pastime,
Games of Elephants.
both to see them fought withal by men, and also among themselves. When
certain prisoners of the Romans were taken by Anniball, he first constrained
them to skirmish among themselves, and so slew one another except only one;
and he was by the like commandment forced to fight with an Elephant, but upon
condition of liberty if he escaped alive: and thereupon joined Combat, and slew
the Elephant, to the great grief and amazement of all the Carthaginians; but
going home, according to agreement, Anniball fearing that by this fact those
great beasts would grow into contempt, sent certain Horsemen

Their trunk or hand is most easy to be cut off; for so it happened in the
aedility or temple office of Claudius, Antonius and Posthumus being consuls,
and afterward in the Circus, Fenestella.
when the Luculli were the commons officers. And when Pompey was consul the
second time, there were 17. or 20. which at one time fought within the Circus,
at the dedication of the Temple of Venus the Victoria, where the Getulians
fought with them with Spears and Darts; for their happened an admirable
accident, one of the Soldiers who having a hurt in his feet did creep upon
his knees betwixt the Legs of the Elephants, and cast up the Darts over his
head into the beasts belly, which fell down round about him, to the great
pleasure of the beholders, so that many of the elephants perished rather by Art
then the strength of the Soldier. No less was the Miracle of another slain
with one Julius Caesar, and in the third time of his consulship, there were
twenty Elephantes, which in the Games fought with five hundred men, and so many
with Towers on their backs, bearing threescore men in every Tower.

To conclude, elephants are afraid of fire, and Martial made this Epigram of a
Bull slain by an elephant, which was wont to domineer in all their triumphant
games, wherewithal I will conclude this discourse.

Qui modo per to tam flammis stimulatus arenam

Occubuit tandem cornuto ardore petitus
Dum facilem tolli sic elephanta putat.
In the next place it is good to relate the story of the taking and taming of
elephants, The taking of Elephants Pliny. Strabo.
for in Libia about the Trogloditae, the hunting and taking of elephants have
given many names to several Towns, as Elephantina, and Elephantis, Epitherae,
Philothera, and the hunting of Elephants by Ptolemais, by the port Saba, the
City Daraba, and L^cha. In Affricke they take them in great ditches, wherinto
when they are fallen, the people presently with boughs, mattocks, leauers, and
digging down of high raised places, take them out again, and so turn them
into a valley wrought by the labor of man, most firmly walled on both sides,
where with famine they tame him: for when he would gently take a bough at the
hand of a man, they adjudged him tamed, and grew familiar with him, leading him
away without all scruple.

But the Indians use another more ingenious and speedy means to tame them,
which is this; Pliny.
first, they dig also a great ditch, and place such meat therein as the beast
loves, Albertus.
and relieve the poor beast; and this they do successively three or four
times; so at the last, the Elephant grows to know and love his deliverer;

Arrianus and Strabo relate another way whereby the Indians take their
Elephantes, which because they Write upon their own eyesight, of the things
they knew assuredly, I have thought good to express the devise. Four or five
Hunters, first of all choose out some plain place, without Trees or Hills but
declining, by the space of some four or five furlongs; this they dig like a
wide Ditch as aforesaid, and with the earth they take

Now these beasts in the day time feed not so boldly as in the night, and
therefore they cannot easily be deceived or taken in the light; but in the
night great flocks of them follow the Captain, (as we have already showed,)
and so coming near this trench, and upon the wound they tie and fasten a
rope, that so the pain may constrain the Beast to be quiet, so that by this
they begin to feel their own weakness, and leave off their wildenesse,
betaking themselves to the mercy of their new Masters.

Being thus raised from the earth again, and yoaked by the necks and Legs
to the tamed Elephants, they are safely led home into stables, where they are
fastened to great pillars by their necks, and if they refuse to eat their
meat, with Tymbrels, Cimbals, Harpes, and other musical instruments, they are
so entised from sullen Wildenesse, that they forget their first natures, and
yeald al loving obedience to men, as to their victorious conquerors and
irresistable masters.

Aelianus
so as they cannot be drawn into the ditches and fosses by any allurements:
but presaging their own misfortunes, turn back again upon their hunters,
even through the midst of them, and so seek to save themselves by flight,
overthrowing their enemies that dare approach unto them At which time there is a
fierce fight, to the great slaughter many times both of men and beasts; for
the men to stay his flight, bend their spears, and charge their darts and
arrows, to strike the Elephant directly on the face, and if the beast perceive
that he has overthrown any man, instantly he makes to him, takes him in
his teeth, lifting him up into the air, and casting him down again, and
stampeth upon him, wounding him many times with his teeth or horns, whereby the
puts him to cruel torments, and leaves him

And when they invade or set upon a man, they spread forth their broad ears,
(which are fashioned like the Wings of Ostriches) as the sails of a ship, and
drawing up their trunk under their teeth, their noses stand forth like the
beak of some ship, and so rush they with irresistable violence upon the weak
bodies of men, ouerturning them in no other sort, then a mighty great hulke or
man of War, the little Oars or Whirries in the Sea.

And as the Trumpets in War give the signs of fighting, so do these send
forth such terrible yelling and roaring clamors, as brings no mean
astonishment to his persecutours: beside the lamentable and mournful voices
of men, by them wounded and fallen

In this conflict, sometime the Elephants, and sometimes men are the conquerors,
by bringing upon the beasts diverse terrors and manacles, out of which they are
not very easily

But if their rage proceed vndeterred, and men be forced to yeald unto them,
forth they go into the woods, making the trees to bend unto them as a dog or an
Ox does the standing corn at harvest: breaking off their tops and branches,
which hinder their course and their food from Palms, Trees or bushes;
afterward betaking themselves to rest and quietness.

But if their Hunters come again into their sight, they also again take them
to their heels, until they have gotten more ground from them, and then they
rest again: and if the sun declyne, and light of day fail the Hunters, and
darkness make an end of the chase; then do they compass in the beasts way,
and set the wood a fire, (for Elephants fear fire as much as Lions:) So that
by all this it appears, that the fabulous tales of Gabinius the Roman writer
of Elephants, are not to be believed; when he affirms, that Elephants will
fight against and resist the violence of fire.

The Trogloditae hunt and take Elephants after another manner, for they climb
up into the trees, and there sit till the flocks of Elephantes pass by, and
upon the last, the Watchman suddenly leapeth (with great courage) taking hold
upon his tail and so slyding down to his Legs, and with a sharp Axe which
he has hanging at his back cutteth the Nerves and sinnewes of his Legs with
so great celerity, that the beast cannot turn about to relieve it self,
before she be wounded and made unable to revenge her harm, Pliny.
or prevent her taking: and sometimes she falls down on the wounded side,
and Crusheth the Hunter-watch-man to death, or else with her force in running,
dasheth out his brains against a tree.

Strabo. Other ways of taking Elephants.
The Elephant eaters (called Elephantophagi) do observe the like policy, for
by stealth and secretly they set upon the hindmost, or else the wandering
solitary Elephant, and

Other among the aforesaid Troglodytae, use a more easy, cunning and less
perilous kind of taking Elephants; for they set on the ground very strong
charged bent-bowes, which are kept by many of their strongest young men, and
so when the flocks of Elephants pass by, they shoot their sharp arrows
dipped in the gall of Serpents, and wound some one of them, and follow him by
the blood, until he be unable to make resistance. There are three at every
bow, two which hold it, and one that draws the string. Other again, watch
the trees whereunto the beast leans when he sleeps, near some Waters, and
the same they cut half asunder, whereunto when he declyneth his body,

Aristotle describes another manner of taking Elephants in this sort; The
Hunter (says he) gets up upon a tamed Elephant, and follows the Wild one
till he have overtaken it, then commands he the tame beast to strike the
other, and so continues chasing and beating him, til he have wearied him and
broken his untameable nature. Then does the rider leap upon the wearied and
tired Elephant, and with a sharp pointed Sickle does govern him after the
tame one, and so in short space he grows gentle. And some of them when the
ryder alighteth from their backs, grow Wild and fierce again;

In the Caspian lake, there are certain fishes (called Oxyrinchi) out of whom
is made such a firm glue, Gillius
that it will not be dissolved in ten days after it has taken hold, for which
cause they use it in the taking of Elephants.

There are in the Island Zeira many Elephants, whom they take on this manner:
In the Mountains they make certain cloisters in the earth, having two great
Trees standing at the mouth of the cloisters, and in those trees they hang up a
great par-cullis gate, within for six or seven days without meat, whereby
they are so infeebled and famished, that they are not able to stand upon their
legs.

Then two or three strong men enter in among them, and with great staves and
Clubbes, be labor and cudgel them, till by that means they grow tame, and
gentle; and although an Elephant be a monster-great-beast and very subtle, yet
by these and such like means do the inhabitants of India and Aethiopia take
many of them, with a very small labor, to their great advantage.

Against these slights of men, may be opposed the subtle and cautelous
euasions of the beast, avoiding all the footsteps of men, if they smell them
upon any herb or leaf, The subtilty of Elephants against their hunters.
and for their fight with the Hunters, they observe this order. First of all,
they set them India for no other cause, then for their teeth, and therefore to
discourage the hunters, they set them which have the worst teeth before, and
reserve the strongest for the second encounter: for their wisdom or natural
discretion is herein to be admired, that they will so dispose themselves in
all their battles when they are in chase, that ever they fight by course, and
enclose the youngest from peril, so that lying under the belly of their Dammes
they can scarce be seen: and when one of them flies they all fly away, to
their usual resting places, stryuing which

Afterward when they are all over, they tarry and help their fellow out of
the Ditch or Trench again, by this slight or devise; one of them puts down
to him his Leg, and the other in the Ditch windeth his trunk about the same,
the residue standers by cast in bundels of Sprigs with their mouths, which the
Elephant warily and speedily puts under his feet, and so raises himself
out of the Trench again, Aelianus. Tzetzes. Plutarch
and departs

But if they fall in and cannot find any help or means to come forth, they
lay aside their natural Wild disposition, and are contented to take meat
and drink at the hands of men, whose presence before they abhorred; and being
delivered they think no more upon their former condition, but in
forgetfulness thereof, remain obedient to their deliuerers.

Being thus taken as it has been said, it is also expedient to express by
what Art and means they are Cicurated and tamed. First of all therefore when
they are taken, The art of taming elepha* Aelianus
they are fastened to some Tree or Pillar in the earth, so as they can neither
kick backward nor Leap forward, and there hunger, thirst, and famine, like
two most strong and forcible Ryders abate their natural wildenesse,
strength, fear, and hatred of men: Afterward

But the Indians by great labor and industry take their young Calves at their
Watering places, and so lead them away, intising them by many allurementes of
meat to love and obey them, so as they grow to understand the Indian language,
but the elder Indian Elephants do very hardly and sildome grow tame, because
of their remembrance of their former liberty, by any bands and oppression;
nevertheless by isntrumental music,

Pliny and Solinus prescribe the juice of Barley to be given to them for their
mitification, whereunto also agrees Dioscorides (calling that kind of drink
Zythus) and the reason hereof is, because of the tarte sharpness in barley
water if it stand a little while; and therefore also they prescribe vinegar and
ashes to rub the beasts mouth, for it has power in it to pierce stones,
Plutarch
al sharp things penitrate deep into his flesh, and alter his nature: the
invention whereof is attributed to Democritus.

Being thus tamed they grow into civil and familiar uses, for Caesar ascended
into the Capital betwixt four hundred Elephants, carring at either side
burning Torches, and Heliogobalus brought four Wagons drawn with Elephantes
in Vaticanum, and men commonly ride upon them, (...)
for Apollonius saw near the River Indus, a Boy of thirteen year old ryding
alone upon an Elephant, spurring and pricking him as freely as any man

They are taught to bend one of their hinder legs to take up their Ryder, who
also must receive help from some other present standers by, The taking up of
their riders.
or else it is impossible to mount on the back of so high a palfrey. They
which are not accustomed to ride upon these beasts, are affected with
vomiting and casting, like men when they first of all take the Sea. vac^omanus.
Gi^lius
They are ruled without bridle or raines, only by a long crooked piece of
Wood, bending like a Sickle, and nailed with sharp Nails, no man can sit
more safely and more softly upon a Horse or Mule then they do which Ride
upon the Elephants. N^^chus Strabo. Elephants for the plowe.
The Indians with their lesser Elephantes (which they call bastard Elephantes)
plow their ground and corn.

The common price of Elephantes is at the least five hundred Nobles, and
sometimes The price of Elephants.
The Indian Women are most chaste and continent, yet for an Elephant they take a
great pride to be hired for Whoores, for they imagine that the fame and
received oppinyon of their beautye, does connteruayle and cover the shameful
loss of their honesty (as Arrianus writes in his book of Indians.)

Since the time that Elephants have been tamed, their natures and dispositions
have been the better observed and discovered; for they willingly obey their
keepers, learning all feats of Arms, Their obedience and tr^c t^^le
gentleness.
to take up stones and cast them, and to swim; so that Strabo affirms,
there was no possession or wealth comparable to a chariot or Wagon of
Elephants.

Mutianus which was thrice Consul affirmed to Pliny, that he saw an Elephant
which Pliny. Their learning in leters
and was able with his tongue to Write these words. Autos egoo Tadegrapsa
laphura te kelt'anetheca; that is, I Wrote these things and dedicated the
Celtican spoils: but in these actions of Writing, the hand of the teacher must
be also present to teach him how to frame the Letters, and then as Aelianus
says they will Write upon Tables, and follow the true proportion of the
Characters expressed before their face, whereupon they look as attentively as
any Grammarian. In India they are taught many sportes, as to Dance and Leap,
which caused Martial to Write thus; Turpes esseda quod trahunt bisontes
Et molles dare iussa quod chore as
Nigro bellua nil legate magistro
Quis spectacula non putet deorum.


When the Prizes of Germanicus Caesar were played; there were many Elephantes
which acted strange feats or parts, four of them went upon Ropes and over
the Tables of meat, where on they set their feet so warily that they never
touched any of the ghests, the boardes or standing Cups being fully
furnished. And also they learned to dance after Pipes by measure, sometime
Dancing softly, and sometime apace, and then again leaping upright, according
to the number of the thing sung or played upon the instrument: and they are apt
to learn, remember, meditate, and conceive such things, as a

Their industrious care to perform the things they are taught, appears
herein, because when they are secret and alone by themselves, they will
practice leaping, dancing, and other strange feats, which they could not learn
suddenly in the presence of their masters (as Pliny affirms) for certain
truth of an Elephant which was dull and hard of understanding, his keeper found
him in the night practicing those things which he had taught him with many
stripes the day before, and cold not prevail by reason of the beasts slow
conceit.

Their was an Elephant playing upon a Cymball, Plutarch.
and others of his fellows dancing about him, for there was fastened to
either of both of his forelegs one Cymball, and another hanged to his trunk,
the beast would observe just time, and strike upon one, and then the other, to
the admiration of all the beholders. There was a certain banquet prepared for
Elephants upon a low bed in a palour set with diverse dishes and po^s of Wine,
whereinto were admitted twelve, six males, apparelled like men, and six
females apparelled Aelianus
so that this beast is not only of an admirable greatness but of a more
wonderful meakenesse and docibility. Aristotle. The reverence of Elephants to
Kings.


They are said to diseerne betwixt kings and common persons, for they adore and
bend unto them, poynting to their Crowns, which caused Martial to Write this
Tetrastichon; Quid pius and supplex elephas te Caesar adorat
Non facit hoc iussus, nulloque docente magistro

Creed mihi numen sentit and ille tuum.


The King of Indians was watched with four and twenty Elephants, 3. kinds of
Elephants.
who were taught to forbear sleep, and to come in their turns at certain
hours, and so were they most faithful, careful and invincible. And as there
be of them three kinds, the Palustrians or Marishye Elephantes are
hare-brained and inconstant, the Elephantes of the Mountains are subtle and
evil natured, lying in wait to destroy and devour, but the Campestriall
Elephants are meek, Gentle, Docible, and apt to imitate men. In these is the
understanding of their country language, of obedience to Princes, government,
and offices;

They have also a kind of Religion, for they worship, reverence, and observe
the course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; for when the Moon shines, The
religion of elephants.
they go to the Waters wherein she is apparent, and when the Sun arises,
they salute and reverence her face: and it is observed in Aethiopia, that when
the Moon is changed until her prime and appearance, these Beasts by a
secret motion of nature, Pliny. Solinus.
take boughs from of the trees they feed upon, and first of all lift them up
to heaven, and then look upon the Moon, which they do many times together;
as it were in supplication to her. In like manner they reverence the Sun
rising, holding up their trunk or hand to heaven, Aelianus.


Iuba was wont to say, that this beast was acceptable to those Gods which
ruled Sea and Land, because of their reverence to Sun and Moon, Elephants
sacrificed and what followed thereupon.
and therefore Ptolomeus Philopator, offered four Elephants in a sacrifice (to
recover the quietness of his mind) thinking that the Gods would have been
well pleased therewith, but finding that his fearful dreams and visions
departed not from him, but rather his disquietnesse increased, fearing that the
Gods were angry with him for that action he made four Elephants of brass, and
dedicated them to the sun, Aelianus. Plutarch
that so by this deed he might purchase pardon

This religion of theirs, also appears before their death, for when they
feel any mortal wounds, or other natural signs of their later end, either
they take up the dust, Tzetzes.
or else some green herb, Plin^us. Aelianus
and lift it up to heaven in token of their innocence and imploration of their
own weakness: and in like manner do they when they eat any herb by natural
instinct to cure their diseases: first they lift it up to the heavens (as it
were to pray for a divine blessing upon it) and then devour it.

I cannot omit their care, to bury and cover the dead carkases of their
companions, or any other of their kind; Tzetzes.
for finding them dead they pass not by them till they have lamented their
common misery, by casting dust and earth on them, and also green boughs, in
token of sacrifice, holding it execrable to do otherwise: and they know by a
natural instinct* some assured fore-tokens of their own death. Besides when
they wax old and unfit to gather their own meat, or fight for themselves the
younger of them feed, nourish, and defend them, yea they raise them out of
Ditches and trenches into which they are fallen, exempting them from all labor
and peril, and interposing their own bodies for their protection: neither do
they forsake them in sickness, or in their wounds, but

Again how much they love their young which is a natural part of religion we
have showed before. Antipater supposes that they have a kind of divination or
divine understanding of law and equity, Plinyus. Their understanding of justice
and in equity
for when King Bochus, had condemned thirty men to be torn and trod in pieces
by Elephants, and tying them hand and foot to blocks or pieces of Wood, cast
them among thirty Elephants, his servants and officers could not by all their
wit, skill, or provocation, make the beasts touch one of them: so that it was
apparent, they scorned and disdained to serve any man's cruel disposition, or
to be the ministers of tyrany and murder. Aelianus. The revenge of adulteryes
by Elephants
They moreover have not only an observation of chastity among themselves, but
also are, reuengers of whoredom and adulterers in other, as may appear by

A certain Elephant seeing his Master absent, and another man in bed with
his Mistress, he went unto the bed and slew them both. The like was done at
Rome where the Elephant having slain both the adulterer and adulteress, he
covered them with the bed clothes until his keeper returned home and then by
signs drew him into his lodging place, where he uncovered the adulterers, and
showed him his bloody tooth that took revenge upon them both for such a
villainy: whereat the master wondering, was the more pacified because of the
manifest-committed iniquity. And not only thus deal they against the Woman,
but they also spare not to revenge the adultery of men, yea of their own
keeper: for there was a rich man which had married a Wife not very amiable or

Their love and concord with all mankind is most notorious, especially to their
keepers and Women: Their love ^o their keepers and all men that harm them not.
for if through wrath they be incensed against their keepers, they kill
Arrianus tells a notable story of an Indian, who had brought up from a Foalea
white Elephant, both loving it and being beloved of it again, he was thereupon
carried with great admiration. The king hearing of this White Elephant, sent
unto the man for it, requiring it to be given him for a present, whereat the
man was much grieved, that another man should possess that which he had so
tenderly educated and loved, fitting him to his bow and purposes, and
therefore like a ryuall in his Elephants love, resolved to deny the king, and
to shift for himself in some other place: whereupon he fled into a desert
region with his Elephant, and the king understanding thereof, grew offended
with him, sent messengers after him to take away the

When they came to the place where he remained and began to take order for
their apprehension, the man ascended into a steep place and there kept the
kings messengers off from him by casting of stones, and so also did the beast
like as one that had received some injury by them, at last, they got near the
Indian and cast him down, but the Eleph. made upon them, killing some of them,
and defending his master and nourisher, put the residue to flight, and then
taking up his master with his trunk carried him safe into his lodging, which
thing is worthy to be remembered as a noble understanding part both of a loving
friend and faithful servant.

The like may be said of the Elephant of Porus, carrying his wounded master
the king in the battle he fought with Alexander, for the beast drew the Darts
gently out of his masters body without all pain, and did not cast him until
he perceived him to be dead and without blood and breath, and then did first of
all bend his own body as near the earth Their love to their keepers and al
men that harm them not.
yet being wild are they afraid of the footsteps of men if they wind their
treadings before they see their persons, and when they find an herb that
yields a suspicion of a man's presence, they smell thereunto one by one, and
if al agree in one savor, the last beast lifts up his voice and cries out
for a token and watchword to make them all fly away.

Cicero affirms that they come so near to a man's disposition, that their
small company or Nation seems to ouergoe or equal most men in sense and
understanding.

At the sight of a beautiful woman they leave off all rage and grow meek and
gentle, Their love of beautiful women.
and therefore Aelianus says, that there was an Elephant in Egypt which was in
love with a woman that sold Corrals, the self same woman was wooed by
Aristophanes, and therefore it was not likely that she was chosen by the
Elephant without singular admiration of her beauty, wherein Aristophanes might
say as never man could, that he had an Elephant for his rival, and this also
did the Elephant manifest unto the man, for on a day in the market he brought
her certain Apples and put them into her bosom, Plutarch
holding his Trunk a great while therein, handling and playing with her
breasts. Another likewise loved a Syrian woman, with whose aspect he was
suddenly taken, and in admiration of her face stroked the same with his
trunk, with testification of farther love: the woman likewise failed not
Horat. to write this verse: Quid tibi vis mulier nigris dignissima barris. At
last, the woman died, whom the Elephant missing, like a lover distracted
betwixt love and sorrow fell beside himself and so perished. Neither ought any
man to marvel at such a passion in this beast, who has such a memory as is
attributed unto him, and understanding Antipater affirms that he saw an
Elephant that knew again and took acquaintance of his master which had
nourished him in his youth, after many years absence.

When they are hurt by any man, they seldom forget a revenge, and so also they
remember on the contrary to recompense al benefits as it has bin manifested
already. Their revenge of harms and observation of the mesure of their meat
They observe things done both in weight and measure, especially in their own
meat. Agnon writes that an Elephant was kept in a great man's house in Syria,
having a man appointed to be his ouerseer, who did daily defraude the Beast of
his allowance: but on a day as his master looked on, he brought the whole
measure and gave it to him: the Beast seeing the same, and remembering how he
had served him in times past, in the presence of his Plutarch and Aelianus, of
another Elephant, discovering to his master the falsehood and privy theft of an
unjust servant.

Strabo
About Lycha in Affricke there are certain springs of water, which if at any
time they dry up, by the teeth of Elephants they are opened and recovered
again. They are most gentle and meek, never fighting or striking man or
Beast, except they be provoked, and then being angered they will take up a man in
their trunk and cast him into the air like an Arrow, Gillius.
so as many times he is dead before him come to ground. Plutarch affirms,
that in Rome a boy pricking the trunk of an Elephant with a goad, the beast
caught him, and lift him up into the air to shoot him away and kill him: but
the people and standers by seeing it, made so great a noise and cry thereat,
that the beast set him down again fair and softly without any harm to him at
all; as if he thought it sufficient to have put him in fear of such a death.

In the night time they seem to lament with sighs and tears their captivity
and bondage, Gillius. Philostratus. Their mourning in secret Aristotle. The
length of their life. Arrianus
but if any come to that speed, like unto modest persons they refrain
suddenly, and are ashamed to be found either murmuring or sorrowing. They live
a long age, even to 200. or 300. years, if sickness or wounds prevent not
their life: and some but to a 120. years; they are in their best strength of
body at threescore, for then begins their youth.

Iuba king of Lybia writes, that he has seen tame Elephantes which have
descended from the father to the son, (by way of inheritance) many
generations: and that Ptolomaeus Philadelphus had an Elephant, which continued
alive many Ages, and another of Seleuchus Nicanor, Aelianus.
which remained alive to the last overthrow of all the Antiochi.

The inhabitants of Taxila in India affirm, that they had an Elephant at the
least three hundred and fifty years old; for they said it was the same that
fought so faithfully with Alexander for king Porus, for which cause Alexander
called him Ajax, and did afterward dedicate him to the Sun, and put certain
golden chains about his teeth, with this inscription upon them: Alexander
filius Iouis Aiacem soli: Alexander the son of Jupiter, consecrateth this
Ajax to the Sun. The like story is related by Iuba, concerning the age of an
Elephant, which had the impression of a Tower on his teeth and was taken in
Atlas 400. years after the same was engraven. of the eating Elephants Strabo.


There are certain people in the world which eat Elephants, and are therefore
called of the Nomades (Elephantophagi) Elephant-eaters, as is already
declared: there are of Daraba, near the wood Eumenes, beyond the city Saba,
where there is a place (called the hunting of Elephants. The Troglodytae live
also hereupon, the people of Affricke called Asachae, Pliny. Solmus
which live in Mountains, do likewise eat the flesh of Elephants, and the
Adiabarae or Megabari. The Nomades have Cities running upon Charriots, and the
people next unto their Territory, cut Elephantes in pieces, and both sell and
eat them.

Some use the hard flesh of the back, and other commend above all the
delicates of the world the reins of the Elephants, va^tomanus.
so that it is a wonder that Aelianus would write, that there was nothing in an
Elephant good for meat except the trunk, the lips and the marrow of his
horns, or teeth. The skin of this Beast is exceeding hard, not to be pierced
by Culicem haud curat Elephas Indicus, the Indian Elephant cares not for the
biting of a Gnat, to signify, a sufficient ability to resist all evil, and
that Noble minds must not revenge small injuries.

The diseases (...) elephants (...)
It cannot be but in such huge and vast bodies there should also be nourished
some diseases, and that many (as Strabo says) wherefore first of all there is
no creatur in the world less able to endure cold or winter, for their
impatiency of cold brings inflammation. Also in Summer, when the same is
hotest, they cool one another by casting durty and filthy water upon each
other, or else run into the roughest woods of greatest shadow. It has bin
showed already that they devour Chamaeleons, and thereof perish, except they
eat a wild Olive.

When they suffer inflammation and are bound in the belly, either black wine or
nothing will cure them. When they drink a Leach they are grievously pained:
for their wounds by darts or otherwise, they are cured by swines flesh, or
Dittanie, or by Oil, or by the flower of the Olive. They fall mad sometime,
for which I know no other cure but to tie them up fast in iron chains. When
they are tired for want of sleep they are recovered by rubbing their shoulders
with salt, Oil and water. Cowes milk warmed and infused into their eyes,
cures all evils in them, and they presently like reasonable men acknowledge
the benefit of the medicine.

The medicinal virtues in this beast are by Authors observed to be these: The
medicines in Elephants. Marcellus
The blood of an Elephant and the ashes of a Weasill, cure the great Leprosy:
and the same blood is profitable against all Rhewmaticke fluxes and the
Sciatica. The flesh dried and cold, or heavy fat and cold is abominable: for
if it be sod and st^eped in vinegar with fennel-seede, Isidorvs. Rasis
and given to a Woman with child, it makes her presently suffer abortement.
But if a man taste thereof salted and steeped with the seed aforesaid, it
cures an old cough. The Albertus
it cures also the pain in the head.

The Iuory or tooth is cold and dry in the first degree, and the whole
substance thereof Corroborateth the heart and helps conception; it is often
adulterated by fishes and Dogs bones burnt, and by White marble. There is a
Spodium made of Iuory in this manner. Take a pound of Iuory cut into pieces,
and put into a raw new earthen pot, covering and glewing the cover with lome
round about, and so let it burn til the pot be thrughly hardened: afterward
take off the pot and beat your Iuory into small powder, and being so beaten,
sift it, then put it into a glass and pour upon it two pound of distilled
rose Water, and let it dry. Thirdly beat it unto powder again, and sift it
the second time, Camphire as will lie upon three or four single Groats, and
work it altogether upon a marble stone into little Cakes, and so lay them up
where the air may not corrupt and alter them. The virtue hereof is very
precious against spittyng of blood, and the bloody-flixe, and also it is given
for refrigeration without danger of byndinge or astriction.

After a man is delivered from the lethargye, pestilence, or sudden
forgetfulness, let him be purged and take the powder of Iuory and Hiera Ruffi,
drunk out of sweet water: This powder with Honey atticke, takes away the
spots in the face: the same with wild mints drunk with water, resists and
auoydeth the Leprosy at the beginning. The

The fime by anointing, cures a lousy skin, and takes away that power which
breeds these vermin: the same perfumed eases Agues, helps a woman in
travail, and drives gnats or marsh-flyes out of a house.


AS the Elephant last handled could not live in any country of the world but
in the whot Esterne, and Sowtherne Regions, The place of their abode. Bonarus
bar^ Balizce.
so the Elke on the contrary is most impatient of all heat, and keeps not
but in the Northern and cold contries: for Polonia and the countries under
that clymate will not preserve an Elke alive, as it has been often tried by
experience: Countries breeding Elkes.
for which cause, they are not found but in the colder Northern regions; as
Russia, Prussia, Hungaria, and Illiria, in the wood Hercynia, and among the
Borussian-Scythians, but most plentifully in Scandinauia, (which Pausanias
calls the Celtes) for all the ancients called the Kingdoms of Germany and
the North, Celtarum Regiones. Countries inhabited by the Celts.

This beast is called in Greek Alke, and in Latin Alces, or Alce, The name of
this beast.
which was a name of one of Actaeons Dogs in Ovid: the Turks, Valachians,
the Hungarians, Iaius, the Illirians The figure of the Elke with horns.
and Polonians Los, in the singular, and plurally Lossie, for many Elkes.
Albertus Magnus calls it Alches and Aloy, and afterward Equiceruus a
Horsse-Hart. The Germans, Elch, An Elke the same that Machlis.
Ellend, and Elent, by a metathesis of Alke, or Alce: and for my part, I take
it to be the same beast which Pliny calls Machlis, for there is nothing
attributed to an Elke which also does not belong to Machlis.

The Elke without horns.


I find not any unreconcilable difference among authors concerning this
beast, Caesar's description of an Elke.
except in Caesar lib. 6. of his Commentaries, who by the relation of other
(not by his own fight) writes that there are Elkes in the Hercynian wood,
like unto Goats in their spotted skins, who have no horns, nor joints in their
legs to bend withal, but sleep by leaning unto trees like Elephants, because
when they are down on the ground they can never rise again. But the truth is,
that they are like to Roes or Hearts, because Goats have no spotted skins, but
Dear have, and there may easily be a slip from Caprea a Roe, to Capra a Goat:
and Caesar himself confesses, that the similitude is in their spotted skins,
which are not competible in Goats but in Roes.

Caesar is sufficiently answered, so as we may proceed to the description of
this beast collected out of the ancient writers, Pausanias; Vopiscus, Caesar
and Solinus, Pliny and the later writers consenting with them in all things,
(excepting Caesar in the two things aforesaid.) Albertus Magnus, Mathaeus,
Michuanus, Seb. Munster, Erasmus, Stella, Johannes Bonarus, Baoron of Balizce a
Polonian, Johannes Kentmannus, Io. Pontanus. Antonius Schnebergerus,
Christophorus Wirsungus, and that most worthy learned man Georgius Ioachimus of
Rhaetia, and Baoron Sigismund.

Pausanias supposes it to be a beast betwixt a Heart and a Camel, Of the
quantity and stature. Bonarus.
and Albertus betwixt a Heart and a Horse; who therefore as it has been
said, calls it Equi-ceruus, a Horsse-hart; but I rather by the horns
afterward described, and by the foot which Bonarus had, do take and hold it to
be as big every way as two Hearts, and greater then a Horse, The taming of
Elks and their labor.
because of the labor and qualities attributed thereunto: Whereunto also
agrees Albertus.

In Swedia and Riga they are tamed and put into Coaches or Charriottes to draw
men through great snowes, and upon the yse in the winter time they also are
most swifte, Albertus.
and will run more miles in one day, then a Horse can at three. They were wont
to be presents for princes, because of their singular strength and swiftnes,
for which cause Alciatus relates in an emblem, the answer of Alexander to one
that asked him a question about celerity; Alexander denied by the example of
the Elke in these Verses: Alciatae gentis insignia sustinet Alce
Constat Alexandrum sic respondisse roganti.
Nunquam inquit differ volens quod and indicat Alce
Vnguibus and (meeden) fert (anaballomeenos)
Qui tot obiuisset tempore gesta breui
Fortior haes dubites, ocyor anne siet?


Pliny affirms (in my opinion) very truly that this beast is like an Ox,
Of his parts and manner of feeding. Pliny.
except in his hair, which is more like to a heart: his vper lip is so great
and hangs over the nether so

Their forehead is very broad, two spans at the least: it has two very large
horns, which we have here also expressed, both for the right side and the
left: so as they bend toward the back in the plain edge, and the spires or
pikes stand forward to the face: both males and females have horns, they are
solid at the root and round, but afterward branched, Munster. Kent mannus
pontanus.
and the breadth measured from the longest spiere to the other opposite side,
about ten inches: the root next to the skin, is more then a man can well griple
in his hand, and therefore here is expressed the figure of both horns, both in
male and female; for there is is not any difference in their natures that I can
learn, and these horns they loose every year. His ears and back are very
long, and hanging down, the color for the most part like a Heart, and sometime
white, and Munster affirms, that in the Summer they are of russet color, and
in the Winter brown or blackish colored. Sigismundus Baro. Of the color
His forelegs without all joints to bend, herein resembling an Elephant, and
therefore it sleeps leaning to posts or Trees, and not lying on the ground.
His hooues are cloven like a Hearts, and with the forefeete he pierces the
Dogs that hunt him, for he fights not with his horns, but with his
forelegges. The manner of their fight
It is a melancholycke beast and fearful to be seen, having an ambling pace,
and keeping in the wet, watery, and marshy places, delighting in nothing but in
moisture. The place of his abode.
The flesh is fat and sweet, but ungrateful to the palate, and engendereth
melancholy. The Germans call this Beast Ellend, The name of this beast in the
Germa^n tongue and the true sign^fication thereof.
which in their language signifies miserable or wretched, and in truth if the
report thereof be not false, it is in a most miserable and wretched case, for
every day thorough out the year it has the falling sickness, and continues
in the pangs thereof, until the hoof of his right forefoote touch his left
ear, which coms not to pass but by the extreme torments of the body, for
whilst the members are reached and stretched with many strains and conuulsions
(as it falls out in that sickness) by chance the aforesaid foot rubbeth
the said ear, The sickness of Elkes.
and immediately thereupon the

They live in herds and flocks together in Scandiuania, and when the waters
are frozen up, the wild mountain Wolves set upon them in great multitudes
together, Their fight with Wolves
whom they receive in battle upon the yse, fighting most fiercely and cruelly
til one part be vanquished: In the mean time the husbandmen of the country
observe this combat, and when they see one side go to the wall, they
persecute them, and take the victours part,

Some have been of opinion, that these are wild Asses, but they are led
hereinto with no reason, except because they are used for travel and burden
as is before said, for there is no proportion or resemblance of body betwixt
them: besides, they have cloven hoofs, for the most part, although Sigismundus
Baro affirm, that there are some of this kind which have their hooues whole
and undivided. Being wild it is a most fearful creature, and rather desires
to lie hid in secret, then to fly, except pursued by hunters; The manner to
hunt them without danger.
and there is no danger in hunting of this beast exept a man come right before
him, for on his sides he may safely strike and wound him, but if the beast
fasten his forefeet on him, he their admirable fear and pusillanimity
instantly it falls down and yields to death, as Bonarus hunting with
Sigismund the second king of Polonia in the woods of Lituania tried with his
own hand, for with his hunting spear he pierced one a very little way in the
skin in the presence of the k. who presently fell down dead.

In some countries of ancient time (says Pausanias) they took them on this
manner. the ancient manner of taking Elkes.
They having found out the field or hill where the beasts are lodged, they
compass it in by the space of a thousand paces round in circle with welts and
toils invented for that purpose, then do they draw in their nets round like a
pursse, and so enclose the beasts by multitude,

Other again take it by the same means that they take Elephants, for when
they have found the trees whereunto they lean, they so cut and saw them, that
when the beast comes, he overthrows them, and falls down with them, and
so is taken alive.

Aurelian at Rome, and in the games dedicated by Apollo and Diana and
celebrated by Valerius Publicola, were many Eleph. Vopiscus.
Elke and Tigres. Likewise there were ten Elkes at Rome under Gordianus. Their
resistance in the waters.
When they are chased eagerly and can find no place to rest themselves in and
lie secret* they run to the Waters, and therein stand, taking up water into
their mouths, and within short space do so heat it, Munster.
that being squirted or shot out of them upon the Dogs, the heat thereof so
opresseth and scaldeth them, that they dare not once approach or come nigh her
any more.

The medicin in an Elke.
The greatest virtue of medicine that I can learn or find to be in this beast,
is in the hoof, for that worn in a Ring, it resists and freeth a man from
the falling evil, the Crampe, and cures the fits or pangs, if it be put on
when he is in his foming extremity: also scraped into powder and put into Wine
and drunk, it is used in Polonia against the same evil. In like sort they
mingle it with Triacle, and apply it to the heart, or else hang it about
their neck for an amulet to touch their skin against that disease: and because
that

Some Mounte-bankes sell in steed thereof a Bugles hoof, but it may be easily
descried by scraping, for (it is said) it smells very sweet, whereas a Bugles
sauoureth very ill and strong. It is observed also that it has not this virtue
except it be cut off from the beast while he is yet alive, and that in the
months of August and September, at what time these Elks are most of all annoyed
with the falling sickness, and then it has strongest virtue to cure it in
others.

Others affirm, it wants his operation if it be cut off from a young one
which never The use of their skins.
and they sell them for three or four Nobles a piece; but in Cracouia for
fifteen Florens. It may be discerned from a Hearts skin by blowing upon it, for
the breath will come through like as in a Buffe, and the hairs of this beast
have also hollow passages in them when they grow upon the back of the beast,
or else soon after the

Some also use the nerves against the crampe, Ant. Schnehergerus.
binding the offended member therewith, and heerewith do we conclude this
story of an Elke, referring the reader to the fable of Alcida related before
in Cacus if he have desire to know it for the affinity betwixt the name
thereof and Alces an Elke.

OF THE FERRET.
I Take it to be most true without all exception, that the Graecians call a
Ferret Gala Agria, a wild Weasill, Ictis and Phereoikos, Etymologus and
Hesychius ascribe the reason of this latter name to her lodging under Oaks and
Oliue-trees. The names in Greek.
Ictis also was a common name of all Weasils, to those Graecians which never
knew or saw any other then one kind of them, or as Sclaliger against Cardan
will have it, to signify a wild Campestriall Weasill, and not a tame kind,
being domestical and living in houses, and that these differ only from one
another in place and manner of living, and not in color, stature or qualities.
And where Aristophanes cites it among other beasts which are deuourers of
fish, in my opinion there is no beast that more desires fish; then Ferrets and
Cattes, and for this cause it Ictis quasi Ichthus, the etymology of Ictys a
Ferret.
of eating of fish; and yet I cannot consent unto them which will have it
descend and hunt fish in the waters like Otters or Beauers: for it abhors
both swimming or dyuing, Ferrets swim not.
but near to the waters it hunteth fish, where for the most part being wild it
remains.

the Latin names.
The Latins call this beast Viuerra, and Furo, and Furetus, and Furectus,
because (as shall be afterward manifested) it preyeth upon Conies in their
holes, and lives upon stealth, and in the earth will kill a cony six times as
big as her self, but being abroad on the land, Their courage and nature in
the earth. Scaliger.
in the open air is nothing so wild, strong or full of courage. From Ictys is
derived Iltissus, and the German Iltis, for a Ferret: this is called by the
French Furon, and Fuson, and Fuset: by the Spaniards Furon, and Furam, and from
the English Ferret is the Germain Fret derived by a common Syncope, and in the
time of Georgius Agricola it was called in Germany Furette, and Frettell, and
the English word seerueth also to be derived from Fretta in Latin, which by a
like Syncope is contracted of Viuerra, as to any indifferent Whether Ferrits be
Ictys.


But herein seems an unreconcilable difference, that it is reported of the
Ictys by Gaza, the interpretour of Aristotle, that it was most greedye of Honey,
and for that cause it will seek out the hyues of Bees, and enter them without
all fear of stings. But when Pliny speaks of Ictys, he does not call it
Viuerra, or once attribute unto it the Scaliger alleges against Cardan, only
to prove that Ictys and Viuerra, are two destinct beasts, and that Cardan was
mistaken in affirming, that they were but several names, expressing one and
the same

The answer whereunto may be very easy, for although Pliny leaves with out
rehearsal their love of honey, it does not necessarily follow, that they love it
not (as Aristotle before him constantly affirms) and Scaliger names no
author, nor brings any reason to demonstrate their hate of honey, or any
Strabo be opposed, who in his thired book, speaking of the Conies of Spain,
and of their hunters and starters, out of their holes, he takes and names
indifferently without all distinction and exception, Viuerra, and Ictys, for
the one and other. Niphus translateth Ictys, a Martall, but without reason; for
the same man finding in Aristotle that there is War betwixt Locusts and
Serpents, which is fitly called Ophiomachia; whereas Aristotle names Akris a
Locust, he falls in doubt whether it were not better to be Ictys a Martell,
or as other copies have it Aspis an Aspe, which can by no means agree unto
them, for there is a kind of Locusts (called Ophiomachum) because of their
continual combats with Serpents. And therefore not to stand any longer upon
this difference, ommitting also the conjecture of Tzetzes, which confounds
Ictys with Miluus a Glead or Kyte, which cannot stand reasonable, because Homer
says there was a kind of caps made of the hairs of Ictys, nor yet of Albertus
his new found name of Ankatinos nor Auicenna his Katyz, or the french Fissau
which is a Poul-cat.

I will descend to the description of the parts and qualities, wherein the
Authors themselves at variance, make their own reconcilement, by attributing
the same things to the Ictya and Ferret, except that of an obscure author,
which says that Ictys is Ankacinor, as big as a Greyhound, and that it is
wiser and more industrious in his youth and tender age, then in his perfection
of strength and years.

These Ferrets are lesser then the Maelitean or Gentlewomens Dogs, and they
were first of all brought out of Affricke into Spain, and therefore are
called by Strabo, Affrican weasils, G^z^ Their several parts.
because of their similitude with Weasils: for Spain, Italy, France, and
Germany, have not this beast bred among them, but brought to them out of other
Countries. But in England they breed naturally of the quantity aforesaid, and
they are tamed to hunt Conies out of the earth. Country of breed.
It is a bold and audatious beast, enemy to all other except his own kind,
drinking and sucking in the blood of the beast it biteth, but eats not the
flesh. When I^^dorus. Per^ttus. Their drinking or blood. Agricola. Their
provocation to hu^t
he first of all makes a great noise to fray all the Conies that are abroad
into their holes, and so having frighted them pitcheth his nets, and then
puts his tame Ferret into the earth, having a long string or cord with bells
about her neck, whose mouth he muzzleth, that so it may not bite the cony, but
only terrify her out of her borough and earth with her presence or claws;
which being performed, she is by Dogs chased into the nets, and there
overwhelmed, as is aforesaid in the history of the conies.

Their body is longer for the proportion then their quantity may afford, for I
have seen them two spans long but very thin and small. Their color and eyes
Their color is variable, sometime black, and white on the belly, but most
commonly of a yellowish sandy color, like hermeline Pliny and Scaliger agree
with Cardan and Straho for the Ictys also) and therefore it always stands
stiff, and is not lesser at one time then at other. The pleasure of the sense
in copulation is not in the yard or genital part, but in the nerves, muscles,
and tunicles wherein the said genitall runs. When they are in copulation the
female lies down or bends her knees, and continually cries like a Cat,
either because the Male The number of their young ones.
And when the female desires copulation, except she be with convenient
speed brought to a Male, or he suffered to come to her, she swells and
dies. They are very fruitful in procreation, for they bring forth seven or
eight at a time, bearing them in their littie belly not above forty days. The
young ones newly littered are blind 30. days together, and within 40. days
after they can see, they may be set to hunting. The noble men of France keep
them for this pleasure, who are greatly given to hunt conies, and they are sold
there for a French crown. Young boys and scholars also use them to put them
into the holes of rocks and Walls to hunt out Birds, and likewise into
hollow Trees where out they bring the Birds in the claws of their feet.

They are nourished being tamed with milk, Their food
or with barlie bread, and they can fast a very long time. When they go, they
contract their long back and make it stand upright in the middle, round like a
bowl. When they are touched, they smell like a Martell, and they sleep very
much: being wild, they live upon the blood of conies, Hens, Chickens, Hares,
or other such things, which they can find and ouermaister. In their sleep
also they dream, which appears by whyning and crying in their sleep,
whereas a long fly (called a Friar) flying to the flaming candels in the night,
is accounted among poisons, the Antidote and resister thereof is by Pliny
affirmed to be a Goats gall or liver, The medicines of Ferrets.
mixed with a Ferret, or wild Weasill, and the gall of Ferrets is held
precious against the poison of Aspes, although the flesh and teeth of a ferret
be accounted poison. Likewise the gall of a Ferret is commended against the
falling disease, and not only the gal (says Marcellus) but the whole body, if
it be roasted, dressed, and eaten fasting, like a young pig. It is said by Rasis
and Albertus, that if the head of a wolf be hanged up in a doue-cote, neither
cat, Ferret, weasil, Stoate, or other noysom^ beast dare to enter therein.
These ferrets are kept in little hutches, in houses and there fed, where they
sleep much: they are of a very whottemperature or constitution, and therefore
quickly digest their meat, and being wild by reason of their fear, they
rather seek their meat in the night then in the day time.

OF THE FITCH OR POVL-CAT.


THe difference of a Poul-cat from the wild-cat, Isidorus. The name and the
notation thereof.
is because of her strong stinking savor, and therefore is called Putorius of
Putore because of his ill smell: for all weasils being incensed and prouokt to
wrath, smell strongly, and especially the Poul-cat; likewise when in the spring
time they endeavor procreation, for which cause among the Germans (when they
would express an infamous Whore or whoore-maister) they say they stink like
an Iltis that is a fitch or Poul-cat. The French call this beast Putois, and
Poytois, as it is to be found in Carolus Figulus, the Sauoyens Pouttett, the
Illirians and Bohemians Tchorz, and the Polonians Vijdra; and Scaliger calls
it in Latin ( Catum fuinam) by another name the^ Putorius. Martell, The
quantity and nature of this b^^st Stumpsius Agricola
and yet commonly fatter: the hairs of it are neither smooth and of one
length, or of one color; for the short hairs are somewhat yellowish, and the
long ones black, so as one would think that in many places of the body, there
were spots of diverse colors, but yet about the mouth it is most ordinarily
white.

The skin is stiff, harsh, and rugged in handling, and therefore long lasting
in Garments, yet because the beast is alwaie fat, the savor of it is so rank,
The skins and use of them.
that it is not in any great request, and moreover it is said that it offends
the head, and procures ache therein; and therefore it is sold cheaper then a
Fox skin, and the fattest is always the worst of all. The skinners approve
the skins of fitches and Martils best, which are killed in winter, because
found untrue by daily experience: They keep in the tops of houses and
secret corners, delighting to kill and eat hens and chickens, whose craft in
devouring his prey is singular, I^^lorus. Their meat and subtletie not to be
descryed
for to the intent that the silly creatures to be devoured may not bewray them
to the housekeepers, the first part that they lay hold upon with their mouths
is the head of the hen and chicken, and by that means stays his crying by
cropping off the head. Some of these Fitches wander and keep in the woods, and
thereby live upon birds and mise, and such things: some again live by the Sea
sides in rocks, and they take Fishes, like Beuers and Otters: and some creep
into the caves of hollow trees, where they eat Frogs, and most of all they
delight to be near stals of cattle, hay-houses, and houses, where they meet

OF THE FOX.


A Fox is called in Haebrew Schual, and in Chaldee Thaal, The several names of
foxes in sundry languages.
and therefore in Psalm, 61. where the Haebrew reads Schualim, there the
Chaldee translateth it Thealaia, the Arabians call him Thaleb, and Auicen
calls a Fox sometime Chabel, and also Chalca^l; the Greek Septuagints
Alopekon, and vulgarly Alopex, and Alopon, the Latins Vulpes, and Vulpecula of
Volipes his tumbling pace, the Italians Volpe, the French Regnard, and a little
Fox Regnardeau; the Spaniards Raposa of ravening; the Germans Fuchs, the
Flemings Vos, and the Illyrians Liss^a.

The epithits of Foxes
warlike or contentious, wicked and rough, the Graecians fiery colored, and
subtle for slaughter, and therefore Christ called Herod a Fox, because he
understood how by crafty means he sought to entrap and kill him: and all the
auncientes called such kind of men Vulpiones, which every nation under heaven
does imitate.

There are store of Foxes in the Alpine regions of Heluetia, the Centries
breeding Foxes. Aelianus.
and amongst the Caspians they abound, so that their multitude makes them
tame, coming into the Cities, and attending upon men like tame Dogs. The
Foxes of Sardinia are very Ravenous, for they kill the strongest Rams and Goats,
and also young Calves, and in Egypt they are lesser then Graecia, and most
commonly all Foxes are of stature like to a sheapheards dog. Munster.
Their color is reddish and more white toward the head: In Moscouia are both
black and white, Viz: about the river Woga, black and ash-colored,
Aristotle. Albertus. The color of Foxes
and in the province of Vsting al black, and these are of the smaller sort,
which are norished to make caps of their skins, and are therefore sold at twenty
or thirty Florens a skin. In Spain they are al white, and their skins are
often brought by the merchants to be sold at Franchford mart.

In the Septentrionall or Northern woods, there are black, white, and red
Foxes, Olaus mag*
and such as are called Crucigerae, that is Crosse-bearing Foxes, for on their
backs and orethwart their shoulders there is a black cross, like an Asses:
and there are Foxes aspersed over with black spots, and al these are of one
and the same malignaunt and crafty nature: and Georg* Fabritius) are
distinguished by their regions or habitations: for it is most commonly seen,
that Foxes which keep and breed toward the South and West, are of an ash
color, and like to Wolves, having loose hanging hairs, as is to be seen both
in Spain and Italy; and these are noted by two names among the Germans, from
the color of their throats. One kind of them is called Koler, whose throat
seems to be sprinkled and darkened with cole-dust, upon white, so as the tops
of the hair apeare black, the foot and stalk being white.

The other Birkfuchse, because their throat is al white, and of this kind the
most splendent white, is most precious. A second there is (called Kreutzfuchse)
because of the cross it bears upon his back and shoulders down to his
forefeet, being in other parts like

A third kind is of a bright skie-colour (called Blauwfusche) and this color
has given a different name to Horses, which they call Blauwschimmell, but in
the Foxes it is much more mingled, and these foxes which have rougher and
deeper hair are called Braudfuchse.

The Moscouians and Tartarians make most account of the black skins, because
their princes and great Nobles wear them in their garments: yet are they more
easily adulterated and counterfaited by the fume or smoke of Torches made of
pitch. The white and blewe Scaliger affirms, that he saw skins brought into
France by certain merchants, which had diverse white hairs disposed in rows
very elegantlye upon them, and in diverse places they grew also single. In
Noruegia and Suetia as there are white Hearts and Bears, so there are also
white foxes; In Wolocha they are black, as it is affirmed by Sigismundus Liber,
the picture of the Cross-bearing-fox which is less then the former is here
following expressed and set down.

THE CRVCIGERAN FOX.


SErpents, Apes, and Foxes, and al other dangerous harmeful beasts, have small
eyes, Adamantius The parts and nature of Foxes.
but sheep and Oxen which are simple, very great eyes. The Germans when they
discribe a good Horse, they decipher in him the outward parts of many beasts,
from whom (it seems) he partaketh his generosity, and from a Fox they
ascribe unto Aristotle.
his tail is long and hairy at the end, his temperament or constitution is
whot, as appears both because of his resemblance or similitude with Dogs
and Weasils, and also his rank and strong smelling savor; for being dead,
his skin has power in it of heating, and his fat or oil after a decoction
is of the same force and condition.

The greatest occasion of his hunting is the benefit of his skin, for his
flesh is in all things like a Dogs, The flesh of Foxes evil to be eaten.
and although Galen, Mnesimachus, and Silutus affirm, that in the Autumn or
latter part of the year, some men use to eat the flesh of Foxes, (especially
being Aetius and Rasis affirm, (and that with great reason) that their flesh,
and the flesh of Hedg-hogs and Hares, is not agreeable to the nature of man.

But their skin retains the qualities of the whot beast being pulled off,
by reason of the long and soft hair growing thereupon; The use of their skins
and the skins of Cubs which are preferred before the elder, are of least
value, because their hair is apt to fall off, which being thin does not admit
any deep rootings of the hair. The Thracians in the time of Xenopho^, wore
Caps of Foxes skins upon their heads and ears, in the coldest and hardest
winters, and from hence it comes, that in some Authors the couers of men's
heads, (commonly called in Greek Pericephalaea) are termed Alopecia, or
Alopeci^^ and for this purpose

In the Summer time the skins are little worth, because that then the beasts
are troubled with the Alopecia, that is, the falling off or looseness of the
hair; and therefore then also they are dangerous to be used, because of that
disease: men which have the gout, shrinking up of the sinnewes, or other cold
fluxions of the Rhewme in their Legs, can use no better or more wholesome thing
then to wear buskins of the skins of Foxes; Alev. ab alex
the Scythians make them shoes, and soale them with the backs of Fox and
Myse skins, upon which they go. The Latins have a proper word for the voice
of a Fox, which is Gannio Gannire, to Ganne, and it is also metaphorically
applied to men, when by scrietching clamours they trouble others; as Terence in
Adelph: quid iile gannit? Quid vult? donotus The voice of Foxes.
And Plautus also; Gannit odiosus omni toti familiae, and for this voice did
Mantuan Write this Putes vlutare lupos, gannire sagaces -vulpeculos. But yet as
Albertus and Constantinus have truly observed, that in the time of his hunger
he will bark like a little Dog, and the Hearts are greatly afraid of this
ganning of Foxes.

It has been already showed in the story of the Badger, how the Fox by
laying his excrements in the Badgers den, gets the same to his own use;
Their d^ns and caves in the earth. Gillius. Oppianus
for the abode of Foxes in the day time is in the caves and holes of the earth,
and come not abroad til the night. These dens have many caves in them, and
passages in and out, that when the Tertars shall set upon him in the ear^h* he
may go forth some other way: and forasmuch as the Wolf is an Zoroastres
Gillius.
that he will never come near the place where it either grows or lies; the
same is affirmed of the Turtle to save her young ones, but I have not read that
Wolves will prey upon Turtles, and therefore we reject that as a fable.

When Aristomanes was taken by the Lacaedemonians, Pliny.
and included into a rock or quarey of stones, he escaped out of their hands,
by digging another passage out of it then where he was put in; saying, that it
was a shame for a man to have less wit then a fox. When they are in their
dens, they lie upon their bellies with their hinder Legs stretched forth at
length, like as a man when he sleeps on his belly, and therefore it seems

This is such a devouring beast that it forsakes nothing fit to be eaten, The
food of Serpents
for it kills Hares and Connies, and with his breath draws field Myce out
of their holes like as a Heart draws out Serpents with his breath, and
deuoureth them. He deuoureth also all kind of Pullen, they also eat Grapes,
Apples, and Pears, whereupon came the proverb in Plautus, Tam facile vinces
quam vulpes pyrum come. Thou shall as easily overcome him, as a Fox eats a
Pear: which is applied to any easy or dispatchable business. In Arabia, and
Syria Palaestina, they are so ravenous, harmefull, and audacious, that in the
night by ganning and barking, they inuit one another (as it were) by a
Watchworde, to assemble in great multitudes together, for to prey upon all
things, and they fear not to carry

But as it falls out in all gluttonous ravening persons, that while they
strive to fill their bellies, they poison their lives, so also it fares with
Foxes, for nature has so ordained, The harm of Foxes.
that if a Fox eat any meat wherein are bitter Almondes, they die thereof, if
they drink not presently: and the same thing do Aloes in their meat work
upon them, Discorides.
as Scaliger affirms upon his own sight or knowledge Apocynon or Bear foot
given to dogs, wolves, Serapio.
Foxes, and all other beasts which are littered blind, in fat or any other meat
kills them, if Democritus, that if wild r^e be secretly hu^ge under a Hens
wi^g no Fox will meddle with her, and the same writer also declares for
approved, that if you mingle the gal of a Fox, or a cat, with their ordinary
food, they shall remain free from the the d^ngers of these beasts.

When they engender and admit copulation, they are joined like dogs, Their
carnal copulation.
the male upon the female: and the female when she perceives her womb filled,
she departs and lives very secret, for it falls out very seldom that a
female or Bitch-Foxe is taken great with young. She brings forth ordinarily
four at a time, and those blind and imperfect, without Articles in their
Legs, which are perfected and framed by licking, for Bears, Wolves, Lions,
Foxes, Dogs, and Thoes which are Multipara and Multifida, that is fruitful,
bearinge many at one time, and also Cloven or slitte-sooted, into many claws,
have not the benefit of nature to perfect their young ones in their wombes.

Kytes, vultures, and Eagles lie in wayt to destroy the Foxes Cubs or Whelps.
Foxes do not only engender with their own kind, but also with Wolves,
Dogs, or any other beasts of equal proportion, both of quantity and time of
going with young, so the Laconian Dogs are engendered by a Dog and a Fox, and
the Hyaena, of a Wolf and a Fox (as Albertus affirms) and the Simiuulpa of
an Ape and a Fox, as is already in the story of Apes declared.

There be also many evils wherewithal Foxes are annoyed, and first of all he
falls sometime into madness as a Dog, The diseases of Foxes.
and the same evils follow a mad Fox, which already are manifested to
accompany a mad Dog, and that more often in Summer then in winter.

Albertus. Albert. Liber Aetius.
When a Fox feels himself sick, nature has taught him to eat the gum of
Pinetrees, wherewithal he is not only cured, but also receives length of
days. They are also vexed with the falling away of their hair, called
therefore Alopecia, because Foxes are

This disease is called Alopecia, and the other Ophiasis, because it is not
general, but only particular in one member or part of the body or head, and
there it windeth or indenteth

Mychaell Ferus affirms, that sometime the liver of the Fox inflameth, and
then it is not cured but by the vlcerous blood flowing to the skin, and that
evil blood causes the Alopecia, or falling away of the hair, for which cause
(as is already said) a Foxes skin is little worth that is taken in the summer
time.

The length of the life of a Fox is not certainly known, yet as Stumpsius
and others affirm, The length of their life.
it is longer then the life of a Dog. If the urine of a Fox fall upon the
grass or other Herbs it dries and kills them, and the earth remains
barren ever afterward. The savor of a Fox is more strong then of any other
vulgar beast, he stincketh at Nose and tail, Varinus
for which cause Martial calls it Olidam Vulpem, an Olent or smelling beast.

Hic olidam clamosus ages in retia vulpem. Touching the hunting or taking of
Foxes, I approve the opinion of Xenophon, who avouches, The hunting and taking
of Foxes.
leporum capturam venatico studia quam vulpium digniorem; that is, the Hunting
of the Hare is a more noble game or pastime then the hunting of the Fox.

This beast is more fearful of a Dog then a Hare, for the only barking of
Dogs causes him to rise many times from his den or lodgings out of the
earth, or from the middle of bushes, Aelianus
briars, and brambles, wherein he hid himself: and for his hunting this is to
be observed; Oppianus
that as in hunting of a Heart it has been already related, the Hunter must
drive the beast with the wind, because it hinders his refrigeration, so in
hunting of a Fox he drive him again the wind, and then he preuenteth all his
crafty and Dellisarius.
for the Dogs that kill a Fox must be swifte, strong, and quick sented, and
it is not good to put on a few at once, but a good company together, for be
assured the Fox will not loose his own blood till he hazard some of his
enemies, and with his tail which he windeth every way, does he delude the
hunters: when the Dogs are pressed near unto him, and are ready to bite him,
Text^r.
he strikes his tail betwixt his Legs, and with his own urine wetteth the
same, and so instantly strikes it into the dogs mouths, whereof when they have
tasted, so many of them as it touched will commonly leave off and follow no
farther.

Their teeth are exceeding sharp, and therefore they fear not to assault or
contend with beasts, exceeding their stature, strength, and quantity. Sometime
he leapeth up into a tree, and there stands to be seen and bayed at by the
Dogs and Hunters, Oppianus
like as a Champion in some fort or Castle, and although fire be cast at him,
yet will he not descend down among the dogs; yea, he endures to be beaten and
pierced with Hunters spears, but at length being compelled to forsake his
hold and give over to his enemies, down he leapeth,

If at any time he take the earth, then with Terriour dogs they ferret him
out of his den again. In some places they take upon them to take him with nets
which sildome proves, because with his teeth he teareth them in pieces; yet by
Calentius this devise is allowed in this verse: Et laqueo Vulpes and decipe
casse foinas.

The French have a kind of Ginne to take them by the Legs (which they call
Hausepied) and I have heard of some which have found the Foxes Leg in the
same Gin, A noble instance of a Foxes corag^
bitten off with his own teeth from his body, rather putting himself to that
torment with The subtlery of a Fox take in a snare.
who coming and taking his Leg forth, not suspecting any life in them, so
soon as the Fox perceives himself free, away he went and never gave
thanks for his deliverance: for this cause Blondus says truly, that only
wise and old Hunters are fit to take Foxes, for they have so many devises to
beguile men, and deliver themselus, that it is hard to know when he is safely
taken until he be thoroughly dead.

They also use to set up Ginnes for them bayted with Chickens in Busnes and
Hedges: but if the setter be not at hand so soon as the Fox is ensnared, it
is dangerous but that

Again, for the killing of this beast they use this slight, they take of
Bacon-grease or and watches in secret till the Beast come within his reach,
and so gives him his great and deadly wound.

But if the Fox be in the earth, and they have found his den then they take
this course to work him out. They take a long thing like a Bee-hiue, and open
at one end, and iron wiers at the other like a grate, and at the open end is
set a little door to fall down upon the mouth, and to enclose the Fox when
he enters in by touching of a small rod that supporteth that door. This
frame is set to the Foxes dens mouth, and all the other passages watched and
stopped. The Fox having a desire to go forth, and seeing light by the wiers,
misdeemeth no harm, and enters into the hiue which is wrought close into the
mouth of

The beast ^s (...) ^miesf (...)
Foxes are annoied with many enemies, and to begin with the least, the small
flies and called gnats do much trouble and infect them, against whom the fox
uses this policy: He takes a mouthful of straw or soft hay, or hair, and so
goes into the water, dipping his hinder parts, by little and little, then the
flies betake themselves to his head, which he keeps out of water, which the
fox feeling, dippeth or diueth also the same under water to his mouth, Albertus
wherein he holds the hay as aforesaid, whereunto the flies runs for
sanctuary or dry refuge, which the fox perceiving, suddenly casts it out of
his mouth, and runs out of the water, by this means easing himself of al
those enemies.

In like manner, as al beasts are his enemies, and he friend and loving to
none, so with Gillius


His manner is when he perceives or sees a flock of foul to fly in the
air, to roll himself in red earth, making his skin to look bloody, and lie
upon his back, winking with his eye, and holding in his breath as if he were
dead, which thing the birds, namely Crows,

In like sort he deceives the Hedgehogge, for when the hedghog perceives the
fox coming to him, he rowleth himself together like a foote-ball, and so
nothing appears outward exeept his prickles, which the fox cannot endure to
take into his mouth, and then the crafty fox to compass his desire, licketh
gently the face and snowt of the Hedgehogge, by that means bringing him to
unfold himself again, and to stand upon his legs, which

All kinds of Hawks are enemies to foxes, and foxes to them, because they live
upon Carrion, and so in the province of Vla. Auicen saw a fox and a Crow fight
together a long season, and the Crow with his talentes so be gripling the
foxes mouth, that he could not bark, and in the mean time she beat and
picked his head with her bill until he bled again. Olaus Magnus affirms,
that in the Northern Regions they lay Eggs and hatch their young in those
skins which they themselus have stripped off from foxes and other beasts.

The Kites, Vultures, and wolves are enemies to foxes, because they are al
flesh-deuouring-creaturs, but the fox which has so many enemies, by strength
or subtilties over comes al

Whereupon Persius calls a subtle man a Fox; saying, Astutam vapido seruas
sub pectore vulpem. The medicinal uses of this beast are these: first, (as
Pliny and Marcellus affirm) a Fox sod in water till nothing of the Fox be
left whole except the bones, The medicines arising out of Foxes.
and the Legs or other parts of a gouty body washed and daily bathed therein,
it shall drive away all pain and grief, strengthening the defective and weak
members; so also it cures all the shrinking up and pains in the sinnewes: and
Galen attributes the same virtue to an Hyaena sod in Oil, and the lame person
bathed therein, for it has such power to euacuate and draw forth whatsoever
evil humor abounds in the body of man, Sextus
that it leaves nothing

Nevertheless, such bodies are soon again replenished through evil diet,
and relapsed into the same disease again. The Fox may be boiled in fresh or
salt water with annise and time, and with his skin on whole and not slit, or
else his head cut off, there being added to the decoction two pintes of oil.

The flesh of a Fox sod and laid to asore bitten by a Sea-hare, Mathaeolus
it cures and heals the same. The Foxes skin (as is already said) is
profitable against all moist fluxes in the skin of the body, and also the
gowt, and cold in the sinnewes. The ashes of Foxes flesh burnt and drunk in
wine, is profitable against the shortness of breath and stoppings of the liver.

Albertus Siluuius
breaks the stone in the bladder, or else (as Myrepsus says) kill the Fox,
and take the blood and drink a cupfull thereof, and afterward with the same
wash the genitall parts, and within an hour the stone shall be voyded: the
same virtue is in it being dried and drunk in wine with sugar.

Oxycraton and Foxes blood infused into the Nostrils of a lethargicke Horse,
Absyrtus
cures him. The fat is next to a Bulls and a Swines, so as the fat or larde of
Swyne may be used for the fat of Foxes, and the fat of Foxes for the Swynes
grease in medicine. Some do heerewith annoint the places which have the Crampe,
and all trembling and shaking members. The fat of a Fox and a Drake enclosed
in the belly of a Goose, and so roasted,

The same with powder of Vine twigs mollified and sod in lie, attenuateth and
brings down all swelling tumors in the flesh. Aetius.
The fat alone heals the Alopecias and loosnesse of the hair; it is
commended in the cure of all sores and ulcers of the head, but the gall and
fime with Mustard-seede is more approved. The fat is also respected for the
cure of pain in the ears, if it be warmed and melt at the fire and so
instilled; Hierocles Absyrtus Theomnestus
and this is used against tingling in the ears. If the hairs rot away on a
Horse tail, they recover them again by washing the place with urine and
branne, with Wine and Oil, and afterward annoint it with foxes grease. When
sores or ulcers have procured the hair to fall off from the head, take the
head of a young fox burned with the leaves of black Orchanes and Alcyonium,
and the powder cast upon the head recouereth again the hair. Aegineta.


Pliny prescribes a man which twinkleth with his eyes, and cannot look
steadfastly, to wear in a chain the tongue of a fox; and Marcellus bids to
cut out the tongue of a live fox, and so turn him away, and hang up that
tongue to dry in purple thread, and afterward put it about his neck that is
troubled with the whiteness of the eyes, and it shall cure him.

But it is more certainly affirmed, that the tongue either dried or green,
laid to the flesh wherein is any Dart or other sharp head, it draws them
forth violently, Discorides
and renteth not the flesh, but only where it is entered. The liver dried and
drunk cures often

The lights of foxes drunk in Wate^ (...) they have been dried into powder,
Pliny.
helppeth the Melt, and Myrepsus affirms, that when he gave the same powder
to one almost suffocated in a pleurisy, it prevailed for a remedy. Archigene
prescribes the dried liver of a Fox for the Spleneticke with Oxymell: and
Marcellinus for the Melt, drunk after the same manner; Sextus
and Sextus advises to drink it simply without composition of Oxymell. The
gall of a Fox instilled into the ears with Oil, cures the pain in them,
and mixed with Honey Atticke and anointed upon the eyes, takes away al dimnes
from them, after an admirable manner. The melt bound upon the tumors and
bunches of the breast, cures the Melt in man's body. The reins dried and
mingled with Honey, being anointed upon kernels, take them away. For the
swelling of the chaps, rub the reins of a Fox within the mouth. The genitals
because of their gristly and bony substance, are approved for

The stones take away pimples and spots in the face. The dung pounded with
Vinegar, by anointment cures the Leprosy speedily. These and such other
virtues medicinal both the elder and later Physicians have observed in a Fox,
wherewithal we will conclude this discourse; saving that many writers have
deuisd diverse witty inventions and fables of Foxes, under them to express
vices of the world, as when they set a Fox in a Friars weed, preaching to a
sort of Hens and Geese, following the fixion of Archilochus Fox, to signify
how irreligious pastors in holy habittes beguile the simple with subtilty. Also
of a Fox teaching a Hare to say his Credo or Creed betwixt his legs, and for
this cause almighty God in his word compares false prophets to Foxes Ezekiel.
13. destroying the young Grapes Forte per angustam tenuis Voulpecula rimam,
Repserat in cameram frumenti, postaque rursus.
Ire for as pleno tendebat corpore frustra.
Cui mustela procul, si vis ait, effugere isthinc
Macra cauum repetes arctum, quem macra subisti.


OF THE GENNET-KAT, called Genetha.
THis beast is called Genitocatus, either for the similitude it holds with a
cat, or else because it has been believed that it was engendered by a cat,
but I rather do assent that the right name thereof is Ginetta or Ginetha,
because they are bred in Spain with the Ginnet horses, and so takes Albertus
(though a learned man yet many times he was deceived in the names of beasts,)
called this creature Genocha, and the Germans call it ei^ Gennithkatz. The
quantity or stature hereof is greater then a cat, Albertus
but lesser then a Fox, and therefore I think it about the mold or bigness of
a young Fox of six months old. It is a meek and gentle creature, except it be
provoked, for in Constantinople they are kept tame, and are suffered to go up
and down from house to house like cats; being wild they love the valleys and
low places, ^ellonius.
especially the marshes or land near the waters, for the steep rocky
mountains they cannot endure. Isidorus.
And these Cardan takes for to be of the Weasill kind, because Foinai,
Vincentius ^^linac.
being black and ash-colored distinguished and variably, interlined with many
spots.

But Scaliger who was delighted to contradict Ierom Cardan, cannot endure to
hear of this comparison, betwixt Weasils and Ginnet-cats, because he says,
the skin of a Gennitta is bigger then 3. Weasils, and that it resembles a
Weasill in nothing except in the ears: but Gardans comparison touches not the
quantity but only the outward form and qualities, and he himself disagreeth
not that it is equal in quantity to an Otter.

Of the skin.

In the next place I have also thought good to express the figure of the skin
taken off which skin, from the head to the top of the tail was about
four spannes and one belly and the upper part of the neck, were ash colored,
and in the tail were eight black circles and so many white, one successively
following the other; the whole body aspersed with black spots, Oppianus
and the residue yellowish white.

The skin smelt sweetly and somewhat like to a Mosk-cat, and from Lions in
France, they are brought into Germany, three or four of them being sold for a
Noble. It is very probable that it is a little kind of Panther or Leopard, for
there is a little Panther which has such spots, and besides of such a stature
and harmeles disposition, whose skin in old time was pretiously used for
Garments, and the savor thereof was very pleasant, and therefore I superseed any
further discourse hereof, till we come to the declaration of the greater

OF THE GOAT Male and Female.
The several names.
THe male or great Goat-Bucke, is called in Haebrew Atud, and the lesser Seir,
and Zeir. The Chaldee translateth it Gen, 13. Teias-i^ij and Numb. 15, Ize, the
Arabians Teus and Maez: the Persians Asteban and Busan; the Grecian, Tragos,
of devouring or ravening in meat, according to the verse: Tragus ab Edendo quod
grana fracta pane. Also Chimaron and Enarchan: the Latins Hircus, and sometime
Caper, which word properly signifies a gelded-goat, as Martial uses it in
this verse: Dum iugulas hircum factus es ipse Caper.

The Italians Beccho, the Germans Bock, and for distinction sake, Geissbocke,
and Reechbock; and Booeck, the Spaniards Cabron, the French Bouc, the Illyrians
Kozell.

The reason of the Latin word Hircus, is derived of Hirtus (signifying rough)
by reason of the roughnes of their bodies. And it is further to be understood
that the general kind of goats (which the Latins distinguish by Hircus,
Capra, and Hoedus) that is, by their sex, or by their age: the Haebrewes call
them singularly Ez, and plurally Izim, Numb. 15 Izbethsch neth. The Chaldee
uses also the general word Oza, the Arabian Schaah, the Persian Buz, and
whereas Leuit, 16, Seir is put for Caper a gelded goat, there the Chaldee
rendereth it Zephirah, the Arabians Atud, and the Persian Buzgalaie. And in the
same chapter you shall read Azazel, which David Kimhi rendereth for the name of
a mountain nere Sinai, where goats use to feed and lodge: and the Septuagints
translate it Apopompaion, signifying emission or sending away, and for this
cause I suppose, that when the scape-goa^ was by the priest sent out of the
Temple, he went to that mountain, and therefore the word Azazel seems to be
compounded of Ez, a goat, and Azal Iuit, that is, he went; for the scapegoat
went and carried away the evil.

The Graecians call the female goat Aix, which seems to be derived of Ez the
Haebrew Dakh and Metaham, as I find in Autcen, the Saracens An se, the
Italians, Artumnus.
Peccho, changing, B. from the male into P. and the Spaniards Capron, the
French Cheure or Chieure, the Germans Geiss, the Illyrians Koza, and the
Tuscanes at this day call a female goat ( Zebei.) And this may suffice for the
names of both male and female.

Their nature is to be declared severally, except in those things wherein they
agree without difference, and first of all: the male is rightly termed Dux and
maritus Caprarum the guide and husband of the females, and therefore Virgill
says of him not improperly, Vir gregis ipse Caper. The hee^goat is the husband
of the flock: and except in his genitals and horns he differs not in any
proportion or substance from the female. His horns are longer and stronger
then are the females, Their several partt.
and therefore upon provocation he strikes The epithets of Goats.
greedy, bearded, swift, long legged, horne-bearer, captain of the flock,
heavy, rough, hoarse-voiced, rugged, unarmed, unclean, strong-smelling,
lecherous, bristle^, wanderer, vile, wanton, sharp, stinking, two-horned, and
such like: whereby his nature and qualities are so deciphered as it needs no
long treatise of explication.

There is no beast that is more prone and given to lust then is a Goat, The
venerious disposition of Goats.
for he joins in copulation before all other beasts. Seven days after it is
yeaned and kiddened, it begins and yealdeth seed, although without proof.
And seven months old it engendereth to procreation, and for this cause that it
begins so soon, it ends at 5. years, Aelianus
and after that time is reckoned unable to accomplish that work of nature.
When the Egyptians will describe fecundity or ability of generation, they do it
by picturing of a male Goat.

That which is most strange and horrible among other beasts is ordinary and
common among these, for in them scarce the Brother joins with the Sister, and
a Camel can Columella
cover their mothers, even while they suck her milk. If they be fat, they are
less venerous then being macilent or lean. Herodotus declares that in his
time a Goat of Mendesia in Egypt, had carnal copulation with a woman in the
open sight of men, and afterward was led about to be seen. When they desire
copulation they have a proper voice wherewithal (as it seems) they provoke
the female to love. This is called in Italy Biccari, and Biccarie, which the
Venetians apply to al lecherous companions as commonly as a proverb, and this
they never use but at that time. By reason of his lust his eyes sink deep into
the corners of their holes (called Eirqui) and Apuleius with other Grammarians
do derive the word Hircus whereby this beast is called, from that disposition.

Hirci-Goats which are contented to permit other men to lie with their Wives in
public, before their own faces for gain, Coelius
because they imagine that such is the property of Goats. But I know not with
what reason they are moved heereunto, for there is a memorable story to the
contrary.

In Sibaris there was a young manne called Crathis, which being not able to
retain lust, but forsaken of God and given over to a reprobate sense, A
memorable story of the punishment of buggery.
committed buggery with a female Goat, the which thing the master Goat
beheld and looked upon, and dissembled, concealing his mind and jealousy for
the pollution of his female. Afterward finding the said young man a sleep,
(for he was a shepherd) he made all his force upon him, and Siluanus, and
placed it in the rank of idol Gods, but the wretched man himself was buried
with more honor then beseemed, for they gave him a Noble funeral, and finding
a river in Achaia which mingled water with another, they called it Crathis,
after the name of that unnatural and beastly monster; whereupon also came the
Italian Crathis which Strabo remembers. By which story it is evident, that
jealous riuality rests as well in Goats as in men of more reasonable capacity
and understanding. Coelius. Strabo


The females desire of copulation is no less then the males, for while they
suck they admit the male, and at the seventh month they conceive. The best time
of their admission to procreation Columella his opinion. The lust of the
females and their copulation.
) They are not filled the first day of copulation, but the second, or third,
and those which are joined in November do bring forth their young in the
spring when all things grow fresh and green: wherefore if they chance to be
slack, and not willing to engender or couple, Means to stir up the goats to
copulation.
their keepers use this slight or policy, to procure and stir up their lust.
They rub their vdders with Nettles until they constrain blood, and afterward
with a handful of salt and nitre, or else with pepper or Myrrh; after which
rubbing, their desire of copulation much increases, and it makes the female
to provoke the male and undergo him more willingly; Aelianus.
and this thing also procures in them abundance of milk (as Aristotle
affirms) he had seen tried by making experiment thereof upon the breasts of
Women, virgins, and widows:

They being filled and with young, Florent^uus The time of their going with
young.
they carry them in their belly five months before deliverance. After three
years old the female cease to retain in her self or confer to her Kids
the strength of nature, and the male after four, so that it is not a part of
good husbandry to keep their young which they bring forth after those years,
but rather to kill them and make them away; So also it is not good to keep
their firstinges, The multiplication of young Kids.
or those which are first of all engendered, but rather the second or 3. seed
of procreation. Some of them bring forth twins, and some more, as it is
reported of the Goats of Egypt, which bring forth five at a time, because they
drink of the fruitful river of Nilus: for the Goat-heards of the country do
give thereof to their cattle, and fetch it into all parts of that region,
Aelianus.
and in Illeria they breed twice a year, bringing forth sometime three, four,
or five at once, Aristotle
but 3. at a time are never to be kept, but killed and eaten, for they are
accounted not worth their bringing up; only cold makes them to suffer
abortementes, Aristotle
and sometimes they

Concerning the time that they bear young, it is in Italy 8. years, The time of
their young bearing.
and being fat they are not apt to conceive, wherefore they make them lean
before they admit them to their bucks. One male is sufficient for ten femals,
and some (says Varro) provide but one for 15. (as Menas,) and other but one for
20. (as Murus.) There is no creatur that smells so strongly as does a male
Goat, by reason of his immoderate lust, The strong smell or ^auor of a goat. In
Market.
and in imitation of them the latins call men which have strong breaths (
Hircosi) Coatish: whereupon Plautus saiteh to an old lecherous fellow which
could not keep his lips from slauering of women, Cum sis iam aetatis plenus,
anima foetida
Senex hircole tu osculere mulierem.
Tiberius Caesar who was such a filthy and greasie-smelling old man, was called
( Hircus Vetolus) an old Goat, in the Atellanican comaedie. They conjecture
of men that have hairy legs to be unchaste and full of lust, by reason of their
similitude with a goat, and those which have shril and clamorous voice, the
Grecians call ( Margoi) that is (Block-heads.) Those which have eyes like to
goats they call Aegopoi Goat-eies, Plutarch.
that is very red eyes. The Egyptians affirm that their femal goats when Sirius
the star in the beginning of dog-daies rises with the sun, do continually
look upon the east, and that their attentive observation is a most certain
argument of the revolution, A secret in female goats.
that is the appearance and departure of the said dog-daies. The like things do
the Libians report of their Goats concerning that star, and moreover that they
foresee and foreshew change of weather, Aelianus
for

Concerning the description of their several parts, The descripon of goats
and their best properties.
it is good to follow the direction of Cossinius, first to look to their age
(as is before said) if men desire to provide Goats for heard-breed and profit,
so as their Kids may be like them, and they bear young or continue procreation
eight yeare^ at the least. And for their outward parts, let them be firm,
great, well compacted, full of muscles, and the superficies of their whole body
be soft and equal, without bunches or indentures: therefore a thick hair,
Lorentius
two dugges hanging under their snout or chin, are good signs of the best
Goats.

The several kinds of got^ Albertus.
with broad foreheades, are the most approved, and by the circles of their
horns their age is discerned: But the vnhorned are best for breed,
procreation, and milk, and such are the Caspian Goats, which are for the most
part white, flat nosed, and little of growth. Their eyes are very deep in
their heads, and therefore their sight sharp, strong, and continual seeing
bright and clear in the night, but the color of their eyes variable, Aelianus
Pliny.
like to the color of their bodies; The males have more teeth then the females,
for the females want their upper teeth: But males and femals have large beards
under their chins, and this is called Aruncus, (says Eryngus) but the reasow
hereof is, because that when a Goat is taken by the beard and drawn out of
the fold, all the residue stand amazed, and so also when any of them has eatan
Sea-holly (called Eryngium:) so that Aristotle confounds Eryngium for Aruncum
and so takes one for another. Once in Lemnos there was a Male-goate Orthagorus
Aristotle
except the Libian Goats and their vdders lie under their breast or forepart
of their belly, like an Apes. In Naxus the Goats have greater gals then in any
other part of the world, and the forepart is held prodigious: Naxvs Aelianus
on the contrary; in Chalcis the Goats have no gall at all. They have many
bellies and a round melt which thing no other horned-beast has except a
sheep. The males have harsher hairs then their females, Of the Cilicia^ cloth
made of goats hair.
and the Libian Goats have hair as long as women's, and very rough curled,
which the inhabitants sheare of every year, and therewith the ship-wrights make
gable ropes: but in Cilicia and Phrygia, they sheare them and make the stuff
called Zambelot: and another kind of cloth called Mathaliaze. Bellnu.
In Arabia they make tents of cloth compiled of Asses and goats hair, and it
seems that Cilicia received his name of this kind of cloth, which is called
in Latin Cilicium, or else that this cloth was first invented among them,
whereupon it received that denomination; but among the Grammarians and Poets,
Lana Caprina, (Goats wool) grew to a proverb, to signify a thing of no
weight or moment, as it is in Horace: Alter rixatur de lana saepe caprina
propugnat nugis armatus.
There are another sort of Goats which are called Syrian Goats, and of some
Mambrin Goats, and most commonly Indian Goats; because they are most noble in
that country, Coytha; and likewise in the Region of Damiata, Of the Membrin or
Syrian goats.
for Mambre is a Mountain near Hebron, from whence it is probable, that the
word Mambrin comes; wherefore I have thought good to express the figure both
of the greatest of that kind, as it was taken by Antonius Musa Brasaualus,
Physician to the Noble Duke Hercules de este, at Ferraria, by one of these
Goats brought thither to be seen.



THese lesser were found pictured in an old manuscript in Germany, which book
did entreat of the holy land. The greater Goat I conjecture to be the same
which Leo Afer calls Adimain, and is found in Mauritania, for they milk
them, and of their milk make Butter and Cheese; their hair is very short, and
they very gentle and familiar, so that the said Leo affirms, that when he
was a young man, and loved those rash and wanton sports wherewithal youth are
delighted, he got up upon one of these, and rode quietly upon the back of it
above a quarter of a mile. They keep being wild in the deserts of Lybia, and
if at time they stray or wander into Nymidia, and the fields thereof, it is
accounted by the people and inhabitauntes, a prodigious and monstrous thing.

The lesser kind I conjecture to be the right Mambrine or Syrian Goat, although
some of the late writers call it an Indian Goat, the reason is, because (as
has been said) they call al strange beasts by the names of Indians, if they
find them not in their own country. The Gallia-Narbon, being at the least as
broad as a man's spanne, they are of color like wilde-Goates, their horns
very sharp, and standing not far distant one from the other, and have
stones like a stone horse, being in all other parts not unlike to the vulgar and
common Goat. Albertus. How Goats ^^ke breath, Varro


Some curious heardsmen (as Alcmaeon and Archelaus) have delivered to the
world, that goats take breath thorough their ears, and Phyles approves their
concept, because he had scene an experiment of a Goat, that his mouth and
nostrilles being stopped fast, nevertheless he seemed not to be troubled for
want of breath: and for this also is alleged the authority of Oppianus, who
writes of certain wild goats called ( Aegari,) that they have

If this be true (as I would not any way extenuate the authority of the
writer) then it is very likely that some have (without difference) attributed
to all kinds of Goats that which was propper to this kind alone, for the
former opinion is not reasonable: Neuerthelesse^ leave every man to his own
liberty of believing or refusing. The quick sense of hea^ing.


There is no beast that hears so perfectly and so sure as a Goat, for he is
not only holp in this sense with his ears, but also has the organ of hearing
in part of his throat, wherefore when the Egyptians describe a man which has
an excellent ear, they express him (...). Mind.
There are some kind of goats in Illyria which have whole hooues like a horse,
and these are only found in that Region: In all other Nations of the world,
they are clouen-footed. The use of ^^^ir several (...).


The use of their several parts is singular, and first of al to begin with
their skin, the people of Sardinia (as says Nymphiderus) nourish goats for
their skins, whereof they make (...) garments, being dressed with the hair
upon them, and they affirm strange virtue in them* namely that they heat their
bodies in the Winter, and cool them in the summer, and the hairs growing
upon those skins are a cubit long, therefore the man that wears them in
Winter time, turns the hary side next to his body, and so is warmed by it:
and in Summer, the raw side, and so the hair keeps the sun from piercing
his skin Sueuia, where the women wear garments of Goats hair in the winter,
and also make their childrens coats thereof, according to Virgils saying in
Moreto, Suida^. Var^^us
Et cinctus villosae tegmine Caprae. For this cause the Merchants buy them
rough in those parts of Sauoy near Geneua, and their choice is, of the young
ones which die naturally, or are killed, or else such as were not above 2. years
old. The Tirians in the Persian war, wore upon their backs goat skins. In
ancient time they made hereof Diphtera, that was a kind of parchment, whereon
they wrote on both sides, (...).
and had the name in Greek from that use: which Hermolaus by a metaphorical
allusion, (called Opistographi.) From the use of these in garments, came the
apellation of harlots Pellices, and a whores bag was called Penula-Scortea,
such a one is used by pilgrims which go to visit the church of Saint James of
Calec, and such Carriers or foote-poastes had wont to use in their iournies,
which caused Martial to write thus: Ingrediare viam coelo licet vsque sereno
An subitas nusquam scortea depit aquas.


The Sandals which men were wont to wear on their feet in the East Countries,
were also made of Goats skins, and there was a custom in Athens, that men for
honor of Bacchus, did dance upon certain bottels made of Goats skins, and full
of wind, the which were placed in the midst of the Theater, and the dauncer
was to use but one Leg, to the intent that he might often fall from the
slippery bottels, and make the people sport; whereunto Virgill alluded this
saying: Plinyus
Mollibus in pratis vnctos saliere pro vtres. There is also a Ladanum tree in
Carmania, by the cutting of the bark whereof there yssueth forth a certain
gum, which they take and preserve in a Goats skin; their use in war Claudius
the Emperor had given him thirty tents of Goats skins for his Soldiers
attendant upon the judges: and the Mariners also by these defended themselves
from the violence of storms upon the sea: and so I leave this part of the
beast with remembrance of that which is written in holy scripture Heb. 11. that
the people of God in ancient times did fly away from the rage of persecution,
being apparelled or rather meanly disguised in goat skins, being charitably
holped by the beasts, that were cruelly put to death by wretched men.

In the next place the milk of Goats comes to be considered for that also
has bin, is, and will be of great account for Butter and Cheese, which the
writers call Tyropoeia, The milk of Goats.
and Virgill celebrateth the singular commendation both of the Woll and of the
milk in these verses; Haec quoque non cura nobis leuiore tuenda
Nec minor vsus erit quamuis Milesia magno
Vellera mutentur Tyrios incocta rubores
Deusior hinc soboles hinc largi copia lactis
Quo magis exhausto spumauerit vbere mulctra
Laeta magis pressis manabunt flumina manonis
Nec minus interca barbas, incanaque menta
Cyniphij tondent hirei setasque comantes

Therefore their milk is profitable for Butter, although inferior to a Cows, yet
equal to a sheep, and the heardsmen give their goats salt before they be
delivered of their young, To increase Goats milk Albertus
for this makes them abound in milk Others with Goats milk preserve their
Wine from corruption by sowrenes; first they put into their wine the twentyeth
part so much as is of the Wine, and so let it stand in the same vessel covered
three or four days, A secret in the milk of Goats. Myrepsus
afterward they turn it into a sweet and fresh vessel, and so it remains
preserved from all annoyance of soreness.

Cheeses made of Goats milk were wont to be called Velabrenses Casei, because
among the Romans they were made at Velabrum, and that with smoke, whereupon
Martial made this Distichon; Non quemcunque focum nec fumum caseus omnem
Sed velabrensem qui bibit: ipse sapit.
Aristotle and Julius Pollux do commend the Sicilian Cheese, which was made of
sheep and Goats milk together, and by Athaeneus it is called ( Caseus
Tromilicus) and by Simonides Stromilius. In Rhaetia of Heluetia there are
excellent Cheeses made of Goats milk and cow-mile mixed together. The milk
also of a Goat mixed to a woman's milk is best for the nourishment of man,
because it is not too fat, Hermolaus
yet Galen says if it be eaten without Honey, water, and salt, it curdleth in
the belly of a man like a cheese and strangleth him; and Jupiter was noursed by
a Goat, and that afterward in his war against the Titanes or Giants, he slew
that Goat by the counsel of Themis and wore her skin for an armor, and so
having, obtained victory placed the Goat among the stars, whereupon she was
called Aixourania, a heavenly Goat, and so Germanicus Caesar made this verse
upon him, and Jupiter himself was called Agiochus: -- Illa putatur
Agio^hus.
Nutrix esse Iouis si vere Jupiter infans
Vbera Cretae mulssit fidissima Caprae
Sydere quae claro gratum testatur alumnum
The flesh of male Goats is not wholesome for man's body, but the flesh of a
female in the spring and fall of the leaf, Of the flesh of Goats.
by reason of the good nourishment may be eaten without danger. They are worse
then bul-beefe, because they are sharper in concoction and hotter, wherefore if
they digest not well, they increase melancholy. The liver of a Goat being
eaten, does bring the falling sickness, yet being salted a good space, and
then sodde with Athenians praised the Lacedaemonians, that in their feast which
they called Copidae, they slew a Goat; and held it for a divine meat.

Also Clitomachus an Academicke of Carthage, relates of a certain Thebane
Champion, which excelled in strength all the Champions of his time, and that he
did eat continually Goats flesh, for it is very strong and remains a long
season in the body, and does much good being disgested, notwithstanding the
strong and rank smell thereof, otherwise it is dangerous as is already said,
therefore Fiera having commended the Kydd, when he comes to speak of the
Goat, he writes thus: Cum male olet siccat, fit iam caper improbus, absit
Et Cadat ante focos victima Bacche tuos.
But Pliny affirms, that if a male Goat eat Barley-bread or Parsneps washed,
the same day that he is killed, then there is no poison in his flesh: the
stones of a Bucke-goat, resist concoction, and beget evil humors in the body:
wherefore such a banquet is called in Greek ( Tragos Hulibertas) for Goats after
their copulation, Aegineta.
have an evil flesh, not fat, but dry, and the remedy to make their flesh
sweeter, is to geld the male when he is young and tender, Albertus.
for so his temperature is amended by a cold and moist constitution.

The inhabitants of Portugal eat Goats flesh, and account it delicate meat;
especially such as dwell in the mountains. In Germany they make of it a kind
of meat which is called Klobvvsst, and is prepared on this manner: they take a
Goats Heart newly taken out of Textor.
and slit it into small pieces, and break six Eggs upon it, and the crumbs of
white bread, seasoned with spices and Saffron, and so put into a bag, and sod
or roasted: afterward they are served upon the table, and strewed over with
kitchen sugar.

The guts being salted are called ( Hilla) which the French stuff like
pudinges, and call them ( Saulcisses) from whence comes our English sawsadge;
of this sewet and fat of Goats are the best candles made, because it is hard
and not over liquyd. The blood of a Goat has an unspeakable property, for it
scoureth rustie iron better then a file, it also softneth an Adamant stone,
Pliny. Hermolaus. Pausanius
and that which no fire is able to melt; nor iron to break, being of such an
invincible nature, that it contemns al violent things, yet is it dissolved by
the warm blood of a Goat. The Lodestone draws iron, and the same being
rubbed

Osthanes, prescribes for a remedy of love, the urine of a Goat to be mingled
with Spicknard, and so drunk by him which is overcome with that passion,
assuring him thereby that they shall fall in as great lothing as ever before
they were in loving. With the hoofs of a Goat they drive away Serpents, and
also with the hairs by burning and perfuming them in the place where the
Serpents lodge. Pallagdius.
With the horns of goats they make Bows, for in Delos there was dedicated the
horn of a Goat, which was two cubits long and a span* and heereat ought no man
to wonder, Archa^hines.
for that noble bow of Pandarus which Homer commends,

Affricanus declares, that in ancient time they made fruitful their
Vine-yards by this means: Varinus
they took three horns of a female goat, and buried them in the earth with
their points or tops downward, to the root of the Vine stocks, leaving the
hollow tops, standing a little out of the ground, and so when the rain
descended, it filled the horns, and soked to the root of the Vine, persuading
themselves thereby that they received no small advantage in their Grapes. The
gaul of a Female-goat put into a vessel and set in the carth, is said by
Albertus to have a natural power in it to draw Goats unto it, as though they
received great commodity thereby. Likewise, if you would have white hairs to
grow in any part of a Horse; shave off the hair and anoint the place with the
gall of a Goat, so shall you have your desire. The Sabcans, by reason of the
continual use of Mirrhe and Frankinsens, grow to a loathing of that savor:
for remedy of which anoyance, they perfume their houses by burning stirackes in
goats skins. And thus much for the several parts of a goat.

There were in ancient time three kinds of Heards-men which received dignity
one Bucollici) Neat-heards, because they keep the greater Cattle: the second
were ( Opiliones) Shepherds, of their attendaunce upon sheep: the third,
last, and lowest kind, were termed, Aepoli and Caprarij, that is (Goat-heards)
or keepers of Goats, and such were the Locrentians, who were called Ozolae,
because of their filthy smell, for they had the most part of their
conversation among other beasts.

A Goate-heard or keeper of these cattle must be a sharp stearne, hard;
laborious, patient, bold and cheerful, and such a one as can easily run over
the rocks through the Wilderness, and among the bushes without fear or
grief, so that he must not follow his flock like other herds, but go before
them: they must also be light and nimble, to follow the wandering goats, that
run away from their fellows, and so bring them back Aelianus says) the
labor of the goat-heard must be to see his cattle well fed abroad in the day
time, and well foulded at night, the first rule therefore in this husbandry is
to divide the flocks, and not to put any great number of them together, for
herein they differ from sheep, who love to live together in multitudes, as it
were affecting society by which Magnos Gregos sed plures: not great flocks, but
many.

The number of their flock ought not to exceed fifty, whereupon Varro writes
this story of Gabinus a Roman Knight, who had a field under the suburbs
containing a thousand Akers of pasture ground, who seeing a poor goat-heard
bring his goats every day to the city, and received for their milk a penny a
piece, he being led with covetousness, proponed to himself this gain, that
if he stored his said field with a thousand Milch-female-goates,

In Indian, in the Region Coitha, the inhabitants give their milch-goates dried
fishes to eat, but their ordinary food is leaves, tender branches, and
boughs of trees, and also bushes or brambles; whereupon Virgill wrote in this
mauner: Pascuntur vero siluas and summa Lycaei

They love to feed on the Mountains better then in the valleys and green
fields; always striving to lick up the yuie or green plants, or to climb
upon trees, cropping off with their teeth all manner wild herbs, and if they be
restrained and enclosed in fields, then they do the like to the plants that
they find there, wherefore there was an ancient law among the Romans, when a
man let out his ground to farm he should always condition and except with the
farmer that he should not breed any Goat in his ground, for their teeth are
enemies to all tender plants: their teeth are also exitiable to a tree, and
Pliny and Varro affirm, that the Goat by licking the Olive tree makes it
barren; for which cause in ancient time, A Goat was not sacrifized to Minerua
to whom the Olyue was sacred.

There is no creature that feeds upon such diversity of meat as Goats, for
which cause they are elegantly brought in by Eupolis the old Poet, bragging of
their belly cheer, wherein they number up above five and twenty several
things, different in name, nature, and taste: and for this cause, Eustathius
defended by strong argument against Disarius, that Alaternus, which never
bears fruit but only leaves: also three leaued-grasse, yuie, the herb Lada,
which grows no where but in Arabia, whereby it comes to pass, that many
times the hair of Goats is found in the gumbe called Ladanum, for the peoples
greedy desire of the gumbe, causes them to wipe the juice from the Goats
beard.

For the increase of milk in them, give them Cinquefoyle five days together
before they drink, or else bind Dittany to their bellies, or (as Lacuna
translateth the words out of Affric^nus) you may lay milk to their bellies,
belike by rubbing it thereupon. The wild Goats of Creete, Aristotle.
eat dittany aforesaid against the stroks of Darts: and Serapion avouches
Galen, that goats by licking the leaves of Tamariske, loose their gall, and
likewise that he saw them licking Serpents which had newly lost their skins,
and the event thereof was, that their age never turned or changed into
whiteness or other external signs thereof.

Also it is delivered by good observation that if they eat or drink out of
vessels of Tamariske, Constantinus
they shall never have any Spleen; if any one of them eat Sea-holly, the
residue of the flock stand still and will not go ^orward, till the meat be
out of his mouth. The Grammarians say that Chim^ra was killed by Bellerophon
the son of Glaucus in the Mountain Lycius, Aelianus.
and the reason hereof is, that the Poets fained Chimaera to be composed of a
Lion, a Dragon, and a Goat, and in that mountain all those three were kept
and fed: for

In like sort it happens if they eat Walnuts (and not to their full) unripe,
therefore either they must be suffered to eat of them to saciety, or else they
are not to be permitted to them. Dioscorides


If at any time they eat Scammony, Hellebore, Lesseron, or Mercury, they are
much troubled in their stomach, and loose their milk, especially the white
Hellebor. The publicans Cyrene have all the government of the pastures, Pliny.
and therefore they permit not Benzwine to grow in their country finding thereby
great gain; and if at any time their sheep or goats meet with any branch
thereof, they eat it geedily, but the sheep immediately fall to sleep and the
goats to Neezing. Agolethros and Sabine are poison to Goats. The Herb called
in Greek Rhododendron, and may be englished Rose-tree, is poison goats, and
yet the same helps a man against the vemon of Serpents.

The prickle or spindle tree (called also Euonimus) which grows in the Mount
Occynius (cal^ed Ordyno) about the bigness of a pine-apple-tree, having soft
leaves like the same, and it budde^h in September, and the flower is like to a
white violet flower, this kills Horus
The Egyptians when they will describe a man devouring sheep or Goats, they
picture the herb Curilago or Conyza, because it also kills them. Also as
Clodrysippus affirms they avoid Cumin, for it makes them mad or brings
upon them lethargies, and such like infirmities.

He auoydeth also the spettle of man, for it is hurtful to him, and to the
Seafish Scolopendra, and yet he eats many venomous herbs and grows fat
thereby; Aelianus
and this also may be added, that Goats grow fat when they are with young, but
by drinking of Honey they are weakened, and indaungered of death. Concerning
their drink, it is necessary for a skillful Goat-herd to observe the nature of
the beast, and the best time and place of their watering, according to the
saying of Virgill: -- I^be^ fronde^tia Capris
Arb^ta sufficere, and fluuios prebere rerentes.
Cephalenia, Aristotle. Myndius.
that they drink not every day like other goats, but only once or twice in
six months, and therefore they turn themselves to the wind or cold air of
the sea, and by gawning, Aelianus.
suck into their mouths or bellies that which serves them instead of water.
When the sun declineth, they lie and look not upon one another but on the
contrary, and they which lodge in the fields take up their rest among their
acquaintance. But if they be used to fold or house, they remember it, and
repair thither of their own accord: which thing caused the Poet to write in
this manner: Atque ipsae memores rede^ntin tecta, suosque



Concerning their stables or houses to lodge in for their defense against the
cold, the diligent heard-man must observe, that nothing must be laid under
the Goat to lie upon, and it is best to make his stable upon stones, or some
such hard flower, and the same must be kept and turned dry every day from
annoyance of their dung, for that hurts their heads. It is good to set the
window of their stable to the Sun, and from the wind, Columella.
according to the counsel of Virgill; Et stabula a ventis hyberno opponere
soli,

Iam cadit extremoque irrorat Aquarius anno.
Although goats be stronger then sheep, yet they are never so found, for in
buying and selling of them, he was never accounted a wise man, that either
hoped to buy, or promised to sell without fault. It was sufficient in open
market places, when and where goats were to be sold, to promise, Hodie capras
recte esse and bibere posse and eas licite habere, that is, that the day of
their sale they were well, and could drink, and they were his own, and it was
lawful for him to have them.

But farther no man was urged, for ( Archelaus says) they are ever
febricitante, because their breath is whotter, and their copulation more fiery,
and therefore their heardmen

The best means to preserve them in health next to a good diet and warm
lodging, is, to plant Alysson near to their stabling houses. And their
continual ague spoken of before is profitable to their body, for when it
departs and leaves them, presently they perish Florentinus.
of earthquakes, and of wholesome temperate Weather, and of abundance and
store of fruits; but neither of both shall be ever infested by the
pestilence, if you give them the power of a Storkes Ventricle or mawe one
spoonful thereof in Water every day. Quintilius.


And whereas all other kind of Cattle when they are sick consume and pule
away by little and little, only Goats perish suddenly, insomuch as all that
are sick are unrecoverable, and the other of the flock must be instantly let
blood and separated before the infection ouerspread all, and the reason of
their sudden death, is because of their abundance of food, which ministerth
speedy flax for the fire of their disease to burn. At such times they must
not feed all the day long, but only thrice or four times a day be led forth
to grass, and brought in again to their stables.

If any other sickness annoy them they are to be cured with reed, and the
roots of white Thorn beat together with iron Pestles, and mingled with rain
Water, and so given to the Cattle to be drunk: but if this medicine help
not, then either sell them away, or else kill them, and salt them till you
mind to eat them. Goats are not troubled

There is a certain Wine called Melampodion, the report is that one Melampos a
shepherd had it revealed unto him, to cure the madness of a Goats: it is made
of black Ellebor, and goats milk. Goats are also molested and subject to the
falling sickness and this is known by their voice and cold most brains;
Coelius.
and therefore the Roman priests were commanded too abstain from touching
such beasts.

They are also troubled with the gowt; the Female-goate eases the pain of her
eyes by pricking them upon a Bul-rush, and the Male-goate by pricking them upon
a Thorn, and so pituitous matter follows the prick, whereby the sight is
recovered without any harm done to the Apple; Aelianus.
and from hence it is supposed, that the Physicians learned Parakeutesis
pricking of so^e eyes with a needle.

The Females never wink in their sleep, being herein like the Roe-buckes.
There are certain birds (called Capri-mulgi) because of their sucking of
Goats, and when these or any of them have sucked a Goat she presently falls
blind. If at any time she be troubled with the Dropsy, Pliny.
an issue must be made under her shoulder, and when the humor is avoided, stop
up the hole with liquid pitch. They drink the seed of Seselis to make them
have an easy deliverance of their young, and for that cause Columella
prescribes a pint of sod corn and Wine to be infused into their throats in
that extremity; their other maladies being like unto sheep, we will reserve
their description and cure to that History.

Probus
These Goats have in ancient times been used for sacrifices, not only by the
Sovereign command of almightye God, but also by the practice of Heathen
people, for their perfect sacrifice which consisted of a Ram, a goat, a Hog,
and a Bull, was called Hecatombe and Tryttis.

The reason why Swine and goats were sacrificed among the heathen, was because
the Swine dig up the earth with their Noses, and rooted out the Corn, they
were sacrificed to Ceres; and the Goats spoil the Vines by biting, for which
cause, they sacrificed him to Bacchus; that so the drunken God might be
pacified with the blood of that Beast, whose hallowed grapes he had
devoured: Whereupon the Poet Writes Sus dederat poenas exemplo territus horum
Palmite debueras abstinuisse Caper
Quem spectans aliquis dentes in vite permentem
Talia non tacito dicta dolor dedit
Rode caper vitem tamen hinc cum stabis adaras
In tua quod spargi cornua possit, erit.


When they sacrificed a goat in Graecia, they tried him by giving him Pease or
cold water to drink, which if he refused, they also refused him for sacrifice,
but if he tasted it,

Martial having seen or rather heard of a Country priest, sacrifising a
goat, and being assisted by a Country man, when the beast was slain the
priest commanded the poor country man to cut off the stones, Teter vt
immunda carnis abiret odar, to let the unwholesome vapor of the unclean flesh
out of the body. Afterward the priest being busy about the sacrifice, and
stooping down to the carkeise of the beast, his coddes appeared behind him
betwixt his legs, the which when the country man saw, he suddenly cut them
off with his sharp knife, thinking that the ancient ceremony of fasting
required this to be done: whereupon Martial wrote this Epigram, Sic modo qui
Tuscus fueras, nunc Gallus aruspeae
Dum ingulas hircum factus es ipse caper.
The Mendesians worshipped Goats both males and females, Gyraldus
because as they imagine they were like to their God Pan. The Egyptians also
deified the male goat for his genitall members, as other nations did Priapus.
The Gentiles had also a brazen goat, whereupon Venus rode in brass, which
picture they called ( Pandemon) and Venus (Epitragia,) I think that lust could
not be better described then by this emblem, for venereous persons will suffer
their whoores to do any disgrace unto them, for their carnal pleasure. And
thus much for these male and female goats, now follow the stories of the wild
goats and the kids in order.

OF THE GOAT, CALLED by PLINY a DEAR.


THere is no man that shall see this beast, but will easily yield unto my
opinion, that it is a goat and not a dear, the hair, Cay affirms in the
Northern part of England, and that figure which is engraven at Rome in a
marble pillar being a remembrance of some Triumph which Pliny sets forth,
differs in no part from this beasts description and proportion. Yet I take it
that it may be brought into England from some other nation and so be seen in
some Noble man's house, but that it should be bred there,

The first Epigram describing their wilful fight one killing another and so
saving a labor to the hunter, for they kill themselves to his hand, is thus.

Frontibus aduersis molles concurrere damas,
Spectauere canes praedam stupuitque superbus,
Vnde leaves animae tanto caluere furore?
Aspicis imbelles tenent quam fortia damae
In mortem paruis concurrere frontibus audent
Vidimus and fati sort iacere pari
Venator cultro nil superesse suo
Sic pugnant Tauri sic cecidere viri.
The second Epigram is a Dialogue speaking to the Emperor, who took care to
increase Praelia tam timidis quanta sit ixa feris
Vis Caesar damis parcere, mitte canes.
The third Epigram is a complaint of their weak and unarmed state, having
neither teeth like Bores, not hoenes like Hearts to defend themselves, but lie
open to the violence of all their enemies: Dente timetur Aper defendunt cornua
ceruum
Imbelles damae quid nisi preda sumus.
These are of a whitish yellow color on the back, and are nourished sometime
for the pleasure, and sometime for the profit of their possessors, for they will
suffer hunting like a Dear and also be tamed for milk like a Goat. And here
of I find no other especial mention among Authors beside that which is
already rehearsed.

OF THE WILD GOAT, AND THE figure of the Heluetian Alpian wild or Rocke-Goat.


WIlde-goats are transfigured into many similitudes, and also dispersed into
many countries beyond the seas and in the Alps, the picture of the Alpine
wild Goat is here set down. They are also to be found in Italy, in the
mountains of Fiscela and Tetrica, Varro
insomuch as the tame goats which Cinthian Goats, because they are bred in the
mountains of Delos called Cinthus. There are of these which are found in the
tops of the Libian mountains as great as Oxen, whose shoulders and legs
abound with loose-shaggy hair, their shinnes small, their faces are round,
their eyes are hollow and hard to be seen.

Their horns crooking backward to their shoulders, not like other Goats, for
they stand far distant one from another: and among all other Goats they are
endued with a most singular dexterity of leaping, for they leap from one top to
another, standing a great way asunder, and although many times they fall down
upon the hard rocks, which are interposed betwixt the Mountains, yet receive
they no harm: for such is the hardness of their members, to resist that
violence, and of their horns to break their falls, that they neither are
offended thereby in head nor legs.

Such are the Goats of Soractum as Cato Writes, which leap from Rock to
rock, above threescore foot: of this kind are those Goats before spoken off
in the History of

And if at any time the Damme be taken by the Hunters, the young one does not
forsake her till he be also ensnared: and you would think by the behavior of
the imprisoned Damme toward her young Kids, and likewise of the Kid toward
his Damme, that they mutually contend one to give it self for the other: for
the dam forseeing her young one to houer about her in the hands of her enemies,
and continually to follow; with sighs and tears seems to wish and persuade
them to depart, and to save themselves by flight, as if they could say in the
language of men, Fugite filij infestos venatores ne me miseram capti materno
nomine private; that is to say, Run away my sons, save your selves from these
harmefull and greedy Hunters, least if you be taken with me, I be for ever
deprived of the

Concerning the Libyan goats before spoken off, which live in the tops of
Mountains, they are taken by nets, or snares, or else killed by Darts and
arrows, or some other art of Hunting. But if at any time they descend down
into the plain fields they are no less troubled, then if they were in the
waves of some great water. And therefore any man of a slow pace may there taken
them, without any great difficulty.

The greatest benefit that arises from them is their skin and their horns,
with their skins they are clothed in Winter time against tempests, Frostes
and Snow, and it is a common weed for Shepherds, and Carpenters. The horns
serve them in steed of buckets, to draw Water out of the running streams,
wherewithal they quench their thirst,

The self same things are Written of the Wild Goats of Egypt, who are said
never to be hurt by Scorpions. There is a great City in Egypt (called Coptus)
who were wont to be much addicted to the worship of Isis, and in that place
there are great abundance of Scorpions, which with their stings and poison, do
oftentimes give mortal and deadly wounds to the people, whilst they mourn
about the Chapel (for they worship that Goddess) with funeral lamentation:
against the stinging of these Scorpions: the Egyptians have invented a thousand
devises whereof this was the principal: At the time of their assembly, they
turn in wild fem: goats naked among the Scorpions lying on the ground, by
whose presence they are delivered and escape free from the wounds of the
Serpents, whereupon the Coptites do religiously consecrate these female Goats
to deuinity, Isis did wholly love them, and therefore they sacrificed the males
but never the females.

It is reported by Plutarch that wild Goats do above other meat love meal
and figs, wherefore in Armenia there are certain black Fishes which are
poison; with the powder or meal of these fishes they cover these figs, and
cast them abroad where the Goats do haunt, and as soon as the beasts have
tasted them, they presently die. Now to the wild Goat before pictured, called
in Latin Rupi Capra and Capricornus, and in Greek a Gargos, and Aigastros, and
of Homer Ixalon, of the Germans Gemmes or Gemmuss, the Rhetians which speak
Italian, call it Camuza, the Spaniards Capramontes, the Polonians Dzykakoza,
the Bohemians, Korytanski Kozlik; that is to say, a Carinthian Goat, because
that part of the Alps called Carinthia is near bordering upon Bohemia.

Bellanius writes, Albertus.
that the French call him Chambris, and in their ancient tongue Ysard, this is
not very great of body, but has crooked horns which bend backward to his
back, whereupon he staieth himself when he falls from the slippery Rocks or
Mountains.

Plinyus
These horns are not fit to fight they are so small and weak, and therefore
nature has bestowed them upon them for the cause aforesaid. Of all other Goats
this is the least, it has red eyes, but a qu^cke eie-sight, his horns are
black, being nine or ten fingers long, and compassed about with diverse
circles, but at the top none at all, which is sharp and crooked like a hook.
They arise at the root Paralelwise, that is by equal distance one from
another, being hollow the breadth of ones Thumb, the residue solid like the

The Males in this kind differ not from the Females, neither in horn, color,
or proportion of body: they are in bigness like the common Goat, but somewhat
hier. Their color is betwixt brown and red. In the Summer time they are red,
and in the winter time they are brown. There has been seen of them which
were white and black in distinct color one from another, and the reason here
of is, because they change color many times in the year. There are some of
them altogether white, but these are seldom found; they inhabit for the most
part the Rocks or Mountains, but not the tops like the Ibe^ks, neither do
they leap so far as the foresaid goats. They come down sometime to the roots of
the Alps, and there they lick sand from the rocks, like as the village tame
goats to

The Heluetians call these places in their natural tongue Fultzen, that is
Salares: about these places do the Hunters hide themselves and secretly with
guns, bows, or other such instruments they suddendly shoot and kill them.
When they are hunted they step up to the steepest rocks, and most inaccessible
for Dogs, by that means providing their own safty: bu^ if the hunters press
after them and clime upon the rocks, with hands, and feet, they leap from
thence, from stone to stone, making their way to the tops of the Mountains,
so long as ever they are able to go or climb, and then they hang by the
Horns of their head, as if they were ready to fall, which caused Martial to
write thus: Pendentem summa Capream de rupe videbis
Casuram speres decipit illa Canes.
Where the Poet attributes that to the Roe which belongs to the wild goat,
and there they hang many times till they perish, because they cannot loose
themselves again, or else they are shot with guns, or fall down headlong,
or else are driven off by the hunters. From the day of Saint James they use
themselves to the coldest parts of the Mountains, because they understand
winter is approaching, making custom to be their shield against cold weather:
there have been some of these made tame, so that they have descended down to
the flocks of tame Goats, whom they do not avoid like the Ibex.

From these wild goats has that same herb (called Doronicum) and of the
Grecians, Doronieu, given a name among the Germans Geniesseh Worts, that is,
wilde-goats-herb, being excellent to cure the Colic, and therefore highly
esteemed among the Arabians Graecians, and Mauritanians. It is hot and dry in
the second degree, and the country people in Heluetia do give it against
dizines in the head, because these wild goats oftentimes feed upon the same,
and yet are never troubled with that infirmity, although they run

There are hunters which drink the blood of this goat coming hot out of his
body, immediately after the wound given, against that sickness. The fat and
milk of a wild goat mingled together, have cured one long sick of the
Ptisick. The wild goats of Creet, being wounded with poisoned Darts, run
presently and eat of the herb Dittani, by the virtue and juice whereof, they
not only avoid the arrow which sticks in their skin, but also death, and
cure the poison.

OF THE KYD.
Of the name
now it follows that we should also entreat of the Kid which is the issue of
a Goat; and first of the several names thereof. It is called in Haebrew Egedi,
which because it signifies also a Lamb, they put unto it Haissim, and the
plural masculine is Gedaijm, and the feminine Gedioth, Genesis 35. where the
Caldean translation has Gadeia, the Persian Bus-kahale, or else Cahali busan;
for the Persians render Cahale for Sheter, in Haebrew Busan, for Issim. The
Septuagints render Erifon, and vulgarly at this day, the Grecians call him
Eriphoi, but the truth is, that Eriphoi are kids of three or four months old,
and after that time until their procreation, Varinus
they are called Chimaroi, Hoedi ab edendo, from eating (as Isidorus says) for
then their flesh is tender and fat, and the taste thereof pleasant. The Italians
call it Cauretto, or Capretto, and Ciauerello; the Rhetians which speak
Italian, Vlzol: the Spaniardes Cabrito, the French Chereru, the Germans Gitse,
or Kitslain, the Polonians Koziel.

It was a question whether nature would finish her parts upon a young one out
of the dams belly, wherefore a trial was made upon a kid which never saw his
dam, for upon a season a dissexion was made upon a Female-goate great with
young, and out of her belly was her young one taken alive, so as it could never
see the mother; the same kid was put into a house where were many boales full
of wine, oil, milk, and Honey, and other lyquid things: there also lay beside
him diverse kinds of fruits, both of the vine, of corn, Hipocrates rule was
most true, Animalium naturas esse indoctas, that is to say, the natures of
creatures are not formed by Art, but of their own inclination.

There is nothing more wanton then a Kid, whereupon Ovid made this verse:
Splendidior vitro tenero lasciuior hoedo. They often iumpe and leap among
themselves, and then they promise fair weather, Aelianu^*
but si sine fine modoque: Pabula delbent cum tutas vesper adire
Compellat caulas monstrabunt ad fore nimbos.
If Geese swallow the hairs of Kids or Goats they die thereof Kids are not to
be separated from their Dammes, A^atolius Varro
or weaned till they be three months old, at which time they may be joined to
the flocks: they are nourished when they are young after the same manner as
they be at a year old, except that they must be more narrowly looked unto,
least their lasciviousness overthrow their age: and besides their Milk, you
must give unto them three leaued-grasse, Palladius
Iuy, and the tops of lentiles tender leaves, or small twigges of trees: and
whereas commonly they are brought forth in twins, it is best, to choose out
the strongest headed kid for the flock, and to sell the other away to the
Butchers. Out of the rennet of the Calves or Kids is the Coagulation.

There was a certain law (as appears by Baifyus) in the books of the civil
Lawyers, that shoes should be made of the skins of Kids, as appeared by
ancient Marble monuments at Rome, which thing Martial approves in his verses
to Phoebus; showing how time alters al things and that the skins of kids which
were wont to cover bald heads, are not put upon bare legs; the verses are these
that follow, Oedina tibi pelle Contegenti
Nudae tempore verticemque caluae
Fefliue tibi phebe dixit ille
Qui dixit c^put esse calciatum. Albertus

Out of the hide of a Kid is made good glue, and in the time of Cicero they
stuffed beds with Kids hair: their flesh has been much esteemed for
delicate meat; and for that cause Melos, or Vmbratia, or Viburtinum, which
never tasted grass, but have more milk in them then blood; according to the
saying of Iuuenall: De viburtino veniet pinguissimus agro
Hoedulus and toto grege mollior nescius herbae
H^c dum ausus virgas humilis mordere falicti.
For this cause they may safely be eaten all the year long while they suck,
both of men of temperate and whot constitution, Arnoldus
for they are less hurtful then the Rams, and do easily digest, and
nourish temperately, for they engender thin and moist blood, and also help
all whot and temperate bodies, and they are at the best when as they are

The red or sandy colored are the best, yet is their flesh hurtful to the
Collicke. Simeon Sethi affirms, that if a man eat a kids liver before he
drink in the morning, he shall not be over drunk that day. Celtus also
prescribes it in the sickness of the Holy-fire. They are wholesome, sod,
roasted, or baked, but the ribs are best sodde. Platina teaches one way
whereby it was dressed in his time for a delicate dishe; they took some field
Herbs and fat broth, twoe Whites of an Egg well beaten together, with two
heads of Garlike, a little Saffron, and a little Pepper, with the Kiddes
flesh, put all together into a dish roasted before at the fire, upon a spitte
(with Parsely, Rosemary, and Laurel leaves)

The blood also of a Kid was made into a bludding, and given to be eaten of
them which have the bloody-flixe. They have also devised to dress a Kidde
whot, and to fill his belly with Spices and other good things: likewise it is
sod in Milk with Laurel, with diverse other fashions, which every Cook is
able to practice without the knowledge of learning.

And thus I might conclude the discourse of Kiddes with a remembrance of their
constellation in the Waggoner, upon the Bulls Horn, which the Poets observe
for signs and tokens foreshewing Rayn and Clowdy weather, according to Virgils
Quantus ab occasu veniens pluuialibus, Hoedi. These Stars rise in the Evening
about the Nones of October and in December, they were wont to sacrifice a kid
with wine to Faunus. There is a byrd called Captilus which is a great deuourer
of kiddes and Lambs, and the same also is hunted by a Dragon, for when she
has filled her self with these beasts, being wearied and idle, the Dragon
does easily set upon her and over take her. Also when they fish for the Worm
seven Cubits long in the River Indus, they bait their hook with a lamb or
Kid, as is reported by Aelianus; and the auncientes were wont by inspection
into the intrals of Kiddes, to declare or search into things to come, as
Gyraldus amongst other their superstitious vanities rehearses.

The manifold medicinal properties of Goats come now in the end of this story
to be declared, and first of all it is to be noted, that these properties are
several, both in the Male, female, and Kidde; and therefore they are not to be
confounded, but as the delygence

There are some which do continually nourish Goats in stables near their
dwelling Houses with an opinion that they help to continue them in health,
Plinyus The medicines arising out of male Goats.
for the ancientes ordained that a man which had been bitten or stroke by
Serpents, and could not easily be cured thereof, should be lodged in a Goats
stable. The hairs of a Goate-bucke burned and perfumed in the presence or
under a man whose genitall is decayed it cures him. Sextus.


The poulder of a Wine bottell made of a Goats skin with a little Rozen
does not only stanch the blood of a greene-wounde, but also cure the same.
The powder of the Tamariske seed, butter, and Oil* Pliny
after the head is shaven by anointing it therewith strengthens the hair
from falling off, when it grows again and cures the Alopecia, and a horn
burnt to powder and mingled with meal, Sextus
cures the chippings in the head and the scabs: for taking away the smell of
the arme-pits, they take the Horn of an old Goat and either scrape or burn
the same, then add they to it a like quantity of Mirrhe, the Goats gall, and
first scrape or shave off the hair, and afterward rub them therewith every day
and they are cured by that perfrication. Dioscorides


The blood fried in a pan, and afterward drunk with Wine, Aetius.
is a preservative against intoxications, and cures the bloody-flixe, and the
blood in a Seare-cloath is applied against the gout, and cleanses away all
Leprosies, and if the blood come forth of Marcellus
and Rozen eases the pain in the small guts; the same mixed with the marrow
of a Goat which has been fed with Lentiles cures the Dropsy, and being
drunk alone breaks the stone in the reins, and with Parsley drunk in Wine
also dissolueth the stone in the bladder, and preuenteth all such calculating
gravel in time to come.

There is a Medicine called by the Apothecaryes Diuina manus, Gods hand,
against the stone, and they make it in this manner. When Grapes begin to wax
ripe, Albertus.
they take a new earthen pot and pour into it Water, and sees the same till
all the scumme or earthy substance Creete, and Philagrius commends the
manifold benefit hereof, for he had often tried it, and with a medicine made
of an Affrican Sparrow mixed with this, he procured one to make water, and to
void a great stone which one be bathed in the warm air and so oftentimes both
the bath and the ointment be reiterated. Marcellus teaches how one may make
trial of the virtue of this blood, for if he take a Male-goate, and put him up
close seven days, feeding him in the mean time continually with baies, and
afterward cause a young Boy to kill him, and receive his blood in a bladder, and
put in the said bladder sandy stones like unto those that are engendered in the
bladder of man, within short time he shall see those stones dissolved and
scarce to be found in the bladder of blood, by which he confidently affirms,
that nothing in the World is of like power to remove the stone, but withal he
wills some superstitious observations, as namely that he be killed by a chaste
person: and on a thursday or sunday or such like: but the conclusion is that
the said blood must be dried to powder in an Oven, Polypus, one ounce of
white Pepper, one ounce of Apian, and one ounce of Loueage-seede to be given to
the party in sweet wine fasting, and having no meat in his stomach undigested,
and having digested the medicine he must eat presently.

And therefore if it be true as all antiquity and experience approves, that
the Goats blood breaks and dissolueth the Adamant stone, then much more
(says Iacobus Siluius) may it work upon the stone in a man's bladder. The
flesh of Goats decocted in Water, take away all bunches and kernels in the
body. Pliny
The fat of this beast is more Moist then a females or a kids, and therefore it
is most strong in operation, to scatter, dissolve, and resolve

Dioscorides.
It cures all fissures in the lips mixed with Goose-greace, Rozen, Pitch, and
the marrow of a Heart. Also if one be troubled with swellings in his Temples or
in his Legs, let him use of this sewet half a pound, and a pound of
Capons-greace mixed therewith, and spreading it upon a cloth like a
seare-cloth, let him apply it to the sore and it shall help mightily. Marcellus


Also when the neck of an Ox swells, it has been proved for a golden
remedy, to take and anoint it with Goates-greace, liquid Pitch, the marrowe of
a Bugle or Ox, and old Oil, and may as well be called Tetrapharmacum, as
that of Galen made of Wax, Rozen, Columella
Pitch, and Goates-sewet. Also if the blood be fallen into Oxens Legs, it
must Rasis


Two ounces of this Goates-greace and a pint of green Oil mixed together,
and melted in a pot, and infused into one that has the bloody-flixe, cures
him speedily: when the whot dung or fime of a Goat is mixed with Saffron and
applied to the gouty members Hydropicke, it works upon them a strange cure:
and some ad heerunto the stalks of Iuy beaten, Mustard Seed, and the flower of
wild Cucumber.

The Liver of this beast laid upon a man that has been bitten by a mad
Dog, causes him never to be afraid of Water: the same being sodde, yealdeth
a certain lyquor, Galen.
Myrepsus


The entralles of a Goat eaten are profitable against the falling sickness.
The Gall kills the Leprosy, al swellings and Botches in such bodies, and
being mingled with Cheese, Quicksiluer, and powder of sponge, and made as
thick as honey, takes away the spots and burles in the face.

It also rooteth out and consumes dead flesh in a wound, and also mingled with
bran and the urine of a Bull, cures the scurffe in the head. Actius also
teaches women how to conceive with child, if she dip a purple cloth in
Goats-blood, and apply it to her Navel seven days, and afterward lie with a
man in the prime and increase of the Moon: the gall of a wild Goat is
commended privately, for the help of them that are purblind, and for all
whitenes and ulcers in the eyes; and when the hairs which trouble the eyes be
pulled up, if the place be anointed with the gall of goats, the hair will
never grow any more.

The melt being sod, helps the Flix, and the Spleen taken hot out out of the
beasts belly, and applied to the Spleen of a man, does within short time
ease it of all pain, if Albertus and Rasis say, Marcellus
that if a man eat two Goats stones, and presently lie with his wife, she shall
bring forth a male child, but if he eat but one, then shall the child have
but one stone. The fyme decocted with Honny, and laid to ulcers and
swellings, dissolueth or draws them, and mingled with Vinegar, is most
profitably used to take away black spots in the face.

And if he which is sick of the falling evil do eat thereof fifteen
pills, or little Balls, it shall procure unto him much ease. If it be
mingled with Mouse-dunge, Galen.
toasted at the fire and sprinkled with Honney, and so anointed upon balde
places, where you would have the hair to grow again, and mingled with
Vinegar wherein a

The pastoral Carthaginians, to the intent that the humor flowing out at
their Childrens noses, may never hurt them, burn a vain in the crown of the
head with Wool, when they are four year old, and thereby they conceive that
they are kept and conserved in perpetual good health: and if when they burn
their children, they fell into a crampe, they eased them presently by casting
upon them the urine of goats. Herodotus.
When a man is thick of hearing, mingle together the gall of an Ox, and the
urine of a Goat, and infused into the ears, although there be in them a
very mattery substance.

Galen prescribes this potion to euacuate that Water which lies betwixt the
skin by Urine, if one drink Hysope Water and the urine of a goat: Likewise
it helps the Dropsy, and the duste of an Elephauntes tooth drunk in this
goats Urine, it dissolueth the stone in the reins and bladder, without all
fearful peril and danger.

The medicines arising out of the female goat are these, we find that the
Female-goat, Pliny.
and the land toad being sodden together, are cures of singular worth for the
diseases of all living foure-footed-beasts. The ( Magi) or wisemen say, that
the right eye of a green living Lizard, being taken out and his hedforthwith
strok off and put in a goats skin is of a great force against quartan Agues.
The ashes of a goats hide besmeared over with oil, Pliny.
takes away the spots in the face. The same ashes made of a goats hide,
recouereth the Marcellus
being rubbed with pummicestone, and mixed with Vinegar, Pliny.
is an excellent approved good remedy for the small pox

If a woman bleed overmuch at the nose, Marcellus.
let her breasts be bound with a thong made of a goats skin. The same being
sodden with the hair on it, the juice being soked up, Marcellus.
staieth the belly. It is not good for those that have the falling sickness to
sleep or lie in a goats skin, if at any time the passion moves them to
it; Pliny
yet it is hurtful for their head, by reason of the rank smell, and not for
any other particular private cause.

Coelius Aureliaenus
which being mixed with Vinegar they are good to staunch the bleeding at nose,
and you may blow in their nostrils goats hairs burnt and whole, and also
myrrh mixed with goats hairs so burnt. Aesculapius Sextus
The same also burned and mingled with pitch and Vinegar, helps the bleeding
at nose, Gallen
and being put in the nose they stir up lethargies. Marcellus. Sextus.


Pliny.
The savor of the Goats horn or of the hair does the like, Goats dung in sweet
water* does expel the stone in the body, so does the ashes of Goats hair in
like mane^, which being burned and bruised, and given in a medicine, they do
mightily help and recover the strangury. Marcellus
It is also reported that Goats horn and the hairs being burnt, will drive
away Serpents: and their ashes soked or anointed, is very good against strokes
or sti^ging of Serpents.

Plinyus.
To stay the flux in the belly, take the hairs that grow behind on the Goats
sitting place, and burn them, which being tempered with beaten Barley and oil,
must be perfumed under a man's seat. Hippocrates


Goats flesh being roasted by the fire where dead men are burnt, is good for
those that Sextus Coelius.
which is excellent to get out spots of any thing: it also very good against
those that are intoxicat with poison, and therefore must be drunk with wine;
and being sod with marrow, Marcellus
it is good against the same disease, so is the male-Goates blood. The root of
sinke-foyle drunk in wine, helps il humors. Goats blood also, either of the
male or of the female, Discorides
aswageth the inwards and the flowings or laskes of the belly: it is good for
those that have the Dropsy, being tempered with honye, and also sodden with
marrow.

Some use it against the bloody Flix and pain of the belly, being also sodden
with marrow, Pliny.


The fat of the male Goat is more faster, and therefore good for those that have
the bloody flix. Marcellinus
The substance of a Goat is fat, yet is not the fat of a Goat so moist as a
swines, but for bitings, and those that are grieved in their belly goats fat
is better then swines, not because it has more operation in it to expel the
grief, but by reason it is thick, whereas the Swines grease will run about
like oil: Galen.
neither is the fat of Kyds so warm and dry as female-Goats, neither the
male-Goats so fat as the gelded Goats, in Latin called ( Hircus) also
female-Goats fat is more binding then the ^allow of Oxen, but the males fat is
good Cantharides.) Aetius.
Being tempered with wax is takes away the stinging of Serpents, it helps
any biting or wound: If a woman's breast grieve her after her delivery of child,
let her sees husked Barley and scallions, and the fat of a male-Goate, whereof
let her drink a little. Against the ach of the eyes, take Goats fat and sheeps
together, Pliny.
with a little warm water.

Almost every greef of the body if it be no wou^d, will be more easily recouerd
by plasters, but if the grief be as it were grounded, Gallen
(or an old grief) let it be burned, and upon the place so scorched, put
Butter or the fat of a male-Goat, it will also recover and heal kibes and
Chilblanes. It helps the kings evil, so does the fat of the female-Goates
help the Collumella
The males fat mixed with Arsenicke, takes away the roughnes of the nails: it
also heals the nails of the Leprosy without any pain: it expels the
Cartharid^ns being applied with the juice of the grape that grows on a wild
Vine. This goats fat is profitable to help any about the straightnes of their
mouths or lips, being tempred with wax it allaieth sores and blisters, Pliny.
and with pitch and Brimstone it heals them, and being applied with honey and
the juice of a brambell, it cures the swellings arising in the hands or
fingers, especially in curing of fellons.

The fat of a Bull well salted, or if it be in an ach or grief, dipped it in
oil without salt, and so after the same manner is the Male-goats fat used,
which being tempered with roses, takes away the wheales or blisters that
rises in the night, being also dropped into the ears

It helps the falling sickness, putting thereto as much of the gal of Bulls,
just of the same weight, Aesculapius
and sees it together, and then lay it in the skin of the gall that it
touch not the ground, and drink it out of the water. It is also good against
the stinging of Scorpions being applied with Butter and the meal of ( Zea)
warmed and washed with red Wine.

The broth that is confected of Goats fat sodden, Dioscorides
is excellent for those that are troubled with the Pthisicke, to sup now and
then a few, also it helps the cough being tempered with new sweet wine, that
an ounce may be put in a goblet and so mixed with a branch of Rue. It being
also sodden with husked barley, eases those that have fretting in the guts.

The same also sodden with barley flower and wine made of pomegranates and
Cheese, Mar^illus
let it be given to those that are troubled with the bloody flixe, and let them
take it with the juice of husked barley.

Rasis also says, that the fat of a fierce Lion is of such singular account,
that if a glyster Dioscorides
and boiled Sunach, and so dissolved with wax, it is a most precious remedy
for the swelling of the inwards. But Goats fat does much help the griefs of
the inward parts that nothing comes forth but cold water. Pliny.
The fat of the Buck-goat many use (being sod with bread and ashes) against the
bloody flixe, and also the she-goates fat being taken out of her back alone
being a little cold, and then supped up: Other allow the fat to be sodden with
Barley flower, Cinnamon, annise, and vinegar mixed together. The same fat taken
so out of the back mixed with barley bran, and Cinnamon, annise, and vinegar,
Pliny.
of each of them alike, and sees thereof, and being strained give it the
patient that is diseased with the bloody flixe, and it shall most speedily help
him.

Marcellus
Also sodden with Goats Dunge and Saffron, and laid on the gout it asswageth
the grief.

The marrow of the Female-goate, in the forth place next after the marrow of
the Heart, the Calfe, and the Bull is commended of Dioscorides, but the last of
all is the sheeps fat. The Hearts is most renowned of all, next the Calves, then
the Buck-goats, and last of all the Female-goats. To help the grief of eyes.
Take the marrow of Goats, and annoint your eyes, and it will cure them. Goats
blood sodde with marrow may be taken against all toxicall poison.

Pliny says, that their dung being anointed with Honey, is good for the
watering or dropping of the eyes, and their marrow against aches. The blood of
Goats, their marrow,

The right Horn of a Goat is of some held to be of more effect then the other,
Pliny
which I rather hold to be superstitious, Pliny.
whatsoever other reason or secret quality the Horn may afford for the bitings
of Serpents, take Goats horn and burn the hairs of them, and the ashes of
them soked in Water, and Goats Milk with the horn, and wild Margerom, and
three cups of wine put together, and being drunk against the stinging of an
adder expels the poison. Sextus.


Plinius
and the gums soft. It is also good against the bloody-flixe, and watering of
the eyes in regard they are most usual.

Yet they neither assuage the griefs nor consume them, which are of a could
and dry nature. Hearts horn being burnt as also a Goats horn, takes away
bitings. Goats dung or the horn being burnt to ashes, and dipped in vinegar,
stops the blood. Gallen
The corrupt blood that comes out of the Liver of a Bucke-Goate is more
effectual and of a better operation, and the ashes of a Goats horn or dung
soked in Wine or vinegar Plinius
Goats Horn being burned at the end, and the pieces or scorchinges that rise
thereof, must be shaken into a new vessel until the horn be quite consumed,
then beat and bruise them with vinegar made of Sea-onyons, and anoint the
evil called Saint Anthonies fire, and it is of a miraculous operation.

^^^ius
It will make one sleep that is troubled with the weakness of his head and
watching, if it be laid under their pillow. It being mixed with bran and oil
of myrtle, it keeps the hairs fast that are falling off the head. The savor
of the Horn burned descrieth the falling sickness, so does the smell of the
intrals of a Goat or the liver eaten: likewise it raises up a lethargick man.
They use also the horns of Hearts and Goats to make white the teeth and to
fasten the gums. The same shorn or shaven into mixed Honey, represseth the flux
of the belly: In the pain of the belly perfume the shauings of the same,
mingled with oil and burned barley, the same perfume is good to be laid upon
the ulcers of horses. The hoofes of Goats are prescribed by Palladius to be
burned for the driving away of Serpents, and the dust of them put into vinegar
cures the Alopecias. The dust of their hoofes is good to Anthonies fire. Burn
the foot of the Goat with the horn, and reserve the dust thereof in a box,
and when you will use it wette the place, first with Wine, and afterward cast
on the powder.

The juice of a goats head sod with hair, is commended for burstnesse in the
belly, and the ancient Magicians gave the brain of the goats to little infants
against the falling sickness, but pressed through a gold ring, the same
cures carbunckles in the belly being taken with Honey.

If the body or head be rubbed with that Water or meat which falls out of
the mouth of a goat, mingled with honey and salt they kill all kind of Lice,
and the same

The Liver of the Female-goate sodde and eaten is given against the falling
evil, and takes from the conuulsion, and with the liquor thereof, after it is
sod it is good to anoint the pur-blinde eyes, Galen. Dioscorides
also it is good to hold the eyes open over it while it seetheth, and to
receive into them the fume, and the reason heerof is because that goats see as
perfectly in the night as in the day time, and therefore Celsus says, that
this medicine is most agreeable to them that cannot see at all in the night, as
it happens to women whose monthly courses are stopped, and then it is good for
them to anoint their eyes

If a woman in travel or with child be swollen up, let her take a Goats liver
rolled in warm ashes, Trallianus
and let her eat it in four days, and drink old wine thereunto, so shall she
be delivered. The gall is contrary to all poisoned Witchcraft made upon the
rusticke Weasill, and if the Kings evil be daily touched therewith at the
beginning, it will keep it from ouer-spreading, Pliny.
and with beaten Alum it disperseth scabs: The old Magicians were wont to say,
that when a man rubbed his eyes when he lay down, and put it underneath his
pillow, Marcellus.
he should sleep soundly, it drives away scabbes in the head if it be mingled
with fullers chaulke, so as the hairs may dry alittle, and the same with Honey
helps the eyes, Serenus: Hybt aei mellis succi cum fell caprino
Subueniunt oculis dira caligine pressis.
The Physicians in application hereof to the cure of eyes take many ways, and
mix it with other drugs, as when they give it against whiteness in the eyes
with Hellebore, against wounds and pin and webs with wine, and against the
broken tunicles with a woman's milk, and therefore Rasis and Albertus do justly
call the gal of a goat an eie-salue, and also being instilled into the ears
when they are full of pain, it cures them, first mingling it with Honey in an
earthen sheard, Marcellus.
and so infusing it into the ear, and shutting it in with a little wool.

Also all the pains in the ears are cured by the stalks or juice of leekes,
gall of Goats, and sweet water; and if there be any rupture in the ear then
use therewith a Woman's milk, or warm oil of roses: likewise against the
cankers in the gums, and the Squinancy it is profitable to use it with Honey.
For all tumors or swellings in the neck, take equal quantities of this gal,
of Goose-grease, and the yolke of an Egg, and these being all mingled together
let the offended place be rubbed therewith.

The same with the juice of Cyclamyne and a little alum looseneth the belly,
Marcellus
and Wool being well dipped therein and bound to the Navel of the belly,
expels the worms, it cures the faults in the seat by anointment, it has
also another virtue in it expressed by the Languidus antiquo purgatur penis
Iaccho.
Ac super illi nitur foecundae fell capellae.
The melt sod cures the bloody-flixe, and the bladder burnt and given in
posset drink is good for them that cannot contain urine in their sleep,
Sextus
and the secunds of a female goat being drunk in wine of women after their
delivery, Plinius
eiecteth and casts forth their secunds also. The milk is many ways
available, for Demcerates the Physician in the recovery of Confidia the
daughter of Seruilius which had been Consul, used the milk of Goats along
Columella
mixed with this milk against a quartane Ague, and when young lambs were
sick, the shepherds cured them by infusing into their chaps the milk of
goats: the powder of Betony drunk out of Goats milk stays bleeding.
Plinius


The holy fire is a disease of sheep almost incurable, because if any remedy
do but touch them, they fall mad: but they only in this Malady admit for the
recreation or remedy goats milk. The root of the greater Siler decocted in
Goats milk; cures those cold vstions in the flesh or belly, when the place
looks black or loses sense: and Aesculapius taught his followers and
patients to drink it against the ytche, or any biting, and if at any time
there be any strain in any member of the body, so that the Article seems to
decline and loose his former strength and humor, it is recovered again by
binding unto it lyne-seede sod in Goats milk. Funerius advises to wash the
face therewith that the beauty of it may be more splendant. Take seven
Sea-crabs and being beaten to powder mingle them with one pint of Goats milk
and a cup of Oil, and so strain them diligently, and infuse them into a
Horses mouth which is sick of the headache and it shall cure him.

The milk also by the counsel of Philistion with the juice of Cabages, Salt,
and Honey, is given against the shortness of breath, and if the right eye of a
Chamaelion be pulled

The fat of a Bull mixed with this milk and infused into the ears, cures
their mattery evils, and causes them to hear more assuredly and fiermely. The
gummes of children anointed therewith, causes their teeth to come forth with
less pain, and it fasteneth the loose teeth by often rubbing: the corners in
the throat, and the arteries are delivered from exulcerations by gargarizing
this milk, either warmed at the fire, or else as it comes forth of the vdder.

The seed of Cresses decocted in this milk and drunk, Plinyus Marcellus
eases the pains in the stomach, and also purges being mixed with salt and
Honey. Marcellus prescribes this excellent Mecis, beat them altogether and
give them to the patient fasting, Hippocrates
and so let him walk a good while till the mdicine be wrought in his body, and
if a woman be with child and oppressed with headache or have an Ague, she may
safely take this milk sod with Honey.

The Physicians make a special drink of this milk, which they call Schiston;
it is sod in a new earthen pot, and has put into it the branches of a
fig tree, and so many cups of sweet water, as there were pintes of milk, and
when it boyleth, keep it from seething over, by putting into it a silver
vessel with cold water, and being taken from the fire, divide it into many
vessels till it be cold, so the whay will part from the milk: and some take the
whay and sees it again till the third part be only left, and afterward set
it abroad in the Sun to cool, and this may be safely drunk five days
together (every day a pint) at five several times, against the falling evil,
melancholy, palsies in Leprosies, gowtes or pains in the Articles, and the
sickness of the liver, which is like to a plereusie. Or let him drink the
Goats milk, the third part thereof mingled with honey (as Hippocrates
prescribes) Mathrum (as Serenus counsels) in this verse: -- Stomacho
medentur
Semina Mathrifactae cum lacte capella.
A draught of Goats milk sodden with mallows, and a little salt put to it,
represseth the gripings of the belly, Plinius
and if you put a little rennet unto it, it will be more profitable. Goats milk
tempered with rennet, before it be altogether strained, while it is warm, it
must be Marcellus
and a little rennet of a kid (as much as a nut kernel is) which being tempred
with the hand, let it be given to the patient, laboring with the bloody flix,
before it be strained, for the space of three days. Let this drink be given
one that is fasting about the time he rises, and being boiled, put sufficient
Barley flower to it, Marcellus.
and being in like manner like pap or pottage, you must give it to the patient
to drink for the same disease.

Goats milk being sodden half away, may be given to those that have the
bloody flix. If they that be troubled with fretting of the guts, and the flix,
are weakened by reason of their often going to the stool. Plinius


The broth of a fat Hen sod with Butter or goats milk, or Sheep, warmed
by it Amylum, Marcellus
being a kind of meat, three months old, into as much goats milk sod as you
shall think fit, and so give it the patient by svppository means for the
bloody Flix. Oxen, Dioscorides
Sheep, or goats milk, staieth the exulcerations and flowings of the belly,
so it be sod on the coals, after the use of glisters, if a man's secret
inwards do abound with filth, but if not after the foments be laid to the roots
and stock of the yard, fresh goats milk must be applied about the measure
Hemian and no less, but it must not be done altogether but a part. The next
day let the milk sees til the one half be diminished, still taking away that
which is vpermost (I mean the skin or froth that gathers in settling) and
so Aeti^s.


For the risings and flowings of the belly and the flix, it is very good to get
cows milk or Goats, as is before mentioned of the Cow. Panicke being sod in
goats milk, helps the belly, being taken twice a day, and so it is good for
the fretting of the guts. Old bread tempered with goats milk, Plnyus
being given those that have the flux in their belly twice a day, in manner of
supping, it is a present help.

The juice of planted pease, soked with goats milk, helps the lask of the
belly. The melt is good with goats milk, after one has fasted two days, let
him drink goats milk, that are fed with Iuy, without any other kind of
meat, for three days together.

They that are troubled with the pain of the melt the best remedy is this: let
milche goats be kept fasting three days, and in the third day let him eat
Iuie only, and let them be milked before they drink, Pliny
and let the fasting patient grieved about his melt, take three sextaries Warm
of that milk, so soon as she is milked, and so let him drink it the space of
three days, during which time he shall not eat nor drink any other meat, and
it shall help him maruailously. Marcellus
He that has the consumption of the Spleen, let him drink the whay of Goats
that are fed with Iuy. Goats milk also half sodden, so it be of them that
feed on Iuy only, it may be given to children that are troubled with the
pain in the melt. A drink made of Goats milk and rennet put to it (as cheese
is acustomed to be made) and given to those that have the Dropsy, Aesculapius
they shall be helped. Also Goats milk kills the worms. Sextus.


Those that are troubled with the grief of the reins, let him take three cups
of Cretian sod in wine, and so much of Goats milk, and three and thirty grains
of Cowcumberseed, Anatolius says, Amitolins.
that a porenger full of Goats milk, with as much Amylum, which is as much as
three porengers of Sheep milk, and three ounces of oil, all which well
tempered together must be given through a horn to a horse that pisseth blood,
and it will remedy the same: and Polygonius says, that goats milk and Amylum
with three Eggs and the juice of pellitory, is good for the same disease in
horses. Pelagonius.
The meal of Bettony soked out of Goats milk stays the blood dropping out of
the paps. Pliny.
Physicians do drink certain medicines made of goats milk that increase
Venus. Marcellus.


The men of Thessalia drink another root of a certain herb (called Orchim)
being softer and nothing inferior with Goats milk to stir up men to carnal
copulation, and Ragwort (as some call it) being given to women with child, it
makes them that they cannot conceive, being of watery condition: against which
Goats milk soked with honey, is an excellent remedy.

If the hinder parts that are somewhat fleshy stand further out then the rest,
and open, Sextus
anoint them with Goats milk warmed. If any man's Sheep be sick, Innominatus
let him take Goats milk mingled with Wine, and so let him give it them to
drink. If Lambs be troubled with Agues or sickness, let goats milk be
given them thorough a horn.

Cheese made of goats milk is an excellent help for those that have drunk
Miselden. Collumella


This same cheese when it is new, so it be well pressed and no whay left in it,
and mixed with honey, is most excellent against the quartan Ague. Serenus.
Goats cheese also represseth all dolors and punctions, and being soft and new,
and made with honey, Pliny.
and covered with a woollen or linen cloth, takes away the puffing up of the
flesh. It being dried with scallions, you may anoint Saint Antonies fire with
it. Being dried out of Honey and Vinegar, Aesculapius Pliny
(when men do bath) without oil, it may be anointed on black wheales. That
which is

For the grief of a man's yard, sees goats cheese and honey, of a like
quantity in a poulteise made in a new earthen pot, and so laid thereunto twice
a day, but first wash the place with old wine that is to be cured. It is good
for Carbuncles, and if a woman be sick of her womb, and troubled with a
Febre, let her take the fifth part of half a Chaeuix, Pliny.
of Pettispurge, Chaeuix of goats cheese scraped, being tempered with old
wine, and afterward being sodden let her sup it up, and if she have the Flix
let her drink the black wild grape, and the rind of a Pomegranat, and a
nutkernel, and the rennet of a Bull, these being washed in black wine, goats
cheese, and wheat flour put them together.

Discorides
The fime or dung of such females as live in the Mountains drunk in wine,
cures the falling evil; and in Galens time they gave the trindles of Goats in
Wine against the Iaundise, and with the fime they annoint them that have the
flux, and made into a poltesse is very helpful against the Collicke: but
Marcellus prepares it on this manner: first it must be steeped in water and
strained, with sixty grains of pepper, and three porringers of sweet water,
and so divide it into three equal potions to be drunk, in three several days:
but the body of the patient must be first washed or anointed with Acopus, so
as all perfrictions by sweat may be avoided.

Aetius against the hardness of the Spleen prescribes a plaster made of
Goats dung, Archigenes
they sees it in the urine of a Boy which has tasted of poison, or in the
Goats urine, till it be as thick that it will stick and cleave, and it will
purge all by the belly, and also the shauings of hides which Corriers make, sod
in vinegar with Goats dung is accounted in England a singular medicine to
repress all hydropick swelling in the legs and belly.

The fime of Female-goates drunk in sweet water expels the stone out of
the bladder. Plinea
Against the pain in the hippes, the Arabians prescribe it in this manner,
which they call adustion (betwixt the thumb and the hand) there is a hollow
place wherein they put Wool diped in Oil; afterward they set on fire little
piles of Goats dung in the same Aetius and Cornarius say, that this adustion
for the hips was used in the ancient time diverse ways, and some on this
manner, holding the burning dung in a pair of tongues unto the leg of that side
where the pain lies, until the adustion be felt in the hip, and this course
used Dioscorides.

Quintillius used another way, which was this: he first of all heat the Goats
dung, and therewithal burned the soft and fleshy part of the great toe, near
unto the Nail, until it pierced to the sick place; after such vstians, they
lay beaten leaves of leekes with salt to

The same with Saffron and Goats sewet, applied to the gowt, heals it, or
else musterdseede, stalks of Iuy, Bittony, or the flower of Wild cowcumber,
the same drunk with spikneard, or other spice, stirs up a woman's flowers,
and causes easy deliverance, but being beaten into meal and vinegar and
laid to a woman's belly, with wool and Frankcumcense, stays all fluxes and
Issues: also little bals of the same with hairs and the fat of a Sea-calfe
wrought altogether and perfumed under a woman, has the same effect, or else
the Liver of a Sea-calfe and the shauings of Ceder wood.

Pliny affirms, that the midwiues of his time stayed the greatest flux of
the belly Vegetius Anatolius
Goats blood with vinegar cures the same, and if an Apletree have worms in it,
the dung of a Goat and the urine of a man laid to the root drive them away.

The urine of Goats blood drunk with vinegar, resists the stinging of
Serpents, and also being laid to bunches and swellings in the flesh, in what
part soever they be, it disperseth and expels them. Against the stiffness of
the Neck which they call Opisthotonos, Take urine of a Goat and the heads of
scallions bruzed to juice, and infuse them into the ears; and the same mingled
with the oil of roses and a little Nytre, cures the pain

Against natural deafness take the horn of a Goat newly slain, and fill
it with the urine and hang it up nine days in the smoke, Gallus
and afterward use it. The urine of a goat made warm, and instilled into the
ears, and the fime anointed with fat is good for the veins of the throat.
For the Dropsy drink one spooenfull mingled with Cardus, and warm it at the
fire, also mingled with wine or water, it expels the stone in the bladder,
according to the saying of Serenns: Nec non obscaenus caprae: potabitur humor
Obruat hic morbum tabefact aque saxa remittit.


The same Physician prescribed Goats trindles to be drunk in wine against the
Iandis, and to stay the fluxes of women, the same dung tied in a cloth about
unquiet children, especially women-kind, makes them more still, being mingled
with wine, cures the bitings of vipers, and the dung taken out of the Goats
belly and anointed upon the sore, cures it with all speed: the same virtue
it has to heal men wounded by Scorpions,

Being laid upon a wound it keeps it from swelling, it has the same virtue
mingled with Barley-meale, but heals the kings evil, It is used also to
ripen sores and ruptures, being applied to the suppurations, it keeps down
the swellings of women's breasts, being first dried and then steeped in new wine,
and so laid to the sore, for it disgesteth inflammation.

When the eyelids be thick, hard, red, and bald, take goats dung and Mouse
dung, of either a like quantity burned, and twice so much of the powder of the
Grecian canes with honey Atticke, and anoint them therewith; being heat with
Vinegar and put upon Mytiae has proved, as sheep dung also does: laying it
round about the wound it cures burnings and draws out heat, with oil of
roses and Vinegar (as Gallen writes.)

It is also commended for broken joints, because it suffers them not to swell
or start out being once set, therefore it must be used with Honey and wine, and
it has the same operation for broken ribs, for it opens, draws and
heals: also it being decocted with Vinegar, it heals the pains in the
nerves although they be ready to rot, and eases the pain in the joints: the
fime of a fat Goat cures the gout, and the contraction or shrinking Arnoldus
says) it cures the Fistula, making a plaster thereof with the meal of
Beans, Wine and Leigh, which has been seen wonderfully to dry up the
Fistula. With Oxymel and Vinegar it cures the Aleptius but it must be burned.

Take seven bals of Goats dung, work them in Vinegar, then anoint your
forehead therewith, and it eases the pain in the head, or else mingle it with
oil of roses, and spread it upon a cloth laying it to your Temples, change it
morning and evening, and you shall find great ease thereby.



The remedies out of a wild Goat.
The same virtue which are in the Goats before spoken of, do also belong to the
wild Goats, the blood takes away bunches in the flesh, and being mingled with
Sea-palme, causes the purblind and the webs in the eye, and generally it has
the same properties in every part as the tame goats before spoken of.

The like may be said of the Kyds or young goats, and first of all a Kyd being
slit assunder alive, and his warm flesh laid to a poisoned wound, does most
assuredly heal the same. Others take the warm flesh of kyds and perfume them
with hair, by the savor whereof they drive away Serpents: the skin newly
pulled off, and put upon the body beaten with stripes, takes away their
pain: others again use it against the Crampe, and not without reason, for the
tender skins of Lambs and Goats, being sprinkled or dipped in Warm Oil,
gives very much strength and patience, to endure the convultion.

Praxagoras prescribes the flesh against the falling evil, and by gargarizing
the broth when it was sod, cures the Quinsie and soreness of the throat.
Demetrius says, that the brain being drawn thorough a gold ring and given to
a Hawke which has the fallinge sickness, it will work admirably upon her. The
blood being dried and decocted with marrow, is good against all intoxicat
passions and being mingled with sharp Vinegar before it be congealed, it
helps the spitting of blood: the same being eaten, cures all kind of
Flixes, being taken three days together. Gallen rehearses in the Antidot of
Vrbane, among other things the blood of Kyds to draw the dead young ones out
of the dammes belly.

With the fat there is an ointment made with rose water, to heal the
fissures of the Pomato) because it smells like Apples, they put also into it
musk and Rose Water, a pound of kyds sewet, and warm it in a Bath until all
be white, and so wash it with the said rose water, and afterward repose it in
a glass: The ointment which is caled ( Vnguentum album) is like unto it: the
ashes of the thighs of a kyd, heals burstnes and stancheth blood: the rennet
is also commendable against Hemlocke, or toad-stoole, and against all the
poisonfull strokes of Sea-beasts; Being drunk in Wine it stays bleeding, and
refreshes excreations of blood; being taken with Vinegar it helps also the
flix, being drunk fasting, it has some operation to stay women's flowers. The
Stibium: likewise the bladder of a female kyd drunk in powder, helps the
inconstancy of urine: the melt laid upon the Spleen of an infant asswageth
the pain and tumors thereof; the liver is not fit for temperate men, but for
weak colliricke men.

The inhabitants of the mount Atlas do gather Euforbium, and corrupt it with
Kyddes milk, but it is discerned by fire; for the good Euforbium being burned,
yields an unacceptable savor, and so we conclude this story, with the two
Emblems of Altiatus. One against them that take much pain and make good
beginninges but evil ends, like Quod fine egregios turpi muculaueris orsus
Innoxamque tuum verteris officium
Fecisti quod Capra sui mulctraria lactis
Cum ferit and proprias calce pro fundit opes.


The other Emblem is upon a Goat, the which by her keeper was constrained to
give a young wolf suck, who afterward notwithstanding that good turn,
deuoureth his nurse: and it may be applied unto them which nourish their own
harms, and save a thief from the gallows.

Capra lupum non sponte meo nunc vbere lacto
Quod male pastoris prouida cura iubet
Ceruerit ille simul mea me post vbere pascit
Improbitas nullo flectitur obsequio.
There is a pretty comparison of a Harlottes love to a fisherman which puts
upon him a goats skin with the horns, to deceive the Sargus-fish, for that
fish loves a goat above all other creatures, and therefore the fisherman
beguileth her with a false appearance, as the flattering love of Harlots do
simple minds by fained protestations.

OF THE GVLON.
THis beast was not known by the ancients, but has bin since discovered in the
Northern parts of the world, and because of the great vorasity thereof, it is
called ( Gulo) that is, a deuourer in imitation of the Vilsruss, and the
Swedians, Cerff, in Lituania and Muscouia, it is called Rossomokal. It is
thought to be engendered by a Hyaena and a Lioness, for in quality it
resembles a Hyaena, Mathias
and it is the same which is called ( Crocuta:) it is a devouring and an
unprofitable creature, having sharper teeth then other creatures. Some think
it

When it has found a dead carkas he eats thereof so violently, that his
belly stands out like a bell; then seeks he some narrow passage betwixt two
trees, and there draws through his body, by pressing whereof, he drives out
the meat which he had eaten: and being so emptied returns and deuoureth
Muscouia, in Lituania, and most shameful of al in Tartaria.

These things are reported by Olaus Magnus, and Mathias Michou; But I would to
God that this same (more then beastly intemporate gluttony) had been
circumscribed and confined within the limets of those unchristian or
hereticall-apostaticall-countries, and had not spread it self and infected our
more ciuell and christian parts of the World; so should not nobility, society,
amity, good fellowship, neighborhood, and honesty, be ever placed upon drunken
or gluttonous companions: or any man be commended for bibbing and sucking in
wine and beer like a swine: When in the mean season no spark of grace, or
christianity, appears in them: which notwithstanding they take upon them,
being

To help their disgestion, for although the Hiena and Gulon, and some other
monsters are subject to this gluttony, yet are there many creatures more in the
world, who although they be beasts and lack reason, yet can they not by any
famine, stripes, or prouocations be drawn to exceed their natural appetites,
or measure in eating or drinking. There are of these beasts two kinds, The
kinds of Gulons.
distinguished by color, one black, and the other like a Wolf, they seldom
kill a man or any live beasts, but feed upon carrion and dead carcasses, as
is before said, yet sometimes when they are hungry, they prey upon beasts, as
horses and such like, and then they subtlely ascend up into a tree, and when
they see a beast under the same, they leap down upon him and destroy him. A
Bear is afraid to meet

This beast is tamed, and nourished, in the courts of Princes, for no other
cause then for an example of incredible voracitie. When he has filled his
belly, if he can find no trees growing so near together, as by sliding
betwixt them, he may expel his excrements, then takes he an Alder-tree, and
with his forefeete rendeth the same asunder, and passes through the midst of
it, for the cause aforesaid. When they are wild, men kill them with bows and
guns, for no other cause than for their skins which are precious and
profitable, for they are white spotted, changeably interlined like diverse
flowers, for which cause the greatest princes, and richest nobles use them in
garments in the Winter time: The skins of Gulons.
such are the kings of Polonia, Sweue-land, Goatland, and the princes of
Germany, Germany it is called a foure-footed Vulture.

OF THE GORGON, or strange Lybian Beast.
AMong the manifold and diverse sorts of Beasts which are bred Gorgon is brought
forth in that country. It is a fearful and terrible beast to behold, it has
high and thick eie-lids, The country and description.
eyes not very great, but much like an Oxes or Bugils, but all fiery-bloudy,
which neither look directly forward, nor yet upwards, but continuallye down
to the earth, and therefore are called in Greek Catobleponta. From the crown
of their head down to their nose they have a long hanging mane, which makes
them to look fearfully. It eats dea^ly and poysonfull herbs, and if at any
time he see a Bull or other creature whereof he is afraid, he presently causes
his mane to stand upright, and being so lifted up, opening his lips, and gaping
wide, sends forth Hesperia and Lybia.

The Poets have a fiction that the Gorgones were the Daughters of Medusa and
Phorcynis, Aelianus
and are called Steingo, and by Hesiodus Stheno, and Euryale inhabiting the
Gorgadian Islands in the Aethiopick Ocean, over against the gardens of Hesperia.
Medusa is said to have the hairs of his head to be living Serpents, against
whom Perseus fought and cut off his head, for which cause he was placed in
heaven on the North side of the Zodiac above the Gorgons head. The truth is
that there were certain Amozonian women in Affricke diverse from the Scithians,
against whom Perseus made War, and the captain of those women was called
Medusa, whom Perseus overthrew and cut off her head, and from thence came the
Poets fiction discribing it with Snakes growing out of it as is aforesaid.
These Gorgons are bred in that country, and have such hair about their heads
as not only exceeds all other beasts, but also poysoneth when he stands
upright. Pliny calls this beast Catablepon, because it continually looks
downward, and says that all the parts of it are but small excepting the head
which is very heavy, and exceeds the proportion of his body which is never
lifted up, but all living creatures die that see his eyes.

By which there arises a question whether the poison which he sends forth,
proceed from his breath or from his eyes. Whereupon it is more probable, that
like the Cockatrice he kills by seeing, then by the breath of his mouth which
is not competible to any other beasts in the world. Besides when the Soldiers
of Marias followed Iugurtha, they saw one of these Gorgons, and supposing it
was some sheep, bending the head continually

Marius hearing thereof sent other soldiers to kill the beast, but they
likewise died as the former. At last the inhabitauntes of the country, told
the Captain the poison of this beasts nature, and that if he were not killed
upon a sudden with the only sight of his eyes, he sent death into his
hunters: then did the Captain lay an ambush of soldiers for him, who slew him
so dainely with their spears and brought him to the Emperor; whereupon Marius
sent his skin to Rome, which was hung up in the Temple of Hercules, wherein
the people were feasted after the triumphs; by which it is apparent that they
kill with their

So that the fable of Seruius which reports that in the furthest place of
Atlas these Gorgons are bredde, and that they have but one eye a piece, is not
to be believed, except he mean, as elsewhere he confesses, that there were
certain maids which were sisters called Gorgons, and were so beautyfull that
all young men were amazed to behold them. Whereupon it was said, that they
were turned into stones: meaning that their love bereft them of their wit and
sense. They were called the daughters of Cetus, and three of them were made
Nymphs, which were called Pephredo, Enyo, and the third Dinon, so called a
Geraldus says: because they were old women so soon as they were borne,
whereunto was assigned one eye and one tooth. But to omit these fables, it is
certain that sharp poisoned Gorgon Blepen, and therefore we will follow the
authority of Pliny and Atheneus. It is a beast all set over with scales like a
Dragon, having no hair except on his head, great teeth like Swine, having
wings to fly, and hands to handle, Hyginus.
in stature betwixt a Bull and a Calfe.

There be Islands called Gorgonies, wherein these monster- Gorgons were bredde,
and unto the days of Pliny, the people of that country retained some part of
their prodigious nature, it is reported by Xenophon, that Hanno King of
Carthage ranged with his army in that region, and found there certain women
of incredible swiftness and perniscitie of foot. Whereof he took two only
of all that appeared in sight, which had such roughe and sharp bodies, as never
before were seen. Wherefore when they were dead, he hung up their skins in
the Temple of Juno, for a monument of their strange natures, which Carthage.
By the consideration of this beast there appears one manifest argument of the
creators divine wisdom and providence, who has turned the eyes of this beast
downward to the earth, as it were thereby burying his poison from the hurt of
man: and shaddowing them with rough, long, and strong hair, that their
poisoned beams should not reflect upwards, until the beast were provoked by
fear or danger, the heaviness of his head being like a clogge to restrain the
liberty of his poysonfull nature, but what other parts, virtues, or vices, are
contained in the compass of this monster, God only knows, who peradventure
has permitted it to live upon the face of the earth, for no other cause but
to be a punnishment and scourge unto mankind:

OF THE HARE.
A Hare is a four-footed beast of the earth, which the Haebrews call Arnebet,
in the feminine gender, which word gave occasion to an opinion that all Hares
were females, or at the least that the males bring forth young as well as
females: whereof we shall see more in the sequel of this story. And the Jews
Arneba, the Arabians Ernab, the Persians Kargos. Anicenna caleth it Arnebeti,
Siluaticus, Of the several name.
Arnoberi, Arnebus, and Arnaben; the Saracens Arneph, the Graecians Leporis,
Lagoos, Lagos, Lagooos, because of his immoderat lust. It is called Ptox for
his fear, and in Latin Lepus, of Leuipes, signifieng swiftness of feet, and
that it is not heard when it goes, howsoever some men derive it from Leporis
the Greek word, others derive Lagos from La, betokening euelation, and Oos
signifieng an ear, because she pricketh up one of her ears when she runs.
The Italians call it Lieuora, the French Licure, and Leurauh, Leureteau, the
Spaniards Hebre, the Germans Hass, or Haas, the Illyrians Zagitz.

Of the several kinds.
There be four sorts of Hares, some live in the mountains, some in the fields,
some in the marshes, and some every where without any certain place of abode.
They of the mountains are most swift, they of the fields less nimble, they of
the marshes most slow, and the wandering Hares are most dangerous to follow:
for they are so cunning in the ways, and muses of the field, running up the
hills and rocks, because by custom they know the nearest way, and forbearing
down hills, sometime making heads upon the plain ground, to the confusion of
the Dogs, and the dismaying of the hunter.

Of the Elyan Hares.
Pollux says, that there be certain Hares called Elymaei (almost as big as
Foxes) being blackish, of long bodies, and large white spots upon the top of
their tails; these are so called of their country (like the Elymaean Dogs.)
There be also Hares called Moschiae, so Hermolaus.
whereunto when the Dogs smell, they are said to be almost mad.

At Pisa the Hares be very great, because there they have more grateful meat
than in other places. A secret in the Mulchian Hares. Niphus.

O the contry Hare, and their several parts.




In the nether Pannonia they are much fatter and better tasted than they be in
Italy, the Italian Hare has his forelegs low, a part of his back pale or
yellowish, the belly white, the ears long: In Gallia beyond the Alps, they
are also white, and therefore some have thought that in the winter time they
eat snow: and this is certain, that when the snow melts, their color is
much altered. There has been white haired Conies whose skin was black, and
hair of their ears black. They are bred in Libia, in Scithia, and in Italy,
Vilna, Bonarus.
and Lethuanya, but they are lesser esteemed, and sold cheaper. (
Schenebergerus says) the back of a Hare is commonly russet, or like olive
color interlined with some black spots: the common Hare of the Alps never
changes color, and it is greater than the ordinary Hare. There are white
Hares also in England, and in Muscouia, there are a multitude of Hares of all
colors, but no where so many as in the desert Islands, because there are no
Foxes there to kill the young ones, or Eagles which frequent the highest
mountains in the continent, and the people that inhabit there regard not

In Athens (Maucrates says) there were no Hares, but Alseus affirms the
contrary. Hares brought into Ithaca die presently, The Hares of Ithaca.
and if they raunge a little about the country, yet return they back to the
haven where they came to land, and depart not from the shore til they be dead.
Hegesander Delphus writes, that in the reign of Antigonus, there was such a
number of Hares in Astipalea (and afterward in Leros) that the inhabitants were
constrained Leros, which at the peoples own request and care multiplied to
their great

In the next place we are to describe all the parts and members of hares, for
it is admirable to behold how every limb and part of this beast is composed
for celerity: Their several parts.
and first of all the head is round, nimble, short, and of convenient
longitude, prone to turn every way; the cares long and lofty like an Asses,
for nature has so provided, that every fearful and unarmed creature should
have long and large ears, that by hearing it might prevent his enemies, and
save it self by flight. The lips continually move sleeping and waking, and
from the slit which they have in the middle of their nose, comes the term

Whatsoever beast be borne in your flock, having that mark upon them, which
is commonly called hares-tooth, never suffer them to suck their dam, but cast
them aware as unprofitable and Bastard cattle; the neck of a hare is long,
small, round, soft, and flexible, the shoulder bone straight and broad, for her
more easy turning, her legs before soft and sound, standing a little asunder
very flexible, brother behind then before, and the hinder legs longer then the
former, a breast not narrow, but fitted to take breath in course, a nimble
back and fleshy belly, tender loins, hollow sides, fat buttockes filled up,
comely, strong and neruy loins, the forefeet very flexible, only it wants a
commodious Of their several senses
it sildome looks forward, because it goes by iumpes. The eie-lids coming
from the brows, are too short to cover their eyes, and therefore this sense is
very weak in them, and besides their overmuch sleep, their fear of Dogs
and swiftness, causes them to see the less; when they Watch they shut their
eyes, and when they sleep they open them. A secret.


Wherefore the Egyptians when they will signify and open a manifest matter,
they picture a hare sleeping. They watch for the most part all the night: when
the eyelid of a man is pulled back, so as it will not cover the ball of the
eye. The Graecians call it Lagophthalmous, that is: hares eyes, for so does
Coelius define it: it comes sometimes, Orus
Virgils verses.

Quem fuga non rapit ore Canum, non occulit vmbra
Concolor immotum sub Jove terra tegit.
The liver is so parted assunder, that a man would think there were two livers
in one body, and Pliny is bold to affirm, that in Briletum, Thirne, Propontis,
Sycynum, Bolba, and other places they are al such. Whether males bear young
like females.
Archelaus upon this occasion affirms, that a hare bears young both male
and female, so that the Gramarians know not of what sex to make it. Albertus
and Democritus are absolute in this point.

Blondus confesses he cannot tell, the common sort of people suppose, they are
one year male, and another female. Aelianus also affirms so much, and by
relation of his friend, he ventereth the matter, and says moreover, that a
male hare was once found almost dead, whose belly being opened, there were
three young ones alive taken out of her

But all this is easily answered, if a man follow the counsel of Archadius, and
look upon the secrets of nature, he shall find a most plain distinction: but
the hunters object that there be some which are only females and no more: but
no male that is not also a female, and so they make him an Hermaphrodyte.
Niphus also affirms so much, for he saw a Hare which had stones and a yard,
and yet was great with young, and also another which wanted stones, and the
males genitall, and also had young in her bellye. Rondeleius says, that they
are not stones, but certain little bladders filled with matter, which men find
in female-Hares with young, such as are upon the belly of a Beuer, wherein also
the vulgar

They are deceived which deliver by authority of holy Scriptures that hares
love to lodge them upon rocks, but we have manifested elsewhere, that those
places are to be understood of Conies. They have foreknowledge both of wind
and weather, Summer and Winter by their noses, Aelianus Their nature and
disposition.
for in the Winter they make their forms in the Sunshine,

We have showed already that their sight is dimm, but yet heerin it is true
that Plutarch says, they have Visum indefessum, an indefattigable sense of
seeing, so that the continuance in a mean degree, counteruaileth in them the
want of excellency. Their hearing is most pregnant, for the Egyptians when they
signify hearing picture a hare, and for this cause we have showed you already
that their ears are long like horns, their voice is a whyning voice, and
therefore Authors call it Vagitum, as they do a young child's, accorto the verse
of Ovid: Intus aut infanti Vagiat ore Puer. They rest in the day time, Their
time of sleep and food
and walk abroad to feed in the night, never feeding near home, either because
they are delighted with foreign food, or else because they would exercise
their legs in going, or else by secret instinct of nature, to conceal their
forms and lodging places unknown, their heart and blood is cold, which
Albertus assigns for a cause of their night-feeding: they eat also grapes,
and when they are overcome with heat, they eat of an herb called Lactuca
Leporina, and of the Romans and Hetrurians, Ciserbita, of the Venetians,
Aelianus.
Lactucinos, of the French Lacterones, that is, hares Lettuce, hares house,
hares palace, and there is no disease in this beast the cure whereof she does
not seek for in this herb. Hares are said to chew the cud in the holy
Scripture, they never drink, but content themselves with the dew, and for that
cause they often fall rotten. It is reported by Phillippus that when a hare
drunk Wine she instantly died, they render their Urine backwardes, and their
milk is as thick as a Swines, and of all creatures they have milk in vdders
before they deliver their young.

They are very exceedingly given to sleep, because they never wink
perfectly: some authors derive their name Lagon in Greek, from Laein to see,
and thereupon the Graecians have a common proverb Lagos Catheudon, a sleeping
Hare for a disembling and counterfetting person, because the Hare sees when
she sleeps, for this is an admirable and rare Work of nature, that all the
residewe of her bodilye parts take their rest, but the eye stands
continually sentinel. Of their copulation and engendring.
Hares admit copulation backewarde, and herein they are like to Connies,
because they breed every month for the most part, and that many; at that time
the female provoking the male to carnal copulation, and while they have young
ones in their belly they admit copulation, whereby it comes to pass that
they do not litter al at a time, but many days asunder, bringing forth
Carpathus, filled that Island with such abundance, that in short time they
destroyed all the fruits, whereupon came the proverb Carpathius Leporem, to
signify them which plow and sow their own miseries.

It falls out by divine providence, that Hares and other fearful beasts
which are good for meat, shall multiply to greater numbers in short space,
because they are naked and unarmed, lying open to the violence of men and
beasts, but the cruel and malignant creatures which live only upon the
devouring of their inferiors, as the Lions, Wolves, Foxes, and Bears,
conceive but very seldom, because there is less use for them in the world,
and God in his creatures keeps down the cruel and ravenous, but aduanceth

Hares do sildome wax tame, and yet they are amongst them, Hares sildom tamed.
which are neither Placidae nor Faerae, tame nor wild, but middle betwixt
both, and Cardane gives this reason of their vntamable nature, because they
are persuaded that all men are their enemies. Scaliger writes, that he saw a
tame Hare in the castle of Mount- Pesal, An example of a tame hare.
who with her hinder legs would come and strike the Dogs of her own
accord, as it were defieng their force, and provoking them to follow her.
Therefore for their meat they may be tamed and accustomed to the hand of man,
but they remain incapable of al discipline and ignorant of their teachers
voice, so as they can never be brought to be obedient to the call

It is a simple creature, having no defense but to run away, yet it is subtle,
as may apear by changing of her form, and by scraping out her footsteps when
she leapeth into her form, that so she may deceive her hunters, Aelianus.
also she keeps not her young ones together in one litter, but lays them a
furlong one from another, that so she may not loose them altogether, if
peradventure men or beasts light upon them. The subtility of hares.
Neither is she careful to feed her self alone, but also to be defended
against her enemies, the Eagle, the Hawke, The defense of the hare against her
enemies.
the Fox, and the Wolf, for she fears all these naturally, neither can there
be any peace made betwixt her and them, but she rather trusts the scratching
brambles, the solitary woods, the ditches and corners of rocks or hedges, the
bodies of hollow trees, and such like places, then a dissembling peace with her
adversaries.

Albertus
for in the night time when he falls into her footsteps, he restrains his
breath, and holds in his savor, going forward by little and little, until he
find the form of the Hare, and then thinking to surprise her, on a sudden
leapeth at her to catch her, but the watchful Hare does not take sleep after
a careless manner, delighting rather in suspicion than security, when she
pereciueth the approaching of such a guest, (for she windeth him with her
Nostrils) and thinks it better to go from home, than make a feast to her foe.

perceives, forth she goes again, forsaking her quiet sleep, for the
sauegarde of her life, and having gone so much ground as she did before, she
betaketh her to rest the second time, hoping that now she has quit her self
from her foe; but the Foxes belly has no ears, and therefore hunger is to him
like a thousand whips, or a whole kennel of hounds, forceing him forward after
his game.

The hare for her better sauegard gets up into some small tree, being sleepy
and weary through the Foxes pursuit; the Fox comes to the tree and shakes it
by the roots, and will not suffer the hare to take any rest, for he hops that
time and travel will bring her to his dish, she leapes away again, and lets
no grass grow under his feet, hoping that her heels shall deliver her from the
Foxes teeth: After follows the Fox, and at length (as Aelianus.


And on the contrary, all the labor of the Fox, like a gentle and kind
exercise for the preparing of his stomach to such a feast. The fifth and least
kind of Wolves are also enemies to hares, and the Weasill do craftily sport and
play with the hare until he have wearied him, and then hangs fast upon her
throat, and will not loose her hold, rume the hare never so fast, till at last
through want of breath and loss of blood, she falls into

The hunting of hares.
It is before expressed, that every limb of a hare is composed for celerity,
and therefore she never trauelleth but iumpeth, her ears lead her the way in
her chase, for with one of them she harkeneth to the voice of the dogs, and
the other she stretches forth like a sail to hasten her course, always
stretching her hinder-feet beyond her former, and yet not hindering them at
all, but sometimes when her ardent desire makes her strain to fly from the
dogs, she falls into the nets, for such is the state of the miserable,
that He that scapeth out of the snare, shall fall into the ditch. And this is
to be noted, that if the hare had the wit to run forth right, and never to
turn, she could not be so easily overtaken, but because of her love to the
place of her breed, there she is taken and loses her life where she had her
beginning: for she prefers that place above all other for safty. Again some
of the elder hares, as soon as they hear the Dogs, fly to the tops of the
high mountains, for they more easily run up the hill, then down.

Wherefore the hunter must studiously avoid that disadvantage, and keep her
down in the valleys. In paths and high ways she runs more speedily,
wherefore they must

The dogs first of all go from them carelessely, because they cannot see them
through the trees, but suffer them to run in the woods following a far off by
the scent, until at last they get the sight of her, and then through their
better exercise and skill, easily over take her: but the campestriall or
fielde-hare being leaner of body and oftener chased, is taken with more
difficulty, by reason of her singular agility, she therefore when she begins
her course leapeth up from the ground as if she flew, afterward passes through
brambles and thick bushes with all expedition, and if at any time she come into
deep grass or corn she easily delivers her self and slideth thorough it.
And as it is said of the Lions, that with their tails they stir up their
strength and courage, so are the ears of this beast like Angels wings, ships
sails, and rowing Oars, to help her in her flight; for when she runs, she
bends them backward and uses them instead of sharp spurs to prick forward
her dulnes, and in her course she takes not one way, but makes heads like
laborinthes to to circumvent and trouble the dogs, that so she may go whether
she will, always holding

The younger hares by reason of their weak members, tread heavier upon the
earth then the elder, and therefore leave the greater savor behind them: and
in ancient time if the Hunters had taken a young Leuerit, they let her go
again in the honor of Diana. At a year old they run very swift, and their
savor is stronger in the woods then in the plain fields.

The Hare is followed by the foot and so discryed, especially in soft grounds
or high ways, but if they go to the rocks, to the mountains, or to the hollow
places, they are more uncertain, if they lie down upon the earth (as they love
to do) in red fallow grounds, they

When they are started in the plain fields they run far, but in the Woods they
make short courses: If they hear the Dogs, they raise themselves on their
legs and run from them, but if fearful immagination oppress them, as
they oftentimes are very sad and melancholy, supposing to hear the noise of
Dogs where there are none such sturring, then do they run too and fro,
fearing and trembling, as if they were fallen mad.

Their footsteps in the Winter time are more apparent then in the Summer,
because as the nights be longer, so they travel farther: neither do they smell
in the winter Mornings so soon as it is day until the frost and ice be
thawed, but especially their footsteps

They which will go forth to hunt or take pleasure in that pastime, must rise
early, least they be deprived of the smell of her foote-steps, so shall not
the dogs be able any way to find the Hare, nor the hunters their game and
pastime: for the nature of the footstep remains not long, but suddenly in a
manner vanishes away every hour. Again, they must set the hills and rocks,
the rivers, and also the brooks with nets and gins, thereby as it were stopping
up the starting holes, paths, and ways, wherein the hare for the most hereof
is after the Sun rising, and not in twy light or break of the day, least the
nett^s be set near the Hares form, and she be scar^ed away, but if they be
set a far off, there is no danger of her departure after the Sun is up,
because then she gives her self to sleep: the nets must be set on this
manner, let the rodes be pitched upright, fastening their snares to the tops,
raising the net in the middle, and hang a long stone at one side, that when
the Hare is in the net she may not go out again. When the Hare is raised, he
which follows her to the nets, must drive her in with great cry, and being in
the net, he must gently restrain the Dogs, and make signification to the
hunter that she is taken, or else if it fail, let him show the contrary.

The keeper of the nets must keep silence, least by hearing of his voice she
be auerted, and the hunter must take the Dogs and go to the form, there to
start the Hare; and the fashion was in ancient time among the Pagans, first of
all to call upon Apollo and Diana, (their immagined Gods of hunting) to
speed their sport, to whom they promised part of their game. But when the dog
is sent forth, and after much winding and casting about, falls into the
footsteppe of the Hare, then let him loose another, and seeing them run in
one course, uncouple all the hounds, let him follow after, speaking to his
dogs by name, saying now A, then B. Hoika C. and such like Words of Art, not
pressing them too eagerly at the beginning, but gently encoraging them to the
pursuit.

The Dogs take this for a sign of joy, and being glad to gratify their
masters, run along with gallant cry, turning over the doubtful footsteps, now
one way, then another, like the Io Dogs, there boys, there Io, A, Io, B, Io,
C, and the shortest word is fittest to applawde the Dogs.

Let the hunter also run after, so as he never meet the Hare and trouble the
hounds, the poor Hare gets her out of sight, and runs to the place where she
was first started, but O Oha, O ohe, that the game is at an end, and then call
the Dogs by name: If the Hare run far, and stand long on foot, and if the
dogs pass over the Hares footsteps and discry them not, then must the hunter
recall them with a peculiar hunting term, and lead them to the place, or
casting about it as near as he can, rebuking the Dogs that range at
uncertainties, and exhorting them that be diligent; who when they have found
the footings again, run on as before, with all alacrity. In the mean season let
the hunter stand still til the dogs do infalliably demonstrat unto him that
they have found the game again, then let the hunter proceed as before,
exhorting his dogs to the sport, and if it last al day, the hunter must regard
that he restrain and keep the Dogs to the wearyed Hare, least if they start
a fresh one, their labor be

Having so done, let him leave her, and seek another before the snow be melt,
and the footings dashed, having respect to the time of the day, that so he may
enclose and take them before the evening: then let him draw his nets round
about them, compasing the whole plat wherein she rests, and then raise her
from her stool: if she avoid the net, he must follow her by the foot unto her
next lodging place, which will not be far off, if he follow her close, for the
snow does weary her and clot upon her hinder feet, so as the hunter may take
her with his hand, or kill her with his staff.

Blondus shows another way of taking Hares: The hunters spread and divide
themselves by the untilled and rough wais, leading a Greyhound in a slip,
beating the bushes, hedges, and thorns, and many times sending before them a
quick smelling Hound, which raises the Hare out of her muse, and then let go
the Greyhound with hunting terms and cries, exhorting him to follow the game;
and many times the Dogs tear the

Others again lie in wait behind Bushes and trees to take the Hare on a
sudden, and some in the vineyards, for when they are fat and resty, they are
easily overtaken, especially in the cold of winter. Cyrus (as appears in
Zenophon) was taught to make ditches for the trapping of Hares in their course,
and the Eagles and Hawks watch the Hare when she is raised and hunted by the
hounds, and set upon her on the right side, whereby they kill and take her, so
that it is true which was said at the beginning, that Hares are hunted by men
and beasts.

Having thus discoursed of hunting and taking of hares, Of parks and warrens of
Hares.
now it follows also in a word Grapaldus says, that the first Roman that
ever enclosed wild beasts, was Fuluius Herpinus, and Gillius says that Varro
had the first warren of Hares: the manner was (says Columella) that Richmen
possessed of whole Towns and Lordships, near some village, enclosed a piece of
land by paile, mudwall, or bushe, storing the same with diverse wild beasts,
and such a one there was in the Lordship that Varro bought of Marcus Piso in
Tusculanum: and Quintus Hortentius saw at Lawretum a wood enclosed, containing
fifty Akers, wherein were nourished all sorts of wild beasts, within the
compass of a wall.

Quintus Althea commanded his forester to call the beasts together before him
and his guestes sitting at supper, and instantly he founded his pipe, at the
voice whereof there assembled together a great company of all sorts, to the
admiration of the beholders. Quintus Fuluius had a Park in Tarquinium, wherein
were included not only all the beasts before spoken off, but also wild
sheep, and this contained forty Akers of ground: besides he had two other.
Pompaeius erected a Park in France, containing the compass of three thousand
paces, wherein he preserved not only Dear, Hares, and Connies, but also
Dor-mise, Bees, and other beasts; the manner whereof ought to be thus; first
that the walls or pales be high, or close iointed, so as neither Badgers, nor
Cattes may creep through, or Wolves, or Foxes, may leap over: Wherein ought
also to be bushes, and broad trees for to cover the beasts against heat and
cold, and other secret places to content

Concerning the use of their skins, in some countries they make sleeves and
breeches of them, especially lynings for all outward cold diseases. The civil
use of their several parts.
Heliogabalus lay upon a bed filled with flew or wool of Hares, for then that,
there is nothing more soft, for which cause the Martial: Inter aues Turdus si
quis me iudice certet
Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus.


In ancient time (as Coelius says) the Brittons were forbidden to eat Hares,
like as the Jews by the law of Moses, Leu. 11. Deuteronomy. 14. Plutarch inquireth
the reason why the Jews worship swine and Hares because they did not eat
their flesh: whereunto answer was made, that they abstained from Hares, because
their color, ears, and eyes, were like asses; wherein the ignorance of Gods
law appeared, for they abstained from Hares at Gods commandment, because they
were not clouen-footed, for the Egyptians accounted all swift creatures to be
partakers of divinity.

Their flesh ingendereth thick blood, therefore it is to be prescribed for a
dry diet, for it binds the belly, procures urine, and helps the pain in
the bowels: but yet it is not good for an ordinary diet, it is hot and dry in
the second degree, and therefore it nourishes but little being so hard, as
Gallen witnesses.

The blood is far more whot then the flesh, it is thin, and therefore
watery like the blood of all fearful beasts; The blood and flesh eaten
the hinder parts from the loins are most delicate meat, called in Latin
Pulpamentum, it was wont to be dressed with salt, and Coriander seed, yet the
forepart is the sweeter, for the manner of the dressing whereof I leave to
every man's humor. It was once believed that the eating of the hinder loins of
a hare would make one fair or procure beauty, whereupon Martial received a
hare from Gellia a friend of his with this message: For mosus septem Marce
diebus eris. And he retorted the jest in this manner upon Gellia; Si me non
fallis si verum (lux mea) dicis
Edisti nunquam Gellia tu leporem.
Lampridius writes that a certain Poet played upon Alexander Seuerus the
Emperor for eating* hares flesh, which made him fair, whereas in truth he
was very black; In this manner; Pulchrum quod vides esse nostrum regem
Quem Syrum suum detulit propago
Venatus facit, and lepus comesus
Ex quo continuum capit leporem.
The Emperor seeing those verses, for Emperors having long ears and hands,
made answer unto them as follows; Pulchrum quod put as esse vestrum regem
Vulgari, (miserande) de fabella.
Si verum putas esse non ^rascor
Tantum tu comedas velim lepusculos
Vt fias animi malis repulsis
Pulcher, ne inuideas liuore mentis.
If any man find fault with the Emperors verses, Erasmus has already answered
the objection, that Kings and Emperors are not subject to laws of versesieng,
besides his answer was in Greek and this is but translated.

The eating of hares procures sleep, and thus much for the flesh and parts.
The Epethites of a Hare expressing their natures are, The epithits of Hares
Eared, trusting their feet, fearful, careful, fruitful, flying, raging,
vnhorned, little, crafty, tender, sharp-smelling, swift, whining, and
wandering, beside many other Greek names. When Xerxes gathered his Army to go
against Graecia, Stories of monstrous Hares.
a man brought forth a Hare which fore-shewed that great Army should work no
strange effect. And another mare of three year old brought forth a hare which
spoke as soon as it was littered, biting her mother with her teeth, and
killing her Fundite iam lachrymas and suspiria miseri mortales, ego hinc abeo:
that is to say, O ye wretched mortal men weep and sigh I go away: at which
words she flew away and was never seen more.

There were present at the sight hereof seven public notaries, which called
witnesses and made instruments thereupon, (as Antonius Bautius writes in his
Epistle to Petrus Toletus of Lions in the year 1537. In December:) whereunto
the said Toletus made this answer, The days shall come (says he) except the
mercy of God prevent them, that children shall think they do obedience to
their parents if they put them to death.

They shall grieve because they were borne, and say they are adulterate, as the
Hare that was borne of the Maire. Likewise it is reported by Lisander, that
when the Corinthians refused the conduct of the Lacedaemonians, and the
Lacedaemonians besiedging the City, fell to be very much afraid, and unwilling
to scale the walls; whiles they stood in this Lisander saw, he exhorted his
Soldiers, saying; Be not afraid (O ye Spartanes) of this sluggish and
unexercised people, for you see they stir not out of the city, but suffer
Hares to lodge under their Walls; whereupon came the proverb ( Dormire
lepores submoenibus) Hares sleep under their Walls, to signify a slothful,
secure, sluggish, idle, and unthrifty people.

The Eagles of Norway lay their young ones in Hares skins, which themselves
pull off. There is also a bird in Scithia, about the bigness of a Bustard,
which brings forth two at a time, and keeps them in a Hares skin which
she hangs upon a bough Hares were dedicated to love, because ( Xenophon
says) there is no man that sees a Hare but he

They say the city Bocas of Laconia was builded by a sign of good fortune
taken from a Hare, for when the inhabitants were driven out of their country
they went to the Oracle to desire a place to dwell in, from whom they received
answer, that Diana should show them a dwelling place: they going out of their
country a hare met with them which they consented to follow, and there to
build where the Hare should lodge, and they followed her to a myrtle tree,
where the hare hid her self, in which place they builded their city, and ever
afterward retained with veneration a myrtle tree. Pausanius
And thus I will conclude this morrall discourse of hares, with that Epigram of
Martial made upon occasion of a hare that in sport passed through the mouth
and teeth of a tame Lion, saying that she was ambitious Non facit ad saeuos
cernix nisi prima leones
Scilicet a magnis ad te descendere tauris
Desperanda tibi est ingentis gloria fati
Quid fugis hos dentes ambitiose lepus
Et quae non cernunt frangere colla velint
Non potes hoc tenuis praeda sub host mori.


The powder of a hare with oil of myrtle, dryueth away pain in the head, and
the same burned cures the cough: the powder thereof is good for the stone in
the bladder: The medicines of Hares Pliny.
also Sextus says, he made trial of it by putting a spoonefull of the powder
into Water wherein was a sand stone, and the same stone did instantly melt and
disolue: so likewise a young hare cut out of the dams belly and burnt to
powder, has the same operation. A wastcoat made of hare skins straighten the
bodies of young and old: also the same dipped in oil laid to the sore places
of a horses Legs where the skin is off by over reatching, it often cures
the sore: the blood taken warm out of the body amendeth Sun burning,
freckles, pimples, and many other faults in skin and face; which Celsus
prescribes to be done first by washing the place many Serenus: Cygnaeos
adipes hilari miserto lyaeo,
Omne malum propere maculoso ex ore fugabis
Sanguine vel leporis morbus delabitur omnis.
It also cures and takes away the thick skin of the eye, it adorneth the
skin, produces hair in able places, and eases the gout.

Or no cutim, perduco pilos and sedo podagrani
Sanguine si fuerint membra perunctameo.
It being fried, helps the bloody-flixe, ulcers in the bowels, an old laske,
and takes away the poison of an arrow: It being anointed upon a whot outward
ulcer it ripeneth it. After a bath, it cures a great leprosy by washing. The
rennet of a Hare staieth looseness, the flesh is profitable for ulcers in the
bowels, it breaks the stone being beaten, and being decocted like a Fox
eases the gout and the shrinking up of the sinnewes. The fat with the flowers
of beans beaten together, draws thorns out of the flesh; If nail stick
Andreas reports to Gesner that he has often heard that the sewet of a Hare
laid to the crown of a woman's head, expels her secunds, and a dead child
out of the womb. The powder made of this wool or hair stauncheth bleeding, if
the hairs be pulled off from a live Hare, and stopped into the nose.

The powder of the wool of a Hare burned, mingled with the oil of Mirtles,
the gal of a Bull, and Alum warmed at the fire and anoint it upon the head,
fasteneth the hair from falling off: also the same powder decocted with Honey,
helps the pain in the bowels,

Arnoldus prescribes the hair to be cut short and so to be taken into the
body against burstnesse: A perfume made of the dung and hairs of a Hare, and
the fat of a sea-calfe, draws forth women's flowers. The seed of a wild
Cowcumber, and an Oyster shell burned, and put into Wine, mingled with the
hair of a Hare, and wool of a sheep, with the flower of roses, cures
inflammations of women's secrets after their childbirth. Also Hipocrates
prescribes the shel of a Cuttle-fish to be beaten into wine and laid in
sheeps wool and Hares hair, helps the falling down of the womb of a woman
with child. If a man's feet be scorched with cold, the powder of a Hares Wool
is a remedy for it. The Gallen says that some have used the whole body of a
hare so burned and mingled for the foresaid cure, being laid in manner of a
plaster.

By eating of a hares head the trembling of the Nerves and the loss of motion
and sense in the members receives singular remedy. These things also
preserves teeth from aching: the powder of a hares head burned with salt
mingled together, rubbed upon the teeth or if ye will put thereunto the whitest
fennel, and the dried beans of a Cutle fish.

The Indians burn together the hares head and mice for this purpose. When ones
mouth smells strong this powder with spicknard asswageth the smell. The
brain is good Dioscorides and Egineta.) It also helps children to breed
teeth easily, if the gummes be rubbed therewith, for it has the same power
against inflammation, that honey and Butter has: being drunk in wine and the
stones thereof roasted and eaten, it is good Serenus.
and if the urine exceed ordinary, for staying thereof take the brain hereof
to be drunk in wine.

The tooth of a hare laid to that part where the teeth ache, eases them. Take
the mawe with the dung in it, Rasis
and wash it in old wine so as the dung may mingle therewith, and then give it
to one sick of the bloody flixe, and it shall cure him. The rennet has the
same virtue that is in a Calves or Kyds, and whereas Nicander praises it in
the first place, for the virtue it has in it against poison, Nicoon an ancient
Physician gives it the second place, Aristotle. Gallen
for it is full of sharp digesting power, and therefore has a drying quality.
It dissolueth the congealed and coagulated milk in the belly, and also clotted
blood within in the stomach more effectually, then the rennet of any other
beast, being always the better for the age.

Being mingled with vinegar, it is drunk against poison, Dioscorides
and also if a man or Beast be anointed with it, no Serpent, Scorpion,
Spider, or wild Mouse, whose teeth are venomous will venture to sting the body
so anointed or else inwardly take thereof three spoonfuls Chamaeleons, or the
blood of Bulls.

The same being drunk in vinegar or applied outwardly to women's breasts,
disperseth the coagulated milk in them: also being mingled with Snailes, or
any other shelfish, which feed upon green herbs or leaves, it draws forth
Thorns, Darts, Arrows, or Reeds out of the belly: or mingled with gum of
Franckincense, Oil, bird-lime, Marcellus.
and Bees-glew, of each an equal quantity with vinegar, it stauncheth blood
and all yssues of blood flowing out of the belly: and it also ripeneth an old
sore, according to the saying of Serenus; Being laid to the kings evil in
Lint with vinegar, it disperseth and cures it: also it heals Cankers, it
cures a quartan Ague, also mixed with Wine and drunk with vinegar, against
the falling evil and the stone in the bladder: If it be mixed with Sagapanum
and Wine Amyney, and infused into the ears, gives help, as also the pain of
the teeth. It dissolueth blood in the lights, and eases the pain of blood
congealed in your stomach: Dioscorides
when one spiteth blood, if he drink Samia and Myrtle wine, with the rennet of
a hare, it shall give him very present ease.

The later learned Physicians take a drink made of vinegar and Water, and give
it warm to eiect and expel blood out of the Lights, and if any drop thereof
cleave in the bowels, then do they three or four times together iterate this
potion, and after apply Dioscorides and other the ancients, that if the pap or
breast of a Woman be anointed therewith, it stays the sucking infantes
looseness of the belly, or else given to the child with Wine, or (if it have
an Ague) with Water.

There is says Aristotle in the rennet a fiery quality* but not in the highest
degree, for as fire dissolueth and discerns, so does this in milk
distinguish the ayery part from the watery, and the watery from the earthye:
Wherefore when one tastes an old rennet, he shall think he tastes an old
putrified Cheese, but as leaven is to bread, which hardneth joins, and
seasoneth the same, so is rennet to Cheese; and therefore both of them have
Galen affirms that he cured one of gowty tumors and swellings, by applying
thereunto old and strong putrified cheese beaten in a mortar, and mixed with
the salted fat or leg of a Swine. If a man sick of the bloody-flixe drink
thereof in a reere egg two scruples for three days together fasting, it will
procure him remedy.

For pacifieng the Collicke, drink the rennet of a Hare: the same mingled with
Goose grease, stays the incontinensie of urine, it also retains women's
flowers. If it be drunk with vinegar it helps the secunds, and being applied
with Saffron and the juice of leeks, drives a dead child out of the womb. If
it be drunk three or four days together after childbirth it causes
barrenness. There are (says Pliny) a kind of Worms which being Afocion.

Masarius says, that if a Woman drink this rennet to her meat before she
conceive with child, she shall be delivered of a Male child: and such is the
foolish opinion of them which affirm at this day, that if men eat parsley or
white buds of black yuie, it makes them unable to carnal copulation.

Aetuis
The rennet of a Hare eases and disperseth al tumors and swellings in women's
breasts, the Lights of a Hare powdered with salt, with Franckinsens, and white
Wine, helps him that is vexed with the falling sickness, if he receive it
thirty days together. Sextus ascribes the same remedy to the heart, and Pliny
commends the Lights to heal the pain in the eyes, by binding it upon the
eyes. Being drunk in powder, it cures the secrets. If the heels be troubled
with kybes they are healed with the fat of Bears; but if they be wrunge with
a cold, they are healed with the dust of a Hares hair, or the powder of the
Lights; Likewise when the foot is hurt with straight shoes, it has the same
operation. The ancient Magi took the skin of an Ox in powder, with the urine
of Boys, and sprinkled it on the toes of there feet, binding the heart of a
Hare to the hands of him that has Sextus.
in the beginning of the fit of him that is so visited. The heart of a hare
dried mixed with Franckincense or Manna in white wine drunk thirty days
together, cures the falling sickness.

Pliny.
For the pain in the belly take the same medicine, and being drunk with warm
water mingled with Samia, cures the fluxes of women: also if a man that has
the flux eat the Liver of a Hare dipped in sharp vinegar it helps him if
he be Liver sick: or if one have the falling sickness, eat the quantity of
an ounce thereof, and it helps him. The gall of a Hare, the Heart, Lungs,
Lights and liver of a Weasill, mixed together, three drams, one dram of
Castoreum, fours drams of Myrrha, a dram of vinegar and Honey beat Galen.
cures him that has a swimming or dizzinesse in his brain. The gal newly
taken forth mingled with a like portion of honey, and warm in the skin of an
onyon, and so put into the ear, gives remedy to him that can hear nothing.

If he that is sick in the melt, that is if it be over hard, swallow down the
melt of a Hare not touching it with his teeth, or seeing it with his eyes, it
cures him. The belly of a hare with the intrals tosted and burned in a
drying pan mixed with oil, and anointed upon the head, restores decayed
hairs. The raines of a hare inueterated and drunk in Wine, expels the
stone, Auicen
and being sod, cut, and dried in the sun, helps the pain in the raines, if
it be swallowed down and not touched with the teeth. The raines of a hare, and
of a Moore-henne, cures them that are poisoned by Spiders, the stones of a
hare roasted and Pliny says.) So likewise Sextus and Marcellus.

Take the anckle bone out of a live hare and hairs from her belly, there
withal make a thread and bind the said bone to him that has the Collicke, and
it shall ease him. The said bone also beaten to powder is reckoned among the
chief remedies against the stone. When women have hard travel, put it into
Creticke-wine with the liquor of penyroyall,

The fime of a hare cures scortched members, and whereas it was no small
honor to virgins in ancient time, to have their breasts continually stand out,
every one was prescribed to drink in wine or such other things, nine grains
of hares dung: the same drunk in wine at the Evening staieth coughing in the
night, in a potion of warm wine it is given to them that have the bloody flix,
likewise if a man be sick of the Collicke, and drink three pieles thereof in
sweet wine, it procures him much ease: being decocted with honey and

Asclepiades in his medicine whereby he procured fruitfulness to Noble Women,
he gave them four drams of Mirrha, two drams of Flower-deluce, two of hares
dung, confected with colli^iall water, and so put up into their bellies after
ceasing of the flowers, before they lay with their husbands. Albertus and
Raphael prescribe this medicine to help a woman that wants milk in her
breasts, Cristall, white mustard seed, and Hares dung put into broth made with
Fennel.

THE HEDG-HOG. Of the kinds of hedghogs.

FOrasmuch as there be two sorts of hedghogs one of the sea, and Kipod, which
in the 14. of Esaias, and Zepha. 2. is so translated by the Septuagints: The
several names.
Kapaz in most Haebrewe dictionaries to signify Claudere Contrahere, and
Contrahere, that is to shut up and draw together, I do rather believe that the
proper meaning thereof is a hedghog, because this beast so draws it self
together, when it is in danger

Implici tumque sinu spinosi corporis erem. The Arabians call him Ceufud, or
Coufed, the Caldeans Caupeda, the Septuagints Mugale. Siluaticus calls it
Agilium, Auicen Aduldu^, and Aliherha signifies a great Mountain Hedghog: the
Grecians Cher, and Acanthonocos, or Echinos, by reason of the pricks upon his
back. The Latins Echinus, Ericius, Ricius, Herix, and Erinatius, the Italians
Riccio, and Rizo, the Spaniards Erizo, the Portingals Ouriso, or Orizo, Cache,
because of hiding themselves: the French Herison, the Germans Igal, as in lower
Germany, in Holland, Even Yseren Vercken in English a Hedghog, or an vrchine: by
which name also we call a man that holds his Neck in his bosom: the
Italians Gess, Malax, Their place of abode.
and Illirians Azvuijer Zatho, and Otzischax. So the^ for the entrance of this
discourse we take it for granted, that Herinatius and Echinus signify one
thing, except one of them signify that kind which is like to a Hog, and the
other that kind which is like to a Dog, for they differ in place, or in
habitation: some of them keep in the mountains and in the Woods or hollow
trees, The quantitye.
and other about Barnes and houses: in the Summer time they keep near
vineyards and bushy places, and gather fruit, laying it up against winter.

The parts. Hermolaus.
It is about the biggnesse of a Cony, but more like to a Hog, being beset and
compassed all over with sharp thorney hairs, as well on the face as on the
feet: and those sharp prickles are covered with a kind of soft moss, but
when she is angered or gathers her food she strikes them up by an admirable
instinct of nature, as sharp as pinnes or Needles: these are hair at the
beginning, but afterward grow to be prickles, which is Pliny says) which
have hair like Hedghogs. It has none of these prickles on the belly, and
therefore, when the skin is off, it is in all parts like a Hog.

Albertus.
His stones are inward and cleave to his loins like as a birds, he has two
holes under his tail, to eiect his excrements, which no creature living has
beside him. His meat is Apples, Worms, or Grapes; When he finds Apples or
Grapes on the earth, he rowleth himself upon them, until he have filled all
his prickles, and then carries them home to his den, never bearing above one
in his mouth. And if it fortun that one of them fall off by the way, he
likewise shakes of all the residue, and walloweth upon them a fresh, until
they be all settled upon his back again, so forth he goes, making a noise
like a

And if he have any young ones in his nest, they pull of his load wherewithal
he is loaded, eating thereof what they please, and laying up the residue for
the time to come.

When they are nourished at home in houses and brought up tame, they drink
both Milk and Wine: Their copulation.
But there is an Herb (called Potomagiton) whereof if they taste, they die
presently. When they are in carnal copulation they stand upright, and are not
joined like other beasts, for they embrace one another, standing belly to
belly: but the prickly thorns upon their backs will not suffer them to have
copulation like Dogs or Swine, and for this cause they are a very little
while in copulation, because they cannot Erasmus says) Echinus Partum Differt,
the hedghog puts of the littering of her young which is also applied against
them which put of and defer those necessary works, which God and nature has
provided them to undergo; as when a poor man defereth the paiement of his
debt, until the value and sum grow to be far more great then the principal.

their inward (...) and di^^^^^tion
The inward disposition of this beast, appears to be very crafty and full of
suttlety, by this, because ( Licophron says) that Nauplius had a cunning
crooked wit, and was called Aristotle says, that some have held opinion,
Oppianus.
that they do naturally foreknow the chang of weather.

There is mortal hatred betwixt the Serpent and the Hedgehog, The enemies to
Hedghogs
the Serpent seeks out the Hedghogs den, and falls upon her to kill her,
the Hedghog draws it self up together round like a football, so that
nothing appears on her but her thorney pricks: whereat the Serpent biteth in
vain, for the more she laboreth to anoy the Hedghog, the more she is wounded
and harmeth her self, yet notwithstanding the height of her mind, and hate of
her heart does not suffer her to let go her hold, till one or both parties be
destroyed.

The Hehghog rowleth upon the Serpent piercing his skin and flesh, (yea many
times Multa nouit vulpes, Echinus Vero vnum magnum: That is to say, the Fox
knows many devises: to help himself, but the Hedgehogge knows but one
great one, for by rolling up her self (as before said) she opposes the
thorns of

The manner of Hedgehog is, that whenever they are hunted by men, they draw
up their Legs and put down there head to the mossy part of there belly, so as
nothing of them can be taken but there prickles: and perceiving that shift will
not serve the turn, but their case growing desperate, they render out of their
own bodies a certain urine hurtful

With the same skin flead off brushes, are made for garments, Coelius. The
eating of their flesh.
so that they complain il Massarius says) and also it is set upon a Iaueline
at the door to drive away Dogs. In ancient time they did not eat the flesh of
Hedgehogs, but now a days men eat thereof, (of them which are of the swinish
kind.) When the skin is off their bodies, they skald it a little in wine and
vinegar, afterward lard it and put it upon a Spitte, and there let it be
roasted, and afterward eaten, but if the head be not cut off at one blow the
flesh is not good.

The Epithits belonging to this beast are not many; it is called red, sharp,
maryne, volible, and rough, whereupon Erasmus said,

And thus much for the natural and moral parts of this Beast. The medicinal
parts of Hedghogs
Now follows the medicinal. Ten sprigs of Laurel, seven grains of
Pepper, and of Opponax as big as a Pease, the skin of the ribs of a Hedghog,
dried and beaten cast into three cups of Water and warmed, so being drunk of
one that has the Collicke, and let rest, he shall in perfect health; A^^ius
but with this exception, that for a man it must be the membrane of a male
Hedgehog, and for a woman a female.

The same membrane, or the body of all Hedgehogs burnt to ashes, has power in
it of clensing, digesting, and detracting, and therefore it is used by
Physicians for taking down of proud swelling wounds, and also for the clensing
of ulcers and boyles; but specially the powder of the skin has that virtue;
also it being roasted with the head, and afterward beat unto powder and
anointed on the head with Honey, cures the Alopec^as. Rasis


The same powder restores hair upon a wound if it be mingled with Pitch, and
if you add thereunto Beares-grease, it will restore unto a bald man his head
of hair again, if Marcellus
The same powder cures the Fistula, and some mingle red Snailes with this
dust, applying it in a plaster to ruptures and swellings in the cods, and
being mingled with oil by anointment, it takes away the burles in the face,
and being drunk in wine is a remedy against the pains of the raines or the
water betwixt the skin and the flesh. Aelianus


A suffumigation made of a Hedgehogs skin, under them that have their urine
stopped, by Gods help (says my Author) the stopping shall be removed, if it
proceed not from the stone, nor from an impostime. The flesh salted, dried,
and beat to powder, and so drunk with sweet vinegar, helps the pain in the
raines, the beginning of Dropsies, conuulsions, and Leprosies, and all those
affections which the Graecians call Cachectae. The Mountain Dioscorides
the meat is of better taste and does more help to the stomach, softning the
belly and provoking the urine more effectually, and all this which is
attributed to Hedghogs is much more powerful in the porcupine.

The Hedghog salted and eaten is good against the Leprosy, the Crampe, and all
sickness in the Nerves, and Ptisicke and pain in the bellye, rising of
windiness and difficulty of digestion: the powder anointed on Women with child
always keeps them from abortment. Marcellus.
The flesh being stale given to a mad man, cures him, and being eaten keeps
one from the Strangury; also being drunk in wine, expels the stone in the
bladder, and is good against a quotidian fever and the bitinges of Serpents.
The fat of a Auicen
it amendeth a broken and hoarse voice, the left eye being fried with oil,
yealdeth a liquor which causes sleep, if it be infused into the ears with a
quill. The gall with the brain of a Bat and the milk of a Dog, Albertus.
cures the raines; likewise, the said gall does not suffer uncomely hairs to
grow again upon the eie-browes, where once they have bin pulled up. It makes
also a good eie-salue.

Warts of al sorts are likewise taken away by the same, the melt sod and eaten
with meat, it heals all pains in the melt, Pliny.
and the raines dried are good against a leprosy or ptisicke coming by ulcer,
or the difficulty of urine, the bloody-flixe, and the cough. The dunge of a
Hedghog fresh, and Sandaracha with vinegar and liquid pitch, being laid to the
head,

When a man is bitten with a mad dog, or pricked with prickles of a Hedghog,
his own urine laid there unto with a sponge or Wool, is the best cure: or if
the thorns stick in the wound of his foot, let him hold it in the warm
urine of a man, and it shall easily shake them forth: and Albertus and Rasis
affirm, that if the right eye of a Hedghog be fried, with the oil of Alderne
or line-seed, and put in a vessel of red brass, and afterward anoint his eyes
therewith, as with an eie-salue, he shall see as well in the dark as in the
light. And thus I will conclude this discourse, with one story that a Hedghog
of the earth was dedicated to the Good-god among the foolish Pagans, and the
water Hedghog to the evil, and that once in the cittye of Phrigia called
Azanium when a great famine troubled the inhabitants, Euphorbus sacrificed a
hedghog, whereupon the famine removed and he was made priest, and the city was
called Traganos upon the occasion of that sacrifice.

OF THE HORSE.
WHen I consider the wonderful work of God in the creation of this Beast,
enduing it with a singular body and Noble spirit, the principal whereof is a
loving and dutiful inclination to the service of man. Wherein he never fails
in peace nor War, being every way more near unto him for labor and travel:
and therefore more dear (the food of man only excepted:) we must needs
account

It is called in Haebrew Sus, and a Mare Susah, The several names of horses.
the which word some derive from Sis signifiing joy, the Syrians call it Rekesh
and Sousias, the Arabians Ranica, and the Caldeans Ramakim, Susuatha, the
Arabians Bagel, the Persians Asbacha, the Grecians Hippos, and at this day
Alogo, the Latins Equus, and Caballus, the Italians and Spaniardes Cauallo,
the French Cheuall, the Germans Kossz, the Bohemians Kun, the Illirians Kobyla,
the Polonians Konij.

Equus seems to be derived, Ab aequalitate, from equality, The deriuation of
sundry names.
because they were first used in Charets and draughtes, and were joined
together being of equal strength, Legs and stature, Caballus seems to be
derived from the Greek word Caballes, which was a common name for ordinary
Hackney-horsses, and Horses of carriage, whereupon Seneca commends Marcus
Cato, that in his triumph of Censorship, Vno Caballo contentum et ne toto
quidem, partem enim sarcinae ab vtroque latere dependentes occupabant. That is
to say, that he was contented with one Horse for his own saddlel, and yet not
totally one neither, for the packes that hung on either side of him, possessed
the greatest part, and the true deriuation of his word, seems to accord with
Caxe, which signifies Alis abundance, because riding Horses are more
plentifully fed, and these Horses were also used for plowing, according to the
saying of Horac; Optat ephippia bos piger optat arace Caballus. The Grecians
call it Hippos, which seems to be derived from standing upon his feet, and
this beast only seems to be one of the number of them, which are called
Armenta.

And besides all histories are filled with appellatiue names of horses, such
as these are Alastor, Aethon, Nicteus, and Orneus, the Horses of Pluto. Aetha
a Mare of Agamemnon remembered by Homer. Aethion, Statio, Eous, Phlego, Pyrois:
the Horses of the Sun; Claudian
Lampus, Podargus, Xampus, Arnon, the horses of Erymus: by whose aid Hercules
is said to overcome Cygnus, the Son of Mars. Balius, Xanthus, and Pedasus,
the horses of Achilles, for whom Adrianus made a grave (as Dion writes)
Bromius, Caerus, Calydon, Camphasus, Cnasius, Corythe, and Herpinus, two names
of Britain horses cited by Martial and Gillius. Cylarus the swift horses of
Castor, Dimos, and Phobos, the horses of Mars. Enriole, Glaucus, and Sthenon,
the horses of Neptune, Parthenia, and Euripha, Mares belonging to the Sentaurs
of Hippodamia, slain by Ornomaus. Harp, another Mare Phoenix, and Corax: the
horses of Eleosthenes. Epidaminus, who wan the prizes in the sixty six
Olimpiade, and caused a statue to be made in Olympus, and his said horses and
Chariot called Pantarces, and beside these, other Cnacias and Samus.

Also Podarces, Rhoebus, Strymon, Tagus, Thereon, Thoes, Volneris, which was a
horse of Prasinum, and it is reported that Verus the Emperor so much affected
this horse, that he Primus equum volucrem Massyli muuera regis
Haud spernenda tulit:
Unto these may be added the affected names of Poets in love of their
favorites, as Rholandus, Vegiantinus, Baiardus, the horse of Rainaldus,
Rubicanus of Argalifas, Hippogrysus of Rugertus, Frontinus and Fratalatus of
Sacrapan, and Rondellius of Oliuerius.

The Epithits that belong to horses, are either general or particular, The
epithits of Horses.
the general may be rehearsed in this place, such as these are following:
brasse-footed, continual, horne-footed, sounding-footed, foming,
bridle-bearer, neighing, maned, dusty, four-footed, fretting, saddle-bearing,
watery, or sweating, whole-footed; and many such others both among the Greeks
and Latins, which howsoever they may contain diverse Alegories in them, and
therefore may seem to be figuratively set down, yet I thought good being

The hair of a horse falls off every year, the nether eye lid or browe
has no long hairs growing upon it, and therefore Nicon that famous painter of
Greece, when he had most curiously limbed forth a horses perfection, and
faild in no part of nature or art, The natural outward and inward parts of
Horses.
but only in placing hairs under his eye, for that only fault h^e received a
disgraceful blame.

Procomion, the Latins Caprona, and in English it may be called a fore-top,
which is granted to horses not only for ornament sake, but also for
necessity to defend their eyes. Aelianus.
The horses are naturally proud of these locks and manes, as may appear by
those mares which are kept for procreation of mules, by copulation with Asses,
which at the first despise to engender with those shaueling and short haired
Stallions.

Wherefore their keepers shave off their manes, and their fore-tops, afterward
leading them to the waters, wherein while the Mares behold their own
deformity, they grow so shamed, dejected, and discouraged, that ever after they
admit with quietness the Asses to cover them. Therefore it is never good to
cut the mane or the fetter-lockes except Armenian fashion, cutting the mane by
rows, leaving some longer then other, as it were the batlements of a Church;
but the best fashion of all is the Persian cut, whereby the one half of the
thickness is cut away on the left side, and the other on the right side
smoothly turned over and combed, according to the saying of Virgill: Densa iuba
and dextro iactata recumbit in armo. But if the Horse be double maned and so
the hair fall half on the one side, and half on the other, then cut all the
middle hairs away, and leave both the sides whole: for such was the invention
of the Parthians. In a Coult or young foale the hinder part is hier then the
fore part, but as he grows in years, so likewise the forepart grows higher
then the hinder.

This beast has two bones in his head, and other two discending from his
forehead to the Nostrils, two inferior Gumbes, or Cheeke-bones, forty teeth,
that is to say, four and Ragulae in his fore-shoulders, from his shoulders to
his Legs other two, from his Legs to his knees two more, in his knees there
are two supporters, and from the shin, to the Articles two mo, there are
sixteen small bones in the bottom of his hoof, and but one in his breast, in
the inward parts there are six and twenty ribs, from the hinder parts to the
top of his reins, Ve^etius
the two grinding bones; and from them to the hinder part of the head there are
two more, and two little ribs from the upper part of the thigh to the Gamba,
and from thence to the hair of the pasternes, there are two, and the little
ones to the hooues sixteen, so all the bones in number are accounted a hundred
and seventy.

Now it follows to declare the measure and number of the members; there are
twelve steps or degrees in the roof of his mouth, his tongue is half a foot
long, the upper Mercurius, there are contained 8. inches, the backbone
contains three and thirty cross ribs. From the conuulsial of the reins, to
the top of the tail, are twelve commissures, the length of his Sagula
contains also twelve ounces, from his shoulders to his legs six, from his
legs to his knees a foot in length, from the Articles to the hooues four
ounces, in his whole length six feet. And this is the stature of a courageous
and middle horse, for I know there are both bigger and lesser.

The quality and the measure of the nerves of sinnewes is this, from the middle
nostrils through the head neck and back bone, is a dubble file or thread to
the top of the

There are certain veins above the eyes which are divided in horses, wherein
they are let blood, by making to them small incisions the blood also is taken
out of the veins, in the pallet or roof of the mouth. There was an ancient
custom of letting horses blood upon Saint Steuens day, by reason of many holy
days one succeeding another, but that custom is now grown out of use: Also
some take blood out of the Matrixe veins, but that is not to be admitted in
geldings, because with their stones they lose a great part of their heat,
excepting extreme necessity, but out of the pallat blood may be let every
month and stallions when they are kept from mares, if the vain of their
mouths be opened, fall into blindness, although it is no good part of husbandry
to let them bleed that year, wherein they admit copulation, for the vacuation
of blood and seed, is a dubble

But the Organicall vain of the neck, is the best letting of blood, both in
stoned and gelded horses. The later leaches make incision in the great vain
called Fontanella, and in Inen Thymus or Iugulis. The eyes of a horse are
gray, or glassy, and it is reported by Augustus, that his eyes were much more
brighter then other men's, resembling horses: these eyes see perfectly in the
night, yet their color varieth as it does in men, according to the caprine and
glazie humor. And sometimes it falls out, that one, and the same horse has
two eyes of distinct colors. When the eyes of a horse hang outward, he is
called Exophthalmos. Such fair eyes are best, for Bucephalus the horse of
Alexander had such eyes, but when the eyes hang inward, they are called
Coeloph-Thalmoi, and the Parthians count Coelius.
whose eyes are of diverse colors, and are therefore called Heteroph Thalmoi,
because the breed of that horse was said to take the beginning from the
Parthians, and the reason why the people loved these horses was, because they
were fearful, and apt to run away in wars.

The ears of a horse, are tokens and notes of his stomach, as a tail is to
a Lion, Aristotle.
his teeth are changed, yet they grow close together like a man's. It is a hard
thing for a Horse to have a good mouth, except his stallion teeth be pulled
out, for when he is chafed or heated, he cannot be held back by his rider,
but disdaineth the bridle: wherefore after they be three year and a half old,
those teeth ought to be pulled forth. In old age, a horses teeth grow whiter,
but in other creatures blacker.

A mare has two vdders betwixt her thighs, yet brings forth but one at a
time: many of the Mares have no paps at al, but only they which are like their
dammes. In the heart of a Horse there is a little bone, like as in an Ox, and
a Mule, he has no gall like Muscarium, it ought to be long, and full of hairs.
The legs are called Gambae of Campo, signifying treading: the hooues of a
horse ought neither to be high nor very low, neither ought the horse to rest
upon his ancles, and those horses which have straight bones in the Articles of
their hinder knees, set hard on the ground, and weary the ryder: but where
the bones are Cynopodae. They have also quick flesh in their hooues, and their
hooues are sometimes called horns, upon which for their better travel, men
have devised to fasten iron plates or shoes. This hoof ought to be hard and
hollow, that the Beast may not be offended, when he goes upon stones; they
ought not to be white, nor broad, but always kept moist, that so they may
travel the better, having strong feet, hard and sound hooues, for which cause
the Graecians call them Eupodes.

Forasmuch as it is requisite for every man to provide him horses of the best
race, The Horses of diverse notions.
and their kinds are diverse in most places of the world, so the coursers of
horses do many Arcauania, Oppianus
and Etolia is as fit for feeding of horses as Thessalie. The horses of the
Greeks, Armenians, and Trojans are fit for war, of the Greekish I will speak
more afterward.

Alexandria was wont to take great delight in horses and combats of horses:
Apolonius Horses with horns and wings
Appolonius writes Lib. 5. Aethiopia (as it is reported) breeds horses
having wings and horns. Varro commends the Apulian horses, and Volatteranus
writes, that they and the horses of Rosea are most fit for war: he means
above all the horses of Italy. There have been Arcadia for cattle, especially
for breeding horses and Asses that are Stallions, for the procreation of
Mules, and the breed of the Arcadian horses excels. The same man prefereth
the horses of Thessalia and the Grekish horses, for they are sound of their
feet and head, but not of comely buttockes, they have their back bone whole,
Ruellius
great, and short.

The latter two I might have referred to the whole body of the horse. Absyrtus
The horses of Armenia are very necessary and convenient for war, for they and
the Capadocians do breed of the Parthian horses, saving their heads are
somewhat bigger. Of the Hackney or common horses, I will say more afterward
where I touch the difference of horses, and of their Barbarian horses are the
same as the Lybian horses. Vegetius commends the horses of Toringa and
Burgundia after them of Vonusci. Britain breeds little horses and amblers.
Of horses that are celebrate of the Calpian mountain, See in the Spanish. The
horses of Cappadocia and Armenia have their breed of the Parthians, but their
heads are bigger, and are of a most famous nobility, for that country before
any other land, Vegetius.
is most commodious for the nourishing of horses, according to the verses of
Nemesian: Cappadocumque not as referat generosa propago,
Armata and palmas nuper grex omnis auorum.


The Cappadocians do pay to the Persians every year, beside silver, a thousand
and five hundred Horses, etc. The Medes have the doble of these, and they
Surname the Cappadocians horses famous and swift, for he says, that whiles
these are young, they are accounted weak by reason of their young teeth, and
their body feeding on milk, but the older they grow, Strabo.
so much the swifter they are, being very courageous and apt for war and
hunting, for they are not afraid of weapons, neither to encounter with wild
beasts. Mazaca is a city of Cappadocia, situate under the mountain Argaeus
now called Cesarea, as Eusebius Mazacenian horse for the Cappadocian horse.
Suetonius
And not only the country, but the city it self sometime was called
Cappadocia from this city or walled town I suppose the horses of Mazaca were
so called, which Oppianus calls Mazaci, of these also and more, I will set
down these verses of Nemesian: Sit tibi praeterea sonipes Maurusia tellus
Quemque coloratus Mazax deserta per arua
Ne pigeat quod turpe deformis and aluus
Q^oque iubis pronos ceruix diuerberet armos
Paret in obsequium lentae moderamine virgae.
Q^in and promissi spatiosa per aequora campi,
Paulatimque, auidos post terga relinquunt.
Cum se Threicius Boreas super extulit antro, etc
His etiam emerito vigor est iuuenilis in aeuo.
Non prius est animo quam corpore passa ruina.
Quem mittit modo sit gentile sanguine firmus,
Pauit, and assiduos docuit tolerare labores
Est illis, quodque infrenes, quod liber vterque,
Nam flecti facilis, lasciuaque colla secutus
Verbera sunt praecepta fugae, sunt verbera freni.
Cursibus acquirunt commoto sanguine vires,
Haud secus effusis Nerei per caerula ventis,
Horum tarda venit longi fiducia cursus:
Nam quaecunqne suis virtus been floruit annis.
And peradventure Nemesianus understood certain horses of Lybia, by the name
of the Mazacion horses, when as he ioyns them with the Maurasian horses, and
call them painted Mauzacion horses, which agrees not with Cappadocian, writing
also, that they are ruled with a stroke of air instead of a bridle, which
thing we have read in Authors writing of Masylian horses in the country of
Lybia, and whereof we will speak when we discourse of the Lybian horses. But
the Cappadocian horses are swift and lusty in their old age, as it is related
by Oppianns. Again if Mazacian horses be the same that the Cappadocian are,
what is the reason why Oppianus does name them apt, unless peradventure every
Mazacian horse is a Cappadocian, and not otherwise. The horses of Chalambria,
are so named of a place in Lybia, Varrius
the Cheonian horses are the same with the Aprirolan horses. The Colophonians
and Magnetians do bestow great labor in breeding of horses, for the
Colophonians dwell in a plain, as I have read in a certain Greek author
Strabo lib. 14. writes that the Colophonians in times past did abound with
sea-forces, and have much excelled in horssemen, that wheresoever in any
nation there was waged war, they hired and required the Colophonian
horsse-men, and so it was made a common proverb: Colophonem addidit Erasmus.
The horses of Creet are commended by Oppianus and elsewhere. From their
loins upward they are as big as the Cyrenian horses, with well set thighs,
excellent for the soundnes of their feet, and holding their breath a long time
in riding, and therefore fit for single races or in chariots.

Strabo
The Epean horses, are remembered of Oppianus, and the Epeans are a people of
Achaia, and the Achaian horses are commended of the same. The Lipidanean kind
of horses is more excellent; and he preserreth the Thessalian horses before
those of Epidaurea, but the Epieotian horses are biting and stubborn: Absyrtus
says, that the Epieotian horses, and the Samerican and Dalmatian, although
they are stubborn and will not abide the bridle, Epieotian horses and the
Sicilian despise not if their qualities and comely parts be aparant in them,
although sometime he has run away from the enemy, as the poet says: Quamuis
saepe fugaille verso egerit hosts,
Et patria Epirum referat.
Epiria and Chaonia, is also a part of Epirus Alpestrian, although sometimes it
be taken for the whole country of Epirus. The horses of Chaonia are commended,
as Gratius remembers, writing of the Sicylian horses, in these verses to this
effect, that no man has presumed to strive with the Chaonians, and the Achaian
hand does not express their deserts: Queis Chaonia contendere coatra,
Ausit, vix merita quas signat Achata palma.


There are a people of Arabia called Erembi, which some some call
Ichthyophagans, Oppianus
and Trogloditans. Vegetius in the third place commends the Frisian Horses
for swiftness and long continuance of course, after the Hunnian, Burgundians.
The French horse is the Menapians, and S. Hierom writes, that wordly men are
delighted with the French geldings, but Zacharies Ass loosed from his bands,
rejoices good men. Lucius Apuleius has commended the French beasts, for if
the young sole be derived of a genereous kind, it is an argument it will prove a
noble beast.

The Gelanoian horses are a kind of base horses not fit for war, whether
this name proceed of a strange country, I have no certain knowledge thereof.
There is a certain river in Sicilia called Gelas, of which country the horses
are of great value and much set by. And also the Gelons are a people of
Scythia, who in their flight fight upon horses, of which Lucanus writes to
this effect. Massagetes quo fugit equo, fortesque; Geloni. And Virgill,
Bisaltae quo more solent, acerque; Gelonus. Cum fugit in Rhodopen, aut in
deserta Getarum. Et lac coueretum cum sanguine potat equino, signifying thus
much that the Massagetes and valianut Gelons fly away upon horses like the
Bisaltans, when they fly into Rhodope, or into the wilderness of the Gelans,
and drink milk mixed with horsse-blood for hunger and famine. But these
fearful horses are not meet for war. Germania has greater horses and hard
trotters, whose pace is very hard and troublesome. The Getican horses run
most swiftly. The horses of the Greeks have good sound broad feet, Aelianus.
and of a great body, a comely fine head, their forepart somewhat high of
stature, straight and well compacted, and of a well fashioned body, but the
joining of their buttockes not so agreeable and answerable to the rest: they
are most swift and courageous, yet notwithstanding in all Greece the Thessalian
horses are most esteemed, Nemesianus writes also of the Greekish horses.
Greece therefore yields choice horses, Absyrtus
and well hoofed. Heluetia the horses are fitted and very expect in war, and
especially the Algecian horses, which will last and continue a long time.

In Spain also the horses are of a great stature of body, well proportioned
and strait, having a fine head, the joints of their bodies very well divided,
set a part, and ready or flexible, simple and short burtockes, but not very
strong and comely. They are strong and able to sustain the undergoing or
compassing of iourneyes, neither are they slender bodied or subject to
leanness, but they are nothing nimble for course, as shall appear by the
words of the Authors following, neither are they spurred when they are ridden:
Ruellius
from their growing even to their middle age, they are pliant and easy to be
handled, afterward they wax wild and biting. The Cappadocian horse is
renowned, the like, or Siuilia yield horses inferior for the ring then those:
and Africa is accustomed to bring forth the most swift Horses by copulation
with the Spanish blood to the use of the saddle.

Oppianus says that their Iberan horses are more excellent, and do so much
surre-passe other horses in swiftness, how much the Eagle or the winding
Hawke in the air, and the Dolphin in the sea excels other birds and fishes,
but they are small and of little strength and no courage (although Absyrtus
affirms) if you read him well, that they are of a great stature of body,
they being rid but a little way do loose their swiftnes of pace, they are

The Spanish horses are desired of great Princes and Peers: Camerarius.
and the Maguates because their opinion is that they are swift and nimble, and
out of Spain they are respected for lightness and elegancy. The judgment of
the ancients for the general breed of horses was this, that the greatest
horses are bred from the third climat, to the end of the sixth and most of al
in Spain, yet we have seen stronger and bigger horses bred in the seventh
climat, and those more able to endure labor then those that are under the
third or fourth climat.

The Horses of the Celliberans somewhat a dusty color: and they chaung if
they be transported into the farther Spain, Albertus
and the Parthian Horses are like them in regard they excel in nimblenes and
dexterity of running, whereof Martial writes thus, Videbis altam liciane
Bilbilim equis and armis vobilem: which Bilbilis is a City of Celiberia. Of
the Callacians and Genntes we will speak also in the Spanish Horses that are
bred in the Calpian Mountain afterward, Strabo
when we entreat the differences of Horses according to their degree.

The Hunnes bring up their Horses hardly, able to endure cold and hunger, and
they Hunnian Horses else where he calls them Hunnican Horses, and the same
in times past Hunnes: but they are called a days Vngarian Horses.

The companies or armies of Hunnes, wandering up and down with most swift
horses filled al things with slaughter and terror. They are biting and kicking
horses, as most Pannonicks are (for they call Panonia at this day Hungaria) of
which there is a proverb of Malignity sprung up, Non nisi irritati aut
opin^one offensae metu ferociunt: that is to say. They wax not fern or rage
not, Vegetius
but either by opinion or fear of offense affirming that the Pannonians are
very fit for War. There is not any that can hold and constrain or draw the
bridles in, or loose them forth, that rydeth an Indian Horse when he
praunseth and runs violently, but such a one that has been trained up
from his childhood in the skill of Horses: these men have accustomed to hold
them with the bridle, and also to break their wilfulness by snaffles or bits,
and those that are well skilled in handling Horses do, compel

They which are most skillful of this art, and cunning dooers of it, know very
well how to bring their course into a circle, whose compass is not to be
regarded chiefly when it can bear but two Soldiers fighting together at one
time. Aelianus
There are among the Indian Psyllans (for there are also other Affricks of that
name) Horses bred no bigger then Rams, and they say that in Indian there are
Horses with one horn, of which horn drinking cups may be made, having this
virtue in them, that if you put poison into them and a man drink thereof it
shall not hurt him, because the horn does drive away or expel the
Monocerotes: and Aelianus himself else where, and Philes following him, write
the same thing of a cup made of the horn of an Indian Ass, having one horn.

The Istrian Horses are of good able feet, very straight, whole backed, and
hollow, but swift of course. Oppianus.
The Moors Horses (says Oppianus) are most excellent, as well to hold out
long courses, as also to endure hard labors: the Lybians next unto these are
of a most durable celerity: they are shaped alike, except that the Lybian
horses are big, and of a longer body, having thicker ribs and sides, and their
breast is larger before on their crest: they can easily abide the heat of the
sun and daily thirst.

Liuius says) in Lib. 23. that it was a custom to the Numidians, being in
battle to lead two horses together, and in manner of vauters oftentimes, in
the most sharp conflict could leap from the weary horse to a fresh, (so great
was the dexterity of the rider and the docibility of the beast.) From Tunis of
Africa, Massalia, and Numidia, there are also brought very singular horses,
passing for running, which the common people call Barbary horses. The
Massylians (a people of Lybia) have very good horses, which they govern with
a rod without a bridles, from whence Virgill in his fourth of his Aeneidos
calls them untamed and wild Numides: and Siluis says also; The Numides a
nation having no skill of the bridle, do leap up and down here and there and
every where, as Martial writes: Hic passim exultant Numidae gens in scia freni
Quis inter geminas per ludum nobilis aures
Quadrupedem fllectit non cedens virga lupati.
Nemesianus writes of those which he calls Mazacians (as I have before
spoken of the Cappadocian horses.) The Dorcadian horses although they are of a
marvelous swiftnes, yet they are inferior to the Lybian horses in running. The
Lybian Mares are taken with a pipe, and by these allurements they are made tame
and leave off all wild qualities, and whither soever the pipe shall allvre
them, thither they follow, and the shepherd when he stands, they leave of
marching forward, and if he sing more pleasantly, they are so delighted with
it, that they cannot hold tears. The Shepherds of these flocks, make their
shepherds pipe of the tree (called Rhododaphus) the sound whereof delights
those that go before the heard. Gratius also writes Fingit equos Pisis Numidae
etc.
Audax and patiens operum genus ille vigebit
Centum actus spatijs atque eluctabitur iram
Nec magni cultus sterilis quodcunque remisit
Terra sui tenuesque sitis producere riui.
Although the place be not perfect, yet that is spoken concerning the Numidian
and Lybian horses, is manifest as well by the words of Oppianus before
recited, as also by that which Aelianus sets down: for (says he) I have
heard these things touching the Lybian horses of the men of that nation, that
of all other horses they are the swiftest, and

The horses and Oxen of Africa, which dwell between Getulia and us, are as
ours, that is, having longer lips (the interpreter translates it hooues.) Their
kings take delight in

The Chalambrian Libians are before spoken of, and the Nasauions we will speak
of here after. Barbary breeds very few Horses, but the Arabians which
inhabit in the desert, and the people of Libia do breed very many, and they
do not so much accustom them to iourneyes and warfare, as to Hunting, and
feeding them with Camels milk only twice a day and night, whereby they keep
them fine, but very lean, and in the time of grass, they turn them out to
feed in the field, but they ride not on them.

Massilia are equal with the Libians. The people of Magnetia have been
renowned in feeding and bringing up Horses, and they are very skillfull in
combat on Horseback (as Lucanus says.) The Magnetians are famous for
Horses, and the nation of Nycaia for Oars: Magnetia is a country of
Macedonia, bordering upon, Thessalie, so the City and country of Asia lies
toward Maeandrus. Opianus commends the Magnetian Horses. The Moors sight
often on Horseback with spears, but their Horses are naked and their bridles
made of rushes.

The Massylians following the Lybians (for the most part) are furnished after
that manner, and they resemble others, having little horses, both swift,
obedient, and easily to be ruled with a rod.

Strabo.
The collars of their horses are made of wood or hair, whereby the bridles
hang The principal horses of Barbary are not swift, but in respect they
live on fodder they are more handsome and better in flesh, which they use in
eminent danger when it stands them upon to escape the rage of their enemies.
Thus far I have related the words of Oppianus, Leo Assric^iu^
touching the norishing of horses, among the Lybians, where he shows that
they are all alike, both in shape and other proportion. Touching the Nemesian
horses, they are all one with the Maurans and Marusans (as Strabo witnesses)
calling them nimbe and

The Sicilians are swifter then the Moors, and the Moors are of a more
valiant courage then the Sicilians, or some such like other thing, who are
furnished with yellow colors, and show to the eye most shining and splendant,
and which is more they only desire the roaring of a Lion, for which when they
come to other wild beasts by way of hunting, he commends them to be
excellent: then he says that the yellow is the best color.

In the country of Mauritania are great store of Lions, and of the Nazacanos
we have spoke of before sufficiently. The Median horses are of exceeding
greatness, and the men of that country are so bewitched with the rich attire
and shape of their bodies, Absyrtus
Aelianus
that they seem to perceive their own stature and comelines. The Medes every
year by way of custom pay 3. thousand horses. Herodotus also calls the
Nisean horses the Medes, whereof more shall be spoke afterward. The Menapians
amongst our countrymen the only men, which I suppose were once called French of
Caesar and the Rugians, (as warriors for the most part are in estimation. I
also find that the Rugians inhabited that country which is now called
Rugerland, and that Paulus Diaconus remembers them lib. 1.

Touching the affairs of Longobardus, there are that say they departed into
Mechelburgia. Althametus) they are counted as Germans, both in language and
virtue. Gratius writes of the Marcibians, saying the Marcibians scarce yield
their tough neck to the sword. Virgill also declares Mycenia to be a country
of most notable horses: and Gratius commends a horse fit for huntinge highly
in these verses: Consule Penei qualis prefunditur amne
Thessalus aut patriae quem conspexere mycaenae
Glaucum nempe ingens nempe ardua fundit in auras
Orura quis Eleas potior lustrault arenas?
Ne tamen hoc attingat opus iact antior illi
Virtus quam siluas duramque lacessere martem.
The Mylian horses were once great in estimation (as Camerarius writes; Also
the Mesamonians are a people of Lybia, living as spoilers of the ships of
Syrtea. Of all these horses beforsaid, the Missaean horse is the goodliest, and
fittest to carry the body of a King, they are of a passing good shape, an easy
pace, and very submissiue to the bridle; having a little head, and a long and
thick mane, with yellow or brown hairs hanging down on both sides: Armenia
is very fit for feeding horses, wherein is a certain meddow called Hippoboans
by which they make their journey which pass from Persia and Babylon into the
Caspian border, in which place they feed five hundred Mares which belong unto
their

The Misaean horses (written with Iota and simple Sigma, as Eustathius writes)
are the most excellent and best; some say that they have their generation from
Germany, others out of Armenia, but they have a certain kind of shape like
the Parthians.

In India most of their living creatures are far greater then in other places
(except horses) for the Misaean horses, do exceed the Indian horses, as
Herodotus writes) in his seventh book, describing the Persian horse. Behind
the spears (says he) came ten Horses in most sumptuous furniture, which were
Nisaeans, so called, because there is a great field named Nisaeus in the
country of Medica, which yields horses of a great stature. After these
followed Jupiters chariot drawn with eight horses, after which Xerxes was
carried in a chariot drawn by Nisaean horses, and by how much the greater the
Lybian Elephant is then the Nisaean horse, so much greater are the Nisaean
horses then the Indian (as the same man says) in his first book: but the
king was about to offer a white horse, that is of the Nisaean horses, having a
better mark as some expounded.

There are that say that Nisaeus is a plane of Persis, where the most famous
and notable horses are bred. Some interpret it to they yellow Susinax and
Bactria, there is a place which the Greeks call ( Nisos) in which the most
singular fine horses are bred. There are also that suppose they are had from
the red sea, and al those to be of a yellow color. Herodotus writing of
Nisaeus makes it a part of Media. Orpheus also writes that there is a place
in the red Sea called Nisa. Stephanus also makes mention of ( Nysaean Pedion)
with the Medes, of which people the horses are so called. Coelius Rhodiginus
reproved a certain man which translanted the Islandish horses for the Nisaean
horses. Plutarchis says that Pirrhus had an apparition of a Nisaean horse
armed and furnished with a rider, that Alexander the great was captain thereof.



Touching the Paphlagonians about the education of their horses see more among
the Venetians: The Parthian horses are of a large body, courageous, of a gentle
kind and most sound of their feet. Concerning those horses which have but one
eye, commended among the Parthians, and of those which are distinguished by
diversity of colors, from those that come forth first, I have spoke already
out of Absyrtus. The Armenian and Parthian horses are of a swifter pace then
the Siculians, and the Iberi swifter then the Parthians, whereof Gratius
writes to this effect:
Musit honor veniat Caudini saxa Taburni
Gargamdue trucem, aut ligurinas de super Alps
Ante opus excussis caedet vnguibus; and tamen illi
Estanimus, funget que meas senissus in arts
Sed iuxta vitium posuit Deus.
That is to say among the Parthians there has remained honor for their soft
Countries, but let him come to the Rocks of Caudmus, Tabernus and too rough
Garganus, or upon the Ligurian Alps, then he will quickly shake off his
hooues: and make a show of great Celtibarians are somewhat white, and if they
may be brought into Spain they change their color. But the Parthians are
alike, for they excel all others in nimblenes and dexterity of running: How
the Parthians do make their pace easy in the trotters and hard footing
horses, after the manner of geldings, shall be declared afterward, for
persia prefers these horses above the censure of their patrimonies, as well
to carry, (having an easy pace) and being of most excellent dignity: As for
their pace it is thick and short, and he does delight and lift up the rider
being not instructed by art, but effects it by nature.

Amongst these ambling nagges, (called of the Latins among the common sort
Totonarij) their pace is indifferent, and whereas they are not alike, they are
supposed to have Vegetius writes in this manner.

In a short iourny they have the more comelines and grace in going, but when
they travel far they are impatient, stuborn, and unless they be tamed will be
stuborn against the rider; and that which is a more greater marvel, when they
are chafed, they are of a delightful comelines, their neck turns in manner
of a bow, that is seems to lie on their breast. The Pharsalian mares evermore
bring foales very like their Sire, and therefore very well so named, Equae
probae, we read of the Phasian horses which receive their name (from the the
mark or brand of a bird so named) or else because of their excellent beauty
and comeliness.

The Rosean horses Varro so names of Rosea, which Volatteranus writes to be
most fit for war: Coelius
and this Rosea otherwise Roscea, Festus says, that it is a country in the the
coasts of the Reatiens, so called, because the fields are said to be moist with
that dew. The horses of Sacae if they happen to throw down their rider, they
forthwith stand still that they may get up again Vegetius having commended the
Persian horses says, that the Armenians Sapharens do follow next. Aelianus.
This Saphirine verily is an Island in the Arabian coast, and the people of
Sapiria lie beside Pontus. The horses of Epirota, Salmarica, and Dalmatia,
although they will not abide to be bridled, yet they snew that they are warlicke
by their legs.

Vegetius
The Sardinian horses are nimble and fair, but lesser then others. The
Sarmatican kind of horses is feat and well fashioned in this kind, very fit
for running, unmixed, having a well se^ body, a strong head, and a comely neck.
Some horses they call Aetogenes, from a certain mark which they have in their
shoulders and color, which the Sarmatians do take unto themselves as very
good, with which they do contend about their cruelty, wherefore they employ
them in warlicke outrodes, but those that bear the Eagles mark in their
buttockes and tail, they are disallowed of them, and they report that they
mark

Pliny.
The Sarmatians when they entend any long iourneyes, the day before they keep
them fasting, giving them a little drink, and so they will ride them a hundred
and fifty miles continually going. These horses are very fit for war, and many
of them are sound gelded in there tender age, and they say they never loose
their teeth. It is a custom of Scythia and Sarmatia to geld their horses to
make them more gentle: they are swift, little, and fierce, but very stubborn
and untamed, neither does Circo, (situate near Sicili^) breed horses
inferior to the Spanish, as Vegetius writes. The Epirotan and Siculian horses
are not to be despised, if they were well bred and educated, they want not
comeliness

The Siculian horses are most swift. Litlybaeum is a promontory of Sicilia
lying toward Lybia, which a certain verse makes more plain but as I
understand it is the three-clifttopt-mountaine Aetna, which casts forth fire,
and covers the carcass of Euceladus the Gianut, lyeng there under, (whereof
Oppianus writes) and some others also. But (says he) the Armenians and
Parthians have swifter coursers by far, then the Siculians. Now, let us hear
Gratius himself, discoursing of the Siculian horses, as well as of the Lybycan.

Sic and strymonio f^cilis tutela Bisaltae,
Possent Aetnaeas vtinam seferre per arts.
Quiludus Siculis: quid tum si turpia colla
Aut tenuis dorso curuatur spina? per illos
Cantalus Graijs Agragas, vict aeque fragosum
Ne broden liquere ferae. O quantus in armis
Ille meis, cuius docties pecuaria faetus
Suff^cient queis Chaontas contendere contra
Ausit vix merita signat Achaia palma.
But as for Gratius I suspect the place to be imperfect; for Agragas is a
mountain of Sicilia, having a town situate in the top of it bearing the same
name, where their ancestors were wont to nourish and bring up the best
horses. There is also in Sicilia a mountain called Mebrodes, Hebrodon
which some think to be so called by reason of the plenty of dear, but they
have no author for it, and as for the printed book of Gratius, I find it
expresses it not so well as Virgill sets it down, saying, that Agragas was
a breeder of most courageous and notable horses: but yet Serutus says,
(according to Pindarus) that the Agrigentines in times past sent their horses
to the iusting or combats of Graecia, returning with victory from thence, and
we have also read that in Cappadocia whole troops of horses have bin
destroyed. The men of Delphos by the answer of Apollo got herds and great
store of horses from Agrigentine, and those were excellent. Aristophanes
calls those great Aetnean horses ( Canthiari) either of the greatness of
the mountain, or else great Canthars are bred in it, or of the horses of
Aetna, being notable for swiftness and running. The horses that are bred in
Creet and Cappadoeia are also most excellent.

In Greece there are most notable horses of Thessalie, which Absyrtus says be
the best in all Greece. The words of Gratius the Poet speaking of the
Thessalian horses are before recited. The mares of Admetus were the most
excellent, Strabo
but as Homer reports the Thessalian were before them. The Solitude or
wilderness of Arcauanus is as commodious to feed Thessalia. It is certain that
Thessalia excels with horses, from whence Xerxes is said to have made a
combat, that he might try his horses there where he understood the best breed
of Greekish horses to be, and from whence this proverb arose, Decernetur equa
Thessalia (:Viz:) let the Thessalian Mare be tried by battle, a proverb of
excellent worth, because in old time the chiefest praise was of the Thessalian
Mares: which is very apparent by the Oracle that was delivered to the
Aeginensians. Suidas relates (but I know not out of what author) that
Thessalia has excelent horsemen; Thrasia expert shooters, and India light
armor: so has likewise Creet and Caria.

Erasmus writes that Thessalia is most fit to feed horses, who do far excel
the Arcadians and Epidaures as Strabo witnesses lib. 8. Caesar was said (when
he was dictator) to have Textor.
and killing them, whereof Lucianus writes thus: Thessalius sompes bellis
feralibus omen. That is to say: the Thessalian horse is profitable for fence
and deadly conflicts. There is also in Thessalia a city (named Pella) from
whence I deem the Pellaean horses are so called of Gratius, yet there be
other places called Pella (as Macedonia and Achaia) whereof Gratius writes
thus: Spadices vis Pellaei valuere Cerauni
Et tibi deuotae magnum pecuaria Cyrrae

Which ( Cerani) are mounts of Epirus, and Cyrrha is a Town of Phocis situate
at the foot of the hill Parnassus, where Appollo Cyrrhaeus was worshipped. The
Tyrrheans being excellent warriors are commended of Oppianus out of the Islands
of the Tyrrhenean sea (especially Corsica and Sardinia) there be very short
horses, but they are of good courage and gentle withal.

The Thracian horses are foul and ill-shapen, being rough al over their
bodies, Volatteran:
and having very great shoulders, which in the Greek is named ( Calomysten)
such a one as will cast down the rider on the ground from off his back, they
are crook-backt, or bunched Absyrtus says, the Thracian horses are the best.
The Thuringean horses are neighbors to Hessis, which Pliny and Volatteranus
supposed, are called ( Mediterranean Cimbri.)

There be some that suppose the Venetians to descend from a people of
Paphlagonia, (called Venetaus) which after the destruction of Troy came to
these places, and by these they make an argument, coniecturing it to be good,
in regard they are wholly employed about breeding horses, which at this time
fails altogether, but in former days they were very careful to follow their
business about the training up of young mules, whereof Homer writes. And
Dyonisius the Tirant of Sicilia ordained, that the breed of horses Vuallachus
this day is called of the Saxones a gelded horse, and brought out of that
country which sometimes was called Dacia. The Lycospades and Lycophotians shall
be spoken of hereafter.

Of the choice of good Horses,
PAladius advises to observe four things in choice of a Stallion horse, the
form or outward proportion, the color, the merit, and the beauty, all which
are necessary to be observed in the choice of Coltes or elder Horses, that
they may be of a generous race, having soft legs, lofty paces, gent^e treading,
such as will lead the way, and be not afraid of any The members of an eligble
horse.
bridge, nor sudden noises; having a gentle neck, a sharp head, a short
belly, a fat back, a dapple color, nimble ears, thick mane lying on the
right side, a dubble bone discending by his loins, a sounding hoof, and legs
that cannot stand still, which Virgill expresses in these words: Nec non and
pecori est idem delectus equino
Tu modo quos in spem statuis, summittere gentis
Precipuum iaminde a teneris impende laborem
Continnue pecoris, generosi pullus in aruis
Altius ingreditur, and mollia crura reponit.
Primus and ire viam, and fluuios tentare minaces
Audet, and ignoto sese committere ponti:
Nec vanos horret crepitus, illa ardua ceruix
Argutumque caput, breuis aluus, obesaque terga
Luxuriatque toris animo sum pectus honesti
Spadices glaucique color, deterrimus albis
Et giluo: tam si qua sonum procul arma dedere
Stare loco nescit micat auribus and traemit artus
Collectumque praemens voluit subnaribus ignem
Densa iuba and dextro tactata recumbit in armo
Ac duplex agitur perlumbos spina cauatque
Tellurem and solido grauiter sonat vngula cornu.
Varro shows that at the first foaling of a colt, a man may observe by
certain signs how he will prove when he is in perfection: signs to choose a
good Colt.
for if he be cheareful, bold, and not terrified at any strange sight, if he
run before the company, be wanton and contend with his equales in course, and
ouer-run them: if he leap over a ditch, go over a bridge, or through water,
and being provoked appears meek, these are the most true signs of an
elegiable Colt.

Also it is to be considered, whether they rise quickly, being stird from their
rest, and run away speedily, if their bodies be great, long, full of muscles,
and sharp, having a little head, black eyes, open aad wide nostrils, sharp
pricked ears, a soft and broad neck, not long, a thick mane curled, and
falling on the right side, a broad and full breast, large Columella Varro
Albertus.
hard, hollow, and round hooues, well set to the crown of their pasterne,
having veins conspicuous and apparent over al his body. That colt which at the
time of his foaling has the most highest legs, is likelyest by common
reason to prove most able and noble in his age, for of all the joints in the
body the knees and legs grow least, and they which have flexible joints in
their infancy, will be more nimble and flexible in their Of the chois of a horse
un backed or never ridden.
And thus much for the parts of a colt. Now, in the next place we must likewise
take consideration of a horse untamed, and ready for the saddle. For the
outward parts of his body says Xenophon, yield evident signification of his
mind, before he be backed.

Plato wills that the state of his body be straight, and articulate, his
head bony, his cheeks little, his eyes standing out, and not sunk into his
head, flaming like blood, looking cruelly if the body be black, but black
eyes if the body be white do argue a gentler and better disposition: short and
little ears, the crown of his head greater then the residue, broad Nostrils,
whereby he not only looks more terribly but breaths more easily, for when
one Horse is angry with another, in their rage they are wont to stretch out
their Nostrils vehemently.

The beak or snout of a Horse, ought not to stand out like a swynes, but to
bend down a little crooked, the head to be so joined to the neck, as it may
bend more commodiously, that is, if the neck be small next to the head, so
will the neck stand before the rider, and his eyes appear before his feet:
and although he be full of stomach, yet will he never be violent or stiff
necked. It ought also to be considered, whether his cheekbones be sharp,
tender, or unequal, standing one above another, for their imparity makes

The backe-bone above his shoulders higher commodious to set the saddle upon,
and his whole body the better compacted, if the back bone be duble, and
smooth; for then shall the rider sit more easily, and the form of the Horse
appear more delectable. A large breast shows his comeliness and strength,
making him fit to take longer reaches without doubling of his Legs, because
in a broad breast the Legs stand further asunder: large side or ribs swelling
out above the belly, for they show the ability of the Horse both to his food
and work, a round even belly and his loins being broad and short, causes the
forlegs to be lifted up more easily, and the hinderlegs to follow, for the small
loins do not only deforme, but enfeeble and oppress the Horse, therefore
the loins ought to be

Now on the contrary side it is good also to set down the faults and signs of
reprobation in Horses, and first of all therefore, a great and fleshy head,
great ears, narrow Nostrils, hollow eyes, a long neck, a mane not hairy, a
narrow breast, hollow shoulders, narrow sides, and little fleshy sharpeloines,
bare ribs, hard and heavy Legs, knees not apt to bend, weak thighs, not
strong, crooked legs, thin, full fleshy, plain and low hoofs, all these things
are to be avoided in the choice of your Horse.


NOw in the next place let us consider the choice of Horses and Mares
appointed for breed and procreation, and we have showed already that in a
stallion we are principally to consider the color, form, merit, and beauty.
This Stallion is called in Italy Rozzone, in France Estalon, in Germany Ein
Springhengst, and in Latin Admissarius quia ad generandam sobolem admittitur,
because he is sent to beget and engender. The Graeci. Anabates or Ocheutes. Of
the color.
First of all therefore to begin with the color: that Horse is best which
is of one continued color, although oftentimes (as Rufus says) Horses of a
despicable color prove as

The chief colors are these; bay, white, carnation, golden; russet,
mouse-colour, fleabitten, spotted, pale and black: of all these the black or
bay is to be preferred. Oppianus makes distinction of Horses by their color
in this manner, the gray or bluish spotted is fittest for the hunting of the
Heart, the bright bay for the Bear and Leopards, the black with flaming eyes
against the Lions. The natural color of the wild Horses are an ash color
with a black struck from the head along the back to the tail, but among tame
Horses there are many good ones of Black, White, Brown, Red, and fleabitten
color. But yet it is to be remembered that seldom or never Coultes be foaled
white, but rather of other color, degenerating afterward by the increase of
their age for such Horses are more lively, durable, and healthy, then other of
their kind, and therefore Plutarch commends a white Horse of Sylla for his
swiftnes of foot and stomach: among al colors, ^^r^nus
first the black, then the bay, next the white, and last the gray are most
commended.

Camerarius commends a certain color called in Latin Varius and may be
englished daple Virgill speaks in this manner; -- Thracius albis
Portat equus buolor moculis vestigia primi
Alba peda, frontemque ostentans arduus albam.
Black Horses also which have one russet or swart spot in their faces, or
else a black tongue Baudius (amongst the Latins) is derived of Vadium quia
inter, coetera animalia fortius vadat; because among other creatures he goes
most surely.

It is also behoouefull that in a Stallion Horse, the mane be of the same
color with the body. Artificial ^eane^ to m^ke Mares conceive the best colored
Colts.
Horsse-keepers have devised to make their Mares conceive strange colors, for
when the Mares would go to the horse, they paint a Stallion with diverse
colors, and so bring him into the sight and presence of the Mare; where they
suffer him to stand a good Idea and full impression of those pictures, and then
they suffer him to cover her; which being performed she conceiueth a Foale of
those colors: In like manner, Pigeons conceive young ones of diverse colors.

The Germans to mingle the color of horses hairs (especially to bring black
among white) take the roots of fearue, and of sage, and sees them together in
leigh, and then wash their horses all over therewith. For the making of their
horses white, they take that fat which arises from the decoction of a moule
in an earthen pot, and there withal anoint the places they would have white.
Also they shave off the hairs, and put upon the balde place crude honey, and
Badggers grease, which makes the hairs to arise white: and many Homer: Et qua
fetae haerent capiti laetaleque vuluus
Precipae sit equis.
And thus much shall suffice for the color of a Stallion: now follows the
form or outward proportion of the body, The form
which ought to be great and solid, his stature aunswerable to his strength,
his sides large, his buttockes round, his breast broad, his whole body full The
beautye of a Stallion.
great eyes, broad nostrils, a long and large mane and tail, with a solid and
fixed rotundity of his hoofes, and such an one, as thrusts his head deep
into the water when he drinks, his ribs and loins like an Oxes, a smooth and
straight back, his or hippes long, broad, and fleshy, his Legs large, fleshy
and dry, the sinnewes and ioynctures thereof great and not fleshy near the
hoofes: that the hinder part of his body be higher then his forepart, like as
in a Heart, and this beauty better appears in a lean body then in a fat, for
fatness covers many faults; the former parts are thus expressed by Horace:
Regibus hic mos est vbi equos mercantur, opertos
Inspiciunt, nesi facies vt saepe decora.
Molli fulta pede est, emptorem inducat hiantem
Quod pulchri clunes, breue quod caput ardua ceruix.
Hipparchus teaches you this experiment: press the genytall member with your
two fingers, and with locks of Woll draw out his seed which being so drawn
out, if it cleave and hang together, so as it will not be cut nor easily
parted, it is a demonstration of a good Stalion, but if it hang not together
like birdlime, but easily go asunder like milk or whay, such a Horse is not to
be admitted to cover your Mares. The age of a Stallion.
When Horses be old among other faults they engender Foales lame in their
feet, and therefore they are to be kept and not to be admitted to copulation
nor War, for his rage is like a weak fire among wet stuble according to these
verses: -- Morbo grauis aut segnior annis

Frigidus in venerem senior frustraque laborem
Ingratum trahit: and si quando ad praelia ventum est
Vt quondam in stipulis magnus sine viribus ignis
In cassum furit.
Therefore it behooves that a Stalion Horse be not under three years old
when he covers a Mare, and it is best for him to begin at five, Collumella.
for so he will endure in generation not only till he be twenty year old, but
also to thirty or forty years, as in some countries has been often proved.
They are not to be admitted to cover above fifteen in one year at the most,
and a young Horse not above ten or twelve in one year; the residue

The King of Babylon beside his Horses War had eight hundredth Stalions, which
were admitted to cover six thousand Mares, so that ever one had twenty a
piece, Palladius.
there is also a place in Syria near Apamia, where in one plot of ground were
nourished thirty thousand Mares, and three thousand Stalions (as Coelius says)
so that every Stalion had an hundredth Mares to cover (in that place) which
number exceeds the proportion of nature. It is also to be remembered that
Stalions are to be separated from Mares all the year long, except at the time
of procreation, and then also he must be largely fed according to these verses.

His animaduersis, instant sub tempus, and omnes
Impendunt cur as denso distendere pingui,

Florentesque secant herbas, fluuiosque mini strant,
Farraque: ne blando nequeant superesse labori:
Inualidique patrum referant ieiunia nati.
Ipsa autem macie tenuant armenta volentes.
Atque vbi concubitus primos iam nota voluptas
Sollicitat, frondesque negant, and fontibus arcent.
Saepe etiam cursu quatiunt, and Sole fatigant:
Cum grauiter tunsis gemit area frugibus: and cum

Hoc faciunt, nimio ne luxu obtusior vsus
Sit genitali aruo, and sulcos oblimet inertes.
Sed rapiat sitiens Venerem, interiusque recondat. Absyrtus

It is also to be observed, that the males which are designed for procreation
be not over much labored, for then he will be the more weak for generation, nor
yet suffered to be to idle, for then a certain fleamie humor is increased in
them, which likewise disableth them in copulation, and thus much for the males.

Almost all the same things which have bin said of the male, belong to the
female, except the belly of the female ought to be greater, The choice of Mares
but if there be any whit speckles or spots in the eyes of the female, such as
are not contracted by accident, but breed in them by nature* such a one is
refused for breed, for a Horse borne of such a Mare, when he comes to be
old, will likewise be affected with the same-blindesse: but if it be a
female, by reason of her yearly purgation, she may peradventure avoid that
mischief.

It behooves therefore that the Mares appointed for race, be well compacted, of
a decent The copulation of horses and Mares.
Concerning their admission to generation, it is to be remembered, that the
Latins have a proper term to signify the appetite of the female to the
male, which they call ( Equire) that is, (Horssing) and they continue in that
lust sixty days together, the signs whereof are these: They forsake their
company, running not toward the East and West, but the contrary, to the North
and South: neither permit they any body to come near them, until they either
be wearied or meet with the male, and if they meet with a female like
themselves, they join near to her, and seem to rejoice at her society,
lifting up the tail, changing of the voice, and sending forth of her secrets,
a certain thin humor, somewhat like the seed of a horse, which is called
Hippomanes.

They also make water more often then at other times, so that among all the
females of the world, Aristotle. Albertus.
there is none beside a woman, that is more greedy of procreation then a Mare,
because they want a menstruous purgation and yet eat abundance of meat, which
Virgill expresses, setting down their vnlimitable rage, which carries them
over mountains and rivers, in the time of this fury.

Scilicet ante omnes furor est insignis equarum
Et mentem venus ipsa dedit, quo tempore Glauci
Potniades malis membra absumpsere quadrigae
Illas ducit amor traus Gargara, transque sonantem
Ascantum, superant montes and flumina tranant.
Also at that time, their genital hangs forth more then at other times, but
if their manes be shorn off, their lust is extinguished. It is reported also
by Columella that in Spain, in the Mountain Tagro which reaches into
Portugal upon the Ocean, there be Mares which rage so far in lust, that by
their ardent desire of copulation they conceue by the Southwest wind, without
the company of a horse, (even as Hens do lay Eggs being not trod by a Cock)
which are called Hypenemia, but those Foales live not till they be above three
year old. And it is the property of these Mares (says Auicen) by kicking
against the wind with their hinder legs, to open their own womb, and to
receive in that delectable air, wherwithall they are satisfied.

Also he says, that he heard of an old man, which was borne in the I Will of
Pealtupha, that Continuoque auidis vbi subdita flamma medullis,
Vere magis (quia vere calor redit ossibus) illae
Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum, stant rupibus altis
Exceptamque leaves auras: and saepe sine vllis
Coniugijs vento grauidae (mirabile dictu)
Saxa per, and scopulos, and depressas conualles
Diffugiunt, non Eure tuos neque Solis adortus:
In Boream Caurumque aut vide Nigerrimus auster
Nascitur, and pluuio contristat frigore coelum.
Sometimes Horses and Mares admit copulation at two year old, but those
Foales never prove excellent, but at three year old or thirty months, they
suffer conjunction safely and with profit, because they cease to loose their
teeth. Pliny
They continue in their generation, bearing every second year, the male until
he be thirty year old, and the female as long as she lives; but the male
ingendereth yearly; And it is reported of a horse in Opus, that covered a Mare
after he was forty year old, being only holp up and down from the Mare.

Pliny, Oppianus, Aelianus, and Aristotle, do confidently affirm, A history
of a stallion to his own dam
that when the King of Scythia had all his generous breed of Horse destroyed
by a pestilence (except one of his

The very like story is reported of a Horse in the coasts of Rea, yet this is
not held to be general: for beasts (as Aristotle says) do promiscuously cover
one another; the father the Daughter, the Son the mother, the Brother the
Sister, and this makes them to be perfect beasts; and the stories before
recited may be true, yet are they extraordinary: otherwise the common rule of
Ovid remains true. That it is not a filthy thing for beasts to observe no
degrees of nature.

-- Coeunt any malia mullo
Caetera delectu, nechabetur turpe iuuencae
Far patrem tergo, fit equo sua filia coniux.
The means to procure horses to copulation.
that her foale may always be delivered in a warm and seasonable time of the
year: for which cause there is an invention for stiring up of the lust both in
the male and female: the Hymenaean shepherds, by the sweetness of songs upon
their pipes, stirred Columella and Absyrtus, to provoke them by natural
means, like as Bulls and Kyne.

And first of all for the male, give him the tail of a Heart burned, mingled
with wine, and anoint therewithal his stones and general member, and so shall
the dull Stallion be more prone to venery; also there is a kind of Satirium,
which they give to them in drink, or the powder of a horses stones: likewise
if the female refuse, take shrimpes beaten soft with water (as thick as honey)
therewithal touch the nature of the Mare in her purgation, and afterward hold
it to her Nose, or else take hens dunge mixed with Rozen and

But you must regard, that no lean and ill favored Mare be anointed, because
the horse is quickly wearied from his lust, and so delights only to be
tickled therewith without doing any thing.

Other again do first of all bring some vulger horse to the Mare, who
provoke and stirs her to lust, and when he is near the very fact of
filling her, they lead her away, to a more generous Stallion, to be covered by
him: And so if none of these means do prevail with her, they do rub her
secrets with a Nettle, and that causes her to suffer the Horse to enter.

Democritus also says that it is in our power to cause our Horses to bring
forth males or females; To engender a male or female.
for if we suffer them to couple when the North wind blows, or the third day
before the full Moon, or bind his leaft stone, he shall get a male; but if
when the South wind blows, or three days after the full Moon, or bind the
right stone of the Horse, it will prove a female.

Also if at the time of copulation, the Horse leap off from the Mare on the
right side,

The males know their females with whom they live, although they have bine but
a few days together; and if strange females fall into their company, they
expel them away by biting, feeding single and alone with their female by
themselves; but if any male or other stone Horse come within their walk, then
presently they make force at him; if their female stir from them, they
restrain her by biting: and in this time of their rage, they neither regard
the rider, nor their adversary, nor the bridle, nor cruel stripes, nor steep
hills, Virgill in these verses: Nonne vides, vt tota tremor pertentet equorum
Corpora, si tantum not as odor attulit auras?
Ac neque eos iam frena virum, nec verbera saeua,
Non scopuli, rupesque cauae, atque object ae retardant
Flumina, correptos vnda torquentia montes.
It has been also received, that a barren mare shall conceive if you take a
bunch of leeks bruised small and put into a cup of Wine and twelve French flies
called Cantarides in water, put them two days together into the genitall of a
mare, like a Glyster, and afterward

Also some use Syler of the mountains to procure conception in Mares and
Cowes, and the true sign of conception is, when their nature (that is) the
fluent humor, out of their secrets cease for a month, or two, or three: and
Pliny says that when a mare is filled she changes her color, and looks
more red, which is to be understood not of her hair, but of her skin, lips
and eyes, her hair standing more full then before. Then let them be separated
from the males, The ordring of a Mare with foale. Varro Palladius.
exempting them from moist places, cold, and labor,

Likewise they must not have too much meat nor too little, but only a
temperate diet and soft lodging, their better ordering is elegantly described
in Virgill in these verses Non illas grauibus quisquamiug a ducere plaustras,
Non saltu superare viam, sit passus and acri
Carpere prata fuga: sluuiosque innare rapaces.
Saltibus in vacuis pascant: and plena secundum
Flumina, and viridissima gramine ripa:
Spleuncaeque tegant: and sacra procubet vmbra.
This is most certain that if a Woman in her flowers, touch a mare with foale
(or sometimes do but see her) it causes to cast her foale, if that purgation,
be the first after her virginity: Orus.
In like manner, if they smell of the snuff of a candle, or eat bucke-mast or
Gartian. The Egyptians when they will describe a woman suffering abortement,
they picture a Mare treading upon a Wolf, for if a Mare kick at a Wolf or
tread where a Wolf has troad, she casts her foale: If an ass cover a
Mare, which a horse has formerly filled, there follows abortment, but if a
horse cover a Mare, which an Ass has formerly filled, there follows no
abortment, because the horses seed is hotter then the Asses, If a Mare be
sick of abortment or foaling, Pollipody mingled with warm water given her in
a horn, is a present remedy.

The Scythians when they perceive their Mares to be quick with foale,
Aristotle. The time of their going with young.
they ride upon them, holding opinion that thereby, they cast forth their
foales with less pain and difficulty. They carry their young one in their
wombes as has been already said, twelve months, but sometimes they come at
eleven months and ten days, and those are commonly males, for the males are
sooner perfected in the womb then the females, and commonly Aristotle
she deuoureth her seconds, and also a thing that cleaves to her foales
fore-heade, being a piece of black flesh called Hippomanes, neither does she
suffer her young one to suck until she have eaten that, for by smelling
thereunto, the young and old horses, or other of that kind would fall mad, and
this thing have the imposters of the world, used for a Phyltre Virgill speaks
thus of it; Quaeritur and nascentis Equi de front reuulsus
Et matris praereptus amor.
And again, Hinc demiem Hippomanes vero quod nomine dicunt
Pastores. Lentum distillat ab inguine virus
Hippomanes, quod saepe malae legere nouercae
Miscueruntque herbas and non innoxia verba.
This poison made into a candle ( Anaxilaus says) in the burning thereof,
there shall be a presentation of many monstrous horsse-heads. There is very
great poison contained in Hippomanes, for the Arcadian Phormis made a horse of
brass at Olympia, and put Hipomanes into the same, and if the horses at any
time had seen this brazen horse, they wear so far enraged with lust, that
no halters or bands could hold them, but breaking all, run and leaped upon
the said brazen horse, and although it wanted a tail, yet would they forsake
any beautiful Mare and run to cover it; neither when they came unto it, and
found it by their heels to be sounding and hard brass, would they despair
of copulation, but more and more, with noise of mouth, rage, and endeavor of
body, labor to leap upon the same, although the slippery brass gave them no
admission or stay of abod upon the back of that substance, neither could they
be drawn from the said brazen Image, until by the great strength and cruel
stripes of the riders they were forcibly driven

Some think this little piece of flesh to cleave to the forehead, others to
the loins, and many to the genitals: but howsoever it is an unspeakable part
of Gods providence, to make the Mares belly a sepulcher for that poison, for if
it should remain in the males as in the females, the whole race of horses
would utterly perish and be destroyed through rage of lust, for which cause the
keepers and breeders of horses; do diligently observe the time of their
Mares-foaling, and instantly cut off the same from the Colte, reserving it in
the hoof a Mare, to procure the Stallions to carnal copulation, and the Colt
from which they cut this piece of flesh, they sacrificed it, for it is manifest
faith Elianus, that the Mare will never love that foale, from whence she has
not eaten and consumed this piece of

And this poison is not only powerful in brute beasts, but also in reasonable
men, for if at any time by chance or ignorantly they taste hereof, they
likewise fall to be so mad and praecipitate in lust, raging both with
gestures and voice, that they cast their lustful eyes, upon every kind of
Women, attempting wheresoever they meet them to ravish or engender with them:
and besides because of this oppression of their mind, their body consumes and
vadeth away: for three days after the Colt is foaled he can hardly touch the
ground with his head. It is not good to touch them, for they are harmed by
often handling, only it is profitable, that it be suffered with the damme in
some warm and large stable, so as neither it be vexed with cold, nor in
danger to be oppressed by the Mare thorough want of room. Also their hooues
must be looked unto, least their dung sticking unto them burn them, afterward
when it waxes stronger, turn him out into the field with his damme, least the
Mare ouer-mourne her self for want of her foale, for such beasts love their
young ones exceedingly.

After three days let the Mare be exercised and rid up and down, but with
such a pace as the foale may follow her, for that shall amend and increase her
milk. If the Colt have soft hooues, it will make him run more speedily upon
the hard ground, or else lay little stones under their feet, for by such means
their hooues are hardened, and if that prevail not, take swines grease, and
brimstone never burned, and the stalks of Garlic bruzed and mingled all
together, and therewithal anoint the hooues.

The mountains also are good for the breeding of Colts for two causes, first
for that in those places their hooues are hardened, and secondly by their
continual ascending and discending, their bodies are better prepared for
enduring of labor: And thus much may suffice for the educating and nursing of
foales. For their weaning observe this rule, first separate them from their
dams twentyfoure hours together, in the next morning let them

Of handling, taming, or breaking of Horses.
THey which are appointed to break horses, are called by the Graecians
Eporedicae, Hipodami, and Hipocomi, the Latins Equisones, Arulatores, and
Cociones, in Italian Io Cozone. Absyrtus is of opinion that foales are to be
used to hand, and to be begun to be tamed at eighteen months old, not to be
backed but only tied by the head in a halter to a rack or maunger, so that
it may not be terrified for any extraordinary noise, for which cause they use
them to brakes, but the best time is at three years old, as Crescetiensis
teaches in many chapters, wherefore when they begin to be handled, let him
touch the rough parts of his body, as the mane and other places, wherein the
horse takes delight to be handled: neither let him be over seaueare and
Tyrannous, Cicero says, by fair means or by hunger and famine.

Some have used to handle them sucking, and to hang up in their presence bits
and bridles, that so by the sight and hearing the gingling thereof in their
ears, they might grow more familiar. And when they came to hand to lay upon
their backs a little boy flat on his belly; and afterward to make him sit upon
him formally, holding him by the head, and this they do at three year old, but
commit him to no labor until he be four year old, yet domestical and small
horses for ordinary use are tamed at two year old, and the best time for
the effecting hereof, is in the month of March.

It is also good in riding of a young horse to light often, and to get up
again, then must oftentimes go into his stable, that so he may observe the
usage of this beast. The manger also ought to be kept continually clean for
the receiving of his prouender, that so no filth or noisome thing be mingled
therewith: there ought also to be partitions in it, that so every beast may eat
his own allowance, for greedy horses do not only speedily raven up their
own meat, but also rob their fellows. Others again have such weak stomachs
that they are offended with the breath of their fellows, and will not eat
except they eat alone.

The rack also is to be placed according to their stature, that so their
throat may not be too much extended, by reaching high, nor their eyes or head
troubled, because it is Vegetius
In the Summer time let them lodge both night and day in the open air. This
also in stabling of your horses must be avoided, namely the sties of Swine,
for the stink, the breath, the gruntling of hogs, is abominable for horses,
and nature has framed no simpathie or concord betwixt the noble and
courageous spirit of a horse, and the beastly sluggish condition of a

Remove also far away from your horses stables all kind of foul, which were
wont to haunt those places, to gather up the remnant-graines of their
prouender, leaving behind them their little feathers, which if the horse lick
up in his meat, stick in his throat, or else their excrements which procures
the loosenes of his belly.

It must also be regarded, that the stable must be kept neat, sweet, and
clean, Camerarius
so as in absence of the horse, it may notly like a place for swine: The
instruments also, and implements thereof, such as are the horse clothes, the
curri-combes, the mane-combes, saddles and bridles be disposed and hung up in
order behind the horse, so as it may neither trouble him eating or lieng, nor
yet give him occasion to gnaw, eat, and devour them to their own damage or
hurt, for such is the nature of some wanton horses, to pull assunder

They are therefore oftentimes to be exercised and backed, and principally to
be kept in a good diet, for want of food deiecteth the spirit of the noblest
horse, and also makes the mean horse to be of no use; but on the contrary,
a good diet does not only make a mean horse to be seruicable, but also
continue the worth and value of the best, which thing Poets considered, when
they fained that Arion the horse of Neptune and some others were made by Ceres
the Goddess of corn, which any mean witted man may intetpret to signify,
that by abundance of prouender the nature of horses was so far advanced
above ordinary, that like the sons of the Gods they perform incredible
things: whether therefore they eat chafe, or hay, or grass, or grain,
according to the diversities

In the morning give them barley or prouender, a little at a time in distinct
or several portions, twice or thrice one after another, so as he may chew and
eke digest it thoroghly, otherwise if he raven it in, as he will do having much
at a time, he renders it in his dung whole and not disgested. About three
hours after he has eaten his prouender, give him a little of hay, and three
hours after that his dinners allowance of grain, as in the morning, and
afterward about two or three a clock hay again, and then some drink: last of
all give him his allowance of prouender for Supper, with a bottle or two of
hay, which

In England in many place^ they give their horses bread made of Fitches,
beans, and pease. When one is to make a journey on horsse-back, let him not
give his horse to much prouinder the noone before, but somewhat the more hay,
and bread steeped in wine, and also let him serve him sooner at night than
ordinary, that so the beast may take the more rest. There be which refuse to
give horses wet prouender or steeped bread, because they conceive that it will
breed in them loathsomeness of meat; but the truth is, a reasonable
horsse-keeper preuenteth that mischief, and besides, the meat of a horse is
altogether so dry, that the beast himself is endangered to be sick of that
disease; and therefore it is as safe to give him moistened food sometimes, as
well as to give him bread mingled with salt. Camerarius


When a horse is weary or sweateth, let him not drink nor eat prouender, but
after he is walked a little while, give him hay, first of al covering him with a
large cloth, and remember, that hay is not to be cast before a horse, as it
is out of the reeke, but first of all, it must be pulled, and shaken betwixt
the hands, for the avoiding of dust, and other filth. Restrain the horse as
much as you may from eating the litter under his feet, for even the best meat
so defiled is unwholesome. It is also good sometimes to suffer him to pick up
his meat on the ground betwixt his forelegs, that will make his neck to grow
thinner, leanner, and more comely. Let his neck be fast bound in the stable
with a Letherne collar, and bind with a manicle his fore-legge to the hinder
leg on the contrary side, and so shall his legs be preserved in more health,
because they cannot move out of their place but

Concerning the drink of horses, something more is to be added in this place,
and namely brackysh and troubled water, such as runs softly, as in great
pondes, is fittest for horse, because that water, being hot and thick
nourishes better, but the swift Water is colder, R^s^ius
and therefore more unwholesome, but yet in hot times (as in Summer) the sweet
and clearer water is more convenient if custom be not against it. And because
a horse (except he drink freely) can never be fat, let his mouth oftentimes
be washed within with salt and wine, and that will make him eat and drink more
liberally: and yet the running water is more wholesome for horses, because
whatsoever is moueably fluent, is less subject to poison then that which
stands still; but if a horse sweat or be weary, it

And it is better to turn or lead forth your horse to water, then to bring it
unto them. And if at any time necessity cause this to be done, then let the
Water be very clear and fresh.

His stable or lodging ought to be ordered, as neither it offend him by cold in
winter, nor yet thorough heat in Summer, for both these extremeties are
pernicious: and therefore when the weather is extreme cold, then must the
horses back and belly be covered with a cloth, and when on the contrary it
exceeds in heat, then must his litter be taken away. Also in heat he must
be covered with linen to auiode flies, and in cold Catullus, who remembers
this custom, saying: Ferream vt soleam tenaci in voragine mula: So that it
seems that this devise was first of al invented for mules. These
horsse-shooes, Pollux.
Another charge of a horsse-keeper is to keep his horses lips soft, tender,
and gentle, so as he may more sencibly feel his bit: and for this cause let
him often rub them with his hands and warm Water, and if need require with
oil also: and in handling of a horse this must be observed for a general
rule, that neither he come to the horse right before his face, nor behind his
tail, because both these are dangerous to the rider; least by his heels or
mouth he harm him, but on his side he may safely set upon him or handle his
horse, and when he leads him, he must likewise go on his side.

Likewise good and painful dressing of a horse is no small means to retain
him in in sound and perfect health: and therefore he must often be touched with
the curry-comb, and afterward with a handful of straw, so as the hand may
follow the stroke to lay the hair smooth: and their fashion was in old time to
brush over their horses with a little tone

The nether part also of the belly is not to be kept over clean, for the more
it is cleansed with water, the more is the horse pained therein: Camerarius
when a horse is dressed it is good to bring him out of the stable, that so in
the open air he may be tied in a longer halter,

Let them be led to the Water twice a day, and wash therein both legs and
belly, except in the Winter time, wherein it is not safe to wet the beast so
often: and if there be in them any appearance of sickness and infirmity, or if
you have any purpose to give

Some use to wash their horses legs with warm wine-lees to refresh their
joints and sinnewes after hard iournies, which custom seems very allowable:
Vegetius
other use instead thereof warm dish-water out of the kitchen, and the backs
they wash with cold water and salt.

Underneath their tails and near their yards, you shall find them in the Summer
time to be much annoyed with flies, and therefore it is a needful part of the
horsse-keepers watch-fulnes to look in those places and drive them away, for
so his charge will take the better rest.



Cato was wont to say: Frons occipitio prior: That is, As the forehead is
before the nape of the neck, meaning thereby that nature has set him highest
and foremost, which should not hide himself, but take his place upon him and
discharge it, for it is not safe or any part of wisdom, to see by another man's
eyes; or work altogether by Deputies.

Men must also be afraid of lending their horses, for the Germans have a
pretty proverb, that they will not trust their wives at great feasts out of
their sight, for commonly they learn some evil fashion or other more then
they had before, and so much more horses (after lending) return home again
to their masters with alteration of strength and quality.

Of adorning and furnishing horses.
I Cannot approve them that cut off their horses tail, or foretop; one
received beginning from an ignorant persuasion of increasing the strength of
the Horses back, The furnitur of a horse and his triming.
and the other from an immagined comelines, by triming it with ribben or some
devised knot, or that it hindered the horses sight. In the first, the beast is
wronged and deprived of his help against flies, and decency of his hinder
parts, and in the second nature acused, for not adorning the horses forhead
with more

Let the horsse-keeper take heed that he harm not the beast when he puts on
his bridle, for a little negligence quickly brings a great offense, by
touching, wringing, and oppressing any tender part in the horses head or
mouth. He must always put on his bridle on the left side, and if the horse of
his own accord do not open his mouth to the bit, then musthe gently open his
mouth with one finger, and so put it upon him; and if

Also it must be regarded that the horse in leading be not drawn after you,
for so will he be made hard headed, unwilling to follow: again his cheeks
must not be pinched by the bridle, least the skin grow senseless, and also it
must not hang long or loose in his mouth, for so he will be always biting his
bit, and give less obedience to his Rider.

Camerarius writes that he has seen some put salt upon their bits, whereof
the horse licking or tasting, became more willing to take it into his mouth:
and for the better performance hereof, it is necessary to observe by often
trial, what kind or fashioned bitt^ best beseems and fitteth the horses
mouth, and finding it, keep him thereunto continually:

The saddle also must be so fastened to his back, as that it may not turn or
roll upon the same; wherefore he which lays it thereupon, most come on the
left side, and gently without violence or noise, set it upon the beast: so as
neither girths, peytrill, sturrops, trappings, or crupyard, fall betwixt the
back and saddle, neither covering therewith the horses wither, nor yet
touching his hips or loins.

First of all let the peytrill on the breast be buckled, then the girths in
order near the forelegs, not upon the belly, for upon the belly they will be
sliding off, and that is against the rules of riding; for Been equitant qui
been cingunt, that is to say; they ride well which

Of riding and sitting on horseback.
WHen you are to get up and mount on horesebacke, take hold on the lower part
of the bridle near the bit, with the left hand, with such a distance as may
both keep him from rising, nor give him offense if you take advantage to get
into the saddle, and with the right hand take the raines on the top of the
shoulders and the mane, and so hold them as you give no check to the Horses
mouth in mounting: there are other

Therefore before you go to Horssebacke, first stroke your Horse and make
much of him with gentle words, or other convenient sound which the Horse
understands, and so will he stand more willingly til you be on his back: for
this thing, there is in Plutarch an excellent story of Alexander the great,
when Bucephalus was first of all presented to his father King Phillip, by a
Thassalian (called Phillonix:) For when the King was persuaded to go forth into
the field to try the qualities of this beast, which was so highly commended
for rare parts, and valued at such a price, as none but a King might yealde
for him* then the Alexander being present, complained of the ignorance and
fearfulness of the riders, and that they were the cause why such a generous
and gallant beast was no better manned. At the hearing whereof, King Phillip
smiled, and yet so carried himself as though he had not heard the words of his
Son, until Alexander repeated his saying the second time; whereunto his
father replied, what (sir Boy) will you make your self more skillful then
these old cunning riders? will you lay on them an imputation of fear and
ignorance? yes (said Alexander) I will adventure to handle this Phillip) what
punishment then will thou undergo if thou fail and perform not what thou
have said? What punishment (said Alexander) why I will give them the price of
the Horse: Whereat the King laughed and strok up the Wager, and so had
Alexander the raines of the Horse delivered to him, who presently turned him
about against the Sunrising, that so he might not be terrified with the
shadow of the beholders, and so led him up and down softly two or three
turns, and at last wan the Horse to hand, which he gently stroked and
applauded: and when he had gotten perfect intelligence and understanding of the
Horses stomach, he cast off his cloak, and addressed himself to mount on
his back, so holding the raines and bearing his hand and whole body as he did
not check or pinch the Horses mouth: so he inclined him first Alexander
desended from his Horse, he could not contain himself, but he must needs
go kiss and embrace such a Son; whereby it is manifest, that when a man is
to ride on a generous spirited Horse, hoshal bend him to endure the burden by
gentleness and familiarity, so as the beast may still know and love his rider.



Some Horses are taught to bend their knees to take up their aged and sick
Masters, Xenophon.
that so they may be the less offended in ascending to their backs, and this
custom (says Pollux) did first of al begin among the Persians.

The ancient Germans were so singularly exercised in Horsmanship, that standing
upon the ground and holding a Spear of lance in their hands, they mounted
without other stirrup or vantage upon their Horses backs; and not only when
they were ordinarily attired in common garments, but then also, when they were
armed (tho Julius Caesar take from them all glory of chiualry) yet now adays
the invention of Saddles with stirrops, is most easy both for Horse and
Horsseman, being then better the Pelethronian invention time.

When the Rider is in his Saddle, and is well seated, he must not sit as in a
Chair or chariot, bended together, but rather keep his body upright, only
bowing outwardly his knees, for so shall he be better able to defend himself,
or offend his adversary; for he must

The Rider or master of Horses must spare his Horse in the heat of Summer,
(about Dog days) and in the cold of Winter, Russius
and never at any time to ride past the twylight of the evening. The Horse
being empty, is more prone to make water then being full, and therefore must
not be hindered in that desire: and always after his staling, ride him not too
fast, until his nerves which were extended to let forth the urine be
contracted, settled and drawn together again.

If in the winter time a horse be to pass over a foord of water (which will
ascend up above his belly) let him stale first of al, Absirtus
least he fall into the strangury, and also be a little eased of his load.

There is no beast that reioyseth more in celerity and swiftness then a horse,
because so Xenophon when you are to ride fast or for a wager, is this; bend the
upper part of the body forward, stretching out the hand that carries the
raines; now drawing it in, and then letting it at length again; and therefore
it is good in such cases to use short raines, and if the Horse in his course
stretch forth the raines of his own accord, then is it a sign of an
unskillful Rider, or of a weak and tireable horse.

Pollux.
Add not Spurs but in great necessity, but guide and provoke him with voice and
riding rod, for quick and good metled Horses, are by the Spur made fierce; and
gentle natured

You must also shorten and lengthen your iournies and times of ridings, so as
they may neither be certain to the beast, nor yet over long; and specially
after a long journey, take a shorter if you ride upon the same horse.

First of all let him be used to plain and equal ways, and if he be to leap
or go vppe^ hill, it was a precept of the old Graecians, that then the Rider
must lay the raines in his neck.

If the Horse at any time be either more fierce or sluggish then ordinary, he
may be holp by these means. Wildenesse and fierceness of Horses, is like to
anger and rage in

But if any man be so simple as to think that by length of journey or race,
his horse will be more meek, because he may be tired, he deceives himself,
for as rage in man inuenteth hurtful revenge, and turns into malice by
continuance, so also in horses it

It is also better to use light and gentle bridles then heavy and sharp,
except the rider can by his art so frame the sharp, as the gentle bitte: and
also the rider must so frame himself in his art of ryding, that in the
commotion of his Horse, he may not touch any member or part of him, but only
his back whereupon he sits.

He must also learn his different terms, to incite and stir up his Horse to
run forward, which the Graecians call ( Clogmos) or else to restrain him and
keep him in which they call ( Poppysmus) the one closes the lips, and the
other touches the palate.

If the Horse be fearful of any thing, you must show the thing to him
plainly, that so by custom he may learn not to be skittish, and let him smell
thereunto, till he learn not to be afraid, but if men beat them, they do but
fear them more; for while they are so ill

When a Horse is so tired and wearied in his journey that a man would judge
him unfit for any labor, take off his Saddle and burden, and put him into
some stable or green field, where he may tumble and towle over and over, and
he shall easily recover. In ancient time, if horses were to be travailed
through snow, they made them boots of

Of the disposition of horses in general.
AMong the flocks or heardes of Horses, there is not a Captain or leader
going before or governing the residue, as among Oxen, Sheep, and Elephants;
because the nature of these is more instable and moveable it being a swift and
high spirited beast, and therefore has received a body furnished Lactantius
truly observes in them a desire of glory, because after victory, the
conquerours exsult and rejoice, but the conquered or overcome, mourn and hang
down their heads: which thing Virgill expresses in this verse; Insultare
solo, and gressus glomerare superbos. But more plainly Ovid, the triumph of
the conquering horse, saying: Hic generosus honos and gloria mayor equorum
Nam capiunt animis palma^, gaudentque triumpho
Seu septem spatijs circo mexuere coronam.

Attollat caput, and vulgi se venditet aura,
Celsaue cum caeso decoratur tergaeleone
Quam tumidus, quantoque venit spectabilis actu:
Compes^atque solum, generoso concita pulsu,
Vngula sub spolijs grauiter redemitis opimis.
And Pliny affirms that when they are joined together in chariots, they
understand their encouragements of glory and comendation: and therefore there
is not any beast of so

Of the natural disposition of horses.
THey love wet places and baths, for which cause they are called Philolutra,
they also love music as has been already declared, and the whole hoaft or
Army of the Sybarites, taught their Horses to dance at the sound of a Pipe:
and Coelius writes hereof in this manner; So great (says he) was the riot
and wantonness of the Sybarit^, that at their common feasts they brought in
horses to dance before men; which thing being known by the Crotoniatae, they
offered them War, and agreed upon the fight: whereupon, in the day of
battle, the Crotoniats brought with them diverse* Pipers and Minstrils, who
upon a sign given to them, sounded their instruments, whereupon the Sibaritan
horses came running and dancing among their adversaries, and so betrayed them
selves and their riders to the enemy.

The like story is reported by Athaeneus, of the people (called Cardiani) for
they also taught their Horses to dance upon their hinder Legs, and to work
many strange

The Bisaltans waged War against the Cardians, and they had to their Captain
a certain man (called Onaris) who when he was a Boy was sold to Cardia, and
there he served with a Barber: In the time of his service he oftentimes heard,
that the Oracle had foretold, A History.
how the Cardians should be overcome by the Bisaltans, and therefore he to
prevent the worst ran away from his master, and came home safe to Bisalta
his own country, and was by his country men created Captain of all their
warlike forces: he understanding what tricks the Cardians taught their Horses
in dancing, brought out of Cardis certain Pipes, and taught diverse Bisaltans
to sound and play the measures upon them, which the Cardians taught their
Horses: whereupon when as they joined battle with the Cardian Horses (for
all the force of the Cardians lay in their Horses) he commanded his piping
Bisaltans to sound their music, which the Horses understood, who presently
stood up upon their hinder legs, and would not fight any more or go any
further, so as they were overthrown by their adversaries.

Solinus
They have also a singular pleasure in public spectacles; and therefore have
been observed to be provoked not only by pipes or such isntrumental music,
but also by songs or vocal harmony, by variety of colors, and by burning
Torches: Dion also Writes that he saw a Horse taught to know and to do
reverence to a king.

And Textor affirms that he saw a Horse at Paris at the triumphs, tilt, and
Tournaments made for the marriage of Jews the twelueth to Mary, a Lady of
Britain, which

Homer seems also to affirm that there are in Horses divine qualityes,
understanding things to come, for being tied to their mangers they mournd for
the death of Patroclus, and also fore-shewed Achilles what should happen unto
him: for which cause Pliny says of them, that they lament their lost masters
with tears, and foreknow battles, Virgill writes thus of the horse of
Pallas: Post bellatrix equus, positis insignibus Aethon
Lachrymans, quisque humectat grandibus ora.
Accursius affirms, that Caesar three days before he died found his ambling
Nag weeping in the stable, which was a token of his ensewing death, which thing
I should not believe, Tranquillus in the life of Caesar, had related the same
thing, and he adds moreover, that the Horses which were consecrated to Mars
for passing over Rubricon, being let to run wild abroad without their
masters, because no man might meddle with the horses of the Gods, were found
to weep abundantly and to abstain from all meat. Whereof their could be no
cause given, but the love of their former masters. It is also reported of
Rodatus, a captain to Charles the great, who after the death of the Emp. was
made a Monk, his horse would never suffer any to come on his back except his
master, who likewise had abstained from riding many years: But it happened
that certain Pagans, brake in upon the said monastery, whereupon poor Rodatus
went unto his horse, who after many years discontinuance, willingly took up
his aged master upon his back, and so carried him until Pliny and Tzetzes,
that when a foale has lost his dam, the residue of the Mares which give suck,
bring it up, and that they are seldom found at variance, except the barren
mares pull away the foales from the natural dams.

For there is no creature so loving to their young ones, as are Mares, neither
any so desirous of young: for which cause, when they are barren themselves,
they labor to steal them away from others.

They which were wont to run rases, would perform it upon Mares, Aristotle.
newly delivered of Foals, they tied up the Foals at home, and led the Mares to
the beginning of the race, making the end thereof at the Foales stable; and so
putting the Beast forward, she runs homewardes more speedily for the
remembrance of her Foale.

Of the fear of Horses and their enemies
Horses are afraid of Elephants in battle, and likewise of a Cammell, for
which cause when Cyrus fought against Cra^sus, he overthrew his Horse by the
sight of Camels, for a Horse cannot abide to look upon a Camel. If a Horse
tread in the foot-path of a Wolf, he presently falls to be astonished;
Likewise, if two or more drawing a chariot, come into the place where a Wolf
has troad, they stand so still as if the Chariot and they were frozen to
Aelianus and Pliny. Aesculapius also affirms the same thing of a Horse,
treading in a Bears footsteps, and assigns the reason to be in some secret,
betwixt the feet of both beasts.

We have showed already, that if a Mare strike a Wolf, Orus.
or tread in the footsteppes thereof, she presently casts her Foale; and
therefore the Egyptians, when they signify a Woman suffering abortement,
picture a Mare kicking a Wolf. The Dextanian Horses being not gelded, dare
fight with Lions, but being gelded, like al other Horses, Oppianus
they are so afraid of Lions, that no stripes, nor Spurs, is able to bring them
in their presence, the Caropion Horses excepted.

Al kind of Swine are enemies to Horses, the Estridge also is so feared of a
Horse, Cardan.
that the Horse dares not appear in his presence. The like difference also is
betwixt a Horse and Anclorus which neyeth like a Horse, flying about, the
Horse does many times drive it away, but because it is somewhat blind, and
cannot see perfectly, therefore the horse does oftentimes ketch it, and devour
it, hating his own voice in a creature so unlike himself.

It is reported by Aristotle, that the Bustard loves a Horse exceedingly, for
seeing other Beasts feeding in the pastures, dispiseth and abhors them, but
as soon as ever it seeeth a Horse, it flies unto him for joy, although the
Horse run away from it: Aelianus.
and therefore the Egyptians, when they see a weak man driving away a
stronger, they picture a Bustard flying to a horse. Horses are also taught to
leap, if a man take him by the rains, and go over the ditch before him,
holding him fast, and pulling him to him. But if he be Persians, and Nodrisians
use and accustom their Horses to run both down hill, and up hill.

These Epethits following, do serve and express the nature of Horses: full of
stomach, generous, magnanimious, strong, ardent, sharp, covetous, fierce,
bold, threatening, Arcauania, Argose, Mysene, Aria, Elis, Epid. Spain,
Thesalt, Farsalis, of which country was Bucephalus, the Horse of Alexander.
Ballasia, a province addicted to Mahomet, has many of these excellent, great,
and swift horses, whose hoofes are so hard, that they need no iron shoes,
although they travail over rocks and mountains.

The Arabians also have such horses, and in the kingdom of Senega, they have no
breed of Horses at all, by reason of the heat of their Country, which does
not only burn up all pasture, but also cause Horses to fa^l into the
strangury; for which cause they do buy Horses very dear, using in stead of
hay, the stalks of Pease dried and cut asunder, and Millet seed, in stead of
Oats, wherewithal they grow exceeding fat, and the love of that people, is so
great to Horses, that they give for a Horse furnished, nine bond-slaues, or
if it please them well, fourteen; but when they have bought their Horses, they
send for Witches, and observe therein this ceremony.

They make a burning fire with sticks, putting therein certain fuming Herbs,
afterward

The love and knowledge of Horses to men.
ANd to this discourse of Horses belongs their nature, either of loving or
killing men. Of the nature of Alexanders Bucephalus, is sufficiently said,
except this may be added, that so long as he was naked and without furniture,
he would suffer any man to come on his back, but afterward being sadled and
furnished, he could endure none but Alexander his master: For if any other
had offered to come near him, for to ride him, he first of all terrified him
with his neighing voice, and afterward troad him under foot if he ran not
away. When Alexander was in the Indian Wars, and ryding upon this Horse in a
certain battle, performed many valiant acts, and through his own
improuidence, fell into an ambush of his foes, Gillius
and set him on the ground; which being performed in the same place he gave
up the ghoast and dyed, (as it were comforting himself with this service)
that by his own death he had saved the life of such a King: for which cause,
after Alexander had gotten victory, in that very place where his Horse died he
built a city and called it Bucephalon.

Textor.
It is also reported that when Limus the Emperor would have had his Horses to
tear Neocles the Son of Themistocles perished by the biting of a Horse:
neither herein only is the nature of Horses terrible, because also they have
been taught to tear men in pieces: for it is said that Busiris and Diomedes
did feed their Horses with man's flesh, and therefore Hercules took the like
revenge of Diomedes, for he gave him to his Horses to be eaten: of Diomedes
were these verses made, Vt qui terribiles programen habentibus herbis,
Impius humano viscere pauit equos.
The like also is reported of Glaucus (the son of Sysiphus) who fed Horses
with man's flesh at Potnia a city of Boeotia, and afterward when he could make
no more provision for them, Virgill writes thus; Et mentem venus ipsa dedit
quo tempore Glauci,
Potniades malis membra absumpsere quadrigae.
But this is thought a fiction, to express them which by feeding and keeping
of Horses, consume their wealth and substance: and thus much for the natural
inclination of Horses.

Of several kinds of Horses.
THere be several kinds of horses which require a particular tractate by
themselves, and first of all the martial or great warlicke horse, which for
profit the poet coupleth with sheep: Lanisierae pecudes and equorum bellica
proles. Xenophon and Oppianus. He must be of a singular courage and docibility,
with out maime, fear^, or other such infirmity.

He must be able to run up and down the steepest hills, to leap, and bite, and
fight in battle, but with the direction of his rider: for by these is both the
strength of his body and mind discovered; and above al, such a one as will
never refuse to labor, though the day be spent: wherefore the rider must first
look to the institution and first instruction of his horse, for knowledge in
martial affairs is not natural in men or horses, and therefore except
information and practice adorn nature, it cannot

The principal things which he must learn are these: Xenophon.
first to have a lofty and flexible neck, and also to be free, not needing the
spur; for if he be sluggish and need often agitation too and fro by the hand of
the rider, or else if he be full of stomach and sullen, so as he will do
nothing but by flattery and fair speeches, he much troubles the mind of the
rider: but if he run into the battle with the same outward aspect of body, as
he does unto

The manner of his institution may be this: The institution of a warlicke
horse.
after the dressing and furnishing of your horse as aforesaid, and likewise
the backing, first of al move, stir, or walk your horse gently, until he be
well acquainted with the carriage of your hand and whole body, and afterward
accustom him to greater and speedier pace or exercise, use him also to run
longer

And always it is to be remembered that after the mounting on horsse-backe, you
must first of al begin on the left hand, bending your hand that way, and also
to the right hand when you would have your horse to turn on that side. And
above all other things horses are deligh^ed w^^^ crooked, bending and round
courses, such as are in circles and Rings, and he must be accustomed (...)
other horses, leaving them behind him, Men have perished by rashness in riding.
and likewise turning toward them and making at them with his face to them: but
headlong and precipitate Nipheus Leucagus, Liger, Clonius, Remulus, Amycus. And
also among the Historiographers. Agenor, Fulco of Jerusalem, Phillip, son of
Ludonicus Crassus king of France, and Bela king of Pannonia.

Of Horsse-men, and the orders of Chiualry and Knighthood.
THe principal horsse-men of the world celebrated in stories, for training,
ruling, and guiding their horses according to the art of war, may for the
dignity of Knighthood (where withal they are honored) and from whom that
Equestrial order is derived, be recited in this place. It is manifest by
S^pontinus The honor of horssemanship.
for at the first the^e was no difference betwixt Equites and Indices, for both
of them had for a badge, cognisaunce, or note of their honor, power to wear a
ring of gold, and in the consulship of Marcus Cicero the title was turned to
Equestriall or name of a knight or man at Arms, by that means reconciling
himself to the Senate, and affirming that he was derived from that order, and
from that time came the Equester ordo, being as is said before the people, and
recorded after the people, because of the latter creation thereof: yet had they
not their beginning at this time, but only now they first came into the
orders of Celeres) under Romulus, of one Celer, who at the command of Romulus
slew Remus, and he was made the chief judge of three hundred. They were
afterward called Flexumines, either because they swayed the minds of them whom
they judged, or else which is more probable, because of martialling and
instructing their horses for war: afterward because they took a great company
of horsse-men, without all aid of footmen, Festus.
at the city Trossulum in Thuscia, they were called Trossulai, and Trossuli,
and yet some ignorant persons honored with the title of Trossuli in remembrance
of that victory, were ashamed thereof as unworthy their dignities.

They were forbidden to wear purple like as were the Senators, and their
golden Ring was a badge both of peace and war. The master of the horse among
the Romans called Hipparchus, and by the Latins Magister Equitum, was a
degree of honor next to the Dictator, and Marcius the Dictator made the first
master of horsse-men, who was called Spurius, Suidas.
and set him in place next to himself. These Equestrial men or knights of
state were wont to be publicans at the least, and it was ordained that no man
should be called into that order, except both he, his father, and grandfather,
were free men, and were worth in value, twenty thousand pound; Turon and
Tiberius made this law, but afterward it grew remiss and not observed, whereby
both bond men and Scribes were rewarded with this dignity from the Emperor,
for Orations and pleasing speeches: yet were the Decuriall judges chosen out of
this rank; for indeed by primary and institution, they were the flower and
seminary of the Roman gentry. Pliny complains that this dignity Cato took
away the horse from Scipio A^iaticus, because he had intercepted money, and from
hence came the terms of their allowance, as Equistrae aes, for that money which
was paid for a horse to one kni. and pararium aes, for a double fee to an
Equestrial man. The Athenian orders.
Among the Athenians the highest order was of them which were (...) medimni,
which had plowd so much land as had sowd (...) of corn, and the next degree
were their Equites, knights, or horssemen, because for the defense of their
city, they Aristophanes Coelius Suidas.
were called Hippades: and they had liberty to norish their long ha^ which was
forbidden to other men, and their tax to the sacrifice was at the least half a
talent, (which is at the least 300. crowns) and this sacrifice was made for the
health of their horses: there were two masters created over these, to wage
and order war, and ten inferior governors or wardens to look to the provision
and norishing of horses. Among the Lacedaemonians they had four governments.
The monarchy for the kings, the Aristocraty for the old men, the Olygarchie for
their Ephori or commissioners, the Democratye for their young men, with
governed, managed, and instructed horses. Nestor that ancient knight was
commended for this skill, and had therefore given him the title of Hippotes.

Among the Chalcidensians there was not a rich man but they took him into this
order, and the Cretians likewise did ever highly account hereof, and made it
their highest degree of Achaeans had this degree in high estimat, like as the
Germans their Bataui or states. The Citizens of Capua were and are disguised
with a perpetuity of this honor, because in the Latins war, they did not
revolt from the Romans, and among all other the Gaditan were most honored
herewith, for at one time and for one battle they created 400. This title has
spread and adornd it self with many more degrees, as that among the French
Caballarij and Equites aurati, and such as are knights of Jerusalem and diverse
other, some for religion, and some for feats of arms: whereas the Persians
used a certain kind of garment in war, called Manduas, from hence comes the
knights

-- Nempe volucrem
Sic laudamus equum: facili cui plurima palma
Feruet, and exultat rauco victoria circo.
And again Ovid says: Non ego nobiluim venio spectator equorum And Horace:
N^c te nobilium fugiat certamen equorum
Primus in certamine.
There was one Anniceris a Cyrenian most skilful in this practice, and
according to the vain Plato would needs in the Academy show him and his
scholars his skill, and therefore joining his horses and chariot together,
made many courses with such an even and delineat proportion, that his horses
and wheels never wandered a hair breadth from the circle or place limited, but
always kept the same road and footsteps, whereat every one marueiled: but Plato
reproved the dubble diligence and vain practice of the man, saying to him in
this manner: It cannot be, that a man which has traveled and labored so much
in an art or skill of no worth or use in the common wealth, that ever he can
addict his mind to grave, serious, and profitable business, for while he
applies all his parts and powers of body and soul to this, he is the less
able and more unapt to those things which are alone more worthy of admiration.

The ancient custom was to use other men's horses in this combat, and
therefore in the funeral of Patroclus, Homer brings in Menelaus, using the
horse of Agamemnon. There were four several places wherein these games of
horses and chariots were wont to be observed and kept, and they were called
after these places, Olympia, Pythia, Nemea, and Isthmia, and of all these the
Olympiads were the chief whereof all stories are full, for they were
celebrated in Olympus every fifte year inclusiuelie, that is, after the end of
every fourth year.

Olympus were first instituted by Hercules in the 2752. year of the world,
beginning the world from Noah's flood, and they begin to record and number
the first Olympiad to be about the 3185. year of the world, about seventeen
year before the building of Rome.

There were of these Olympiads, 328. and the last of these by computation or
account fell about the year of our Lord 534. after the birth of Jesus Christ,
the blessed Savior of the world.

The perfection of these games began the twenty five Olympiad, at what time
Pagondas the Theban was pronounced victor: for then were swift horses brought
into the games, and were called ( Teleioi) that is, perfect in agility and
growth: and these are called by Pindarus (Monampycia,) afterward came in
Synoris with two horses, and in succession both Colts, Mares, and Mules: their
courses are thus expressed by Virgill, Ergo animos aevumque notabis,
Et quis cuique dolor victo, quae gloria palmae.
Nonne vides? cum praecipiti certamine campum
Corripuere, runt que effusum carcere currus:
Cum spes arrectae inuenum: exultantiaque haurit
Corda pauor pulsans, illi instant verbere torto,
Et proni dant lora: volat viferuidus axis.
Iamque humiles, iamque elati sublime videntur
Era per vacuum ferri atque assurgere in auras,
Nec mora, nec requies: vt fuluae nimbus arenae
Tollitur: humescunt spumis, flatuque sequentum:
Tantus amor laudum tantae est victoria curae.
Sin ad bella magis studium turmasque feroces:
Aut Alphaea rotis prelabi flumina Pisae.
Et Iouis in luco, currus agitare volantes
Primus equi labor est animos atque arma videre
Bellantum lituosque pati tractuque gementem
Far rotam and stabulo frenos audire sonantes
And Horace expresses it in this manner: Sunt quos curriculo paluerem Olympicum
Collegisse iuuat, metaque farindis
Euitata rotis palmaque nobilis
Terrarum dominos euehit ad deos.
Women were wont to be excluded from these games, until Cynisca the daughter
of Archidamus Olympus, she obtaind the prize, therefore her horses were
consecrated to Jupiter Olympus, and their figures remained in brass in his
Temple.

Pliny.
It is also said that Echerates a Thessalian overcame in the Olympian games with
a Mare great with foale: And it is also reported that Miltiades the son of
Cimon Stesagora (one of the ten captains of Athens) ran away from
Pisistratus the Tyrante, and in the time of his absence, he was twice victor at
Olympus by four Mares, the first time he bestowed the glory upon his cozen
German Miltiades, his mothers brothers son, and the second time he took it
to himself, for which cause he was slain by the sons of Pisistratus, his
Mares Olympus, so that it appeared, he ran diverse times and never missed
victory. At Athens they observed these courses with horses in honor of
Theseus, and called the place of the running, Hippodromus.

The Latins call it Stadium, and Curriculum, and it was appointed in some
plain valley, according to the proverb; Equus in planiciem, in the midst
whereof was a building called ( Circus) whereon the beholders stood to look
upon the pastime, and there were also places to contain the horses and
Chariots, till they were turned out to run, (called Carceres) according to the
verses of Silius Sic vbi prosiluit piceo de carcere preceps
Ante suos it victor Equus.
And Horace also Vt cum carceribus missos rapit vngula currus
Instat equis auriga suos vincetibus, illum
Preteritum temnens exstremos inter Enutom.
And hereof came the pouerbe ( A carceribus ad calcem) signifieng, from the
beginning of the race to the latter end. Eurithonius invented a chariot called
Harma, and was the first that ever ran in Olympus with four horses in the
same, of whom Virgill writes thus: Primus Erichthonius currus and quataeior
ausis
Iungere Equos rapidisque insistere victor.
And from hence came the term Quadriga for a chariot with four horses.
There was a chariot in Athens drawn by one horse, and the games thereof were
called Polemysteri^, Likewise at Rome in the Consuall-feasts celebrated for the
honor of Neptune, they ran with horses both joined and single.

There were likewise games at Rome, called Aequitia, and Equiria, celebrated
every year, the twelfth of the calenders of May, wherein after the horses
they coursed Foxes Tarneamentum, and in Italian by Scoppa, Hagiostra, and in
French Formierim. There is also a play with horses for children called Troya,
first invented by Ascantus when he besieged Alba, and by him brought and taught
to the Romans, of which Virgill speaks, saying: Incedunt pueri, pariterque
ante ora parentum
Frenatis lucent in equis,
Cornea bina ferunt praefixa hastilia ferro:
Pars laeues humero pharetras.
Tres equitum numero turmae, ternique vagantur
Ductores: pueri bisseni quenque secuti.

Aepytides long dedit, insonuitque flagello,
Olli discurrere pares, atque agmina terni
Diductus soluere choris, rursusque vocati
Conuertere vias, infestaque tela tulere.
Inde alios ineunt cursus, aliosque recursus
Aduersis spatijs, alternosque orbibus orbs
Impediunt pugnaeque cient simulacha sub armis.
Et nunc terga fugae nudant: nunc spicula vertunt
Infensi; facta pariter nunc pace feruntur.

Ascanius, longam muris cum cingeret Albam
Retulit, and priscos docuit celebare Latinos.
Hinc maxima porro
Accepit Roma, and patrium seruauit honorem:
Troiaque nunc pueri, Troianum dicitur agmen.


Of the greatest Horsse-maisters, and nourishers of Horse.
Solomon, that he had forty thousand stables of horses, for chariots, and
twelve thousand for war. The Lybians when they went to war, did fight out
of their chariots, and therefore they were said to fight upon two horses. The
Centaures were the first that ever taught men to fight on horsse-back, and the
Roman Turnia consisted of two and thirty horsse-men, the Captain whereof was
called Beeurio. The people of Nomades called Surgatij, brought eight thousand
horssemen at one time into the field, which neither used armor, nor brass, nor
iron, except only their daggers, and a rope of leather thonges,

The Indians use the very self same Armor on horsse-backe that they do on
foot, but yet they lead empty horses and chariots to leap up and down upon,
and to refresh their fighting horses, and the number of their horsse-men were
at one time, fourscore thousand.

When Pharnuches the Arabian, was riding on horsse-backe, there was a Dog ran
betwixt his horses legs, wherewithal the horse being amazed, suddenly
leaped upright, and cast off his Rider, who being bruised with the fall, fell
into a consumption: whereupon the Servants at the commandment of their
Master, brought the said horse into the place where he cast his Rider, and
there cut off his legs above the knees. There was also a fashion for horses
to sight in battles without bridles: For Fuluius Flaccus, when the Romans
overthrew the Celtiberians in Spain, caused them to pull off their bridles
from their horses, that so they might run with all voilence, without
restraint

There is a proverb in Greek, ( Choris hippeis) that is, ( Seorsim equites)
the horssemen are assunder, whereof Suidas gives this reason: when Datys
invaded the territory of the Athenians ranging and destroying at his pleasure,
no man daring to abide his forces, at his departure, the Ionians climed up into
trees, and signified unto the Athenians, that the horssemen had broken rank
and were assunder. Whereupon Miltiades set upon the scatered

Of fighting in war upon Horses.
THe most cruel and fearful kind of fight, is the arming of horses, which
were called in ancient time Catafracti, and Clibanarij, and Acatafracti, and
Ferentarij, fighting first of all with spear, and afterward with sword and
shield, casting sometimes also Darts at one another, and bearing bows to
shoot arrows, their horses making room for

The ancient horsse-men of the Romans had no brest-plates, (as Polibius
affirms) and therefore they were naked in their fore parts, providing for the
danger that was behind them, and defending their breasts by their own
celerity: their shieldes were made of Ox skins plighted and pasted together,
being a little round in compass like the fashion of a man's belly.

There was also great use of swift horses in War, for the Roman soldiers
carried with them two horses a piece, D^^n.
being taught and exercised like Indians, when they had need to fly, to leap
upon their empty horse, for the sparing of their other: and they were
therefore called Amppiphi, being apt to carry their masters out of danger, and
from hence ( Aelianus says) the Romans took the pattern of their Phalanx,
(called Antistomus* which they used to terrify the Barbarians, setting their
horses in a doubble front, so as they appeared headed both ways: and this was
also the custom of all the* Germans, when the number of their horsse-men was
not equal, they mingled the footmen, with their light horses, Alexander.
who being experienced to run suddenly with the horsemen, leaped into the
battle, and surprised the enemies flying away: and the same fashion did
Strabo says,) for the terrifieng of their enemies, making the foot men to fall
into the battle among the horsemen.

Those which did shoot Darts on horseback, were called Hippotoxotiae, and
therefore Aristophanes in his discourse of byrds, calls Hawks by that name,
for the resemblance betwixt them and horses, bearing these Riders. The hawks
are so called in the swiftnes of their course; and because the talants of the
Hawk are crooked like bows. Arianus writes that the horsemen of Alexander
carried spears in their hands, fourteen cubits long; whereunto I cannot
consent, for eight cubits is a common size, as much as any Soldier on
horseback is able to use.

In battle there are wings of Horsemen, which are so called, because like
Wings they cover and protect the Army. And there were also Legionary Horsemen,
because they were joined to the Legions of Soldiers, and the company of
Elephants, Footmen, and Horsse-men which were wont to go before the King,
were called Agema. A company of Horses set like a Tower in a Quadrangular
form in a field, was called ( Pergus.) The Prometopidia) upon the ears (
Parotia) upon the cheeks ( Paria) upon the breast ( Prasternidia) upon the
sides ( Parapleuridia) upon the loins ( Parameridia,) upon the Legs (
Paracnemidia..) And the time of arming a Horse is known of every Soldier.

Of Riding.
THe Meades, Persians, and Armenians, were the first that invented the art of
riding and shooting, (as Strabo says,) Pausanias called Neptune Hippeos for no
other cause, but that it was supposed he was the first invented the art of
riding. Pollidorus ascribes it to Bellerophon. Lysias the Orator says that
the Aamazonian Women were the first of all mortal creatures that first
adventured to back Horses. Others ascribe it to the Centaures: But to leave
the invention, and come to the Art. Damis in the life of Apollonius, sets
down the sum of the Art of riding, which briefly is this. To sit straight
upon his Horse, to rule him valiantly, to turn him with the bridle which way
soever he pleases, to beat him when he is stubborn, to avoid Ditches,
Gulfes, and Whyrpooles when he rides through Waters; going up a hill, to
lengthen

Martial has an excellent Epigrame upon one Priscus a rash-headed-hunter, who
neither feared Hedges, Hills, Dales, Ditches, Rocks, Rivers, nor other perils;
using a bridle to his Horse but none to his affections, and therefore he
tells him, that he may sooner break a Hunters neck, then take away a Hares
life: for there are deceits in the rocks, hills, and plain fields, to shake the
rider from horseback to the earth. Thus follows the Epigram.

Parcius vtaris moneo rapiente veredo
Prisce, nec in leopores tam violentus eas.

Decidit excussus nec rediturus equo.
Insidias and campus habet: nec fussa, nec agger,
Nec sint saxa licet, fallere plana solent.
Non deerunt qui tanta tibi spectacula praestent:
Inuidia fatised leuiore cadunt.
Si te delectant animosa pericula, Thuscis
(Tutior est virtus) insidiemur apris.
Quid te frena iuuant temeraria? Saeptus illis

The best place for riding, is a barren and plain Country. It is reported of
Claudius, that when he had road a great way in the Country upon his enemies
and met no body, he returned back again into his own Camp, and blamed the
sluggishnesse of his enemies, because no one of them was seen abroad.

It is reported by Aristotle, that the further a man rides, the more apt he
shall be to weep; and the reason is, because of all the motions of the body,
riding is the wholsomest, both for the stomach, and for the hippes; for a man
must not sit on horseback, as if he were carried in a coach; but rather keep
his backe-bone upright, not only to be moved by his Horse that bears him,
but also by himself; and therefore he must sit close to the Horses hips,
extending his Legs to the uttermost, using not only his eyes to look before
him, but also lifting up his neck to help his sight: for so the soft pace of
the Horse does corroborate the spirit above al other exercises; likewise, the
body and stomach; also it purges the senses, and makes them sharp; yet
sometimes by the violent course of a Horse, the breast of a man, or some other
part about the raines receive damage, (as some

The Scythians above all other Nations have the loosest and broadest bodies;
and the reason is, because they wrap not their children in swaddling clothes as
other people, and likewise because they have no regard unto their sitting upon
horseback, and lastly for their continual sloth and easy: for the men use
much to ride in Chariots, and Litters, before they get on horseback, but after
they are accustomed thereunto they ride so much, that their hips and bones fall
full of ache, and they are also thereby made unfit for generation, because in a
journey of an hundred Miles they never light to ease themselves and their
beasts.

These men hereafter named, were excellent riders and tamers of Horses.
Antomedon, servant Achilles, Idaeus, servant to Paraimus; Metiseus servant to
Turnus; Myrtilus servant to Ocnomaus; Ceberes servant to Darius; Anniceris,
servant to Cyreneus; Picus to Mesapus; and Lausus Silius remembers Cyrnus,
Durius, Atlas, and Iberus.

The instruments of Riding appertaining to a Horse.
A Good rider must consider the hardness or softness of his Horses mouth,
that so he may temper his bit; for a stiff Lupati, because they are unequal,
and indented like to a wolves teeth, whereunto the Horse being accustomed,
grows more tractable and obedient to a gentle bit. According to the saying of
Ovid: Tempore pareot equus, lentis, animosis habenis
Et placido duros, accipit ore lupos.
And Virgill again speaks to like effect: prensisque negabunt
Verbera lenta pati, and duris parere lupatis
Asper equus, duris contunditur, ora lupatis.
And Silius says: Quadrupedem flectit, non cedens virga lupatis. There is also
another instrument made of iron or Wood (called Pastomis) and englished (
Barnacles) which is to be put upon the horses Nose, to restrain his tenatious
fury from biting, and kicking, especially at such time, as he is to be shod or
dressed. The Indians were wont to use no bridles, like the Graecians and Celts,
but only put upon their horses mouth a piece of a raw Ox skin, fastened round
about, containing in it certain iron pricks standing to the Horses lips,
putting a long a round trench through his mouth, to the edge whereof they
fasten the raines, wherewithal they guide the beast. The Turkish Horses,
Habenae) because they make the horses, Habeles, that is, tractable, and
rulable, to be turned, restrained, or put forward, at our pleasure, according
to the saying of Cilius; Ferrato calce, atque effusa, largus habena,
Cunctantem impellebat equum.
And Virgill: Ipse ter aducta, circum caput egit habena.
Neither is there any Horse, swift, or slow, noble, or unnoble, that can be
guided without these, which must be held continually in the hand of the rider,
they must not be unequal, one longer then another, neither thick, neither
weak, nor brickle.

There was a certain Golden chain (called Ampix) wherewithal the fore-tops
of Horses were wont to be bound or tied up, and thereupon Homer calls the
Horse of Mars, ( Crysampix) and from hence came that custom of women's
frontlets, to be adorned with gold and precious stones. There are also other
ornaments of Horses called trappings, and in Latin ( Phalerae) derived from
Phalon in Greek, signifying bright, because they were wont to put a great
deal of Gold and Silver on them, (as Liuius says) which Horses so trapped,
were presents for great Princes: And there is a kind of Achates stone,
wherwithall Homers time, that they used little Bells, or sounding pieces of
Brass to be fastened to their horses bridles and trappings; they hanged
likewise Jewels, and pearls to the breast of their Horses, which Virgill
expresses in this manner: Instratros ostro alipdes, pictisque tapetis
Aurea pectoribus, demissa monilia pendent
Tecti auro, fuluum mandunt, sub dentibus aurum.
A good horseman must also have a paring knife, wherewithal to purge and open
his Horses feet; this is called by Rusius (Rossneta) and by others Scalprum.
There is a kind of Manicle for the pasternes of Horses, (called Numella.)
Moreover a good rider must provide Subsellares and Staphae) which although it
be but a new devise, yet are they so necessary for every Ryder, as without
them they cannot long continue. They must not be made to straight for the foot,
because that then they do not onley hinder motion in that part, and so make it
benumbed and cold, but also give occasion of great hurt to the Ryder in case
the Horse fall, except he can so temper himself to put but a very little part
of his foot therein.

There are also Spurs requisite to a Rider (called Calcaria) because they are
fastened to the heel of a man, wherewithal he pricketh his dull Horse when
he would have him hasten the journey; and the Greeks derive it from Muops,
signifieng a pricking fly, from imitation of which creature it may seem they
took this invention: but this must be remembered,

Lastly, he must have regard to his Saddle, whereon he must sit: for the
Barbarians did use to ride upon bare Horses backs, but since that time, the
wiser sort of horsemen have invented a seat for their own security. Martial
writes hereof thus: Stragula succincti, venatur sum veredi,



Of hunting Horses.
HVnting Horses because of their swiftness, were wont to be called ( Veredi)
according to the saying: Sunt et veredi, cursu pernices; Although they use this
kind also for posts, and performance of speedy iournies. The males are much
better then the females, and therefore they seldom use Mares in hunting,
because they are not so well able to leap, or endure the woods, for which
cause Gratius writes in this manner of them;
Admittant: non omne me as genus audet in arts
Est vitium ex animo: sunt quos imbellia fallant:
Corpora: praeueniens quondam est incommoda virtus.
Oppianus in his discourse of hunting horses, (as we have said already)
advises to make choice of them by the color, unto whom Gratius consents
saying: Venanti melius pugnant color, optima nigri. They that are of bluish
color, having variable spotted Legs (he says) are fittest to hunt Hearts: they
that are of a bright gray, to hunt Bears, and Leopards; they that are bay, or
of a readish color, to hunt the Boars; they that are black, having glazen
eyes, are good against Lions: and thus much for the hunting Horses.

Of coursers or swift light running Horses.
AFter the use of Wagons, and Chariots, which men had invented for their ease
in travel, and growing to be weary thereof, by reason of many discommodities,
they came also to the use of single Horses, which therefore they called
coursers, and now a days a Horse for Saddle, whereupon men perform their
iournies; and the Poets say the inuenter heerof, was Belerophon the Son of
Neptune, to whom his father gave Pegasus the flying Horse, which therefore they
describe with wings, and place for a star in heaven like an Angel, because
Sesostris, otherwise called Sesonchosis, a K. of Egypt, some to Orus, when he
waged war against his brother Typhon; For these horses, are no less
profitable in war, then in peace, although none use them in these days, but
common Soldiers, yet in ancient time the greatest nobles rode upon them. The
Emperor Probus had one of these Horses, which was nothing comely nor very
high, yet would he endure ordinary iournies, to run a hundred mile a day,
whereupon his master was wont to say merrily, that he was better for a flying,
then a fighting Soldier. The Horses of Spain are of this kind, which they
call Iennets, of Genibus their knees, because when the rider is on their backs,
he must hold his knees close to the Saddle and sides, for his better ease. Like
unto these are the Barbary Lycospacles, and the reason of this name is, as some
say; because when they were Foales, they escaped the teeth of Wolves, being set
on by them: and therefore they run the more speedily to their dying day, for
the wounds of Wolves makes a Horse light-footed; but this is not likely, for
fear cannot put that into them which is not bred of nature, even as we say,
that Ulysses by avoiding Circes cup, or Cyclops, was therefore made wise, but
rather on the contrary, because he was wise, therefore he did avoid Circes
cup; so likewise we say, that these Horses are not lighter of foot, nor
fuller of courage, because they were set upon by Wolves, and delivered by
fear, but because nature has framed them, nimble, valiant,

Aelianus also says that these Horses, had a wonderful knowledge, and
sagacity, to discern betwixt Graecians and other nations; for when a Grecian
came unto them, they loved them, stood still, and took meat at their hands, but
if a Barbarian, or stranger came unto them, they discerned them by their nose,
as a dog does the footsteps of a beast, lifting up their voice, they ran as
fast away from them as they would from any ravening beast. These loved not
only their familiars, but above all other things, to be neat, fine, and
cleauely in Chariots: For if at any time they came through water, drawing of a
Chariot they took a pride in clensing themselves from all durte and
filthiness cleaving to their legs or face. And that which is more strange,
they were unwilling in race, to be stayed Festus. There is says he in Rom a
great gate called Ratumena, which took his name from the death of a young man,
an Hetrurian, who perished there in a race of chariots, being conqueror,
because his horses would not stay until they came into the Capitol, and saw
the framed earthen Chariots which were placed in the porch of Jupiters Temple
by the Romans, and were appointed to fashioned in earth by the hand of a
cunning potter, the which being wrought in earth, and put into the furnace,
they grew so great that they could not be taken out whole; at the sight of
these, the Horses of Ratumena stood still, but first of al, their master was
slain in the course by falling off.

The horses of Tartaria are so incredibly swift, that they will go twentye
German miles in one day. There was a race of Horses at Venice (called
Lupiferae) which were exceeding swift, and the common fame is, that they came
upon this occasion. There was a certain merry fellow which would become surety
for every man, for which he was commonly Iested at in the whole City. It
fortuned on a day, as he travailed abroad in the

Afterward in remembrance of this good turn, he brought to the house of his
surety a great company of Mares without mark or brand, which he received, and
branded them with the image of a Wolf, and they weretherfore called (
Lupiferae) from whom descended that gallant race of swift horses among the
Veneti: upon these ride the posts, carrying the letters of kings and Emperors
to the appointed places, and these are said to refuse

The Persian horses are also exceeding swift, which indeed have given name
unto all others. The messengers of the great Came King of Tartaria, have their
posts so appointed at every five and twenty miles end, of these running light
horses, that they ride upon them, two or three hundred miles a day; And the
Pegasarian coursers of France, by the like change of horses, run from Lions to
Rome in five or six days.

The Epethits of a swifte running corser are these, winged or wing-bearing,
Larke-footed, breathing, speedy, light, stirred, covetous of race, flying,
sweating, not slow, victorious, rash, violent, and Pegasaean. Virgill also
describes a swift and sluggish horse most excellently in these verses;
sending one of them to the Ring, and victory of running, without respect of
Country or food, they are to be praised for enriching his master, -- Nempe
volucrem.
Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
Feruet, and exultet vanco victoria circo.
Nobilis hic, quocunque venit, degramine cuius
Clara fuga ante alios, and primus in aequore puluis
Sed venale pecus Corithae, posteritas and
Hirpini, sirara, iugo victoria sedit,
Nil tibi maiorum respectus, gratia nulla
Vmbrarum, dominos pretijs mutare iubentur

Segnipedes, dignique malam versare Nepotis.
One of these swift light horses is not to be admitted to race or course until
he be past three year old, and then may he be safely brought to the ring and
put to the stretching of his legs in a composed or violent pace as Virgill
says: Carpere mox gyrum inicipiat gradibusque sonare.
Compositis, sinuetque alterna volumina crurum.
Pliny affirms that if the teeth of Wolves be tied to these horses it will
make them never to give over in race, and when the Sarmatians were to take long
iournies, the day before

The Arabians also in many regions use to ride upon Mares, upon whom they
perform great iournies, and King Darius did also fight his battles upon Mares
which had foales; Vartomanus.
for if at any time their affairs went to wrack and they in danger, the Mares
in remembrance of their foales at home would carry them away more speedily then
any other horse, and thus much for the light or swift horses.

Of the Gelding.
THey have used to lib their Horses and take away their stones, and such an
one is caled in Latin Canterius or Cantherius, which is derived of Cauterium
because they were seared with whot irons, or else from the stronger boughs or
branches of Vines so called because they were pruned. In French Cheual Ogre,
Cantier, Cheuron, Soppa does interpret the Spanish Ianetto to be a Gelding. It
is said of Cato Censorius that he was carried and rode upon a Gelding, and of
these the Turkish Horses receive the greatest commendations.

Grapaldus.
Forasmuch as many Horses by their seed and stones are made very fierce,
truculent, and unruly, by taking away of them, they are made serviceable and
quiet which before yealded unto man very little profit: and this invention may
seem first of all to be taken from them which fed diverse together in one
heard, being taught the intolerable rage of their stoned Horses toward their
Colleagues and guides; for abating whereof they took from them their male-parts.

Camerarius
Of the manner hereof you may read plentifully in Rusius, and he affirms
that the Scythians and Sarmatians, who keep all their Horses in heardes, were
the first deuisers

Camerarius.
If they be gelded under their dams when they suck, it is reported by some,
that from such their teeth never fall away, and beside in the heat of their
course their nerves are not hardened, for which cause they are the best of all
to run withal.

They use to geld them in March in the beginning of the spring, afterward being
well nourished they are no less strong, able and courageous then other
vnlibbed, also there is Cantherius in Fossa, a Gelding in a Ditch, which is
then to be used, when a man undertakes a business which he is not able to
manage, for a Horse can do much in a plain, L^^i^s
but nothing at al in a Ditch. It is reported that Iubellius, Taurea, and C.
Assellius, fought a combat on Horseback near the City ( Capua,) and when
one had provoked another a good while in the plain fields, Taurea descended
into a hollow way, telling his fellow combatant, that except he came down unto
him, it would be a fight of Horses and not of Horsemen, Whereunto Assellius
yealded and came down into the Ditch: at whom his adversary iested, asking him
if he did not know that a Gelding cold do nothing in a ditch, from whence came
the common proverb aforesaid.

There is also another proverb ( Anthenius in Porta.) A Gelding in the gate,
to signify a Sulpecias Galba) who riding out of the City, Vestus
his horse tired in the gate.

There is likewise another adage in Plautus which is this: Crete haec mulier
cantherino ritu astans somniat. That is to say, this Woman sleeps standing
like a new dressed Horse, and is applied against them which in a kind of
foolish iesture shut their eyes when they talk or work: and thus much for the
Gelding.

Of carriering Horses for pomp or Triumph.
THe nature of these Horses is to lift up themselves and rise before, standing
upon their hinder Legs, which is not possible for any to do without a
generous and gallant spirit, and also nimble and strong loins to bear up the
hinder Legs, for it is not as many suppose that this power of rising before
from the softness of his Legs, but rather from his loins and hips betwixt
his hinder Legs, for when his mouth is a little checked with the bridle he
presently bends his hinder pasterns and Ancles, and so lifts up his fore
parts, that his belly and yard do appear, and in doing heerof the rider must
not bear his hand hard, but give him the bridle, that so he may do it
willingly and with greater grace of the beholdders.

There are some which teach Horses to lift up themselves by knocking their
pasternes with a rod, which the Horse understands as well as he does his
race, when he is stroke on the back by the rider. And in teaching of a Horse
this feat, it must be observed, that he never have rest until he have learned
it, and that at certain signs and tokens, Xen^ph^^.
he be taught

Of load or Pack-horsses.
Festus says) mules were first used for carrying and draught; but for as much
as all Nations have not Mules, they are therefore enforced to use Horses, and
for this purpose the Geldings are much better then the stoned Horses; wherefore
the countrymen of most nations take Horses, for this purpose, after they be
old, past breeding, or have some other blemish in wind or lim, whereby they are
disabled to travel under a man: for so great is the greedines of our age, that
horses are not spared so long as Assinis equis Mulis feriae nullae) Horses,
Mules, and Asses, keep no hollidaies: where the law of God concerning the
Saboth is not observed; for the nourishing of horses does counteruaile the
charges. Among these may be remembered those little Nags called Hinni and Ginni
spoken of already in the discorse of Asses, whereof some are generated betwixt a
Horse and an Ass, and others fall to be very little, through some sickness
which happens unto them in their dams belly: these are used with shorn manes
according to the saying of Propertius: huc mea detonsis aucta est cynthia
manuis. They are used for pleasure, to carry the young sons of noble men and
Gentle men. There are also horses called ( Equifunales, because in their
triumphs

Of wild Horses, the Seahorse, and the Hart-horse (called Hippellaphus.)
IN the days of Gordianus there were brought to Rome forty wild Horses, and
in the map of Gordianus wood, there were pictured three hundred. They are
called in Latin Equiferi, and in Greek Hippagroi, they abound in Spain, and in
the Alps, and in the deserts of Aethiopia there are many of them, which have
two long venomous teeth standing out of their mouth: they differ also in their
hoofes from other Horses, for they are Oppianus
And if at any time the inhabitants take them by ginnes and other slights, they
fall so sullen that they abstain from meat and drink disdaining to be kept
in any servitude or bondage, the Wild Horses of India have but one horn:
Albertus.
In the Alps they are of an ash color, with a black list down their backs.
The wild horses of Scythia, near the River Hypanis, are clean white. The
wild horses of Syria live in flocks and herds together, and in every heard
they have one Captain or Master over the residue, and if it Fortune that any
of the younger horses leap upon a Mare, this captaine-horsse runs after
him, never giving over till he has bit off his stones.

There are wild horses in Brushia which are like to other horses in all
parts, excepting their backs, Aristotle
which are so soft and weak, that they cannot endure to be fat upon, neither
are they easily tamed, and the people of the country eat their flesh: In
Polonia there is a kind of wild horse which has horns like a Heart, and
therefore I take it to be the same which is called Hypellaphus, whose picture
is here described as it was taken here in England, by that learned Physician
Docter Cay.

The figure of HIPELLAPHVS.


THis beast was brought out of Norway, having a mixed form, betwixt a Heart and a
Horse, having a well compacted body, a long and lean leg, a cloven hoof, a
short tail, and in all parts you would judge him to be a Heart, but in his head
and ears you would judge him to be a mule, and in his horns a Roe, the upper
lip hanging over the nether almost as much as an Elkes: his mane like a
horses, but thinner and standing more upright, without other alteration: from
their shoulders to their tail, they have a like bristling mane growing on the
back bone, as long as their other hair, a bunch under their chappes, and
upon that a bunch or shagie hair, the hair about their shoulders is more
longer than ordinary, but their necks so short that they can neither drink
their drink nor eat their meat upon the ground, except they bend down upon
their knees. The males in this kind do only bear horns, and such as do not
grow out of the Crowns of their head, but as it were out of the middle on
either side, a little above the eyes, and so bend to the sides: They are sharp
and full of bunches like Hearts, no where smooth but in the tops of the speers,
and where the veins run to carry nutriment to their whole length, which is
covered with a hairye skin: they are not so rough at the beginning or at the
first prosses specially in the for part as they are in the second, for that
only is full of wrinckles; from the bottom to the middle they grow straight,
but from thence they are a little recurued; they have only three speers or
prosses, the two lower turn awry, but the uppermost grows upright to heaven,

Their teeth are like Hearts, and inwardly in their cheeks they grow like
furrows, bigger then in a Horse; the tooth rising out sharp above the throat,
as it should seem that none of his meat should fall thereinto vnbruised. This
beast in his young age is of a mouse or Ass color; but in his elder age it is
more yellowish, especially in the extreme parts of his body: the hair smooth
but most of all on his legs, but under his belly, in the inner part of his
knee, the top of his Neck, breast, shoulders, and backbone, not so smooth: In
height it was about 22. handfuls and three fingers, being much swifter then any
horse, the female bears every year as the keeper said in Norway two at a
time, but in England it

The flesh of it is black, and the fibere broad like an Oxes; but being
dressed like hearts flesh and baked in an Oven, it tasted much sweeter. It
eats commonly grass, but in england seldom after the fashion of horses,
which forbear hay when they may have bread; but leaves, rindes of trees, bread
and Oats, are most acceptable unto it. It reaches naturally thirty hand
breadths high, but if any thing be higher which it does affect: it stands up
upon the hinder legs, and with the forelegs there imbraseth or leans to the
tree, and with his mouth biteth off his desire.

It drinks water and also English Ale in great plenty, yet without
drunkenness; and there were that gave it wine, but if it drink plentifully it
became drunk. It is a most pleasant Elke or Elend, but it is plain they are
deceived in so calling it, because it has not the legs of an Elke, which
never bend, nor yet the horns, as by conference may appear. Muchlesse can I
Hippardius, because the female wants horns, and the head is like a Mules;
but yet it may be that it is a kind of Elke, for the horns are not always
alike, or rather the Elke is a kind of Horsse-hart, which Aristotle calls
Arrochosius of Arracotos a region of Assya, and herein I leave every man to
his judgment; referring the reader unto the former discourses of a Elke and the
Tragelaphus.

OF THE SEAHORSE.


THe Sea-horsse, called in Greek Hippotomos, and in Latin Equus Fluuiatilis;
It is a most ugly and filthy beast, so called because in his voice and mane he
resembles a Horse, but in his head an Ox or a Calfe; in the residue of his
body a Swine, for which cause some Graecians call him sometimes a Sea-horsse,
and sometimes a Sea-oxe, which thing has moved many learned men in our time to
affirm, that a Sea-horsse was never seen; whereunto I would easily Bellonias)
were it not that the ancient figures of a Sea-horsse, altogether resembled
that which is here expressed; and was lately to be seen at Constantinople,
from whom this picture was taken. It lives for the most part in Nilus, yet is
it of a doubtful life, for it brings forth and breeds on the land, and by the
proportion of the Legs it seems rather to be made for going, then for
swimming: for in the night time it eats both Hay and fruits, forraging into
corn fields, and devouring whatsoever comes in the way; And therefore I
thought it fit to be inserted into this story. As for the Sea-calfe, which
comes sometimes to land only to take sleep, I did not judge it to belong to
this discourse, because it feeds only in the waters.

This picture was taken out the Colossus In the Vatican at Rome, representing
the River Nylus, and eating of a Crocadile: and thus I reserve the farther
discourse of this beast unto the History of Fishes, adding only thus much, that
it ought to be no wonder to consider such monsters to come out of the Sea,
which resemble horses in their heads, seeing therein are also creatures like
unto Grapes and swords.

The Orsean Indians do hunt a beast with one horn, having the body of a
Horse, and the head of a Heart. The Aethiopians likewise have a beast, in the
neck like unto a Horse, and the feet and legs like unto an Ox. The
Rhinocephalus has a neck like a Horse, and also the other parts of his body,
but it is said to breath out air which kills men. Pausanias writes* that in
the Temple of Gabales there is the picture of a Horse, which from his
Lampsacenus writes, that in the Scythian Ocean, there are Islands wherein the
people are called Hippopodes, having the bodies of men but the feet of
Horses, and the Lamya hereafter to be declared, has the feet of a Horse,
but in other things the members of a Goat: and thus much for the several kinds
of Horses, both for them that are properly so called, and also for any other
which like bastards retain any resemblance of nature with this Noble and
profitable kind of beast.

Of the diet of Horses and their length of life.
Having thus discoursed of the kinds of horses, and their several accidents,
and uses, both for War, and peace, pleasure, and necessity; now likewise it
follows, that we should proceed to their diet, and manner of feeding: wherein
we are first of all to consider, that the natural constitution of a Horse,
is whot and temperate. Whot, because of his Leuity, Russius
and Velocity, Varro says) that in feeding of Horses, we must consider three
things; first of all what food the country wherein we live does yeald;
secondly when it must be given: thirdly, by whom, but specially the place of
feeding Horses is to be considered, for although Goats can live in the
Mountains, better then in the green fields, yet Horses live better in the
green fields, then they can in the Mountains. For which cause when we choose
pasture for horses, we must see that it be fat, such as grows in meddowes,
Palladius.
A Mare when she has foaled give herbarly, and generally at all times in the
Winter season Bullimung, or a mixture of al kinds of grain is fit for them in
the house, according to these verses of Nemetian: Inde vbi pubentes, calamos
durauerit aestas
Lactentesque vrens herbas siccauerit omnem
Mensibus humorem, culmisque armarit, aristas
Ordea tum, paleasque leaves, praebere memento

Cura sit, atque toros, manibus, percurrere equorum
Gaudeat, vt plausu, sonipes, letumque, relaxet,
Corpus, and altores, rapiat per viscera succos,
Id curent famuli, comitumque animosa iuuentus.
We have showed already, that they must have straw, or litter to lie upon, and
Pollux does set down the kinds of meats for Horses, as Barley, Hay, or French
wheat, rise, and hay; for hard and dry meat is fittest for Horses, because it
does not fill them with wind; but al green meat is the less aproued, by reason
of inflammation. Three-leaud-grasse is also good

The herb Medica which abounds in Media, is very nourishable to Horses, but
the first stalks are refused, says Aristotle, the residue being watered with
stinking Water, Mathaeolus Dioscorides
is most commodious. In Italy they fat their horses with Trifoley, in Calabria
with Sulla, or Arthritica, and the Thrasians, near the River Strymon, with a
green Thistle.

In the spring time give your younger Horses Bullimung for many days
together, for that will not only make them fat, but also purge their bellies:
for this purgation is most necessary for Horses, which is called soyling, and
ought to continue ten days together, without any other meat, giving them the
eleventh day a little Barley, and so forward to the fourteeneth; after which
day, continue them in that diet ten days longer, and then bring them forth to
exercise a little, and when as they sweat, anoint them with Oil, and if the
weather be cold, keep a fire in the stable: And you must remember when the
Horse begins to purge, that he be kept from Barley and drink, and give him
green meat, or Bullimumg, whereof that is best that grows near the Sea side.

But if the Horse go to soil in April, after five days bring him forth,
and wash him Masline, or Bullimung as before, except he be troubled with the
Glaunders, and then he must not feed on it in the day time, least through the
heat of the Sun, he fall into the Mange or into madness.

It is also requisite that while we feed our Horses with green Corn, they be
let blood in the veins of the breast, and also cut in the roof of their
mouths, that so those places being emptied which were stuffed with corruption,
the vacuety may be replenished with better blood; a Horse thus dieted shall
not only live in more health and free from sickness,

With the blood that comes out of him, mingled with Niter, Vinegar, and Oil,
you shall anoint him all over, if so be he be subject to the Glaunders, or to
the Mange, and then keep him in the stable five days together, suffering no
curri-combe to come upon him, until the sixth day, feeding him in the mean
time with green Corn, or Bullimung; and then bring him forth again, washing
him al over with water, and rubbing him with a hard whisp, until the humor or
moistures be wholly wiped off, and he fed as before fourteen days together.

If you please not to keep him in the stable, then in the spring time, turn
him out in some meddow, or green pasture, and there let him feed at his own
pleasure; for it has bin often

It is reported of the Horotae, and Gedrusij, and men of Freeseland, the
Macedonians, and Lydians, do feed their Horses with fishes: Likewise the
Paeonians which inhabit about Prasius near the Mountain Orbelus, do feed
their Horses and all cattle which they yoke with fishes.

Concerning the drink of Horses we have spoken elsewhere, and therefore we
shall not need to say anything of it here, except that the drinking much, and
the horse thrusting his head in deep into the troubled water, is an vnfalible
sign of his goodness; and the custom of some is, for to give their horses
mashes made of water and corn sod together or else, Bear, Ale or Wine, by
drinking whereof, they increase their spirits and

Albertus says, that some to make their Horses fat, take Snailes, and beat
them in pieces, so putting them into their meats whereby they grow to a false
fatness, which is easily disolued. By eating of black Hellibor, Oxen, Horses
and Swine, are killed: and thus much for the food of Horse.

Concerning the voice of Horses, the Latins call him Hinnitum, and the
Graecians, Phruma, and Phrumatesta; but this is certain, that from their very
foaling, the females have a shrill and sharper voice then the males, which is
fuller, and broader, until they be two year old, and after copulation their
voice increases, so continuing until they be twenty year old, after which
time, it falls, and decreaseth again.

The length of a Horses life, (according to Aristotle) is eighteen or twenty
years, and if they be well it ended and regarded in their youth: It has been
found, that some have lived unto five and twenty, The time of their life.
or thirty year old. The femals live longer then the males, because of their
generation, for the immoderate lust of Horses, shortneth their days. And it
has been found that a Mare has lived to forty, or fifty years, and a Horse
to three and thirty: wherefore I do leave the relation of Pliny and Atheneus,
to be censured by the Reader, who affirm, that horses in their time, lived
threescore or seauenty years.

Albertus also affirms, that a Soldier told him for a certain truth, that
he knew a horse which lived till he was three score years old, and at that
age, did service in the field. And August. Niphus also affirms, that the
Riders of Ferdinand the first, told him, there was a horse in their masters
stable of seventy year old. The age of a horse may be known by his teeth, and
the Persian, Bohemian, Epirian, and Sycilian horses, live longer then the
Spanish or Numidian. In their years, the female never grows after five, nor
the male

The males have more teeth then the females, and in each sex they which have
fewest teeth, live not so long, and in their old age, their teeth grow white.
Now their age is discerned by their teeth on this manner, the first four, that
is two above, and two beneath, be changed, after they be thirty year old, and
a year after the four next are changed in like manner, again after another
year, four more are changed, so that after four year, and six months, he
loses no teeth, except the canine, which comes again in the fifth and sixth
year; so that afterward their age cannot be diserned, because in the seventh
year, they are al filled; An other unfeigned note

Some try the age of their horses by their cheeks, for they pull up the skin
from the bones, and if it will quickly fall back again into his former place,
they take it for an assured token of the horses youth: but if if it stand out
and fall slowly down, then on the

Of the uses of Horsse-flesh, Mares milk, and other parts.
TThere were certain people in Scythia, which were called Hippophagi, because
they lived upon horsse-flesh; such also were the Sarmatians and the Vandals:
likewise in Scythia the less, near Taurica Chersonnessus, the people do not
only eat the flesh of horses, but also their milk, and make cheese Athaeneus
also affirms, that the manner of the ancient Persians was, upon the feasts of
their natiuities to roast an Ox, an Ass, a Horse, and a Cammell whole, and so
set them before their guests.

Inlike sort, they eat horseflesh and Camels-flesh at Damascus, and in
Pollonia wild horses, especially that part, which grows under the mane.
The Sarmatians make meat of Millet seed, and mingle it with Mares milk, or with
blood taken out of the veins of their legs, wherewithal they make puddings,
Mat^michou Pau^venetus
and this is their chief food. So likewise do the Tartarians, who having a
horse sick, cut off his ulcer or wound, and so kill him and eat his flesh. The
Goths also in the days of Virgill did Profuit incensos, aestus auertere and
inter
Ima fertre pedis, salientem sanguine venam
Bisaltae, quo more solent, acerque Gelonus
Cumfugit in Rhodapem, atque indeserta Getarum
Et lac concretum, cum sanguine potat equino.


The poets do also feign, that Pelias, the Son of Tirus and Neptune, was
educated by a Mare, and Metabus brought up his Daughter Camillus with Mares
milk, because she was borne wild, he also bredde her among the bushes,
according to these verses: Hic natamindumis, interque horrentia lustra
Armentalis equae and lacte ferino
Nutribat, teneris immulgens vbera labris.
The Tartarians drink Mares milk, which they dress like white wine, and call
it Churnis, Paulus Venetus rehearses this story. The king of Tartar says he,
nourishes above ten thousand milk white horses and Mares, and every year,
upon the eight and twenty day of August, they observe a solemn feast, wherein
the milk of these white mares is dressed and set forth in comely vessels.

Afterward the king takes a bowl full thereof, and pours it on the ground
round about him, being so taught by his Magitians, to offer sacrifice to the
gods of his country: For they persuade him, that the gods lick up that milk
spilt on the ground, and afterward the king drinks up the residew, and
besides him no body that day, except it be of the kings lignage, or of the
country of Horiach (for the people of that country, have liberty to taste
thereof that day,) because of a battle which once they obtained for the great
Came.

The property of this milk is to loosen the belly; and because it is thin and
has no fat in it, therefore it easily discendeth, and does not curdle in the
stomach, and it is said that the Scythians can keep it twelve days together,
therwithal satisfying their hunger, and quenching their thirst, and thus much
shall satisfy for the natural discourses of horses; hereafter follows the
morrall.

The morrall discourse of Horses, concerning fictions, pictures, and other
devises.
ANd first of al for the morral dignity of horses, there is a celestial
Hippos, according to these verses of Arratus thus translated: Huic Equus ille
iubam quatiens fulgore micanti
Summum contingit caput aluo stellaque tungens vna.
The Latins call this star Pegasus, and they say that he is the son of
Neptune and Gorgon; Medusa with striking his foot upon a Rock in Hellicon a
mountain of Baeotia, opened a fountain, which after his name was called
Hippocrene. Others tell the tale in this sort, at what time Bellerophon came
Praetus the son of Abas the king of the Argiues, Antia the kings wife fell
in love with her ghuest, and making it known unto him, promised him half her
husbands kingdom if he would lie with her, but he like an honest man
abhorring so foul a fact, utterly refused to accomplish the desire and
dishonesty of the lustful Queen; whereupon she being afraid least he should
disclose it unto the king, prevented him by her own complaint, enforming the
king that he would have ravished her: when the king heard this accusation
(because he loved Bellerophon well,) would not give punishment himself, but
sent him to Scheno^eas the father of Queen Antia, that he in defense of his
daughters chastity might take revenge upon him, who presently cast him to
Chimaera, which at that time depopulated all the coast of Lycia: but
Bellerophon by the help of the horse Pegasus did both overcome placed among
the stars by Jupiter. Euripides tells the tale otherwise, for he says that
Chiron the Centaure had a Daughter nourished in the mountain Pelius which was
called Theas and afterward Hippe, because of her exceeding hunting on horse
back, she was persuaded by Aeolus (the son of Hellen, a Nephew of Jupiters,
to let him lie with her, whereupon she conceived with child, and when the time
of her deliverance came, she fled from her father into the woods, for fear the
loss of her virginity should be known unto him, but he followed her to see
what was the cause of his Daughters departure, whereupon she desired of the
Gods that her father might not see her in travail, her prayer was granted,
and she after her delivery, was turned into a mare, and placed amongst

Others say that she was a prophetess, and because she revealed the counsels
of the Gods, was therefore metamorphized in that shape in the place
aforesaid. Others say, that because she gave over to worship Diana, she lost
her first presence: but to return to the first tale of Bellerophon, who after
the death of Chimaera, growing proud for his valor attempted to fly to heaven,
but Jupiter trobled his horse with a fury, and so he shook off his rider, who
perished in the field, Alecus apo tese alese, because of his error: and Pegasus
was placed in heaven.

But to come nearer to the description of the poetical horse, Albertus Magnus
and some others say, that it is a beast bred in Aethiopia, having the head and
feet of a horse, but horned, and wings much greater then the wings of an
Eagle, which he not does lift volutres, and Alipedes, so the error of that
figure, has rather given occasion to the framing of this new Monster Pegasus,
then any other reasonable Aligory.

Likewise I know no cause why the poets should feign, that Ceres was turned
into a Mare, and hid her self in the herds of Oncius, Neptune falling in
love with her, followed her to those fields, and perceiving that he was
deceived, turned himself also Ceres was grievously offended, and fell into a
very great fury, for which cause she was called Erinnis: yet afterward she
washed her self in the River Ladon, laying aside al her rage and fury, at the
fulness of time she brought forth Arion.

And the Arcadians also had a certain Den, wherein they had a great
remembrance of this rauishment of Ceres, sitting in a Den, wherein they say
she hid her self from all creatures, and whereunto they offer divine
worship. They picture her in a colts skin, sitting like a woman in all parts,
with a long garment down to her ancles, but the head of a horse with the
pictures of many Dragons, and other such wild beasts, holding in one of her
hands a Dolphin, and in the other a Dove.

Ceres, does not only maintain men, Fowls, Beasts, and Fishes, but also the
immoderate use thereof draws men to inordinate lust and concupisence, and that
the Gods of the Heathen were more rather to be accounted beasts then men.

Diana also among the Arcadians was called Eurippa, for the finding out of
those Mares which Ulysses had lost: which Ulysses erected a statue for Neptune
the great Ryder, and they say that Hippolitus being torn in pieces by Horses
through the love of Diana, and skill of Aesculapius, by the virtue of certain
Herbs he was restored Jupiter being sore vexed and angry with Aesculapius
for such an invention, deluding as it were the fury of the Gods, killed him
with lightning; and thrust him down to hell, because no wretched man would
fear death if such devises might take place: which fact Virgil describes in
these verses: At Triuia Hippolitum secretis alma recondit
Sedibus and nymphae Aegeriae nemorique relegat
Solus vbi in siluis Italis ignobilius aeuum
Exigerit, versoque vbi nomine virbius esset
Vnde etiam Triuiae templo lucisque sacratis
Cornipedes arcentur equi quod litore currum
Et iuuenem Monstris pauidi effudere marinis.
The Poets also do attribute unto the night, black horses, and unto the day
white. Homer says, that the names of the day-horsses are Lampus and Phaethon,
to the moon they ascribe two horses, one black and another white, the reason
of these inventions, for the day and the night is, to signify their speedy
course or revolution by the swiftnes of horses, and of the darkness of the
night by the black horses, and the light of the day by the white, and the
Moon which for the most part is hid and covered with earth, Textor.
both increasing and decreasing, they had the same reason to signify her
shadowed part by a black horse, and her bright part by a white one.

The like fixtion they had of H^c^te, whom Ausonias calls Tergemina, because
she is described with the head of a Horse, Heltodorus
a Dog, and a wild Man, the horse on the right

We may also read in the Annals of Tacitus, that in his time there was a
Temple raised to Equestriall fortune, that is, for the honor of them which
managed horses to their own profit, and the good of their country, and that
Fuluius the Praetor in Spain, because he obtained a victory against the
Celtiberians, by the valiant diligence of his horssemen, was the first that
builded that temple. Likewise, there was another temple in Baeotis for the same
cause dedicated unto Hercules. Coelius


The ancient Pagans call the Godde of Horses H^ppona, as the Godde of Oxen
B^bona. S^lentinuma horse was cast alive into the fire and offered to Jupiter.
Likewise the L^cedemonians sacrifyced a horse to the winds: Gyraldus
at Rome also they sacrificed a horse to Mars, and thereof came the term of
Equus October, which was sacrificed every year in October in Campus Martius.
This horse was often taken out of a chariot, which was a Conqueror in race,
and stood on the right hand, as soon as he was killed some one carried his tail
to a place called Regia, and for his head there was a continual combat
betwixt the inhabitants of the streets ( Suburra) and ( S^c^auia) which of
them should possess it: for the Suburans would have fastened it to the wall of
Regia, and the Sacrauiens to the Tower Mamillia.

The reason why they sacrifyced a horse, some have coniecturd because the
Romans (...)
they did it only for the honor of Mars (the god of victory) or else because
they would signify, that flying away in battle was to be punished by the
example of sacrificing of a swift horse.

The Carmani did also worship Mars, and because they had no horses to use in
war, they were forced to use Asses, for which cause they Sacrificed an Ass
unto him. There is another fable amongst the Poets, that the Methimnaeans were
commanded by the Oracle to cast a Virgin into the Se^ to Neptune, which they
performd: now there was a young Ennallus) which was in love with the said
Virgin, and seeing her in ^he Waters, swum after her to save her, but both of
them were covered with the waters of the Sea, yet after a certain space,
Ennallus returned back again, and brought news that the virgin lived among
the pharies of the Sea, and that he after that he had kept Neptunes horses, by
the help of a great wave, escaped away by swimming; for the poets fain that
Neptunes chariot was drawn by horses of the sea, acording to these verses of
Gilius: Non aliter quotiens perlabitur aequora curru
Extremamque petit Phaebaea cubilia Tethyn
Fraenatis neptunus equis.
They also feign that the Sun is drawn with two swift white Horses,
Idolatry by the pictures of Horses
from whence came that abomination, that the Kings of Iudaea had erected
Horses and Chariots in honor of the Sun, which were set at the entrance of
the Temple of the Lord; which Horses were destroyed by Josias, as we read in
holy Scripture. Munster.
And the manner of their abomination was, that when they did worship to the
Sun, they road upon those Horses from the entrance of the Temple to the
chamber of Nethan-melech. The Persians also sacrificed a Apollo according to
these verses of Ovid: Placat equum Persis, radij hyperiona cinctus
Ne detur sceleri victima tarda deo.
And for this cause the Masagetes sacrificed a horse (the swiftest of all
Beasts) unto the sun, the swiftest of all the Gods. Philostratus also
records, that Palamedes gave charge to the Graecians to sacrifice to the
Sun rising a white horse. The Rhodians in honor of the Sun did cast yearly
away into the Sea, the Chariots dedicated to the Sun, in imagination that the
Sun was carried about the World in a Chariot, drawn by six Horses.

As the Army of the Persians did proceed forward on their journey, The
ceremony of the Persians going to war
the fire which they did (call holy and eternal) was lifted up on Silver
alters: Presently after this, there followed the Wisemen, and after those
wisemen came 165. young men, being clothed Jupiter, which was drawn by white
Horses: after which, with a resplendant magnitude the Horse of the Sun was
seen to appear (for so it was called) and this was the manner of their
sacrifice. Coelius


The King of Indians also (as is said) when the days began to wax long, he
descended down to the River Indus, and thereunto sacrificed black Horses and
Bulls, for the Bulls in ancient time were consecrated to the rivers, and horses
also were thrown therinto alive, Varrmus
as the Trojans did into Xanthus.

The Veneti (which worshipped Diomedes with singular honor) did sacrifice to him
a whit horse: when the Thebanes made war on the Lacedaemonians, Strabo
it is said that Caedasus apeared Pelapidas, one of the Thebane Captains, and
told him that now the Lacedaemonians were a Laeuctra, and would take vengance
upon the Thebanes, and their Daughters; Whereupon Pelapidas to auert that
mischief, caused a young foale to be gallantly attired, and the day before
they joined battle, to be led to a Sepulcher of their virgins, and there to be
killed and sacrificed.

The Thessalians observed this custom at their marriges and nuptial
sacrifices, the man took a Horse of War armed and furnished, which he led
into the Temple, after the sacrifice ended he delivered the raines of the
bridle into the hands of his Wife who led the same Horse home again, but for
what signification or cause this rite was observed, Plutarch.
Aelianus which relates the story shows not, but says he refers
himself to the Thessalians

Another moral-honor done unto them was their burial; The burial of Horses
For we have showed already that Volucer the Horse of Verus the Emperor was
honorably buried, the Mares of Cinon which had won three games at Olympus,
were likewise interred near his own body. The Scithians at the burial of
their kings used for to strangle one of his harlots, his cupberer, his Cook,
his Horsse-keeper, his messenger, and also Horses and other cattle; and after
a year they do this the second time; taking fifty of his dearest servants
which were natural Scythians and strangled them; Likewise fifty of his best
Horses, out of whose bellies they pull out their bowels and guts, and filling
their bellies up again with chafe, they sow them up: then make they half
an arch upon two posts standing upright, and bridle they the horses, and
stretch forth the reins of their bridles unto the poastes of the earth,
afterward upon every one of the dead horses they lay a dead man, putting a
stake through his back out of his neck, and the neither part of the said
stake they fasten in the post, which pierces or goes thorough the horse,
and thus having compassed about the grave of their king, with such horses and
horsse-men, they depart, leaving both one and the other to the consumption of
nature, and after this manner did they bury all their kings.

Adrian buried his hunting horse, Enomaus his Mares, Partheria and Eripha.
Likewise Miltiades, (...).
Euagoras, and Augustus the Emperor: At Agrigentum also there are many
Piramides erected upon the sepulchers of horses, and thus much shall suffice
for the burial Aelianus.


^^iny.
We have showed you already how men and women have bin transformed into horses,
according to the fiction of the Poets, as of Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Ceres,
Hippes, and Ocyrrhoes the daughtrrs of Chiron. ^^lus Predictions (...) by horses
In like sort there have been predictions or ostentations of things to come,
taken from a Wolf, a Fox, and a Serpent, and a Horse, which were called
Auspicia Pedestria.

Dreams also have been declared by horses, for Publius Vatinius in the
Macedonian war, coming toward Rome in the night time, supposed he saw two
young men of excellent beauty to meet him, and tell him that Perses the king was
taken by Paulus, which thing he declared to the Senate, but was by them put
into prison as a contemner of the Vatinius was delivered out of prison, and
rewarded with land and liberty. ^^ler. Max.


It also apeareth that the same day that Castor and Pollux washed away the
sweat of them selves and their horses, in the lake of Iuturne, that they
watched for the safety of the Roman Empire, and their Temple which was joined
to the same fountain being fast locked, upon a sudden flew open without the
hand of man.

Aenaeas also in Virgill says, that he knew war would follow by the
appearance of four horses, which in a green field set upon a whole camp,
whereupon in Virgill he speaks thus to Anchises.

Quatuor hic, primum omen Equos in gramine vidi
Trudentes campum late candore nouali
Et pater Anchises bellum o terra hospita parts
Bello armantur equi, bellum haec armenta minantur
Sed tamen ijdem olim curru succedere sueti
Quadrupedes and fraena iugo concordia far
Spes est pacis ait.
Lucan also speaks to the same purpose that horses presage war; Primus ab
aequorea percussis cuspide saxis
Thessalicus sonipes bellis feralibus omen
Exiluit.
Alexander also writes, that the Germans were wont to bring up white horses
which were never used to labor, by whose neighing they were forewarned of
wars, and of other strange euentes. It is vulgarly known how Darius came to
the kingdom of Persia, after it was agreed amongst the seven princes, that he
whose horse did first neigh in the morning in a place appointed, should be
saluted king, Ebares his rider in the night time took one of the Mares which
he knew his masters horse loved, and ledd her into the suburbs, and there
tied her, afterward he brought thither Darius his horse, and led him about her
2. or three times, and at length suffered him to cover her, and so led them
both away together.

In the next morning the princes met as soon as day brake, and road up and
down the subburbs, until at last they came to the place where the Mare of
Darius was tied the night before, whereunto the horse of Darius ran neighing
strongly, and presently it thundered and lightened in a clear day: whereupon
the residue of the princes alighted from their horses, and did reverence to
king Darius, whom by divine appointment was thus advanced to the Scepter.

Although there be some that say Ebores by handling of a Mares genitall and
keeping his hand warm, until they came to the place aforesaid, there
stroking the Nostrils of his masters horse, caused him thus to neigh and win
the kingdom, yet I rather incline to the former opinion which was related by
Herodotus in his Thalia.

There have also been horses of strange fashions, for as we have showed
already, that a Mare did bring forth a Hare, so also ( Liuy says) an Ox did
bring forth a Foale. Of Monster horse.
Nero did show certain Hermaphrodite mares, wherewithal his chariot was
drawn, which was a thing worth the sight, that the Monarcke of the world
should sit upon Monsters.

Julius Caesar had a horse which had cloven hooues like a man's fingers, and
because he was foaled at that time when the south-sayers had pronounced that
he should have the Pli^ius
and never permitted any man to back him but himself, which afterward he
dedicated in the Temple of Venus, for he conceived, that such a strange beast
bredde in his own flock was a prediction unto him of great honor. The
Palatine of Vilua had a horse soled with five legs, Dion. Coelius
and Henry the count- Palatine had likewise a horse with six legs: Thus much
may suffice for the monster horses.

In the next place it is good to enquire what the Centaures are, who are
described by the Poets to have their forepar^like men, and their hinder part
like horses, Of Centaurs
the occasion whereof is thus related by Pindarus: that Centauru the Son of
Ixion, committed buggery which the mares of Magnetia, under the mountain
Pelius, from whence came that monstrous Hippocentauri: And some say that they
were first of all nourished by the Nymphs in the mountain Pelius, who
afterward being the first that tamed horses, were thought to be half men,
and half horses, because they were seen backward, and from hence came the
fable that they were tamed by Hercules, which was one of his greatest labors:
But yet that no man may wonder or think it impossible that such monstrous
creatures should have existence in nature, these authorities following may
persuade sufficiently.

Plutarch in his banker of wisemen, affirms, there was a horsse-keeper which
brought into the house of Periander an infant or rather a monster which he had
got upon a Mare, which had the head, neck, hands and voice o^ a child, and the
other parts like a horse, Diocles presently judged it to be a monster, and
signified contentions and strifes in the world. But Thales told Periander he
was of another opinion, namely, that it was no monster, but a mere natural
birth from such a copulation, and therefore advised Periander, that either he
should keep no riders, or else let them have wives.

Claudius Caesar also writes, that in the time of his reign there was such a
one borne in Thessaly, which dyed the same day it was borne: and Pliny that he
afterward saw it seasoned in honey, brought out of Egypt to be showed to the
Emperor. These Centaures Homer calls Feray, that is Ferae, wild persons. The
Lapithae and the Centaures are said to be Centaures in a banquet being drunk,
offered to ravish the famals of the Lapithae, for which cause the Lopithae slew
them in their iealosie, whereon fell a mortal war, whereby the poets signify
how intemperancy in men and beasts does not only bring with it other sins, but
also causes much slaughter. And so I conclude the story of Centaures, holding
it possible that such should be generated by unclean and unnatural
copulation, but impossible that they should live long after birth, and
therefore the Centaurs of the Poets are nothing else but men sitting on
horssebacke, mistaken for one entire creature which were divided, and so I
conclude with the verse of Horace: Humano capiti cernicem pictor Equinan



Of the statues and figures of Horses.
IT is was no small dignity that the ancient Cephalenes did stamp their money
with the picture of a horse, for surely from them it came, (...).
that coin was first of all called current, because of the image of a speedy
horse, wherewithal it was imprinted. Textor also writes, that amongst the
auncientes there was a custom to make the Character of a horse in the
forehead of Hippiades (who by Lysias the Orator are said to be the first that
ever backed horses: Such was the statue of Claelia, Quintus Martius; Tremulus,
Domitianus, and many other both men and women: for the Romans had the
Equestriall statues in great reverence and ceremony, no doubt in imitation of
the Graecians, but with this difference, that they pictured none but the swift
horses, but the Romans, horses and chariots, and from hence came the custom
to have chariots in triumph.

But this custom to have six horses in a chariot was brought in last of all
by Augustus. Aristolemus pictured the chariots and wagener. Pisicrates the
woman Pitho, with a wagon. Eut^^crates the son of Lysippus expressed the
Equestriall combat at the Oracle of Troph^nium with singular art, also many
Chariots of Medea, the horse and his carriage: there were also (...) chariots
at Rome in the porch of Jupiters Temple, as we have showed before in the
discourse of chariots.

When Constantinus the great took a view of the city of Rome, and passing from
place to place, came at length to Forum Traiani, the most exquisite building of
all the world, he st^od amazed at the admirable frame of Giants, which were
lineally deciphered therein, whereof disparing to imitate any part of that
work, he chose only to erect the picture of such a horse and prince, Amianus
as in the middle of the same was erected, in remembrance of Traiane*
Hormisda^a (a persian) who made the Emperor this answer: Ante imperator
stabulum tale condi iu^eto si vales: Equus quem fabrica^e disponis ita late
succedat vt iste quem videmus: O Noble Empe. before you make such a horse,
first of all build such a stable; that your work in all parts may be
correspondent to this which you propose unto your self to imitate.

M^^^llus the Macedonian raised two porches which were compassed about with two
horses, without inscription or dedication, which now are compassed with the
porches of Octauia, and the row of Equestrial statues in the front of the said
buildings, now the greatest ornament of that place, he also brought out of
Macedonia. And it is said that Alexander the great caused Lysippus (that
singular workman) to frame the pictures of all those Granicum, and also to
place his own picture amongst them.

In the city of Rome there are two mountains called Equilini, in one of them
are the ba^hes of Dic^lesian, and the great Marble horses, with two men half
naked, holdinge their reins, being most singular workmanship, whereof one
has this inscription in latin letters Opus Praxitelis, the work of
Praxitiles, the other Opus Phidiae the work of Phidias: and it is clear, that
they were brought thither by Tyridates king of Armenia, for whose entertainment
Nero caused the Theater of Pompey to be covered all over with gold in the space
of one day. C^pontinus
The story of the Trojan horse is vulgarly known, which is also caled Equus
Durateus, or Durens, wherein Grecian princes hid themselves, when they Nec cum
duratens Troianis pergama partu
Inflammascit Equus nocturno graiugenarum.
The truth whereof stands thus, the Graecians making show that they had vowed
a vow unto Pallas, framed a horse of so great bigness, that it could not be
taken into Troy, except the gates were pulled down; and this they placed hard
to the walls of Troy: Sinon (the counterfeit runagat) being then within the walls
among the Troyans, persuaded them to pull down their walls and pull in that
wooden horse; affirming that if they could get it, Pallas would stand so
friendly to them that the Graecians should never be able to move war against
them: wherefore they pull down their gates, and part of their wall, and by
that means do bring the horse into the city: while the Troyans were thus
reuelling and making merry with themselves, and not thinking of any harm might
ensue upon them, the leaders of the Grecian army who by deceit all this while
kept themselves close hid, (ever since which time the Graecians are termed of
all nations deceitful) on a sudden

Others are of opinion, that the poets fiction of the Troyan horse, was no
other but this, that there was a mountain near Troy called Equus, and by
advantage thereof Troy was taken, whereunto Virgill seems to alude, saying;
Instar montis Equum diuina Palladis art
Aedificant.
For they say that Pallas and Epeus made the horse, and therefore I
conjecture, that the Trojan horse was nothing else but an engine of war, like
unto that which is called Aries: For ( Pausanias says) that Epeus was the
inuenter, thereof. And Higintas says, that the Machina oppugnatoira, a devise
of war, to overthrow the walls.

Of this horse there was a brazen image at Athens in Acropolis, with this
inscription, Chaeridemus, Fuangeli filius caelenenatus dicauit. When Alexander
looked upon his own picture at Ephesus which Apelles had drawn with all his
skill, the king did not commend it according to the worth thereof: It fortuned
that a horse was brought into the room, who presently neighed at the picture
of Alexanders horse, smelling unto it as to a living horse, where at Apelles
spoke thus to the king: Ho men Hippos eoice sou graphicoteros
Cata polu.
That is to say: the horse is a better discerner of truth then you.

Phormis which went from Maenalus in Arcadia into Scicilia, to serve Gelon the
Son of Dinomenes, under whom and his brother Hiero he arose to great estate
of wealth, and therefore he gave many gifts to Apollo at Delphos, and made two
brazen horses with their riders at Olympia, setting Dionisius the Grecian
upon one, and Simon Egenenta upon the other.

Aemilius Censorinus (a cruel Tirant in Scicilia) bestowed great gifts upon
such as could invent new kind of Torments; there was one Aruntius Paterculus,
hoping to receive from him some great reward made a brazen horse, and
presented it to the Tirant: to include therein such as he should condemn to
death: at the receipt whereof Aemilius which was never just before, first of
all put the author into it, that he might take experience how cursed a thing it
was to minister unto cruelty.

Apelles also painted Clytus on horsse-backe hastening to war, and his armor
bearer reaching his helmet unto him, so lively, that other dumb beasts were
afraid of his horse. And excellent was the skill of Nealces who had so
pictured a horse foaming that the beholders were wont to take their
handkerchefs to wipe it from his mouth: and thus much for the morrall uses of
horses.

Of the several diseases of Horses and their cures.
Blundevile, and M. Markham, whose works of these matters are to be recorded
like the Illiads of Homer in many places and several Monumentes, to the the
intent that envy or Barbarism may never be able to bury them in oblivion, or
neglect to root them out of the world, without the loss of other memorable
labors.

Wherefore good Reader, for the ensuing Tractate of diseases and cure; compiled
by them, after that I had read over the labors of C. Gesner, and compared it
with them, finding nothing of substance in him, which is not more materially,
perspicuously, profitably, and familiarly, either extracted or expressed by
them, in a method most fitting this Hystory, I have thought good to follow the^
in the description of the disease and the remedy, first (according to time)
declaring them in the words of M. Blund. and afterward in the words of M.
Markam methodically one after the other in the same place: wherwithal I trust
the living authors will not be displeased, that so you may with one labor
examine both; and I hope, that neither they nor any of their friends or
Scholars shall receive any just Blundeuill) after the discourse of the nature
of a horse follows those things which are against nature, the knowledge
whereof is as need fully profitable as the other. Things against nature be
those whereby the heathfull estate of a horsse-body is decayed, which are in
number three. That is, the causes, the sickness, and the accidents; of the two
first in order, and the other promiscuously as need requires.

Of causes and kinds thereof.
THe causes of sickness be unnatural affects, or evil dispositions Blundevile
Of causes, some be called internal, and some External. Internal be those
that breed within the body of the beast, as evil juice. External be those
that chance outwardly to the body, as heat, cold, or the stinging of a Serpent,
and such like. In knowing the cause of every disease, consists the chief
skill of the Ferrer. For unless he knows the cause of the disease, it is

Of sickness what it is, and how many general kinds there be, also with what
order the diseases of Horses are herein declared. And finally, of the four
times, belonging to every sickness.
Sickness is an evil affect contrary to nature, hindering of it self, some
action Intemper^es, that is to say, evil temperature, which is either simple
or compound. It is simple, when one quality only does abound or exceed too
much, as to be too hot or too cold; it is compound, as when many qualities do
exceed, as when the body is too hot and too dry, or too cold and too moist.
The second kind is called Mala constitutio, that is to say, an evil state or
composition, which is to be considered, either by the shape, number, quantity,
or sight of the member, or part evil affected or diseased. The third Vnitatis
solutio, that is to say, the loosening or division of the unity, which as it
may chance diversely; so it has diverse names accordingly: for if such
solution or division be in a bone, then it is called a fracture, if it be in
any fleshie part, then it is called a wound or ulcer; in the veins a
rupture, in the sinnews a conuulsion or crampe, and in the skin an excoriation.

Again, of diseases, some be called long, and some sharp and short, called of
the Latins, Morbi accuti, which be perilous, and do quickly kill the body.
The long, do tarrye longer by it. Yet moreover there is sickness by it self,
and sickness by consent. Sickness by it self, is that which being in some
member, hinders the action thereof by it self. Sickness by consent, is
derived out of one member into another, through the neighborhood and community
that is betwixt them: as the pain of the head which comes from the stomach.

Thus the learned Physicians which write of man's body, do divide sickness. But
Absirtus writing of horsse-leach craft, says of that sickness or rather malady
(for so he terms Vegetius adds three others, that is, the Farcine, the
pain of the Reins or Kidneys, and the cankered Mangenesse, most commonly
called of the old writers the Leprosy; and so makes seven kinds of maladies,
under which all other particular

Again, Laurentius Russius, uses an other kind of division of sickness. Of
horses diseases (says he) some be natural, and some accidental. The natural
be those that do come either through the excess, or lack of engendring seed,
or by error of nature, in missorming the young, or else by some defect of the
damme or sire, in that perhaps they be diseased within, and have their seed
corrupted.

The accidental diseases be those that come by chance, as by surfeiting of
cold, heat, and such like thing. But forasmuch as none of these writers do
follow their own divisions, nor handle the parts thereof accordingly: to
avoid their confusion, and to teach plainly: I thought good and profitable
therefore to use this my own division and order

First then, of diseases some be inward, and some be outward. The inward be
those that breed within the horses body, and are properly called maladies
and diseases, whereof some do ocupy all the wholebodie, and some particular
parts or members of the body.

Of those then that occupy all the body, and not be accident to any private
member, I do first treat, as of Agues, of the Pestilence, and such like, and
then of those that be incident to every particluar member, beginning at the
head, and so proceed orderly throughout all the members, even down to the
sole of the foot, observing therein so nie as I can, the self same order that
Galen uses in his book, De locis male affectis, declaring first, what manner
of disease it is, and how it is called in English, and also in Italian, because
the Kings stable is never without Italian riders, of whom our Ferrers have
borrowed I do not let to enterlace them with outward diseases, incident to
those parts, yea rather, I leave out no outward disease belonging to any
particular member, and to the intent you may the better know to what diseases
or sorances every part or member of the horses body is most commonly
subject. And note by the way, that I call those outward diseases that proceed
not of any inward cause, but of some outward cause, as when a horse is
shouldered by means of some outward cause, or his back galled with the
saddle, or his sides spurgalled, or his hooue cloid with a nail, and such
like, which properly

Thirdly, I talk of those diseases as well outward as inward, that may
indifferently chance in any part of the bdie, as of Impostumes, cankerous
Ulcers, Wounds, Fistules, Burninges, Brousinges, Breaking of bones, and such
like. Fourthly, because most diseases are healed either by letting of blood, by
taking up of vains, by purgation, or else by cauterisation, that is to say, by
giving the fire: I talk of those four necessary things severally by
themselves; and finally, I show you the true order of paring and shooing all
manner of hooues, according as the diversity of hooues require: and to the
intent you may the better understand me, you have the perfect shapes of all
necessary shoes, plainly set forth in figures before your eyes. Thus much
touching mine order which I have hitherto observed.

Now it is necessary to know, that to every disease or malady, belongs four
several times, that is to say, the beginning, the increasing, the state, and
declination, which times are diligently to be observed of the Ferrer, because
they require diverse applying of medicine: for that medicine which was meet to
be used in the beginning of the disease, perhaps

Of the signs of sickness in general.
^^undevile
Sickness according to the learned Physicians, is known four manner Vegetius
says, that it is best known, whether a Horse be sick or not, or toward
sickness, by these signs here following: for if he be more slow and heavy in
his trotting, or gallopping, harder of Spur, then he was wont to be, or
spreads his litter abroad with his feet, often tumbling in the night season,
fetching his breath short and violently, loud snuffling in the Nose, and
c^^ting out vapors at his Nostrils, or lies down immediately after his
prouender, or makes Vegetius, that the Horse is not well, and therefore he
would have him immediately to be separated from his companyons that be whole,
and to be placed by himself until his disease be perfectly known and
cured, and especially if it be any contagious disease.

I have seen diverse Ferrers here in England to use that for the trial of a
Horses sickness* out the original cause of his sickness. But I fear me,
that more Ferrers smell without judgment, than with such judgment, and no
marvel why, since that few or none be learned, or have been brought up with
skilful masters. But from hence forth I trust that my travail, will cause
such Ferrers as can read, and have some understanding already, to be more
diligent in seeking after knowledge then they have bin heretofore, whereby
they shall be the better able to serve their country, and also to profit
themselves, with good fame, whereas now for lack of knowledge they incur much
slander.

Of the Fever and the diverse kinds thereof
I Think it will seem strange unto some, to hear that a horse should have
an Ague or Fever, but it was not strange unto the men of old time, as to
Absyrtus, Hierocles, Blundev^^e
Xenophon, Vegetius, and such like old Soldiers, thoroughlie experimented in
horses griefs. A Fever, according to the learned Physicians, is an unnatural
and immoderate heat, which proceeding first from the heart, spreads itself
thoroughout all the arteries and veins of the body, and so lets the
actions thereof.

Of Feauers there be three general kinds, whereof the first, is that which
breeds in the spirits, being inflamed or heated more than their nature
requires. The second Vegetius, who speaks somewhat of a Fever Quotidian, of
a Fever continual, and also of a fever Accidental. He speaks also of
Summer, Autumn, and Winter Feauers, without making any great difference
betwixt them, more then that one is worse than another, by reason of the time
and season of the year, so that in effect all is but one Fever. Wherefore
according unto Absirtus opinion, I will breefely show you first the causes
whereof it

The Fever chances sometime by surfeiting of extreme labor or exercise, as
of too much traveling, and especially in hot weather, of too swift gallopping
and running, and sometime by extreme heat of the Sun, and also by extreme
cold of the air, and sometime it breeds of crudity or raw digestion, which
many times happens by over greedy eating of sweet green corn, or of such
prouender as was not thoroughly dried nor cleansed: for after such greedy eating,
and specially of such meat, never follows perfect digestion. The signs to
know a Fever be these. The horse does continually hold down his head, and is
not able to lift it up, his eyes are even blown so as he cannot easily open
them: yea and many times they be watering, the flesh of his lips and of all
his body is lush and feeble, his stones hang low, his body is hot, and his
breath is very hot and Absirtus says, is an assured token of a Fever: he
also sleeps but little. The cure and diet. Let him blood in the face and
Temples, and also in the palate of his mouth, and the first day give him no
meat, but only warm drink, and that by little and little. Afterward give him
continually grass, or else very sweet hay wet in water, and let him be kept
warm, and sometime walk him up and down fair and softly in a temperate
air, and then let him rest, and when you see that he begins to amend, give
him by little and little at once barley fair sifted and well sodden, and also
mundified, that is to say, the husk pulled away, like as

Of diverse sorts of Fevers, according to Vigetius, and first of that which
continues but one day.
THe Fever of one day called by the Geeek name Ephemera, or else by the Latin
name Diaria, chances many times through the rashness and small discretion of
the keeper, or some other that lets not to ride a horse vnmeasurably,
either before or after watering, whereby the horse afterward in the stable
enters into an extreme heat, and so falls into his Fever, which you shall
know

Moreover, he will forsake his meat, and his Legs will wax stiff and feeble.
The cure. Let him have rest all the next day following, and be comforted with
warm meat, then let him be walked up and down saite and softly, and so by
little and little brought again to his former estate.

Of the Fever continual.
THe Fever continual, is that which continues without intermission, and is
called Febris continua, which springs of some inflammation or extreme heat,
bredde in the principal members or inward parts, about the heart, which is
known in this sort. The Horse does not take his accustomed rest, whereby his
flesh dothfal away every day more and more, and sometime there does appear hot
inflammations in his flanks, and above his withers. The cure. Purge his head by
squirting into his Nostrils man's urine, or the Water of an Ox that has been
rested a certain time, to the intent such water may be the stronger, and then
give him the drink written in the next Chapter.

Of the Fever taken in the Autumn, that is to say, at the
IF a Horse chance to get a Fever at the fall of the leaf, cause him
immediately to be let blood in the neck vain, and also in the third furrow of
the roof of his mouth, and then give him this drink. Take of Iermander four
ounces, of Gum dragant, and of dried roses, of each one ounce, beat them all
into fine powder, and put them into a quart of Ale, adding thereunto of Oil
olive four ounces, and of Honey as much, and give it the Horse lukewarm.

Of the Fever in Summer season.
A Fever taken in Summer season is much worse then in any other time, and
especially if it be taken in the Dog days, for then the accidents be more
furious. Blundevile
The signs be these: his artires will beat evidently, and he will shed his
seed when he staleth, and his going will be unorderly. The cure. Let him blood
in a vain that he has in his hinder hanch, about four fingers beneath the
fundament, or if you cannot find that vain, let him blood in the neck vain,
toward the withers, and if it be needful you may give him also this drink.
Take the juice of a handful of Parslein mingled with Gum dragant, with Ensens,
and a few

Of the Fever in winter.
FOr the Fever in Winter, it shall be good to take the powder of the drugs
last mentioned, and with a quill or reed, to blow it up into his left
Nostrill to make him to neese. It shall be good also to let him blood in the
neck vain, Blundevile
and in the palate of the mouth, and then to give him one of these drinks here
following. Take of Ireos six ounces, of round Pepper one ounce, of
Bay Berries, and of the seed of Smallage, of each one ounce, and let him
drink them with sodden Wine.

As touching his diet, let his water be always lukewarm, wherein would be put
a little Wheat meal, and remember to give him no meat so long as his fit
continues. And Apotorapie, which is made in this sort. Take of Damask Roses
one pound, of old Oil a pint, of strong vinegar a pint and a half, of
Mintes and Rue beaten into powder, of each one ounce and a half, together with
one old dry Nut, beat them and mingle them together, then being strained and
made lukwarme, rub and chafeal the horses body therewith against the hair,
until he begins to sweat, then set him up in the warmest place of the
stable, and cover him well.


YOu shall know if the Fever proceeds of any such cause, by these signs
here following. The Horse will blow at the nose more then he is accustomed
to do, seems to fetch his wind only at his nose, and his breath will be
short, hot and dry; you shall see his flanks walk, and his back to beat. The
cure. Cause him to be let blood abundantly in the head, and palate of his
mouth, and by squirting warm vinegar in the morning into his nostrils, force
him to neese: and if he be costiue, let his fundament be raked, or else give
him a glister to ease the pain in his head. And as touching his diet,

Of the Fever accidental coming of some ulcer in the mouth or throat.
THe Horse not being well kept and governed, after that he has been let
blood in the upper parts: yea, and also besides that of his own nature is
subject unto the his meat, it shall be good to give him lukewarm water,
mingled with Barley meal, or wheat meal, and besides that, to make him swallow
down seven sops sopped in wine one after another, at one time: some use at the
second time to dip such sops in sweet sallet oil. Thus far Vegetius.

Of the Pestilent Ague.
IT seems by Laurentius Russius, that Horses be also subject to a pestilent
fever, which almost incureable, Blundevile
is called of him Infirmitas Epidimialis, that is to say, a contagious and
Laurentius himself rendereth no cause thereof, but only shows signs how to
know it, which be these. The Horse holds down his head, eats little or
nothing, his eyes waterish, and his flanks do continually beat. The cure.
First give him this glister. Take of the pulpe of Coloquintida one ounce, of
Dragantum one ounce and a half, of Centuary and Wormwood, of each one
handful, of Castoreum half an ounce, boil them in water, then being
strained, dissolve therein, of Gerologundinum six ounces, of salt an ounce and
a half, and half a pound of Oil olive, and minister Castoreum, of Mustard
seed and of Euforbium, of each two ounces, dissolve the same in the juice of
Daffodill, and of Sage, and lay it to the Temples of his head next unto his
ears, or else give him any of these three drinks here following; take of the
best Triacle two or three ounces, and distemper it in good wine, and give it
him with a horn; or else let him drink every morning the space of three
days, one pound or two of the juice of Elder roots, or else give him every
morning to eat, a good quantity of Venus hair, called of the Latins Capillus
Veneris, newly and fresh gathered, but if it be old then boil it in water, and
give him the decoction thereof to drink

Martins opinion and experience touching a Horses Fever.
THough Martin have not seen so many several kinds of fevers, to chance to
Horses, Blundevile
yet he confesses that a Horse will have a fever, and says that you shall
know it by these signs. For after the Horse has been sick two or three
days, if you look on his tongue, you shall see it almost raw and scalt, with
the heat that coms out of his body, and he will shake and tremble,

Of sickness in general, and the Fever.
IN general, sickness is an opposite foe to nature, warring against the agents of
the body and mind, seeking to confound those actions which uphold and
maintain the bodies strength and liuely-hood: Markham.
Who coueteth to have larger definition of sickness, let him read Vegesius
Rusius, or excellent Master Blundiuile, who in that has bin Aqua vitae, and
give it him in a horn, then bridle him, and in some Close or Court, chafe him
til his shaking cease and he begin to sweat: then set him up and cloth him
warm. And during the time of his sickness, give him no water to drink, but
before he drink it, boil therein Mallows, Sorrel, Purslaine, of each two or
three handfuls.

As for his food, let it be sodden Barley, and now and then a little Rye in
the sheafe to cleanse and purge him, chiefly if he be dry inwardly and grow
costiue. This I have proved

Of the Pestilence.
THe Pestilence is a contagious disease, proceeding as Pelagonius says,
sometime of overmuch labor, heat, cold, hunger, aad sometime of sudden
Blundevile
or of drinking cold water whiles the Horse is hot and sweating, for all
these things do breed corrupt humors in the Horses body, whereof the
Pestilence does chiefly proceed, or else of the corruption of the air,
poisoning the breath, whereby the Beasts should live, which also happens
sometime of the corruption of eeuill vapors and exhalations that spring out of
the earth, and after great floodes or earthquakes, and sometime by means of
some evil distillation or influence of the Planettes, corrupting sometime the
plants and fruits of the earth, and sometime diverse kind of cattle, and
sometime both men, Women and children, as we daiely see by experience. It
seems that this evil or mischief in times paste came suddenly, without
giving any warning, for none of mine Authors does declare any signs how to
know whether a Horse whole from the sick: yea, and have them clean out of
the air of those that be dead, the bodies whereof as Vegetius says, if they
be not deep buried, will infect all the rest. And let them blood as well in the
neck, as in the mouth, and then give them this drink: take of Gentian, of
Aristoloch, of Bay berries, of Myrrh, of the scraping of Iuory, of each like
quantity, beat them into fine powder, and give as well to the sick as to the
whole, whom you would preserve from this contagion, every day a spoonefull or
two of this powder in a pint of good wine, so long as you shall see it
needful. This medicine before rehearsed, is called of the ancient writers
Diapente, that is to say: a composition of five simples, and is praised to be a
sovereign medicine and preservative against al inward diseases, and therefore
they would have such as travel by the way, to carty of this powder always
about

There be many other Medicines which I leave to write, because if I should
rehearse every man's medicine, my book would be infinite, I for my part would
use no other then either that before expressed, or else wine and treacle only.

Of the diseases in the head.
Blundevile
THe head is subject to diverse diseases according to the diverse parts thereof:
for in the pannicles or little fine skins cleaning to the bones, and covering
the brain, do

Of headeach.
THe headeach, either comes of some inward causes: as of some choleric
humor, Eumelus says, that it comes of raw digestion: but Martin says most
commonly of cold: the signs be these. The Horse will hang down his head, and
also hang down his ears, his sight will be dim, his eyes swollen and
waterish, and he will forsake his meat. The cure. Let him blood in the palate
of his mouth. Also purge his head with this perfume. Take of Garlike stalks a
handful, all to broken in short pieces, and a good quantity of Frankencense,
and being put into a chafingdish of fresh coals, hold the chafingdish under
the Horses Nostrils, so as the Pelogonius says, that it is good to pouer into
his Nostrils wine, wherein has been sodden Euforbium, Centuary, and
Frankencence.

Of the frenzy and madness of a Horse.
THe learned Physicians do make diverse kinds, as well of frenzy, as of
madness, which are not needful to be recited, since I could never read in any
Author, nor learn of any Ferrer, that a horse were subject to the one half
of them. Absiruus, Hierocles, Eumelus, Pelagonius, and Hippocrates, do write de
furore and rabie: that is to say, of the madness of a Horse. But indeed
vegetius in his second book of horseleach-craft, seems to make four mad
passions belonging to a Horse, intituling his Chapters in this sort, de
Appioso, de Frenetico, de Cardiacis, de Rabioso, the effects whereof though I
fear me it will be to no great purpose, yet to content such as perhaps have
read the Author as well as I my self, I will here briefly rehearse the same.

When some naughty blood (says he) does strike the filme or pannacle of the
brain, in one part only, and makes the same grievously to ache, then the beast
becomes Appiosum, that is to say, as it seems by his own words next
following, both dull of mind and of sight. This word Appiosum, is a strange
word, and not to be found again in any other Author, and because in this
passion, the one side of the head is only grieved, the Horse turns round,
as though he went in a Mill. But when the poison of such corrupt blood does
infect the mid brain, then the Horse becomes Frantike, and will leap and
fling, and will run against the walls. And if such blood fills the veins of
the stomach, or breast, then it infecteth as well the heart as the brain, and
causes alienation of mind, and the body to sweat, and this disease is called
of Vegetius, Passocardiaca, which if Equus Appiosus Rabiosus, that is to say,
stark mad. For says he, by overmuch heat of the liver and blood, the veins,
and artires of the heart are choked up, for grief and pain whereof the Horse
biteth himself, and gnaweth his own flesh.

Of two sorts of mad horses, I believe I have seen my self here in this
Realm. For I saw once a black Sweathland Horse (as I took him to be) in my
Lord of Hunsdons stable at Hunsdon, coming thither by chance with my Lord
Morley, which Horse would stand all day long biting of the manger, and eat
little meat or none, suffering no man to aproch unto him, by which his doings,
and partly by his color and complexion, I judged him to be vexed with a
melancholy madness, called of the Physicians, Mania, or rather Melancholia,
which comes of a corrupt Melancholy, and filthy blood or humor, sometime

This Horse I say though he could eat his meat, drink his drink, and sleep:
yet if he were never so little offended, he would take on like a spirit, and
both bite and strike at any Martin never took such cure in hand. Absirtus, and
the other Authors before mentioned say, that the madness of a Horse comes
either by means of some extreme heat taken by traueling, or long standing in
the hot sun, or else by eating over many fitches, or by some hot blood
resorring to the pannicles of Hipocrates says, he will forsake his meat and
pine himself with hunger.

The cure. Cause him to be let blood in his Legs aboundanly, which is done (as
I take it) to divert the blood from his head. Notwithstanding it were not
amiss, to let him blood in the Neck and breast vains. Then give him this
drink: take the roots of wild Cowcumber, and boil it in harsh red wine, and
put thereunto a little Nitre, and give it him with a horn lukwarm: or if you can
get no Cucumber, then take Rue, and Mints, and boil them Eumelius says, that
if you give him man's dung in wine to drink 3. mornings together, it will heal
him: also to take of black Elleborus 2. or 3. handfuls, and boil it in a
sufficient quantity of strong vinegar, and therewith rub and chafe both his head
and all his body once or twice a day, for the oftener his head is rubbed the
better, and often exercise is very profitable to al his body. Some again would
have the skin of his head to be pierced in diverse places with an hot iron, to
let out the evil humors: but if none of all this will prevail, then the last
remedy is to geld him of both his stones, or else of one at the least, for
either that will heal him or else nothing. As touching the diet and usage of a
mad Horse, the Authors do not agree, for some would have him kept in a close,
dark and quiet house, void from all noise, which as Absirtus says, will
either make him madder, or else kill him out of hand. His diet would be thin,
that is to say: without any prouender, and that day that he is let blood and
receives his drink, they would have him fast until even, and then to have a
warm mash of Barley meal: yea, methinkes

Another of the Headache.
Markham.
THe Headache as most are opynionated, proceeds of cold and rast digestion,
the cure is, take a Goose feather anointed with Oil de bay, and thrust it up
into the horses nostrils, to make him neese, then take a wreath of Pease-straw
or wet hay, and putting fire thereunto, hold it under the horses nose, so as
the smoke may ascend up into his head, then being thus perfumed, take a knife
and prick him in the pallat of the mouth,

Of the sleeping evil.
Blundevile
THis is a disease forcing the beast continually to sleep, whether he will or
not, taking his memory and appetite clean away, and therefore is called of the
Physicians Lethargus, it proceeds of abundance of phlegm moistening the
brain overmuch It is easy to know it, by the continual sleeping of the
Horse. The cure of this disease according Pelagonius, Vegetius, and others, is
in this sort. Let him blood in the neck, and then give him this drink: Take
of Camomile and Motherwort, of each two or three handfuls, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, and put thereunto a little wheat bran, salt and
vinegar, and let him drink a pint of that every day, the space of three or
four days together. It is good also to perfume and chafe his head, with Time
and Peniroyall sodden together in vinegar, or with Brimstone and feathers
burned upon a chafingdish of coals under his nose: and to provoke him to
neese, by blowing pepper and Pyrethre beaten to powder, up into his nostrils:
yea and to anoint the palate of his mouth, with Honey and Mustard mingled
together, and in his drink, which would be always warm water, to put Parsley
seed, and Fennel seed, to provoke urine. His Legs also would be

Another of the sleeping evil.
Markham.
THe sleeping evil in a horse, differs nothing from that which the Physicians
call the Lethargy in men, for it provoke the horse to sleep continually,
without disisting, robbing his memory and appetite of their qualities: the
knowledge thereof is easily Tobacco, which being dried and beaten to powder,
with a quill blow it up into his nostrils, and give him to drink vinegar,
salt, and Mustard mingled well together, to which if you put a little Honye, it
shall not be amiss: and also when he drinks any water, put thereto either
Fennel-seedes, Anny-seedes or Pepper.

Of a Horse that is taken.
A Horse is said to be taken, when he is deprived of his feeling and moving,
Blundevile
so as he is able to stir no manner of way, but remains in such state and
form, as he was taken in. Which disease is called of the Physicians by the
Greek name Catalepsis, and in Latin Deprehensio, or Congelatio and of
Vegetius, Sideratio, which also calls those beasts I^^^enta sideratitia. The
physicians say, that it comes of abundance of Phlegm and choler mixed
together, or else of melancholy blood, which is a cold dry humor opressing the
hinder parts of the brain. But Vegetius says, that it coms of some extreme
outward cold, striking suddenly into the empty veins, or some extreme heat
or raw digestion, or else of some great hunger, caused by long fasting. It is
easy to know by the description before mentioned.

As touching the cure, Vegetius says, that if it come of cold, then it is
good to give him to drink, one ounce of Laserpitium, with Wine and Oil mixed
together, and made lukewarm: if of heat, then to give it him with water and
honey: if of crudity, then to hea^e him by fasting: if of hunger, then by
feeding him well with Pease. But Martin says, that Surprins, and it comes
(as he says) most chiefly of cold taken after a heat, and he wishes a horse
that is thus taken, to be cured in this sort. First to be let blood on both
sides of the breast, and then to be put in a heat either by continual stirring
and molesting him, or else if he will stir by no means, then to bury him all
save the head in a warm dunghill, and there to let him lie until his limbs have
some feeling. And before you so bury him, it shall be good to give him this
drink. Take of Malmsie three pints, and put thereunto a quarterne of Sugar,
and some Cinnamon and Cloves, and let him drink it good and warm, and until
he be perfectly whole, let him be kept warm, and often exercised and walked up
and down in the stable, and thinly dieted, and drink nothing but warm water,
wherein if you put some Fennel and Parsley seed, to provoke him

Another of a Horse that is taken.
A Horse which is bereft of his feeling, moving or stirring, is said to be
taken, and in sooth so he is, in that he is arrested by so vallainous a
disease, yet some Farriors, Markham.
not well understanding the ground of the disease, conster the word taken, to
be stricken by some Plannet or evil spirit, which is false, for it proceeds
of too great abundance of fleme and choler, simboliz'd together, the cure is
thus. Let him blood in his spur vains, and his breast veins, Petrolium, and in
twice or thrice dressing him he will be sound.

Of the Staggers.
THis is a dizzinesse of the head, called in Latin vertigo, and of the
Italians as I remember Capistura. It comes of some corrupt blood, Blundevile
or gross and tough humors Martin is thus.

Let him blood in the temple veins, and then with a knife make an hole an inch
long ouerwart his forehead, hard underneath his fore-top, and raise the skin
with a Cornet, thrusting it upward toward the head-stale a good handful, and
then put in a taint dipped in Turpentine and hogs grease molten together,
renewing the taint every day once until it be whole, and do the like upon the
ridge of the rumpe, but methinkes it were better to do the like, in the powle
of his head, or nape of his neck, for so should the evil humors have both
ways the easier and speedier passage: and as touching his diet, let him have
continually warm drink, and mashes, and once a day be walked up and down
fair and softly to exercise his body.

Of the Staggers.
THe Staggers is a dizy disease, breeding frenzy in a Horse, which if it be
not instantly helped, Markham.
is mortal: the cure is thus. Let him blood in the temple veins, and then
aply to his temples cloth in the juice of Garlike, and Aqua vitae mixed
together: if you crush Garlike and put it in his ears, it is excellent: or if
you slit his forehead, and loosening the skin from the bone, taint it with
Turpentine and Sallet-oyle, it will undoubtedly help him.

Of the falling evil.
Blundevile
THis is a kind of convulsion or crampe, called of the Latins by the Greek name
Epilepsia, Il morbo caduco, depriving the beast at certain times, and for a
certain space of the use of feeling, hearing and seeing, and of all the other
senses. And although it be a disease that has bin seldom seen to chance unto
Horses of this Country, yet it appears by Absirtus, and also by Vegetius,
and diverse others, that Horses be subject thereunto. For Absirtus writing to
his friend Tiberius Claudius says, that unto horses chances many times the
falling sickness. The signs whereof are these. The Horse will fall down
suddenly, partly through the resolution of his members, and partly through
distension of his sinnewes, and al his body will quiver and quake, and sometime
he will foam at the mouth. Vegetius again writes in this sort: by a certain
course of the Moon horses and other beasts many times do fall, and die for a
time as well as men. The signs whereof

Let him blood abundantly in the neck veins, and within five days after
let him blood again in the temple veins and let him stand in a warm and
dark stable, and anoint al his body with comfortable ointments, and his head
and ears with Oil of Bay, and liquid Pitch or Tar, mingled together. And also
put some thereof into his ears, and Panax or Panaces, and of Scammony, of each
one ounce, beat al these things together, and boil them in a quart of Honey,
and at sundry times as you shall see it needful, give him a good spoonefull or
two of this in a quart of Ale lukewarm, whereunto would be put three or four
spoonefuls of oil. It is good also to blow the powder of Motherwort, or of
Pyrethrum, up into his nostrils, and if the disease do continue still for all
this, then it shall be needeful to pearse the skin of his forehead in diverse
places with a hot iron, and to let out the humors oppressing his brain.

of the night Mare.
THis is a disease oppressing either man or beast in the night season when he
sleeps, so as he cannot draw his breath, and is called of the Latins
Incubus. It comes of a continual crudity or raw digestion of the stomach,
from whence gross vapors ascending up into the head, do oppress the brain,
and all the sensitive powers, so as they cannot do their office, in giving
perfect feeling and moving to the body. And if this disease chancing often to a
man, be not cured in time, it may perhaps grow to a worse mischief, as to the
faling evil, madness, or Apopelexy. But I could never learn that Horses were
subject to this disease, neither by relation, nor yet by reading, but only in
an old English writer, who shows neither cause nor signs, how to know when a
horse has it, but only teaches how to cure it with a fond foolish charm,
which because it may perhaps make you gentle Reader to laugh, as well as it did
me, for recreation sake I will here rehearse it. Take a flint stone that has
a hole of his own kind, and hang it over him, and

In nomine patris, etc.
Saint George our Ladies Knight,
He walked day, so did he night,
Until he her found,
He her beat, and he her bound,
Till truly her troath she him plight,
That she would not come within the night,
There as saint George our Ladies knight,
Named was three times, saint George.


Of the Apoplexy.
THe Apoplexy, is a disease depriving all the whole body of sense and moving.
And if it deprive but part of the body, then it is called of the Latins by the
Greek name Paralysis, in our tongue a palsy. It proceeds of cold, gross,
and tough humors, Blundevile
oppressing the brain all at once, which may breed partly of crudities and raw
digestion, and partly by means of some hurt in the head, taken by a fall,
stripe, or otherwise. As touching Vegetius writes in this manner. A Horse
(says he) may have the palsy as well as a man, which is known by these
signs. He will go grouelling and sideling like a Crab, carrying his neck
awry, as if it were broken, and goes crookedly with his legs, beating his head
against the walls and yet forsakes not his meat nor drink, and his prouender
seems moist and wet. The cure. Let him blood in the temple vain, on the
contrary side of the wrying of his neck, and anoint his neck with
comfortable ointment, and splent it with splents of wood to make it stand
right, and let him stand in a warm stable, and give him such drinks as are
recited in the next chapter following. But if all this profits not, then draw
his neck with a hot iron on the contrary side: that is to say, on the whole
side,

Of the Crampe or convulsion of the sinnewes. and Muscles.
A Conuulsion or crampe, is a forceable and painful contraction or drawing
together of the sinnewes and Muscles which do happen sometime through the
whole body, and sometime but in one part or member only. And according as the
body Emprosthotonos, in Latin Tensio ad anteriora. And if the body be drawn
back, it is called in Greek Opisthotonos, in Latin Tensio ad pesteriora.

But if the body be stark and strait, bowing neither forward, nor backward,
then it is called simply in Greek Tetanos, in Latin Distensio or Rigor: which
names also are applied to the like conuulsions of the neck. Notwithstanding,
Vegetius writing of this diease, in^ituleth his chapters de Roborosis, a
strange term, and not to be found again in any other A^thor. A conuulsion as
I said before, may chance as well to one part or member of the body, as to the
whole body: as to the eye, to the skin of the forehead, to the roots of the
tongue, to the jaws, to the lips, to the arm, hand or Leg: that is to say,
whenever the sinnew or muscle serving to the moving of that part, is evil
affected or grieved. Of which conuulsions, though there be many diverse causes:
yet Hippocrates brings them

Besides these kinds of conuulsions, there is also chancing many times in a
man's singers, Legs and toes, another kind of conuulsion, which may be called
a windye conuulsion, for that it proceeds of some gross or tough vapor,
entered into the branches

For I have seen some my self, that have had one of their hinder Legs
drawn up with the crampe almost to the belly so stiff and hard, as no man
has been able to stir it, neither could the Horse himself set it0 down to
the ground of a long season, which I think might be soon remedied: first by
continual chafing, fretting, or rubbing his Legs with a good wispe, and then
by tying up the other hinder Leg, or else the forelegge on the fore side,
when by he should be forced to set down the pained Leg. Thus far I have
discoursed

Absirtus says, that this disease does come, either by driving the Horse
into a sweat when he halteth, or for that he has trodden upon some nail, or
by taking cold after iournying and sweating in Winter season, whereby his
lips are clung together, or by long lying and rest after sweating, whereby
the sinnewes of his forelegges be nummed, or by having some stripe of his privy
members, or by long traveling in the cold Mountains, where snow and Ise
does abound. For Theomnestus Writes, that coming out of Paonia, with the King
and his army, and passing over the Mountains to go into Italy, there
Theomnestus his own Horse which he loved dearly, was sore vexed therewith.
The signs to know whether a Horse be troubled with the conuulsion in the
sinnewes or not, be these.

His head and neck will be so stiff and stark as he can bow it no manner of
way, his ears will stand right up, and his eyes will be hollow in his head, and
the fleshy parts thereof ground, and by means of the conuulsion in his back,
his bladder also for neighborhood sake, suffers, whereby the Horse cannot
stale but with great pain. The cure. Put him into a sweat, either by burying
him all save the head in some warm dunghill, or if he be a horse of price,
carry him into a hot house, where is no smoke, and let him sweat there. Then
anoint all his body, head, neck, legs, and all with oil of Cypres, and
oil of Bay mingled together. Or else with one of these ointments. Take of
Hogs-greace two pound, of Turpentine half a pound, of Pepper beaten in powder
one dram, of new Wax one pound, of old Oil two pound, boil all these
together, and being made very warm, anoint all his body therewith. Or else
with this ointment. Take of new wax one pound, of Turpentine four ounces, of
oil de Bay as much, of Opopanax two ounces,

It is good also to bath his head with the decoction of Fitches, or else of
Lupines, and make him this drink. Take xx. grains of long Pepper, finely
beaten into powder, of Cedar two ounces, of Nitre one ounce, of Lacerpitium as
much as a Bean, and mingle all these together with a sufficient quantity of
white Wine; and give him thereof to drink a quart every Morning and Evening
for the space of three or four days, or else this drink. Take of Opopanax two
ounces, of Storar three ounces, of Gentian three ounces, of Manna Succ^rie,
three ounces, of Myr one scruple, of long Pepper two scruples, give him this
with old Wine; or make him a drink of Lacerpitium, Cumin, Annis seed,
Fenegreeke,

In old time they were wont to let him blood in the Temples, which Absirtus
does not allow, saying that it will cause the sinnewes of his lips to dry up, so
as the horse being not able to move them, shall pine for hunger. As touching
his diet, give him at the first warm mashes, and such soft meat as he may
easily get down, and wet haie, bringing him to harder food by little and
little. And in any case, let him be kept very warm, and ridden or walked once
a day to exercise his legs and lims. Theomnestus cured his horse, as he
says, by placing him in a warm stable, and by making a clear fire without any
smoke round about him, and the horse not being able to open his jaws of
himself, he caused his mouth to be opened, and put therein sops dipped in a
confection called Entrigon conditum, Acopum (the making whereof herafter
follows) dissolved in Cypres oil, which made him to fall into a sweat, and
being before half dead and more, brought him again to his feeling and moving,
so as he did rise and eat his meat.

Of the Crampe or convulsions of the Sinnewes or Muscles.
I have known and helped diverse. These convulsions have two grounds, namely,
either natural, or else accidental: natural, as proceeding of cold windy
humors engendered in the body, and dispersed into those parts, work there the
effects of greeuance. Accidental, is by wounding or pricking the sinnews of
which immediately ensues a convulsion. If it be natural, and the disease
generally dispersed; then the cure is thus: dig a great deep hole in some old
dunghill, and there bury him all save the head, so he may sweat there for the
space of two hours at the least, then take him out, and anoint his body all
over with Narueoile, Turpentine, and Deares suet

Then give him to drink old Ale brewd with Sinamon, Ginger, Fenecreeke and
long Pepper: of each three ounces. As for his diet, let it be warm mashes,
sodden wheat and hay, thoroughly carded with a pair of wool cards: let him be
kept very warm and ayred abroad once a day at the least.

If this convulsion be not only in one member, then it is sufficient if every
day with hard ropes of hay or straw you rub and chafe that part exceedingly,
and apply there to a little quantity of the oil Pepper. If the convulsion be
accidental, proceeding of some hurt, whereby the sinnews is wounded or pricked,
then shall you incontinently take up the sinnew so wounded, searching the wound
with great discretion, and cut it clean insunder, then shall you endeavor to
heal up the same with unguents, plasters and balms, as shall be hereafter
mentioned in the chapters of wounds and ulcers, of what kind or nature soever.

Of the cold in the head.
ACcording to the cold which the horse has taken, is new or old, great or
small, and Blundevile
so is the disease more or less dangerous. For if the horse casts little
or no matter out of his nose, nor has no very great cough but only heavy in
his head, and perhaps lightly cougheth now and then, it is a sign that he is
stopped in the head, which we were wont to call the pose. But if his head be
full of humors congeald by some extreme cold taken of long time past, and that
he casts foul filthy matter out at the nose, and cougheth grievously, then
it is a sign that he has either the Glaunders, or the Strangullion, mourning
of the cheine, or consumption of the lungs. For all such diseases do breed for
the most part of the Rhueme or distillation that comes from the head. Of

Martin says, it is good to purge his head, by perfuming him with
Frankencence, and also to provoke him to neeze by thrasting two Goose feathers
dipped in oil de Bay up into his nostrils and then to trot him up and down
half an hour, for these feathers will make him to cast immediately at the
nose. Laurentius Russius would have him to be perfumed with Wheat, Penneroyal,
and sage sodden well together and put into a bag so hot as may be, which bag
would be so close fastened to his head, that all the savor thereof may ascend
up into his nostrils, and his head also would be covered and kept warm: and to
provoke him to neeze, he would have you to bind a soft clout anointed with
soap, or

Of the cold in the head.
THe pose or cold in a horse, is the most general disease that happens, and
Markham.
the cure thereof is in this sort: If it be but newly taken by some careless
regard, and immediately perceived, you shall need no other remedy but to keep
him warm every Morning and Evening after his water, to ride him forth, and to
trot him up and down very fast till his cold break, and then gently to gallop
him a little, which moderate exercise with warm keeping will quickly recover
him again; but if the cold has had long residence in him, and still
increases, then you shall give him this drink three days together. Take of
strong Ale one quart, of the best Treakle six penniworth, of long Pepper and
grains, of each as much beaten to powder,

Of the diseases of the eyes.
Horses eyes be subject to diverse griefs, as to be waterish or blood-shotten,
Blundevile
to be dim of sight, to have the pin and web, and the haw, whereof some comes
of inward causes, as of humors resorting to the eyes, and some of outward, as
of cold, heat, or stripe.

Of weeping or watering eyes.
Laurentius Russius says, may come sometime by confluence of humors, and
sometime by some stripe, whose cure I leave to recite, because it does not
differ much from Martins experience here following: take of Pitch, Rosen and
Mastick, a like quantity, melt them together. Then with a little stick, having
a clout bound to the end thereof, and dipped therein, anoint the Temple veins
on both sides, a hand full above the eyes, as broad as a Testern, and then clap
unto it immediately a few flocks of like color to the horse, holding them
close to his head with your hand, until they stick fast unto his head, then
let him blood on both sides (if both sides be infected) a handful under the
eyes. Russius also thinks it good to wash his eyes once a day with pure white
wine, and then to blow therein a little of Tartarum, and of Pomis stone, beaten
into fine powder.

Of watering eyes.
WAtering eyes comes most commonly in some stripe or blow, and the cure is
thus. Lay unto his Temples a plaster of Turpentine and Pitch molten together,
Markham.
then wash his eyes with white Wine, and afterward blow the powder of burnt
Allome into the same.

Of bloud-shotten eyes, also for a blow, or itching and rubbing in the eyes.
Martin never used any other medicine, then this water here following,
wherewith he did always heal the foresaid griefs: take of pure Rose water,
of Malmesie, Blundevile
of Fennel water, of each three sponfuls, of Tutia as much as you can easily
take with your thumb and finger, of cloves a dozen beaten into fine powder;
mingle them together, and being luke warm, or cold if you will, wash the
inward part of the eye with a feather dipped therein twice a day until he be
whole. Russius says that to bloudshotten eyes it is good to lay the white of
an Egg, or to wash them with the juice of Selidonye.

Another of blood-shotten eyes, or any other sore eye, coming of rume of other
humor.
Markham.
and Malmesey, of each three spoonefuls, of Cloves 6. or seven beaten to fine
powder, of the juice of Houselicke two spoonefuls, mix all these together and
wash the horses eyes therewith once a day, and it will recover him.

Of dimnesse of sight, and also for the pin and web, or any other spot in the
eye.
IF the horse be dim of sight, or has any pearl growing in his eye, or thin
film covering the ball of his eye, than Russius would have you take of pomis
stone of Tartarum, and of sal Gemma, of each like weight, Blundevile
and being beaten into Martin says, that he always used to blow a little
sandiuoire into the eye once a day, which simple he affirms to be of such
force, as it will break any pearl or web in short space, and make the eye
very clear and fair. Russius amongst a number of other medicines, praises
most all the powder of a black flint stone.

Of the Pin and Web, and other dimnesse.
Markham.
FOr to cure the Pin, Web, Peatle, Fylme, or other dimnesse, use this means
following: Take of Sandiuere, the powder of burnt Allom, and the powder of
black Flintstone of each like quantity: and once a day blow a little thereof
into the horses eye, and it will wear away such imperfect matter, and make
the eye clear.

Of the Haw, called of the Italians, Il vnghia de gli occhi.
THis is a gristle covering sometime more then one half of the eye. It
proceeds of gross and tough humors, Blundevile
discending out of the head, which Haw, as Martin says, would be cut away in
this sort. First pull both the eyelids open with two several threads, stitched
with a needle to either of the lids. Then catch hold of the Haw with another
needle and thread, and pull it out so far as you may cut it round the breadth
of a penny, and leave the black behind. For by cutting away too much of the
fat and black of the eye, the horse many times becomes blear eied. And the
haw being clean taken away, squirt a littie white wine or beer into his eye.

Another of the Haw.
A Haw is a gross grissell growing under the eye of a horse, and covering
more then one half of his sight; Markham.
which if he be suffered will in short time perrish the eye: the cure is thus,
Lay your thumb under his eye, in the very hollow, then with your finger pull
down the lid, and with a sharp needle and thread take hold of the haw, and
plucking it out, with a sharp knife cut it away the compass of a penny, or
more, that done, wash the eye with a little Beer.

Of Lunaticke eyes.
VEgetius writes De oculo lunatico, but he shows neither cause nor signs
thereof, but only says that the old men termed it so, Blundevile
because it makes the eye sometime to look as though it were covered with
white, and sometime clear.

Martin says, that the horse that has this disease, is blind at certain
times of the Moon, insomuch that he sees almost nothing at all during that
time, and then his eyes will look yellowish: yea, and somewhat reddish, which
disease according to Martin, is to be cured in this sort. First use the
plaster mentioned before in the chapter of waterish or weeping eyes, in such
order as is there prescribed, and then with a sharp knife make two slittes on

Another of lunaticke or moon eyes.
Markham.
OF these Lunaticke eyes, I have known diverse: they are blind at certain
times of the Moon, they are very read, fiery, and full of filme: they come
with ouer-riding, and extraordinary heat and fury, the cure of them is thus:
Lay upon the Temples of his head a plaster of Pitch, Rozen, and Mastick
molten together very exceeding hot: then with a little round iron made for the
purpose, burn three or four holes an inch or more underneath his eyes, and
anoint those holes every day with Hogs grease, then put it in his eyes every
day with a little Honey, and in short time he will recover his sight.

Of the Canker in the eye.
Blundevile
and be full of corrupt matter. The cure according to Martin is thus. First,
let him blood on that side the neck, that the eye is grieved, the quantity of
a pottle. Then take of Rochalum, of green Coporas of each half a pound, of
white Coporas one ounce, and boil them in three pints of running water, until
the half be consumed, then take it from the fire, and once a day wash his eye
with this water being made luke warm with a fine linen cloth, and cleanse the
eye therewith so often as it may look raw, continuing thus to do every day until
it be whole.


IMpostumes breed either by reason of some blow or brusing, or else of evil
humors congealed in the ear by some extreme cold, the signs be apparent, by
the burning and painful swelling of the ear and part thereabout. The cure
according to Martin is in this sort. First, ripe the impostume with this

Of the Poll evil.
THis is a disease like a Fistula growing betwixt the ears and the poll or
nape of the neck, and proceeds of evil humors gathered together in that
place, or else of the place, which by continuance of time will break it self,
rotting more inward then outward, and therefore is more perilous if it be not
cured in time, and the sooner it be taken in hand the b^^ter. The cure
according to Martin is thus. If it be not broken, ripe it with a plaster of
hogs grease laid unto it so hot as may be, and make a biggen for the Poll of
his head to keep it from cold, which biggen would have two holes open, so as
his ears may stand out, and renew the plaster every day once until it
break, keeping the sore place as warm as may be.

And if you see that it will not break so soon as you would have it, then
there as it is softest and most meetest to be opened, take a round hot iron, as
big as your little finger,

Then at the four days end, take of Turpentine half a pound, clean washed
in nine sundry waters, and after that thoroughly dried, by thrusting out the
Water with a slice on the dishes side, then put thereunto two yolks of Eggs,
and a little saffron, and mingle them well together: that done, search the
depth of the hole with a whole quil, and make

Of the Viues.
Blundevile
THe Viues be certain kirnels growing under the horses ear, proceeding of
some Viuole, which if they be suffered to grow, Laurentius Russius says, that
they will grievously pain the horse in his throat, so as he shall not be able
to swallow his meat, nor to breath. They be easy to know, for they may be felt
and also seen: The cure according unto Martin, is in this sort: First draw
them right down in the midst with a hot iron, from the root of the ear so far
as the tip of the ear will reach, being pulled down: and under the root again
draw two strikes on each side like a broad arrow head, then in the midst of the
first line lance them with a launcet, Hierocles would have them to be cured
in this sort: take a piece of sponge sowsed well in strong Vinegar, and bind
that to the sore, renewing it twice a day until it has rotted the kirnels,
that done, lance the neathermost part where the matter lies, and let it out,
and then fill it up with salt finely braied, and the next day wash all the filth
away with warm water, and anoint the place with honey and fitch-flower mingled
together. But beware you touch none of the kirnels with your bare finger for
fear of venoming the place, which is very apt for a Fistula to breed in.

Another of the Viues.
THe Viues be certain kirnels, growing under the horses ear, which come of
corrupt blood, Markham.
the cure is diversely spoke and written of, but this is the best mean which I
have tried: that if you find the kernels to inflame and grieve the horse,
take a handful of Sorrel, and lap it in a Bur-docke leaf, and roast it in the
hot embers like a warden, then being taken out of the fire, apply it so hot as
may be to the forepart, suffering it to lie thereunto the space of a day and a
night, and then renew it, till such time that it ripen and break the sore,
which it will in short space do. When it is broken and the vilde matter taken
away, you shall heal up the sore place with the yolk of an Egg, half a
spooneful of honey, and as much wheat flour as will serve to make it thick,
plaister-wise, which being bound thereunto, will in three or four days heal
the same.

Of the Cankerous Ulcer in the nose.
Blundevile
and making it al raw within, and not being helped in time will eat through the
gristle of the nose. It comes of corrupt blood, or else of sharp humors
ingendered by means of some extreme cold. The signs be these. He will bleed
at the nose, and all the flesh within will be raw, and filthy stinking savors,
and matter will come out at the nose. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take
of green Coporas, of Alum, of each one pound, of white Coporas one quarterne,
and boil these in a pottle of running water, until a pint be consumed, then
take it off, and put thereunto half a pint of honey: then cause his head to be
holden up with a drinking staff, and squirt into his nostrils with a squirt of
brass, or rather of Elder, some of this water being lukewarm, three or four
times one after another, but betwixt every squirting* give him liberty to hold
down his head, and to blow out the filthy matter,

Of bleeding at the nose.
I Have seen Horses my self, that have bled at the nose, which have had
neither sore nor ulcer in their Nose, and therefore I cannot choose, but say
with the Physicians, that it comes by means that the vain which ends in
that place, is either opened, broken or settered. It is opened many times by
means that blood abounds too much, or for

Of the bleeding at the nose, or to staunch Flux of blood in any sort.
I Have known many Horses in great danger by bleeding, Markham.
and I have tried diverse remedies for the fame, yet have I not found any more
certain then this: take a spooneful or two of his blood, and put it in a
Sawcer, and set it upon a chafingdish of coals, and ^et it boil til it be al
dried up into powder, then take that powder, and if he bleed at the ^e, with
a Cane or quil blow the same up into his Nostrils: if his bleeding come of any
(...) or other accident, then into the wound put the same powder, which is a
present ^^edy. New Horse-dung or earth, is a present remedy, applied to the
bleeding place, (...) are Sage leaves bruised and put into the wound.

Blundevile
Of the diseases in the mouth, and first of the bloody rifts or chops in the
palate of the mouth.
THis disease is called of the Italians, Palatina, which as Laurentius Russius
says, comes by eating hay or prouender that is full of pricking seeds,
which by continual pricking and fretting the furrows of the mouth do cause
them to rankle, and to bleed corrupt and stinking matter, which you shall
quickly remedy, as Martin says, by washing first the sore places with vinegar
and salt, and then by anointing the same with honey.

Of the bladders in a Horses mouth, which our old Ferrers were wont to call the
Gigs. The Italians call them Froncelle.
THese be little soft swellings or rather pustuls with black heads, growing in
the inside of his lips, next unto the great iaw-teeth, which are so painful
unto the horse, as they make him to let his meat fall out of his mouth, or at
the least to keep it in his mouth vnchawed, whereby the horse prospers not.
Russius says, that they come either by eating too much cold grass, or else
pricking, dusty, and filthy prouender. The cure whereof, according to Martin, is
in this sort. Slit them with a launcet, and thrust out all the corruption, and
then wash the sore places with a little vinegar and salt, or else with Alum
water.

Of the bladders in a Horse mouth.
Markham.
SOme Horses will have bladders like paps growing in the inside of their lips,
next to

Of the Lampasse.
THe Lampasse, called of the Italians Lampascus, proceeds of the abundance
of blood, resorting to the first furrow of the mouth, I mean that which is
next unto the upper foreteeth, causing the said furrow to swell so high as the
Horses teeth, so as he cannot chew his meat, but is forced to let it fall out
of his mouth. The remedy is to cut all the superfluous flesh away, with a
crooked hot iron made of purpose, which every

Another of the Lampasse.
THe Lampasse is a thick spungy flesh, growing over a horses upper teeth,
hindering the conjunction of his chaps, ^arkham.
in such sort that he can hardly eat: the cure is as follows. Cut all that
naughty flesh away with a hot iron, and then rub the sore well with salt, which
the most ignorant Smith can do sufficiently.

Of the Canker in the mouth.
THis disease as Martin says, is a rawnesse of the mouth and tongue, which is
full of ^lundevile
so as he cannot eat his meat. Which proceeds of some unnatural heat,
coming from the stomach. For the cure whereof, take of Alum half a pound, of
Honey a quarter of a pint, of columbine leaves, of Sage leaves of each a
handful: boil al these together in three pints of water, until a pint be
consumed, and wash the sore places therewith so as it may bleed, continuing so
to do every day once until it be whole.

Another of the Canker in the mouth.
THis disease proceeds of diverse causes, as of unnatural heat of the
stomach, of foul Markham.
or of the rust or vennome of some bit or snaffell, indiscreetly looked unto: the
cure is thus. Wash the sore place with strong vinegar, made thick with the
powder of Alum, two or three days together, every time until it bleed, which
will kill the poison and vigor of the exulcerated matter: then make this water,
take of running water a quart, of Alum four ounces, of Honey four or five
spoonefuls, of Wood-bineleaues, of Sage-leaues, and of Collombine-leaues, of
each half a handful, boil al these together til one half be consumed, then
take it off, and every day with the water warmed, wash the sore until it be
whole.

Of the heat in the mouth and lips.
SOmetime the heat that comes out of the stomach breeds no Canker, but
makes the mouth hot, and causes the horse to forsake his meat. The cure
whereof, Blundevile
as Martin says, is in this sort. First, turn up his vpperlip, and iagge

Of the tongue being hurt with the bit or otherwise.
IF the tongue be cut or hurt any manner of way, Martin says, it is good first
to wash it with Alum water, and then to take the leaves of black Bramble and
to chop them together small with a little lard, that done to bind it up in a
little clout, making it round like a ball, then having dipped the round end in
honey, rub the tongue therewith: continuing so

Of the Barbles, or Paps underneath the tongue.
THese be two little paps, called of the Italians Barbole, growing naturally
(as I think) in every Horses mouth underneath the tongue, in the nether
jaws, which if they shoot of any length, Russius says, that they will hinder
the Horses feeding, and therefore he and Martin also would have them to be
clipped away with a pair of sheeres, and that don, the Horses mouth to be
washed with vinegar and salt.


A Horse may have pain in his teeth, partly by descent of humors from his
head, down into his teeth and gums, which is to be perceived by the rankness
and swelling of the gums, and partly having two extraordinary teeth called the
wolfes teeth, which be two little teeth growing in the upper jaws, next unto
the great grinding teeth, which are so paineful to the Horse, as he cannot
endure to chaw his meat, but is forced either to let it fall out of his mouth,
or else to keep it still half chawed, whereby the Horse prospers not, but
waxerh lean and poor, and he will do the like also when his upper Iaw-teeth be
so far grown as they ouerhang the nether Iaw-teeth, and therewith be so
sharp, as in Vegetius says, it is good to rub all the outside of his gums with
fine chalk and strong vinegar mingled together, or else after that you have
washed the gums with vinegar, to strew on them of Pomegranate piles. But
methinkes that besides this, it were not amiss to stop the temple vains, with
the plaster before mentioned, in the chapter of weeping and waterish eyes. The
cure of the Wolfes teeth, and of the iaw-teeth according to Martin is in this
sort. First cause the horse head to be tied up to some rafter or post, and his
mouth to be opened with a cord, so wide as you may easily see every part
thereof.

right hand strike upon the head of the tool one pretty blow, and therewith you
shall loosen the tooth, and cause it to bend inward: then staying the midst of
your tool upon the horses nether iaw, wrinch the tooth outward, with the
inside or hollow side of the tool, and thrust it clean out of his head:
Blundevile
that done, serve the other Wolfes tooth on the other side in like manner, and
fill up the empty places with salt finely braied. But if the upper iawe-teeth
do also ouerhang the nether teeth, and so cut the inside of his mouth as is
aforesaid, then keeping his mouth still open, take your tool and mallet, and
pare al those teeth shorter, running along them even from the first unto the
last, turning the hollow side of your tool toward the teeth so shall not the
tool cut the inside of his cheeks, and the back or

Why the diseases in the neck, withers, and back, be declared here before
the diseases in the throat.
Having hitherto spoken of the diseases incident to a horses head, and to all the parts thereof, natural order requires that we should now descend into the
throat, as a part next adjacent to the mouth. But forasmuch as the diseases in
the throat have not only afinity with the head, but also with the lungs and
other inward parts, which are many times grieved by means of distillation
coming from the head, and through the throat: I will speak of the diseases,
incident to the neck, withers, and back of a Horse,

Of the Cricke in the neck.
BEcause a Cricke is no other thing but a kind of conuulsion, and for that we
have spoken sufficiently bofore of al kinds thereof in the chapter of
conuulsion: I purpose not here therefore to trouble you with many words, but
only show you Russius opinion, and also Martins experience therein. The
cricke then called of the Italians Scima or Luterdo Russius, and according to
Martin is, when the Horse cannot turn his neck any manner of way, but hold it
still right forth, insomuch as he cannot take his meat from the ground but by
times, and that very slowly, Russius says it comes by means of some great
weight laid on the horses shoulders, or else by overmuch drying up of the
sinnewes of the neck. The cure whereof according to Martin is in his sort.
Draw him with a hot iron from the root of the ear on both sides of the neck,
through the midst of the same even down to the breast, a straw deep, so as both
ends may meet upon the breast: then make a hole in his forehead, hard under the
fore-top, and thrust in a cornet upward betwixt the skin and the flesh a
handful deep, then put in a Goose feather, doubled in the midst and anointed
with Hogs-greace to keep the hole open, to the intent the matter

Of Wennes in the neck.
A Wen is a certain kirnell like a tumor of swelling, the inside whereof his
hard like a gristle, and spongious like a skin full of wrets. Of Wens, some be
great, and some be small. Again, some be very painful, and some not paineful
at all. The Physicians say, that they proceed of gross and vicious humors,
but Vegetius says that they chance to a Horse by taking cold, or by drinking
of waters that be extreme cold. The cure according to Martin is thus: take of
Mallows, Sage, and red nettles, of each one handful, boil them in running
water, and put thereunto a little butter, and honey, and when the herbs be soft,
take them out and all to bruise them, and put thereunto of oil of Bay two
ounces, and two ounces of Hogs-greace, and warm them together over the fire,
mingling them well together; that done, plaster it upon a piece of leather so
big as the Wen, and lay it to so hot as the Horse may endure it, renewing it
every day in such sort, the space of eight days, and if you perceive that it
will come to no head, then lance it from the midst of the Wen downward, so deep
as the matter in the bottom may be discovered and let out, that done, heal it
up with this salve: take of Turpentine a quarter, and wash it nine times in

Of swelling in the neck after bloodletting.
THis may come of the fleame being rusty, and so causing the vain to rankle,
or else by means of some cold wind striking suddenly into the hole. The cure
according to Martin is thus. First anoint it with oil of Camomell warmed, and
then lay upon it a little hay wet in cold water, and bind it about it with a
cloth, renewing it every day the space

How to staunch blood.
IF a Horse be let blood when the sign is in the neck, the vain perhaps
will not leave bleeding so soon as a man would have it, which if any such
thing chance, then Russius says, it is good to bind thereunto a little new
Horse dung tempered with chalk and

Of the falling of the Crest.
THis comes for the most part of poverty, Blundevile
and specially when a fat Horse falls away suddenly. The cure according to
Martin is thus. Draw his Crest the deepnes a straw, on the contrary side with a
hot iron, the edge of which iron would be half an inch broad, and make your
beginning and ending somewhat beyond the fall, so as the first draught may go
all the way hard upon the edge of the mane, even underneath the

Of the falling of the Crest.
THe falling of the Crest is occasioned most commonly through poverty: yet
sometimes I have seen it chance through the il proportion of the crest, Markham.
which being hye, thick and heavy, the neck thin and weak underneath, is not
able to support or sustain it up, how ever it be there is remedy for both: if
it proceed of poverty, first try by good keeping to get it up again, but if
it will not rise, or that the original of the disease be in the il fashion of
the crest, then let this be the cure: First with your hand raise up the Crest
as you would have it stand, or rather more to that side from which it
declineth, then take up the skin between

Of the manginesse of the maine.
THe manginesse proceeds of rankenesse of blood, or of poverty, of lowsines,
or else of rubbing where a mangy Horse has rubbed, Blundevile
or of filthy dust lying in the mane for lack of good dressing. The signs be
apparent by the itching and rubbing of the Horse, and the scabbes, fretting
both flesh and skin. The Martin, is thus: take of fresh grease one pound, of
quicksiluer half an ounce, of Brimstone one ounce, of rape oil half a pint,
mingle them together, and stir them continually in a pot with a slice, until
the quicksiluer be so wrought with the rest, as you shall perceive no
quicksiluer therein. That done, take a blunt knife, or an old Horssecombe, and
scratch all the mangy places therewith until it be raw and bloody, and then
anoint it with this ointment, in the sunshine if it may be, to the intent the
ointment may sink in: or else hold before it a fire pan or some broad bar of
iron made hot, to make the ointment to melt into the flesh And if you see that
within the space of three days after, with this once anointing, he leave not
rubbing, then mark in what place he rubbeth, and dress that place again, and
you shall see it heal quickly.

Of the falling of the hair of the mane.
IT falls for the most part, because it is eaten with little Worms, fretting
the roots in sunder, which according to Martin you shall remedy in this sort.
Anoint the mane and Crest with soap, then make strongly and wash all the mane
and Crest withal, and that will kill the worms, within twice or thrice washing.

Of griefs in the withers.
TO a horses withers and back, do chance many griefs and sorances, which
Russius says, do sometime proceed of inward causes, as of the corruption of
humors, and sometime of outward causes, as through the galing and pinching of
some naughty saddle, or by some heavy burden laid on the horsses-backe or
such like. And of such griefs some be but superficial blisters, swellings,
light gals or brusings: and be easily cured. Some again do pierce to the very
bone, and be dangerous, and especially if they be nigh the back bone; let us
first then show you the cure of the smaller griefs, and then of the greater.

Another of blistrings, or small swellings in the withers or back and gallings.
Whenever you see any swelling rise, then Martin would have you to bind a
little hot horse dung unto it, and that will assuage it. If not, Blundevile
then

Russius bids you, so soon as you see any swilling rise, to shave the place
with a rasor and lay thereunto this plaster: take a little wheat flower and
the white of an egg beaten together, and spread it on a little clout, which
being laid unto the swelling two or three days and not removed, will bring it
to a head, and when you come to take it off, pull it away so softly as you can
possible, and whereas you see the corruption gathred together, then in the
lowest place thereof, pierce it upward with a sharp iron somewhat hot, that
the corruption may come out, and anoint the sore place every day once with
fresh butter, or Hogs grease, but if the skin be only chafed off, without
any swelling, then wash the place with water and salt, or else with warm Wine,
and springle this

Of great swellings and inflammations in a Horses withers.
IF the swelling be very great, then the cure according to Martin is thus.
First draw

That done, taint both the holes with a taint dipped in hogs grease to kill the
fire, and also anoint all the other burnt places therewith, continuing so to
do until the swelling be assuaged, renewing it every day once, until the fiery
matter be clean fallen away, and then taint him again with washed Turpentine
mingled with yolks of Eggs and Saffron in such manner as has been
aforesaid, renewing the taint every day once until it be whole.

If you see that the swelling for all this go not away, then it is a sign of
some impostumation same every day once, until it be whole. But the sore may be
so vehement, that for lack of looking in time, it will pierce downward
betwixt both shoulders toward the intrailes, which is very dangerous: yea, and
as Russius says, mortal, because the corruption of the sore infecting the
lungs and h^rt (which be the vital parts and chief preservers of life) the
body must needs decay. And therefore Martin would have you to fill the hole with
the salve last mentioned, and to thrust in afterward a piece of a sponge, as
well to keep the hole open, as also to suck out the corruption, renewing it
every day once, until it be whole.

Of the horns or hard knobs growing under the saddle
THis is a dead skin like a piece of leather, called of the Itallans Corno,
that is to say, a horn, for that it is hard under hand, and comes by means
of some straight saddle, pinching the horse more on the one side than on the
other: or else on both sides equally. Blundevile
The cure whereof according to Martin, is in this sort: Anoint them with fresh
butter or Hogs grease, until they be mollified and made so soft as you may
either cut-them, or pull them away, and then wash the wound with man's stale, or
with white wine, and dry it with powder of vnsleact lime mixed with honey.

Of Wennes or knobs growing about the saddle
THese be great hard knobs growing most commonly betwixt two ribs, apparent to
the eye, which by their hardness seem to come of some old bruise, and are
called of Italians le Curf. The cure whereof, according to Martin is thus.
First mollify them, by anointing them with Hogs grease every day once or
twice, the space of eight days, and if you perceive that it will come to no
head with this, then lance it from the middle downward, that the matter may
come out: then taint it with washed Turpentine, yolks of Eggs, and safforon
mingled together as is aforesaid, renewing the taint every day

Of the Nauill gall.
THe Nauill gal is a bruise on the back behind the saddle right against the
Nauill of the horse, and thereof takes his name. It comes either by
splitting of the saddle behind, or for lack of stuffing, or by means of the
hinder buckle fretting that place, or else by some great weight laid on his
back: you shall perceive it by the puffed up, and spungy flesh, looking like
rotten lights or lunges, and therefore is called of the Italians Pulmone, or
Pulmoncello. The cure whereof according to Martin, is thus. Cut it roundabout

Of the swaying of the back.
THis is called of the Italians, Malferuto, Blundevile
and according to Russius and Martins opinions, comes either by some great
strain, or else by heavy burdens: you shall perceive it by the reeling and
roling of the horses hinder parts in his going, which will falter many times,
and sway sometimes backward, and sometime sideling, and be ready to fall even
to the ground, and the horse being laid, is scant able to get up. The cure
according to Martin is thus. Cover his back with a sheeps skin, coming hot
from the sheep back, laying the fleshy side next unto his back, and lay a
howsing cloth upon

Of the weakness in the back.
IT does appear by Laurentius Russius, that there is an other kind of
weakness in the back, called in Italian le got, or morsecatura de le reni,
that is to say, the fretting or biting of the reins, which as the said Russius
says, proceeds of abundance of humors, resorting to that place, whereby all
the hinder parts of the horse do leese their feeling Russius, is in this
sort: Let him blood abundantly in the neck, and draw his back with a hot
iron, in such sort as is declared in the last Chapter. He says also it is good
to make him swim through a river, and to rowell him on his hanches, nigh the
huckle bones; and to make the hair to grow again, it is good as he says to
aynoint the place with hogs grease, and three leaued grass stamped together.

Of Hydebound.
Ruellius calls Coriago: it comes meth for the most part of poverty, or
else when the horse after some great heat has been suffered to stand long in
the rain or wet weather, for that will cause the skin to shrink, and to
cling to his ribs. It is known by the leanness of the horse, and gantnes of
his belly, and by fast sticking of the skin unto the ribs when you pull at it
with your hand. The cure according to Martin is thus. Let him blood on both
sides the belly in the flank veins betwixt the flank and the girding place:
that done, give him this drink. Take a quart of white Wine, or else of good
Ale, and put thereunto three ounces of good sallet oil, of Cummin one ounce,
of Annis seeds two ounces, of Licoras two ounces, beaten another cloth, and
girde it fast with a surcingle, stuffing him well about the back with fresh
straw, continuing thus to do every day once the space of a week, during which
time give him no cold water but luke warm, and put therein a little ground
malt. The wet sack will cause the back to gather heat it self, and the skin
to loosen from the flesh, and if you will bestow more cost, you may anoint all
his body with wine and oil mingled together, according to the opinion of the
old writers, which no doubt is a very comfortable thing, and must needs supple
the skin, and loosen it from the flesh.

Of the diseases in the throat and lungs, and why the griefs of the shoulders
and hippes be not mentioned before amongst the griefs of the
Blundevile
SOme perhaps would look here, that for so much as I have declared the
diseases of the neck, withers and back, that I should also follow on now with
the griefs of the shoulders and hips. But since that svch griefs for the most
part does cause a horse to halt, and that it requires some skill to know when
a horse halteth, whether the fault be in his shoulder, hip, leg, joint, or
foot, I think it is not good to separate those parts assunder, specially since
nature has joined them together, that is to say, the shoulders to the
forelegs, and the hips to the hinder legs. And therefore according to natures
order, I will treat of them in their proper place: that is to say, after that
I have showed all the diseases

Of the Glanders and Strangulion, so called according to the Italian name,
Strangui^lion.
MOst Ferrers do take the Glanders and Strangullion to be all one disease, but
it is not so, for the glanders is that which the Physicians call Tronsillae,
and the Strangullion Angina, in Greek Synanchi, and we commonly call it in
English, the squinnancy, or Qunzie. Tronsillae, is interpreted by them to be
inflammations of the kirnels, called in Latin Glandes the Italian Glandulae,
which lie on both sides of the throat, underneath the root of the toongue,
nigh unto the swallowing place, of which word Gland^^, or Gl^ndulae, I think
we borrow this name glanders. For when the horse is troubled with this disease,
he has great kirnels underneath his jaws, easy to be seen or felt, paining
him so, as he can not easily swallow down his meat, which comes first of cold
distilation out of the head: But if such kirnels be not inflamed, they will
perhaps go away of themselves, or else by laying a little hot horse-dung and
straw unto them, the warmth thereof will dissolve them, and make them to vanish
away.

But if they be inflamed, they will not go away but increase and wax greater
and greater, and be more painful every day then other, and cause the horse to
cast continually filthy matter at his nose: The cure whereof according to
Martin is thus: First ripe the kirnels with this plaster. Take of bran two
handfuls, or as much as will thicken a quart of wine or Ale: then put thereunto
half a pound of hogs grease, and boil them together, and lay it hot to the
sore with a cloth, renewing it every day until it be ready to break, then
lance it, and let out all the matter, and taint it with a taint of flax dipped in
this salve: Take of Turpentine, of hogs grease, of each like quantity, and a
little wax, and melt them together, and renew the taint every day until it
be whole. Laurentius Russius says, that this disease is very common to colts,
because in them does abound flexible moisture, apt to be

But the kernels will not decrease, then pull them away by the roots, and to dry
up the vlcerous place with an ointment made of vnslect lime, Pepper, Brimstone,
Nitrum, and oil Olive. It shall be also good to purge his head by perfuming
him every day once, in such sort as has been before declared. And let the
horse be kept warm about the head and stand in a warm stable, and let him
drink no cold water: but if you see that after you have taken away the
kirnels, the horse does not for all that leave casting filthy matter at the
nose, then it is to be feared, that he has some spice of the mourning of the
Chine, for both diseases proceed of one cause, and therefore I think good to
speak of it here presently.



A drink for the Strangullion or Glaunders.
TAke of warm milk as it comes from the Cow a quart, or instead thereof a
quart of new Beer or Ale warmed, and put thereunto of moulten Butter the
quantity of an Egg: and then take one head of Garlic, Blundevile
first

Of the mourning of the Chine.
THis word mourning of the Chine, is a corrupt name borrowed of the French
tongue, wherein it is called Mote deschien, that is to say, the death of the
back. Because many do hold this opinion that this disease does consume the
marrow of the back: for remedy whereof, they use strange kinds of cures. For
some taking it to be a rheum, go about to stop it, by laying a strictiue, or
binding charges to the nape of the neck. Some again, do twine out the pith of
the back with a long wire thrust up into the horses head, and so into his
neck and back, with what reason I Martin says, that he has cut up diverse
horses which have been judged to have dyed of the mourning of the chine, but
he could find never either back or lungs to be perished, but only the liver,
and most commonly that side of the liver, which answeareth the nostrill whereat
he casts, whereof we will talk in his proper place, when we come to speak
of the diseases in the Liver. The Italians do call this disease Ciamorro, the
old Authors do call it the moist malady, whereof Theomnestus makes two
differences. For in the one the matter which he does cast at the nose is white,
and does not smell at all: and in the other, that which he casts is filthy
and sticking corruption. They proceed both of cold humors congealed in the
head, but more abounding in the one then in the other; filthy and stinking,
then it is very hard to cure. Notwithstanding, it shall not grieve me to write
unto you here, the experience of Theomnestus, and of Laurentius Russius.
Theomnestus cure is thus. Take of Water and honey called of the Physicians
Hydromel, a quart, and put thereunto three ounces of oil, and power that into
his nostrill every morning the space of three days: and if that do not profit
him, then let him drink every day, or once in two days, a quart of old wine,
mingled with some of the medicine or rather the precious meat, called of the
old writers Tetraphramacum, and that will restore him to his former estate.
Laurentius Russius says, that of al diseases there is non more perilous, nor
more to be suspected, th^n the rheum which comes of cold, for horses

The signs according to the said Russius be these, the horse does cast matter
continually at the nos^, sometime thin and sometime thick, his nostrils,
ears, and al his outward parts, will be cold to the feeling, his eyes, head,
and all his body heavy, and he will cough, and have small appetite to his meat,
and less to his drink, and sometime he will tremble and shake: his cure is in
this sort. Purge his head, partly by perfuming him, and partly by making him to
neeze in such sort, as has been before taught in the chapter of the pose,
which ways of perfuming and purging his head as they be good, so does
Russius praise these two here following to be most excellent: the first is
this: Take of the stalks of Vitis alba otherwise called Brioni, or wild Vine,
two or three good handfuls, and being bruised, put them into a linen bag, and
fasten the bag to the horses head, so as he may receive the scent up into his
nostrils, without touching the herb wi^h his mouth, and this will cause the
humors to run down abundantly. The second medicine; Take of Euforbium beaten
into fine powder, three ounces, of the juice of Betes one pound, of Swines
blood half a pound, boil al these together until they be thr^ughly mingled
together, and liquide like an ointment, and then take it from the fire and put
thereunto one ounce more of Euforbium and mingle them again thoroughly
together, and preserve the same in a box, to use at needful times in this
sort: Make two Pessi, and being anointed with the ointment aforesaid, thrust
them up into the horses nostrils, and let them abide therein a pretty whilk,
then pull them out, and you shall see such abundance of matter ^^me forth at his
nose, as is marvelous to behold: Russius also praises very much this
medicine here following.

Take as much of the middle bark of an Elder tree, growing on the water side,
as will fill a new earthen pot of a mean size, putting thereunto as much clear
water as a pot wll hold, and let it boil until one half be consumed: and then
to be filled up again with fresh water, continuing so to do three times one
after another, and at the last time that Russius says, with a bath made of
Rue, Wormewoode, Sage, Iuneper, Bay leaves, and Hysop. And let his drink be
warm water mingled with Wheat meal; yea, and to make it the more comfortable,
it were good as Russius says, to put thereunto some Cinnamon, Ginger,
Galingale, and such hot pieces. And his meat in Winter season would be no
other but sodden corn, or warm mashes, made of ground Malt and wheat bran: in
summer season if he went to grass, I think it would do him most good, so that
he go in a dry warm ground, for by feeding always downward, he shall purge
his head the better as Russius says. Thus much of the Glanders, and mourning
of the Chine. Now we will speak somewhat of the strangullion, according to the
opinion of the Authors, though not to the satisfaction perhaps of our English
Ferrers.

Of the strangullion or Squinancy.
Angina, according to the Physicians, is an inflammation of the inward parts of
the throat, and as I said before, is called of the Greeks Synanchi, which is
as much to say in English as strangling, whereof this name strangullion as I
think is derived for this disease does strangle every man or beast, and
therefore is numbered amongst the perilous and sharp diseases called of the
Latins Morbi accuti, of which strangilng the physicians in man's body make
four differences. The first and worst is, when no part within the mouth nor
without, appears manifestly to be inflamed, and yet the patient is in great
peril of strangling. The second is, when the inward parts of the throat only
be inflamed. The third is, when the inward and outward parts of the throat be
both inflamed. The fourth is, when the muscles of the neck are inflamed,
Absirtus, Hierocles, Vegetius, and others do say, Absirtus writing to his
friend a certain Ferrer or horse-leach, called Aistoricus, speaks in this
manner. When a Horse has the strangvllion it quickly kills him, the signs
whereof be these. His temples will be hollow, his tongue will swell and hang out
of his mouth, his eyes also will be swollen, and the passage of his throat
stopped so as he can neither eat nor drink. All these signs be also confirmed
by Hierocles.

Moreover, Vegetius rendereth the cause of this disease, affirming that it
proceeds of abundance of subtle blood, which after long travel will
inflame the inward or outward muscles of the throat or wisand, or such
affluence of blood may come, by use of hot meats after great travel, being so
alteratiue, as they cause those parts to swell in such sort as the Horse can
neither eat nor drink, nor draw his breath. The cure according to vegetius, is
in this sort.

First bath his mouth and tongue well with hot water, and then anoint it with
the gal of a Bull, that done give him this drink. Take of old oil two pound,
of old wine a quart, nine figs, and nine Leekes heads well stamped and braied
together. And after you have Absirtus and Hierocles would have you to let him
blood in the palate of his mouth, and also to pour wine and oil into his
nostrils and also give him to drink this decoction of Figs and Nitrum sodden
together, or else to anoint his throat within with nitre oil and honey, or else
with honey and hogs dung mingled together, which differs not much from Galen
his medicine, to be given unto man. For he says, that honey mingled with the
powder of hogs dung that is white, and swallowed down, does remedy the
squanancy presently. Absirtus also praises the ointment made of Bdellium, and
when the inflammation begins somewhat to decrease, he says it is good to
purge the horse, by giving him wild Cocumber, and Nitre to drink. Let his meat
be grass if it may be gotten, or else wet hay, and sprinkled with Nitre.

Of the Cough.
OF Coughes, some be outward and some be inward. Those be outward which do
come of outward causes, as by eating a feather, or by eating dusty or sharp
straw and such like things: which tickling his throat, causes him to cough:
you shall perceive it by wagging and wrying his head in his coughing, and by
stamping sometime with his foot, laboring to get out the thing that grieueth
him, and cannot. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take a Willow wand,
rolled throughout with a fine linen clout, and then anoint it all over with
honey, and thrust it down his throat, drawing your hand to and fro, to the
intent it may either drive down the thing that grieueth him, or else bring it
up, and do this twice or thrice, anointing every time the stick with fresh
honey.

Of the inward and wet cough.
OF inward Coughs some be wet and some be dry. The wet cough is that comes
Martins experience, to the intent the fleam may break the sooner, it shall be
necessary to keep him warm, by clothing him with a double cloth, and by
littering him up to the belly with fresh straw, and then to give him this
drink: take

Of the dry cough.
THis seems to come of some gross and tough humor cleaving hard to the
hollow places of the lungs which stops the wind-pips, so as the horse cannot
easily draw his breath, and if it continue, it will either grow to the pursick,
or else break his wind altogether. The signs be these. He will cough both
often, drily, and also vehemently, without, voiding at the nose, or mouth. The
cure, according to Martin, is in this sort. Take a wheaten straw: if in summer
give him grass, and let him eat no hay, Blundevil^
unless it be very well dusted, and sprinkled with water, and give him not much
thereof. And therefore you shall need to give him the more prouender, which also
most be well cleansed of al filth and dust, and give him no water, the space of
9. days. And if you perceive that the cough does not wear away, then if it be
in winter, purge him with these pills. Take of lard two pound laid in water
two hours: then take nothing but the clean fat thereof, and stamp it in a
mortar, and thereto put of Licoras, of Annis-seeds, of Fenegreeke, of each
beaten into powder three ounces, of Aloes in powder two ounces, of Agerick one
ounce. Knead these together like paast, and make thereof six bals as big as an
egg. Then the horse having fasted


THis proceeds as Absirtus and Theomnestus says, either of an extreme
cough, or of vehement running, or leaping, or of over greedy drinking after
great thirst for the lungs be enclosed in a very thin filme or skin, and
therefore easy to be broken, which if it be not cured in time, does grow to
apostumation, and to corruption, oppressing all the lungs, which of old Authors
is called Vomica, and Supp^ratio. But Theomnestus says, that broken lungs, and
rotten lungs, be two diverse diseases, and have diverse signs, and diverse cures.
The signs of broken lungs be these. The Horse draws his wind short, and by
little at once, he will turn his head often toward the place grieved, and
groneth in Theomnestus healed a friends horse of his, whose lunges were
fretized, or rather broken as he says, by continual eating salt, with this
manner of cure here following. Let the Horse have quiet and rest, and then let
him blood in the hanches, where the veins appear most: and give him to drink
the space of seven days barley or rather Otes sodden in Goats milk: or if you
can get no milk, boil it in water, and put therein some thick collops of
larde and of Deeres sewet, and let him drink that: and let his common drink
in winter season be the decoction of wheat meal, and in summer time, the
decoction of barley, and this as he says will bind his lungs again together.
Vegetius utterly disalloweth letting of blood in any such disease as this is,
and all manner of sharp medicynes, for fear of

Of putrified and rotten lungs.
THe signs to know whether a Horses lungs be putrified or rotten, according
to Theomnestus are these. The Horse will eat and drink greedilyer then he was
wont to do, he shall be oftener vexed with a cough, and in coughing he will cast
little lumps of matter out at his mouth. The cure whereof according to
Theomnestus, is thus. Give him to drink every morning, the space of seven
days the juice of Purslain mingled with Oil of Roses, and ad thereunto a
little tragagantum that has been laid before in steep Vegetius would have him
to be cured in this sort and with less cost I assure you. Take of Frankincense
and Aristoloch, of each two ounces, beaten into fine powder, and give him that
with wine, or else take of unburned Brimstone two ounces, and of Aristoloch one
ounce and a half beaten into powder, and give him that with wine. And he
would have you also to draw his breast with a hot iron, to the intent the
humors may issue forth outwardly.

Of shortness of breath.
A Horse may have shortness of breath, by hasty running after drinking, or
upon a full stomach, or by the discending of humors unto his throat or lungs,
after some extreme heat dissoluing the said humors, which so long as there is
nothing broken, may in the beginning be easily helped. The signs be these.
The Horse will continually pant, and fetch his breath short, which will come
very hot out at his nose, and in his breathing he will squise in the nose, and
his flanks will beat thick* yea and some cannot fetch their breath unless
they hold their necks right out and straight, which disease is called of
Orthopnoea. The cure. Let him blood in the neck, and give him this drink, take
of wine, and oil, of each a pint, of Frankincense half an ounce, and of the
juice of Horehound half a pint. It is good also to pour into his throat
honey, butter and Hogs-greace moulten together, and made lukewarm. Tiberius
says, it is good to give him whole eggs, shells and all, steeped and made soft
in vinegar: that is to say, the first day three, the second day five, and the
third day seven, and to power wine and and oil into his nostrils. I for my
part would take nothing but Annis-seedes, Licoras, and Sugarcandy, beaten all
into fine powder, give him that to drink, with wine and oil mingled together.

Of the Pursicke.
THis is a shortness of breath, and the horse that is so diseased is called of
the Italians, Cauallo pulsiuo, or Bolse, which I think is derived of the Latin
word Vulsus, by changing V. into B. and I think differs not much from him
that has broken lungs, called of vegetius and other old writers vulsus, for
such shortness of breath coms either of the same causes, or else much like, as
abundance of gross humors, cleaving hard to the hollow places of the lungs,
and stopping the wind-pips. And the wind being kept in, does resort downward
as Russius says, into the Horses guts, and so causes his flanks to beat
continually without order: that is to say, more swiftly and hier up to the
back, then the Vegetius, recited before in the Chapter of broken lungs. And if
that prevails not, then I think it were not amiss according to Russius to
purge him with this drink, here following: take of Maiden hair, of Ireos, of
Ash, of Licoras, of Fenegreeke, of Raisins, of each half an ounce, of
Cardanum, of pepper, Blundevile
of bitter Almonds, of Baurach, of each, two ounces, of nettle seed, and of
Aristoloch, of each three ounces, boil them al together in a sufficient
quantity of water, and in that decoction dissolve half an ounce of Agarike,
and two oun* of Coloquintida, together with two pound of Honey, and give him of
this a pint or a quarte at diverse times: and if it be too thick make it
thinner, by putting thereunto water wherein Licoras has been sodden, and if
need be you may also draw both his flanks crosse-wise with a hot iron, to
restrain the beating of them, and also slit his Nostrils, to give him more
air. And if it be in summer turn him to grass, if in winter let him be kept
warm, and give him now and then a little sodden wheat. Russius would have it
to be given him three days together and also new

Of a Consumption.
A Consumption is none other thing but an exulceration of the lunges,
proceeding of some fretting or gnawing humor, descending out of the head into
the lungs. And I take it to be that disease which the old writers are wont to
call the dry Malady: which perhaps some would rather interpret to be the mourning
of the chine, with whom I intend not to strive. But thus much I must needs
say, that every Horse having the mourning of the Chine, does continually cast
at the nose, but in the dry Malady it is contrary. For Absirtus says) yet he
does not digest it, nor prospers not withal, he would cough and cannot but
hickingly, as though he had eaten small bones. And this disease is judged of
all the Authors to be incurable. Notwithstanding, they say, that it is good to
purge his head with such perfumes as have been showed you before in the
Chapter of the Glanders, and also to give him always Coleworts, chopped small
with his prouender. Some would have him to drink

Of the consumption of the flesh, and how to make a lean Horse fat.
MArtin says that if a Horse take a great cold after a heat it will cause his
flesh to wast, and his skin to wax hard and dry, and to cleave fast to his
sides, and he shall have without the which things his meat will do him but
little good. And his meat must be fine and clean, and given him often and by
litttle at once. Russius says, that if a Horse eating his meat with good
appetite, does not for all that prosper, but is still lean: then it is good to
give him Sage, Sauin, Bay berries, Earth-nuttes, and Boares grease, to drink
with wine: or to give him the intrals of a Barbell or Tench, with white Wine.
He says also that sodden Beans mingled with Branne and Salt, will make a
lean Horse fat in very short space.

Of grief in the breast.
Blundevile
LAurentius Russius writes of a disease called in Italian Grauezza di petto,
Russius says, of the superfluity of blood, or other humors dissolved by some
extreme heat, and resorting down the breast, paining the Horse, so as he
cannot well go. The cure whereof according to Russius is thus. Let him blood
on both sides of the breast in the accostomed veins, and rowell him under the
breast, and twice a day turn the rowells with your hand, to move the humors
that they may issue forth, and let him go so roweled the space of fifteen
days.

Of the pain of the heart called Anticor, that is to say, Contrary to the
heart.
THis proceeds of abundance of rank blood bred with good feeding and
overmuch rest: which blood resorting to the inward parts does suffocate the
heart, and many times causes swellings to appear before the breast, which
will grow upward to the neck, and then it kills the Horse. The signs. The
Horse will hang down his head in the manger, forsaking his meat, and is not
able to lift up his head. The cure according to Martin is thus. Let him blood
on both sides abundantly in the plat veins, and then give him this drink:
take a quart of malmesie, and put thereunto half a quarterne of Sugar, and two
ounces of Cinnamon, and give it him lukewarm, then keep him warm in the
stable, stuffing him well

Of tired Horses.
Because we are in hand here with the vital parts, and that when the Horses
be tired with overmuch labor, their vital spirits wax feeble, I think it
best to speak of them Vegetius uses, but briefly to show you how to refresh
the poor Horse having need thereof, which is done chiefly by giving him
rest, warmth and good feeding, as with warm mashes and plenty of prouender.
And to quicken his spirits, it shall be good to pour a little oil and vinegar
into his Nostrils, and to give him the drink of sheeps heads recited before in
the Chapter of consumption of the flesh, yea and also to bath his Legs with
this bath: take of Mallows, of Sage, of each two or three handfuls, and a
Rose-cake: boil these things together, and being boiled, then put unto it a
good quantity of butter or of Sallet-oyle. Or else make him this charge: take
of Bole Armony and of Wheat Flour of each half a pound, and a little Rozen
beaten into powder, and a quart of strong vinegar, and mingle them together,
and

Of the diseased parts under the midriffe, and first of the
THe old Authors make mention of many diseases incident to a horses stomach,
as loathing of meat, spewing up his drink, surfeiting of prouender, the hungry
evil, and such like, which few of our Ferrers have observed: and therefore I
will breefely speak of as many as I think necessary to be known, and first
of the loathing of meat. Blundevile



A Horse may loath his meat through the imtemperature of his stomach, as for
that it is too hot or too cold. If his stomach be too hot, then most commonly
it will either inflame his mouth and make it to break out in blisters, yea and
perhaps cause some cancker to breed there. The cure of all which things has
been taught before. But if he forsake his meat only for very heat, which you
shall perceive by the hotnesse of his breath and mouth, then cool his stomach
by giving him cold water mingled with a little Vinegar and oil to drink, or
else give him this drink. Take of milk, and of wine, of each one pint, and
put thereunto three ounces of Me^ Rosatum, and wash al his mouth with Vinegar
and salt. If his stomach be too cold, then his Absirtus and others were wont
to cure, by giving the horse good wine and oil to drink, and some would sees
in wine Rue, or Sage, some would add thereunto white Pepper and Mirre, some
would give him Onions and Rocket seed to drink with wine, Again there be
other somewhich prescribe the blood of a young Sow with old wine. Absirtus
would have the horse to eat the green blades of wheat, if the time of the year
will serve for it. Columella says, that if a horse or any other beast, do
loath his meat it is good to give him wine, and the seed of Gith, or else
Wine and stamped garlic.

Of casting out his drink.
VEgetius says, that the horse may have such a Palsy proceeding of cold in
his stomach as he is notable to keep his drink, but many times to cast it out
again at his mouth. The remedy whereof is to let him blood in the neck, and to
give him cordial drinks, that is to say, made of hot and comfortable
spices, and also to anoint al his breast and under his shoulders with hot
oils, and to purge his head, by blowing up into his Nostrils, pouders that
provoke neezing, such as have been taught you before.

Of surfeiting with glut of prouender.
THe glut of prouender or other meat not digested, does cause a horse to have
great

Of another kind of surfeiting with meat or drink, called of us, foundering in
the body.
THis disease is called of the old writers in Greek Crithiasis, in Latin
Hordiatio, it comes as they say, by eating of much prouender suddenly after
labor, whilst the horse is hot and panting, Blundevile
whereby his meat not being digested, breeds evil humors, which by little
and little do spread thoroughout his members, and at length do oppress all his
body, and do clean take away his strength, and make him in such a

But howsoever it comes, they say all, that the humors will immediately
resort down into the horses legs, and feet, and make him to cast his
hooues: and therefore I must needs judge it to be no other thing but a plain
foundering, which word foundering is borrowed, as I take it, of the French word
Fundu, that is to say, molten. For foundering is a melting or dissolution of
humors, which the Italians call Infusione. Martin makes diverse kinds of
foundering, as the foundering of the body, which the French men call most
commonly Morfundu, and foundering in the legs and feet, also foundering before
Magister Maurus, and Laurentius Russius, affirming that there are fewer humors
behind than before, and that they cannot easily be dissolved or molten, being
so far distant from the heart, and the other vital parts. Whereunto a man might
answer, that the natural heat of the heart does not cause dissolution of
humors, but some unnatural and accidental heat, spread throughout all the
members, which is daily proved by good experience. For we see horses foundered
not only before or behind, but also of al four legs at once, which most
commonly chances either by taking cold suddenly after a great heat, as by
standing still upon some cold pauement, or abroad in the cold wind, or else
perhaps the horse traveling by the way, and being in a sweat

Of the hungry evil.
THis is a very great desire to eat, following some great emptiness, or lack
of meat, and it is called of the old Authorus by the Greek name Bulimos,
which is as much to say, as a great hunger proceeding, as the Physicians say,
at the first of some extreme outward cold, taken by long traveling in cold
barren places, and especially where snow abounds, which outward cold causes
the stomach to be cold, and the inward powers to be feeble. The cure according
to Absyrtus and Hierocles, is in the beginning to comfort the horses stomach,
by giving him bread sopt in wine. And if you be in a place of rest, to give him
wheat flower and wine to drink, or to make him cakes or bals of flower and
wine kneaded together, and to feed him with that, or with wine and nuttes of
pine trees. Hierocles says, if any such thing chance by the way whereas no
flower is to be had, then it shall be best to give him wine and earth wrought
together, either to drink or else

Of the disease in the liver.
ALl the old Authors speak much of the pain in the liver, but none of them
do declare whereof it comes, or by what means, saving that Hippocrates
says, that some horses get it by violent running upon some stony or hard
ground. I for my part think that the liver of a horse is subject to as many
diseases as the liver of a man, and therefore may be pained diversely. As
sometime by the intemperatnesse of the same, as for that it is perhaps too hot,
or too cold, too moist, or too dry: sometimes by means of evil humors, as
choler, or phlegm abounding in the same, according as the liver is either
Schirrus, which in man's body may be felt, if the body be not over fat: and it

good by writing thus much, Blundevile
to give such Ferrers as be wise, discreet and diligent, occasion to seek for
more knowledge and understanding than is taught them, and methinkes that it is
a great shame, that the Ferrers of this age should not know much more than the
Ferrers of old time, since that besides that, the old men's knowledge is not
hidden from them, they have also their own experience, and time also brings
every day new things to light. But now to proceed in discoursing of the liver
according to the Physicians doctrine as I have begun, I say then of an
inflammation in the hollow side of the liver, the signs be these: loathing of
meat, great thirst, loosenes of belly, easy lyeng on the right side, and
paineful lyeng on the left. But if the inflammation be on the full side or
swelling side of the liver, then the patient is trobled with difficulty of
breathing, with a dry cough

The signs of Apostumation is paineful and great heat. The signs of
Vlcerations is decrease of the heat with feeblenes and fainting. For the filthy
matter flowing abroad with evil vapors corrupts the heart, and many times
causes death. The signs of the consumption of the liver, shall be declared in
the next chapter, and as for the curing of al other diseases before mentioned,
experience must first teach it ere I can write it. Notwithstanding, I cannot
think but that such things as are good to heal the like diseases

The cure of an inflammation consists in letting blood, and in bathing, or
fomenting the sore place with such herbs and oils, as may mollify and
disperse humors abroad, wherewith some simples that be astrigent would be
always mingled: yea, and in all other medicines that be applied to the liver,
for any manner of diseases. Simples that mollify and disperse be these:
Linseed, Fenegreeke: Camomel, Annis seeds, Meliot: and such like things.
Simples astringent be these: Red Rose leaves, Bramble leaves, Wormwood,
Absirtus is in this sort. Let him drink stamped Ireos with wine alayed with
water. He praises also an herb much like unto Calamint: called of Pliny,
Polymoria, or let him drink Sauerie with wine and oil. I think that Agrimony
or liuer-woort is as good as the best of them. Absirtus would have his body to
be chafed with wine and oil mixed together:

Of the consumption in the Liver.
I Believe that no inward member of a horse does suffer so much as the lungs
and liver, and that not so much by continual as by inordinate, and untimely
travail, labor, and exercise, whereby either the horses lunges, or his liver
do most commonly perish, and is consumed: yea, and sometime both. Of the
consumption of the lungs, we have talked sufficiently before: therefore let us
show you here the causes whereof the consumption of the liver proceeds. The
Physicians say, that it may come of any humor, but chiefelie and most
commonly of choleric matter, shed throughout the substance of the liver,
which putrifieng by little and little, and leisurely, does at length corrupt
and perish all the substance of the liver, which thing in man's body does first
proceed, as the physicians say, either by eating corrupt meats, or else by
continual drinking of sweet wines.



The horse will forsake his meat, and will stand stretching himself in length,
and never covet to lie down, and his breath will be so strong, as no man can
abide it, and he will Saccharum, Rosaceum, Diarchadon, Abbatis, Diasantalon,
Licoras and of the liver of a Woolfe, and such other simples as do comfort and
strengthen the liver, or else to give him the same things with Goats milk
lukewarm.

Of the diseases in the Gall.
IN my opinion the gall of a horse is subject to diverse diseases, as well as the
gal of a man, as to obstruction, whereof comes the fullness and emptines of
the bladder and likewise the stone in the gall. But obstruction may chance two
manner of ways: First, when the way, whereby the choler should proceed

Of the diseases in the Spleen.
THe Spleen, as I have said before in many places, is the receptacle of
melancholy, and of the dregs of blood, and is subject to the like diseases that
the liver is, that is to say, to swelling, obstruction, hard knobs, and
inflammation: for the substance of the spleen is spongeous, and there sort apt
to suck in all filth and to dilate it self, wherefore being full it must needs
swel, which will appear in the left side under the short ribs, and such
swelling causes also shortness of breath, and especially when the body does

Now as touching the inflammation of the spleen which chances very sildome,
for so much as every inflammation proceeds of pure blood, which sildome
enters into the spleen: I shall not need to make many words, but refer you
over to the chapter of the Liver, for in such case they differ not, but
proceeding of like cause, have also like signs, and do require like cure. The
old writers say, that horses be often* grieved with grief in the spleen, and
specially in Summer season with greedy eating of sweet green meats, and they
call those horses Lienosos, that is to say splenetike. The signs whereof (say
they) are these, hard swelling on the left side, short breath, often groaning,
and greedy appetite to Absirtus is to make a horse to sweat once a day during a
certain time, by riding him or otherwise traveling him, and to pour into his
left nostril every day the juice of mirabolans mingled with wine and water,
amounting in alto the quantity of a pint. But methinks it would do him more
good, if he drank it as Hierocles would have him to do. Eumelius praises this
drink: take of Cummin seed and of honey, of each six ounces, and of Lacerpitium
as much as a bean, of Vinegar a pint, and put al these into three quartes of
water, and let it stand so al night, and the next morning give the horse
thereof to drink, being kept over night fasting. Theomnestus praises the
decoction of Capers, especially if the bark of the root thereof may be gotten
sodden in water to a sirrop. Or else make him a drink of Garlic, Nitrum,
Hore-hound, and wormwood, Absirtus does not allow saying the spleen lies so,
as it cannot easily be fired, to do him any good. But for so much as the
liver and spleen are members much occupied in the ingendring and seperating of
humors, many evil accidents and griefs do take their first beginning of them,
as the Iandis, called in a horse, the yellowes, dryness of body, and
consumption of the flesh, without any apparent cause why, which the Physicians
call Atrophis also evil habit of the body, called of them Chachexia, and the
Dropsy. But first we will speak of the Iaundis or Yellowes.

Of the Yellowes.
THe Physicians in a man's body do make two kinds of Iandis: that is to say, the
Yellow proceeding of choler dispersed throughout the whole body, and dieng the
skin yellow, and the black proceeding of melancholy, dispersed likewise
throughout the whole body, and making all the skin black. And as the yellow
Iaundis comes for the most part, either by obstruction or stopping of the
cundits belonging to the bladder of the gall, which (as I said before) is the
receptable of Choler, or by some inflammation of the liver, whereby the blood is
converted into choler, and so spreads throughout the body: even so the black
Iandis comes by mean of some obstruction in the liuer-vain, that goes to
the spleen, not suffering the spleen to do his office, in receiving the dregs
of the blood from the liver, wherein they abound too much, or else for that the
spleen is already too full of dregs, and so sheddeth them back again into the
veins. But as for the black Iandis they have not bin observed to be in horses
as in me^, by any of our Ferrers in these days that I can learn. And yet the
old writers of horseleach-craft, do seem to make two Cholera, that is to say,
the dry Choler, and also the moist choler. The signs of the dry choler, as
Absirtus says, is great heat in the body, and costiuenesse of the belly,
whereof it is said to be dry. Moreover, the horse will not covet to lie down,
because he is so pained in his body, and his mouth will be hot and dry.

It comes, as he says, by obstruction of the cundit, whereby the choler
should resort into the bladder of the gal, and by obstruction also of the vrin
vessels, so as he cannot stale. The cure according to his experience, is to
give him a glister made of oil, water and Nitrum, and to give him no
prouender, before that you have raked his fundament, and to power the decoction
of Mallows mingled with sweet wine into his nostrils and let his meat be
grass, or else sweet hay sprinkled with Nitre and water, and he must rest from
labor, and be often rubbed. Hierocles would have him to drink the decoction of
wild coleworts sodden Absirtus was wont to heal, as he says, by giving the
Horse a drink made of Time and Cumin, of each like quantity stamped together,
and mingled with wine, honey, and water, and also by letting him blood in the
pasterns. This last disease seems to differ nothing at all from that which
our Ferrers call the yellowes. The signs whereof, according to Martin, be these.
The Horse will be faint, and sweat as he stands in the stable, and forsake
his meat: and his eyes, and the inside of his lips and all his mouth within
will be yellow. The cure whereof according to him is in this sort. Let him
blood in the Neck vain, a good

Of the Yellowes
THe yellowes is a general disease in horses, and differ nothing from the
yellow-iandise in men: it is mortal, and many horses die thereof: the signs
to know it is thus: Markham.
pull down the lids of the horses eyes, and the white of the eye will be
yellow, the inside of his lips will be yellow, and gums, the cure follows.
First let him blood in the palate of the

Of the evil habit of the body, and of the dropsy.
AS touching the drines and consumption of the flesh, without any apparent
cause why, Blundevile
called of the Physicians as I said before Atrophia, I know not what to say
more then I have already before in the chap. of consumption of the flesh, and
therefore resort thither. And as for the evil habit of the body, which is to be
evil colored, heavy, dull, and of no force, strength, nor liuelines, comes not
for lack of nutriment, but for lack of good nutriment, for that the blood is
corrupted with phlegm, choler, or melancholy, proceeding either fro I think it
good here briefly to show you their experience therein, that is to say, how
to know it, and also how to cure it. But since none of them do show the cause
whereof it proceeds, I think it meet first therefore to declare unto you the
causes thereof, according to the doctrine of the learned Physicians, which in
man's body do make three kinds of dropsies, calling the first Anasarca, the
second Ascites, and the third Timpanias. Anasarca, is an universal swelling of
the body through the abundance of water, lying betwixt the skin and the flesh,
and differs not from the disease last mentioned, called Cachexia, that is to
say, evil habit of the blood, saving that the body is more swollen in this then
in Cachexia, albeit they proceed both of like causes as of coldness and
weakness of the liver, or by Ascites is a swelling in the covering of the
belly, called of the Physicians, Abdomen comprehending both the skin, the fat,
eight muscles, and the filme or panicle called Peritoneum, through the
abundance of some whayish humor entered into the same, which besides the causes
before alleged, proceeds most chiefly by means that some of the vessels
within be broken or rather cracked, out of the which, though the blood being
somewhat gross cannot issue forth* yet the whayish humor being subtle, may run
out into the belly, like water distilling through a cracked pot.

Timpanias called of us commonly the Timpany, is a swelling of the aforesaid
covering of the belly, through the abundance of wind entered into the same,
which wind is ingendered of crudity and evil digestion, and whilst it
abounds in the stomach, or other intrals

Notwithstanding, the body swells not so much with this kind of dropsy as
with the other kind called Ascites. The signs of the dropsy is shortness of
breath, swelling of the body, evil color, lothing of meat, and great desire to
drink, especially in the dropsy called Ascites, in which also the belly will
sound like a bottle half full of water: but in the Timpanie it will sound like a
Tabar. But now though mine authors make not so many kinds of dropsies, Absirtus
and Hierocles, be these. His belly, legs, and stones, will be swollen, but his
back, buttocks, and flanks, will be dried and shrunk up to the very bones.

Moreover, the veins of his face and temples, and also the veins under his
tongue will be so hidden, as you cannot see them, and if you thrust your finger
hard against his body, you shall leave the print thereof behind, for the flesh
lacking natural heat will not return again to his place, and when the
horselyeth down he spreads himself abroad, not being able to he round
together on his belly, and the hair of his back by rubbing will fall away.
Pelagonius in showing the signs of the dropsy, not much differing from the
Physicians first recited, seems to make two kinds thereof, calling the one the
Timpany, which for difference sake may be called in English the wind dropsy,
and the other the water dropsy. Notwithstanding Pelagonius would have him to
drink Parsley stamped with wine, or the root of the herb called (...) Latin
Panax, with wine. But if the swelling of the belly will not decrease for all
this, then slit a little hole under his belly a handful behind the nauil, and
put into that hole a hollow reed

Of the evil habit of the stomach.
IF your horse either by inward sickness, or by present surfeit, grow to a loath
of his meat, Markham.
or by weakness of his stomak cast up his meat and drink, this shall be the
cure for the same: first, in all the drink he drinks, let him have the powder
of hot spices, as namely of Ginger Annis-seeds, Lycoras, Sinamon, and Pepper,
then blow up into his Nostrils the powder of Tobacco to occasion him to neese,
instantly after he has eaten any meat, for an hour together after, let one
stand by him, and hold at his Nose a piece of sower Leven steept in vinegar,
then anoint all his breast over with the Oil of Ginnuper and Pepper

Of the diseases of the guts of a Horse, and first of the Colike.
THe guts of a Horse may be diseased with diverse griefs as with the Colic,
Blundevile
with costiuenesse, with the Lax, with the bloody-flixe and worms. The colic
is a grievous pain in the great gut, called of the Physicians Colon, whereof
this disease takes his name, which gut, because it is very large and ample,
and full of corners, it is apt to receive diverse matters, and so becomes
subject to diverse griefs. For sometime it is tormented Russius was wont to use
this kind of cure: take a good big reed a span long or more, and being
anointed with oil, thrust it into the horses fundament, fastening the outward
end thereof unto his tail, so as it cannot slip out, and then having first
anointed and chafed all the horses belly with some hot oil, cause him to be
ridden hastily up and down some hilly ground, and that will make him to void
the wind out of his belly through the Absirtus would have you to give him a
glister made of wild Cucumber, or else of hens dung, Nitrum, and strong wine.

Of Costiuenesse, or belly-bound.
COstiuenesse is when a horse is bound in the belly and cannot dung, which may
come by glut of prouender, or overmuch feeding and rest, whereof we have talked
sufficient before, also by wind, gross humors, or cold causing obstruction,
and stopping in the Benedicte laxatiue, and pour that into his fundament with
a little Horn meet for the purpose, that done, clappe his tail to his
fundament, holding it still with your hand, whilst another does lead him in
his hand, and trot him up and down, Blundevile
that the medicine may work the better, and having voyded all that in his
belly, bring him unto the stable, and there let him stand a while on the bitte
well covered, and warm littered, and then give him a little hay, and let his
drink be warmed, it shall not be amiss also to give him that night a warm
mash.

Of the Laxe.
THe Italians call this disease Ragiatura, and the Horse that has this disease
Cauallo Arragiato, or Sforato. It may come through the abundance of cholerike
humors Russius says, that it comes most commonly by drinking overmuch cold
water immediately after prouender, or by sudden traveling upon a full stomach,
before his meat be dygested, or by hasty running, or galloping immediately
after water. If this disease continue long, it will make the Horse very weak
and feeble, so as he shall not be able to stand on his legs. Notwithstanding,
since nature feeling her self oppressed, endeavors thus to ease her self by
expelling those humors that grieve her, I would not wish you suddenly to stop
it, least some worse inconvenience grow thereof. But if you see that the Horse
loses his flesh, and waxes more dull and feeble then he was wont to be, then
give him this drink often experimented by Martin, and that shall stop him: take
of beane-flower, and of bole Armony of each a quarterne, mingle these things
together in a quart of red wine, and give it him lukwarm,

Of the bloody-flixe.
IT seems by the old writers, that a horse is also subject to the bloody
Flixe. For Absirtus, Hierocles, and Democritus, say all with one voice, that
the guts of a horse may be so exulcerated, that he will void bloody matter at
his fundament: yea, and his fundament Disenteria, which is is as much to say,
as a painful exulceration of the guts, under the which, the old men as it
seems by the words of Hierocles, and Absirtus, would comprehend the disease
called of the Physicians Tenasmus, that is to say, a desire to dung often, and
to do but little, and that with great pain: And also another disease called
Procidentia any, that is to say, the falling out of the fundament, which the
Physicians do account as several diseases. Notwithstanding, for so much as
Dysenteria, and Tenasmus, do spring both of like causes: yea, and also for that
the falling out of the fundament has some affinity with them, I will follow
mine Authors, in joining them altogether in this one chapter.

The Physicians make diverse kinds of bloody-flixe, for sometime the fat of the
slimy filth which is voided, is sprinkled with a little blood, sometime the
matter that voydeth is Tenasmus, for that is an ulcer in the right gut serving
the fundament and does proceed even as the Flixe does of some sharp humors,
which being violently driven, and having to pass through many crooked and
narrow ways, do cleave to the guts, and with their partly by overmuch
straining, and partly they may be loosened by overmuch moisture, for which
cause children being full of moisture are more subject to this disease then men.
And for the self same cause I think that Horses having very moist bodies be
subject thereunto. Thus having showed you the causes of the diseases before
recited, I will show you the cure prescribed by the old writers. Absirtus would
have the fundament on the outside to be cut round about, but so as the inward
ringe thereof be not touched, for that were dangerous and would kill the horse,
for so much as his fundament would never abide within his body, and that done,
he would have you to give him to drink the powder of unripe Pomgranat shells,
called in Latin Malicorium, together with wine and water, which

But if it be inflamed, then to bath it well, first with a sponge dipped in the
decoction of Mallows, Camomile, Lineseede and Fenegreek, and also to anoint
it well with oil of Camomile Acatium, Galls, A corn cups, parings of Quinces,
and such like simples as be astringent, and then to throw on some astringent
powder made of bole Armony, Frankincens, Sanguis Draconis, Myrrh, Acatium, and
such like: yea, and also to give the Horse this drink much praised of all the
old writers. Take of Saffron one ounce, of Myrrh two ounces, of the herb
called in Latin Abrotonum, named in some of our English herbals Sothernwood,
three ounces, of Parsley one ounce, of garden Rue, otherwise called herb Grace
three ounces, of Piritheum, otherwise called of some people spittlewort, and of
Isope of each two ounces, of Cassia which is like Cynamon, Cremor Ptisane, and
give to the Horse to drink thereof with a horn, for the medicine, as the
Authors write, does not only heal the bloody-flixe and the other two diseases
before recited, but also if it be given with a quart of warm water it will
heal al grief and pain in the belly, and also of the bladder, that comes
for lack of staling. And being given with sweet wine it will heal the biting
of any Serpent or mad dog.

Of the Worms.
Blundevile
though they be not altogether like in shape. The first long and round, even
like to those that children do most commonly void, and are called by the
general name worms. The second little worms having great heads and small long
tails like a needle, and be called Bots. The 3. be short and thick like the
end of a man's little finger, and therefore be called Troncheons: and though they
have diverse shapes according to the diversity of the place perhaps where they
breed, or else according to the figure of the putrified matter whereby they
breed: yet no doubt they proceed all of one cause, that is to say, of a raw,
gross and flegmatike matter apt to putryfaction, engendered most commonly by
foul feeding, and as they proceed of one self cause, so also have they like
signs, and like cure. The usignes be these. The Horse will forsake his meat,
for the Troncheons and the Bots will covet

The cure according to Martin is thus: take of sweet milk a quart, of honey a
quarterne, and give it him lukewarm, and walk him up and down for the
space of an hour, and so let him rest for that day, with as little meat or
drink as may be, and suffer him not to lie down. Then the next day give him
this drink: take of berbe Grace a handful, of Sauin as much, and being well
stamped, put thereunto a little Brimstone, and a little foot of a Chimny, beaten
into fine powder, and put all these things together in a quart of wort or Ale,
and there let them lie in steep the space of an hour or two, then strain it
well through a fair cloth, and give it the Horse to drink lukewarm, then
bridle him and walk him up and down the space of an hour: that done bring
him into the stable, and let him stand on the bit two or three hours, and then
give him a little Hay. Laurentius Russius says, that it is good to give the
Horse the warm guts of a young hen with a salt

I have found by often trial, that if you give the horse with a horn a good
pretty dishfull of salt brine, be it flesh brine or cheese brine, it will kill
any of the three kinds of worms, and make the horse to avoid them dead in
short time after.

Of Worms in general.
BEsides the Bottes, there are other Worms, which lie in the great paunch or
belly of a Horse, and they be shining, of color like a Snake, six inches in
length, Markham.
great in the midst and sharp at both ends, and as much as a spindle: they
cause great pain in a Horses belly, as you shall perceive by his continual
striking of himself on the belly with his foot, the cure is thus: Give him two
or three mornings together new Milk and Garlike boiled together, or chopped hay
in his prouender either of both will serve: it kills the worms and makes
them to void.

Of the pain in the kidneynes.
MEthinkes that the Kidneys of a Horse should be subject to as many griefs as
the kidneys of a man, as to inflammation, obstruction, Apostumes and Ulcers,
Blundevile
and specially to obstruction that comes by means of some stone or gravel
gathered together in the kidneys, whereby the Horse cannot stale but with
pain, for I have seen diverse horses my self that have voided much gravel
in their stale, which without doubt did come from the kidneys, but my Authors
do refer such griefs to the bladder and urine, and write of no disease but
only of the inflammation of the kidneys, which is called of them Nephritis, and
so it is called of the Physicians. It comes as they say by some great strain
over some ditch, or else Asphodelus, Englished by some Daffadill, sodden in
wine.

Of the diseases belonging to the bladder and urine of a Horse.
HIerocles says, that a horse is subject to three kinds of diseases incident
to the bladder or urine, the first is called Stranguria, the second Dysuria,
the third Iscuria. Stranguria, otherwise called in Latin Stillicidium, and of
our old Ferrers, according to the French name Chowdepis, is when the horse is
provoked to stale often, and voideth nothing but a few drops, which comes
as the physicians say, either through the sharpenes of the urine, or by some
exulceration of the bladder, or else by means of some Apostume in the liver or
kidneys, which Apostume being broken, the matter resorteth down into the
bladder, and with the sharpenes thereof causes a continual provocation of
pissing.

Dysuria is when a horse cannot piss but with great labor and pain, which
for difference sake I will call from hence forth the paine-pisse. It may come
sometime through the weakness of the bladder and cold intemperature thereof,
and sometime through the abundance of flegmatike and gross humors, stopping
the neck of the bladder. Ischuria, is when the horse cannot piss at all, and
therefore may be called the pissupprest, or suppresseion of urine, whether you
will: methinkes always that the shorter and the more proper the name is, the
better and more easy it is to pronounce.

It may come as the Physicians say, by weakness of the bladder, or for that
the Water conduit is stopped with gross humors, or with matter discending from
the liver or kidneys, or with the stone: yea and sometimes by means of some
inflammation or hard knobbe Hierocles also recites, adding thereunto that it
may chance to a horse thorough overmuch rest and ydlenes, and also by means
of some extreme cold, and especially in winter season, for the which warmth of
the fire is a present remedy. But now mine Authors do not show for every one of
these three kinds of diseases several signs, but only say, that when a horse
cannot stale, he will stand as though he would stale, and thrust out his yard a
little, and also for very pain, stand beating his tail betwixt his thighs.

Neither do they seem to appoint several cures, but do make a hochpoch,
mingling them altogether, some of them praising one thing and some another: For
some say it is

The scraping of the inward parts of his own hooues beaten into powder and
mingled with wine and powered into his right nostril will make him to stale, if
you chafe him upon it, and the rather as Hierocles says, if you carry him to
some sheep coat or other place

Some will give the horse white Dogs dung dried and mingled with salt, wine,
and Amoniacum to drink, some hogs dunge only with Wine, and some the
dregs of horse-pisse with wine, and many other medicines which I leave to
rehearse for fear of being too tedious, and especially, since Martins
experience does follow here at hand, agreeing in all points with Laurentius
Russius cure, which is in this sort. First draw out his yard and wash it well
in white wine, and scour it well, because it will be many times stopped with
dirt and other baggage together, and hardened like a stone, and then put a
little oil of Cammomile into the conduit with a wax candle and a bruised cloue
of Garlic, and that will provoke him to stale. And if that will not help.
Take of Parsley two handfuls, of or upon some green plot, or else in a sheeps
coat, the savor whereof will greatly provoke him to stale, as has bin aforesaid.

Of pissing blood.
PElagonius says, that if a horse be overmuch labored, or ouercharged with
heavy burden, or over fat, he will many times piss blood, and the rather as I
think, for that some vain is broken within the horses body, and then clear
blood will come forth many times, as the Physicians say, without any piss at
all. But if the blood be perfectly mingled together with his stale, then it is
a sign that it comes from the kidneys having some stone therein, which
through vehement labor, does fret the kidneys and Pelagonius, Absirtus,
Hierocles, and the rest, is thus. Let the horse blood in the palate of the
mouth, to convert the blood the contrary way, then take of Tragagant that has
been steeped in wine, half an ounce, and of Poppy seed one dram and once
scruple, and of Stirax as much, and twelve Pineaple kirnels: let all these
things be beaten and mingled well together, and give the horse thereof every
morning, the space of seven days, the quantity of a hasellnut distempered in
a quart of wine: methinkes that the quantity of a Walnut were too little for so
much wine. Some write that it is good to make him a drink with the root of
Asphopelus, which some call Daffadil mingled with wheat flower and Sumach
sodden long in water, and so to be given the horse with some wine added
thereunto, or make him a drink of Goats milk and oil, straining thereunto a
little Fromenty. Anatolius says that it good to give the horse three days
together, sodden beans clean pilled whereunto would be added some Deeres
sewet and a little wine.

Of the Colt evil.
Blundevile
THis name Colt evil, in my judgment, does properly signify that disease,
which the physicians call Priapismus, which is a continual standing together,
with an unnatural swelling of the yard proceeding of some wind, filling the
artires and hollow sinnew or pipe of the yard, or else through the abundance of
seed, which do chance Martin says, are sieldome troubled with this disease
because of their heat, unless it be when they have been over travailed, or
otherwise weakened. The cure, according to him, is thus. Wash the sheath clean
within with Lukewarm Vinegar, then draw out his yard and wash that also: that
done ride him into some running stream up to the belly; tossing him therein
too and fro to alay the heat of the members, and use him thus two or three
days and he

Another of the Colt evil.
THe Colt evil is a disease that comes to stoned horses, through rankenes of
nature and want of vent, it appears in his cod and sheathe, which will swell
exceedingly, Markham.
the cure is nothing, for if you will but every day, twice or thrice drive him
to the mid-side in some Pond or running river, the swelling will fall and the
horse will do well. If the horse be of years, and troubled with this grief, if
you put him to a Mare it is not amiss, for standing still in a stable without
exercise, is a great occasion of this disease.

Of the mattering of the yard.
IT comes at covering time, when the horse and mare both are ouer-hot and so
perhaps burn themselves. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take a pint of
white wine, and boil therein a quarterne of roche Alome, and squirt thereof
into his yard three or four squirtfuls, one after another, and thrust the
squirt so far as the liquor may pierce to the bottom, to scowre away the
bloody matter, continuing thus to do once a day until he be whole.

Of the shedding of seed.
THis disease is called of the Physicians Gonorrhea, Blundevile
which may come sometime thorough abundance and rankenesse of seed, and
sometime by the weakness of the stones and seed vessels not able to retain the
seed until it be digested and thickened. Vegetius says, that this disease will
make the horse very faint and weak, and especially in Summer season, For cure
whereof, the said Vegetius would have the horse to be ridden into some cold
water, even up to the belly, so as his stones may be covered in water, and
then his fundament being first bathed with warm water and oil, he would have
you to Acatium, the juice of Plantaine, and a little Masticke, and bath his
back with red Wine and oil of Roses mingled together.

Of the falling of the yard.
Absirtus was wont to wash the yard with salt water from the sea if it may be
gotten, and if not with water and salt, and if that prevailed not, he would al
to prick the outmost skin of the yard with a sharp needle but not deep,
and then wash all the pricks with strong Vinegar, and that did make the horse
as he says, to draw up his yard again immediately: yea, and this also will
remedy the falling out of the fundament. Pelagonius would have you to put into
the pipe of his yard, honey and salt boiled together and made liquid, or else a
quick fly, or a grain of Frankencense or a cloue of Garlic clean Sanguis
Draconis, Turpentine, and Vinegar, or else lay on a wet sack, which being
covered with another dry cloth will keep his back very warm.


ABsirtus says, that the inflammation and swelling of the cod and stones,
comes by means of some wound, or by the stinging of some Serpent, or by
fighting one horse with another. For remedy whereof, he was wont to bath the
cod with water wherein has been sodden the roots of wild Cucumber and salt,
and then to anoint it with an ointment made of Cerusa oil, Goats grease, and
the white of an Egg. Some again would have the cod to be bathed in warm
Water, Nitrum and Vinegar together, and also to be anointed with an ointment
made of chalk, or of potters earth, Ox dung, cumin, Water and Vinegar, or
else to be anointed with the juice of the herb Solanum, called of some
nightshade, or with the juice of Hemblocke growing on dunghils: yea and also
to be let blood in the flanks. But Martin says, that the swelling of the cods
comes for the most part after some sickness or surfeiting with cold, and
then it is a sign of amendment. The cure according to his experience is in
this sort. First let him blood on both sides the flank veins. Then take of
oil of Roses, of Vinegar of each half a pint, and half a quarterne of Bole
Armony beaten to powder. Mingle them together in a cruse, and being lukewarm,
anoint the cods therewith with two or three fea^hers bound together, and the
next day ride him into the water so as his coddes may be within the water,
giving him two or three turns therein, and so return fair and softly to the
stable, and when he is dry anoint him again as before, continuing thus to do
every day once until they be whole. The said Martin says also, the cods may be
swollen by means of some hurt or evil humors resorting into the Cod, and then
he would have you cover the cods with a charge made of Bole Armony and Vinegar
wrought together, renewing it Mel Rosatum, and make him a breech of Canuas to
keep it in, renewing the taint every day once until it be whole.

Of incording and brusing.
THis term incording is borrowed of the Italian word Incordato, which in plain
English is as much to say as bursten, Blundevile
and might be more rightly termed of us vncodded. For when a horse is bursten,
his guts falls down into the cod making it to swell. The Italians as I take
it did call it Incordato because the gut follows the string of the stone called
of them Ilcordone, or Lachorda, whereof Incordato seems to be derived with
some reason. According to which reason we should call it rather instringhed than
inchorded, Chorda does signify a string or chord. Notwithstanding, since that
incording is already received in the stable, I for my part am very well content
therewith, minding not to contend against it. But now you have to note, that
either man or beast may be bursten diversely, and according to the names of the
parts grieved, the Physicians do give it diverse names: for you shall
understand, that next unto the thick outward skin of the belly, there is
also another inward thin skin covering all the muscles, the Caul, and the guts
of the belly, called of the Anatomists Peritoneum, which skin comes from both
parts and sides of the back, and is fastened to the midriffe above, and also
to the bottom of the belly beneath, to keep in all the contents of the nether
belly. And therefore

If the gut slip down into the cod, then it is called of the Physicians by the
Greek name Enterocele, that is to say, gut-bursten. But if the caul fall down
into the cod, then it is called of the Physicians Epiplocele, that is to say,
Caule-bursten. But either of the diseases is most properly incident to the
male kind, for the femal kind has no cod. Notwithstanding they may be so
bursten, as either gut or caul may fall down into their natures, hanging there
like a bag: But if it fall not down so low, but remains above nigh unto the
privy members or flanks, which place is called of the Latins Inguen, then of
that place the bursting is called of the physicians Bubonocele, whereunto I
know not what English Hydrocele, that is to say, water-bursten, and sometime
the cod may be swollen by means of some hard piece of flesh cleaving to the
thin skins or panicles of the stones, and then it is called of the physicians
Sarcocele, that is to say, flesh-bursten.

But forasmuch as none of mine Authors, Martin nor any other Ferrer in these
days that I know, have intermedled with any kind of bursting, but only with
that wherein the gut falls down into the cod: leaving all the rest apart, I
will only talk of this; and that according to Martins experience, which I
assure you differs not much from the Peritoneum, is either sore strained, or
else broken, either by some stripe of another horse, or else by some strain in
leaping over an hedge, ditch, or pale, or otherwise: yea and many times in
passing a carier, through the carelesnes of the rider stoping the horse suddenly
without giving warning, whereby the horse is forced to cast his hinder legs
abroad, so straineth or bursteth the skin aforesaid, by means whereof the gut
falls down into the cod. The signs be these. The horse will forsake his
meat, and stand shoring and leanning always on that side that he is hurt: and
on that side, if you search with your hand, betwixt the stone and the thigh
upward to the body, and somewhat above the stone you shall find the gut it
self big and hard in the feeling, whereas on the other side you shall find no
such thing. The cure according to Martin is thus. Bring the horse into some
house or place that has over head a strong balk or beam going overthwart, and
strew that place thick with straw: then put on four pasternes with four
ringes on his feet, and then fasten the one end of a long rope to one of those
Ringes, then thread all the other rings with the loose end of the Rope, and so
draw all his four feet together, and cast him on

That done, cast the rope over the baulke, and hoise the horse so as he may lie
flat on his back, with his legs upward without struggling. Then bath his
stones well with warm Water and Butter molten together, and the stones being
somewhat warm, and well mollified, raise them up from the body with both your
hands being closed by the fingers fast together, and holding the stones in your
hands in such manner, work down the gut into the body of the horse, by
striking it downward continually with your two thumbs, one laboring
immediately after another, until you perceive that side of the stone to be so
so small as the other, and having so discorded, that is to say, returned the gut
into his right


IF a horse be full of humors and then suddenly labored, the humors will
resort into the weakest parts, and there gather together and breed a botch,
and especially in the hinder parts betwixt the thighs, not far from the
cods. The signs be these. The hinder legs will be al swollen, and especially
from the houghes upward, and if you feel with your hand you shall find a great
kind of swelling, and if it be round and hard it will gather to a head. The cure
according to Martin is thus. First ripe it with a plaster: take of
Wheat Flour, of Turpentine, and of honey, of each like quantity, stirring it
together to make a stiff plaster, and with a cloth lay it unto the sore,
renewing it every day once until

Of the diseases incident to the womb of a Mare, and specially of barrenness.
IT seems by some writers, that the womb of a Mare is subject to certain
diseases, though not so many as the womb of a Woman, as to ascent, descent,
falling out, convulsion, barrenness, aborsment, yea Aristotle and others do
not let to write, that for the same, as the old writers have taught. A Mare
then may be barren through the vntemperatenesse of the womb or matrix, as well
for that it is too hot and fiery, or else to cold and moist, or too dry, or
else too short, or too narrow, or having the neck thereof turned awry, or by
means of some obstruction or stopping in the matrix, or for that the mare is
too fat or too lean, and many times mares go barren, for that they be not
well horsed. Well, the cure of barrenness that comes through the fault of the
matrixe or womb according to the old writers is thus. Take a good handful of
Leekes, stamp them in a mortar with half a glasseful of wine, then put
thereunto twelve Flies, called of the Apothecaries Cantharides, of diverse
colors, if they may be gotten, then strain altogether with a sufficient
quantity of water to serve the mare therewith two days together,

Another receipt for the same purpose.
TAke of Nitrum, of sparrowes dung, and Turpentine, of each a like quantitye
well wrought together and made like a suppository, and put that into her
nature, and it will cause her to desire the horse and also to conceive.
Hippocrates says, that it is good also to put a nettle into the horses mouth
that should cover her.

Of the Itch, Scabbe, and manginesse in the tail, and falling of the tail.
Blundevile
IN springtime horses many times are trobled with the troncheons in their
fundament, and then they will rub their tail, and break the hair thereof,
and yet in his tail perhaps, shall be neither itch, scurffe nor scabbe:
wherefore if you rake the horse well with your hand anointed with Soap, and
search for those tronchens and pull them clean out, you shall cause him to leave
rubbing: and if you see that the hair do fall away it felfe, then it is a
sign, that it is either eaten with Laurentius Russius says, make the joints
to fall away one by one) it shall be good as Martin says, to wash all his
tail with Aquafortis, or

Of the Scabbe.
THe Scab is a foul scurffe in diverse parts of a horses body, and comes of
poverty or il keeping, or many times by going amongst woods wherein they are
infected with water boughs: it is most incident to old horses, which will die
thereof, and

How to know when a horse halteth before in what part his grief is.
Being now come to talk of the griefs in the shoulders, legs, hips, houghes,
joints, and hooues, causing the horse most commonly to halt: I think it good
first to show you the way how to find in what part of his legs the horse is
grieved when he halteth either before or behind. And first you have to consider
that if a horse halteth before, it must be either in his shoulders, in his
legs, or in his feet. If it be in his shoulders and new hurt, the horse will not
lift that leg, but traile it nigh the ground. If it be old hurt, he will cast
that Leg further from him in his going then the other, and if he be turned on
the foreside, then he will halt so much the more. If a horse halteth in the leg,
it is either in the knee, in the shank, or else in the pastern joint, if it be
either in the knee, or pastern joint, he will not bow that leg in his going
like the other, but go very stiffly upon it. If he halteth in the shank, then it

If he halt in the toe, which is not commonly seen, then he will tred more upon
the heel.

Of the grief and pinching in the shoulder.
THis comes either by laboring and straining the Horse too young, or else by
some great burden; you shall perceive it by the narrownes of the breast, and by
consuming flesh of the shoulders, insomuch as the forepart of the shoulder bone
will stick out, and be a great deal higher then the flesh. And if it be of long
continuance, he will be very hollow in the brisket toward the armeholes, and he
will go wider beneath at the feet, then above at the knees. The cure according
to Martin is thus. Give him a slit of an inch long with a sharp knife or rasor
upon both sides an inch under the shoulder bones: then with a Swans

Take of Pitch, and rosen, of each one pound, of tar half a pint, boil these
things altogether in a pot, and when it is somewhat cooled, take a stick with a
woollen clout bound fast

Then take them out, and heal up the wounds with two taints of Flax dipped in
Turpentine, and hogs grease molten together, renewing the same every day once,
until the wounds be whole. But let the charge lie still, until it fall away of
it self, and let the horse run to grass, until he has had a frost or two.

Of the wrinching of the shoulder.
THis comes sometime by a fall, and sometime by turning too suddenly in some
in even ground, or by rash running out of some door, or by some stripe of
another Sanguis Draconis two ounces, and mingle them altogether, so as the
flower may not be perceived, and if it be too stiff, you may make it more
liquid or soft, with a little vinegar. Then with your hand daube all the
shoulder from the mane downward, and betwixt the fore-bowels all against the
hair, and let not the horse depart out of that place, until the charge be
surely fastened unto the skin.

That done, carry him into the stable, and tie him up to the rack, and suffer
him not to lie down all that day, and give him a little meat, dieting him
moderatly the space of fifteen days: during which time, he may not stir out of
his place, but only to lie down, and every day once refresh the shoulder
point with this charge, laying still new upon the old, and at the fifteen
days end, lead him abroad to see how he goes, and if he be somewhat amended,
then let him rest without traveling, the space of one month, and that shall
bring his shoulder to perfection. But if he be never the better for this that
is done, than it shall be needeful to rowell him with a leather rowell upon the
shoulder point, and to keep him rowelled the space of fifteen days, renewing
the rowel, and clensing the wound every other day, and then walk him up and
down fair and softly, and turn him always on the

Of splaiting in the shoulder.
THis comes by some dangerous sliding or slipping, whereby the shoulder
parts

Then either prick him with a lancet or fleame, in all the swelling places, or
else with some

Of the shoulder pight.
THis is when the shoulder point or pitch of the shoulder is displased,
Blundevile
which grief is called of the Italians Spallato, and it comes by reason of
some great fall forward rush or strain. The signs be these. That shoulder
point will stick out further then his fellow, and the Horse will halt right
down. The cure according to Martin is thus. First make him to swim in a deep
water up and down a doozen turns, and that shall make the joint to return in
his place. Then make two tough pins of ashen wood as much as your little
finger, sharp at the points, each one five inches long: that done, slit the
skin an inch above the

Then take a piece of a little line somewhat bigger then a whipcord, and at one
end make a loope, which being put over one of the pins ends, wind the rest of
the line good and strait

Of the swelling of the forelegs after great labor.


Of the Foundering in the forelegs.
THe cause of this grief is declared before in the Chapter of foundering in
the body, whereas I showed you, that if a horse be foundred in the body, the
humors will immediately resort down into his legs, as Martin says within the
space of 24. hours, and then the horse will go crovching al upon the hinder
legs, his forelegs being so stiff, as he is not able to bow them. The cure
whereof, according to Martin, is in this sort. Garter each leg immediately one
handful above the knee, with a list good and hard, and then walk him or chafe
him, and so put him in a heat, and being somewhat warmed, let him blood in both

Take of that blood two quartes, and of Wheate-flower half a pecke, and six
Eggs, shelles and all, of bole Armony half a pound, of Sanguis Draconis
half a quarterne, and a quarte of strong Vinegar: mingle them altogether, and
charge all his shoulders, Breast, Back, Loins, and Forelegges therewith, and
then walk him upon some hard ground, suffering him not to stand still, and
when the charge is dry, refresh it again. And having walked him three or 4.
hours together, lead him into the stable, and give him a little warm water
with ground malt in it, and then a little hay and prouender, and then walk him
again, either in the house, or else abroad, and continue thus the space of
four days: and when all the charge is spent, cover him well with a housing
cloth, and let him both stand and lie warm, and eat but little meat during the
four days. But if you see that at the four days end he mendeth not a whit,
then it is a sign that the humor lies in the foot, for the which you must
search with your butter, paring all the soles of the fore-feete so thin as you
shall see the water issue through the sole. That done, with your butter, let
him blood at both the toes, and let him bleed well. The stop the vein

Of Foundring.
OF all other sorances, Foundering is soonest got, and hardlyest cured: yet if
it may be perceived in twenty and four hours, Markham.
and taken in hand by this means hereafter prescribed, it shall be cured in
other twenty and four hours: notwithstanding, the same receipt, has cured a
horse that has bin foundred a year and more, but then it was longer in
bringing it to pass. Foundering comes when a horse is heated, being in his
grease and very fat, and takes thereon a sudden cold which strikes down
into his legs, and taking away the use and feeling thereof. The sign to know
it is, the horse cannot go, but will stand cripling with all his four legs
together: if you offer to turn him, he will couch his buttocks to the ground,
and some Horses have I seen sit on their buttocks to

The cure is thus: Let him blood of his two breast veins, of his two shackle
vains, and of his two veins above the cronets of his hinder hooues: if the
veins will bleed, take from them 3. pints at least, if they will not bleed, then
open his neck vain and take so much from thence. Save the blood, and let one
stand by and stir it as he bleeds lest it grow into lumps, when he has don
bleeding, take as much wheat flour as will thicken the blood, the whits of 20.
Eggs, and three or four yolks, then take a good quantity of Bolea^ minacke,
and a pint of strong vinegar, incorporate al these well together, and withal
charge his back, neck, head, and ears: then take two long rags of cloth and
dip in the same charge, and withal garter him so strait as may be above both
his knees of his forelegs, then let his keeper up, the next day pull off his
shoes, and pare his feet very thin, and let him blood both of his heels and
toes, then set on his shoes again and stop them with hogs grease and bran
boiling hot, and splint them up, and so turn him out to run, and he shall be
sound.

Of the splent as well in the inside or outside of the knee, as other where in
the Legs.
THis sorance to any man's feeling is a very gristle sometime as big as a
Walnut, and sometime no more then a Hasel nut, which is called of the Italians,
Spinella, Blundevile
and it comes, as Laurentius Russius says, by traveling the horse too
young, or by oppressing

Wash it well with warm water, and shave off the hair, and lightly scarifie all the sore places with the point of a rasor, so as the blood may issue forth.
Then take of Cantharides half a spoonefull, and of Euforbium as much, beaten
into fine powder, and mingle them together with a spoonefull of oil de bay,
and then melt them in a little pan, stirring them well together, so as they may
not boil over, and being so boiling hot, take two or 3. feathers, and anoint
all the sore

The next day anoint the sore place with fresh butter, continuing so to do
every day once for the space of 9. days, for this shall allay the heat of the
medicine, and cause both that, and the crust to fall away of it self, and
therewith either clean take away the splent, or at the least remove it out of
the knee into the leg, and so much diminish it, as the Horse shall go right up,
and halte no more through occasion thereof. Laurentius Russius would

Of the splent.
A Splent is a sorance of the least moment, unless it be on the knee, or else
a through Splent, both which cannot be cured: A Splent is a spungy hard
grissell or bone, Markham.
growing fast on the inside of the shin-bone of a Horse, where a little making
stark in two or three places, then with your two thombes thrust it hard, and
you shall see crushed matter and blood come out, which is the very Splent, then
set him up and let him rest, or run at grass for a week or more: others for a
young Spleent do thus: take a hasell stick and cut it square, and therewithal
beat the splint till it be soft, then take a blew cloth and lay upon the
splent, and take a Tailors pressing iron made hot and rub it up and down upon
the cloth over the splent and it shall take it clean away. But if the splent
be old and great and grown to the perfection of hardness, then you must cast
the Horse and with a sharp knife slit down the splent, then take Cantharides
and Euforbium, of each like quantity, and boil them in Oil debay, and with
that fill up the slit, and renew it for three

Of a Malander.
Blundevile
A Malander is a kind of scab growing in the form of lines, or strokes,
overthwart the bent of the knee, and has long hairs with stubborn roots,
like the bristles of a Bore which corrupts and cankereth the flesh, like the
roots of a child as scabbed head: and if it be great it will make the Horse
to go stiff at the setting forth, and also to halt. This disease proceeds
sometime of corrupt blood, but most commonly for

Another of the Mallander.
A Mallander is a peevish sorance and comes of ill keeping, it is on the
forelegs, just on the inside, Markham.
at the bending of the kne, it will make a horse go stark, and stumble much the
cure is in this sort. Cast the Horse, and with some instrument pluck off the
dry scab that will stick thereon, and rub it till it bleed, then take and bind
it thereto for three days, in which space you shall see a white asker on the
sore, then take that off, and anoint it with oil of Roses or fresh butter,
until it be thoroughly cured.

Of an upper attaint or ouerreach upon the back sinnew of the shanke, somewhat
above the joint.
THe Italians call this sorance Atrincto, which is a painful swelling of the
master sinnew, by means that the Horse does sometime ouerreach, and strike
that sinnew with the toe of his hinder foot, which causes him to halt. The
signs be apparent by the swelling of the place, and by the horses halting. The
cure, according to Martin, is thus: wash the place with warm water, and shave
all the hair so far as the swelling goes, and scarifie every part of the
sore place lightly with the point of a rasor, that the blood may issue forth.
Then Cantharides and of Euforbium, of each half an ounce, mingle them together
with half a quarterne of Soap, and with a slice spread some of this
oyntmentouer all the sore, suffering him to rest there as you dress him for one
half hour after, and then you may carry him into the stable, and there let
him stand without litter, and tied as has been said before in the Chapter of
the spleen, and the next day dress him with the same ointment once again,
even as you did before. And the third day anoint the place with fresh
Butter, continuing so to do the space of nine days, and at the nine days end
make him this bath. Take of Mallows three handfuls, a Rose-cake, of Sage an
handful. Boil them together in a sufficient quantity of water. And when the
Mallows be soft, put in half a pound of Butter, and half a pint of Sallet
oil, and then being somewhat warm, wash the sore place therewith every day
once, the space of three or four days.

Of a nether taint.
THis is a little bladder full of ielly, much like unto a wind-gal, not apparent
to the eye, Blundevile



AN Attaint is a grief that comes by an ouer-reach, Markham.
as clapping one leg upon another, or by some other horses treading upon his
heels, the cure is: take a sharp knife and cut out the ouer-reach, that is, if
it be never so deep like a hole, cut it plain and smooth, how broad soever
you make it, then wash it with Beer and Salt, and lay to it Hogs grease,
Wax, Turpentine, and Rozen, of each like quantity boiled and mingled together,
and this will in few days heal him, be it never so sore.

Of an ouer-reach upon the heel.


Of false quarters.
THis is a rifte sometime in the outside, but most commonly in the inside of
the Falso quarto. It comes by evil shooing, and partly by evil paring. The
signs be these. The horse will for the most part halt, and the rift will bleed,
and is apparent to the eye. The cure according to Martin is thus. If the horse
halt, then pull off the shoe, and cut so much away on that side of the shoe
where the grief is, as the shoe being immediately put on again, the rift may
be uncovered. Then open the rift with a Rosenet or drawer, and fill the rift
with a role of Towe dipped in Turpentine, Wax, and Sheep sewet molten,
renewing it every day once, until it be whole: And the rift being

Of halting behind, and where the grief is.
Blundevile
IF a horse halt behind, the grief must either be in the hip, in the stiffle,
in the hough, in the hamme, in the leg, in the nether joint, pasterne or
foot. If he halt in the hippe of a new hurt, the horse will go sideling, and not
follow so well with that leg as with the other. But if it be old hurt, the
sore hippe will shrink and be lower then the other. And is best seen, when he
goes up a hill, or upon the edge of some bank, so as the woorste leg may go
on the higher side, for then he will halt so much more, because it is paineful
unto him to go so unevenly wrinching his leg. If the grief be in the
stiffle, then the

If the grief be in the hough, then it is by means of some Spauen, or some
other hurt apparent to the eye. And the like may be said of the ham, wherein
may be seen the Selander, or such like apparent sorance, causing the horse to
halt: If the grief be either in the leg, pasterne or foot, then you shall find
it by such signs as have bin taught you before. And therefore let us now
speak of those sorances, that are properly incident to the hinder legs.

Of the String-halt.
THe String-hault is a disease that makes a horse twitch up his leg suddenly,
and so Markham.
as deep as the horse is hie, and set the horse in, and cover him with warm
dung, and so let him stand the space of two hours, then take him out and make
him clean, and then bath him al over with Traine-oile made warm, and it will
help him.

Of a horse that is hipped, or hurt in the hippes.
THe horse is said to be hipt, when the hip-bone is removed out of his right
place, Mal del ancha. It cummeth most commonly by some great stripe or strain,
slipping, sliding, or falling. The signs be these. The horse will halt, and in
his going he will go sideling, and the sore hip will fall lower than the other,
and the flesh in process of time will consume clean away. And if it be
suffered to run so long, it will never be restored unto his prestine estate. The
best way as Martin says to make him go upright, is to charge his hip and back
with Pitch and Rozen molten together, and laid on warm, and then some flox of
his own color to be clapped upon the same, and so let him run to grass,
until he go upright. But the sore hip will never rise again so high as the
other. If the horse be not hipped, but only hurt in the hip, and that newly,
then first take of oil de Bay, of Dialthea, of Nerual, of Swines-greace, melt
them

And before you dress him, cause him every day to be led up and down a foot
pace a quarter of an hour, to make the humors come down, and at the
fortnights end pull out the rowel, and heal up the wound with the same salve,
making the taint every day lesser, and lesser until it be whole. And so soon
as it is whole, draw with a hot iron cross lines, of eight or nine inches
long, right over the hip-bone, so as the rowelled place may be in the very
midst thereof, and burn him no deeper, but so as the skin may look yellow and
then charge all that place, and over al his buttocks with this charge. Take of
pitch one pound, of Rozen half a pound, of Tar half a pint: Boil them
together, and then being good and warm, spread it on with a clout tied in a
riuen stick: and then clap on a

Of stiffling, and hurts in the stiffle.
THe horse is said to be stiffled, when the stiffling bone is removed from the
place: but if it be not removed nor loosened, and yet the horse halteth by
means of some grief there, then we say that the horse is hurt in the stiffle,
and not stiffled. The stiffle comes by means of some blow, or some great
strain, slipping or sliding. The signs be these. If he be stiffled, the
Martin would have you to cure the stiffle in all points like unto the
shoulder-pight, saving that the pins need not be so long, because the stifling
place is not so broad as the shoulder, and standing in the stable, let him have
a pasterne with a Ring on his forelegge, and thereunto fasten a cord, which
cord must go about his neck, and let it be so much strained, as it may bring
his forelegge more forward than the other to keep the bone from starting out.
But if the horse be but hurt in the stiffle with some stripe or strain, then
the bone will not stand out, but perhaps the place may be swollen. The cure
according to Martin is thus. First anoint the place with the ointment
mentioned before, every day once the space of a fortnight, and if the horse
amend not with this, then rowel him with a hearen rowel,

Of foundering behind.
THis happes most commonly when a horse is very fat, and has his grease
moulten within him, which is soon done with every little heat. You shall
perceive it by his going, for he will be afraid to set his hinder feet to the
ground, and he will be so weak behind, as he will stand quiuering and shaking
and covet always to lie down. The cure, according to Martin is thus. First
garter him above the houghes, and then force Sanguis Draconis two ounces, six
Eggs, shells and al, of Turpentine half a pound, of Vinegar a quart. Mingle al
these things together, and therewith charge both his hinder Legs, his
Reins, and Flanks, al against the hair. And if the horse cannot dung, let
him be raked, and give him this glister: take of Mallows three handfuls, and
boil them well in fair Water from a pottle to a quart. Then strain it and put
thereunto half a pound of Butter, and of Sallet Oil a quarter of a pint,
and having emptied his belly, give him also this drink to comfort him; take
of Malmesie a quart, and put thereunto a little Cinnamon, Mace, and Pepper,
beaten into fine powder

That don, let him be walked up and down a good while together if he be able
to go: if not, then tie him up to the rack, and let him be hanged with Canuas
and ropes, so as he may stand upon the ground with his feet: For the less he
lies the better, and pare his hinder feet thin, until the deaw come out, and
tacking on the shoes again, stop the hooues with bran and hogs grease
boiled together, and let both his feet having this geere in it, be wrapped up
in a cloth even to his pasternes, and there tie the clout fast. Let his diet
be thin and let him drink no cold water, and give him in winter wet hay,
and in Summer grass.

Of the dry Spauen.
Blundevile
THe dry Spauin called of the Italians Spauano or Sparauagno, is a great hard
knob as

Notwithstanding, Martin says, that it may be made less with these remedies
here Cantharides one dozen, of Euforbium half a spoonefull, break them into
powder, and boil them together with a little oil de Bay, and with two or
three feathers bound together, put it boiling hot upon the sore, and let his
tail be tied up for wiping away the medicine; and then within half an hour
after, set him up in the stable, and tie him so as he may not lie down all the
night for fear of rubbing off the medicine, and the next day anoint it with
fresh butter, continuing thus to do every day once the space of five or six
days, and when the hair is grown again, draw the sore place with a hot
iron. Then take another hot sharp iron like a Bodkin, somewhat bowing at the
point, and thruste it in at the nether end of the

And then taint it with a little Turpentine and Hogges-greace moulten together
and made warm, renewing it every day once the space of nine days. But
remember first immediately after his burning to take up the master vain,
suffering him to bleed a little from above, and tie up the vper end of the
vain, and leave the nether end open, to the intent that he may bleed from
beneath until it cease it self, and that shall diminish the Spauen, or else
nothing will do it.

Of the Spauen, both bone and blood.
Doubtless a Spauen is an evil sorance, and causes a horse to hault
principally in the beginning of his grief, Markham.
it appears on the hinder Legs within, and against the joint, and it will
be a little swollen, and some horses have a thorough Spauen, which appears
both within and without. Of the Spauen there are two kinds, the one hard the
other soft: That is: a bone-Spauen, and a blood-Spauen, for the bone-Spauen I
hold it hard to cure, and therefore the less necessary to be dealt withal,
except very great occasion urge, and thus it may be helped.

Cast the horse and with a hot iron slitte the flesh that covers the Spauen,
and then Cantharides and Euforbium boiled together in oil de Bay, and anoint
his legs round about, either with the oil of Roses, and with Vngue^tum album
camphiratum. Dress him thus for three days together, then afterward take it
away and for three days more lay unto it only upon Flax and vnsleact lime,
then afterward dress it with Tar until it be whole.

The Cantharides and Euforbium, will eat and kill the spungy bone, the lime will
bring it clean away, and the Tar will suck out the poison, and heal al up
sound: but this cure is dangerous, for if the incision be done by an unskillful
man, and he either by ignorance or by the swaruing of his hand, burn in twain
the great vain that runs cross the Spauen, then the horse is spoiled.

Now for the blood Spauen that is easily helped, for I have known diverse which
have been but newly beginning, helped only by taking up the Spauen vain,
and letting it bleed well beneath, and then stop the wound with Sage, and Salt,
but if it be a great blood Spauen, then with a sharp knife, cut it as you
burnt the bone Spauen, and take the Spauen

Of the wet Spauen, or through Spauen.
THis is a soft swelling growing on both sides of the hough and seems to go
clean through the hough, and therefore may be called a through Spauen. But
for the most part the swelling is on the inside, because it is continually fed
of the master vain, and is greater than the swelling on the outside. The
Italians call this sorance Laierda, or Gierdone, which seems to come of a more
fluxible humor, and not so viscous or slimy as the other Spauen does, and
therefore this waxes not so hard, nor grows to the nature of a bone as the
other does, and this is more curable Cantharides half an ounce, of Euforbium
an ounce broken to powder, and Oil de Bay one ounce, mingle them well together
cold, without boiling them, and dress the sore therewith two days together,
and every day after, until the hair be grown again, anoint it with fresh
Butter. Then fire him both without and within, as before, without tainting him,
and immediately take up the master vein, as before: and then for the space of
nine days, anoint him every day once with Butter, until the fiered place
begin to scale, and then wash it with this bath. Take of Mallows three
handfuls, of Sage one handful, and as much of red nettles, boil

Of the Selander.
THis is a kind of scab breeding in the ham, which is the bent of the hough,
and is like in all points, to the Malander, proceeding of like causes, and
requires like cure, and therefore resort to the Malander.


THis is a round swelling boony, like a Paris bal, growing upon the tippe or
elbow of the hough, and therefore I thought good to call it the hough-boonie.
This sorance comes of some stripe or bruise, and as Martin says, is cured
thus. Take a round hot iron somewhat sharp at the end like a good big
bodkin, and let it be somewhat bending at the point. Then holding the sore with
your left hand, pulling it somewhat from the sinnewes, pierce it with the
iron, being first made red hot, thrusting it beneath in the bottom, and so
upward into the belly, to the intent that the same ielly may issue downward
out at the hole, and having thrust out all the ielly, taint the hole with a
tainte

Of the Curb.
Blundevile
THis is a long swelling beneath the Elbow of the hough, in the great sinnewe
behind, and causes the horse to halt, after that he has been a while labored
and thereby somewhat heated. For the more the sinnew is strained, the greater
grief, which again by his rest is eased. This comes by bearing some great
weight when the horse is young, or else by some strain or wrinch, whereby the
tender sinnewes are grieved, or rather bowed (as Russsius says (whereof it is,
called in Italian Curba a Curuando, that is to say, of bowing, for anguish
whereof it does swel, which

Another of the Curb.
Markham.
A Curb is a sorance that makes a horse to halt much, and it appears upon his
hinder legs, straight behind upon the cambrell place, and a little beneath
the Spauen, and it will be swollen as big as half a Walnut, the cure follows:
Take a small cord and bind his legs hard above it, and beneath it, then beat
it, and rub it with a heavy stick til it grow soft, then with a fleame strike
it in three or four places, and with your thumbes crush out the filthy bruised
matter, then loose the cord, and anoint it with Butter until it be whole.

Of the pains.
Blundevile
THis is a kind of scabbe, called in Italian, Crappe, which is full of fretting
matterish water, and it breede^h in the pasternes for lack of clean keeping
and good rubbing after the horse has been iournied, by means whereof the sand
and dirt remaining in the hair, fretteth the skin and flesh, and so breeds a
scab. And therefore those horses that have long hair, and are rough about the
feet, are soonest troubled with this disease, if they be not the cleanlier
kept. The signs be these. His legs will be swollen and hot, and water will
issue out of the scab, which water his hot and fretting, as it will scalde off
the hair and breed scabs, so far as it goes. The cure, according to Martin
is thus. First wash well all the pasternes with Beer and Butter warmed together,
and his legs being

Another of the pains.
Pains is a sorance that comes of hot ill humors of il keeping: it appears
in the Fetlockes, Markham.
and will swel in the Winter time, and will send forth a sharp water: the hair
will stare, and the cure is thus: Wash them every day twice or thrice with
gun-pouder and Vinegar, and they will be whole in one week at the most.

Of Mules or kibed heels, called of the Italians Mule.
THis is a kind of scab breeding behind, somewhat above the nether joint,
growing ouerthwat the fewterlock, which comes most commonly for being bred in
cold ground, or else for lack of good dressing, after that he has bin labored
in foul mire and dirty ways, which dirt lying still in his legs, fretteth the
skin, and makes scabby rifts, which are soon bred, but not so soon gotten
away. The anguish whereof makes his legs sometime to swell, and specially in
winter and spring time, and then the horse goes very stiffly,

Of Frettishing.
FRettishing is a sorance that comes of riding a horse, til he sweat, and
then to set him Markham.
it appears under the heel in the heart of the foot: for it will grow dun, and
wax white and crumbly like a Pomys, and also in time it will show, by the
wrinckles on his hoof, and the hoof will grow thick and brickle, he will not
be able to tread, on stones or hard ground, nor well to travel but stumble and
fall: the cure is thus: Take and pare his feet so thin as may be, then roast two
or three Eggs, in the Embers very hard, and being extreme hot taken out of fire,
crush them in his foot, and then clap a piece of leather thereon, and splint it
that the Eggs may not fall out, and so let him run and he will be sound.


HItherto we have declared unto you the causes, signs and cure of all such
griefs as are properly incident, either to the forelegs, or hinder legs: now
therefore we speak of those griefs that be common to them both, and first of
windgals.

Of Windgalles.
THe windgall called of the Italians Galla, is a bladder full of corrupt ielly,
Blundevile
whereof some be great and some be small, and do grow on each side of the
joint, and is so painful, and especially in summer season when the wether is
hot and the ways hard, as the horse is not able to travel but halteth down
right. They come for the most part

Then having taken away the cloth, lay unto the place a piece of shoomakers
wax made like a flat cake, about the breadth of a testorn, and with your iron
not made over hot, streek softly upon it too and fro, until the said wax be
thoroughly melted into the sore. Whereupon lay a few flox, and let him go. Which
flocks will afterward fall away of their own accord.

Of Windgals.
WIngals are easy to cure, they be little swellings like blebs or bladders, on
either side the joint next unto the feuter-locks, as well before as behind, and
they come through Markham.
in hard, grauelly, or sandy ways. The cure is. Take Pitch, Rozen, and
Mastick, of each like quantity, melt them together, and with a stick lay it
round about the horses legs, and whilst it is hot lay flocks thereon: the
nature of this plaster, is never to come away whilst there is any windgall on
the Horses legs, but when they are dried up, then it will fall away of itself.

Of wrinching the nether joint.
THis comes many times by treading awry in some cart root or otherwise. The
signs

Of enterfering.
Because enterfering is to be helped by shooing, we purpose not to speak of
it, until we come to talk of the order of paring and shooing all manner of
hooues.

Another of Enterfering.
ENterfering is a grief that comes sometimes by ill shooing, and sometimes
naturally, when a horse trots so narrow that he hewes on leg upon another, it
appears both before and behind, between the feet against the fet-lockes,
and there is no remedy but shooing him with shoes made thin and flat on the
outside, and narrow and thick within.

Of the shakell gall.
IF a horse be galled in the pasterns, with shakell, lock pasterne, or halter,
anoint the sore

Of hurts in the legs, that comes by casting in the halter or collar.
^^undevile
IT chances many times, that a Horse having some itch under his ears, is
desirous to scratch the same with his hinder foot which whilst he reaches
too and fro, does fasten in the collar or halter, wherewith the more that he
strives

Russius calls such kind of galling Capistratura, which he was wont to heal
with this ointment here following, praising it to be excellent good for the
cratches, or any scab, bruise, or wound: take of oil Olive one ounce, of
Turpentine two or three ounces, melt them together over the fire, and then put
thereunto a little wax, and work them well together, and anoint the sore place
therewith. Martin says it is good to anoint the sore place with the white of
an egg and sallet-oile beaten together, and when it comes to a scab, anoint
it with butter being molten, until it look brown.

Of the Cratches or Rats tails, called of the Italians Crepaccie.



SCratches will cause a horse to halt sore, and they come only by naughty
keeping, and they appear in the pasterns under the Fetlocks, as if the skin
were cut overthwart, Markham
that a man may lay in a wheat-straw: the cure is thus: bind unto the^ (the
hair being cut clean away) black Soap and Lime kned together, for three
days, then lay that by, and annoint the place with butter, and heal the sore
with Bores grease and Tar mixed well together.

Of the Ring-bone.
Soprosso. Laurentius Russius says, that it may grow in any other place of the
Leg, but then we call it not a Ring-bone, but a knot or knob. It comes at the
first either by some blow of another Horse, or by striking his own foot
against some stub, or stone, or such like casualty. The pain whereof breederh
a viscous and slimy humor, which resorting to the bones, that are of their own
nature cold and dry, waxes hard, cleaves to some bone, and in process of
time becomes a bone. The signs be these.

The Horse will halt, and the hard swelling is apparent to the eye, being
higher then any place of the cronet. The cure according to Martin is thus.
First wash it well with warm

But if these ring-bones, or knobs, breed in any other place, then in the
cronet, you shall cure them, as is before said, without firing them.

Of the Ring-bone.
THe Ring-bone is an il disease, and apeareth before on the foot above the
hoof, as well before as behind, Markham.
and will be swollen 3. inches broad, and a quarter of an inch or more of
height, and the hair will stare and wax thin, and will make a Horse halt much,
the cure is. Cast the Horse, and with an iron made flat and thin, burn away
that gristle which annoies him, then take wax, Turpentine, Rozen, Tar, and
hog's grease, of each like quantity,

Of the Crowne-scab.
THis is a kind of filthy and stinking scab, breeding round about the feet
upon the cronets, Blundevile
and is an eluish and painful disease, called in Italian Crisaria. It seems
to come by means that the Horse has bin bred in some cold wet soil,
striking corrupt humors up to his feet, and therefore the horse that has this
grief is worse troubled in winter then in summer. The signs be these. The
hair of the cronets will be thin and staring like bristles,

Of hurts upon the cronet crossing one foot over another, which the Italians
call Supraposte.
MArt* says wash it well with white wine, or with a little stale, and then lay
unto it the white

Of the quitterbone.
THis is a hard round swelling upon the cronet, betwixt the heel and the
quarter, and grows most commonly on the inside of the foot, and is commonly
called of the Italians Setula, or Seta. It comes by means of gravel
gathered underneath the shoe, which frerteth the heel, or else by the cloying
or pricking of some nail evil driven,

Then to allay the burning thereof, taint the hole with flax dipped in hogs
grease, and turpentine, molten and mingled together, and cover the taint with a
bolster of tow dipped also in the ointment aforesaid, continuing so to do every
day once, until you have gotten out the core. Then shall you see whether the
loose gristle in the bottom be uncovered or not, and if it be uncovered, then
feel with your finger, or with a quil, whether you be nigh it or not. And if
you be, then raise the gristle with a little crooked instrument, and pull it
clean out with a pair of small nippers, meet for the purpose. That done,
taint it again with a full taint dipped it the aforesaid ointment, to assuage
the anguish of the last dressing, and stop it hard, to the intent that the hole
may not shrink together or close up, and the next day take out that taint, and
taint it anew with the salve or ointment taught in the chap. of the shakell
gall, renewing it every day once until it be whole keeping always the mouth of
the sore as open as you may, to the intent that it heal not up too fast, and
let not the horse in any wet, nor travel, until he be perfectly whole.


QVitter-bone is a round hard swelling upon the cronet of the hoof, betwixt
the hoof and the quarter, and for the most part, grows on the inside of the
foot: the origynall effect thereof is the fretting of gravel underneath the
shoe, which bruiseth the heel, Markham.
or else by means of some stub, or the pricking of some nail, through the
pain whereof the grissell is loosened, breeding evil humors, which be indeed
the ground of the Quitter-bone: it is to be known by the horses halting, and
by the apparent swelling to the eye of that part, which in 3. or 4. days will
grow unto a head and break, euacuating great abundance of filthy matter at a
little hole, the cure is thus. Take a hot iron, made in fashion of a knife, and
with it burn out the flesh, in compass of a Moon till you come to


THis is a fretting under the foot, most commonly in the inside, Blundevile
and sometime in the outside, and sometime in both sides together of the heel.
It comes by means of little gravel stones getting betwixt the hooue, or
calking, or sponge of the shoe, which by continual labor and treading of the
Horse, does eat into the quick, and the rather, if his heel be soft and
weak, or that the shoe do lie flat to his foot, so as the gravel being once
gotten in, cannot get out. The signs be these. The horse will halt, and covet
to tread all upon the toe, to favor his heel. The cure according to Martin
is thus. First pare the hooue, and get out the grauel with a cornet, or drawer,
leaving none behind for if you do, it will breed to a quitterbone. That done,
stop him with Turpentine and

Of grauelling.
GRavelling is a hurt will make a horse to halt, and comes of gravel and
little stones, Markham.
that goes between the shoe and the heart of the foot, the cure is: take
off the shoe, and let him be well pared, then set on the shoe again, and
stop it with Pitch, Rozen,

Of Surbating.
THis is a beating of the Hooue against the ground, called of the Italians
Sobatitura, it comes sometime by means of evil shooing, lying too flat to his
foot, or by going barefoote, and sometime by the hardness of the ground, and
high lifting of the Horse. And those Horses that be flat footed, the coffins
whereof are tender and weak, are most commonly subject to this sorance. The
signs be these: the Horse will halt on both his forelegs, and go stifely and
creeping, as though he were half foundered. The cure, according to Martin is
thus: take off his shoes, pare him as little as may be, and if the shoes be
not easy, that is to say, long, large, and hollow enough, then make them so,
and then tacke them on again with four or five Nails. That done, stop his
feet with branne, and Hogs-greace boiled together, so hot as may be, and also
cover all the coffin round about with the same, binding all in together with a
cloth, and a list fastened about

Of a prick in the sole of the foot, by treading on a nail, or any other
sharp thing that does enter into the foot.
THe signs be these. If a man be on his back when he treads on any such
thing, he shall feel that the Horse will lift up his foot, and covet to stand
still to have help. And if it chance at any other time, Blundevile
the halting of the Horse, and the hurt it self will show. The cure according
to Martin is thus. Pull off the shoe, and pare the foot,

Of accloyd or pricked.
ACcloyd is a hurt that comes of shooing, when a Smith drives a Nail in the
quick, ^^rkham.
which will make him to halt, and the cure is, to take off the shoo, and to cut
the hoof away, to lay the sore bare: then lay to it wax, Turpentine, and
Deere-sewet which will heal it.

Of the Fig.
IF a Horse having received any hurt, as before is said by nail, bone, splent,
or stone, or otherwise in the sole of his foot, and not be well dressed and
perfectly cured, there will grow in that place a certain superfluous piece of
flesh, like a Fig: and it will have little Un fico, that is to say a fig. The
cure whereof according to Martin is thus. Cut it clean away with a hot iron,
and keep the flesh down with Turpentine, hogs grease, and a little wax laid
on with Towe or flax, and stop the hole hard, that the flesh rise not, renewing
it once a day, until it be whole.

Of a Retreat.
THis is the pricking of a nail, not well driven in the shooing, and therefore
pulled out again by the Smith, and is called of the Italians, Tratta messa.
The cause of the pricking may be partly, the rash driving of the Smith, and
partly the weakness of the nail, or the hollownes of the nail in the shank.
For if it be too weak, the point many times bendethawry into the quick when
it should go right forth. It slatteth and shiuereth in the driving into two
parts, whereof one part raceth the quick in pulling out, or else perhaps
breaks clean assunder, and

Of Cloying.
Inchiodatura, passinge through the quick, and remaining still in the same, and
is clenched as other nails be, and so causes the horse to halt. The grieved
place is known, by searching with the hammer and pinsons, as is before said:
If the horse halt immediately, then pull off his shoe, and open the hole, until
it begin to bleed, and stop it with the ointment aforesaid, in the same page of
the Retreat, and clap on the shoe again, and the hooue may be so good, and
the harm so little, as you may travel him immediately upon it: but if it be
ranckled, then renew the stopping every day once, let him come in no wet, until
it be whole.


THis is a parting of the hooue from the cronet, called of the Italians,
Dissolatura del vnghia, which if it be round about, it comes by means of
foundering, if in part, then by the anguish caused by the pricking of the canel
nail, piercing the sole of the foot, or by some quitterbone, Retreat,
Grauelling, or Cloying, or such like thing: The signs be these. When it is
loosened by foundering, then it will break first in the forepart of the
Cronet, right aagainst the toes, because the humor does covet always to
descend toward the toe. Again when the pricking of a canel nail or such like
cankered thing is the cause, then the hooue will loosen round about, equally
even at the first. But when it proceeds of any of and also heal up the
wound, as is before taught in the chap. of a prick in the sole of the foot.

Of casting the hooue.
THis is when the coffin falls clean away from the foot, which comes by
such causes as were last rehearsed, and is so aparant to the eye, as it needs
no signs to know it. The cure, according to Martin is thus. Take of Turpentine
one pound, of Tar half a pint, of unwrought Wax half a pint. Boil all
these things together, and stir them continually until they be thoroughly
mingled, and compact together. Then make a boot of leather with a good strong
sole meet for the horses feet, to be laced or buckled about

Of the hooue bound.
THis is a shrinking of all the whole hooue. It comes by drought, for the
hoous perhaps are kept to dry, when the horse stands in the stable, and
sometime by means of heat, Blundevile
or of ouerstraight shooing. The Italians call the horse thus grieved
Incastellado. The signs be these, The horse Lunette, the order and shape
whereof you shall find among the Ferrers, and raze both the quarters of the
hooue with a drawer, from the coronet unto the sole of the foot, so deep as
you shall see the dew it self come forth. And if you make two rases on each
side, it shall be so much the better, and enlarge the hooue the more. That
done, anoint all the hooue about, next unto the coronet round about, with the
ointment prescribed before in the chapter of casting the hooue continuing so to
do every day once until

Of the running Frush.
THe Frush is the tenderest part of the hooue toward the heel, called of the
Italians Fettone, and because it is fashioned like a forked head, the French
men call it Furchette, which word our Ferrers, either for not knowing rightly
how to pronounce it, or else perhaps for easiness sake of pronuntiation, do
make it a monasillable, and pronounce it the Frush, in which Frush breeds
many times a rotennesse or corruption proceeding of humors that comes out of

The horse will hauls, and specially when the passage of the humor is stopped
with any grauel gathered in the Frush, and not being stopped it will continually
run, the savor whereof will be so strong as a man is not able to abide it,
and in some places it will look raw. The cure according to Martin is thus.
First take off the shoe and pare away all the corrupt places and make them
raw, so as you may see the water issue out of the raw places, then tack on the
shoe again, being first made wide and large enough. That done, take of foot
one handful, of salt as much, bruise them well together in a dish, and put
thereunto the white of three Eggs, and temper them together, and with a little
Towe dipped therein, stop all the foot and especially the Frush, and splent is
so as it may not fall

Of the Frush.
THe Frush is the tendrest part of the sole of the foot, which by humors
distilling many times down from the legs, occasion inflammations in that
part, Markham.
which may easily be perceived by the impostumation of the same: the cure is,
first having taken off the shoe, pare away all the corrupted and naughty
matter, until the sore look raw,

Of diseases or griefs indifferently incident to any part of the body, but
first of the Leprosy or universal manginesse, called of the old writers
Elephantia.


Of the Farcin, called in Italian of some, Il verme, and of some Farcina.
THis is a kind of creeping ulcer growing in knots, following along some vein,
and it proceeds of corrupt blood engendered in the body, or else of some
outward hurt, as of spurgalling, or the biting of some other horse, or of
biting of ticks, or of hogs lice, or such like causualties: Or if it be in the
legs, it may come by interferring. It is easilye known, partly by the former
description, and also it is apparent to the eye. The cure, according to Martin
is thus. Let him blood in that vain where it comes, as nigh the sore place
as may be, and let him bleed well, then fire every knot one by one, taking the
knot in your left hand, and pulling it so hard as you can from his body to the
intent you may the better pierce the knot, with a blunt hot iron, of the
bigness of a man's forefinger, without doing the body any hurt, and let out
the matter, leaving none vnburnd, be it little or much. That done, anoint every
knot so burned with Hogges-greace warmed every day

That done, fill every hole immediately with the powder of slect lime,
continuing thus to do every day once, until the holes be closed up, and if any
be more ranker than other, fill those with Verdigrease, and during this cure,
let the horse be thinly dieted, that is to say with straw and water only,
unless it be now and then to give him a loaf or bread. For the lower he be
kept, the sooner he will be whole. And in any wise let his neck be yoked in an
old bottomless paile, or else with short staves to keep him from licking
the sores, and the less rest he has the better. Or do thus. Take a good great
Dock-root clean

Of the Farcion.
THe Farcion is a vilde disease, engendered of ill blood, flegmaticke matter,
and unkindly feeding, it appears in a horse like unto little knottes in the
flesh, as big as a Hasell Nutte, Markham.
the knottes will increase daily and inflame, impostume, and break and when
the knots amount to threescore, they will every night after breed so many more
till they have overrun the horses body, and with the poison, which is
mighty and also strong, soon bring gim to his death: This disease is very
infectious and dangerous for some horses, yet if it be taken in any time it is
easy to be helped: the cure thereof is in

A most approved medicine to cure the Farcion.
TAke of Aqua-vitae two spoonfuls, of the juice of herb of grace as much,
Markham.
mingle them together, then take of plegants or Bals of Flax or Toe and steep
them therein, and stop them hard into the Horses ears, then take a needle and
a thread, and stitch the tips of his two ears together, by means whereof he
cannot shake out the medicine, and use him thus but three several mornings,
and it will kill any Farcion whatsoever, for it has bin often approved.


SLit every hard kernel with a sharp knife, and fill the hole with an
ointment made of old Lard, Soap, and gray Salt, for that will eat out the
coare, and cause it to rot, and so fall out of the one accord.

Of the Canker, called of the Italian Il Canero.
A Canker is a filthy creeping ulcer, fretting and gnawing the flesh in great
breadth. In the beginning it is knotty, much like a Farcine, Blundevile
and spreads it self into diverse places, and being exulcerated, gathers
together

Of the Fistula called of the Italians Fistula.
A Fistula is a deep hollow crooking ulcer, and for the most part springes of
malign humors, ingendered in some wound, sore, or canker, not thoroughly
healed. It is easy to know by the description before. The cure according to
Martin is thus. First, search the depth of it with a quill, or with some other
instrument of lead, that may be bowed of flax dipped in this ointment. Take of
honey a quarterne, and of Verdigrease one ounce beaten into powder. Boil them
together, until it look read, stirring it continually, least it run over,
and being luke warm, dress the taint wherewith, and bolster the taint with a
bolster of flax. And if it be in such a place, as the taint cannot conveniently
be kept in with a band, then fasten on each side of the hole, two ends of
Shoomakers thread right over the bolster to keep in the taint, which ends may
hang there as two laces, to tie and untie at your pleasure, renewing the taint
every day once until the sore leave mattering. And then make the taint every
day lesser and lesser, until it be whole. And close it up in the end, by
sprinckling thereon a little slect lime. But if the Fistula be in such a place
as a man can neither cut right against the bottom, or nigh the same: then
there is no remedy,

Of an Aubury.
THis is a great spungy Wart full of blood, called of the Italians, Moro, or
Selfo, which may grow in any place of the body, and it has a root like a Cocks
stone. The cure according to Martin is thus. Tie it with a thread, so hard as
you can pull it, the thread will eat by little and little in such sort, as
within seven or eight days, it will fall away by it self. And if it be so
flat as you can bind nothing about it, then take it away with a sharp hot
Russius says, that if it grow in a place full of sinnewes, so as it cannot be
conveniently cut away with a hot iron, then it is good to eat out the core with
the powder of Resalgar, and then to stop the hole with flax dipped in the white
of an Egg for a day or two, and lastly, to dry it up with the powder of
vnslect lime and honey, as before is taught.

Of Wounds.
VVOunds comes by means of some stripe or prick, and they are properly
called wounds, when some whole part is cut or broken. For a wound according

Then having found the depth, stop the hole close with a clout, until your
salve be ready: Then take of Turpentine of Mel Rosatum, of Oil of Roses, of
each a quarterne, and a little unwrought Wax, and melt them together, and if
it be a cut, make a handsome roll of clean picked Towe, so long and so big as
may fill the bottom of the wound, which for the most part is not so wide as
the mouth of the wound: then make another role greater than that to fill up the
rest of the wound, even to the hard mouth, and let both these rolls be
anointed with the ointment aforesaid Lukewarm. But if the hurt be like a hole
that the taint may be continually kept in by one means or other, as by binding
or staying the seine with the ends of shoomakers thread as is aforesaid. And if
the hole be deep, and in such place as you may not cut it, then make your taint
of a sponge, and so long as it may reach to the bottom, and the taint being
made somewhat full, with continual turning and wrying of it, you shall easily
get it down, and then dress the wound with this twice a day, clensing the
wound every time with a little white wine lukewarm. For this sponge, anointed
with the ointment aforesaid, will both draw and suck up all the filthy matter,
and make it so fair within as is possible: and as it begins to heal, so
make your taint every day lesser and lesser, until it be ready to close up,
and never leave tainting it, so long as it will

Of wounds in the fleshy parts.
Use the same ointment and manner of proceeding as before. And if the wound be
large then to keep in the taint or roles, you shall be fain to put two or 3.
shoomakers ends on each side of the sore, leaving them so long as you may tie
them together, and loosen them when you will like laces.

Of old Ulcers or wounds.


Of an hurt with an arrow.
IF the horse be hurt with an arrow, taint the hole with hogs grease and
Turpentine molten together, renewing it every day once until it be whole.

Of pulling out shiuers or thorns.
Russius says, that the roots of reed being stamped and mingled with honey will
draw out any thorn, or shiuer: and so will snailes, as he says, being stamped
and wrought with fresh butter, and if the place be swollen, he says it is good
to mollify it with Hog's Grease and honey, which will assuage any new swelling,
that comes by stripe or otherwise.

Of bruisings or swellings.


Of sinnewes cut, pricked, or bruised.
Blu^^evile
TAke of Tar, and Bean-flower, and a little oil of Roses, and lay it hot unto
the place. And if this do no good, then take Worms and sallet-oile fried
together, or else the ointment of worms, which you shall have at the
Apothecaries, and one of these will knit ir again, if it be not clean asunder.

How to cure a wound made with harquebush-shot.
MArtin says. First seek with an instrument whether the pellet remain within
or not, and if it do, you must get it out with an instrument meet for the
purpose. Then to kill the fire. Take a little vernish, and thrust it into the
wound with a feather, anointing it well within with the feather, and after
that, stop the mouth fair and softly with a little soft flax, to keep the
wind out, and on the outside, charge all the swelling with this charge: take of
bole Armony a quarterne, of Lineseede beaten into fine powder half a pound, of
bean flower as much, and three or 4. broken eggs, shells and all, and of
Turpentine a quarterne, and a quart of vinegar, and mingle them well together
over the fire, and being somewhat warm, charge all the sore place with part
thereof, and immediately clap a cloth, or a piece of leather upon it, to keep
the wound from the cold air, continuing

Of burning with Lime, or any other fiery thing.
MArtin says. First wash away the Lime, if there be any, with warm water.
Then kill the fire with oil and Water beaten together, dressing him so every
day until it be all raw, and then anoint it with hogs grease, and strew
thereupon the powder of slecked lime, dressing him so every day once until it
be whole.

Of the biting of a mad Dog.
IF a Horse be bitten with a mad dog, the venom of his teeth will not only
pain him extremely, Ebulus, called of some Danewort, of each half a pound,
and xl. walnuts. Stamp all these things together, and lay thereof unto the
sore, and this will suck out the venom, and heal the wound. It is good also
to give the Horse Treacle, and Wine to drink: yea, and some would have the
sore place to be fiered with a hot iron.

Of hurts by tuskes of a Boar.
IF a horse be hurt with the tuske of a Boar, lay Vitriol, and Coporas
thereunto, and the

To heal the biting or stinging of Serpents.
LAurentius Russius says. Take a good quantity of the herb called Sanicula,
stamp it, and distemper it with the milk of a Cow, that is all of one color,
and give him that to drink, and that will heal him.

Another medicine for the same purpose.
MAke a plaster of Onions, honey and salt, stamped and mingled together, and lay
that to the sore place, and give the horse wine, and treacle to drink. Absirtus
would have you to give him white Pepper, Rue, and Time, to drink with wine.

Of drinking of horseleaches.
Absirtus, is to pour oil into the Horses mouth which will make them to fall
away and kill them.

Of swallowing down hens dung.
IF a horse swallow down hens dung in his hay, it will fret his guts, and make
him to void filthy matter at the fundament. For remedy whereof, Absirtus would
have you to give him drink made of smallage seed, wine, and honey, and to
walk him thoroughly upon it,

Of Lice, and how to kill them
THey be like Geese Lice, but somewhat bigger, they will breed most about the
ears, neck, and tail, and over all the body. They come of poverty, Blundevile
and the horse will be always rubbing, and scratching, and will eat his
meat, and not prosper withal, and with rubbing he will break all his mane,
and tail. The cure according to Martin is thus. Anoint the place with soap
and quicksiluer, well mingled together, and to a pound of soap, put half an
ounce of quicksiluer.


THere be Horses that will be Lousie, and it comes of poverty, cold, and il
keeping, Markham.
and it is oftnest amongst young horses, and most men take little heed unto it,
and yet they will dye thereon, the cure is, to wash them three mornings
together in Stau-aker and warm water.

How to save horses from the stinging of flies in Summer.
Anoint the Horses coat with oil, and Bay berries, mingled together, or tie
to the

Of bones being broken out of joint.
FEw or none of our Ferrers do intermeddle with any such griefs, but do refer
it over to the bone setter, whose practiced hand, I must needs confess, to be
needful in such business. Notwithstanding, for that it belongs to the
Ferrers art, and also for that the old writers do make some mention thereof, I
thought good not to pass it over altogether Absirtus, and Hierocles, is in
this sort.

First, put the bone again into his right place. That done, wrap it about with
unwashed wool, binding it fast to the leg with a small linen roller, soked
before in Oil and vinegar mingled together And let that roller be laid on, as
even as is possible, and upon that lay again more wool, dipped in oil and
vinegar, and then splent it with three splents, binding them fast at both ends
with a thong, and let the horses leg be kept straight, and right out, the space
of forty days and let not the bonds be loosened above 3. times in twenty
days, unless it shrink, and so require to be new dressed, and bound again. But
fail not every day once, to pour on the sore place, through the splentes,
oil and vinegar, mingled together. And at the forty days end, if you perceive
that the broken place be sowdered together again with some hard knob or
gristle: then loosen the bonds, so as the horse may go

Of broken bones.
I Have not for mine own part had any great experience in broken bones of a
Horse, because it chances seldom, Markham.
and when it does chance, what through the horses brutish unruliness, and the
immoderate manner of the act, it is almost held incurable, yet for the little
experience I have, I have not found for this purpose any thing so sovereign or
absolut good, as oil of Mandrag, which applied, conglutinateth and binds
together any thing especially bones being either shiuered, or broken.

Of bones out of joint.
IF a Horses knee or shoulder be clean out of joint, and no bone broken, Martin
says the readiest way is, Blundevile
to bind all the four legs together, in such sort as has bin taught before in
the chap. of incording, and then to hoise the Horse somewhat from the ground,
with his heels upward, so shall the weight and peise of his body, cause the
joint to shoot in again into the right place: for by this means he pleasured
not long since a friend and neighbor of his, who going with his cart from S.
Albo^s* toward his own house, his Thiller fell and put his shoulder clean
out of joint,

Certain receipts of plasters, very good for broken bones, taken out of the
old Authors, writing of horse-leach-craft.
TAke of Spuma argenti, of vinegar, of each one pound, of Sallet-oyle half a
pound, of Amoniacum, and Turpentine, of each 3. three ounces, of wax, of
Rozen, of each two ounces of Bitumen, of Pitch, of Vardigrease, of each half a
pound. Boil the vinegar, oil and Spuma argenti together, until it wax thick,
then put thereunto the Pitch, which being molten, take the pot from the fire,
and put in the Bitumen, without stirring it at al, and that being also molten,
then put in all the rest, and set the pot again to the fire, and let them boil
al together, until they be all united in one. That done, strain it, and make
it in a plaster form, and this is called Hierocles plaster.

Another receipt for broken bones.
TAke of liquid Pitch one pound, of wax two ounces, of the purest and finest
part of Frankincense one ounce, of Amoniacum four ounces, of dry Roses, and of
Galbanum, of each one ounce, of vinegar two pints. Boil first the vinegar and
Pitch together, then put in the Amoniacum, dissolved first in vinegar, and
after that all the rest of the aforesaid drugs and after they have boiled
together, and be united in one, strain it, and make it plaisterwise, and this
is called Emplastrum flauum, that is to say, the yellow plaster.

An ointment for broken bones.
TAke of old Sallet-oile a quart, and put thereunto of hog's grease of Spuma
nitri, of each one pound, and let them boil together, until it begin to buble
above, and let this ointment be very warm when you use it. Hitherto of all the
diseases belonging to a horse. Now

In how many veins a horse may be let blood, and to what end.
AS touching the order, time of the year, Moon, and day, and other
circumstances belonging to letting of blood, we have sufficiently spoken
already in the keepers office, Vegetius opinion. But first I will rehearse unto
you once again, in how many veins a horse may be let blood, and the rather for
that I follow Vegetius. A Horse then may be let blood in the two Temple
veins. Item, in the two eye veins, which are easy to find in the face of
the horse, somewhat beneath the eyes.

Item, in the two pallat veins of the mouth. In the two neck veins. Item in
the two plat veins which be in the breast. Item, in the two forethigh veins.
Item, in the four shakell veins before. Item, in the two toe vains before.
Item in the two side veins, which may be otherwise called flancke veins.
Item in the tail vein. Item in the two haunch Vegetius says, that if a Horse
be pained with any grief in his head, as with ach, heaviness, frenzy, falling
evil, or such like, then it is good to let him blood in the temple veins with
a fleame. If his eyes be waterish, blodshotten, or grieved with pin, web, or
hawe, then it is good to strike the eye vein with a fleame. If he have any
heaviness or weariness of body, or be diseased in the throat with the
strangullion, quinzy, or swelling of the artires, either within or without,
then it is good to let him blood in the mouth, in the palate veins with a
Cornet. If he be vexed with an Ague, or with any other disease, universally
hurting his body,

And if he be foiled on his forefeet by foundering or otherwise, then let him
blood in the toe veins, making way first with your drawer, or cornet in the
hoof to come to the vein. If he be diseased in the kidneys, reins, back,
or belly, then let him blood in the flancke veins, and in his tail, if he
has any grief in his hips, or houghs, then let him blood in the hip or hough
veins, and if his hinder legs, joints, or feet, be grieved, then let him

The order of taking up veins, and wherefore it is good.
^^^ndevile
THe order observed by Martin is in this sort. First, if the Horse be very
cursed and shrewd, then cast him upon a dunghill, or some straw, then having
found the vein that you would take up, mark well that part of the skin
which covers the vein, and pull that somewhat a side from the vein with
your left thumb, to the intent you may slit it with a Rasor, without touching
the vein. And cut not no deeper then only through the skin, and that

Then with a cornet uncover the vain and make it up, and heing bare, thrust
the cornet underneath it, and raise it up, so as you may put a shoomakers
thread underneath, somewhat higher then the cornet, to knit the vain when time
is. And if your cornet had a hole in the small end to put in the thread, it
should be the easlier done.

Then the cornet standing so still, slit the vain longst wise that it may
bleed, and having bled somewhat from above, then knit it up with a sure knot,
somewhat above the slit, suffering it to bleed only from beneath, and having
bled sufficiently, then knit up the vein also beneath the slit with a sure
knot, and fill the hole of the vein with Salt, and then heal

Of purging with Purgation, or Glister.
PVrgations is defined by the Physicians, to be the emptiyng or voiding
Cacochimia, which when it will not be corrected or helped with good diet,
alteration, nor by the benefit of nature and kindly heat, then it must needs
be taken away by purgation, vomit or Glister. But forasmuch as Horses are not
wont to be purged by Vomit, as men be, I will speak here only of Glisters
and purgations. And first because a Horse is grieved with many diseases in his
guts, and that nothing can purge the guts so well as a Glyster, and especially
the thick guts, I wish that our Ferrers would learn to know the diversity of
Glysters to what end they*

But now you shall understand that Glisters be made of four things, that is to
say, of decoctions, of Drugges, of Oils, or such like unctious matters, as
butter and soft grease, and fourthly of diverse kinds of salt to provoke the
virtue expulsive. A decoction is as much to say as the broth of certain
herbs or simples boiled together in water till the third part be consumed.

And sometime instead of such decoction, it shall be needful parhaps to use some
fat broth as the broth of Beef or of Sheeps heads, or Milk, or Whay, or some
other such like liquor, and that perhaps mingled with Honey, or Sugar, according
as the disease shall require, the Glister to be either Lenitiue, that is to
say, easing pain: or Glutinatiue, that is, joining together: or else
Abstersive, that is to say, cleansing or wiping away filthy matter, of which
decoction of broth being strained, you shall need to take three pintes or a
quart at the least. And then into that you may put such drugges as shall be
needful to the weight of three or four ounces, according as the simples
shall be more or less violent.

Of Purgations.
PVrgations for men may be made in diverse sorts and forms, but horses are wont
to Blundevile
wine or some other liquor. But the simples whereof such pills or powders be
made, would be chosen with judgment and aptly applied, so as you may purge
away the hurtful humors, and not the good. Learn first therefore to know
with what humor or humors the horse is grieved, be it Choler, Phlegm, or
Melancholy, and in what part of the body such humors do abound: then what
simples are best to purge such humors, and with what property, quality, and
temperament they be endued. For some be violent and next cousins to poison, as
Scamony, or Coloquintida. Some again are gentle, and rather meat than
medicines, as Manna, Cassia, Whay, Prunes, and such like. And some again be
neither too violent, nor too gentle, but in a mean, as Rhewbarbe, Agaricke,
Seen, Aloes. The old men did use

Notwithstanding I would not wish you to be rash in purging a horse after the
old men's example. For as their simples many times be very violent, so the
quantities thereof by them prescribed are very much, and dangerous for any
horse to take in these days, in the which neither man nor beast, as it
seems, is of such force or strength as they were in times past. And therefore
whenever you would purge him with such like kinds of Purgations as Martin
uses, whereof you have example before in diverse places, and whenever

Again, weak, delicate, and tender Horses, may not be purged in such sort,
as those that be of a strong sturdie nature. And therefore in such cases the
quality and quantity of as he would in Summer. And therefore the time and
season of the year is also to be observed: yea the day and time of the day.
For the more temperate the day is the better, not in an extreme hot day, for
making the horse to faint, nor yet when the wind blows in the cold North,
for that will stop and hinder the working of the medicine, but rather in a
temperate moist day, when the wind is in the South, if it may be, for that
will further and help the working of the medicine, and make the body loose and
soluble.

Again for a horse, whether you purge him with pills or drink, it is best for
him (as Martin says) to take them in the morning, after that he has fasted
from meat and drink all the night before. And having received his medicine, let
him be walked up and down, one hour at the least, and then set him up, and
suffered to stand on the bit two or three hours

Of Cauterization, or giving the fire, as well actual as potentiall.
FOrasmuch as the fire is judged of all the old writers to be the chiefest
remedy, and as it were the last refuge in all diseases almost whereunto a horse
is subject, I thought

Auicen says, that an actual cauterie moderately used, is a noble remedy to
stop coruption Vegetius also writing of horse-leach-craft, praises the
actual cavterie very much, speaking in this sort. The actual cautery says
he, binds together parts losened, it does attinuate parts blown and puffed
up, it dries up superfluous moisture, it looseneth, and divides evil matter
gathered together into knots, it asswageth old griefs, it rectifieth those
parts of the body that are corupted by any manner of way, reducing them to
their pristine estate, and suffers no superfluity to grow or increase, for
the skin being opened with a hot iron, all kind of corruption by virtue of
the fire is first digested and ripened, and then dissolved, so as the matter
Vegetius and the other old writers would have them to be made of copper,
praising that mettell to be far better to burn with, that iron. The
chirurgians for man's body do praise gold and silver, but as for the fashion of
the yrons, it is to be referred to the kind of sore place and grieved,
wherewith you have to deal, according to the diversity whereof, the
instruments are to be made of diverse fashions, as some with searing yrons with
sharp edges, and some with blunt and broad edges, some like right, and button
iron, like in form to those that Martin uses, referring all the rest to your
own judgment, and specially since you have bin fully instructed before of what
sort they should be made meet to serve your turn in any disease: Now, as
touching the use of the instruments, two things are specially to be considered,
that is the heating of the iron, and the bearing of the hand. For the back of
the iron may not be red hot, but only the edge, for fear of yielding too much
heat. And therefore though it be made red hot at the first, yet it shall be
good before you occupy it, to cool the back of the instrument in water, and as
touching the bearing of the hand more euenly and lightly it is done the
better, and that according as the finenesse and thinness of the skin shall
require, which is to be judged by

But the fine skin will look yellow with lesser burning, then the thick
skin. For the thick skin with his long hair does choke the fire, and
therefore requires a more heavy hand: yea, and more often heating of the
instrument than the thin skin does, and be sure to draw always with the
hair, and not against the hair, in what form and in what manner of lines
has been taught you before: for those must be made either long, short, deep,
shallow, right-crooked, or ouer-thwart, according as the disease does require:
Vegetius precepts, not to fire any sinnewie place, nor bone that is broken or
out of iointe, for fear of weakening the whole member, nor to bear so heavy or
uneven hand, as you should thereby deforme or misfashion any part of the horse,
nor be too hasty in giving the fire, but to attempt first all other convenient
remedies, and when nothing else will help to make the fire your last refuge,
and yet not so much to neglect it and abhor it, like the ignorant sort, as
you will not use it when need requires, for lack whereof many horses go lame,
and uncured of diverse diseases. P^^ctise your selus therefore in giving the
fire at needful times with judgment and discretion, so shall you do it to the
horses benefit, and to your own

Of Cauteries potentiall.
CAuteries potentiall, as Johannes Vigo says, are medicines Corosiue,
Putrifactiue and Causticke. This word Corosiue, is derived of the Latin word
Corrodo, which is as much to say, as to gnaw and frette, and of such
Corosiues, some be simple and some compounde. The simple as Vigo says, be such
as these be, Roche Alum, as well burnte as not burnt, sponge of the Sea
somewhat burnt, Lime, read coral powder of Mercury. Compound corosiues be
these, Vnguentum Apostolorum, Vnguentum aegyptiacum, Vnguentum Ceraceum.
Medicines putrifactiue, called of Septica according to Auicen, be those that
have strength to corrupt the complexion of the member, and to induce any
scarre like dead flesh, causing great pain: yea and Fevers, and therefore ought
not to be ministered, but to strong bodies and in strong diseases, as in
Carbuncles, Cankers, Ulcers, and such like, and they be these, Arsenicke
sublimat resalgar, and other medicines compound therewith. Siluius also adds
thereunto Sandaraca, Chrysocolla, and Aconitum, but he does not agree with
Auicen in the description of the putrifactiue medicines: For he says, that
they have little pain or none, neither be they so hot and dry as those that
are called Escharotica: that is to say crustiue: which be hot in the forth
degree and do breed a crust and scarre, and cause great pain, as vnslect lime,
and the burned dregs of wine: wherefore it seems that Auicens description
belongs rather to the crustiue than to the putrifactiue medicines.

Hogges-greace. Medicines causticke: that is to say burning, are those whose
operation are most strong and inclines to the natute of the fire, and yet more
easily alayed as Vigo writes, than the medicines putrifactiue, and therefore
may be more safely used. They be made as he says of strong lie, called
Capitellum, or Magistra, of Vitriolae Romanae, Sal Nitri, Aqua fortis, of this
sort be al those which Vigo calls the blistering medicines, as Apium,
Cantharides, Ciclamine, Onions, strong Garlic, Melanacardinum, the stones or
grains of Vitis alba, otherwise called Brione. Moreover, Vigo makes every one
of these cauteries potentiall to excel one another, as it were by certain
degrees, saying, that corosiues be weaker then putrifactiues, and
putrifactiues be weaker then causticke, and therefore corosiues

And therefore I leave to trouble you any further, wishing you that are
desirous to know any more of those matters, to read Taugantius writing De
piroticis. And Siluius de medicamentorum compositione. And John Vigo writing of
surgerie, Englished but few years since. But the old writers so far as I can
judge by the words of Absirtus, and others, that write or horseleachcraft, do
apply this word causticke, to such medicines as are astrictiue and binding,
called of Martin and other Ferrers in these days, binding charges, as may well
appear by the composition and use here following, recited by Vegetius in this
sort.

The receipt of a Causticke used by Chiron, to dry up the superfluous moisture
and to bind parts loosened, and to strengthen parts weakened.
TAke of Bitumen Iudaicum two pound, of Bitumen Apolonij two pound, of the
purest part of Frankencense six ounce, of Bdellium Arabicum two ounces, of
Deares sewet 2. pound, of Populeum two ounces, of Galbanum two ounces, of the
drops of Storax two ounces, of common wax two pound, of Resin Gabial one
pound, of Viscus Italicus three ounces, of Apoxima two ounces, of the juice of
hipsop two ounces, of the drops of Armoniake

Another Causticke used by Pelagonius, to dry up swellings, Bladders, Windgals,
and splents in the Legs and joints.
TAke virgin wax one pound, of Rozen two pound and a half, of Galbanum three
ounces, of Asphaltum Iudaicum two pound, of Mirrhe secondary two pound, of
Bitumen one pound, of Armoniacke six ounces, of Costus six ounces. Boil all
these things together in an earthen pot, saving the Asphaltum, Armoninack and
Costum: which being first ground Anodina, easing pain and grief. Martin
calls them Linoges, which are made of Lineseede, Cammomile, soft Narcotica,
that is to say, astonying or bringing to sleep, as those that are made of
Opium, Mandrago^a, Popie, and such like cold and gross things. And some are
called Sarcotica, that is, breeding flesh, as Barley flower and Frankencense.
And many other kinds of emplaisters, ointments, waters and salues, which would
occupy a book of no small volume, to be written hereafter by some other
perhaps, if not by my self. And in the mean time, let this that I have
already written suffice.

Of the Anticor.
AN Anticor, comes of superfluity, of evil blood or spirit in the artires,
and also of inflammation in the liver, which is ingendered by means of too
choice keeping, Markham.
and overmuch rest, which choaketh the vital power, and occasion unnatural
swellings in the breast, which if they ascend upward and come into the neck,
they are instantly death: the cure thereof is in this sort. Let him bleed so as
he may bleed abundantly, then with a sharp knife in diverse places cut the
swelling: which done, set a cupping-glasse thereon, and cup it till the glass
filled with foul water fall away it self: then give the Horse to

Of the Cords.
THe Cords is a disease that makes a horse stumble, and many times fall, and
they apeare in a horses forelegs, this is the cure thereof. Take a sharp
knife, and cut a slitte even at the tip of his nose, just with the point of the
grisle, open the slit being made, and you shall perceive a white string, take
it up with a Bores tooth, or some crooked bodkin, and cut it insunder, then
stitch up the slit and anoint it with Butter, and the horse

Of the Millets.
THe Millets is a grief that appears in the Fetlockes behind, and causes
the hair to shed three or four inches long, and a quarter of an inch in
breadth, like as it were bare and ill to cure, but thus is the cure: First wash
it well with strong lie, and rub it till it bleed, then bind unto it Honey,
vnslect lime, and Deares sewet, boiled and mingled together, this do for the
space of a week, and it shall be whole.


A Serew is a foul soraunce, it is like a Splent, but it is a little longer,
and is most commonly on the outside of the fore leg, as the splint is on the
inside, the cure is thus. Take two spoonefuls of strong Wine-Vinegar, and one
spoonefull of good Sallet-oyle, mingle them together, and every morning bestow
one hour in rubbing the sorance with it altogether downward til it be gone,
which will not be long in going.

The medicines arising out of Horses.
Pliny.
because in their country there was none of them usually bredde or gotten: yet
notwithstanding the same we ought to think that all medicines or any other
things, which do proceed from them, are more strong in operation, and have in
them greater force and power then any common horses have, as it falls out in
all sorts of other beasts.

The blood of a horse (as Pliny affirms) does gnaw into blood of horses for
diverse diseases which are incident unto them, both by anointing or rubbing the
outward parts, as also within their bodies.

Furthermore if one do cut the veins of the pallet of a horses mouth, and let
it run down into his belly, Theomnestus
it will presently destroy and consume the maw or belly-worms, which are within
him. When a horse is sick of the pestilence, they draw blood out of the veins
in his spurring place, and mingling the same upon a stone with salt, make him
to lick it up. The blood of a horse is also mingled with other medicines, and
being anointed upon the arms and shoulders of men or beasts, Veg^tius
which are broken or out of joint, does very much help them. But a horse which
is weary or tired, you must cure after this manner. First, draw some blood
out of his matrixe or womb, and mingle it with Oil and Wine, and

If the sinnewes of horses do wax stiff or shrink in together, it is very
necessary that the sick parts should be anointed with the hot blood which
does proceed from him, Pliny.
for horses also which are fed in the field use their flesh and dung, against
the biting and stinging of Serpents.

We do also find that the flesh of horses being well boiled is very medicinable
for diverse diseases. Furnerius.
Moreover it is very usual and common with the women of Occitania to take the
fat or grease of horses to anoint their heads to make the hair of their
heads multiply and increase, and certain later Physicians do mingle the marrow
of a horse with other

The marrow of a horse is also very good to loosen the sinnewes which are knit
and fastened together, but first let it be boiled in wine, and afterward made
cold, and then anointed warmly either by the fire or Sun. If a horse do labor
in what kind of impostume which they vulgarly call the worm, either any where
as well as in the nose, they do open the skin with a searirg iron, and do
sprinkle Verdigreace within the horses mouth being brent, there being added
thereunto sometimes the seed of Hen-bane.

The teeth of a male horse not gelded or by any labor made feeble, being put
under the head or over the head of him that is troubled or starteth in his
dream, does withstand and resist all unquietness which in the time of his rest
might happen unto him. Albertus
Pliny also does

The teeth also of a horse is very profitable for the curing of the Chilblanes
which are rotten and full of corruption when they are swollen full ripe.
Marcellus.
Marcellus says that the toothe of a horse being beaten and crushed into very
small powder, and being sprinkled upon a man's genitall does much profit, and
very effectually help him: but the teeth which were first ingendered in a
horse have this virtue in them, that if they should touch the teethe of man or
woman who are molested and grieved with the toothache, they shall presently
find a final end of their pain: if in the like manner a child do kiss the
nose or snowt of a horse he shall never feel pain in his teeth, neither at any
time shall the child be bitten by Sextus.


The teeth which do first of all fall from horses, being bound or fastened upon
children in their infancy, do very easily procure the breeding of the teeth,
but with more speed and more effectually if they have never touched the ground,
wherefore the poet does very well apply these verses, saying; Collo igitur molli
dentes nectentur equini
Qui prima fuerint pullo crescente caduci.
It is also said that if the hair of a horse be fastened unto the house of a
man's enemy, it will be a means that neither little flies or small gnats shall
fly by his dwelling place or abode. The tongue of a horse being never
accustomed unto wine, Pliny
is a most present and expedient medicide Caecilius Bion reports unto us,
that he learned it of the Barbarians.) But Marcellus says, that the horse
tongue ought to be dried and beaten into small powder, and put into any drink
except Wine only, and forthwith it will show the commodity which rises
thereuppon, by easing either man or Woman, of the pain of the spleen or milt:
diverse also do think that a horses tongue used after this manner, is a good
means or preservative against the biting of Serpents or any other venomous
creatures.

But for the curing of any sores or griefs in the inward parts, the genitall
of a horse is most of all commended: for as Pliny supposes, this genitall of
a horse is very medicinable for the loosing of the belly, as also the blood,
marrow, or liver of a Goat, but these things do rather dry up and close the
belly (as before we have taught) concerning the Goat. Plinius


In the heart of Horses there is found a bone, most like unto a dogs tooth, it
is said that this does drive away all grief or sorrow from a man's heart, and
that a tooth being pulled Plinius
does drive away impostumes and little bunches which rise in the flesh in what
part of the body soever they be; and the dust of the hoof of an ass anointed
with oil, water, and whot urine, does utterly expel all wens and kernels
which do rise in the neck, arme-holes, or any other part of the body, of either
man or woman.

The genitall of a gelded horse dried in an oven, beaten to powder, and given
twice or thrice in a little whot broth to drink unto the party grieved, is by
Pliny accounted an excellent and approved remedy for the secunds of a woman.
The foame of a horse, or the dust of a horse hoof dried, is very good to drive
away shamefastnes, being anointed with Marcellus.
The scrapings of the horses hoofes being put in wine and poured into the
horses nostrils, do greatly provoke his vrin. The ashes also of a horses
hoof, being mingled with wine and water does greatly ease and help the
disease called the collicke or stone: as also by a perfume which may be made by
the hoofes of Horses being dried, a child which is still borne is cast out.

The milk of Mares is of such an excellent virtue, that it does quite expel
the poison of the Sea-hare, and all other poison whatsoever, drink also mingled
with Mares milk, does make the body loose and laxatiue. It is also counted an
excellent remedy against the falling sickness, to drink the stones of a Boar
out of Mares milk or water. Hippocrates
If there be any filth or matter lying in the matrice of a woman, lether take
Mares milk boiled and througly

The thinnest or latest part of the milk of a Mare does very easily, gently,
and without any danger purge the belly. Mares milk being daily anointed with
a little honey does without any pain or punishe^nt take away the wounds of the
eyes being new made. Cheese made of Mares milk does repress and take away all
wringings or aches in the belly whatsoever. Rasis
being 3. or 4. times taken in drink does quiet expel and drive away the
cough. But Marcellus does affirm that whosoever is troubled with the cough, or
consumption of the lunges, and does drink the foame of a Horse by it self
alone without any drink shall find present help and remedy: but as Sextus
says the horse will presently die after it. The same also being mingled with
hot water and given to one who is troubled with the same diseases, Marcellus
being in manner past al cure, does presently procure health, Rasis
but the death of the horse does instantly ensue. The sweat of a horse being
mingled with wine and so drunk, does cause a woman which is very big and in
great labor, to cast a still child. Albertus.


The sweat of any beast, (but as Albertus says) only of a horse, does breed
wind in a man or woman's face being put thereupon, Rasis
and besides that, does bring the squince or squincy, as also a filthy stinking
sweat. If swords, knives, or the points of spears when they are red fire hot,
be anointed with the sweat of a horse, they will be so venomous and full of
poison, Rasius
they will never cease from bleeding as long as life does last If a horse be
wounded with an arrow, and have the sweat of another horse, and bread which
has been brent, being mingled in man's Urine, given him to drink, and
afterward some of the same, being mingled with horse-grease put into the
wound, it will in short time procure him ease and help. There are some which
will assure us, that if a man be troubled with the belly worms, or have a
Serpent crept into his belly, if he take but the sweat of a horse being
mingled with his urine and drink it, it will presently cause the worms or the
Serpent to issue forth.

Dioscorides. Pliny
The dung of a horse or Ass which is fed with grass, being dried and
afterward dipped in wine, and so drunk, is a very good remedy against the
bitings and blows of Scorpions. The same medicines they do also use, being
mingled with the genital of a Hare in Marcellus


The dung of Horses or Asses being new made or warm, and so clapped and put
to a green wound does very easily and speedily stanche the bleeding. If the
vain of a horse be cut and the blood do issue out in too great abundance,
apply the dung of the same horse unto the place where the vein is cut, Russius.
and the bleeding will presently cease, wherefore the Pell^ganius.
Sine fimus manni cum testis vritur oui
Et reprimit fluidos miro medicamine cursus. Albertus.

The same does also very well drive away the corruption in men's body which does
cause the blood to stink if it be well and justly applied unto the corrupt
place: The same also being mingled with oil of Roses, Aes^ulapius.
and new made, and so applied unto the ears, does not only drive away the
pain, but also does very much help for hearing; There is another remedy also
for the hearing, which is this, to take the dunge of a horse which is new made,
and to make it hot in a furnace, Marcellus.
and then to pour it on the middle of the head against the V^^la, Pliny


The dung of a young Ass when he is first foaled, given in Wine to the
quantity or magnitude of a Bean, is a present remedy for either man or Woman
who is troubled with the Iaundice or the ouer-flowing of the gall: and the same
property has the dung of a young horse or Colte when he is new foaled. But
the dunge of an old horse, being boiled in fair water, Sextus
and afterward strained and so given to the party to drink, who is troubled
with Water in his belly or stomach, does presently make vent for the same.

There is also an excellent remedy against the Collicke and stone, which is
this, to take a Empiric^s.
and mingle very well it with half a pint of Wine, all which I do guess
will amount unto the weight of eighteen ounces, and then boil them altogether
until half of them be boiled or consumed away, and then drink the same by
little and little until it be all drunk up, but it will be much better for
the party that is troubled to drink it up altogether if he be able.

There is moreover a very good and easy way by horse-dung to cure the Ague or
quarterne fever, which is thus, to burn the aforesaid dung, Marcellus
and to mingle the very dust it self thereof in old wine, and then beat it
unto small powder, and so give it unto the party who is troubled therewith, to
drink or suck without any water in it, and this will very speedily procure ease
and help. If that a woman supposes her child which is in her womb to be
dead, Pliny
let her drink the milt or spleen of a horse in some sweet water, not to the
smell, but to the taste, and she will presently cast the child. The same virtue
is in the perfume which is made of a horses hoof, as also in the dry dung of a
horse: There are some which do use this means against the falling sickness, or
the sickness called Saint John's evil, Plinyus
that is to mingle the water or urine which a horse does make with the water
which comes from the Smiths trough, Empiricus.
to make a paast of Wheat Flour and beat it and mingle it together with Butter
and Eggs in the urine of a horse which has lately drunk, and afterward to
give that paast or poultes baked even into ashes to the beast so grieved. To
provoke urine when a man's yard is stopped, there is nothing so excellent as the
dung or filthe which proceeds from the urine which a horse has made, being
mingled with wine, and then strained, and afterward poured into the nostrils
of the party so vexed. There are certain Tetters or Ring-wormes in the knees
of horses, and a little above the hooues in the bending of these parts, there
are indurate and hardened thick skins, Dioscorides
which being Galen.
the same is also a very good remedy for them which are bitten with any wild
Beast whatsoever. By the Tetter or Ring-worme which grows in a horses knees
or above the hoofes beaten and mingled with oil, and so poured in the ears,
the teeth of either man or woman which were weak and loose, will be made very
strong and fast. The aforesaid Tetter without any mingling with oil, pliny.
does also heal and cure the headache and falling sickness, in either man or
woman. The same also being drunk out of Clarret Wine or Muscadel for forty
days together, does quite expel and drive away the collicke and stone. If
that any man do get and put up the shoe of a horse being stroke from his
hoof as he trauaileth in his pace which does many times happen, Magi,
it will

OF THE HYAENA, AND THE diverse kinds thereof.
WE are now to discourse of a Beast whereof it is doubtful whether the names
or the kinds thereof be more in number, and therefore to begin with the
names, it seems to me in general, that it is, The names and other general
accidents.
the same Beast which is spoken of in holy scripture, and called Zeeb-ereb, and
Araboth. Zepham. 3. Principes vrbis Hierosolymae velut Leones rugientes,: Their
Princes are roaring Lions, and their judges are like to night-wolues which
leave not the bones til the morning, as it is vulgarly translated. In like sort
Ier. Cap, 5, calls them Zeeb-Araboath, Wolves of the wilderness, and the
Prophet Habbakuk. Cap. 1. uses the word Zeeb-ereb, Wolves of the evening. By
which it is made easy to consider and discuss what kind of Beast this Hyaena
may be deemed: for the Hyaena as I shall show you afterward, is a Greek word.
And first of al I utterly seclude al their opinions, which translate this word
Arabian wolves, for the Haebrew notes cannot admit such a version or
exposition: But seeing we read in Oppianus and Tzetzes, that there are kinds of
Wolves which are called Harpages, more hungry then the residue, Hyaenae, which
is also the name of a fish much like in nature hereunto. It is also called
Glanos, and the Phrygians, and Bythinians Ganos, and from one of these came the
Illirian or Sclauonian word San, and it seems that the Graecians have given
it a name from Swine, because of the gristles growing on the back, for an
Hyaena can have no better deriuation then from Hus or Hyn. Julius Capitolinus
calls it Belbus in Latin, in the same place where he records that there
were december Belbi sub Gordiano ten Hyaenaes in the days of Gordianus: And the
reason of this name is not improbably derived from Belba a city of Egypt.
Pincianus a learned man calls it Grabthier, because it hunteth the sepulchers
of the dead. Albertus in stead of Hyaena, calls it Iona. The Arabians call it
Kabo, and Zabo, or Ziba, and Azaro. I take it also to be the same beast which
is called Lacta, and Ana, and Zilio, because that which is reported of these is
true in the Hyaena, Albertus.
Papio or Dabuh, the third Crocuta and Leucrocuta, whereunto by conjecture we
may add a forth, called Mantychora.

THE FIGVRE OF THE FIRST HYAENA.


THis first and vulgar kind of Hyaena is bred in Affricke and Arabia, being in
quantity of body like a wolf, Hieronimus Aristotle.
but much rougher haird, for it has bristles Oppianus The several parts.
a thousand times a day, for which cause many ignorant writers have affirmed
the same of the whole body, yet can he not see one quarter so perfectly in the
day as in the night; and therefore he is called Lupus vespertinus a wolf of the
night. The skilful Lapidarists of Germany affirm that this beast has a stone
in his eyes (or rather in his head) called Hyaena or Hyaenius; but the ancients
say that the apple or puple of the eye is turned into such a stone, and that it
is endued with this admirable quality, Pliny
that if a man lay it under his tongue, he shall be able to foretell and prophecy
of things S^lmus Albertus.
he must supply that quality by removing of his whole body.

This Beast has a very great heart as all other Beasts have which are hurtful,
by reason of their fear. The genital member is like a dogs or wolves; and I
marvel upon what occasion the writers have been so possessed with opinion
that they change sexes, Aristotle Whether they change sexes yearly
and are sometime male and another female, that is to say male one year, and
female another, according to these verses; Si tamen est aliquid mir ae
nouitatis in istis
Alternare vices and quae modo foemina tergo.
Passa marem est nunc esse marem miremur Hyaenam. Ovid.

Both kinds have under their tails a double note of passage, in the male there
is a scissure like the secrets of a femal, and in the femal abunch like the
stones of the male, but nether on nor other inward, but only outward; and
except this has given cause of this opinion, I Orus writes, that there is a
fish of this name which turns sex, and peraduentute some men hearing so
much of the fish, Aelianus
might mistake it more easilye for the foure-footed-beast, and apply it
thereunto. Their procreation.
These engender not only among themselves, but also with Dogs, Lions, Tigers,
and Wolves, for the Aetheopian Lion being covered with an Hyaena bears the
Crocuta. The Thoes of whom we shall speak more afterward, are generated
betwixt this beast and a Wolf: and indeed it is not without reason that God
himself in holy scripture calls it by the name of a Vespertine Wolf, seeing
it resembles a Wolf in the quantity, color, in voracity and gluttoning in of
flesh, in subtilty to overcome dogs and men, even as a Wolf does silly sheep.
Their teeth are in both beasts like sawes, their genitals alike, The
disposition and natural properties of this beast. Pliny. Sol^nus
and both of them being

This is accounted a most subtle and crafty beast according to the allusiue
saying of Mantuan.

Est in eis Pietas Crocodili astutia Hyaenae. And the female is far more
subtle then the male, and therefore more seldom taken, for they are afraid of
their own company. It was constantly affirmed that among eleven Hyaenes, there
was found but one female, it has been believed in ancient time that there is
in this beast a magical or enchanting power, for they write, that about what
creature soever he goes round three times, it shall stand stone-still and not
be able to move out of the place: and if Dogs do but come within the compass
of their shadow and touch it, Aelianus philes.
for although the swiftness or other opportunity of the Dogs helps them to
fly away from her, yet if she can but cast her shadow upon them, she easily
obtains her prey. She can also counterfeit a man's voice, vomit, cough, and
whistle, by which means in the night time she comes to houses or foldes
where Dogs are lodged, and so making as though she vomited, or else whistling,
draws the Dogs out of doors to her and deuoureth them. Solinus. Aelianus.
Likewise her nature is, if she find a man or a Dog on sleep, she considers
whether she or he have the greater body, if she, then she falls on him, and
either with her weight, or some secret work of nature by stretching her body
upon him kills him, or makes him senseless; whereby without resistance she
eats off his hands: but if she find her body to be shorter or lesser then
his, then she takes her heels and flies away.

Aelianus reports of them, that one of these coming to a man asleep in a
sheep-coat, by laying her left hand or forefoote to his mouth made or cast him
into a dead-sleep, and afterward dug about him such a hole like a grave, as
she covered all his body over with the earth, except his throat and head,
whereupon she sat until she suffocated and stifled him: yet Philes attributes
this to her right foot. The like is attributed to a Sea-calfe, and the fish
Hyaena, and therefore the old Magicians by reason of this Solinus reports of
them, that by secret accustoming themselves to houses or yardes, where
Carpenters or such mechanics work, they learn to call their names, and so
will come being an hungered and call one of them with a distinct and articulate
voice, whereby he causes the man many times to forsake his work and go to
see the person calling him; but the subtle Hyaena goes farther off, and so by
calling allureth him from help of company, Textor.
and afterward when she sees time deuoureth him, and for this cause her proper
Epithet is Aemula vocis, Voice counter-fayter.

Aelinaus Their enmity with other beasts. Orus
There is also great hatred betwixt a Pardall and this beast, for if after death
their skins be mingled together the hair falls off from the Pardals skin,
but not from the Hyaenaes; and therefore when the Egyptians describe a superior
man overcome by an inferior, they picture these two skins, and so greatly
are they afraid of Hyaenaes, that Aelianus says, that the Ibis bird which
lives upon serpents is killed by the gall of an Hyaena.

He that will go safely through the mountains or places of this beasts aboade,
Rasis and Albertus say, The natural use of their skins. Palladius Rasis
Plutarch
that he must carry in his hand a root of Coloquintida. It is also believed
that if a man compass his ground about with the skin of a Crocodile, an
Hyaena, or a sea-Calfe, and hang it up in the gates or gaps thereof, the
fruits enclosed shall not be molested with hail or lightning. And for this
cause Mariners were wont to cover the tops of their sails with the skins of
this beast or of the Sea-calfe; and Horus says, that a man clothed with this
skin may pass without fear or danger through the midst

And the true cause thereof is assigned by the Philosophers to be the
bitterness of it, for the influence of the heavens has no destructive
operation upon bitter but upon sweet things, Coelius
and there is nothing sweet in a fig tree but only the fruit. Also
Collumella writes, that if a man put three bushels of seed grain into the
skin of this beast and afterward sow the same, without all controversy it
will arise with much increase. Gentian worn in an Hyaenaes skin seven days in
steed of an amulet is very sovereign Pliny writes, that the hairs laid to
women's lips, makes them amorous. And so great is the vanity of the Magicians,
that they are not ashamed to affirm that by the tooth of the upper iaw of this
beast on the right side bound unto a man's arm or any part thereof, he shall
never be molested with dart or arrow.

Likewise they say, that by the genital of this beast, and the article of the
backe-bone which is called Atlantios, with the skin cleaving unto it
preserved in a house, keeps the family in continual concord, and above al
other, if a man carry about him the smallest and Actuarius Zoroastres
but also foreknow the success and event of his petitions and suits in Law.

If his left foot and nails be bound up together in a Linen bag, and so
fastened unto the right arm of a man, he shall never forget whatsoever he has
heard or knows. And if he cut off the right foot with the left hand and wear
the same, whosoever sees him shall fall in love with him, besides the Beast.
Also the marow of the right foot is profitable for a Woman that loves not her
husband, if it be put into her nostrils; And with the powder of the left claw,
they which are anointed therewith, it being first of al decocted in the blood of
a weasil, do fall into the hatred of al men. And if the nails of any beast be
found in his mawe after he is slain, it signifies the death of some of his
hunters: And to conclude, such Symis and religious votaries departing life send
their souls into Lions, Pa^phirius
and their religious women into Hyaenaes.

The excrements or bones coming out of the excrements when it is killed, are
thought to have virtue in them against magical incantations. And Democritus
writes, that in Cappadocia and Mesia, by the eating of the herb
Therionarcha, all wild beasts fall into a deadly sleep, and cannot be
recovered but by the aspersion of the urine of this beast. And thus much for
the first kind, now follows the second.

THE SECOND KIND OF HYAENA called Papio or Dabuh.


THis beast abounds near Caesaria in quantity resembling a Fox, but in wit
and disposition a Wolf; the fashion is, The region and quantity
being gathered together, for one of them to go before the flock singing or
howling, and all the rest, answering him with correspondent tune; In hair it
resembles a Fox, and their voices are so shrill and sounding, that although
they be very remote and far off, yet do men hear them as if they were hard
by: And when one of them is slain, The lamentation for the dead.

Albertus. Bellunensis. The several names.


the residue

When they grow to be very hungry by the constraint of famine they enter into
the Graves of men and eat their dead bodies, yet is their flesh in Syria,
Damascus, and Berutus, eaten by men. It is called also Randelos, Abenaum,
Aldabha, Dabha, Dahab, and Dhoboha, which are derived from the Hebrew word Deeb
or Deeba: Dabuh is the Arabian name, The parts and natural disposition.
and the Africans call him Leseph, his feet and legs are like to a man's,
neither is it hurtful to other beasts being a base and simple creature. The
color of it is like a Bear, and therefore I Judge it to be Arctocyon which is
engendered of a bear and a dog, and they bark only in the night time. They
are exceedingly delighted with Music, such as is used by pipes and tymbrels,
The manner of their taking.
wherefore when the hunters have found out their caves, they spread their nets
and snares at the mouth thereof, and afterward striking up their instruments,
the seely beast inconsiderat of all fraud comes out and is taken, the
picture hereof is formerly expressed. And there was one of these in Germany in
the year of our Lord 1551. at the City Auspurg to be seen publicly. It was
brought out of the India, it did eat apples, pears, and other fruits of
trees, and also bread, but especially it delighted in drinking of wine: when it
was an hungry, it climed up into trees, and did shake the boughs to make the
fruit fall, and it is reported, that when it is in the tree, it fears not an
Elephant, but yet auoydeth all other beasts which it is not able to resist. It
was of a cheerful nature, but then especially when it saw a woman, whereby it
was gathered that it was a lustful beast. His four feet were divided like a
man's fingers, and the female ever brings forth twins a male and a female
together.

It continually holds up his tail showing the hole behind, for at every
motion it turns that, as other beasts do their head. It has a short tail,
and but for that, I should judge it to be a kind of Ape, I know not whether it
be that kind of little Wolf Bellonius says abounds in Cilicia and Asia,
which in the night time raueneth and comes to the bodies of sleeping men,
taking away from them their boots, shoes, caps, or bridles: when they are
shut up in the night time they bark like dogs, but being at liberty they
live two hundred in a company, so that there is no beast so frequent as these
in all Cilicia.

As for the golden Woolfe spoken of by Oppianus I defer the description of it
to his due place, for they are not all of one color, and thus much shall
suffice for the second kind of Hyaena.

OF THE CROCVTA.
The region proportion and other qualities.
THe third kind of the Hyaena is called Crocuta not the Gulon aforesaid but
another different from that, which is said to be an Ethiopian foure-footed
beast, because it is engendered betwixt a lioness and an Hyaena. His teeth are
all of one bone, being very sharp on both sides of his mouth, and included in
fleshlike as in a case, that they may not be dulled: with their teeth they
break any thing. It is said also by Solinus that it never winketh, and that
their nature seems

In the Region Dachinabades, which is a mediterranean Country in the East,
containing great and high mountains. Amongst other wild Beasts, are abundance
of these Crocut^^s, and at the marriage of Antonius the son of Seuerus the
Emperor, to Plautilla the daughter of Plautianus, amongst the spectacles set
forth for the delight of the beholders, was a combat betwixt an Elephant and
this beast, which before that time was never to be seen at Rome (as Dion
reports) and thus much for the third kind of Hyaena, except I may ad
Loupchatt, that is Lupus Catus, a Wolfe-cat, resembling in face a cat with
sharp and harmefull claws, being betwixt a black and spotted color, and was
called an Indian wolf, and this was to be publickely seen, in the Bishops
castle at Trent.



OF THE MANTICHORA.
THis beast or rather Monster (as Ctesias writes) is bred among the Indians,
having a treble row of teeth beneath and above, whose greatness, roughness,
and feet are like a Lions, his face and ears like unto a man's, his eyes gray,
and color red, his tail like the tail of a Scorpion of the Philes
so as no distance or space does hinder him, and I take it to be the same
Beast which Auicen calls Marion, and Maricomorion, with her tail she
wounds her Hunters whether they come before her or behind her, and presently
when the quils are cast forth, new ones grow up in their room, wherewithal she
overcomes all the hunters: and although India be full of diverse ravening
beasts, yet none of them are styled with a title of Andropophagi, that is to
say, Men-eaters; except only this Mantichora. When the Indians Leucrocuta
about the bigness of a wild Ass, being in legs and hoofes like a Heart,
having his mouth reaching on both sides to his ears, and the head and face of
a female like unto a Badgers. It is called also Martiora, which in the Persian
tongue signifies a deuourer of men, and thus we conclude the story of the
Hyaena for her description, and her several kinds now follows the medicines
arising out of her several parts.

The Medicines of the Hyaena.
The Oil in which a Fox is baked either alive or dead, does either altogether
cure and make whole those which are troubled with the gout, The medicinal
propertis
if so be that the disease or sickness be green or new, or at the least not
of to long continuance, it does so cure them, that although it may happen to
return again: yet it will be much more mild and gentle then before it had
been. But the oil which proceeds from Foxes does nothing more drive away
the forenamed disease, Galen
then that which likewise is got or prepared out of the Hyaena; for that has
an excellent and eminent quallity of dissoluing and dispersing. The flesh of
the Alzabo is both what and cold, Rasis
and being baked with oil, does very much help either men or women which have
their feet gouty, or have any pain in their joints, which

Pliny
The vanity of the Magi or Wisemen which is witty in nothing but in
circumstance of words, does say that the best time to take Hyaenaes is when the
Moon passes over the sign called Gemini, and that for the most part the
hairs be all kept and preserved. The Magi do also affirm that the skin of
an Hyaena being spread upon a sore which was bitten by a mad Dog, Pliny
does presently and without any pain cure the same. The same also being bound
to that part of the head, which does ache, will imediately drive away the pain
and grief thereof.

The same does very effectually and speedily help them which are troubled with
the Albertus
or swelling in the joints. The flower of Barley being mingled with the blood
of an Hyaena, and fried or baked over the fire and so taken, does very much
assuage the wringings and wrinchings either in the guts or belly of a man or
woman. If the blood of an Hyaena being whot be anointed on them which are
infected with the Leprosy, it will without delay very effectually cure them.
Rasis


The Hyaenes flesh being eaten does much avail against the bitinges of
ravenous Dogs: but some are of opinion that the liver only being earen is of
more force and power to cure or heal them. The Nerves or sinnewes of an Hyaena
being beaten to small powder and dried and mingled with and Frankincence,
together and so drunk, Plinius
does restore fertility and plenty of seed in that woman which before was
barren.

There is also for the biting of a ravenous dog another excellent remedy, which
is this, first to anoint the place so bitten with the fat or grease of a
Sea-calfe, or else to give it in drink, and then to make the operation more
effectual mingle the marrow of an Hyaena, Pliny.
and oil that comes from the Masticke tree and wax together, and being so
applied and anointed upon the sore it will presently cure the same. The same
marrow of the Hyaena

The marrow which proceeds from the Chine-bone of an Hyaena, being mixed with
his gall and old Oil altogether, and so boiled until they come unto a soft
temperance, Democritus
and mollifiyng medicine, being anointed upon the sinnewes, does expel and
force away all pain of grief thereof whatsoever. The same marrow being bound
unto the back of either man or woman who are troubled with vain fantasies or
dreams in their sleep, does very speedily and very effectually help them. The
fat or grease of an Hyaena being burnt, does drive away all venomous Serpents
from the place where it is so used.

The same being mingled with leaven and so being wrought into a plaster is a
very good Myrepsus
The left part of the brain of an Hyaena being anointed upon the nostrils of
either men or beasts is of such virtue that it will cure diseases upon them
which are in manner mortal. For the sterility or barrenness of women, the eye
of an Hyaena being mixed with Lycoras, and the herb called Dill, and so taken
in drink, is of such force and power, that in three days it will make them
fit for conception.

The teeth of an Hyaena either touched or bound in order unto the teeth of any
man or woman who are troubled with the toothache, will presently ease the pain
and vexation thereof. One of the great teeth of an Hyaena being bound with a
string unto any that are troubled in the night tims with shadows and
fantasies, and which are frayed out of their Alzabo) being bound upon the
right arm of any one which is either obliuous or forgetful, and hanging down
from the arm unto the middle finger or wrist, does renew and refresh their
decayed memory. Albertus


The pallat of an Hyaena being dried and beaten to powder, and then mingled
with Egyptian Alum, and so made whot and mixed altogether, being three times
turned in any ones mouth which has either fore or ulcer in it, will in small
time procure them remedy and help of their vexation and trouble. The flesh
which grows upon the hinder part of the neck being burned and then eaten or
taken in drink, does very speedily help and cure the grief and aches of the
loins.





The chine bone of an Hyaena being bruised and beaten into small powder, and so
dried, and then mingled with the tongue and the right foot of a Sea-calfe, the
gall of an Ox being added thereunto, Pliny.
and all of them boiled or baked together, and anointed upon the hide or
skin of an Hyaena, and so lapped about the legs or joints of them which
are troubled with the gout, will in short time ease the pain, and rid them
altogether of the grief thereof.

The chine-bone being also beaten to powder and given in wine to drink, is
very profitable and necessary for those which are in sore travail or pain of
childe-birth. The first or eighth rib of the same beast, being beaten and
mingled with a certain perfume, is very good and medicinable for sores and
botches which do break thorough the flesh.

Their flesh also being eaten, does quickly cure and heal the bitings or
tearings of a ravenous Dog, but the liver being so used is more effectual
and speedy, for the curinge thereof. The liver of the aforesaid beast is also
very curable for Agues or Quarterne feauers being beaten to powder and drunk
in Wine, before the augmentation or second assaults thereof. The fame also is
an excellent and speedy remedy for the wringings and aches of the belly,
Dioscorides.
as also for that grievous and painful disease called the collicke and stone.
For the same diseases, the gall of a Sea Scorpion, and of a fish called
Haelops, and of a sea crabbe and of an Hyaena, being beaten to powder, and
mixed together, and so drunk in Wine, is a very good and effectual cure and
help. Marcellus
The gall of an Hyaena, by it self alone being rubd or anointed upon the head
of either man or woman whose hairs are fallen off, does presently

The gal of an Hyaena being mingled with honey, and anointed upon the eyes;
does sharpen and clear the eye sight, and expel and drive away al blemishes
and small skins which cover the sight of the eye, as also the pain in the eyes
called the pin and the web. But Apollonius Pitanaus does say, Gallen
that the gal of a Dog, being used in the aforesaid manner is better to cure
the sight of the eyes then the gal of an Hyaena. But Pliny whom I think best
to follow, and worthiest to be believed, does best allow of the Hyaenaes gal
for the aforesaid purpose, and also for the expelling of certain white spots
in the eye which do hinder the sight thereof. Marcellus.


The gall of a Bear and of a Hyaena, being dried and beaten to powder, and so
mixed with the best honey which is possible to be had, and then stirred up and
down a long time together, does help them unto their eyesight which are
stark blind, if that it be dailye anointed and spread upon the eyes for a
reasonable space together: The gall of a Hyaena being baked in a cruse of
Athenian honey, and mingled with the crooked herb Crocis, and so anointed
upon the brows or forehead of them which are purblind does speedily help
them; Pliny.
it does also ease them which are troubled with the water or rheum which
falls in the eyes. Democritus does also affirm that if the brow of either
man or woman be anointed with the gall of an Hyaena only, it will drive away
all darkeninges, and blemishes, in the eyes, and expel the Water or rhewme
thereof, and also assuage the pain or grief

The marrow which proceeds from the chine-bone of an Hyaena, being mixed with
his own gall, Marcellus
and with old oil, and then baked or boiled in a cruse until it come unto a
temperate and mollifying medicine, and then being laid or anointed upon the
sinnewes or Nerves who is in those parts troubled, will thoroughly heal and
cure any default or pain which may hapen thereunto. The gal of a male Hyaena
being pounded or beaten and bound about the left thigh of any woman that is
barren, does help for conception. The gal of the same beast being drunk in
wine to the value of a dram, with the decoction or liquor which comes from
Spike-Lauender called oil of spike, is a very good remedy and help against
the timpany or swelling of the belly. The gall also being beaten and mixed with
the pliny.
The lunges being dried and beaten to powder, and mingled with oil, and
anointed upon the loins of any one who is grieved or troubled in those
places, will speedily cure the Aches or griefs thereof.

The bladder of an Hyaena being drunk in wine, is a very good and effectual
remedy against the incontinency of man or woman's vrin, or the running of the
raines. Marcellus
But if there be any urine in the blader of the Hyaena found when he is taken,
let it be poured forth into some clean vessel, and mixed with oil which
proceeds from the pulse or corn of India, and so drunk up, and it will much
ease and help them who are troubled in mind, and are full of care and grief.
The secret parts of a femal Hyaena beaten and mixed with the and or skin of a
Pomgranate and taken in drink is very profitable to cure the inconueni^nces or
pain of a woman's secret parts.

The genitall of a male Hyaena dried and beaten to powder, being mingled with a
certain perfume, does cure and help those which are troubled with the crampe,
and conuulsion Dioscorides
The feet of an Hyaena being taken does heal and cure those which are
sand-blind, and such as have botches and sores breaking through the skin and
flesh, and also such as are troubled with inflammations or breedings of wind in
their bodies, only by touching and rubbing them over.

The dirt or dung which is found in the interior parts of an Hyaena, being
burned, and dried into powder and so taken in drink is very medicinable and
curable for those which are grieved with painful excoriatious and wringings of
the belly, and also for those which are troubled with the bloody-flixe. And the
same being mingled with Goose-grease and anointed over all the body of either
man or woman, will ease them of any pain or grief

OF THE IBEX.
THis beast Deuter. the 14. is called Ako* and is there rehearsed Tragelaphus,
Of the name
yet we have showed already in that story, that it cannot stand with the
meaning of the Holy Ghost, because that beast is found no where but near the
river Phasis, or in Arabia (as Pliny and Diodorus write:) and besides, the
Chaldey translation has Iaela, the Persians Kotziotu, the Arabians Ohal, all
which by Abraham Ezra, and Rabbi Solomon, and many other of the learned Jews,
are interpreted to be the Ibex, which of the Germans is called Steinbook, and
the Female of the Heluetians is called Ybschen and Ybschgeiss, which words
seems to be derived from the Latin word Ibex, and the Cisalpine French,
which speak Millain, retain the German word for the Male, but the Femal by a
proper word they call Vesina, and so also do the Rhetians. The Transalpine
French Bouc estane, the Illirians Kozoroziecz, and some latin Authors call him
Capricornus. The Graecians Ixalos and Aeigoceros; Although I have never read
Capricornus to signify a beast, A fiction of Capricornus
but only a star, excepting some poetical Gramarians who affirm this beast
to be a monster of the Sea, and that Pan when he fled out of Egypt with other
Gods from Typhon the Giant, their great enemy, cast himself into the water,
and was transformed into this beast. But Jupiter admiring his wit, placed him
among the stars near to Leo, according to this verse: Although there be some
that affirm, this Capricorn to be placed among the stars by Jupiter,
because he was nursed with him. And that Pan has his hinder parts like a
fish and his fore part like a Goat, according to these verses; Tum gelidum
valido de pectore frrgus anhelaus,
Corpore semifero, magno capricornus in orb.
Cancer and Capricornus, the ancients were wont to understand the descending
and ascending of the soul: that is to say, by the Cancer or crab which goes
backe-ward, the souls descent; by the Capricorn, (because the Goat climbeth)
the souls ascent: Porphyrius.
and therefore they place it in the Zodiac, where the Sun after the short
days begins to ascend, The attributs of this beast. Textor.
for no other cause then for that which I have rehearsed. The Epithets that are
given unto this Capricorn, do also belong unto the Ibex, such as are these,
moist, cold, swift, horne-bearer, watery, snowy, wool-bearer, rough,
bristly-cared,

To return therefore unto the Ibex, although I do not dislike the opinion of
them, which take it to be a wilde-goat, Their Countries of breed and parts of
their body.
yet I have reserved it into this place, because of many eminent difference as
may appear by the story. First these are bred in the alps, and are of an
admirable celerity, although their heads be loaded with such horns, as no
other beasts of their stature bears. For I do read in Eustathius, that their
horns are sixteen palms long, or five spannes, and one palm, and sometimes
seven spans, such was the horn consecrated at Delos, being two cubits and a
span long, and six and twenty pounds in weight. This beast (says Polibius) in
his neck and hair is like a Bucke-goat, beating a beard under his chin of a
span long, as thick as a colts tail, and in other parts of his body

It seems that his Haebrew name Iaall, The places of their abode.
is derived of climbing, and ( Isidorus says) that Ibices are quasi Auices,
that is like Birds, because like Fowls of the air, they enhabite the tops
of cliftes, Rocks, and Mountains, far from the view and sight of men.
Their horns reach to their Buttockes or Hippes, so that if at any time he
do chance to fall, he cowcheth his whole body betwixt his horns, to break
the strong force and violence of his own weight, and also he is able to
receive upon his horns the stroks of great stones which are shot or cast at
him; they are knotty and sharp, and as they increase in age so do their horns
in strongnesse and other qualities until they be twenty years old.

These beasts inhabit and keep their abode in the tops of those Mountains,
Stumptius.
where the ye never thaweth or dissolueth, for it loves cold by nature,
otherwise it would be blind, The benefit of cold.
for cold is agreeable to the eie-sight and beauty. It is a Noble beast and
very fat. In the small head, and lean Legs, it resembles a Heart, the eyes
are very fair and bright, Their several members.
the color yellowish, his hoof cloven and sharp like wild Goats. It far
excels a wild Goat in leaping, for no man will believe how far off, or
what long space it will leap except he saw it. For there is no place so steep
or cragged that if it afford him but so much Their taking
The Hunters drive them to the smooth and high rocks, and there they by
enclosing them take them in ropes or toils, if they cannot come near him with
shot or Swords. When the beast sees his Hunter which descends to him by some
Rock, he observes very diligently and watches if he can see any distance or
space betwixt him and the rock; yea, but so much as his eyesight can pierce
through: and if he can, then he leapeth up and gets betwixt the Hunter and
the rock, and so casts him down headlong and if he can espy no distance at
all, then does he keep his standing until he be killed in that place.

Valois (near the River Sedunus) take them in their infancy when they are
young and tame them, and until they be old they are contented to go and come
with the tame Goats to pasture, but in their older and riper age they return
to their former Wild nature.

Aristotle affirms that they couple or engender together (not by leaping upon
each other) but standing upright, upon their hinder Legs, whereunto I cannot
consent, Their copulation.
because the joints and Nerves of their hinder Legs will not be stretched to
such a copulation; and it may be that he or his relatour had seen them playing
together as Goats do, standing upright, and so took that gesture in their
pastime for carnal copulation. The female has

When this beast feels infallible tokens of her death, Their behavior at
their death.
and perceives that her end by some wound or course of nature approaches, and
is at hand, it is reported by the hunters, that she ascends to the top of
some Mountain or high rock, and there fasteneth one of her horns in the same
steep place, going round continually and never standing still, until she have
worn that horn asunder, whereby she stays her self, and so at length at
the instant or point of death, breaking her horn, falls down and perishes.
And because they dye among the rocks, it falls out seldom that their bodies
are found, but many times when the snow falls from the Mountains in great
and huge Masses, it meets Ibex and other wild beasts, and so oppressing
them drives them down to the foot of the hills or Mountains, as it does trees
and small houses, which are built upon the sides of them. Pelagonius.


In Creete they make bows of the horns of these beasts. the use of their
horns.
And concerning their taking it is not to be forgotten how the hunter which
pursues her from one rock to another, is forced many times for the safeguard
of his own life, to forsake his standing, and to observe the beast when it
makes force at him, and to rid himself from danger of death by leaping upon
his back, and taking fast hold on his horns, whereby he escapes. In the house
of Pompey where the memorable forest of Gordianus was painted, there were
among other beasts, two hundred Ibices, which Pompey gave unto the people at
the day of his triumph,

The medicines of the Ibex.
Some do commend the blood of the Ibex to be a very good remedy against the
stone of the bladder, being used in this manner: first, they divide it in
parts, and put one part of the blood, and about some six parts of wine Apiat
and Honey mixed together, and do boil them both together lukewarm, and
afterward they reserve it in a clean vessel, and the third day in the
morning they give it unto the party to drink who is grieved, and then they put
him into a Bath about noone time, and in the evening, and this order is to

There is also by the dung of the aforesaid beast, an excelent remedy against
the Sciatica or hippe-gout, by which that most excellent Physician Ausonius
himself was healed, and many other lying disperate of remedy, which is this;
to gather the dunge of this beast in the seuenteeneth day of the Moon, neither
is it any great matter whether you gather it in some part of the old Moon, for
it will have the same operation: you shall therefore take as much of this dung as
you can hold in your hand or fist at one time: so that the quantity of the dung
be unlike, and you shall put it in a mortar and beat it to powder, and

OF THE ICHNEVMON
MArcellus and Solinus, do make question of this beast ( Ichneumon) to The
kinds and names with the reason thereof.
or the Otter a kind of this Ichneumon, which I find to be otherwise called
Enydros or Enhydrus, because it lives in water, and the reason of this name I
take to be fetched ab infestigando, because like a dog or hunting-hound, it
diligently searches out the seats of wild beasts, especially the Crocodile
and the Aspe, whose eggs it destroys. And for the emnity unto Serpents, it
is called Ophiomachus. Isidorus is of opinion, that the name of this beast in
the Greek is given unto it, because by the savor thereof, the venom and
wholsomenesse of Dracontius writes in this manner: Predicit suillus, vim
cuiuscunque veneni. The Ichneumon foretells the power, and presence of all
poison. And it is called Suillas, in Latin, because like a hog, it has
bristles in stead of hair; Albertus also does call it Ne^m^n, mistaking it for
Ichneumon.

Hermolaus. Gyllius.
There be some that call it an Indian Mouse, because there is some proportion
for similitude in the outward form between this beast and a mouse. But it is
certain, that it is bred in no other Nation but only in Egypt, about the
river Nilus, and of some it is called Mus Pharonis, Pharoes Mouse. For Pharo
was a common name to all the Egyptian kings.

There be some that call it Thyamon, Albertus. Vincentius.
and Anschycomon, and also Damula, mistaking it for that Weasell which is an
enemy to Serpents, called by the Italians Donola: yet I know The quantity and
several parts.
the eyes small and narrow, which signify a malignant and crafty disposition;
the tail of it very long like a Serpents, the end turning up a little,
having no hairs but scales, not much unlike the tail of a Mouse. Aelianus
affirms, Their procr^ation and fights one with another.
that both sexes bear young, having seed in themselves, whereby they conceive.
For those that are overcome in combats one with another, are branded with a
warlicke mark of Villanage, or subjection to their Conquerors, and on the
contrary side they which are conquered and overcome in fight, do not only make
vassals of them whom they overcome, but in token thereof for further
punishment, fill them with their seed by carnal copulation, so puttnig off
from themselus to them, the dolours and Torments of bearing young.

When it is angry the hairs stand upright, and appear of a double color,
being white and yellowish by lines or rows in equal distaunce, entermingled,
and This first picture of the Ichneumon was taken by Bellonius, except the
back be too much elevated.
The second picture taken out of Oppianus poems, as it was found in
then a Cats, and better set or compacted; the beak black, and sharp at the
Nose like a Ferret, and without a beard, the ears short and round, the Legs
black, having five claws upon his hinder feet, whereof the last or hinmost
of the inner side of the foot is very short, his tail thick toward the
rumpe: the tongue, teeth, and stones, are like a Cats, and this it has
peculiar, namly a large passage, compassed about with hair, on the outside of
his excrement hole like the genitall of a woman, which it never opens but in
extremity of heat, the place of his excrements remaining shut, only being more
hollow then at other times. And it my be that the Authors aforesaid had no
other reason to affirm the mutation of feeble or common transmigration of
genitall power, beside the Nilus, amongst the reeds, growing on the banks
thereof, The places of their abod
according to the saying of Nemetian; Et placidis Ichneumona quaerere ripis,
Inter arundineas segetes.
For it will diue in the Water like an Otter, and seem to be utterly drowned,
holding in the breath longer then any other foure-footed beast, as appears by
his long keeping under Water, The courage and strength of this beast.
and also by living in the belly of the Crocodile, until he deliver forth
himself, by eating through his bowels, as shall be showed afterward. It is a
valiant and nimble creature, not fearing a great Dog, but sets upon him
and biting him mortally, Her entrance into a Crocodile.
suddenly to run down into his throat and belly, and there to eat up that
meat which the Crocodile has devoured, and not returning out again the way
it went in, makes a passage for it self through the beasts belly.

The taming of Ichneumons.
And because it is a great enemy and deuourer of Serpents, the common people of
that Country do tame them, and keep them familiarly in their houses like Cats,
for they eat Mice, and likewise bewray all venomous beasts: for which cause as
is said before, they call Pharoes Mouse by way of excellency. At Alexandria they
sell their young ones in the Market, and nourish them for profit: It is a
little beast, and maruelously studious of purity and clenlinesse.

Bellonius affirms that he saw one of them at Alexandria, amongst the ruins
of an old castle, which suddenly took a Hen and eat it up, for it loves all
manner of fowls, especially Hens and chickens, Their food.
being very wary and crafty about his prey, oftentimes standing upright upon
his hinder Legs, looking about for a fit booty, and when it espieth his prey
near him, Their subtilty in obtaining their prey.
it slideth so close to the ground, as is very admirable until it be within
the reach, and then leapeth upon it with incredible celerity, dying to the
throat, and like a Lion kills al by strangling. It eats indifferently every
living thing, as Snales, Lizardes, camelions, Strabo says, when he finds an
Aspe by the water side, it ketcheth hold on the tail, and so draws the beast
into the Water, and receives help from the fluds to devour her enemy, and
whereas we have said already, that the Ichneumon enters into the belly of the
crocodil, Ammianus, Marcelinus, Strabo, Pliny, and Oppianus, makes thereof
this discourse following. When the crocodile has filled his belly, and
ouerglutted himself with meat, he comes to the land to sleep.

Now there is in Egypt, a certain Bird called Crochillus, whose nature is to
wait upon the crocodile, and with her breath and claws gently and with a kind
of delight, to pull out the remnants of the meat sticking in the crocodiles
teeth, wherewithal the crocodile being Ichnumon, perceiving him, to be deeply
plunged, in a senseless security, goes presently and walloweth in sand and
dirt, and with a singular confidence enters into the gate of death, that is
the crocodiles mouth, and suddenly pierces like an arrow through the monsters
wide throat down into his belly.

The CROCODILE feeling this unlooked for evil, awaketh out of sleep, The
Crocodiles behauior feeling the Ichneumon in her belly.
and in a rage or madness, void of counsel, runs too and fro, far and
wide, plunging himself into the bottom of the river, where finding no ease,
returns to land again, and there breaths out his intolerable poison,
beating himself with all his power, striving to be delivered from this
insufferable evil. But the Ichneumon cares not for all this, sitting close upon
the liver of the CROCODILE, and feeding full sweetly upon his intrals, until
at last being satisfied, eats out her own passage through the belly of her
host. The self same thing is related by Plutarch: but I wonder for what cause
the beast should roll her self in sand and dirt, to enter into the CROCODILES
belly; For first of all, if after her roling in the dirt, she dry her self in
the Sun, yet will not that hard crust be any sufficient Aristotle says, and
therefore the Author seeing her so covered with mudde, might easily be mistaken
in her purpose. Their combats with Aspes.
For it is true indeed that when she sees the Aspe upon the land, she calls
her fellows, who arm themselves as beforesaid before the combat, by which
means they are safely preserved, from the bitings of their enemies; or if it
be true that they wallow themselves

Concerning their fighting with Aspes, and the arming of themselves as
aforesaid, the Egyptians make this hyrogliphicke of the Ichnumon, to signify
a weak man, that wants and craves help of others; Pliny also says that
when the Aspe fights with this beast, the Ichnumon turns to her, her tail,
which the Aspe taking for defiance, presently makes force at it, whereby she
is overtaken and destroyed by the Ichnumon, but in my opinion this combat is
better expressed by Oppianus.

For says he, the Ichnumon covers her body in the sand as it were in a
grave, leaving nothing uncovered but her long Serpentine tail, and her eyes,
and so expects her enemy. When the Aspe espyeth her threatening rage,
presently turning about her tail, provoke Ichnumon to combat, and with an
open mouth and lofty head does enter the list, to her own perdition. For the
Ichnumon being nothing afraid of this great brauado, receives the encounter,
and taking the head of the Aspe in his mouth, biteth that off, to prevent the
casting out of her poison: afterward tearing her whole body in pieces,
although gathered together wound in a circle, for the success of these two
combatants, lies in the first blow. If the Aspe first bite the Ichnumon, then
does her poison destroy her adversary; and so on the contrary, if the Ichnumon
first bite the Aspe, then is the Ichnumon conqueror, and for this cause she
covers her body as aforesaid.

Furthermore, this Beast is not only enemy to the crocodile and Aspe, but also
to their Eggs, which she hunteth out by the sagacity of her nose, and so
destroys them, Their enmity to al kinds of Serpents, and their eggs


For which cause the blind Pagans, consecrated this beast to Lat^na, and
Lugina, and the Heracleopolites did think that they possessed all religion;
the Egyptians themselves did worship them, because as their country is above
all other plagued with serpents, so they are much eased by the help of this
little beast. And when they die, they do not only lament them, but also bury
them religiously. And thus much for the description of Ichnumon. Now follows
their medicinal virtues.

The medicines of the Ichneumon.
The skin of the Ichneumon, being dried and beaten into small powder,
afterward mingled with wine vinegar, and anointed upon those which are
grieved with the venomous or poison some bites of the same beast, does very
effectually and speedily cure them of the same. Pliny
The precious stone called by the name of Iris, which is very hard, as Horus
says, being burned and afterward beaten or pounded into powder, is an
excellent remedy against the venomous biting of the Ichneumon. It is also said
that all beasts (but especially the Crocadile) do for the most part hate and
detest the society of this beast.

The hairs of the Ichneumon, Auicenna
being taken in a certain perfume, does very much help and cure those which
are troubled or grieved with the Maw-wormes. The dung of a Cat, or the dung of
this beast* is very medicinable to be put in any salve, or potion, for the
strenghthening, and confirming of the body. The urine or tail of an Ichneumon,
being mixed with the milk of a black Cow, and given unto those which are
troubled with that grievous disease, Marcellus
called the collicke and stone for the space of three days together in any
kind of drink will easily and speedily cure them of their pain. The stones
of an Ichneumon, being either beaten in powder, or taken raw, either in wine or
any other drink, is Herodotus
pain, or disease in their belly; And thus much shall suffice concerning the
cures, and medicines, of the Ichneumon.

OF THE LAMIA.
The signification of the word Lamia.
THis word Lamia has many significations, being taken sometimes for a beast of
Lybia, sometimes for a fish, and sometimes for a Spectre or apparition of women
called Phairies. And from hence some have ignorantly affirmed, that either
Aristophanes affirms, that he heard one say, that he saw a great wild beast
having several parts resembling outwardly an Ox, and inwardly a Mule, and a
beautiful woman, which he called afterward Empusa.

When Appollonius and his companions travailed in a bright Moon shine night,
they saw a certain apparition of Phairies, Visions o^ Phairie^.
in latin called Lamiae, and in Greek Empusa, changing themselves from one
shape into another, being also sometimes visible, and presently vanishing out
of sight again: as soon as he perceived it, he knew what it was and did
Philostratus.
for that is the best remedy against the invasion of Phairies. And when his
companions did likewise rail at them, presently the vision departed away.

The Poets say, The poetical Lamia.
that Lamia was a beautiful woman, the daughter of Bellus and Lybia, which
Iupiter-loued, bringing her out of Lybia into Italy, where he begot upon her
many sons, but Juno jealous of her husband, destroyed them as soon as they
were horn, punishing Lamia also with a restless estate, that she should never
be able to sleep, but live night and day in continual mourning, Varinus
for which occasion she also steals away and kills the children of others,
whereupon came the fable of changing of children* Jupiter having pity upon
her, gave exe^ptile eyes that might be taken in and out at her own Acho, and
Alphito, wherewithal women were wont to make their children afeard, according
to these verses of Lucilius.

Terricolas Lamias, fauni quas Pompilijque
Instituere numae tremit has, etc.
The true picture of the Lamia.


Of these, Angelus Policianus relates this old wives story, Old Wives tales of
Phairies.
in his preface upon Aristotle's first book of Analitickes, that his
grandmother told him when he was a child, there were certain Lamiae in the
wilderness, which like Bug-beares would eat up crying boys, and that there was
a little Well near to Fesulanum, being very bright, yet in continual shadow,
never seeing Sun, where these Phairy women have their habitation, which are

Plutarch also affirms, that they have exemptile eyes as aforesaid, and that
as often as they go from home, they put in their eyes, wandering abroad by
habitations, streets, and cross ways, entering into the assemblies of men,
and prying so perfectly into every thing, that nothing can escape them, be it
never so well covered: you will think (says he) that they have the eyes of
Kites, for there is no small mote but they epsy it, nor any hole so secret but
they find it out, and when they come home again, at the very entrance of their
house they pull out their eyes, and cast them aside, so being blind at home,
but seeing abroad. If you ask me (says he) what they do at home, they sit
singing and making of wool, and then turning his speech to the Florentines
speaks in this manner: Vidisti sue obsecro Lamias is it as vtri Florentini,
quae se and sua nesciunt, alios and aliena speculantur, negati atqui: that is
to say: O ye Florentines, did you ever see such Phairies, which were busy in
prying into the affairs of other men, but yet ignorant of their own? Do you
deny it, yet do there commonly walk up and down the City, phairies in
the shapes of men.

There were two women called Macho, and Lamo, which were both foolish and
mad, and from the strange behauiours of them, came the first opinion of the
Pharies: there was also an ancient Lybian woman called Lamia, and the opinion
was, that if these Pharies had not whatsoever they demanded, presently they
would take away live children, according to these verses of Horace.

Nec quodcunque volet, poscat, sibi fabula credi
Neu pransae Lamiae viuum puerum extrahat aluo.
It is reported of Menippus the Lycian, A story of a Phairie woman.
that he fell in love with a strange woman, who at that time seemed both
beautiful, tender, and rich, but in truth there was no such thing, Corinth to
Cenchrea he met with a certain phantasme or spectre like a beautiful woman,
who took him by the hand, and told him that she was a Phoenicean woman, and of
long time had loved him dearly, having sought many occasions to manifest the
same, but could never find opportunity until that day, wherefore she
entreated him to take knowledge of her house which was in the Suburbs of
Corinth, therewith all pointing unto it with her finger, and so desired his
presence: The young man seeing himself thus wooed by a beautiful woman was
easily overcome by her allurements, and did oftentimes frequent her company.

There was a certain wise man and a Philosopher which espied the same, and
spoke unto Moenippus in this manner. O formose, and aformosis, expetitie
mulieribus, ophin thalpies, that is to say, O fair Menippus beloved of
beautiful women, art thou a serpent and do nourish a serpent? by which words
he gave him his first admonition, or incling of a mischief; but not
preuayling, Menippus purposed to marry with this spectre, her house to the
outward show being richly furnished with all manner of household goods, then
said the wise man again unto Menippus, this gold, silver, and ornaments of
house, are like to Tantalus Apples, who are said by Homer to make a fair show,
but to contain in them no substance at all: even so whatsoever you conceive of
this riches, there is no matter or substance in the things which you see, for
they are only inchaunted images and shadows, which that you may believe, this
your neat bride is one of the Empus^, Lamioe or Mormolicioe wonderful
desirous of copulation with men, and loving their flesh above measure, but
those whom they do entice, with their veneriall marts, afterward they devour
without love or pity, feeding upon their flesh: at which words the wise man
caused the gold and silver plate and household stuff, Cooks and servants, to
vanish all away; Then did the spectre like unto one that wept, entreat the
wise man that he would not torment her, nor yet cause her to confess what
manner of person she was, Coelius
but he on the other side being inexorable, compelletd her to declare the whole
truth, which was, that she was a Phairy, and that she purposed to use the
company of Menippus, and feed him fat with all manner of pleasures, to the
intent that afterward she might eat up and devour his body, for all their
kind love was but only to feed upon beautiful young men.

These and such like stories and opinions there are of Phairies, which in my
judgment arise from the praestigious apparitions of Devils, whose delight is
to deceive and beguile the minds of men with error, The true definition of
Phairies.
contrary to the truth of holy Scripture, which does no where make mention of
such inchaunting creatures; and therefore if any such be, we will hold them
the works of the Devil, and not of God, or rather I believe, that as Poets
call Harlots by the name of Charibdis, which deuoureth and swalloweth whole
ships and Nauies, aluding to the insatiable gulf of the Sea, so the Lamiae
are but poetical alligories of beautiful Harlottes, who after they have had
their lust by men, do many times devour and make them away, as we read of
Diomedes daughters, and for this cause also Lupae, shee-Wolues, and Lepores,
Hares.

To leave therefore these fables, Their names and description.
and come to the true description of the Lamia, we have in hand. In the four
and thirty chapter of Esaias, we do find this beast called Lilith in the Haebrew,
and translated by the auncients' Lamia, which is there threatened to possess
Babell. Likewise in the fourth chapter of the Lamentations, where it is said in
our English translation, that the Dragons lay forth their breasts, in Haebrew
they are called Eiha^^^, which by the confession of the best interpreters,
cannot signify Dragons, but rather sea-calues, being a general word for
strange wild beasts. Howbeit the matter being well examined, it shall appear
that it must needs be this Lamia, because of her great breasts, which are not
competible, either to the Dragon or Sea-calues; so then we will take it for
granted, by the testimony of holy Scripture, that there is such a beast as
this Crisostomus. Dion also writes that there are such beasts in some part of
Libia, having a Woman's face, and very beautiful, also very large and comely
shapes on their breasts, such as cannot be counterfeited by the art of any
painter, having a very excellent color in their fore parts without wings, and
no other voice but hissing like Dragons: they are the swiftest Coelius and
Giraldus, adding also, that there is a certain crooked place in Libia near
the Seashore, full of sand like to a sandy Sea, and all the neighbor places
thereunto are deserts.

If it fortune at any time, that through shipwreck men come there on shore,
these beasts watch upon them, devouring them all, which either endeavor to
travel on the land, or else to return back again to Sea, adding also that
when they see a man they stand stone Aristophnies writing of Cleon a Corior,
and lustful man, compares him to a Lamia, in the greatness and filthiness
of his stones, the hinder parts of this beast are like unto a Goat, his fore
legs like a Bears, his upper parts to a woman, the body scaled all over like a
Dragon Probus the Emperor brought them forth into public spectacle: also it is
reported of them, that they devour their own young ones, and therefore they
derive their name Lamia of Laniando, and thus much for this beast.

OF THE LION.
BEing now come to the discourse of the Lion (justly styled by all writers the
King of beasts,) I cannot choose but remember that pretty fable of Esope,
concerning the society and honor due unto this beast. For (says he) the Lion,
Ass, and the Fox entered league and friendship together, and foraged abroad to
seek convenient

In like manner I would be loath to be so simple, in sharing out the discourse
of the

And therefore as when Lisimacus, the son of Agathocles, being cast by
Alexander to a Lion to be destroyed, because he had given poison to Calistines
the Philosopher, that was for the ending of his misery, who was included by
the said Alexander in a cave to be famished to death; upon some slight
displeasure the said Lisimacus, being so cast unto the Lion, did not like a
cowardly person offer himself to his teeth, but when the Lion Alexander,
having at the time of his death, the command of all his treasure.

In like sort I will not be afraid, to handle this Lion, and to look into him
both dead and alive, for the expressing of so much of his nature, as I can
probably gather out of any good writer.

First of all therefore to begin with his several names, The several names of
Lions.
almost all the nations of Europe do follow the Greeks in the nomination of
this beast, for they call him Leon, the Latins, Leo, the Italians Leone, the
French and English Lion, the Germans and Illirians, Leuv; the reason of the
Greek name Leon, is taken para To luessein from the excellency of his sight;
for Laio signifies to see, and Alaoos signifies blind, for indeed there is
no creature of the quantity of a Lion, that has such an admirable eye fight.
The Lionesses called in Greek Loena which word the Latins follow, from whence
also they derive Lea for a Lioness, according to this verse of Lucretius:
Irritata Leae, iaciebant corpora saltu. The Hebrews have for this beast male
and female, and their young ones diverse names: and first of all for the male
Lion, in Deuteronomy. the 33. they have Ari, and Arieh, where the Caldians translate
it Ariauan, the Arabians Asad, the Persians Gehad, and plurally in Hebrew
Araijm, Araiot, Araoth, as in the first of Zeph. Araoth, Schoianim, roaring
Lions: and Ariel, signifying valiant and strong, to be the name of a Prince:
and Isai 29. Ezec. 43. it is taken for the alter of burnt offerings, because
the fire that came down from heaven, did continually lie upon that altar, like
a Lion in his den: or else because the fashion of the temple was like the
proportion of the Lion: the Assirians call a Lioness Arioth, the Hebrews also
call the male Lion Labi, and the female Lebia, and they distinguish Art, and
Labi, making Ari to signify a little Lion, and Labia a great one; and in Number.
23. in this verse, containing one of Gods promises to the people of Israel for
victory against their enemies, Behold my people shall arise like Labi, and be
lifted up like Ari: there the Chaldey translation rendereth Labi, Leta, the
Arabian Iebu, the Persians Scher, and Munster, says that Labi is an old Lion.
In Job. 38. Lebaim signifies lions, and in Psa. the 57. Lebaot signifies
Lionesses. In the Prophet Naum the 2. Laisch is by the Hebrews translated a
Lion, and the same word Esa. the 30. is by the Chaldies translated a lions
Whelpe; and in the aforesaid place of the prophet Naum, you shall find Arieh for
a lion, Labi for a lioness, Cephirim for little lions, and Gur for a lions
whelp, all contained under The several kinds of Lions.
The Sarazens call a Lion at this day Sebey, and thus much for the name.

In the next place we are to consider the kinds of Lions, and those are
according to Aristotle two, the first of a less and well compacted body, which
have curled manes, being therefore called Acro leontes, and this is more
sluggish and fearful then the other. The second kind of Lion has a longer
body, and a deeper lose hanging mane, these are more noble, generous, and
courageous against all kind of wounds. And when I speak of manes it must be
remembered, that all the male Lions are maned, but the females are not so;
neither the Leopards which are begotten by the adultry of the lioness: for
from the lion there are many beasts which receive procreation, as the Leopard
or Panther.

There is a beast called Leontophonus, a little creature in Syria, and is bred
no where else but where lions are generated. Of whose flesh if the lion taste, he
loses that princely power Varinus. Hesychius
take the body of this Leontophonus, which may well be englished Lion-queller,
and burns it to ashes, afterward casting those ashes upon flesh, whereof if
the lion taste she presently dies, so great is the poison taken out of this
beast for the destruction of lions; for which cause, the lion does not
undeservedly hate it, and when she finds it, although she dare not touch it
with her teeth, yet she teareth it in pieces with her claws. The urine also of
this beast sprinkled upon a lion does wonderfully harm him, if it does not
destroy him; They are deceived that take this Lion-queller to be a kind of
Worm, or reptile creature, for there is none of them that render urine; but
this excrement is merely proper to foure-footed-liuing-beastes: And thus much
I thought Aristotle, Pliny, Solinus, Aelianus.
and other Authors aforesaid, although his proper place be afterward among the
lions enemies.

The Chimaera is also fained to be compounded of a lion, a Goat, and a Dragon,
according to this verse: Prima leo, postrema Draco, media ipsa Chimaera.

There be also many Fishes in the great Sea, about the I Will Taprabones, having
the heads of Lions, Panthers, Rams, and other beasts. The Tigers of Prasia are
also engendered of Lions, and are twice so big as they. There are also Lions in
India, (called Formicae) about the bigness of Egyptian Wolves. Camalopardales
have their hinder parts like Lions. The Mantichora has the body of a Lion: The
Leucrocuta, the neck, tail, and breast like a lion, and there is an
allogorical thing called ( Demonium Leoninum) a lyon-Diuel, which by Bellunensis,
is enterpreted to be an allegory, signifieng the mingling together reasonable
understanding with malicious hurtful actions. Monsters breed like Lions.
It is reported also by Aelianus, that in the Island of Choos, a sheep of the
flock of Nicippus, contrary to the nature of those beasts, in stead of a lamb
brought forth a lion, which monstrous prodigy was seen and considred of many,
whereof diverse gave their opinions what it did pretend, namely that Nicippus,
of a private man should effect superiority and become a tyrant, which shortly
after came to pass, for he ruled all by force and violence, Coelins.
not with fraud or mercy; for Fraus (says Cicero) quasi vulpeculae, vis leonis
esse videtur, that is: Fraud is the property of a Fox, and violence of a Lion.
Heroditus.


It is reported that Meles the first King of Sardis did beget of his concubine
a lion, and the South-sayers told him that on what side soever of the city he
should lead that lion, it should remain inexpugnable, and never be taken by any
man; whereupon Meles led him about every tower and rampire of the city, which
he thought was weakest, except only one Tower, standing toward the river
Tmolus, because he thought that side was invincible, and could never by any
force be entered, scaled, or ruinated. Afterward in the reign of Crasus, the
City was taken in that place by Darius.

There are no lions bred in Europ, except in one part of Thrasia, for the
Nemaeon, Countries without Lions.
or Cleonaean lion is but a fable; yet in Aristotle's time, there were more
famous and valiant lions in that part of Europe, lying betwixt the Rivers
Achelous and Nessus, then in all Africa and Asia. For when Xerxes led his Army
through Paeonia over the River Chidorus, the lions came and devoured his Camels
in the night time; but beyond Nessus toward the East, or Achillous toward
the West, there was never man saw a lion in Europe: but in the region betwixt
them which was once called the country of the Abderites, there were such
store, Olimpus, Macedonia, and Thessalia, but yet of purpose Princes in castles
and Towers for their pleasures sake, do nourish and keep Lions in Europe,
where sometimes also they breed, as has been seen both in England and
Florence; Pelloponesus also has no lions, and therefore when Homer makes
mention of Dianaes hunting in the mountains of Frimanthus and Taygetus, he
speaks not of lions, but of Hearts and Bores.

All the countries in the East and South, lying under the heat of the Sun, do
plentifully breed lions, and except in whot countries they breed seldom, and
therefore the lions of Fesse, Temesna, Angad, Hippo, and Tunis, are accounted
the most noble and audatious lions of Afric, because they are whot countries.
Countries of their breed.
But the lions of colder countries have not half so much strength, stomach,
and courage. These Libian lions have not half Apolonius saw lions also beyond
Nilus, Hiphasis, and Ganges: and Strabo affirms that there are lions about
Meroe, Astapae, and Astabore, which lions are very gentle, tame, and fearful,
and when the dog star called ( Canis Sirius) does appear, whereof comes the
dog days, that then they are drove away by the bitings of great gnats.

Aethiopia also breeds Lions, being black colored, having great heads, long
hair, rough feet, fiery eyes, and their mouth betwixt red and yellow. Silicia,
Armenia, and Parthia, about the mouth of Ister, breed many fearful Lions,
having great heads, thick and rough necks and cheeks, bright eyes, and
eyelids hanging down to their noses. There Arabia, so that a man cannot
travel near the city Aden over the mountains, with any security of life,
except he have a hundred men in his company. The Lions also of Hircania are
very bold and hurtful, and India the mother of al kind of beasts, has most
black, fierce, and cruel Lions. In Tartaria also, and the kingdom of
Narsinga, and the Province of Abasia, are many Lions, greater then those of
Babylon and Siria; of diverse and sunrdy intermingled colors, both white,
black and red. Vartomanus
There be many Lions also in the province of Gingui, so that for fear of them,
men dare not sleep out of their own houses in the night time. For whomsoever
they find they devour and tear in pieces. The ships also which go up and
down the river, are not tied to the bankside for fear of these lions, because
in the night time they come down to the Waterside,

The color of Lions is generally yellowe, for these before spoken of, black,
white, The color of Lions.
and red are exorbitant: Their hair some of them is curled, and some of them
long, shaggy, and thin, not standing upright, but falling flat, longer
before, and shorter behind, cardanus
and although the curling of his hair be a token of sluggish timidity, yet if
the hair be long and curled at the top only, it pretends generous
animosity. So also if the hair be hard: (for beasts that have soft hair, as
the Heart, the Hare, and the Sheep), are timorous, but they which are harder
haired, as the Boar and the Lion, are more audacious and fearelesse.

therefore Pliny said: Turrigeros elephantorum miramur humeros, leonum iubas.
We wonder at the Tower-bearing shoulders of Elephantes, and the long hanging
manes of Lions. And Aelianus in orationis expertibus maripraestantiam quandam
natura largita est, iuba leo antaecellit foeminam, serpens Christa. Nature has
honored the Male, even in creatures without reason, to be distinguished from
the female, as the mane of the male Lion, and the comb of the male Serpent do
from their females. Martial writes thus of the lions mane: O quantum per
colla decus, quem sparsit honorem,
Aurea lunatae cum stetit vnda iubae?
A Lion has a most valiant and strong head, The several parts.
and for this occasion, when the Nymphs were terrified by the Lions and fled
into Carystus, the promontory wherein they dwelled was called Co leon, that is
the Lyons-head, where afterward was built a goodly City. It fortuned as
Themistocles went thither to manage the affairs of the Graecians, Epiries the
Persian, president of Phrygia intended his destruction, and therefore committed
the business unto one Pisis, with charge that he should behead Themistocles, who
came thither to execute that murder, but it happened as Themistocles slept at
the noone day, he heard a voice crying out unto him, O Themistocles effuge
leonum caput ne ipse in leonem incurras: that is to say, Plutarch.
O Themistocles get thee out of the Lions head, least thou fall into the Lions

The face of a Lion is not round as some have imagined, and therefore compared
it unto the Sun, because in the compass thereof the hairs stand out eminent
like Sunne-beames, but rather it is square figured like as his forehead, which
Aristotle says, you may choose whether you will call it a forehead or Epipedon
frontis: that is, the superficies of a forehead: for like a cloud it seems to
hang over his eyes and nose, and therefore the Germans call a man that looks
with such a countinance, Niblen of Nubilare, to be cloudy, and it betokens
either anger or sorrow: also it is called Scithicus aspectus, because the
Scithians were always wont to look as though they were ready to fight. The
eyes of a Lion are red, fiery, and hollow, not very round nor long, looking for
the most part awry; wherefore Tocua leaena. The pupils or aples of the eye shine
exceedingly, in so much as beholding of them, a man would think he looked upon
fire.

His upper eie-lid is exceeding great, his Nose thick, and his upper chap does
not hang over the nether, but meet it just: his mouth very great, gaping
wide, his lips thin, so that the upper parts fall in the nether, which is
a token of his fortitude: his teeth like a Wolves and a Dogs, like sawes,
losing or changing only his canine teeth, the tongue like a Cats or leopards,
as sharp as a file, wearing through the skin of a man by licking; his Neck
very stiff because it consists but of one bone without joints, like as in a
Wolf and an Hyaena, the flesh is so hard as if it were all a sinnew: There are
no knucles or turning joints in it called Spondyli, and therefore he cannot
look backward.

The greatness and roughness of his Neck betokens a magnanimious and
liberal mind, nature has given a short Neck unto the Lion, as unto Bears
and Tigers, because they have no need to put it down to the earth to feed
like an Ox, but to lift it up to catch their prey. His shoulders and breasts
are very strong, as also the forepart of his body, but the members of the
hinder part do degenerate. For as Pliny says, Leoni vis summa in pectore, the
chiefest force of a Lion is in his breast.

The part about his throate-bole is loose and soft, and his Metaphrenon or part
of his back against his heart (so called) betwixt his shoulder-blades, is very
broad. The backbone and ribs are very strong, his ventricle narrow, and not
much larger then his maw. He is most subject to wounds in his flancke, because
that part is weakest, in all other parts of his

About his loins and hip-bone he has but little flesh. The lioness has two
vdders in the midest of her belley, not because she brings forth but two at a
time, (for sometimes she brings more, but because she abounds in Milk, and
her meat which she gets seldom,) and is for the most part flesh turns
all into milk. The tail of a Lion is very long, which they shake oftentimes,
and by beating their sides therewith, they provoke themselves to fight. The
Graecians call it Alcaea: and Alciatus makes this excellent emblem thereof
upon wrath.

Alcaum veteres candam dixere Leonis
Qua stimulante iras concipit ille graves.
Lutea quam surgit bilis crudescit and atro,
Fell dolor, furias excitat indomitas.
The nether part of his tail is full of hairs and gristles, and some are of
opinion, that there is therein a little sting where withal the Lion pricketh
it self; but of this more afterward.

The bones of Lions have no marrow in them, or else it is so small, that it
seems nothing: therefore they are the more strong, solid, and greater, then
any other beast of their stature, and the Males have ever more harder bones
then the female, Aelianus Aristotle
for by striking them together you may beget fire, as by the percussion of
Flints; and the like may be said of other beasts that live upon flesh, yet are
some of the bones hollow. The legs of a Lion are very strong and full of
Nerves, and instead of an anckle-bone it has a crooked thing in his pasterne,
such as children use to make for sport, and so also has the Lynx.

His forefeet have five distinct toes or claws on each foot, and the
hinderfeet but four. pliny. cardanus
His claws are crooked, and exceeding hard, and this seems a little miracle
in nature, Solinus.
with their tails they cover their footsteps with earth, that so they may not
be bewrayed.

The Epithets of this beast are many, whereby the authors have expressed their
several natures, such are these, the cursed kind of lions, full of stomach,
sharp, bold, greedy, blunket, flesh-eater, Caspian, Claeonian, the lord and
King of the beasts, and woods, fierce, wild, hairy, yellowe, strong,
fretting, teeth-gnashing, Naemean, thundering, raging, Getulian, rough,
lowering, or wry-faced, Impacient, quick, untamed, free, and mad, according to
this saying of the Poet;
Vim stomacho opposuisse nostro.
For As the Eagle is fained to feed upon the heart of Prometheus, so also is
the lion the ruler of the heart of man, according to the Astrologians. And from
hence it comes that a man is said to bear a stomach when he is angry, and
that he should be more subject to anger when he is hungry, then when he is
full of meat.

These also are the Epethets of lions, wrathful, maned, Libian, deadly, stout,
great, Masilian, Mauritanian, Parthian, Phrygian, Molorchaean, Carthaginian,
preying, ravening, The epithets of Lions.
stubborn, snatching, wrinkled, cruel, bloody, terrible, swelling, vast,
violent, Marmaruan. These also are the Epethites of the Lioness, Affrican,
bold, stony-harted, vengible* cauelodging, fierce, yellowe, Getulian,
Hercanian, vegentle, Libian, cruel, frowning, and terrible. Rugitus, The voice
of Lions.
that is roaring, or bellowing; according to this verse of the Poet. Tigrides
indomita rancant rugiuntque leones. And therefore comes Rugitus leonis the
roaring of the Lion. It is called also Gemitus, and Fremitus as Virgill, fremit
leo ore cruento. And again: Hinc exaudiret gemitus iraeque leonum
Vincla recusantum, and sera sub nocte rudentum.
And when the young lions have gotten a prey, in token whereof they roar like
the bleating of a calfe, thereby calling their elders to participate with them.
The places of their Leo cacumina montium amat. Their sight and their smelling
are most excellent, for they sleep with their eyes open, and because of the
brighnesse of their eyes, they cannot endure the light of fire; for fire and
fire cannot agree: also their smelling (for which cause they are called
Odorati) is very eminent, for if the lioness have committed adultry with the
leopard, the male discovers it by the sense of his Nose, and for this cause
also they are tamed in Tartaria, and are used for hunting Boares, Pa. Venetus.
Bears, Hearts, Roe-buckes, wild Asses, as also for wild and vtlandish Oxe^,
and they were wont to be carried to hunting two Lions in a cart together, and
either of them had a little dog following them.

There is no Beast more vehement then a she or Female-lyon, for which cause
Semiramis the Babilonian tyranness, Aelianus
esteemed not the slaughter of a Male Lion or a Libbard, but having gotten a
Lioness, The estimation o^ a Lyones, and the ^^uerall rage Lions.
above all other she rejoiced therein. A Lion while he eats is most fierce
and also when he is hungry, but when he is satisfied and filled, he

Aristotle
I have heard a story of an Englishman in Barbary which turned Moore, and lived
in the Kings Court, on a day it was said in his presence that there was a Lion
within a little space of the Court, and the place was named where it lodged.
The Englishman being more then half drunk, offered to go and kill the lion
hand to hand, and therewithal armed himself with a Mvsket, Sword and Dagger,
and other complements, and he had also about him a long Knife; so forth went
this renegate English Moore, more like a mad man then an advised Champion to
kill this Lion, and when he came to it, he found it a sleep, so

Therefore with his Musket top he smote the lion to awake it, whereat the beast
suddenly mounted up, and without any thanks or warning, set his forefeet on
this Squires breast, and with the force of her body overthrew the Champion, and
so stood upon him, keeping him down, holding her grim face and bloody teeth
over his face and eyes; a sight no doubt that made him wish himself a thousand
miles from her, because to all likelihood they should be the grinders of his
flesh and bones, and his first executioner to send his cursed soul to the
Devil for denying Jesus Christ his savior.

Yet it fell out otherwise, for the lion having been lately filled with some
liberal prey did not presently fall to eat him, but stood upon him for her
own safeguard, and meant so to stand till she was an hungry; during which time,
the poor wretch had liberty to gather his wits together, and so at the last,
seeing he could have no benefit by his Musket, Sword, or Dagger, and perceiving
nothing before him but unavoidable death, thought for the saving of his credit,
that he might not dye in foolish infamy, to do some exploit upon the Lion
whatsoever did betide him; and thereupon seeing the lion did bestride him,
standing over his upper parts, his hands being at some liberty, drew out his
long Barbarian knife, and thrust the same twice or thrice into the lions
flank; which the lion endured, never hurting the man, but supposing the
wounds came some other way, and

The Male Lion does not feed with the Female, but either of them apart, by
themselves. Their food and eating.
They eat raw flesh, for which cause the Graecians call them Omesteres,
Omoboroi, and Omophagoi: the young ones themselves cannot long be fed with
Albertus
because they are whot and dry; being at liberty they never want meat, and
yet they eat nothing but that which they take in hunting, and they hunt not
but once a day at the most, Auicen.
and eat every second day: whatsoever they leave of their meat, they return
not to it again to eat it afterward, whereof some assigned the cause to be
in the meat, because they can endure nothing which is unsweet, stale, or
stinking; but in my opinion they do it through the pride of their naturs,
resembling in all things a Princely majesty, and therefore scorn to have one
dish twice presented to their own table. But tame Lions being constrained
through hunger, will eat dead bodies, and also cakes made of meal and honey,
as may appear by that tame Lion which came to Appollonius, and was said to
have the soul in it of Amasis King of Egypt, which story is related by
Philostratus in this manner.

There was (says he) a certain man which in a leame led up and down a tame
Lion like a Dog, whethersoeuer he would, and the Lion was not only gentle to
his leader, but Appollonius satte in a Temple, he came unto him in more humble
manner, lying down at his feet, and looking up into his face, then ever he
did to any, as if he had some special supplycation unto him, and the people
thought he did it for hope of some reward, at the command and for the gain of
his master: At last Appolonius looked upon the lion, and told the people
that the lion did entreat him to signify unto them what he was, and
wherewithal he was possessed; Amasis a King of Egypt, who reigned in the
province of Sai. At which words, the Lion sighed deeply, and mourned forth a
lamentable roaring, and gnashing his teeth together, and crying with abundance
of tears; whereat Appollonius stroked the beast, and made much of him, telling
the people, that his opinion was, forasmuch as the soul of a K. had entered into
such a kingly beast, he judged it altogether unfit that the beast should go
about, and beg his living, and therefore they should do well to send him to
Leontopolis, there to be nourished in the Temple. The Egyptians agreed
thereunto, and made sacrifice to Amasis, adorning the beast with Chains,
Bracelets, and branches, so sending him to the inner Egypt, the priests
singing Hymns, and Anthems; but of the transfiguration of men into Lions, we
shall say more afterward, only this story I rehearsed in this place to show
the food of tame and enclosed lions.

The substance of such transfigurations, I hold to be either poetical or else
diabolical. The food therefore of lions is most commonly of meek and gentle
beasts, for they will not eat Wolves or Bears, or such beasts as live upon
ravening, because they begette in them melancholy: they eat their meat very
greedily, and devour many things whole without chewing, but then they fast
afterward two or three days together, never eating until the former be
digested; but when they fast, that day they drink, and the next day they eat,
for they seldom eat and drink both in one day: Aelianus. philes
and if any stick in his stomach which he cannot digest because it is
ouercharged, then does he thrust down his Solinus.
that never after any beast will taste thereof: for so great is the poison of
his breath, that it putrifieth the flesh, and also in his own body after it is
suddenly rypped up, the intrals stink abhominably. Pliny Aristotle
The reasons whereof I take to be their great voracitie which cannot but
corrupt in their stomach, and also the seldom emptying of their belly, for
they utter their excrements not above once in three days, and then also it is
exceeding dry like a dogs stinking abhominably, and sending forth much wind:
and because their urine smells strongly, which also they render like a dog
holding up one of their legs: They never make creatures for desire of meat,
and especially when they are old, and not able to hunt they go to towns and
villages, to the stables of Oxen, and foldes of sheep, and sometimes to men
and devour them, wherefore they never eat herbs but when they are sick.

Polybius affirms that he saw them besiege and compass about many Cities of
Affricke, and therefore the people took and hanged them up upon crosses and
gallowses by the high ways to the terror of others. Wherefore as they excel
in strength and courage, so also they do in cruelty, The cruelty of Lions.
Leo Afer Philes Herodotus.
devouring both men and beasts, setting upon troops of horsemen, depopulating
the flocks, and herds of cattle, carrying some alive to their yoonge ones,
killing five or six at one time, and whatsoever they lay hold on, they carry
it away in their mouth, although it be as big as a Camel: for they love
Camels

And therefore the Lions that set upon the Camels of Xerxes, neither meddled
with the men, The hatred of Lions and their several enemies.
Oxen, nor victuales, but only the Camels: so that it seems no meat is so
acceptable unto them. They hate above measure the wild Asses, and hunt and
kill them, according to the saying of the wise man. Leonum venatio onager^ the
wild Ass is the game of Lions, Ecclus 13. They hate also the Thoes, and fight
with them for their meat, because both of them live upon flesh, of whom
Gratius writes, Thoes commisses (clarissima fama) leones
Et subiere asto, and paruis domuere lacertis.
They eat also Apes, but more for Physic then for nourishment: they set upon
Oxen, Aelianus
that they may take one. They eat also young Elephants as we have showed
before in the story of Elephants; and so terrible is the roaring of the lion,
that he terrifieth all other beasts, but being at his prey, it is said he
makes a circle with his tail, either in the snow, or in the dust, and that
all beasts included within the compass of that circle, when they come into it
presently know it, and dare not for their lives pass over it, (believe this
who that list.)

It is also said, Ambrosius
that when the beasts do hear his voice, all of them do keep their
standing and dare not stir a foot, which assertion wants not good reason,
for by terror and dread they stand amazed. And the writer of the Gloss upon
the Prophet Amos, Nunquid rugiet leo in saltu, nisi habuerit praedam: Will the
lion roar, except he have a pray? Leo (says he) Tum famem patitur, si videt
praedam dat rugitum quo audito ferae stant fixo gradu stupefactae: that is to
say, the lion when he is hungry and sees his prey roareth, and then all the
wild beasts stand still amazed.

The drink of Lions.
They drink but little, and also seldom as we have said already, and
therefore Cyrus praising good soldiers in Xenophon, uses these words: Vos
famem habetis pro obsonio, and hydroposian de raon toon Leontoon pherete, that
is to say, hunger is your shambles, and you are more patient of thirst then
lions, The terrors of Lions and means whereby they perish.
although you drink water: Notwithstanding this great valliancie of lions yet
have they their terrors, enemies, and calamities, not only by men, but also by
beasts, over whom they claim a sovereignty. We have showed already India and
Hircania do kill lions, and forsake other beasts to combat with them. There
is a Tigre also called Lauzani which in many places is twice as big as a
lion, that kills them, and despises the huge quantity of Elephants. Martial
also writes, that he saw a tame Tiger devour a wild lion. A serpent or snake
does easily kill a lion, whereof Ambrosius writes very elegantly. Eximia
leonis pulchritudo per comantes ceruicis toros excutitur, cum subito a serpente
os pectore tenus attollitur, itaque Coluber ceruu^ fugit sed leone^ interficit.
The splendant beauty of a lion in his long curled mane is quickly abated and
allayed when the Serpent does but lift up his head to his breast; for such is
the ordinance of God that the snake which runs from a fearful Heart, should
without all fear kill a courageous lion: and the writer Marcellus life, Alla O
men dracon* etc. How much more will he fear a great Dragon, against whom he
has not power to lift up his tail: and Aristotle writes that the lion is
afraid of the Swine, and Rasis affirms as much of the Mouse.

Plinius Ambrose
The Cock also both seen and heard for his voice and comb, is a terror to the
lion and Basiliske, and the lion runs from him when he sees him, especially
from a white cock and the reason hereof, is because they are both partakers of
the Suns qualities in a high degree and therefore the greater body fears
the lesser, because there is a more eminent and predominant sunny property in
the Cock, then in the Lion. Animalia solaria.


Lucretius describes this terror notably, affirming that in the morning when
the Cock croweth the Lions betake themselves to flight, because there are
certain seeds in the body of Cocks, which when they are sent and appear to
the eyes of Lions, they vex their pupils and apples, and make them against
nature become gentle and quiet, the verses are these: Quinetiam gallum nocte
explaudentibus alis

Quem nequeunt rapidi contra constare leones
Inque tueri: ita continuo meminere fugari
Nimirum quia sunt gallorum in corpore quaed am
Semina: quae quum sint oculis immissa leonum
Pupillas intersodiunt acremque dolorem,
Praebent, vt nequeant contra durare feroces.
We have spoken already of the Leontophonus how she renders a urine which
poysoneth the Lion; the noyses of wheels and chariots do also terrify them,
according to the saying Seneca, Leonipauida sunt ad leuissimos strepitus
pectora. The high stomach of a Lion is afraid of a little strange noice.
Anthologius has an excellent Epigram of one of Cybels Priests, who travailing
in the mountains by reason of frost, cold, and snow, was driven into a Lions
den, and at night when the Lion returned, he scarred him away by the sound of a
bell: The like also shall be afterward declared of Wolves in their story.

They are also afraid of fire, Ardentesque faces, quas quamuis saeuiat horret;
For as they are inwardly filled with natural fire (for which cause by the
Egyptians they were dedicated to Vulcan) so are they the more afraid of all
outward fire, Aelianus
and so suspicious is he of his welfare, that if he tread upon the rind or
bark of Oak or the leaves of Osyer, he trembles and stands amazed: And
Democritus affirms that there is a certain herb Armenia and Cappadocia,
which being laid to a Lion, Plinius
makes him to fall presently upon his back and lie upward without stirring,
and gaping with the whole breadth of his mouth, the reason whereof ( Pliny
says) is because it cannot be bruised.

There is no beast more desirous of copulation then a lioness, Leo Afer Their
lust of copulation.
and for this cause the males oftentimes fall forth, for sometimes eight, ten,
or twelve males follow one lioness like so many dogs one fault bitch: for
indeed their natural constitution is so hot, that at all times of the year
both sexes desire copulation, although Aristotle seems to be against it
because they bring forth only in the spring.

The lioness (as we have showed already) commits adultery by lying with the
Libbard, The adultery of lionesses. Pliny Apollonius
for which thing she is punished by her male if she wash not her self before
she come at him, but when she is ready to be delivered, she flies to the
lodgings of the Libbards, and there among them hides her young ones, (which for
the most part are males) for if the male Lion find them, he knows them and
destroys them, as a bastard and adulterous issue, and when she goes to give
them suck, she faineth as though she went to hunting.

By the copulation of a lioness and an Hyaena is the Ae^thiopian Crocuta
brought forth. Pollux Coelius
The Arcadian dogs called Leontomiges were also generated betwixt dogs and
Lions: In all her life long she bears but once, and that but one at a time,
as Aesop seems to set down in that fable, where he expresses that
contention between the lioness and the Fox, about the generositie of their
young ones: the Fox obiecteth to the lioness, that she brings forth but one
whelpe at a time, but he on the contrary Parere se quidem vnum sed Leonem:
That is to say, she brings forth indeed but one, yet that one is a Lion:
for one Lion is better then a thousand Foxes, and true generosity consists
not in popularitie, or multitude, but in the gifts of the mind joined with
honorable descent: The lionesses of Syria bear five times in their life; at
the first time five, afterward but one, and lastly they remain barren.
Herodotus speaking of other lions, says they never bear but one, and that
only once, whereof he gives this reason, that when the whelpe begins to
stir in his dams belly, the length of his claws pearce through her matrix,
and so growing greater and greater, by often turning leaves nothing whole; so
that when the time of littering comes she casts forth her whelpe and her
womb both together, after which time she can never bear more: but I hold this
for a fable, because Homer, Pliny, Oppianus, Solinus, Philes, and Aelianus

When Apollonius traveled from Babylon, by the way they saw a lioness that
was killed by hunters, the beast was of a wonderful bigness, such a one as
was never seen: about her was a great cry of the hunters, and of other
neighbors which had flocked thither to see the monster, not wondering so much
at her quantity, as that by opening of her belly, they found within her eight
whelps, whereat Appolonius wondering a little, told his companions that they
travailing now into India should be a year and eight months in their journey:
Philestratus
For the one lion signified by his skill, one year, and the eight young ones
eight months. The truth is, that a lion bears never above thrice, that is
to say, six at the first, and at the most afterward, two at a time, and lastly
but one, because that one proves greater, and fuller of stomach, then the
other before him; wherefore nature having Physiologus
until by the roaring of the male their father, and by breathing in their face
they be quickened, which also he goes about to establish by reason: but they
are not worth the relating. Isidorus on the other side declares that for three
days and three nights after their littering, they do nothing but sleep, and
at last are awaked by the roaring of their father: so that it should seem
without controversy, they are senseless for a certain space after their
whelping: At two months old they begin to run and walk. They say also that
the fortitude, wrath, and boldness of lions, is Physiologus whereby he goes
about to establish his opinion: but herein I leave every man to his own
judgment, in the mean season admiring the wonderful wisdom of God, which
has so ordered the several natures of his creatures, that whereas the little
Partrige can run so soon as it is out of the shell; and the

There is no creature that loves her young ones better then the lioness, for
both sheapheards, and hunters, frequenting the mountains, do oftentimes see
how irefully she fights in their defense, receiving the wounds of many darts,
and the strokes of many stones, the one opening her bleeding body, and the
other pressing the blood out of the wounds, standing invincible never yielding
till death, yea death it self were nothing unto Aelianus Endemus
so that her young ones might never be taken out of her den: for which cause
Homer compares Ajax to a lioness, fighting in the defense of the carcass of
Patroclus. It is also reported, that the male will lead abroad the young ones,
but it is not likely, that the lion which refuses to accompany his female in
hunting will so much abase his noble spirit, as to undergo the lionesses duty
in leading abroad the young ones. In Pangius a mountain of Thracia, there was a
lioness which had whelps in her den, the which den was observed by a Bear,
Gillius
the which Bear on a day finding the den unfortified both by the absence of
the Lion and the lioness, entered into the same and slew the Lions whelps,
afterward went away, and fearing a revenge, for her better security against
the lions rage, climbed up into a tree, and there sat, as in a sure castle of
defense: at length the lion and lioness returned both home, and finding their
little ones dead in their own blood, according to natural affection fell both
exceeding sorrowful, to see them so slaughtered whom they both loved; but
smelling out by the foot the murderer, followed with rage up and down until
they came to the tree whereinto the Bear was ascended, and seeing her, looked
both of them ghastly upon her, oftentimes assaying to get into the tree, but all
in vain, for nature which adorned them with singular strength and nimblenesse,
yet

Then the male forsook the female, leaving her to watch the tree, and he like
a mournful father for the loss of his children, wandered up and down the
mountain making great moan and sorrow, till at the last he saw a Carpenter
hewing wood, who seeing the lion coming toward him let fall his Axe for
fear, but the lion came very lovingly toward him, fawning gently upon his
breast with his forefeete, and licking his face with his tongue; which
gentleness of the lion the man perceauing, he was much astonished, and being
more and more embraced, and fawned one by the lion, he followed him, leaving
AElianus
which the two furious beasts seeing they tore her all to pieces: And
afterward the lion conducted the man unto the place and work where he first
met him, and there left him, without doing the least violence or harm unto him.

Neither do the old lions love their yongue ones in vain and without thanks
or recompense, for in their old age they require it again, The recompense of
young Lions to the old. Tzetzes
then do the yongue ones both defend them from the annoyances of enemies and
also maintain and feed them by their own labor: for they take them forth
to hunting, and when as their decrepite and withered estate is not able to
follow the game, the younger pursues and takes it for him: having obtained it,
roareth mightily like the voice of some warning piece; to signify unto

Admirable is the disposition of lions, both in their courage, society, and
love, Aristotle Albertus The love of lions to their benefactors.
for they love their nourishers and other men with whom they are conversant:
they are neither fraudulent nor suspicious, they never look awry or squinte,
and by their good wills they would never be looked upon.

Their clemency in that fierce and angry nature is also worthy commendation,
The nature of their revenge. Pliny Solinus
and to be wondered at in such beasts, for if one prostrate himself unto them
as it were in petition terrify the hunter, but if it pinch them further, and
draw blood, they increase their punishment.

There is an excellent story of a Souldior in Arabia, who among other his
colleagues rode abroad on geldings to see some wild Lions: now geldings are so
fearful by nature, that where they conceive any fear, no wit or force of man
is able by spur and rod to make him to come near the thing it fears, but
those which are not gelded are more bold and coragious, and are not at all
afraid of Lions, but will fight and combat with them. As they road they saw
three Lions together, one of the soldiers seeing one of them stray and run
away from his fellows, cast a Dart at him, which fell on the ground near the
Lions head, whereat the beast stood still a little, and pawsed, and afterward
went

There is an obscure Author that attributes such mercy and clemency to a
Beast which he calls Melosus, for he persecuteth with violence and open
mouth stout men, and al whom he is able to resist, but yet is afraid of the
crying of children. It is probable that he mistaketh it for the Lion, for
besides him, I have not read of any Beast that spares Solinus affirms that
many Captives having been set at liberty, have met with Lions as they returned
home, weak, ragged, sick, and disarmed, safely without receiving any harm or
violence.

And in Lybia the people believe that they understand the petitions and
entreatings of them that speak to them for their lives: for there was a
certain captive woman coming home again into Getulia her native country
through many woods, was set upon by many Lions, against whom she used no other
weapon but only threatenings and fair words, falling down on her knees unto
them, beseeching them to spare her life, telling them that she was a stranger,
a captive, a wanderer, a weak, a lean and lost woman, and therefore not
worthy to be devoured by such courageous and generous beasts as they: at
which Pliny. Solinus.
which thing she confessed after her safe return: the name of this woman was
called Iuba. Although about this matter there be sundry opinions of men, some
making question whether it be true, that the Lion will spare a prostrate
suppliant, making confession unto him that he is overcome; yet the Romans did
so generally believe it, that they caused to be inscribed so much upon the
gates of the great Roman palace in these two verses; Iratus recolas, Textor.
quam nobilis ira leonis
In sibi prostratos, se negat esse feram.
It is reported also, that if a man and another beast be offered at one time to
a lion to take his choice, Albertus.
whether of both he will devour, he spares the man and kills the other
beast. These lions are not only thus naturally affected, but are enforced
thereunto by chance and accidental harms. As may appear by these examples
following, Mentor the Syracusan as he travailed in Syria met with a Lion, that
at his first sight fell prostrate unto him, roling himself upon the earth like
some distressed creature, whereat the man was much amazed, and not
understanding the meaning of this beast, he indeauored to run away; the beast
still ouertooke him, and met him in the face, licking his footstepes like a
flatterer, showed him his heel, wherein he did perceive a certain swelling,
whereat he took a good heart, going unto the Lion, took him by the leg,
and seeing a splint sticking Syracusis, until Plynies time, as he reports.
The like story is reported of Elpis the Samian, who coming into Affricke by
ship, and there going a shore, had not walked very far on the land, but he
met with a gaping lion, at which being greatly amazed, he climbed up into a
tree, forasmuch as there was no hope of any other flight, and prayed unto
Bacchus (who in that Country is esteemed as chief of the Gods) to defend him,
as he thought from the iaws of death: but the lion seeing him to climb into the
tree stood still, and laid himself down at the root thereof, desiring him in
a manner, by his heavy roaring to take pity upon him, gaping with his mouth
and showing him a bone sticking in his teeth, which through greediness he
swallowed, which did so pain him, that he could eat nothing: at the last the
man perceiving his mind, (moved by a miracle) laid aside all fear, and came
down to the dumbe-speaking distressed Lion, and eased him of that Pliny.
but once a day came to show himself to the man his helper, during the time
that they abode in those quarters; and therefore Elpis did afterward dedicate a
temple unto Bacchus in remembrance thereof. And this seems to me most
wonderful, that Lions should know the virtue of men's curing hands above other
creatures, and also come unto them against nature and kind, but so much is the
force of evil and pain, that it alters al courses of savage minds and
creatures.

When Androcles a servant ran away from a Senator of Rome, Aelianus Gellius.
because he had committed some offense, (but what his offense was I know not)
and came into Africa, leaving the Cities and places inhabited to come into a
desert region: Afterward when Androcles A notable story of a Lion.
he was compelled by daily stripes to run away, that his sides might be free
from the blows of his master, and went into the solitary places of the
fields, and the sands of the wilderness: and if he should happen to stand
in need of meat, he did purpose to end his life by some means or other: and
there he was so scortched with the heat of the sun, that at last finding
out a cave, he did cover himself from the heat of it therein: and this cave
was a lions den. But after that the lion had returned from hunting, (being very
much pained by reason of a Thorn which was fastened in the bottom of his
foot) uttered forth such great lamentation and pitiful roaringes, by reason
of his wound, as that it should seem, he did want some body to make his moan
unto for remedy; at last coming to his cave,

But the man at the first was very sore afraid of him, and made no other
reckoning but of death: but after that he saw such a huge savage beast so meek
and gentle, began to think with himself, that surely there was some sore on
the bottom of the foot of the beast, because he lifted up his foot so unto
him, and then taking courage unto him, Gellius.
lifted up the lions foot, and found in the bottom of it a great piece of
splint, which he plucked forth, and so by that means eased the lion of her
pain, and pressed forth the matter which was in the wound, and did very
curiously without any great fear thoroughly dry it, and wipe away the blood:
the lion being eased of his pain, laid himself down to rest, Androcles.

With the which cure the lion being very well pleased, because he handled him so
curtiously and friendly, not only gave him for a recompense his life, but also
went daily abroad to forage and brought home the fattest of his prey.
Androcles whom all this while (even for the space of three years) he kept
familiarly, without any note of cruelty or evil nature in his den, and there
the man and the beast lived mutually at one commons, the man roasting his meat
in the whot sun, and the lion eating his part raw, according to kind. When he
had thus lived by the space of three years, and grew weary of such a
habitation, life, and society, he bethought himself of some means to depart;
and therefore on a day when the lion was gone abroad to hunting, the man took
his iourny away from that hospitality, and after he had travailed three days
(wandering up and down) he

And being received by his master, he was guilty of so great and foul faults,
that he was condemned to death, and the manner of his death was, to be torn in
pieces of Wild beasts. Now there were at Rome in those days many great,
fearful, cruel, and ravening beasts, and among them many Lions, it fortuned
also that shortly after the taking of the man, the aforesaid Libyan Lion with
whom he lived long, seeking abroad for his companion and man-friend, was
taken and brought to Rome, and there put among the residue, who was the most
fierce, grim, fearful, and Savage, above all other in the company, and the
eyes of men were more fastened upon him then all other beside. When Androcles
was brought forth to his execution, and cast in among these Savage beasts,
this Lion at the first sight looking steadfastly upon him, stood still a
little, and then came Accepti beneficij memore, mindful of former friendship,
licked gently his hands and legs, and so went round about him touching his
body, and so the man began to know him, and both of them to congratulate each
other in that their imprisoned occurrence; and to signify to all the beholders
their former acquaintance and conversation, the man by stroking and kissing
the Lion, and the Lion by falling down prostrate at the man's feet. In the
mean time a Pardall came with open mouth to devour the man, but the lion rose
up against her and defended his old friend, and she being instant, the lion
tore her in pieces to the great admiration of the beholders, Gillius.
Caesar which had caused those spectacles, sent for the man, and asked him the
cause of that so rare and prodigious an event, who incontinently told him the
story before expressed. The rumor whereof was quickly spread abroad among the
people, and tables of writing were made of the whole matter, and finally all
men agreed that it was fit that both the man and the lion should be pardoned
and restored to liberty: Appion.
and afterward (says Appion) all the people (and beholders of that comedy)
were suitors to the Senate for the accomplishment thereof, and so the man was
pardoned, and the lion was given unto him for a reward or fuffrage, who led him
up and down the streets in a leame or slip, Androcles receiving money, and the
lion adorned with flowers and garlands, and all men that saw or met them, said:
Hic est leo hospes hominis, hic est homo medicus leonis, Here goes the lion
which was this man's Host, and here is the man which was this lions Physician.
Seneca also in his book de beneficijs, out of Gellius writes so much of
another lion: and indeed there is no man or other beast more fixed and constant
in their love and friendship, A story of the justice of Lions.
or more ready to revenge the breach of amity and kindness, then is a lion; as
appears by this story of Eudemus, who writes of a certain young man, that
he nourished together many years, a dog, a bear, and a lion, who lived in
perfect peace and concord without breach, snarling, or appearance of anger. On a
day as the bear and dog played together and biting one another gently, it
happened that the dog fastened his teeth (in sport) deeper then the bear could
digest, and therefore presently he fell upon him, and with his claws tore out
the soft part of his belly, whereof he presently dried: The lion Aelianus.
measured the same measure to the bear as he had done to the dog, and served
him with the same sauce, tearing him instantly in pieces. There is also in the
life of S. Jerome, a story of a lion, that was cured by him, as you have read
before the lion was by Elpis, and that the beast in gratitutde of that good
turn, did ever afterward follow the ass which brough him home his carriage
and provision through the woods; Till at last the lion being a sleep, the Ass
was stolen away, for sorrow whereof the lion put himself in the Asses stead,
T^xtor.
to bear burdens as he did ^ within short time after he found out the Ass in
Erasmus mind concerning this story, Diodorus.
that the Author thereof took upon him to write wonders and not truth. The
Kings of Egypt and Syria did keep tame lions, to accompany them into their
wars, which were led about their own bodies for their guard and costody, The
clemency of Lions in sparing men.
against all peril and invasion.

It is also very pertinent to this place, to express the clemency of these
beasts toward the martyrs and servants of Jesus Christ, both men and women,
that so we may observe the performance and accomplishment of that prophecy
Psalm. 91. That they should walk upon the Aspe and the Cockatrice, and sofely
tread upon the lion and the Dragon; This we are not to attribute to the nature
of lions, but rather to the ouerruling hand of ours and their Creator who in
remembrance of his own promise, and advancement of his own glory, stopeth the
mouth of lions, and restrains all violence both of living creatures and
elements, yet I will not impose any necessity of believing these stories upon
the reader, Textor.
for I my self report them not for truth, but because they are written. When
S. Anthony went about to make a grave for the interring of the carcass of
Paul the first Anachorite, and wanted a shouell or spade to turn up the
earth, there came two lions, and with their claws opened the earth so wide and
deep, that they performed therein the office of a Eleutherius being cast to
the lions at the command of Adrian the Emperor, and Prisca a noble Vergin, at
the command of Claudius Caesar, both of them in their several times, tamed
the untamed beasts and escaped death.

Macarius being in the wilderness or Mountains, it fortuned that a Lioness
had a den near unto his cell, wherein she had long nourished blind whelps, to
whom the holy man (as it is reported) gave the use of their eye and sight; the
Lioness requited the same with such gratification as lay in her power, for she
brought him very many sheepe-skins to cloth and cover him. Primus, and
Foelicianus, Thracus, Vitus, Modestus, and Crescentia, all martyrs, being cast
unto lions, received no harm by them at all, but the beasts lay down at their
feet and became tame, gentle, and meek, not like themselves, but rather like
Doves. When a bear and a lion fell upon Tecla the vergin, a Martyr, a Lioness
came and fought eagarly in her defense against them both. When Martina the
Daughter of a Consul could not be terrified or drawn from the Christian faith
by any imprisonment, chains or stripes, nor allued by any fair words to
sacrifice to Apollo, there was a lion brought forth to her, Daria a virgin in
the days of Numerian the Emperor, who was defended by a Lioness, but I spare
to blot much paper with the recital of those things (which if they be true) yet
the Authors purpose in their allegatio^ is most prophain, unlawful and wicked,
because he thereby goes about to establish miracles in saints, which are long
agone ceased in the church of God.

Some Martyrs also have been devoured by lions, as Ignatius Bishop of Antioch,
Satyrus and Perpetua, he under Traian the Emperor, and they under Valerian and
Galienus. Men devoured by Lions.
King 13. that was sent by the almighty unto Jeroboam, to cry out against the
alter at Bethell, and him that erected that altar, with charge, that he should
neither eat nor drink in that place.

Afterward an old prophet which dwelt in that place hearing thereof, came unto
the Prophet, and told him that God had commanded him to go after him, and
fetch him back again to his house to eat and drink; wherewithal being
deceived, he came back with him contrary to the commandment of the lord given
to himself: whereupon as they sat at meat, the prophet that beguiled him, had
a charge from God to prophecy against him, and so he did: afterward as he went
homeward a lion met him and killed him,

In the twentieth chap. of the same book of Kings, there is another story of a
prophet, which as he went by the way he met with a man, and bade in the name
of the lord to wound and smite him, but he would not, preferring pity before
the service of the Lord: well (said the Prophet unto him) seeing thou refusest
to obey the voice of the Lord, Behold as soon as thou art departed, a lion
shall meet thee and destroy thee: and so it came to pass; for being out of
the presence of the Prophet, a lion met him and tore him in pieces.

The idolotrous people that were placed at Jerusalem by the King of Babel were
destroyed by lions, and unto these examples of God his judgments, I will add
other out of humane stories. Paphages a King of Ambracia, meeting a lioness
leading her whelps, was suddenly set upon by her and torn in pieces, upon
whom Ovid made these verses: Foeta tibi occurrat patrio popularis in aruo,
Sitque paphageae causa leaena necis.
Hyas the brother of Hyades, was also slain by a lioness. The people called
Ampraciota in Affrique, Aelianus
do most religiously worship a lioness, because a notable tyrant which did
oppress them was slain by such an one. There is a mountain near the river
Indus (called Litaeus) of a shepherd so named, Plutarch
which in that mountain did most superstitiously worship the Moon and
contemned all other Gods, his sacrifices were performed in the night season; at
length (says the Author) the Gods being angry with him, sent unto him a couple
of lions who tore him in pieces, leaving no monument behind but the name of the
mountain for the accident of his cruel death.

The inhabitants of that mountain wear in their ears a certain rich stone
(called Clitoris) which is very black, and bred no where else but in that
place. There is a known story of the two Babilonian lovers, Pyramus and
Thisbe, who in the night time had couenanted to meet at a fountain near the
sepulcher of Ninus, and Thysbe coming thither first, as she sat by the
fountain, a lioness being thirsty, came thither to drink water (after the
slaughter of an Ox:) at the sight whereof, Thysbe ran away and let fall her
mantell, which the lioness finding tore i^ in pieces with her bloody teeth.

Afterward came Pyramus, and seeing her mantell all bloody and torn asunder,
suspecting that she that loved him, being before him at the appointed place had
been killed by some wild beast, very inconsiderately drew forth his sword,
and thrust the same Thysbe came again, and seeing her lover lie in that
distress, as one love, one cause, one affection had drawn them into one
place, and there one fear had wrought one of their destructions, she also
sacrificed her self upon the point of one and the same sword.

There was also in Scythia a cruel tyrant (called Therodomas) who was wont to
cast men to lions to be devoured of them, and for that cause did nourish
privately many lions: unto this cruelty did Ovid allude, saying:
Therodomantaeos vt qui sensere leones. And again: Non tibi Therodomas
crudusque vocabitur Atreus. Unto this discourse of the bloud-thirstie cruelty
of lions, you may add the puissant glory of them, who both in sacred and
profane stories are said to have destroyed lions. Men that have overcome lions.
When Sampson went down to Thimnath, it is said, that a young lion met him
roaring to destroy him, but the spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he tore
it in pieces like a Kid; wherein he was a type of Jesus Christ, who in like
sort being set upon by the roaring of the devil and his members, did with
facility (through his divine nature) utterly overthrow the malice of the
devil. Afterward Sampson went down to the Philistine woman whom he loved, and
returning, found that Bees had entered into the lions A voraci exiunt cibus, and
ex forti egressa est dulcedo: Out of the deuourer came meat, and out of the
strong came sweetness.

Benaia the son of Iehoiada one of David's worthies, did in the Winter time in
the snow kill a Lion in a ditch: David himself feeding his fathers flock,
slew a Lion and a Bear which had robbed him of a Lamb.

It is reported of Perdicas (one of the Captains of Alexander) a valiant man,
that he went alone into the den of a lioness, but not finding her therein,
took away her whelps and brought them forth to the admiration of all men; for
the lioness both among the Barbarians and Graecians is accounted the strongest
and most irresistable beast. In the Northern parts of the world (says
Pausanias) near the monuments of Alcmea and Hyllus, the sons of Hercules,
there was a Lion which slew many people, and at last also Euippus the only
son of King Megareus; whereat the King grew so sorrowful and angry,
thirsting after revenge, that he promised to the man that could overcome him
his daughter and the succession of his kingdom: There was a noble and valiant
young man called Alcathus, who undertook the action and killed the Lion, for
which thing he obtained both the wife and the kingdom according to the promise
of Negareus, and therefore in thankfulness of so good fortune, he builded
there a famous Temple dedicating it to Diana, Agrotera, and Apollo Agraeus.

We have spoken before of Lysimachus, unto whom we may add Polydamas the
Scotus^an, who in all things hetooke in hand, propounded unto himself the
example of Hercules, and did kill a Lion of monstrous stature and bigness,
being unarmed, in the mountain Olympus, as at another time he held a Bulls leg
so fast in his hand, that while the beast Hercules was a boy or stripling, he
slew the Teumessian Lion in Teumessus a mountain of Becotia, and pulled off
his skin which ever after he wore insteede of a cloak. This Lion is also
called a Naemean Lion, yet some are of opinion that the Maemean Lion, was
another called also the Moloschaean because having killed the son of
Notorchus, he persuaded Hercules which did sworn with him, to take revenge in
his stead.

From whence the Nemaean sacrifices is performed by the Graecians in
remembrance of Hercules, and Lucan makes mention of this Nemaean Lion in this
verse: Si saenum premaeres Nemaeum saena leonem. Jupiter Nemaeus. Varinus
speaking of the Nemaean lion tells this story thereupon, whereas says he,
the said lion could not be killed with any sword, dart, or other sharp
instrument, Hercules tore him in pieces with his hands without all weapons,
and afterward wore his skin in remembrance of that victory: It happened on a
day, that as he travailed he met with his friend Telamon who wanted children,
of whom he was entreated that he would make sacrifice to Jupiter for him in
that weed or garment, and also entreat for a son. Hercules yielded, and
taking the golden censer in his hand, made the sacrifice and supplication to
Jupiter, that Telamon might have a son, and as he sacrificed, an Eagle flew
over them, which in Greek is called Aetos, wherefore when Hercules saw the
same, he charged Telamon that his son should be called Aetos; that is, an
Eagle: and so he was, but Ajax, and wore continually that Lions skin which
was given him by Hercules: and therefore he could not be wounded: But I take
this to be but a fable: rather this was the truth.

Ajax was a valiant soldier, and so warily carried himself in many battles,
that he never received wound, but at last he slew himself with his own sword
thrusting it thorough his neck; and for this cause it was fabled, that he
never could be wounded by a virtue, as was imagined conferred on him from
Hercules. Ovid has a witty fiction of one Phyllius, who fell so deeply in
love with a little boy, that at his pleasure he took many wild beasts, birds,
and Lions, and tamed them to the delight of his Amasius: at length the
infatiable boy required him to do the like by a Bull, which he had overcome,
but Phyllius denying that request, the boy presently cast himself down from a
rock, he gives, also the denial of one small request cannot be endured
although a thousand good turns have gone before it, wherefore such minds may
well be transfused into Swannes, which forsake their owners and breeders, going
and swimming far from their first and proper habitation.

Having but mentioned such a story, it is not exorbitant to add in one word
other fictions of metamorphosing, Men transfigured into Lions according to
poets and fictions
and transfiguring men into Lions, which we promised in the former discource of
Amasis and Apollonius when I discoursed of the food of Lions.

And first of all, it is not improper to remember the caution of Timaeus the
Pythagoraean who affirms, that the mutation of men into beasts is but a
fiction brought in

Olympiodorus.
And this thing is thought to be most consonant to the opinion of Plato, for in
consideration of the habit and not of the kind, a good house-keeperr and
charitable nourishing man is said to be transmuted into a tree: he which lives
by catching and snatching, to serve his own concupiscence into a Kite, he
which for love of military discipline and martial affairs into a lion, he
that was a tyrant and a deuourer of men into a dragon: and Empedortes also
said, that if a man depart this natural life and be transmuted into a brute
beast, it is most happiest for him if his soul go into a lion: but if he
loose his kind and senses and be transmuted into a plant, then is it best to
be metamorphosed Hippo changed into a lion, and Atlas into a lioness, and the
like I might say of Proteus, of the Curetes, and others: and generally all the
Eastern wise men believed the transmigration of spirits from one into
another, and insinuated so much to their symmists and disciples, making little
or no difference betwixts the natures of men and brute beasts.

Therefore they taught that all their Priests after death were turned into
lions, their religious Vestals or women into Hyaenaes, Porphyrius
their servant or ministers in the temples about the service of their vain
Gods into Crows and Ravens, the fathers of families into Eagles and Hawks,
but those which served the Leonticke aulters, meaning Namaeasacra instituted
for the honor of Hercules, were transformed diversely: but of all these

As that which has been already expressed most notably describes the nature
of the lion, The understanding of Lions.
so that succeeds has the same use for the manifestation of the dignity and
honor of this beast. First of all therefore to begin with his understanding,
and to show how near he comes to the nature of man. It is reported by
Elianus, that in Lybia they retain great friendship with men, enjoying many
things in common with them, and

And if at any time he being deceived in his hunting, and cannot get to
satisfy hunger, then goes he to the houses of men, and there if he find the
man at home, he will enter in and destroy, except by wit, policy, and
strength, he be resisted; but if he find no man but only women, they by
railing on him and rebukes drive him away, which thing argues his
understanding of the Lybian tongue; The sum and manner of those speeches and
words which she uses to affright and turn them away from entering houses,
are these:

Art not thou ashamed being a Lion the King of beasts to come to my poor
cottage to beg meat at the hands of a woman? and like a sick man
distressed with the weakness of

By such like words she enchanteth the mind of the Lion, so that like a
reasonable person overcome with strong arguments, notwithstanding his own
want, hunger, and extremity, he casts his eyes to the ground ashamed and
aflicted, and departs away without any enterprise: Neither ought any
judicious or Wiseman think this thing to be incredible, for we see that
Horses and Dogs which live among men, and hear their continual voices, do
discern also their terms of threatening, chiding, and rating, and so stand in
awe of them; and therefore the Lions of Libia, whereof many are brought up like
Dogs in houses, with whom the little children play, may well come to the
knowledge and understanding of the Maurysian tongue.

Leo Afer.
and discern sexes, and are indeed with a natural modesty, declyning the
sight of women's privy parts. And unto this may be added the notable story of a
Lion in England (declared by Crantzius) which by evident tokens was able to
distinguish betwixt the King, nobles, The anger of Lions, and the signs
thereof.
and vulger sort of people.

As the ears of Horses, are a note of their generosity, so is the tail of
lions, when it stands immovable, it shows that he is pleasant, gentle,
meek, unmoved, and apt to endure any thing, which falls out very seldom,
for in the sight of men he is seldom found without rage. In his anger, he
first of all beats the earth with his tail, Adamantiu. Albertus.
afterward his own sides, and lastly leapeth upon his prey or adversary. Some
creatures use to wag their tails, when they see suddenly those which are of
their acquaintance, as Dogs; Aphroditius.

The backbone of such beasts is hollow, and contains in it marrow, which
reaches to the tail, and therefore there is in the tail a kind of animal
motion, and power. For which cause when the beast sees one of his
acquaintance, he waggeth his tail by way of salutation for the same reason
that men shake hands, for that part is the readiest and nimblest member of his
body, but Bulls and lions, are constrained to the wagging of their tails for
the same reason that angry men are light fingered, and apt to strike: for when
they cannot have sufficient power to revenge, they either speak if they be
men, or else bark if they be Dogs, or smite their sides with their tail if
they be lions; by that means uttering

But we have showed before that the lion strikes his sides with his tail, for
the stirring up of himself against dangerous perils, for which cause Lucan
compares Caesar in his warlike expedition, at Pharsalia against his own
Country, before his passage over Rubicon, whilst he exhorted his soldiers,
to a lion beating himself with his own tail, in these verses; Inde mora
sol^it belli, tumidumque per amnem,
Signa tulit propere: sicut sqallentibus armis,
Aestifer ae Lybies, viso leo cominus host*

Mox vbi se saeuae stimulauit verbere caudae,
Erexitque iubas, vasto and grave murmur hiatu.
Infremuit: tum torta leuis si lancea Mauri.
Haereat, aut latum subeant venabula pectus,
Per ferrum tanti securus vulneris exit
There are many Epigrams, both Greek, and latin, concerning the rage, force,
friendship, and society of lions with other beasts, whereof these are most
memorable: the first of a Hare which through sport crept through the mouth of a
tame lion, whereof Martial writes in this sort, teaching her to fly to the
lions teeth against the rage of Dogs, in these Rictibus his tauros, non
eripuere magistri,
Per quos praeda fugax, itaque reditque lepus,
Quodque magis mirum, velotior exit ab hostae.
Nec nihil a tanta, nobilitate refert.
Tutior in sola, non est cum currit arena.
Nec cauiae tanta, conditur ille fide,
Si vitare canum morsus, lepus improbe guaeriis
Ad quae confugias, or a leonis habes.
There is another of the same Poets, about the society of a Rame and a Lion,
wherein hewondereth, that so different natures should live together, both
because the Lion forgets his prey in the woods, and also the Ram, the eating
of green grass, and through hunger, both of them constrained to taste of the
same dishes, and yet this is no other, then that which was foretold in holy
scripture, the lion and the lamb should play together, the Epigram is this;
Maessyli leo fama iugi, peicorisque martitus,
Lanigeri, mirum qui posuere fide,
Ipse licet videas, cauea stabulantur in vna,
Et pariter socias, carpit vterque dapes
Nec faetu nemorum gaudent, nec mittibus herbis,
Concordem saciat, sed rudis agna famem.
For we have showed before, that a Lion in his hunger, will endure nothing, but
fearcely falls upon every prey, according to these verses of Mannilius. Quis
dubitet, vasti quae sit natura leonis?
Quasque suo dietet, signo nassentibus arts?
Ille nouas semper pugnas, noua bella ferarum,
Apparat, and pecorum, viuit spolio, atque rapinis.
Hoc habet, hoc studium posts, ornare superbos
Pellibus, and captas domibus configere predas,
Atque parare metum syluis, and viuere rapto.
Concerning the hunting and taking of lions, The hunting and taking of Lions.
the Indian dogs, and some other strong hunters do set upon Bulls, Bores, and
Lions, as we have said before in the History of dogs: but dogs, which are
begotten of Tigers, amongst the Indians, and those of Hyrcania, especially do
this thing, as it is noted by Mantuan concerning the fortitude and courage of a
dog, saying: Et truculentus Helor certare leonibus audens. In the province of
Ginezui which is subject to the great Cham king of Tartaria, there are very
many lions which are very great and cruel: and in that region the dogs are
accounted so bold and strong, as they will not fear to invade or set upon
those lions; And it oftentimes comes to pass, that two dogs and a hunting
Archer sitting on horseback do kill and destroy a lion, for when the Dogs
perceive the lion to be near them, they set upon him with great barking, but
especialy when they know themselves backed with the help of a man, they do not
cease to bite the lion in his hinder parts and tail: and although the lion
does oftentimes threaten them with his frouning and terrible countinance,
turning himself this way and that way, that he might tear them in pieces,
notwithstanding the dogs looking warily unto themselves, are not easily hurt
by him, especially when the

And if he can, he betaketh himself rightly unto some tree, that he may enjoy
the same for a place of defense for his back, then turning himself, with a
scornful grinning he fights withal his force against the Dogs. Paulus.
Venetus.
But the Hunter coming nearer upon his Horse cease, not to throw Darts at
the lion until he kill him: neither does the lion feel the force of the
Darts until he be slain, the Dogs do unto him so great hurt and
trouble.

If a lion be seen in the time of hunting, being ashamed to turn his back,
he does a little turn away himself if be oppressed with a multitude: being
removed from the sight of the Hunters, he does hastily prepare for flight,
thinking that his shame is cleared by concealing himself; and therefore
knows that the woods cannot give testimony of this fear.

He does want in his flight the leaping which he uses in pursuing other
beasts. He does craftily dissemble and abolish his footesteps to deceive the
Hunters: Pollux affirms that if a Hunter do fight against any wild Beasts,
as a Bore, he must not straddle with his Legs wide abroad, but keep them
together within the compass of a foot, that he may keep his ground steadfast
and sure, even as the manner is in Wrestling: for there are some wild Beasts as
Panthers and Lions, when they are hunted, and are hindered in their course by
their Hunters, if they be any thing near them do presently leap upon them.

But the stroke which is given ought to be directed or leauelled right against
the breast, and the heart, for that being once stricken is incurable. ( Xenophon
says) in his book concerning Greece,) are taken about the Pangaean Mountain,
and the Mountain called Cyrtus above Macedony: some in Olympus, Mysius, and
Pindus: some in Mysa above Syria, and in other Mountains which are fit for the
breeding and nourishing Beasts of this kind. But they are taken partly in the
Mountains by poison of Wolfe-bane, for the sharpness of the Region (because
that can admit no other kind of hunting as by Nets and Dogs) but mingling
this with that thing in which every wild beast delights, the Hunters do
cast it unto them near the Waters. There are some also which do discende down
in the night time, who are taken in regard that all the ways by which they
should ascend unto the Mountains are stopped with Hunts-men, and

There are some also which make pitfals or great ditches in the ground to catch
Lions, in the midst whereof, they leave a profound stony pillar, upon which
in the night time they tie a Goat, and do hedge the pitfals round about with
boughs, least that it might be seen, leaving no entrance into the same. The
lions hearing the voice of the goat in the night, do come unto the place and
walk round about the hedge, but finding no place where they may enter, they
leap over and are taken. Oppianus does describe three manner of ways of
hunting Lions, which also Bellasarius does, but he does describe them in my
mind very unskillfully.

Xenophon, Three ways to take Lions.
we will notwithstanding also add thereunto Oppianus: for he does vary in both
of them. The second is made by fire, the third by Whips or scourges. The first
manner of way is therefore as Gillius for the most part translateth out of
Oppianus, in this sort. Where the Hunters of Lybia do observe the beaten path
or way of the Lion going out of his den unto the Water, they make a broad and
round ditch near unto it, in the midest whereof they raise up a great pillar,
upon this they hang a sucking Lamb, they compass the Ditch round about with a
Wall of stones heaped together, least that when the wild beast comes near
he perceives the deceit. The Lamb being fastened upon the top of the
pillar, does incitate the hunger-staruen heart of the Lion by his bleating,
therefore coming near, and not being able to stay longer Gillius affirms.
The second.


The other manner of hunting by fire, is the devise of the people which
inhabit about the River Euphrates, who hunt lions after this manner. The
Hunters some upon strong Horses, and some upon gray Horses with glasen eyes
which are more swift, and which dare only meet lions, when other Horses dare
not abide the sight of lions: other being on foot do set the Nets. Three of
them being placed in the snares remain to underprop the Nets, with stays and
stakes: one in the middle, all the rest in both the bendinges or turninges and
the footmen likewise do follow with a great noise: the lions being terrified
with the crying out of the hunters, not daring to resist, give place: and
as well for fear of fire, as of the men they run into the nets and are taken:
like as fishes in the night time, by fire are compelled and driven into the
nets of the fishers.

The third.
The third manner of hunting is done with lesser labor: that is, four strong
men armed with shields, and fortified all over with thonges of leather, and
having helmets upon their heads, that only their eyes, noses, and lips may
appear, with the brandishing of their firebrands rustle in upon the lion lying
in his den: he not bearing this indignation, with a gaping and open-wide mouth,
the lightning, or burning of his eyes being

But Pliny says, that in times past it was a very hard and difficult manner to
catch lions, and that the chiefest catching of them was in ditches.

In the mountain Zaronius in Affricke, the strongest men do continual hunt
lions, the best of which being taken they send them unto the King of Fesse: and
the King orders his hunting in this manner: in a very spacious field there
are little hutches built of that height as a man may stand upright in them:
every one of these is shut with a little gate, and within stands an armed
man, the lion being raised and forced to that place the doors being open, then
the lion seeing the doors open, runs with great force, which being shut
again, he is provoked to anger: Afterward they bring a Leo Afer
the armed men be overcome: the King with his Nobles sitting in an high place
to see the hunting kill the Lion with Crosse-bowes, but it comes often times
to pass, that every one of them is slain before the lion.

The reward of those which combat with the lion is ten golden Crowns,
together with a new garment: neither are any admitted unto this fight, except
they are of a most Zalag, but those which do first of all provoke and give
onset to the lions, are borne in the mountain Zaronius.

To conclude this discourse of the hunting of lions. If it fortune that he be
followed with men and dogs, Pliny
yet in the plain fields he never mendeth his pace, as some writers affirm,
oftentimes turning about and looking upon his pursuers, as it were to dare
their approchment, and to give defiance unto all their pretenses: yet having
gotten the thickets, he looks to his safety with his best celeritie and
speed, so wisely tempeering his fear before his foes, that it may seem a
boldness, and so politiquely when he thinks no eye sees him, no longer
dissembleth with himself, but runs Aristotle Albertus
or Hare, laying down his ears, and striking his tail betwixt his legs,
like a curre-dogge, seldom times looking behind him, but most irefully upon
those that come before him, especially if he receive from them any wound,
whereunto Horace alluded saying: Quid vt nouerca me intueris, aut vt petita
ferro bellua? In his course he spares no beast that he meets, but falls
upon it like a mad-dogge, (except swine) for he is afraid of their bristles;
and if a man do not attempt to wound him, he will snatch at him, and
overthrow him, but do him little harm; according to these verses of Ovid:
Corpora magnanima satis est prostrasse leoni
Pugna suum finem, cum iacet hostis, habet.
He observes most vigilantly the hand that wounds him, and labors to take
revenge for the evil turn, and so it remains in his mind, till
opportunity send him his adversaries head* as may appear by this story
following.

When Iuba King of Moors, (the father of him which when he was a child was
brought

After the taking of Lions, it follows that we should entreat of their
taming, Of the taming of lions.
and first of all, they which are tamed in their infancy while they are
whelps, are most meek and gentle, full of sport and play, especially being
filled with meat; so that without danger, a stranger may meet with them: but
being hungry, they return again to their own nature, for as it is true
(which Seneca says) Leonibus manus magister inserit osculatur Tigrim suos
custos, that is to say. The master of a Lion may put his hand in his mouth,
and the keeper of a Tiger may kiss him, yet is it also to be feared, Tigres
leonesque nunquam feritatem exuunt, aliqua^do submittunt, and cum minime
expectaueris, toruitas maligna redibit. Lions and Tigers do never leave off
their wildenesse, although sometimes they yield, and seem to be submisse, yet
upon a sudden when a man expects not, their malignant wrath breaks forth,
and they are exasperated.

Wherefore after they grow to be old, it is impossible to make them utterly
tame, yet we read in diverse stories of tame Lions, whether made so from their
littering, or else constraind by the Art of man, such are these which follow;
Hanno, had a certain Lion, which in his expeditions of war carried his baggage,
and for that cause the Carthagenians condemned Male credi libertus ei, cui in
tantum c^cissit etiam feritas, It is not safe to trust such a man with the
government of the commonwealth, who by wit, policy, or strength, was able to
overcome, Coelius
and utterly to alter the wild nature of a Lion: for they thought he would prove
a Tyrant that could bring the Lion to such meekenes, as to wait on him at
Table, to lick his face with his toongue, to smooth his hand on his back, and
to live in his presence like a little dog.

The Indians tame lions and Elephants, and set them to plough, Onomarcus,
Aelianus
the tyrant of Cattana, had lions with whom he did ordinarily converse. In the
country of Elymis there was a Temple of Adonis, wherein were kept many tame
lions which were so far from wildness, and fierceness, that they would
embrace and salute the people Fes, in a plain called Adecsen, there are
certain forests wherein live tame and gentle Lions, which if a man meet, he
may drive away with a small stick, or wand, without receiving any harm; And
in an other region of Afric, the lions are so tame, Leo Afer
that they come daily into Cities, and go from one street to another,
gathering, and eating bones; from whose presence, neither women nor children
run away. Likewise in many parts of India, they have lions so tame, A^lianus
that they lead them up and down in leames, and accustom them to the hunting
of Bores, Bulls, and wild Asses like dogs, for their noses are as well fitted
for that purpose, as the best hounds, as we have showed before of the King of
Tartary.

The best means to tame Lions.
And the best means of taming them is the rule of Apolonius, which he said was
the precept of Pharaotes, which is, that they be neither handled too roughly,
nor too mildly,

Albertus says, that the best way to tame lions is to bring up with them a
little dog, and oftentimes to beat the same dog in their presence, by which
discipline, the lion is made more tractable to the will of his keeper. It is
said of Heliogabalus, that he nourished

From hence it came, that there were so many spectacles, at Rome, as first of
all Lucius Scilla, The triu^phs, games and co^bats with Lions.
in the office of his aedilitie, or oversight of the Temple, brought into the
Roman circle, or ring, one hundred great maned Lions loose, which always
before that time, were turned in bound, or mufled. And King Bochus sent so many
valiant Archers, and dart-casters, to fight with them and destroy them. After
him Pompey the great, in the same place brought in a combat, consisting of six
hundred great Lions, and among them there were three hundred fifty maned
Lions: Also he instituted hunting of Lions at Rome, Plutarcke
wherein were slain five hundred. Caesar when he was Dictator, presented in
spectacle four hundred Lions. Quintus Scaevola caused Lions to fight one with
an other. But Marcus Antonius, Pliny
in the civil war, after the battle of Pharsalia, did first of all cause
Citheris a Iester, which thing was not done, without show and observations, of
a prodigeous and monsterous action, and especially in those times, wherein it
was interpreted, that as the noble spirits of those Lions were so much abased,
and vassalaged, insteede of horses to draw a chariot, they being in nature the
King of beasts, so it was feared that the ancient nobility of Rome, the grave
Senators, and gallant Gentlemen, commanders of the whole commonwealth, should
in time to come, through civil wars, and pride of the people, be deprived of
all honor, and brought down to the basest offices, of the whole state,
Antoninus Pius, nourished a hundred lions. Domician the Emperor, called for
Acillius Gabrio the consul, into Albania, about the time that the games were
celebrated, for the prosperity of youth and young men which were called
Iuuenalia, to fight with a great lion, and Acillius coming wisely into the
combat did easily kill him. In ancient time when lions could not be tamed, they
did discern them by their teeth, and nails, and so taking as it were the
sting and poison from the serpent, and the Weapons wherein consists all their
strength, they were without all peril, sent into the public assemblies, at
the time of their general meetings, and great feasts. Martial has an
excellent Domitian, wondering that the Masilian and Ausonian shepherds were so
afraid of this lion, and made as great a noise, and murmvr about his presence
as if he had bin a heard of lions, and therefore he commends the Libian
country for breeding such a beast, and withal expresses the joy of the
shephards for his death, as are shown in these verses following; Auditur
quantum Massyla per auia murmur,
Innumero quoties sylua leo ne furit:
Pallidus attonitos ad plena mapalia pastor
Cum reuocat tauros: and sine mente pecus
Tantus in Ausonia fremuit modo terror arena
Quis non esse gregem crederet? vnus erat,

Cui diadema daret marmore picta Nomas.
O quantum per colla decus, quem sparsit honorem,
Aurea lunatae cum stetit vnda iubae.
Grandia quam decuit latum venabula pectus
Quantaque de magna gaudia morte tulit?
Vnde tuis Libie tam felix gloria syluis
A Cybeles nunquid venerat ille iugis
An magis Herculeo Germanice misit ab astro
Hanc tibi vel frater, vel pater ipse feram.
Tame Lions become wild again.
and that through hunger, which breaks through stone Walls, according to the
common proverb, and therefore makes them to destroy whatsoever comes in
their way, according to these verses of Virgill; Impastus ceu, plena leu, per
ouilia turbans
Suadet enim vesana fames, manditque trahitque
Molle pecus, mutumque metu, fremet ore creuento.
Such a one was the Lion of Borsius Duke of Ferrara, who being in his cave
would deuore Bulls, Bears, and Boares, but with a Hare or little whelp he would
play, and do them no harm; at last leaving al his tamable nature, he
destroyed a young wench, who oftentimes Stroza made these two verses; Sustulit
ingratus cui quondam plurima debens
Pectendasque iubas, and fera colla dabat.
The like unto this also, was that tame lion that Martial speaks of, who
returning to his first nature, destroyed two young children, and therefore he
says justly, that his cruelty exceeds the cruelty of war, the Epigram is
this: Verbera securi, solitus leo far magistri
Insertamque pati, blandus in ora manum,
Dedidicit pacem, subito, feritate reuersa,
Quanta ne^ in libicis, debuit esse iugis

Sanguineam, rastris que renouabat humum,
Seuus and infoelix, furiali dente peremit,
Martia non vidit, maius arena nefas.
Having thus spoken of the taming and taking lions, it also now follows to
entreat of the length of their life, The length of a Lions life, and their
diseases.
and the diseases that are incident unto them, with their several cures: first
therefore, it is held that they live very long, as threescore, or fourscore
years: for it has been seen, that when a lion has bin taken alive, and in
his taking received some wound whereby he became lame, or lost some of his
teeth, yet did he live many years, and also it is found that some have bin
taken without teeth, which were all fallen out of their head through age, and
Aelianus says, that a lion and a Dolphin, do both consume away through
multitude of years. The sicknesses wherwithal they are anoid, are not very
many, Albertus
and scratching of their nails, for a man lightly touched by them at sometimes
is as much poisoned, as by the biting of a mad dog, also by reason of his
extreme hot nature every each other day he suffers one sickness or other, at
which time he lies prostrate upon the earth, roaring not all the day long, but
at certain hours, and in his wrath he is consumed through the heat enclosed in
his own body. Cardan
And in his best estate he is afflicted with a quartan Ague, even then when he
seems to be in health, and except this disease, did restrain his violence
and malice by weakening of his body, he would be far more hurtful to mankind
then he is: and this is to be understood, in the summer time he falls into
this disease sometimes at the sight of a man, and is cured by the blood of
dogs, Albertus and Physioligus, when he feels himself sick, through
abundance of meat, he faleth a vomiting, either by the strength of nature, or
else helps himself by eating a kind of grass, or green corn in the blade,
or else rapes, and if none of these prevail, then he fasteth, and eats no
more till he find ease, or else if he can meet with an Ape, he deuoureth and
eats his flesh, and this is the principal remedy and medicine, which he
receives against all his diseases, both in youth and age, and when he grows
old, being no more able to hunt Hearts, Boares, and such beasts, he exercises
his whole strength in the hunting, and taking of Apes, whereupon he lives
totally; and for these causes, there is a comparison betwixt the lion and the
Dolphin, in Aelianus. Leoni, and delphino multa sunt communia, vterque imparat,
ille terrenis, hic aquatilibus beslijs, senectute ambo tabescunt, and cum sunt
in aegritudine, illa terrestris, simia medetur, huic marina, quodque simia
remedio est: that is, the lion and the Dolphin do agree in many things, both
of them are kings, this rules over the beasts of the earth, and that over the
beasts of the sea, both of them consume through age, and long life, and as the
lion recouereth, by eating an Ape of the earth, so is the Dolphin cured by
eating an Ape of the Sea, and thus much for the diseases and cure of lions.

The use of a Lions seural parts.
Unto this natural discourse of lions belongs the use of their parts, both
outward and inward, and also the several pictures and statues erected for their
singular monuments. First therefore with the skins of lions were the ancient
Moors and Barbarians, enhabyting betwixt the mountain Caucasus and the river
Cophena, and so they appeared to Apollonius Hercules is pictured wearing a
lions skin, that the world might be admonished what was the ancient attire of
their forefathers. Virgill describes Auentinus covered with a lions skin in
this sort: -- Quem fulua leonis
Pellis obit totum praefulgens vnguibus aures,
And again: Ipse pedes tegmen torquens immane leonis,
Terribili impexum caeta cum dentibus albis,
Indutus capiti, etc.
And Aeneas sleeping upon a lions skin, saying: Fuluique in sternor pelle
leonis, Aeneas
Praecipiumque toro, and villosi pelle leonis
Accipit Aeneam.
Adrastus was commanded by the Oracleto marry his daughters to a boar and a
lion, when they came a wooing unto them. Whereupon Tydaeus came in a Boares
skin, and Pollynices in a Lions skin, unto whom he gave his Daughters in
marriage, taking it to be the meaning of the Oracle, that men clothed in those
skins should be the husbands of his Daughters. From hence came the common
proverb. Induitis me leonis exuuium, you put upon me a Lions skin to
signify a man that takes upon him more then he is able to perform, and
spend more then their condition will afford, and the beginning of the proverb
was taken from Hercules, who clothed in a Lions skin as we have said before,
and bearing in one hand a Club, and in the other a bow, in which attire he
went down Cerberus.

Afterward there was one Bacchus which clothed with the same weed, and armed
with the same weapons, in like sort in the imitation of Hercules, went down to
hell, Ridiculous imitation.
to hear the feigned disputation betwixt the two Poets, Euripedes, and
Aesculus, at the sight whereof Hercules laughed, telling him, that such
apparel did nothing at all become him, because he was wanton, tender, and
effeminate. For it is not available to have a rich ceremony, and want the true
substance; a glorious outside, and a shameful inside, the Armor of a Champion,
and the heart of a base coward, the outward shows of holiness, and the inward
love of prophanes. Others do think that the proverb was taken from that Ass
called Asinus cumanus, who being weary of his servitude and bondage, slipped
collor, and ran away into the wild woods, where finding by chance a Lions skin,
he crepte into it, and Cumanes themselves which had never seen a Lion, were
not a little afraid of this counterfeit beast. In this fashion he domineerd a
good time, until at last there came a stranger to Cumae, who seeing the
counterfeit personate Asse-lyon by the way, having oftentimes seen both lions
and Asses, knew it for an Ass, in a lions skin, for if all other conjectures
failed, yet this proved true, namely the length of his ears, wherefore he beat
him well, and brought him home to his master, before whom he pulled off the
lions skin, and then his master knew him to be his Ass. From which Socrates
concludes wisely, that no man ought to be afraid of outward greatness,
because though the Ass was clothed with a lions skin, yet Lysander the
Lacedemonian does sufficiently prove; for when he was blamed for his outward
pomp, whereby he beguiled others, therefore condemned for foolish hipocricy, he
made this answer, Quo leonis peruenire pellis non potest, vulpinam assuisse, de
decuerit, every man ought to have two shutes of apparel, one of a Fox, and
another of the lion. For whether the lions skin cannot come the Fox will creep,
and vvher the fox cannot com the lion can. Coelius.
Clothes wrapped in a lions skin, kills mothes: also a man's body anointed with
the fat of a lion mingled with garlike, so as the savor of the garlike may
overcome the lions grease, The fat of Lions Rasis. Albertus.
he shall never be molested with wolus. Also if the folds of sheep be compassed
about with the melted grease of lions, there is no wolves, nor ravening beasts
will annoy the flock. Ammulet be made of lions grease, no man shall be harmed,
wounded, or killed, by treachery or deceit: but you must understand, Marcellus.
Sextus.
that this was an invention of the Magicians or wise men, that by such
pretenses and promises of great matters, they might insinuate themselves, into
the favor of princes and noble men, and so make fools of the world, and
therefore they prescribe, the fat which is taken from betwixt the eie-lids or
from the right part of their mouth or teeth, and the hairs from the nether
chap. It is likewise affirmed, that a man anointed all over with the blood of
a lion, shall never be destroyed by any wild beast.

Democritus calls Helianthe, growing in the Maritime Mountains of Cilicia,
and Themiscira, wherewithal the fat of lions, decocted with Saffron, and
paulme wine with which all the kings of Persia were anointed, to make the^
beautiful bodies to look upon. And above al other things, the Magicians
prescribed this composition, Magical physic for to be invincible
to make a man invincible, the tail and head of a Dragon, the hairs of a
Lions forehead, and the marrow of his bones, the spume or white mouth of a
conquering Horse, bound up together with a dogs claws in a Hearts skin, with
the nerves of a Heart or Roe. The dung of a Lion drunk in wine, makes a man
for ever more to abhor wine.

It was also wont to be observed, that when Lions forsook the Mountains and
woods, to come and live in fruitful and fertile soiles, it did foreshew some
great drought; and the like deuination did Agarista the mother of Pericles make
upon her dream, when she was with child, Alex. ab alex
for she thought she brought forth a lion, and so in short time after, she
brought forth Pericles, who was a valiant man, and a great conqueror in
Graecia. The sight also of a lion as a man trauaileth by the high ways, is
very ominous, and taken for an evil sign. Pythias, concerning Cypselus the
Son of Eti^^ which said in this manner; Concipit in petris aquila enixura
leonem
Robustum, soeuum, genua, and qui multa resoluet.
Haec been nunc animis, versate, Corinthia proles,
Qui colitis pallenem, altamque Corinthium.
In the year of our lord 1274. there was a certain Noble Woman in the
Bishopric of Kostnizer, A monster like a lion.
which brought forth a child like to a Lioness in all parts but it had the skin
of a man; The Images and several statues of Lions.
unto this discourse I may add the Images of lions, both in Temples, and also
upon shieldes, and first of all in the temple where the shield of Agamemnon
hung up, (as Paucennius writes) there was the picture ( Fear,) drawn with a
lions head, because as the lion Coelius
and therefore the ancients did simbolically picture a lion upon the doors of
their temples, and upon the ships also, in the forepart of them, they ingraued
the figure of lions, Anthologius
according to this saying of Virgil: -- Aenaeia puppis
Prima tenet rostro, phrigios subiecta leones.
It was also a usual custom to picture lions about fountains and Cundits,
especially amongs the Egyptians, that the water might spring forth of their
mouths, Quomam ^ilus, aruis Egipti, nouam aquam inuehit, sole transeunte
leonem, because that Nilus, did ouerflow the fields of Egypt, at what time the
sun passed through the sign Leo. Therefore also the River Alpheus was called
Leontios poros, the lions fountain, because at the heads thereof, there were
dedicated the pictures of many lions. There was a noble Harlot called Leena,
which was acquainted with the tiranies of Harmodius and Aristogiton; for which
cause, she was apprehended, Varrinus
and put to greiuous torments, to the intent she should disclose them, but
she endured all unto death, never bewraying any part of their counsel: After
her death, the Athenians devising how to honor that virtue, and because she
was a Harlot or common curtizan, Pausanias Atheneus
they were not willing to make a statue for her in the likeness of a woman,
but as her name was Leena, that signifies a lioness, so they erected for her
the picture of a lioness, and that they might express the virtue of her
secrecy, they caused it to be framed Layis there was a covering containing the
picture of a lion, holding a Ram in his forefeet by the buttockes, with an
inscription, that as the lion held the Ram, so do Harlots hold their lovers,
which Alciatus turned into this Epigram: Quia scalptus sibi vult aries quem
part leaena,
Vnguibus apprensum posteriore tenet?
Non aliter captos quod and ipsa teneret amantes
Vir gregis est aries cluni tenetur amans.
There was also a lion at Delphos which waied ten talentes of gold, and at the
entrance of Thermopilae upon the tomb of Leonides the Captain of the
Spartans, there stood a Lion of stone. Upon the steps of the capital of Rome,
there were two lions of black Marble touchstone. Agricolae
Cyziceni ingraued upon one side of their money the picture of a Lion, and on
the other side the face of a woman. King Solomon built his Iuory throne upon
two Lions of Brass, and upon the steps or stairs ascending up to that
throne were placed twelve Lions, here and there. And from hence it came that
many kings and states gave in their arms the Lion, Rampant, Passant, and
regardant, distinguished in diverse coullers in the fields of Or, Argent, Azure,
and Sables, with such other terms of Art. The earth it self was wont to be
expressed by the figure of a Lion, and therefore the image of Atergas was
supported with Lions. Sybale the fained Godesse of the Mountains was carried
upon Lions. And it is fained that the Curetes, which nourished Jupiter in
Creete, who was committed to them by his mother Rhea by the anger of Saturn,
Oppianus. Varinus.
were turned into lions, who afterward by Jupiter when he reigned were made
the kings of beasts, and by him enjoined to draw the chariot of his mother
Rhea, according to this verse; Et iunctae currum, dominae subiere leones. There
is a constellation in heaven called the Lion, The constellation of the Lion.
of whom Germanitus writes in this Zodiac, containing three stars in his
head, and one clear one in his breast, and that when the Sun comes to that
sign which happens in the month of July, at which time the vehement heat of
summer burns the earth, and dries up the rivers. And therefore because the
Lion is also of a hot nature, and seems to partake of the substance and
quantity of the Sun, he has that place in the heavens. For in heat and force
he excels all other beasts as the sun does all other stars.

In his breasts and forepart he is most strong, and in his hinder part more
weak, so is the sun, increasing until the noone or forepart of the year,
until the summer, and afterward seems to languish toward the setting, or
latter part of the year called the Macrobius.
The Lion also is a signification of the sun, for the hairs of his mane do
resemble the streaming beams of the sun, and therefore this constellation is
styled with the same epethites that the Lion and the Sun are, as heate-bearing,
aestiue, ardent, arent, calent hot, flammant, burning, Herculean, mad,
horrible, dreadful, cruel, and terrible. It is feigned of the Poets that this
Lion was the Naemaean Lion slain by Hercules, which at the commandment of
Juno was fostered in Arcadia, and^ that in anger against Hercules after his
death, she placed him in the heavens.

To conclude this story of the Lions: it is reported of the Devils called
Onosceli, that Serapis which was fained to have three heads, on the left side a
Wolves, on the right side a Dogs, and in the middle a Lions. We have showed
already, that the people called Ampraciotae did worship a Lioness because she
killed a Tyrant. And the Egyptians builded a City to the honor of Lions,
calling it Leont^polis, Lions norished in Temples, and worshipped.
and dedicating Temples to Vulcan for their honor. And in the porches of
Heliopolis, there were common stipends for the nourishing of lions.

As in other places where they are fed daily with Beef, and have also windows
in their lodgings, with great Parkes and spaces allotted unto them for their
recreation and exercises: with an opinion that the people that came unto them
to offer and worship them, should see a speedy revenge through divine
judgment upon al those that had wronged Judah; for as he is a lamb in his
innocence, so is he a Lion in his fortitude. The Devil also is called a roaring
Lion, because Lions in their hunger are most of al full of fury and wrath. And
so I will conclude and end this story of Lions, with that Emblem of Alciatus,
describing how little Hares did rejoice and leap upon dead Lions; Qui toties
hosts vicerat ante suos,
Dum curru et pedibus nectere vincla parant.
Conuellant barba^^ vel timidi Lepores.


The medicines of the Lion.
The blood of a Lion being rubbed or spread upon a Canker, or upon a sore which
is swelled about the veins, will presently and without any pain cure and ease
the grief thereof. Albertus Sextus.
Whosoever does anoint his body all over with the blood of a Lion, may safely
and without any danger travail amongst any wild Beasts whatsoever. The flesh
of a Lion being eaten either by a man or Woman which is troubled with dreams
and fantasies Aescul^pius.
will very speedily and effectually work him ease and quietness. The ^ame
also being boiled or baked, and given to them which are distraught of their
wits to eat does bring them ease and comfort, and renew their wits again: it
is also very good for the pains or deafness of the ears. And being taken in
drink, it helps those which are troubled with the shaking of the joints or
the Palsy. Whosoever shall have shoes made of the hide or skin of a Lion or
Wolf and wear them upon his feet, he shall never have any pain or ache in
them. Galen.


They will also defend him that uses them from the gout, or swelling in the
feet or Legs. The skin or hide of a Lion is also very good for either man or
Woman which are troubled with the piles or swelling of the vains, if they shall
but at some several times set upon it.

The fat of a Lion is reported to be contrary to poison and venomous drinks,
and being taken in Wine it will by the sent expel all wild Beasts from any
one: and it does also resist and (...) ^way the sent or smell of Serpents, by
which they follow men to destroy them. Whomsoever does anoint his body all
over with the tallow or sewet of the raines or kidny of a Lion, shall by the
sent and savor thereof expel and drive away from him all Wolves, how greedy
and ravenous soever they be. A man being thoroughly anointed with the grease of
a Lion being melted* does drive away from him and put to flight any living
creature whatsoever, and also venomous and poisonous Serpents themselves. Rasis.
If any wild beast be anointed with the tallow or sewet of a Lion which is
dissolved and clarified, he shall neither be troubled with the stinging of
Flies or Bees. The

The grease of a lion being dissolved and presently again conglutinated
together and so being anointed upon the body of those who are heavy and
sad, it will speedily exte^pate

The same being mingled with Oil of Roses, does ease and help those which are
troubled daiely with Agues and quartan Feauers. The same also being dissolved
and poured into the ears of any one which is troubled with any pain in them,
will presently free him from the same. There is also in this lions Grease,
another excellent virtue which is

The fat or sewet of a Lion being melted and mixed with certain other things,
and so ministered unto any one that is troubled with the wringing of the bowels,
and bloody flix, in the same manner as a glister is used, is commended for an
excellent remedy for the same. The same also being mingled with a certain
oil and warmed together, and anointed upon the head of any one, whose hair
does s^ed, or is troubled with the Foxes evil, Galen
does immediately help and cure the same. The seed of a Hare being mixed with
the fat of a Lion, and anointed upon the privy members of any one, will stir
and incitate them up to lust, how chaste soever they shall be.

The fat of a Lion mingled with the fat of a Bear, and melted together,
Myrepsus
being anointed upon the belly, does allay and assuage the hardness thereof,
as also any other pain or grief in the same. The brains of a Lion, as also
of a Cat, being taken in drink, does make him mad unto whom it is given. The
same being mingled with some small quantity of oil of spike, Albertus
and powered or distilled into the ears of any one which is deaf

If the eye teeth of a Lion be hung about the neck of a young child before
that he cast his teeth, and the beginning of his second or new teeth, Rasis
they will keep him for ever from having any ache or pain in them. The heart
of a Lion being beaten into small powder, and taken in drink, does very
speedily cure and heal those which are troubled with Agues and quartaine
feauers. The liver of the Lion being dried, Pliny
and beaten to powder, and put in the purest wine which is possible to be
gotten, and so drunk, does take away the pain and grief from any one which
is troubled with his liver. The gall of a lion being taken in drink by any
one, does kill or poison him out of hand. Betrutius
But some do impute this venom, to be in the gall of a leopard. The gall of a
lion being Albertus
A very little part or dram of the gall of a lion being put in wine and so
drunk, will speedily help and cure those which are troubled with the yellow
iaundise. The same disease is also cured by yellow carets being stamped and put
in wine, and so given in drink.

For the sores or blemishes in the eyes, the gall of a lion being mingled with
honey, Galen
and so anointed upon them, is commended for a very special and effectual
cure or healing. The gall of a lion, a Bear, or an Ox be mixed with certain
other unguents, is very much used for the extending or moving forward of
conception. The right stone of Rasis
until some liquid juice or water does proceed from them, and so taken in
drink, does make that party barren, unto whom it is given: it has the like
effect in it, if it be eaten, either roasted or broiled, or raw and bloody.
The fat which proceeds from the priuitie or secret parts of a she lion being
put in a vessel made of Iuory, and so being temperately mollified, Aetius
is commended for a very effectual and speedy means to hinder conception. The
dung, or dirt of a lion being dried into powder, and mixed with some certain
soft and easy ointment, with which any one may be easily anointed over all his
body, Albertus
does drive away the blemishes and spots in the skin.

The hurts or sores which are bitten either by a male or female lion, are so
full of matter Aristotle
they are cured by the same means as the sores which are bitten by ravenous
dogs are, as I have before declared in the cures of the Hyaena. The wounds
which are made by the teeth of a lion are very hurtful: for as much as the
venom of their interior parts does go into the wounds, and when the wounds
are tied, the venom issues from them into the things with which they are
tied, and the same bindings being again bound upon the wound, does so infect
it, that it can be cured by no other means but by the aforesaid medicine. The
bitings of lions and such like beasts are so dangerous, in regard of their
strength and fierceness, for they do not only bite, but also wreath and
tear the wounds which

OF THE LYNX.
The picture of a Linx, once in the Tower of London, which was first described
by Doctor Cay.




The names of the Linx.
THe wild beast which amongst the Germans is named Luchss, by making a name
from the Linxe, or as others write Lux, or Luxs: amongst the Italians is at
this day called Lupo ceruero, or Ceruerio, being engendered betwixe a Hind and
a wolf; and likewise amongst the Rhaetians which speak Italian; and the
Sabandians, and the Dalmatians or Ceruiro. But there was certain Bohemian of
late, which declared that the Linx as he coniectured, was called amongst the
Illyrians Rys (and that it was called Luchss among the Germans) but that
amongst the Illirians was lesser then the other, yet very like.

The Spaniards do as yet call him by the Latin name Lince, even as certain
Italian writers in their vulgar tongue, as Alunnus does testify. In certain
places in Heluetia, and about Sedu^us, they call him Thierwolfe. Amongst the
barbarous writers he is called by the name of an Ounce: which I do suppose to
be a Panther. Fr. Alunnus does say, that this beast was called of certain
Italian writers in the vulgar tongue, Lonza, some interpreting it to be a
Lioness, some a Pardall, a Panther, or a Wolf, engendered of a Hind and a
Wolf.

Ounces do commonly seem to be called rather Linxes, then Panthers: but
although some late writers do attribute the name to a Leopard or a lesser
Panther, Bellonius.
it seems notwithstanding corrupt from the Linx: for he is a creatur very
like him both in his craft and shape of his body, but a Linx has his tail
shorter, and his longer. Auicenna
Libards-bane does kill

THESE FIGVRES WERE TAKEN by Olaus Magnus, wherein the Linx pursues a wild Cat.


The Latins call this beast Lupus Ceruarius, and Linx of the Greek word Lugx,
from whence the German ein luchs: and it has been believed, The reason of the
Latin names*
that the Latin name was given unto it, because they were engendered betwixt a
Wolf and Hind, but there is no wise man that will suppose or be easily induced
to believe, that beasts of such hostility, and adverse dispositions in nature,
should ever engender or suffer copulation together* and therefore I rather
suppose that it is called Ceruarius, either beeause it hunteth Hearts and
Hindes, or else because it imitateth their young ones in the outward color and
spots in the skins. There was a beast (says Pliny) which was called Chaus,
and by the French Raphlus, brought in public spectacle by Pompey the great
out of France, which in shape resembles a wolf, Chaus, Raphlus, and lupus
ceruarius, are diverse names of one and the same wild Beast, and yet by diverse
writers it is confounded with the Thoes, or with the Panther, or with the Ounce.

But I cannot agree thereunto, seeing it is written by Pliny, that about the
River Padus in Italy, there are certain beasts called Lynces, from whence
comes the Lyncurion, which by Zenothomis are called Langae, and by others
Languriae. And Solinus also agrees thereunto, taking Lupus Ceruarius, for a
kind of Linx.

Some have fabled that there is a Beast called Lynceus, Two kinds of Linxes.
which Suidas and Varinus call Oxuderches: and they say, that the eyes of it
are the best sighted of all the beasts in the world. Oppianus makes two kind of
Linxes, one, a greater, and hunteth Hearts and great Beasts, A story of a Linxe
by D. Cay, taken in England by the sight of this beast in the Tower.
D. Cay, whose words I do here express. There is in the Tower of London
(says John Cay) a beast which eats flesh, his whole body being of the
greatness of a lamb of two months old, having his head, mouth, feet, and nails,
like to a cat. But concerning his beard, and tail, his bearde hangs down on
both sides, divided in the middle with sundry colors, the former being white,
and the latter black: his tail is short and thick, being from the middle to
the uppermost part red, and to the lower part black: his eyes being yellowe,
the hair of the eyelids obscurely waxing white. His ears erected upright, as
the ears of a catte, being replenished within with white hair, without
covered with white and black, but so that the upper part is black, the
middle, (for it is divided into three parts) be white, and the lowest black
again. Neither is it content to be ended in his own course, except also that
his former parts, or the farthest brinkes or edges, and also his Venetians.

In the top of his ears there are placed some black hairs, as it were a
foretop or tuft. The color of this beast in the outmost parts is red, in the
innermost white, but sprinkled here with black spots, and almost by rows, and
there with spots somewhat lighter then the other, all his hair being for the
most part white all over: all his body except the aforesaid spots, as it is
in certain black skins of young Conies. And on both the sides of his nose
there are four spots set in order. In both his lips, as now we will
declare: in his uppermost lip there are five orders or rows, being of a very
equal distaunce.

In the first row, and the upper, four: in the second, five: in the third,
eight: in the fourth, five; in the fifth, there are four, and these also every
one in his order, having an equal distance. In the lower lip there are only
seven more manifest and evident, being placed in two rows. In the first,
four, to the very mouth of the lip, in the second after them three others:
after these, other lesser but not placed with so certain and true order as the
uppermost.

In the upper lip on both sides there are certain white hairs being rougher
then those in Cats and Lions. His nose, is somewhat of a pale red color, being
somewhat distinct or apart from the rest of his face on every side with a
black line. Another line also does divide the outermost part of his nose by
length (as in an Ounce) but only being

The skin of his feet is exceeding hard, and his nails are hid in his feet
(as the nails of an Ounce and a cats are) neither does he put them forth at
any time, unless in taking of his prey as they do.

He does climb wonderfully, so, that what he may be able to do in that thing
(either in his cave or den) nature her self does teach. He is a
quicke-moouing-creature, and cannot stand still in a place, so that except (by
mere chance) the voice of a wood-pecker in the basket of a certain country man
(who came then only to see the Lions) had made him quiet and attentive, there
had been no hope of the portraiting out the picture of his body. He being
present he was most quiet: but he going away, he would never stand

Our Country men call it Luzarne, it is doubtful whether we should call it
Leunce, or Lynx, in the affinity of the words. His skin is used by Noblemen,
and is sold for a great price. He is angry at none but them which offer him
injury, his voice is like a cats, when he would snatch away the food from his
fellow. He is loving and gentle unto his keeper, and not cruel unto any man,
so far Doctor Cay.

Unto this description of Doctor Caius, I may add another description that was
taken by the sight of the skin of this beast. Another description taken by
the ^ight of a skin
The length whereof from the tip of the nose unto

In the middle they are more read and dusky, the middle of the belly, and
especially the lower part is white, but both sides of it are white and red, and
every where upon his belly there are black spots, but most plentiful in the
bottom of the belly, and on both sides. The uppermost part of his neck, right
over against his ears, has great black spots, his ears are small, and not
bigger then a little Triangle, in the edges they are black, although with the
black hairs there are mingled some white. His beard is mixed with black, and
white hair, which hair is great like to bristles. The teeth are most white
and the upper canine teeth hang over the nether, the breadth of a finger,
whereof six are small, and of those six two are the greatest, and all the
residue are very small on the nether chapp, and to conclude, all the teeth were
like a common Weasils or Martill: his

The tail was of equal bigness and thicknes, but in the tip thereof it is
black. The price of a Lynxes skin
These skins are sold for three Nobles a piece, and sometime for six, and
sometimes for less, according to the quantity of the skin and country
wherein it is sold. And unto this description do Bellonius and Bonarus agree.
For Bellonius at Constantinople saw two Lynxes, Countries of Lynxes.
much like unto cats, and Bonarus had oftentimes seen them hunted in
Moschouia, Littuania, Pollonia, Hungaria, and Germany: But he commends above
al other the Linxes of Scotland and Swesia, as most beautiful, having
Triangular spots upon their skins. But the Indian and Affrican Linxes, he
says have round spots, sharpe-bristly-short-haire, and Europe, which with good
cause he coniectureth to be the Linxe that Pliny speaks of, and not unlike to
that which is bred in Italy. There are Linxes in diverse countries, as in the
for named Russia, Littuania, Pollonia, Hungary, Germany, Scotland, so also they
are most abundant in Scandinavia, in Swesia, so also about* Hyelsus, and
Helsyngia: likewise in all the Regions upon the Alps, and in Sylua Martia,
they are also very plentiful in Aethiopia, in France and Italy, about the river
Padus, and in the Island Carpathus: and thus having discoursed of their country
and proportion, whereby their differences and kinds may be discerned, we will
leave every one of them to their particular, and proceed to the treatise and
description of their general natures.

Their outward shape and several parts
a nimble and cheareful face, and ( Albertus says) that their body is longer
then the body of a Wolf, but their legs shorter, mistaking the Linxe for the
Thoes. Their eyes stand forth of their heads very far, their tongue like the
tongue of a Serpent, (and Textor affirms) that they have pappes or vdders in
their Breasts, but surely he takes Linxe for Sphinx.

Their meat goes into the belly straight through the maw, without staying, and
therein is a note of their insatiable voracity, for none but insatiable beasts
or birds are so affected, as in birds, the Cormorant. It has no ankle bone,
but a thing like unto it, the nails are

The inward proportion and anatomy of their bodies is like unto a man's, and
therefore Galen gives this lesson to students in Physic, Praestat simiarum
homini, quam similimarum artus dessicare, cum te in exemplo, exercere
institues, sin ea non detuo, aliquam ei proximam delegito, aut si nulla omnino
Simia reperiatur, Cynocephalum, vel Satyrum, vel Lincem, summatim ea omnia,
quibus artuum extrema, indigitos quinque discreta sunt. That is to say. It is
good to discect those bodies which are likest to a man, when one would instruct
himself in anatomy, and if he cannot find an Ape, let him take a Baboone, a
Satyr, or a Linx, and

There be some that have thought, that Panthers, Pardals, Linxes, or Tigers,
had bin all of the kind of cats, because of a mutual resemblance in the
greatness and strength of their nails, in the distinction of their skins,
which are party colored and fair, having also a round head, a short face, a
long tail, a nimble body, a wild mind, and get their meat by hunting: but
herein I leave every man to his own best liking and opinion: for when we have
done our best to express their natures and several properties, it shall be idle
to spend time about disputation to what rank or order, every beast ought to be
referred. For every one that reads our story and sees our pictures may
either be satisfied, The (...)
or else amend our labor.

The Linx therefore biteth most cruelly and deep, and therefore is accounted,
Rap a^ animal, instar lupi sed callidius, a Beast as ravening as a wolf, but
more crafty, they get up into trees, and from them leap down upon very great
beasts, and destroy them, being enemies both to men and beasts, and at their
pleasure, according to necessity, set upon the (...) of (...)


They are taken sometimes in Germany, in the duchy of Wertinberg, and that it
was once credibly affirmed, one of them leaped down from a tree upon a
country man, as he passed under the same tree, but being weary, and having an
axe on his neck, he received her on the sharp edge thereof, and so killed her,
otherwise she would soon have killed him.

(...) meat or food.
They live in the mountains also, where they are killed by poison, or else
hunted by armed men on horseback, and included with multitudes, for their
hunting is perilous, and therefore they must be enclosed with great company.
Some take them with ditches as we heard before Lions were taken, others in
snares or ginnes laid upon the rocks,

In the Summer time they are very weak and live among the Rocks, never
strayinge far from their own lodging, hurting no man until the autumn. They
hunt wild goats, whom they follow from Rock to rock, leaping as fast, or
faster then the Goats. They hunt also wild cats and Hares, and some other
little beasts, but the greatest Linxes hunt Hearts and Asses, Ola^^ mag.
and their manner is as we have said already, to get up into trees, and there
to ly in wait for their prey, until they espy it under the boughs, and then
suddenly leap into the neck thereof, whether it be a man or a great Beast,
wherein they fix their claws so fast, that no violence can shake them off, but
with the sharpness of their teeth,

A singular note of forgetfulness,
Yet this is a wonderful secret in their nature, that although they belong
afflicted with hunger, yet when they eat their meat, if they hear any noise,
or any other chance cause them to turn about from their meat, out of the
sight of it, they forgette their prey, notwithstanding their hunger, Pliny.
and go to seek another bootey, never remembering that which they had before
them, Solinus.
nor yet return back again to eat thereof. The voice of this beast is
called by a special word in Latin, Orcare, or Corcare, which I may English
croaking, or whining, for the voice thereof is not great, and therefore the
Author of Philomela dum linxes orcando fraemunt, vrsus ferus Vncat, while the
Linxe croaketh, the wild bear whineth. And Arlunus says, Corcare vox lupae
Ceruarij, to croake is the voice of a Linx. the voice of Linx^s. (...) sight of
Linxes.


It is thought that of all beasts they seem most brightly, for the poets
feign, that their eie-sight pierces through every solid body, although it be
as thick as a wall; yet if you offer unto it any thing which is transparent,
it is much offended, and sometimes blinded, but I cannot tell, whether the
sight be attributed to the Linxe truly according to nature, or fabulously in
imitation of the poetical fiction of Lynceus, of whom it was said in
ancient time, that he saw thorough stone Walls, of whom Horace writes
thus: Non possis oculo, quantum contendere lynceus
Non tamen id circo, contemnas lippus in vngi.
Marcus Tullius also says in this manner, O^pheus*
in the admiration of Lynceus eyesight, as though darkness did not hinder it,
quis est tam lynceus qui in tantis tenebris nihil offendat. Apollonius says,
that so great was the perfection of this man's eyesight, as he was believed to
see perfectly down into the earth and what was don in Hell. Plutarch says,
that he could see through trees and rocks. Pausanias writes, that he was a
king, and reigned after Danaouita. Pyndarus writes that Ida and Lynceus were
the sons of Aphaneus, and that a contention growing betwixt Ida and Castor and
Pollux at the marriage of Helena because they twain would have ravished Phoebe
and Ilayra, the wives of Ida, The Fables of the Poets about Linceus.
and Lynceus did therefore slay Castor, and afterward Lynceus slew Pollux when
he spyed him lie under an Oak, from the mountain Taygetus.

Wherefore Jupiter slew Ida with lightning, and placed Castor and Pollux in
heaven among the stars. There was another Lynceus husband of Hypermnestra,
Theocritus
Daughter of Danaus, Danaus having commanded all his daughters in the night
time to kill their husbands, she only spared her husband Lynceus. But the
truth is, that Lynceus of whom there is so many fables of his eiesight, was the
first that found out the mines of gold, Coelius.
silver and Brass in the earth, and therefore simple people seeing him bring
gold and silver out of the earth, and coming now and then upon him while he
was a digging deep for it, using the light of Candles, which he never brought
out of the pits, they foolishly imagined, that by the sight of his eyes he was
first of all led to seek for those treasures, Palaephatus
and from hence came the common proverb. Lynceo perspicacior, for a man of
excellent eyesight; and to conclude others say, that Lynceus could see the new
Moon the same day or night that she changed, and that therefore the fame of
his eyesight came so to be celebrated, because never any mortal man saw that
sight himself excepted. And from these Lynceus came the opinion of the
singular perspicacity of the beast Linx: of whom as I said before, as the sight
is very excellent, and so far excelling men, (as Galen says) like as is also
the sight of Egles, so I do not hold any such extraordinary and miraculous
sense to be in this beast, after any other manner, then the Poets did feign it
to be in Lynceus, except as before said, Omnes imbeciliore sumus cernendi
potestate, si aquilarum et Lyncis, acuminibus conferamur. And therefore the
proverb before spoken of, may as well be applied metaphecically to the beast
Linxe, as poetically to the man Lynceus, and so much may suffice for the sight.
It is reported also that when they see themselves to be taken they do send
forth tears and weep very plentifully. Their urine they render all
backewards, N. Spreng: Their urine and tears or weeping Urine congeled into a
medicinal sto^e
not only the female but the male also, wherein they differ from all other
beasts: and it is Lyncurium, which for brighnesse resembles the Amber, and yet
is so congealed and hardened in the sand that no carbuncle is harder, shining
like fire, wherewithal they make sealing rings, which caused Ovid to write
thus: Victa, racemifero Lyncas dedit India Baccho
Equibus vt memorant quicquid vesicaremisit
Vertitur in lapides, and congelat aere tacto.
But they say that of the male comes the fiery, and yellowe Amber, and of the
female Langurium, and the beast Languria, and Lange. This Lyncurium is called
of some Electrum, Pterygophoron, and they say it is the same which will draw
unto it leaves, straw, and plates of Brass and iron, according to the
opinions of Diocles, and Theophrastus, and that being drunk out of Water is
good for the stomach, and very convenient for the flux of the belly,
according to Dioscorides, and that it cures the pains of the reins, and
heals the kings evil, according to Solinus; And Theophrastus goes about to
establish this opinion by reason, and laboreth to persuade it as probable, that
the urine of a Linx, should congeale into a stone among sand, as well as the
urine of a man, to engender a stone in the raines or in the bladder.

And of this opinion is Pliny, Theophrastus, Hesychius, Varinus, Zenothimis,
Plutarch, and Aristotle. But in my opinion it is but a fable: For Theophrast
himself confesses that Lyncurium, Lyngurion, and Amber Hualos, is dug out
of the earth in Lyguria. Sudines, and Metradorus say that there is a certain
tree in Lyguria, out of which amber is taken, and this tree is the black
Popler, and it is also very probable, that seeing this Amber was first of all
brought into Greece out of Lyguria, according to the denomination of all
strange things, they called it Lyngurium after the name of the country,
whereupon the ignorant La^ines did feign an etimology of the word Lyncurium,
quasi Lynxis vrinam, and upon this weak foundation have they raised that
vain buildinge; and for further demonstration of this truth, ( Dioscorides
says) in his discourse of the Popler, that it growing about the river
Euridanus, sends forth a certain humor like tears which grows hard,
whereof they make that which is called Electrum, being rubbed, it smells
sweet, and for that it has not only power to draw unto it, Brass, Iron, and
such things, but also gold; It is also called Chrysophoton; unto this Lucianus
subscribeth, and whereas it was said that in Italy this Amber*stone is
begotten, near the river Padus, where stand many white Poplers, my conjecture
is, that some such like humor may issue out of them, and

Hermolaus also writes this of the Lycurium, that it grows in a certain
stone, and that it is a kind of Mushrom, (...) out of (...).
or Padstoole which is cut off yearly, and that another grows in the room
of it, a part of the root or foot being left in the stone, grows as hard as
a flint, and thus does the stone increase, with a natural fecundity: which
admirable thing (says he) I could never be brought to believe, until I did
eat thereof in mine own house.

Euax (as is recyted by Syluaticus says) that the urine of the Linx, domi
seruatus, generat optimos sungos supra se quotanis, reserved at home in ones
house, brings forth every Mushroms. This is also called lapis Litzi, and
lapis prasius, which is divided into three kinds, that is Iaspis, Armeni^cus,
and lapis phrigius, called also Belemintes; wherewithal the Chirurgians of
Prussia and Pomerania, cure green wounds, and the Physicians break the stone
in the bladder. But the true Lyncurium which is extant at this day, and current
among the Apothecaries, is as light as the Pummis-stone, and as big as fills
a man's fist, being of a blackish color, or of a russet; the russet is more
solid, sandy, and fat, and being bruised or eaten, tastes like earth: both
kinds are covered with little white skins, and there is apparent in them, a
spungy tenatious substance, and this I take to be the Mushrom, whereof
Hermolaus speaks. And by the little stones and small skins, it may be
coniectured to be corpus heterogones, interracoalescens: A Hetrogenian body,
increasing

There was another stone of the urine of a Linx to be seen in Sauoy, the
substance whereof was clearly crystal, the form of it was triangular, the
hardness so, as you might strike fire with it, and the color partly white, and
partly like wine mingled with water, so that I will conclude, that the urine of
a Linx may engender a stone, though not in such manner as is before said. For
the Arabian Iorath affirms, that with in seven days after the rendering, it
turns into a stone; but it is not the Lyncurius property so called, for that
is the Amber or gum before spoken of, although catacrestically so called.

And if it be true, that there be certain Mushroms near the red sea, which
by the heat of the sun are hardened into stones, then also it may follow very
naturally, that those Mushroms again, for both the dissolution and the
constitution of things are thought to be grounded upon the same principles. And
thus much shall suffice for the urine of the Linx, and the stone made thereof.

The skins of Linxes are most precious, and used in the garments of the
greatest estates, both Lords, Uses of their seue^^^ parts. P^^rus.
Kings, and Emperors, as we have showed before, and for that cause are sold
very dear; The claws of this beast, especially of the right foot, which he
uses instead of a hand, are e^cluded in silver, and sold for nobles a piece,
and for Amulets to be worn against the falling sickness. The love of these
beasts to their young ones is very great, like as the Pardals Lions, and
Tigers. The king of Tartaria has tame Linxes which he uses in hunting instead
of dogs. The ancient Pagans dedicated this beast to Bacchus, feigning Lynxes
tamed.
And therefore Virgill says, Quid Lynces Bacchi variae, And Ovid: Dicta
racemifero, Lyncas dedit India Baccho. All the nails of a Linx being burned
with the skin, beaten into powder, and given in drink will very much cohibite
and restrain abominable lechery in men: the medcines of the Lynx.
it will also restrain the lust in women being sprinkled upon them: and also
very effectually and spedily take away either itch or scurfe in man or woman's
body. The vrin of this beast is accounted very medicinable for those which are
troubled with the strangury, or running of the raines.

The same is also very good and wholesome for the curing of any pain or grief
in the windpipe or throat, Pliny.
Bonarus Baro does affirm that the nails of Linxes which are in their
country, are had in great estimation and price amongst their piers or noble
men: for there is a very certain opinion amongst them, that those nails being
put upon the yeard of either horse or beast whose urine is kept back or
restrained, will in very short space cause

The Linxe or wolf, which is begotten of a wolf and a Hind, the Musk-cat,
Arnoldus.
the weasell and al such other like beasts, do more hurt men by their biting
teeth-wounds then by Collinus reports, which told him that the flesh of a
Linx being sod in some whot pottage or broth, and afterward eaten, would be a
very good and wholesome medicine for the expelling of the Ague, or quartan
fever: and that the bones of the same beast being brent and pounded into
powder, would be a very excellent remedy for the curing of wounds which are old
and stale, and full of putrefaction, as also the Fistulaes which grow in the
thighs or hips of men.

Of the Marder, Martell, or Marten.
Oach, or as some say Zijm, amongst the Arabians Eastoz, or rather Kacheobeon,
The several names
or Kachineon, in Latin Martes: the Germans Marder, or Marter like the
english, the Italians Marta, Martore, or Martorello, the French Mardre or
Foyne, the Spaniards Marta, the Illirians and Polonians Kuna, and some later
Latins use these words Marta, Martarus, Marturus, and Marturellus, and the
reason, or etimoligy of this Latin word is taken from Martia, which signifies
Martial, because this beast in warlike and hostill manner, destroys her
adversaries, two kinds of Martens
and lives upon the prey, of hens, birds, and Mice. The Germans divide these
into two kinds, which they Tachmarder, Hussmarder, Steinmarder, Buochmarder,
Feldmarder, Wildmarder, Thanmarder, Fiechtmarder, that is to say, The
fir-Martin, the rock-Martin, the tame-martin, the beech-martin, the
field-martin, the wild-martin, and the wall-martin. For they live either in
houses, walls, and temples, or else in rocks, fields, and woods: And yet is not
their distinction, taken only from the places of their abode, but also from
the goodness of their skins. Places of their abode.


And therefore the French call the word Martin by the name of Foines: And the
skins of the firre-martin, or house-martin, are far more beautiful to look
upon, then those that live wild in the trees or woods. Agricola calls the
wood-martin Baummarder, because it lives for the most part in trees, and says
that it never forsakes the woods or Martin, is most excelent, The use of
their skins and how to choose the best.
for princes The picture of the Marten.
and great Nobles are clothed therewith, every skin being woorthe a French
crown, or four shillinges at the least. And they are so much the beter, when
there are more whit Martial, Venator capta Mart superbus ad est. Here
comes the proud hunter that has killed a Martin, may very well be applied
unto martins skin. Difference betwixt Foynes and Martens
By inspection of the Foines, that is; The martins of the beech, for the
Frenchmen called a Beech Fau, from whence comes the word Foines, you may see,
that that their skins are more dusky, having martins of the firres. And
therefore you must understand, that they of the Firs, are by way of excelency
called martins, and the other of the woods called Foines. There is no great
difference betwixt their bigness: and if by their skins at any time there seem
any inequality, in breadth, or length, it must be attributed martins are
absolutely the best, yet that is not to be understood generally. For the
martins of Pollonia are so brown, that they are altogether disliked, and are
accounted no better then the common beech- martins. Wherefore the bright-browne
aspersed with white hairs, Regions breeding Marte^s.
is ever accounted more precious without all exception, and by Germany and the
North, there are abundance of fir-martins with yellow throats, for you must
remember that the wild martin has a white throat, and the firr-martin a
yellow throat.

There are also of both kinds in Heluetia, Eras. Stella
and the most excellent are in the vailes toward the Alps. In France there
are no Martins of the wall, but the beach Martins live in hollow beaches. There
are also woods full of these beasts in Brussia, which the people there call
Gayni. Lanzaerucca a wood of Scandenauia fourscore mile long, is full of
Martins. Also Muscouey, and Littuania have store of these beasts, and Sabels.
But they of Littuania, O^ius. Mag.
are the whitest in the world.

The people of Surmasia in Europe, wear garments of these in sables; and the
inhabitants of Scithia, Hungaria, near Tanayois, do pay yearly unto the
Emperor of Rushia, Io. Bohemus
once called the Duke of Muscouia, a certain number of Sabels, and Martins
skins. There are also store of Martins near Bragansa, and generally in all
parts of Europ except in England.

their quantity and seural parts.
and more yellow on the back. Their teeth are exceeding white, and unequal,
one longer then another, being above measure sharp, and the canine teeth both
above and beneath hang out very long. Amongst which on the nether chap, stand
six small cutting teeth in a right line over against one another, which I
think happens not in any other beast of the world. The grinding teeth are
like a saw, being triangular in fashion, eight above, and eight beneath.
Whereof the furthermost upon the uppermost side of the mouth, are more deep,
and inward in the pallat; then all the residue, the whole number is thirty two.

Albertus says miscentur inter se haec genera, and Martes thagi, fere
sequitur, Martem abietum, tanquam nobiliorem, their copulation
vt foetum ex ea nobiliorem acquirat. The beech-Martin follows the fur
Martin, and desires her copulation as the nobler kind, that he may thereby
dignifie his own issue. It should seem that they breed in March, and make
their nestes, like the draies of squirrels, and bring forth many at a time; For
it was constantly affirmed, by a country man of Germany, that he found a nest
of these Martins builded like a Squirrelles, having four young ones in it, in
the beginning of April.

Gesner had one of these, the taming of Martins
which loved a little Dog wonderfully, and would follow him abroad whether
soever he went, far or near. It would also play with dogs and men, with teeth
and nails, lying flat upon the back like a Cat, and never give any little
hurt. But losened from his chain it would wander abroad into the neighbors
houses, and many times far off, but always return home again. They which
tame them because that they are easily exasperated, and bite deeply when they
are angry, do break off the tops of their canine teeth with a pair of
pinsons, for the preventing of that mischief. Ruellius affirms, that the
excrement of this beast smells like a musk-cat, their Food.
and says the reason of it is, because they feed upon sweet fruits; but we
have heard that they eat pullin birds, eags, and mice, but that they eat of
fruits it cannot be proved. I rather Calentius, wherwithall I will conclude. Et
laqueo vulpes, and decipe, casse, foinas.

OF THE MOLE OR WANT.


I Do utterly dissent from all them that hold opinion that the Mole or Want is
of the kind of Myse, for that all of them in general, both one and other have
two long crooked foreteeth which is not in Moles, The several names.
and therefore wanting those as the inseparable propriety of kind; we will take
it for granted that it pertains not to that rank or order of
four-footed-beasts. But concerning the Haebrew name thereof, there is much
variance, and little certainety amongst writers. Some of them calling it
Tinschemet, which word is found Deuteronomy. 14. which is also translated by the
Chaldees Bota or Baueta a swan, and the Septuagints and Ierom, Ibis, and Rabbi
Solomon in another place of the same Chapter translate it a Bat, which the
French call Chaulue-souris. But in that place of Leuit. 11. where the Stellio,
the Lyzard, and Tinschemet are reckoned unclean beasts, Rabbi Solomon
interpret it Talpam the Mole. The Septuagints Aspalax, the Chaldee Aschuta, the
Arabian Lambaraz. The Persian Angurbah-Dedach. There is a sentence Esaias. 2. in
Haebrew thus. Lachepor perot velatalephim, which by Munster is thus translated.
In die proijciet homo aureos and argenteos deos, infossur as taiparum and
vispertilionum. In that day shall a man cast away his goods of silver and gold
into the holes of Moles and Bats. By S. Ierom it is translated thus: Proijciet
homo Idola, vsque vt adoraret talpas and verspertiliones. A man shall cast away
his Idols to worship Moles and Bats. Some again make but one word of
Lacheporperot, and translate it a beast digging ditches: and the Symmochus,
unprofitable things: but Aquila Orugas, digging-beasts: and therefore at this
day all the learned take Perot for Moles, so called by reason of their digging.
Auicen calls it Pelagoz, a blind Mouse. In Greek it is called sometimes
Spalax, but more often Aspalax: yet Albertus calls it by a strange Grecian
name Colty and Koky, which he took from Auicen.

The Italians retain the latin word Talpa, the Spaniards Topo, by which word
the Italians at this day call a Mouse. The French call it Taulpe, the Germans
Mulwerf, and in Saxon, Molwurffe, from whence is derived the English Mole and
Molewarpe. The Heluetitians Schaer and Schaermouse, and the Molehil they call
Schaerufen of digging. The Hollanders Flemmings call it Mol and Molmuss, in
imitation of the German word: the Illyrians Krtize. And generally the name is
taken from digging and turning up the earth with her nose and back, according
to the saying of Virgill: Aut oculis capti fodere cubilia Talpae. Some are of
opinion, that it is called Talpa, because it is appointed to an everlasting
darkness in the earth; of which sort Isidorus writes thus: Talpa dicta est eo
quod perpetua caecitate tenebris damnata, est enim absque oculis.

It is called also in Greek Indouros, and Siphneus, of Siphnon the earth,
because it lives in the earth, and turns it upward to make it hollow for
passage. The like I might say of his other names, Ixliocha, and Orthoponticos,
but this shall suffice for his name. Countries of Moles Aristotle. Aelianus.


In Boeotia about the Champaignes called Orchomenius ager, there are the
greatest store of Moles in the world, for by digging they vnder-myne all the
fields, and yet in Lebadia another country of Boeotia, there are none at all,
and if they be brought thither from any Rodolphus, Oppianus, and Albertus
affirm, Pliny. Generation of Moles
that they are created of themselves of wet earth and raine*water, for when the
earth begins to putrify, the Mole begins to take life.

They are all for the most part of a black dusky color, with rough, short,
and smoth soft hair as wool, and those hairs which were whitest when they
are young, are most glistering and perfect black when they are old: and Gesner
affirms, that he saw in the end of October, a Mole taken, which was very
white, mixed with a little red, and the red was most of all upon her belly,
betwixt her forelegs and the neck, and that it could not be a young one,
because it was two palms in length betwixt his head and tail.

These beasts are all blind and want eyes, Blindness of Moles.
and therefore came the proverb Talpa caecior Tuphloteros aspalacos, blinder
then a Mole; to signify, a man without all judgment, wit, or foresight: for
it is most elegantly applied to the mind. Yet if any man look earnestly upon
the places where the eyes should grow, he shall perceive a little passage, by
drawing up the membrane or little skin which is black, and therefore (
Aristotle says) of them in this manner probably.

All kinds of Moles want their sight, because they have not their eyes open and
naked as other beasts, but if a man pull up the skin of their brows about
the place of their eyes, which is thick and shawdoweth their sight, he shall
perceive in them inward covered eyes, for they have the black circle, and the
apple, which is contained therein, and another part of the white circle or
skin, but not apparently eminent; neither indeed can they, because nature at
the time of generation is hindered, for from the brains there belong

Yet there is in this Beast a plain and bald place of the skin where the eyes
should stand, having outwardly a little black spot like a Millet or
Poppey-seede, fastened to a Nerve inwardly, by pressing it, there follows a
black humor or moystnesse, and by dissection of a Mole great with young, it is
apparent (as has been proved) that the young ones before birth have eyes,
but after birth, living continually in the dark earth without light, Albertus
they cease to grow to any perfection; for indeed they need them not, because
being out of the earth they cannot live above an hour or two. Esope has a
pretty fable of the

Oppianus says, that there was one Phineus which was first deprived of his
eie-sight, and afterward turned into a Mole: It should seem he was condemned
first to loose his eyes, and afterward his life. Their seural parts and members.


And for this cause they dig about their lodging long passages, which brings
noises and voices to them, being spoken never so low and softly, like as the
voice of a man carried in a trunk, reed, or hollow thing.

Their snowt is not like a Weasils (as Suidas says) but rather like a
shrewe-mouses, or (if it be lawful to compare small with great) like to a
Hogs. Their teeth are like a shrews and a Dogs, like a shrewes in the
nether teeth and furthermost inner teeth, which are sharp pointed and low
inwardly; and like a dogs, because they are long at the sides, although only
upon the vpper-iaw, and therefore they are woorthily called by the Graecians
Marootatous; that is, daungerous-biting-teeth, for as in swine the vnderteeth
stand Hyperphereis.

The tongue is no greater then the space or hollow in the nether chap, and they
have in a manner as little voice as sight, and yet I marvel how the proverb
came of Loquax Talpa, a prattling mould, in a popular reproach against woordy
and talkatiue persons, which Ammianus says, was first of all applied to one
Iulianus Capella, after he had so behaved himself, that he had lost the good
opinion of all men.

The neck seems to be nothing, it is so short, standing equal with the
forlegges. The lights are nothing else but distinguished and separated Fibers,
and hang not together upon any common root or beginning, and they are placed or
seated with the heart, which they enclose, much lower toward the belly then in
any other beast. Their gal is yellowish, Cardanus.
with her feet she diggeth, and with her nose casts away the earth, and
therefore such earth is called in Germany mal werff, and in England Molehill:
and she loves the fields, especially meddowes and Gardens, where the ground
is soft, for it is admirable with what celerity she casts up the earth.

They have five toes with claws upon each forefoot, and four upon each foot
beehind, according to Albertus, but by diligent inspection you shall find five
behind also, for there is one very little and recurued backward, which a man
slightly and negligently looking the places of their abode


They live as we have said in the earth, and therefore Cardan says, that there
is no creature

When the worms are followed by Molds, (for by digging and heauing, they
foreknow their own perdition) they fly to the superficies and very top of
the earth, the silly beast knowing that the Molde their adversary, dare not
follow them into the light, so that their wit in flying their enemy is
greater, then in turning again when they are troade Albertus says) he saw a
great Toade whose leg a Mole held fast in the earth, and that the Toade made
an exceeding great noise, crying out for her life, during the time that the
Molde did bite her. And therefore Toads and frogs do eat dead Moles. They eat
also the root of herbs and plants, for which cause they are called by Oppianus,
poiophagi Herbiuorae, herbe-eaters.

In the month of July they come abroad out of the earth, Enemies to Moles.
I think to seek meat at that time when worms be scanty. They are hunted by
Weasels, and wild Cats, for they will follow them into their holes and take
them, but the Cats do not eat them: whereas we have said already, that they
have an understanding of men's speech when they hear them talk of them.
Understanding of Moles


I may add thereunto a story of their understanding, thus related by Gillius
in his own experience and knowledge. When I had (says he) put down into the
earth an earthen pot made of purpose with a narrow mouth to take Moles, it
fortuned that within short space as a blind Mole came along she fell into it
and could not get forth again, but lay therein whyning; one of her fellows
which followed her seeing his mate taken, heaued

Because by their continual heauing and laboring for meat, they do much
harm to Gardens and other places of their abode, and therefore in the
husband-mans and house-wifes commonwealth it is an acceptable labor to take
and destroy them. Taking of Moles
For which cause it is good to observe their passages, and mark the times of
their coming to labor, which

Some have placed a board full of pikes which they fasten upon a small stick
in the mole-hil or passage, and when the mole comes to heave up the earth, by
touching the stick she brings down the pikes and sharp nailed board upon her
own body and back. Other take a Wyar or iron, and make it to have a very sharp
point, which being fastened to a staff and put into the earth where the Moles
passage is, they bend and so set up that when the Mole comes along, the pike
runs into her and kills her.

The Graecians (says Palladius) did destroy and drive away their Moles by this
invention, they took a great Nut, or any other kind of fruit of that quantity,
receipte, and solidity,

Also Paxamus shows another means to drive away and take Molles: If you take
white Hellebor, and the rindes of wild Mercury instead of Hemlocke, and dry
them and beat them to poulder, afterward sifte them and mix them with meal
and with Milk beaten with the white of an Egg, and so make it into little
morsels or bals, Paramus.
and lay them in the Mole-hole and passages, it will kill them if they eat
thereof, as they will certainly do.



With the skins of moles are purses made, for the rough and soft hair, Use
(...) their several parts.
and also black russet color is very delectable. Pliny has a strange saying,
which is this; Epellibus talparum cubicularia vidimus stragula; adeo ne religio
quidem a portentis summouet delicias,

For all the ancient Wisemen and magicians did hold, that this beast was
capeable of Religion, Nullis aeque credunt extis; nullum Religionis capacius
iudicant animal, vt si quis cor eius recens palpitansque deuorarit diuinationis
and reru^ efficiendarum euentus promittat, they give not so much credit to any
intrals as to theirs, for they judge that no beast is so capable of Religion,
because if a man eat the heart of a Mole newly taken out of her belly and
panting, he shall be able to divine and fortell infalliable events. Another
says, Veteribus monumentis traditur Gallinaceorum fibris maxim dijs gratas
videri: sicut Talparum viscera Magi verissima dicunt, Alex. ab alex
illisque haud secus quam solenni victima litari, haec enim sunt exta
argutissima, in quibus diuina men's in esse creditur: that is. The Fibers of
Cocks were wont among ancient monuments to be accounted most acceptable to
the Gods, even as the

But I will leave this paganism, and let it never enter into the heart of a
reasonable man that such beasts can love religion, or that God has planted in
their bowels and corrupt parts, such letters of his wisdom and foreknowledge
which he has not granted to the immortal and incorruptible soul of man.
Only this I find by experience, that before any rain and change of weather,
these silly beasts heave up the earth more abundantly then at other times, and
that in Thessaly (as Varro says) a whole Town was once undermined by Moles.
They were wont to sacrifice this beast to Neptune, because of the affinity
Asphaloos signifies Neptune, and Asphalax a mole. Alunnus also writes that
they were sacred and dedicated to hell, because they kept continually within
the bosom and bowels of the earth, and to conclude, because that moles would
not live in Coronea a part of Boeotia before spoken of, and thereof came the
common proverb Asphalaca eis Coronean, a mole is brought to Coronea, to
signify the hatred of a gift or ghest to him that is forced to receive him.
Thus much for his natural and moral story, now follows his medicinal.

The medicines of the Mole.
There is nothing which is more profitable or medicinable for the curing of the
bites of a shrew, then a mole being flead and clapped thereunto. The same does
also very effectually cure and heal the blows or bitings of a Scorpion.
Pills being made with that which proceeds from moles and with Honey, Pliny
eaten nine days together, does preserve the body of any one from swellings or
bunches in the flesh who shall so eat them. For the avoiding or driving away
the hairs which grow in any part of man's body, that they may never return
or be renewed again: take a mole and lay her in water to be steeped or
soaked, Arnoldus
so long as she shall not have any hairs left upon her, with this water
anoint the place which is full of hairs, and afterward wash it with lie made
of ashes, and then rub Furnerius
and this being rubbed or anointed upon the bare or bald place will without
dout in some short time or space procure the hair to grow thick. For the
renewing of hairs which fall from horses. Rus^ius.
Take a mole and boil her in Oil, until all the flesh be consumed and quite
dissolved into a liquid juice, with this oil anoint the place which is bare
or destitute of hairs twice every day for some short space, and it will make

For the changing of the hairs of horses from black to white, take a mole and
boil her in salt Water, or lie made of ashes three days together, and when
the Water or lie shall be quite consumed, put new water or lie thereunto: this
being done, wash or bathe the place with the water or lie somewhat hot;
presently the black hairs will fall and slide away, and in some short time
there will come white. Whosoever shall take a mole and hold her in his right
hand until she die, shall have such an excellent virtue therein, that she shall
ease the pain of a woman's breasts only by touching them.

The dust of a mole being brent, mingled with the white of an Egg, and
anointed upon a sneepe, is an excellent and medicinable remedy against the
Leprie which comes oftentimes upon them. The dust of a mole mixed with oil
or honey, Pliny.
and anointed upon the skin of either man or woman which is full of Lepry, will
very speedily and effectually cure and heal the same. The same being used in
the aforesaid manner, is very good for the curing of those which are troubled
with the disease called the Kings evil, as also for Marcellus
and in other parts of their body.

The whole body of a mole being taken and burned in the skin into dry dust, or
pouper, is an excellent remedy against the disease called the Fistula, as also
for the purging of the corruption in them and healing of them, being once
taking by any man. The same being also mixed with honey, and rubd upon the teeth
of any one who has pain in them does not only ease the pain and grief
thereof, but also does strengthen and make them fast. The blood of a mole being
killed, Vincentius
spread or anointed upon the head of any one which is bald, will very speedily
renew and bring the hairs again. The head of a mole being cut off and beaten
together with the earth which is stirred up by moles, and wrought into a paast,
and rolled together like a little loaf, is very much used for the healing of
al swellings, Sextus
as also for all swellings or kernels which arise in the neck, so that in the
time of the curing of these things, the party which is pained and grieved, be
not suffered to eat any swines flesh.

The tooth of a living mole taken out and tied or bound to the teeth of any who
is griued therein, Obscurus
is commended by the Magi or wisemen to be an excellent remedy and cure for
the same. The heart of a mole being eaten nine days together, does very
speedily and effectually cure either him or her which shall so eat it, of that
pestiferous disease called the Kings evil, if it be so that it has not been of
too long continuance with them. Pliny. Arnoldus
The same is also very good and profitable for the asswaging of Wens, being
used in the aforesaid

Of the vulgar little Mouse.
AS we have handled the natures, and delivered the figures of the great Beasts,
so also must we not disdain in a perfect Hystory to touch the smallest: For
Almighty God which has Definition of a Mouse
The little mouse therefore is justly termed Incola domus nostrae, an
inhabitant in our own houses, Et rosor omnium rerum, and a knawer of al things.
And therefore from the sound of her teeth which she makes in gnawing, she is
called Serex. Although we shall show you afterward, that Sorex is a special
kind, and not the name of the general. Wherefore seeing there be many kinds
of Mise, and every one of them desires a particular tractate, I thought good
to begin with the vulgar little mouse, and so to descend to the several
species and kinds of all, The several names.
according to the method of the Philosopher, A notioribus minus ad nota, from
things that are Achar, Leuit xi. where the Septuagintes translate it muys, the
Chaldee Acbera, the Arabians Fer, or Phar, from whence comes the Sarasan word
Fara. The Persians An Mus, the Latins mus, the Italians Tapo, or Sorice,
Alsorgio, O Rato, Di-Casa, although Rato signifies a Rat, both among the
Germans, French, and English. The Spaniards call the little Mouse, Ratt; and
the great Rat Ratz, the French the little Mouse Souris, which word seems to be
derived from the Latin Sorex, and the great mouse they call Ratt. The
Germans the great ones Ratz, and the little one Muss, the Illyrians, and
Pollonians, Myss, which is the Greek word, and the great one they call Sczurcz,
the Venetians call the Rat Pantegana, of Pontis, the vulgar greekename, and the
Romans Sourco.

Denomination of sundry creatures from the Mouse.
Now the dignity of this little beast, may appear by the name, which has spread
it self both to beasts, fishes, men, herbs and Cities. To beasts as we have
showed before in the Ichneumon, which is vulgarly called the Indian-mouse, or
Pharoes-mouse. And to fishes, Musculus, and in Greek Mystocetos, the
Whale-mouse, because it leads the way, and shows the Whale whether so ever
she swimmeth, for the avoiding of rocks, (according to Pliny) although
Rondoletius affirms otherwise, namely, that that guide of the Whale is called
Egemon, and Egetur, and Mystocetus (he says) is a shell fish. Generally most
kind of Oysters are also called Myss, because sometimes they gape and make a
noise like a mouse, and close their shells again. The purple Fishes be also
called Myss, there is likewise a kind of precious stone called Mya, about
Bosphoras, Thrasius, and many such other dignities, has the name of this beast
attained.

Pausanias.
There was one Mys, the servant of that famous Philosopher Epicurus, likewise
the name of a champion or chalenger, is Suidas and Varinus, and there was
another called Mus, of excellent skill, for ingrauing in Silver, and therefore
did draw upon the shield of Minerua, the fight betwixt the Lapithae, and the
Centaurs, and many other things. Whereupon martial made this verse: Quis labor
in Phyala? docti myos? anne myronis. There was a Consul of Rome, whose name
was Mus, and therefore Camerarius made this riddle of the mouse; Parua mihi
domus est, sedianua semper aperta, acciduo sumptu, furti^^ viuo sagina, quod
mihi nomen in est, Romae quoque Consul habebat. The Thrasians called Argilus a
mouse, and the city which he builded Argelus. Myes was a city of Ionia, and a
citizen of that city was called Myetius. Myon a city of Locri in Epirus, and
the people thereof are called Myones. Myonesus a little region betwixt Teon and
Lebedon, and acording to Stephanus, an Island near Ephesus, the first port or
haven of Egypt opening to the red sea, is called Muos armos, the mouses haven,
and Mysia also seems to be derived from their stem. There is an Island under
the Equinoctial line, called Insula murium, the mouse-Ilande, because of the
abundance of myce therein: and to conclude, even the herbs and plants of the
earth, Theuetus.
have received names from this little beast, as Hordeum Murinum, Myacantha,
Sperrage, Myopteton, Myuoos, Myortocon Mouse-eare, Mouse-foot, and such like.
There have bin also commedies made of Myss, as that of Carsinus, called Myes,
wherein the Weasill strangleth the night-wandring Myss. And another Greek
comedy called Galeomyomachia, that is a fight betwixt cats and myce, wherein
the poet does most pleasantly feign names of myce, as their king he called
Creillus, that is a flesh-eater, and his eldest son Psicarpax, Fictions
learned and witty of the proper nams of Mise
a corne-eater; and his second son Psitodarpes Bread-eater, and his eldeste
Lycnogluphe, candle-eater, and all his ancestors Carpodaptai, that is
Fruit-eaters. And then he brings other myce in, as Turolicos, Psicolices,
Cholecoclophos. Homer in his Batracomiomachia, that is, a fight betwixt Frogs
and mice, does very elegantly describe diverse proper names of mice. As
Piscarpax, whose father was Tuoxartes, and his mother Lychomile, daughter of
Plernotrocta the king, and then other mice, as Lychopinax, Terogliphus,
Embaschitrus, Lychenor, Troglodites, Artophagus, Ptermogliphus, Pternophagus,
Cnissodioctes, Sidophogus, Artepibulus, Meridarpax, and Thulacotrox, all which
are not only out of the abundance of the Authors wit, but invented for the
expressing of the mouses nature.

The color of Mice.
The Epithets of myce are these; short, small, fearful, peaceable, ridiculous,
rustik, or country Color murinus be a common term for a mouse color of
Asses, yet notwithstanding Scaliger. Albertus.
The quantity and severally parts of Mice. Mathoeolus.
sometimes broune and sometimes ash color. There are White Mice among the
people of Sauoy, and Dolphin in France called Alaubroges, which the inhabitants
of the country do beleeu that they feed upon snow. But the white Mouse is
above all other most laciuious and leacherous, and therefore it came into a
proverb, Myss Leucos, Myss Cacos, the white Mouse is an ill Mouse, of whose
lust Alciatus made this emblem; Delitias and mollitiem, Mus creditur albus,
Aristotle. Cicero.


An quod ei natura salax, and multa libido est?
Ornat romanas, an quia pelliunrus?
Sarmaticum, Murem vocitant plerique zibellum.
Of all which conjectures of the Poets, the first is most probable, for the
auncientes were wont to call wanton, and effeminate men Pygargoy, and
Leucopeugoy, from their beauty and whiteness. And as there is a difference in
their colors, so also there is in their quantity. For some are very great,
some meanly great, and some very small. Their heart is very great, and their
liver and lights increase in the winter time. Also the fibers that are in them,
do increase and decrease with the waxing and wayning of the Moon. For every
day of the Lucilius said well, Luna alet ostrea, and implet echinos, Muribus
fibras. That is to say. The Moon feeds Oysters, fills Hedghogs, and
increases fibers in Mice. Some of these Mice have a gal, and some have none,
as Aristotle and Pliny show in many places.

The Mouses place of conception have many holes in it, during the time s^e
b^ar^h her young ones. There is no creature that hears more perfectly then a
Mouse, they dwell in houses of men, especially near supping and dyning rooms,
kitchins or larders, Albertus,
where any meat is stirring. And they make themselves places of aboade by
gnawing with their teeth, if they find not convenient lodginges prepared to
their hand, Orus. Aelianus.
and they love the hollow places of walls, or the roofes of houses, and
therefore the Waspes which in Aristophanes Drophae, that is gnawers of roofes,
are to be understood to be Mice, because Myss Drophia is a Mouse in the house
top. In the day time they lie still, so long as they either see or hear a man,
or any other beast harmeful unto them, for they discern their enemies, not
fearing an Ox, though they run away from a Cat.

They are very desirous of bread, and delight in all those meats which are made
of fruit, for the nourishment of men. It is a creature very diligent and
exquisite, both to compass, seek out and choose the same, so that therefore it
does often endanger and loose his own life: and finding any cubbards, wood, or
such like hard matter, to withstand his purpose, and hinder his passage, it
cease not to weary it self with gnawing, until it obtain the purpose. All
kinds of Mice love grain and corn, and prefer the hard before the soft, they
love also cheese, and if they come to many cheeses together they taste all, but
they eat of Hyrogliphicks do picture a mouse, to signify a sound judgment
and good choice. Buckmast is very acceptable to Mice, and the Mice in the I Will
Parus, in Teredos, in the Island Giaros, which is one of the Islands of the
Sporads in Cyprus, and in Calcis, they did eat iron, as appears by Aristotle,
Aelianus, and Heraclides. And it was also found, that in a certain Island near
Calybes, Mice eat and devour gold, and therefore the Goldsmiths did cut them
in pieces among their mettles. Plutarch, in the life of Marcellus says, that
there were many prodigies and fearful signs that did proceed the war of
Marius, amongst other he says that mice did eat the Gold hanging in the
temple, and that one of the temple keepers in a certain trap took a female
mouse alive, who littered five little mice in that place, and devoured three of
them. Anthologius rehearses a witty exasticon of Antiphilus, upon a mouse
which was slit asunder alive, for certain gold-dust, which she had devoured,
whereby was signified how men procure Pliny. Albertus.
and unavoidable mortal harms by stealing, and increasing of riches signified
by Gold. Vulgar Mice do ruminate or chew the cud as well as the Pontix, and
they drink by licking or lapping, although their teeth be not sawed. It is
reported that the mice of Affricke, Mice cannot drink without danger.
and especially of Libia die as soon as they drink. And the reason whereof we
will show afterward in the taking of mice, when we come to discourse of their
poisons. And for the present it should seem their temperament, or constitution
is so moist that nature can endure no addition. Yet in the plains of Arcadia
there are Myce which drink of a certain fountains without any harm.

Theophrastus Generation of mice and their carnal copulation.
The generation or procreation of Myce, is not only by copulation, but also
nature works wonderfully in engendering them by earth and small showers, as
we will show in the discourse of wild Mice.

But the house-Mouse whereof we now entreat, is engendered by copulation
betwixt male and female, and they are in general most libidenous, as may
appear by that saying of Crattinus against Xenophon, Phere nun ex aithrias
Katapuposunen muos astrapso Xenophontos, go to now, for from the skies I will
strike by lightning the Murin wantonness of Xenophon, and the female is much
more venerious then the male, as appears by that fable of Ipicrates
describing the rage of a lustful Woman. Postremo subijt me, detestabilis lena
deierans, per dianam, per puellam, per persephattam, se esse vittulam, esse
virginem, esse pullam indomitam, at illa myonia erat. Then followed me that
detestable band, swearing by Diana and Persephatta that she was a Heighfar
never touched, a Virgin never stained, and a Colt never covered, but the truth
is she was as good a maid as a Mouse. Politianus instead at illa myonia erat,
has, at illa canus erat Murinus: that is, she was a Mouses hole, signifieng
that her virginnity was lost, and that she suffered any lovers as a Mouse-hole
does any Mice. And from hence came that verse of Martial, describing the
speech of a lover to his love, calling him her Mouse and her joy; Nam cum me
Murim tu cum mea lumina dicis. So that ingenerall all mice, Albertus.
Copulation of mice.
and not only the white Mouse are most desirous of copulation. And when they
are in copulation, they embrace with their tails, filling one another without
al delay. By tasting of salt, they are made very fruitful, and therefore
Aristotle, and the soldiers of Alexander the great do report, that mice by
licking one another, and Pliny and Aristotle, that in a certain part of
Persia, a female mouse being slit assunder alive, all the young females within
her belly are also found pregnant conceived with young. Two miracles in their
procreation and multiplication.


It is very certain, that for the time they go with young, and for the number
they bring forth, they exceed all other beasts, conceiving every fourteen or
sixteen days, so that it has been found by good experience, that a female
mouse having free liberty to litter, in a vessel of millet-seede, within less
compass then half a year, she has brought forth

They live very long, if they be not prevented of their natural course, and
dying naturally, Volateranus Gillius. whether mice be docible.
they perish not al at once, but by little, and little, first one member, and
then another, (Pliny says) Euolucribus, hirundines sunt indociles, e
terrestribus Mures, among the Fowls of the air, the swallows are vndocible,
and among the creatures of the earth a mouse; yet Albertus writes, that he saw
in upper Germany, a mouse hold a burning candle in her feet, at the
commandment of her master all the time his guests were at Supper.

Now the only cause why they grow not tame is, their natural fear, such as
is in Conies, Hares, and Dear. For how can any man or beast love or harken
unto him, who they are persuaded lies in weight for their life, and such is
the peswasion of all them that fear, which persuasion being once removed by
continual familiarity, there is no cause in nature but that a Mouse may be
docible as well as a Hare or Cony, which we have showed heretofore in their
stories.

It is also very certain that Mice which live in a house, if they perceive by
the age of it, Presages and for knoledge of mice.
it be ready to fall down or subject to any other ruin, they foreknow it and
depart out of Helice in Greece, wherein the inhabitants committed this
abominable act against their neighbors the Greeks. For they slew them and
sacrificed them upon their altars. Whereupon followed the ruin of the city,
which was premonstrated by this prodigious event. For 5. days before the
destruction thereof, all the Mice, Weasels, and Serpents, and other reptile
creatures, went out of the same in the presence of the inhabitants, every one
assembling to his own rank and company, where at the people wondered much,
for they cold not conceive any true cause of their departure, and no marvel.
For God which had appointed to take vengance on them for their wickedness, did
not give them so much knowledge nor make them so wise as the beasts to avoid
his judgment, and their own destruction;

And not only the city and Citizens perished, Aelianus.
but also there was ten ships of the Lacedaemonians in their port all drowned at
that instant. The wisdom of the Mouse apeareth Their natural wisdom.
and therefore many means to be hunted from place to place, she commiteth not
herself to one lodging alone, but provides many holes; so that when she is
hunted in one place she may more safely repose her self in another. Which
thing Plautus expresses in these words. Sed tamem cogitato, Mus pusillus,
quam sapiens sit bestia, aetatem qui vni cubili, nunquam committit suam: cum
vnum obsidetor, aliunde perfugium quaerit, that is to say, it is good to
consider the little mouse, how wise a beast she is, for she will not commit her
life to one lodging but provides many harbors, that being molested in one
place she may have another refuge to fly unto.

Their natural love to one another.
out of which they cannot ascend again of themselves, they help one another,
by letting down their tails, and if their tails be to short, then they
lengthen them by this means, they take one another tail in their mouth, and
so hang two or 3. in length until the Mouse which was fallen down take hold
on the neathermost, which being performed, they al of them draw her out. Even
so Wolves holding one another by their tails, do swim over great rivers, and
thus has nature granted that to them which is denied to many men, Aelianus.
Their disposition and their flesh. Proc^p^^s. Aristeas.
namely to love, and to be wise both together. But concerning their manners,
they are evil, apt to steal, incideous, and deceitefull, and men also which
are of the same disposition with these beasts fearing to do any thing
publicly, and yet privately enterprise many deceits Comedentes carnem suilla^,
and abominationem, atque murem simul consumentur inquit Dominus, that is they
which eat swins flesh, abomination, and the Mous shall be destroyed together
says the Lord: wherein the prophet threatens a curse unto the people,
Arnaldus.
that broke the first law of God, in eating flesh forbidden, and the Physicians
also say, that the eating of the flesh of Mice engendereth forgetfulness,
abomination, and corruption in the stomach.

The eating of bread or other meat which is bitten by Mice does increase in
men and children a certain disease in their face, hu^t by mice to the bodies
of mankind.
and in the flesh, at the roots of the nails of their fingers certain hard
bunches, called by the Venetians Spelli, and by the Germans Leidspyssen, and by
the Latins Dentes Muris: yet it is affirmed, that the flesh of Mice is good for
Hawks, to be given them every day, or every each other day together with the
skin, for it helps their entrals, purges fleame, and choler, restrains
the fluctions of the belly, Medicine of Hawks. Demetrius.
drives out stones and gravel, stays the distillation of the head to the
eyes, and final corroborateth the stomach. Yet we have hard that in the
kingdom of Calechut, Eating of Mice.
that when Hanniball besieged Casselinum, there was a man that sold a Mouse for
two hundred pieces of quoine, so great was the extremity of famine, that the
man which sold it dyed for hunger, and as it should seem through the want of
it, but he which bought it lived by eating thereof, the which thing argues that
necessity, hunger, and famine, makes men for the safeguard of life, to make more
reckoning in extremity of the basest creaturs, then in prosperity they do of
the best. For that person which gave so much money for a Mouse, at another time
would have scorned to have given

And on the other side the wretched love of gain, which causes a man to
endanger his own life for love of silver. But I rather think that it was the
hand of God himself taking vengance of such a covetous disposition which would
not suffer him to live, that like Midas had gotten so much gold.

Enemies of Mice.
The enemies of Mice are many, not only men which by sundry artificial devises
kill them because of harm, but also beasts and wild foul do eat their
flesh, and live upon them. And first of all Cats and Weasels, do principally
hunt to catch Mice, and have bin therefore by the late writers called Murilegi,
for their taking of Mice. And the nature of the Weasell is not only more
inclined to hunt after them, then the cat, but is more terrible Pliny.
for if the brains of a Weasell, the hair or rennet be sprinkled upon Cheese
or any other meat whereto Mice resort, they not only forbear to eat
thereof, but also to come in that place.

They are also driven away by the sprinkling of the ashes of Weasels, and as
all noises make them afraid, so none so much as the skreetching or crying of a
weasell, for at the hearing thereof they fall astonished. And besides they have
more opportunity to follow and take them then cats, because their bodies are
lesser, and their noses and snouts longer, and therefore they follow them many
times into their holes, and very nimbly pull them forth when they think they
are most secure. Foxes also kill Mice, and in Italy there is a black Snake
called Carbonario from his color resembling coals, which I think to be the
same Myagros, from his hunting of Mice: This snake does also eat and devour
Mice. Hawks eat Mice, and all the night-birds, especially the night-crowes
and Owls. How hateful a Mouse is to the Elephant, we have showed already in
that story, how in the presence thereof he will not touch his meat, nor eat
any thing over which a Mouse does run. Nor yet eat in the cratch or manger
wherein a Mouse has bin. Ponzettus affirms, that there is great love
between Mice and Serpents, for sometimes they play together.

Their is a hatred betwixt Bats, Frogs, and Mice, as may appear by
Anthologius, Museus, and others. It is said also that they are hateful to
Oysters, whereof I know no reason, except it be because they love their fish.
And Alciatus has a pretty emblem, which he entituleth Captinus ob gulam,
wherein he shows, that a Mouse watches an Oyster when he gapeth, and seeing
it open thrust in his head to eat the fish, as soon as ever the Oyster felt
his teeth, presently he closes his shell again, and so crusheth the mouses
head in pieces, whereby he disciphereth the condition of those men which
destroy themselves to serve their belies, And thus much for the love and enmity
betwixt Mice and other beasts. Now concerning the actions of men, they hunt
Mice to be rid from their anoyances, because they do not only destroy the
things they eat, and live upon other men's cost, and therefore Parasites are
compared unto them whom the Germans call Schmorotzer, and Tellerlecker, that is
smell-feasts, and lick-spickets, are compared to Mice, because they live at
other men's tables. But also Mice do defile, corrupt, and make unprofitable
whatsoever they taste, and therefore the Egyptians, when they would describe
corruption, do picture a Mouse

For these causes have men invented many devises, snars, and gins, the general
whereof is called by the Latins Muscipula, and by the Gretians Muspala, and
Miagra, the diverse

And although every woman, and silly Rat-ketcher can give instruction enough
therein, yet their knowledge cannot excuse my negligence if I should omit the
inventions and devises of the ancient, whereby they deliuerd themselves from
the annoiances of these beasts. And therefore first of al to declare the manner
of ketching them in places where corn is kept: Let your moustrap be placed to
ketch mice, right against the door, but let them have room to come in, and in
short time it will so fear them, that they will trouble you no more. But if
mice breed in the ground under creaueses, except you fill all the creauises
Pandatharia are feign to do.

There are other kind of moustraps which do ketch mice alive: Varrus.
and othersome which do kill them, either being pressed down with the weight of
it, or stifeld with water, or otherwise, as with a strong piece of iron being
small, and hung right against the butten of the trap, on the which piece of iron
they hang meat, and so by that means the mouse is ketched by putting her head
through the hole to snatch at the meat, for she by stirring the iron does
losen the butten, and so her head is shut fast in the hole. And there are
other kind of moustraps which are covered al over, into the which the mouse may
run, and if you have put any water therein they are presently stifeled. Of al
which kind of traps shall be severally

The common kind of this moustrap is made of wood, long and four cornerwise,
and is framed of four boards, but the hinder part is strengthened with strong
wiers of iron, that she may without any danger look in to see what she may
get there, and that the smell of the which she finds there, may alure her to
come to it. And the former part has a hole in the top, through which there is
put a small piece of iron, and also there is made a trapdoor in form of a
percullis, to the which the iron is very slightly hung, that when the mous
comes to ketch at the meat she is suddenly taken by falling of the same; but
the meat which you fasten to the nether end of this iron hook must be fat, or
the crust of cheese or bread, which if it be a little toasted at the fire it
will not be amiss, that the mouse may smell it far off. Some do make these kind
of traps doble, with one door at one end, and another Peterus Crescent: does
call traps belonging to houses, which shall be spoken of hereafter.

The other kind of moustrap is made with iron hooks hung in the round circle.
In the midst of the which brim is put a great many of the same wiers, which
being made sharp at every end are after the form of the top of a crest, or
helmet, or as it is made in a bownet to ketch fishes, and upon the hook let
their be hung meat, by the which means the mouse coming to the meat,
sticks her self upon the hooks. The manner of making lesser moustraps is
with Walnut tree, and that the middle part of it be not covered, and that
there be put to the mouth or brim thereof some kind of mettle, so that the open
part may bend inward, and that the mouse may not gnaw that which is within
except she creeps under: which if she shall do, she shall presently be shut
in by stirring the trap.

Crescentient
but there is tied a swines skin in the middle, and also an earthen pot
covered with the same bark being first sprinkled with corn that the Mice may
custom to come to it, and being dried with lying they break in pieces, but
you must lay them together again, and fill your pot with Water, by the which
means as soon as ever they are upon the same they fall into the pyt, and so
are stifeled.

And also it is reported of those which have tried the same, that if Mice fall
into a vessel without water, and remain there a long time without meat, that
then they devour one another, but if they remain there so long until one
among them all be left alone, that is to say the strongest of them all, and
that he be suffered to go out, wheresoever he Senensis did set a purse in a
hollow place, and made it to open and shut by some devise, so that at length he
took a mouse, which mouse he fed only with the flesh of Mice, and after he
had fed it so a long time, he let it go, who killed all the Mice that he did
meet, and was not satisfied with them, but went into every hole that he could
find, and eat them up also. Also Mice are taken in vessels, from whence they
cannot escape, upon the which vessel let there be put a small staff, which is
so cut in the middle, that she may only hold her self by the meat, and when
you have so done, put the kernel of a Nut upon the middle of the staff, to
the which the Mouse coming, does fall into the vessel with the staff,
Crescentien.
and they will be stifeled if their be any Water: but if there be none

And again he tells of another manner of ketching of mice, which is as great
as the first, and it is after this manner. Take two smooth boardes about the
length of thy arm, and in breadth half thy Arm, but join it so together
that they may be distant from the lower part in length some four fingers or
little less, with two small spindles or clefts, which must be at every end
one, and fasten Paper under them, and put a piece of paast therein, being cut
overthwart in the middle, but you must not fasten it nigh the middle, and let
it be so bound that it may easily be lifted up betwixt the spindles, that if by
slipping it should be altered, it migh be brought again to the same form. But
the two spindles spoken of before, ought to be joined together in the ends
above, and beyond them another

There is another manner also, which is to make a round piece of Wood fastened
on both sides with Needles, and made so that the hinder part of it way heavier
then the former, and that it stand an inch hyer then the other, and then when
you have so placed it, throw some corn thereon, that the mice may be alluted
thereto, and tie also a piece of flesh upon the former end of it; and so the
Mouse going into the middle, by the rouling Crescentien.
all falling into the kettle. Also there are many kinds of mice-traps where
mice do perish by the weight thereof, and they are made of a smal-piece of wood
made hollow, into the which shall fall down another small piece of Wood, but it
must be made so that it may fall weighty to press down the mice going to the
meat, and let the meat be tied to another little small piece of wood, which
being touched, the heavy piece does presently fall down, and so by that means
the mouse is taken.

Our country men do make a trap which is somewhat like to this, let two pieces
of boords be joined together one foot broad, and two foot long, and afterward
let there be put in of it, but that board which is uppermost, must touch both
the ends of the other, and notched according to the breadth, the notch being
made after the form of a wedge divided into two parts, and an other small
piece of wood must be put to that which is vpermost, almost two fingers long,
and one finger broad, and let there be put into the lower notch, a piece of
wood with meat at it, so that it may be slightly fastened to the brimme of the
uppermost, that the meat being presently touched, the other may the easiler
fall.

And you may lay a stone upon the uppermost board that it may fall the heavier.
And there are some also which to the lower board, do fasten iron pinnes, made
very sharp, against the which the Mice are driven by the weight of the fall.
Furthermore, there is another

There is also another manner of mouse-trap used among us, which is, let there
be a hole made and compassed about with a board of a foot long, and five or
six fingers broad, the compass whereof must be four fingers, into this hole
let there be put a vessel made

Furthermore there is another manner of trap, when a vessel out of which they
cannot escape, is filled half up with water, and upon the top thereof Otmell
is put, which will swim, and not sink, making the uppermost face of the water
to seem white, and solid, whereunto when the mouse comes, she leapeth into
the oate-mell, and so is drowned: And the like may be done with chafe mingled
with oat-mell: and this in all traps must be observed, wherein mice are taken
alive, that they be presently taken forth, for if they make water in the place,
their fellows will for ever suspect the trap, and never come neare^t, till the
savor of the urine be aholished.

Palladius says, that the thick froth of oil, being infused into a dish or
brazen caldron, and set in the middle of the house in the night time, will draw
all the mice unto it, wherein they shall stick fast, and not be able to escape.

Anatolius
Pliny says, that if a mouse be gelded alive and so let go, she will drive
away all the residue; Sorex. If the head of a mouse be flaied, or if a male
mouse be flaied all over, or her tail cut off, or if her leg be bound to a
post in the house, or a bell be hung about her neck, and so turned going, she
will drive away all her fellows. And ( Pliny says) that the smoke of the
leaves of the Ewe-tree, because they are poison, will kill mice, so also will
libbards-baine, and henbaine-seede, and Wolf baine, for which cause they are
severally called Myoctonos, and the roots of Wolf bane, are commonly sold in
Sauoy unto the Country people for that purpose.

In Germany they mingle it with oat-mell, and so lay it in bals to kill mice.
The fume of wall-wort, calcauth, parcely, origanum, and deaths-hearb, do also
kill mice: you may also drive them away with the fume of the stone Haematites,
and with green tamarisk,

The seed of Cowcumbers being sod, and sprinkled upon any thing, mice will
never touch it, likewise wild coucumber and coloquintida, kill mice. To keep
mice from corn, make mortar of the froth of oil mingled together with chafe,
and let them well dry, and afterward be wrought thoroughly, then plaster the
walls of your garnery therewith, and when they are dry cast more froth of oil
upon them, and afterward carry in your corn and the mice will never annoy it.

Cato
Wormwood laid among clothes, and skins, defend them from mice,: And also
the water of wormwood sod, sprinkled upon clothes has the same operation.

Tragus
Ink tempered with water, wherein Wormwood has been washed, or sod, causes
that the Parchment and Paper written therewith, shall never be eaten, or
touched with mice.

Auicen
Anatolius and Tarentinus, in the discourse of the grauery or barm do write,
that milk-thistle mingled with honey, water, and fine flower, or mil-dust, made
into little balls, and laid where mice my eat of it, does make them blind if
they taste thereof. White Hellebore mixed with pottage, Paxausus
or the seeds of wild Cowcumber, Coloquintida, and meal, mingled with black
Hellebore, and put into Cheese or bread, or any kind of fat meat, kills both
Rats and mice. So likewise a white camelion sod in broth, mingled with water
and oil, kills Dogs, swine, and mice.

The juice of the root of the herb Camelion, mixed with water and oil,
draws mice unto it, and kills them by tasting thereof, if they drink not
presently: so also does Henbane. The roots of the bramble Tree, mingled with
Butter, Bread, or Honey, Elecampaine, and sea Onions, Scamoney, wild
Sparradge, Arsenicke, Mug-wort, otherwise called mouse-wort, mingled with Lard in
small pieces, with Auri pigment, kills Wolves and mice. Croscentiensis.
and in some countries, for the better dispersing of the poison, set drink
beside the same, whereof as soon as they taste they swel and die, but I have
seen them die without drinking at all. Mice and wolves if they taste of the
wild Rose, and drink after it, do not not only dye, but also fall into
madness and bite their fellows, communicating the quality of the disease to
every one they bite. Flesh cut into little pieces and fried with butter in
Cardon
and afterward when it is cold, add half so much soft pitch thereto, and
mingle t together, rolling up the flesh in the pitch, then distribute it upon
little boords, and set it in the place, and places whereunto the mice do much
resort, and water beside it, and when that they have tasted of it a little,
they are so eagerly a thirst, that they drink and dye.

The like I may say of Rats-bane, Quicke-siluer, Sublimate, and Precipitate,
and diverse other things, and thus much may suffice, for the ketching, taking,
and killing of myce, whereunto I may add the use of their members and parts,
not medicinal, but natural, although I have touched it heeretoforein part.

The Scythians were wont to be clad with the skins of mice and Wolves, and
it is observed, that when mice cry and screeketh above their ordinary custom,
it presageth an alteration and change of the Weather, and thus much shall
suffice for their natural discourse.

Having thus discoursed of the nature of the vulgar mouse, The morrall story of
mice
I may also add the morral Glaucus the son of Minos and Pasiphae, that while
he followed a mouse to take her, he fell into a vessel of honey, but after
Polyades the prophet, by laying an herb on him raised him again to life. Hatto
an Arch*Bysh. of Metz in the frontiers of Germany, was destroyed by mise, or as
other say by Rats, Tzetzes.
but the words of Textor are: Hatto Archiepiscopus Moguntinus a muribus fertur
deuoratus. And the error may proceed, because that Mus is a general word for
the Rat and mouse, and therefore they which have thought it an unreasonable
thing, that so small beasts should destroy so mighty a prince, have rather
attributed it to the Rats then to the mice; Herod was deuourd by worms, and
other have been eaten up with lyce. Adrian the Pope was strangled by a fly,
and therefore Hatto an Archbishop might as well perish through the afflicting
hand of God by a multitude of mice.

Heliogabalus that wretch, among other his monstrous desires, and Tyrannical
commaundes, Lampridius affirms, that upon a time he commanded that there
should be brought unto him ten thousand mice alive, a thousand weasils, and a
thousand Sorices or wild fielde-mice, so base were his thoughts, that while he
should have attended his Imperial calling, and hearkened to the suits and
complaints of poor distressed subjects, he

The like is reported of a Moscouian Emperor, who to afflict his people and to
gather money from them, commanded the Citizens of Musco to bring him a pecke
full of fleas, whereunto the people answered, that if they could take so many,
yet could not they keep them together from leaping away. And mice have been
brought into public spectacle, because at Lauinium they gnawed asunder the
shields of silver; and it was afterward judged a prodigy, for there followed
the Marsicke war. When the Scythians understood that Darius with his great
army stood in need of vittailes, they sent unto him a Prouant-master with
these presents or gifts, a bird, a mouse, a frog, and five darts. Darius gave
his opinion that the mouse, signified the earth, Herodotus.
the frog, the waters, the bird, horses, and the darts warlike furniture and
strength of forces, and that the Scythians by sending all these unto them,
yielded that the Persians should be Lords of their land, sea, horses and
themselves, and that therefore they ought to be of good courage.

Gobrias a grave Councellor who was one of the seven that slew the Magi or
Wizards answered otherwise, for his conjecture was more true, for said he, O
persae, nisi effecti vt aues subuoletis in coelum, aut vt mures subeatis
terram, aut vt ranae insiliatis in paludes, non remeabitis vnde venistis his
sagittis confecti: O ye Persians, except ye become like birds to fly up into
heaven, or like mice to creep into the earth, or like frogs to leap into the
waters, you shall not return back again unto the place from whence you came,
and so indeed it came to pass. We read 1. Sam. 5. that when the Ark of God
was taken by the Philistimes, and they kept it in their Temple at Hazzah, the
hand of the Lord fell upon their Princes, and he smote them with Emrods, in
the bottom of their belly, that is, God punished them with mice, for he
afflicted their bodies, and the fruits of the earth, for which cause Cap. 6.
they advise with themselves; to send back again the Ark of the Lord with a
present of Golden Mice. Ovid, Homer, and Orpheus call Apollo Smyntheus, for the
Cretians in ancient time called Mice Smynthae: Now the fained cause thereof is
thus related by Aelianus.

There was one Crinis which was a Priest of Apollo: who neglected his daily
sacrifice, Apollo himself was moved; and taking pity of the misery,
appeared to one Horda a Neate-heard, commanding him to tell Crinis that all
the cause of that penury was for that he had omitted his accustomed sacrifice,
and that it was his duty to offer them again diligently, or else it would be
far worse afterward. Crinis upon the admonition amended the fault, and
immediately Apollo killed all the devouring Mice with his darts, whereupon he
was called Smyntheus. Other again say, that among the Aeolians, at Troas and
Hamaxitus, they worshipped mice and Apollo both together, and that under his
Altar they had meat and nourishment, and also holes to live in safely, and the
reason was, because once many thousands of mice invaded Aeolia and Troy,
cutting down the same before it was ripe, and also frustrating the husbandman
of fruit and hope: this evil caused them to go to Delphos to ask counsel
at the Oracle what they should do to be delivered from that extremity, where
the Oracle gave answer that they should go sacrifice to Apollo Smyntheus, and
afterward they had sacrificed, they were delivered from the mice, and that
therefore they placed a statue or figure of a mouse in the Temple of Apollo.

When the Troyans came out of Creete, to seek a habitation for themselves,
they received an Oracle, that they should there dwell, where the inhabitants
that were borne of the earth should set upon them, the accomplishing whereof
fell out about Hamaxitus, for in the night time, a great company of wild mice,
set upon their bows, quiuers, and Ida, so called after the name of Ida in
Creete: and to conclude we do read that mice have been sacrificed,
Sacrificing of Mice. Scoliast^^yco.
for the Arcadians are said first of all to have sacrificed to their Gods a
mouse, and secondly a white horse, and lastly the leaves of an Oak.

And to conclude, Aelianus tells one strange storye of mice in Heraclea, that
there is not one of them which touches any thing that is consecrated to
Religion, or to the service of their Gods. Insomuch that they touch not their
vines which are sacred to religious

The medicines of the Mouse.
Albertus
The flesh of a mouse is hot and and soft, and very little or nothing fat, and
does expel black and melancholy choler. A mouse being flead or having his
skin pulled off, and afterward cut through the middle, and put unto a wound or
sore wherein there is the head Marcellus
or any other thing whatsoever within the wound, will presently and very easily
exhale and draw them out of the same. Mice being cut and placed unto wounds
which have been bitten by Serpents, or put to places which are stinged by
them, do very effectually and in short space of time cure and perfectly heal
them. Mice which do lurk and enhabite in houses, being cut in twain and put
unto the wounds which are new made by Scorpions, Dioscorides
does very speedily heal them.

A young mouse being mingled with salt is an excellent remedy against the
biting of the mouse called a shrew, which biting horses and laboring cattle,
it does venom until it come unto the heart, and then they die, except the
aforesaid remedy be used. Pliny
The shrew also himself being bruised and laid unto the place which was
bitten, is an excellent and very profitable remedy against the same.

A mouse being divided and put or laid upon warts, will heal them and quite
abolish them, of what kind soever they shall be. The fat which is distilled
from mice, Marcellus
being mixed with a little goose-greace and boiled together, is an excellent
and medicinable cure for the asswaging and mollifying of swellings and hard
lumps or knots which do usually arise in the flesh. Young mice being beaten
into small bits or pieces, Pliny
and mixed Dioscorides
There are certain of the wise men or Magi who think it good that a mouse
should be flead and given to those which are troubled with the toothache
twice in a month to be eaten. The water wherein a mouse has been sod or
boiled, is very wholesome and profitable for those to drink who a^e troubled
with the inflammation of the jaws or the disease called the Squincie. Mice,
but especially those of Affricke, having their skin pulled off and Pliny


Sodden mice are exceeding good to restrain and hold in the urine of infants
or children being too abundant, if they be given in some pleasant or
delightsome drink. Mice being also cut in twain, and laid unto the feet or
legs of those which are gowtie is an excellent remedy and cure for them. Mice
being dried and beaten to powder, does very effectually heal and cure those
which are scalded or burned with hot water, or fire. Cypres nuts being burned
and pounded, or beaten into dust, Marcellus
and mixed with the dust of the hoof of a male or female mule, being dried or
stamped small, and the oil of myrtle

The dust of a mouse pounded and beaten to powder, and mingled with a certain
oil, is very good and wholesome, for those which are grieved with a Tettor or
scabbe which may ouerrunne their whole body. Pliny
The brains or tail of a mouse being dried and beaten to powder is very
medicinable for those which are troubled with the casting and shedding of their
hair, as also for the disease called the Foxes evil, but this operation will
work

There is also another excellent remedy to cure and heal the aforesaid disease
which is this, to take mice which inhabit in houses, and to burn or dry them
in a pot, Galen
and then beat them: and being so used, to mix them with oil of Laurel, and
to rub the hairs which are like to fall or shed with garlic, and to put
them altogether into a Frontlet or forehead cloth, and daily to keep the
same medicine or plaster unto them, until the hair do grow fast, and they be
rid of that disease. There is also another remedy for the same disease, which
is this: To burn a mouse, and beat him into powder and then to Galen
and this is accounted for a very speedy and effectual cure.

The dust or powder of mice being mixed with honey and oil of Roses, and so
baked, or boiled together, and afterward distilled into a clear water and so
powered into the ears of any one which is deaf or troubled with any pain in
his ears, Pliny
and it will quickly bring him help and remedy. The dust of a dried mouse
being also mingled with honey and rubbed upon the teeth of any one which is
troubled with a stinking breath, will presently take away the savor thereof.
Marcellus
If the urine of a man or woman be too fluent and abundant, let them take the
dust or powder of a dried mouse, being beaten and stamped, and mix it with wine
or with goats milk, and so drink it up, and he shall speedily have remedy.
Galen
The grievous and violent inflammation or turning of the eyelids, is cured
after this manner. First, they take the flesh of the mice, as soon as ever it
is beaten small, and mingle it with the yolke of an egg, and mollify it into
a salve or plaster like unto wax, and then put it into a linen cloth, and
so wrap it upon the eye lides in the

There is an excellent remedy for the ouerspreding of the eyes, or to cure the
disease in them, called the pin and the web, or to help them which are
altogether blind, which is this: To take the blood of a mouse, the gall of a
Cock, and some part or quantity of woman's milk, and to take of each of them
alike, and then to mingle or mix them together, and being well wrought or
kneaded until it come to an ointment to rub or spread it upon the eyes: and
this will in very short space help them unto their sight; For it has been
tried, and has helped many.

Galenus Paral. 3.16
The skin of a mouse being burned or dried, and beaten into powder, and so
mingled with vinegar, and then anointed upon the head of any one who is pained
or troubled with the heade-ache, it will presently ease and help him. The
head of a mouse being Pliny Galenus
and beaten into small powder, and then mixed or mingled with honey, and so
anointed upon the legs or feet of them which are troubled with the gowte,
are excellent good and wholesome for the curing of that grievous disease. The
same virtue has the tails or bodies of Mice, being used in the aforesaid
manner in them. Some do think that the aforesaid disease is more speedily and
effectually cured after this manner: First, Pliny
to take a Beetle or horse-flye, and stamp it all to pieces, and then to
mingle it with soft and liquid pitch, the skin being prepared or made ready
with nitre: but there must be great care taken that it eat not too far in
the flesh: then to take the head of a mouse, and the gall and dung of a mouse

Sextus
The heads of Mice dried and beaten into powder or dust, and then mixed with
honey, and so anointed upon the eyes for the space of ten days together, will
clarify the eyes, and expel all pain or blemishes from them. Of the heads of
Mice being burned is made that excellent powder, Pliny
for the scowring and cleansing of the teeth called tooth-soape: unto which if
spikenard be added or mingled, it will take away any filthy sent or strong
savor in the mouth. The brains of a Mouse being taken and put or steeped in
wine and stamped, Marcellus
and beaten small and anointed upon the brow or forehead of any one who is
Magi or wise men do very much commend this medicine for the expelling of a
quartaine Ague or fever, which is thus, To take the nose or snowt of a Mouse,
as also the very tops of the ears, and bruise them together, and afterward tie
them in a linen cloth, which has had Roses or Rose leaves in the same,
Myrepsus
and then bind them unto the arms or wristes of him which is so troubled, and
they will very effectually and speedily cure and heal him. For the rottenness
and deminishing ^^xtus
is of such force and power, as it will cause her never to conceive. The laps
or fillets of the liver of a Mouse, being beaten small and mingled with four
drams of sower and unpleasant wine is an excellent remedy for those which are
troubled with quakings in their joints, as also for feauers and shaking agues.
Galenus
A mouse being cut or parted in the conjunction of the sun and the Moon, and
the liver pulled out and roasted or boiled, and given to one which is troubled
with the aforesaid disease to eat, will very speedily and without any
difficulty or pain cure and heal him of the same. The gall of a Mouse being
beaten very small, and steeped or washed in Vinegar, Pliny
and so poured or distilled into the ears of any one who is deaf or thick of
hearing, or has any ach or pain in the same, is counted for the chiefest, and
most singular and chiefest remedy or cure which is used for the same. Varro.


The dung or dirt of a mouse being new made, is very profitable for those which
are troubled Archigenes.
will presenly ease and help him of the same. The gum called Benzoine being
mixed with wine and Saffron, and pepper, as also with the dirt or dung of Mice
being new made, and mixed with vinegar, and mingled al in one medicine, and so
strained and given to one to drink which is spare and lean, in some short
space or time it will make him grow very fat. Pliny


The dung or dirt of a mouse being mingled with certain other medicines, is
very good and wholesome for those which are troubled with tetters, and dry
scabs which oouerrun

The dung of mice being mingled with the dust or powder of Frankincense, wtih a
little red arsenicke added thereunto, is a very profitable and wholesome
medicine for those to use which are troubled with little hand red bunches and
swellings arising in diverse and several parts of the body. Marcellus.
Seven pills being taken out of the dung of a mouse and mingled with vinegar and
anointed upon the forehead and temples, of those which are grieved therein,
will very speedily help and cure them.

The inward parts of earth mixed with mouse-dung, white Pepper, and Mirrhe,
being of each of them half an ounce, and afterward mingled with Vinegar
altogether, and so anointed upon the head of any one which is troubled with
the megrime, will very effectually and speedily ease and rid him of the same.
Myrepsus
The Herb called Strumus beaten together Marcellus.
and then rubbed upon the head of any one who is troubled with the scurfe or
skaules thereon in a bath or stone, will presently expel and drive them quite
away. The dung of mice being mingled with Frankincense, and so beaten or
tempered together until they come unto the likeness or thickness of honey,
and then anointed upon the legs or feet of any one that is troubled with the
gout, he shall find present help and remedy.

The same disease is also very effectually cured by the dung of a mouse, and
burned or scorched Galenus
and afterward mixed with vinegar altogether, and so spread or anointed upon
the diseased parts. There is also another excellent remedy for curing of the
aforesaid disease which is thus: to take Cantharides and bruise them all to
pieces, and mingle them with soft or liquid Pitch, and also with Nitre, and so
anoint or rub them upon the skin being prepared for the purpose, Pliny.
but there must be great care had that the skin be not rubbed or launced too
far. Afterward unto the wounds so made, there must be taken the heads, gales,
and dung of mice, being mixed with the herb Lingwort, and pepper, and so
beaten altogether until they come unto a temperate salve or medicine, and then
anointed upon the said wounds, and they will in very short space cure the same.

Alexius Pedemontanas.
The same is also very good to staunch the blood which issues from wounds
being new made. White Sceny-seede, and the dung of a Mouse or Hare being put
into broth with the stem or stalk of Fennel, and so boiled together, and
afterward given unto a Woman to drink who is destitute of milk in her
breasts, will presently and very speedily procure her milk in great
abundance.

(...)
The dung of Mice being steeped or washed in rain water, does ease and refresh
the swelling of women's dugs in their time of delivery. The dung of a Mouse
being given in any drink or liquor to one that is troubled with the disease
called the colic and stone to drink, will in very short space or time cure
him of the same. Mouse dung being also taken Marcellus
and given to the party grieved upon a bench or foote-stoole to drink, so that
he drink it standing upon that foot only which paineth him, even at the sun
rising, and having so drunk it, let him leap down, and afterward let him
leap three times, and let him do this but three days together, and he shall
have present help and remedy of his disease. Dioscorides


Auicen
Mouse-dung mixed with Frankincense and sweet Wine, and so drunk by any one
which is troubled with the colic and stone, will presently ease him of the
same. But the dung of mice mingled with Frankincense, water, and Honey, and so
boiled together, and Pliny
Mouse-dung also being taken in drink by it self alone, does dissolve and
melt the stone in the bladder. The same being also boiled in water is very good
and profitable for those which cannot make Water. The same being new made and
anointed upon the belly of any one who is troubled with the collicke or stone,
shall find present ease and remedy thereby.

There is yet moreover another excellent medicine proceeding from this dung,
whereby the fruit in a Woman's womb may be brought forth either dead or
putryfied without any hurt or prejudice unto the Woman, which is thus; first to
take Egyptian salt, Hippocrates
and Gourds which are sown in woods, and afterward to pour in half a pint
of Honey, being half boiled, and to cast one dram of Rozen into the Honny, the
Gourdes, and the mouse-dung, and beat them well and thoroughly together, and
then roll them up, and fashion them in the manner of acornes, and put them to
the belly of the party so grieved as often as you shall think it meet and
convenient, and in using this some short space or time you shalsee the
aforesaid putryfied fruit to proceed and issue forth.

Mouse-dung being parched or burned and mingled with Honey, is very good and
medicinable as well for those which are troubled with the swellings in their
legs and feet, as also for those whose eyelids are pilled and bald, Auicen
to make hair to grow again upon them, being spread or anointed thereuppon.
The dunge of mice being dried and beaten Marcellus
and also confirm and make the teeth strong. The dust or powder which
proceeds from mouse-dung is also very good to cure any disease in the
fundament of either man or woman.

The urine of a mouse is of such strong force that if it shall but touch any
part of a man's body, it will eat unto the very bones. The bitings of mice are
healed by no other means but by green figes and Garlike being mixed or mingled
together, and so anointed thereupon.

OF THE RAT.
THere is no doubt that this beast belongs also to the rank of mice, The
vulgar Rat, or great domestical Mouse.
and the name thereof we have showed already, is common both to the French,
Spanish, Italian, and English, and it may seem to be derived from the Greek
word Rastes, or Heurex, or Riscos, for the Gretians use al those words. And
this beast is 4. times so big as the common Mouse, The quantity of Rats and
their parts.
being of a blackish dusky color, more whit on the belly, having along head,
not much unlike the head of the Martin, short and round ears, a reasonable
rough skin, short legs, and long claws, and exceeding great eyes, such as ca^
see very perfectly in the dark night, and more perfectly then by candle light,
with their nails they climb up steep and hard walls, their tail is very long,
and almost naked void of hair, by reason whereof it is not unworthily counted
venomous, for it seems to partake with the nature of Serpents. The quantity
of their body is much like a weasels, and sometimes you shall see a Rat
exceeding the common stature, which the Germans call Ratzen Kunig, the king of
Rats, because of his larger and greater body, and they say that the lesser
bring him meat and helieth idle. But my opinion is that as we read of the
Dormous she nourishes her parent when she is old, so likewile the younger Rats
bring food unto the elder, because through their age, they are not able to hunt
for themselves, and are also grown to a great and vnweeldy stature of body.
Sometimes you shall see white Rats, as was once seen in Germany, taken in the
middle of April, having very red eyes standing forth of their head, and a
rough and long beard. And at Auspurg in Germany, about the Temple called the
Church of S. Hulduic they abound in greater number then in other places. They
do not lie in the earth like Mice, except in the valley of Ioachim, where for
the summer time they forsake houses, and go into cony holes, but in the winter
time they return to the houses again. They are more noisome then the little
Mouse, for they live by stelth, and feed upon the same meat that they feed
upon, and therefore as they exceed in quantity, so they devour more, and do
far more harm. They are killed by the same poisons and meats that the
common Mice are killed, except wolfe-baine, for if they eat thereof, they
vomit it up again and are safe. They are also taken in the same traps, but 3.
or four times so big; Their flesh is far more hot and sharp then the flesh
of the vulgar Mouse, as we have gathered by the dissection of it, and therefore
in operation it is very like that it expels and dries more then the other.

Medicines by Rats. Poison of Rats.
The excrements are also of the same virtue, and with the dung of Rats the
Physicians cure the falling off of the hair. And it is said also that when
they rage in lust, and follow

OF THE WATER RAT.
SEeing there are two kinds of Rats, one of the earth called Rattus terrestris,
Names of Water-Rats.
and the other of the water called Rattus Fluuiatilis, of which we are now to
entreat, being also called of the Latins Mus aquaticus by the Germans
Twassermaus, and Wafferrat, by the Italians Sorgomogange, Meat of Water-Rats.
Rat d, eau. This beast hunteth fishes in the winter, and have certain caves
in the water sides, and banks of the rivers or ponds: For which occasion it
being seen in the waters, deceives their expectation which look for the
return of it to the land. And this beast has been forgotten by the ancients,
for they have left of it no description nor story, because it lives partly in
the water, and partly on the land, and therefore he said true that spoke of the
habitation and place of aboade of this beast, in this sort, Ego non in fluuijs,
Places of water rats abod
nec alijs aquis magnis, sed paruis tantum riuis atque herbosis omnium ^ipis,
hoc animal frequentissimum versari audio. That is to say, That this beast does
not keep in great waters or rivers, but in small and little currents and
pondes, where abundance of grass and other weeds do grow on the sides and
banks; Pliny attributes that to the A wonder in the parts of a female Rat
which is proper to the Tortise, for indeed there is some similitude of natures
betwixt these beasts, with this exception, that the females in this kind have
three visible passages for their excrements, one for their urine, another for
the dung, and the third for the young ones, that is a peculiare place for the
littering of their young ones, and this water-rat over and beside her common
nature with other Rats, does swim over rivers, and feed upon herbs, and if at
any time she be hunted from her native biding and accustomed lodging, then also
she goes among vulgar and common Rats and mice, and feeds upon such as they
eat: and ( Bellonius says) that there are great store of these in Nilus and
Strym^n, and that in calm nights when there are no winds, they walk to the
shores, and get up upon Aristotle says in the Arcadian Lusae, which is a city
so called, (as Stephanus writes,) where Malampus did wash the daughters of
Proetus, and delivered them from their madness. There is a certain fountain
wherein do live Rats of the earth, (they should say Rats of the water) for
hereunto agree both Pliny and Theophrastus. Likewise in a river of Cassinus;
the ancient wisemen, which were followers of Zoroastres, made great account
of the Hedghog, but hated deadly the

Of the Alpine-Mouse
THe Alpine Mouse takes her name from the Alps wherein she is bred, and
although there be many other kinds of mice bred in the Alps, yet this being
the principal thereof, receives denomination from the mountains, because they
are bred in the very tops of the mountains, and sildom Marmota, and Murmont,
and according to Matheolus, Marmontana, the Rhaetians Montanella, and in some
part of Italy Varrosa, in France Marmote, although Marmot be a word also among
them for a Munkey. The Germans and especially the Heluetians by a corrupt word,
drawn from a Murmelthier, and Murmentle, and some Mistbellerle, by reason of
his sharp whining voice like a little Dogs. In Latin it is called also
Emptra, which seems to be compounded of Embdor, and this is the least kind of
Alpine Mice which is found in all the German regions, of which we will speak
in the end of this story. Some take this to be called Taxus, amongst whom
Brassauolus is one, yet it has no Grapaldus and Alununs, both learned Italians
say, that the Armelins are called Alpine mice, whereunto they are led, because
they sleep all the winter Saphan, acording to some Authors, and is translated
Arcktonim, but we will show in due place, that the Arcktomys is the Crycetus,
or Grycet-mouse, and the Saphan we have

These Alpin Mice are in the tops of the Apenine hills, and none of the
Auncientes except Pliny make mention thereof, and it is doubtful whether he
does describe it or no. For his words are, Sunt his Muribus Alpinis, pares and
in Egypto similiterque residunt in clunibus and binis pedibus gradiuntur,
prioribusque, vt manibus vtuntur, that is to say, there are mice in Egypt like
to the Alpin Mice, for they sit upon their Buttocks, and go with their
foremost two feet, which also they use instead of hands, by which we collect,
that they are not the same, but like the Alpine mice.

The quantity of this beast, and the several parts.
The Alpine mouse is in quantity like a Hare, or at the least betwixt a Hare and
a Cony, being more fat, and of a thicker body then a Cat, but shorter legs in
outward appearance most like a mouse, and therefore it is called an Alpine
mouse. The back of it is Mathaeolus.
which in some is more clear, and in others more obscure and brown. Their
eyes of a reasonable quantity, standing far out of their heads. Their ears
very short like cropped ears. The head like a Hares, and their feet with long
nails, his foreteeth like a squirrels, two above, and two beneath, but long and
sharp like a Beuers, in color yellowe, about the nose and vpper-lippes, he
has long-blacke-bristle-haires like a cat. The tail, is half a cubit long,
according to Stumpsius, but two palms according to Agricola. His legs very
short and thick, covered with long deep thick hair, like to the bottom of
his belly.

The toes of his feet are like a Bears, and his claws long and black,
wherewithal be diggeth the earth to make his den, he goes upon his hinder
feet like a Bear, or like

The description of the great Alpine mouse.
Scaliger describes them in this manner, a Marmot (says he, for so he
terms an Alpine mouse in French) is a Beast about the bigness of a Badger,
having hair and tail much like it, and after the same manner short legs,
and little or no ears, long, sharp, firm, crooked, strong, and black claws,
which is numbered amongst the kinds of mice, with whom it holds little
correspondence, except that like a squirell it takes his meat

Their teeth are like to the teeth of hares and mice, after that they are made
tame, they are not hurtful to men or children, except they be provoked. Being
kept in houses, they will eat and gnaw all linen and woolen cloth, Thus far
Scaliger. But we have showed already that the outward appearance of it is like
a mouse, and that therefore it is safer to follow Pliny, Albertus, Mathaeolus,
Stumpsius, and others, then his sole and singular opinion; they keep as we
have said already in the tops of the mountains wherein they make their cave
with wonderful art and circumspection, The places of their abod and then
singular art in making their cave.
making two different passages into their den, one above another a poles
length, which meet in the middle like a forke, or the

They play many times before the mouth of their den together, and in their
sport or pastime, Their observation of watch.
bark like little Dogs. When they go out of their cave into the mountains
to gather food, or to play, or to fetch in grass, always one of them
remains like a Watchman near the mouth of the cave upon some high place,
looking most diligently and vigilantly, both far and near; and if he see
either a man or wild beast coming toward them, then he suddenly cries
out, and with his voice gives the warning word, whining like the whisling of a
pipe, if his fellows be far off, or else barking like a him in pieces with
their teeth. There is no beast which is so strong as this, Stumsius
considering the quantity, for it has been seen that when a lusty young man
took one of them by the hinder leg as it ran into the den, he could not
withal his might pluck it back again. The strength of this beast.
The claws of it are exceeding sharp, and fit to dig, so that it is thought
if a man find them in the earth, and seek to take them by digging unto them,
he shall labor in vain, because the beast diggeth faster from him then he can
follow her; they cannot run very fast in the plain ground, but are easily
killed by a man, except they get into the earth: with their teeth they bite
deep, for they can shere asunder wood with them like Beauers, Their usual
food.
they eat or live upon fruits and especially being tamed when they are young,
they refuse not bread,

Toward the feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, and of Gallus, they enter
into their caves, and as Pliny says, they first of all carry provision of Hay,
Entrance into their caves
and green Herbs into their den to rest upon, wherein their wit and
understanding is to be admired, for

For there is no reason that leads the Author thereunto, but that some of
them have been found bald on the back. But this is certain, when the Snow
begins to cover the Mountains, then do they enter into their dens, and shut
up close the passages, with Sticks, Grass, and earth, both so hard and so
thick, that it is easier to break the solid ground, then the mouths of
their Caves, and so being safely encluded both from the fear of the Hunters,
from Rain, Snow, and cold, there they live until the Spring without Their
continual sleep all the winter time.
to express a drowsy and sleepy fellow in the German tongue thus. Er musse
synzyt geschlaffen haben wie ein murmelthier, in Latin thus, Necesse habet
certum, dormiendo, tempus consumere, instar muris Alpini, He must needs sleep
a little like the Mouse of the Alps. They sleep also when they be tamed, but
it has been found by experience, that when a tame one has been taken
asleep and laid in a warm barrel upon Hay, the mouth being shut and closed
to keep out Rain and Snow, at the opening thereof it was found dead; and the
reason was, because it lacked breath, and therefore this is most wonderful
that in the Mountains, notwithstanding the close stopping of the mouth of
their caves,

But this is to be considered, that after they have been long tamed, they
sleep not so much as when they are wild, for I think that their continual
eating of raw and green Herbs, ingendereth in them so many humors as cannot
be dispersed without along continuing sleep, but afterward when they are
dieted with such meat as is provided for the nourishment of man, they are
eased of the cause, and so the effect cease. During the time that they
sleep, they grow very fat, and they are not awaked very easily, Growing fat
with sleep.
except with the heat of the sun or fire, or a hot-house. Now the manner of
their taking while they are wild is thus.

In the summer time when they go in and out of their caves, they are taken
with The taking of these beasts.
then also are the inhabitants forced to another devise, for then in the summer
time, they set up certain pillars or perches near the mouth of their den,
whereby they may be dyrected, when the snow does cover the mountains.

For the Pillars or poles stand up above the snow, although the snow be very
deep. Then come the inhabitants upon round pieces of wood in the midst of
the winter, fastened to their shooe-soles over the deep snow with their pyoners
and diggers, and cast away the snow from the den, and so dig up the earth, and
not only take the beasts, but carry them away sleeping, and while they dig,
they diligently observe the frame and manner of the stopping of the Mouses den.
For if it be long and deep, it is a sign of a long and a hard winter, but if
it be shallow and thin, of the contrary: so coming upon them as we have said,
they take them and carry them away asleep, finding always an odd number
among them, and they diligently observe, that whilst they dig, there be no
great noise, or that they bring not their fire too near the^. For as Stumpsius
says, Experrecti enim capinon possunt, nam vt cunque strenue fodiat venator,
ipsi fodiendo simul and retrocedunt and pedibus quam effoderint, terram
reijciendo fossorem impediunt. That is to say, If they be once awaked, they
can never be taken, for howsoever the Hunter dig never so manfully, yet they
together with him, dig inward into the mountains, and cast the earth backward
with their feet to hinder his work.

Being taken as we have said, they grow very tame, and especially in the
presence of their keepers, Their taming and conditions in the house.
before whom they will play and sport, and take Lice out of their heads with
their forefeet like an Ape. Insomuch as there is no beast that was ever wild in
this part of the world, that becomes so tame and familiar to man as they, yet
do they always live in the hatred of dogs, and oftentimes bite them
deeply, having them at any advantage, especially in the presence of men, where
the dogs dare not resist nor defend themselves.

Their blood is saved in a vessel, and afterward the Mouse it self is
dressed in hot scalding water like a pig, The saving and use of their flesh.
and the hair thereof plucked off, and then do they appear bald and white;
next to that they bowell them, and take out their intrals: afterward put in
the blood again into their bellies, and so sees them or else salt them, and
hang them up in smoke, and being dressed after they are dried, they are
commonly eaten in the Alpine regions with Rapes and Cabiges, and their flesh is
very fat, not a fluxible or loose fat like the fat of Lambs, but a solid fat,
like the fat of Hogs and Oxen. And the flesh hereof is commended

The ventricle or maw of the Mouse Alpine, is prescribed to be laid upon the
belly against the collicke. the medicines of this beast.
If the hands of a man be anointed with the fat of this beast, it is said he
shall be the better able to endure cold all that day after: Also the same fat
being drunk up

Certain Horseleeches, in the cure of that disease which they call the worms,
which are certain ulcers rising in the body, do mingle this fat with other
medicines which are very drying or skeptic. And Mathaeolus does prescribe it
for the softning and mollifieng of contracted nerves and joints in the body.

By the discourse aforesaid, it does appear that of these Alpine-Mice, there
are two kinds, The descripon of the Emp^^a or little Alpine Mouse.
one great like a Badger, and the other in stature of a Hare or cony: This
lesser seems to be proper to Germany, which there they call Embdor, of the
Latin word Emp^ra, a mouse of the mountain.

The story whereof I thought good to express being short out of Stumpsius and
Agricol^. The male and females say they of this kind, do gather together wild
corn which grows among the rocks in the summer time against the winter, and
carry the same into the holes of the earth where their lodging is.

Now the female in this kind is crafty, and more apt to devour; the male on
the otherside more thirsty and sparing, wherefore he drives his female out of
the den in the winter time, and stopeth the mouth of his cave, to forbid her
entrance, but she gets behind the same, and diggeth a secret hole, whilst
the male lies at the mouth asleep, Albertus.
she consumes the whole store behind him, wherefore in the spring time she
comes forth very fat and comely, and he very lean. And therefore in my
opinion, the makers of Emblems may very well discribe an unthrifty wise, that
consumes her husbands wealth, by the picture of this female, as by the picture
of the Ass behind Ocnus, biting assunder the cord that he weaueth, as we have
showed before in the history of the Ass. These beasts give themselves much to
sleep, and when they are awake they are never idle, but always

Whereas they are nourished tame in houses, it is observed, that they are a
neat and cleanly kind of beast, for they never defile their lodgings with
their excrements, but seek out some secret corner, wherein they both render
vrin, and empty their bellies. With their teeth they gnaw wood, and make holes
in bords, so larg as their bodies may pass through, and while they live, they
have a very rank and strong savor like a mouse, especially in the Summer
time while they are lean, and before they grow fat; for such is the nature

OF THE DORMOVSE.


THe Dormouse is called in Latin Glis, and in Greek Myoxos, the reason of the
Latin name Glis, The names and reasons thereof.
is taken from gliscere which signifies to grow fat, according to the saying
of Columella. Paleis vero quibus fere omnes regiones abundant, ^ssinus gliscit,
That is to say, an Ass grows fat by eating chafe which abounds in all
countries. This word glis, signifies not only a beast, but a piece of fat
earth and and also a Thistle, whereupon Syluaticus made this verse.

Glis animal, glis terra tenax, glis lappa vocatur. The Italians call it, Lo,
galero, Lo, gliero, or giero, the Spaniards Liron, the French likewise Liron,
and Rat: Liron, and Vngloyer, and Vngratvevl, the Germans, Ein greul, the
Heluetians, ein rell, or Relmus, or Gros haselmus but our English Dormouse,
seems to be a compounded word of Dormiens mus, that is, a sleeping Scurez.
But concerning his name Myoxus, there is some question among the Authors. For
Saint Ierom writing upon the eleventh chapter of Leuiticus, and the 66. Chapter
of Esaias, translateth Akbar the Hebrew word for a mouse, glirem a Dormouse, and
he gives this reason, because all the countries of the East, meaning Graetia,
do say, that Myoxus is a Dormouse. And this Myoxus by Epiphanius in his
Ankerot is alleged to prove the resurrection. Myoxus says he, animal
semestre moritur, and rursus post tempore sua revivisset. The Dormouse at half
a year old dies, and after her full time reuiueth again: And in his book
against heresies, he speaks thus to Origin. The description of the Dormouse
out of Epiphanius.
Tradunt naturae rerum experti, Myoxum latitare, and foetus suos sinaul in
eodem loco, multos parere: quinque, and amplius, viperus autem hos venari, and
si inuenerit totum latibulum

The Philosophers which are cunning in the nature of things do write that the
Dormouse does lie hid, and bring forth many young ones in the same place where
he lies, through the venom which the viper has left in them, so fares it
with thee O Origem, for thou art blinded with the Graecians doctrine, and do
vomit out that poison into their hearts which do believe thee, that thou art
made unto them a venomous meat, whereby thou do wrong others, as thou have
been wronged thy self.

By which it is manifest, that Myoxus is neither a Toad nor a Frog, but the
Dormous. And the charm which is made for the Asses urine, as we have showed
already in his story, Gallus bibit, and non meijet, Myoxus meijet, and non
bibit. whether they render urine and drink not
The cock drinks and makes not water, the Dormous makes water and never
drinks. But whether it be true or no that she never drinks, I dare not
affirm: But this is certain, that she drinks but very Elayos, although that
word do likewise signify a Squirel. In Maesia a wood of Italy, there is never
found Dormous, except at the time of their littering.

They are bigger in quantity then a squirrel, the color variable, sometimes
black, The quantity color and several parts.
sometimes grisled, sometimes yellowe on the back, but always a white belly,
having a short hair, and a thinner skin then the pontike mouse. They are
also to be found in Heluetia, about Clarona. It is a biting and an angry beast,
and therefore sildome taken alive. The beak or snowt is long, the ears short
and pricked, the tail short, and not very hairy at the end. Lardironi.

Bucke-mast is very acceptable meat unto them, and does greatly fatten them,
Their food.
they are much delighted with walnuts, they climb trees, and eat Apples,
according to some, (but Albertus says more truly,) that they are more
delighted with the juice then with the Apple. For it has bin oftentimes
sound, that under Apple trees, they have opened much fruit, and taken out of
it nothing but the kernels, for such is their wit and policy, that having
gathered an Aple, they presently put it in the twist of a tree betwixt bows,
and so by sitting upon the uppermost bough press it assunder. They also grow
fat by this

In ancient time they were wont to keep them in coopes or tons, and also in
Gardens paled about with board, where there are beeches or Wal-nut trees
growing, Norishers and nourishing of Dormice.
and in some places they have a kind of earthen pot, wherein they put them
with Wal-nuttes, Buck-mast, and Chesnets. And furthermore it must be observed,
that they must be placed in romes convenient for them to breed young ones,
their water must be very thin, because they use not to drink much, and they
also love dry places.

Titus Pompeius (as Varro says) did nourish a great many of them enclosed, and
so also Herpinus in his park in Gallia. It is a beast well said to be Animal
Semiferum, a creatur half wild, for if you set for them hutches, and nourish
them in warrens together, it is observed, that they never assemble, but such as
are bread in those places: And if strangers Society and charity in them. Pliny.
they discry them, and fight with them to death.

They nourish their parents in their old age, with singular piety. We have
showed already, how they are destroyed by the Viper, and it is certain, that
all serpents lie in wait for them. Their old age does end every winter. They
are exceeding sleepy, and therefore Martial says: Somniculosos illi porrigit
glires. They grow fat by sleeping, and therefore Ausonius has an elegant
verse; Dic, cessante cibo, somno quis opimior est? glis? Because it draws the
hinder legs after it like a Hare, it is called Animal tractile, for it goes
by iumpes and little leapes. In the winter time they The meane^ to take these
Dormice.
At other times they leap from tree to tree like Squirrelles, and that they are
killed with arrows as they go from bough to bough, especially in hollow
trees: for when the hunters find their haunt wherein they lodge, they stop the
hole in the absence of the Dormouse, and watch her turn back again: the
silly beast finding her passage closed, is busied hand and foot to open it
for entrance, and in the mean season comes the hunter behind her and kills
her. In Tellina they are taken by this means: The countrymen going into the
fields, carries in their hands burning torches in the night time, which when
the silly beast perceives, with admiration thereof flocketh to the lights,
whereunto when they were come, they were so daseled with the brightness that
they were stark blind, and might so be taken with men's hands.

The use of the flesh of these mice.
The use of them being taken was, to eat their flesh, for in Rhetia at this day
they salt it and eat it, because it is sweet and fat like swines flesh.
Ammianus Marcellinus wondereth at Appitius also prescribes the muscles and
flesh enclosed of them, taken out of every member of a Dormous, beaten with
pepper, Nut-kernels, Parcenippes, and Butter, stuffed altogether into the belly
of a Dormous, and sewed up with thread, and so baked in an Oven, or sod in a
kettle, to be an excellent and delicate dish. And in Italy at this day they eat
Dormice (says Coelius,) yet there were ancient laws among the Romans, called
Leges censoriae, whereby they were forbidden to eat Dormice, strange birds,
shel-fish, the necks of beasts, and diverse such other things. And thus much
shall suffice for the description

The medicines of the Dormouse.
Dormyse being taken in meat, do much profit against the Bulimon; The powder
of Dormyse mixed with oil, Pliny
does heal those which are scalded with any hot licker. A live Dormouse does
presently take away all warts being bound thereupon. Dormyse, and field-mice
being burnt, and their dust mingled with honey, will profit those which desire
the clearness of the eyes, if they do take thereof some small quantity
Marcellus
The powder of a Dormouse, or field mouse rubbed upon the eyes helps the
aforesaid disease. A Dormouse being flead, roasted and anointed with oil, and
salt, being given in meat, is an excellent cure for those that are short
winded. The same also does very effectually heal those that spit out filthy
matter or corruption. Powder of Dormice, or fielde-mice, or young worms, being
mixed with oil does heal those that have kibes on their heels, or
chilblaines on their hands. The fat of a Dormouse, the fat of a hen, and
the marrow of an Ox melted together, and being hot, infused into the ears,
does very much profit both the pains and deafness thereof.

Sextus
The fat of Dormice being boiled, as also of field-mice, are delivered to be
most profitable for the eschewing of the palsy. That fat of a Dormouse is also
very excellent for Pliny
will very effectually heal all diseases which are incident to the ears,
being anointed thereupon. The skin of a Dormouse or a silk worm being
pulled off, and the inward parts thereof being boiled in a new brazen vessel
with honey, Marcellus
from the quantity of 27. ounces even to three, and so kept, that when there
is need of a certain bathing vessel, the medicine being made warm and powered
into the ears, does help all pains, deafness, or inflammation of the
ears. The fat of a Dormouse is commended to be very medicinable for the
aforenamed diseases. The same is profitable for all pains, aches, or griefs
in the belly. The urine of a Dormouse is an excellent

Of the Hamester, or Cryetus, the first figure taken by Mychaell Horus.


The second picture taken by John Kentmant, and it


THis beast is called in Latin Crycetus, and in the German Hamester, Traner,
and Kornfaerle, The names
that is piggs of the corn. It is a little beast, not much bigger then a Rat,
dweling in the earth of the roots of corn, she is not drawn against her will
out of her cave at any time, The description.
but by pouring hot water or some other lickor. The head of it is of diverse
colors, the back red, the belly white, and the hair sticks so fast to the
skin, that it is easier to pull the skin from the flesh, then any part of the
hair from the skin. It is but a little Beast as we have said, but very ap^ to
bite and fight, and full of courage, and therefore has received from nature
this ornament and defense, that it has a bonie helmet, covering the head and
the brain when it stands up, upon of the Arctomys^
And for this cause some writers have interpreted it to be the beast called
Arctomys, thus described by Saint Ierom. It is a creature (says he) abounding
in the regions of Palastina, dwelling always in the holes of rocks and caves
of the earth, not exceeding the quantity of a Hedgehogge, and of a compounded
fashion, betwixt a mouse and a Bear.

But we have showed already, that this is the Alpine mous, and therefore we
will not stand to confute it here. The name Crycetus seems to be derived from
the Illirian word, which we read in Gelenig to be Skuzecziek: this beast says
he, is common in the Northern parts of the world, and also in other places, in
figure, and shape, it resembles a Bear, in quantity it never exceeds a
great Sorex. It has a short tail, almost like no tail, it goes upon two
legs, especially when it is moved to wrath. It uses the fore-feete in stead
of hands, The voracity of the Cricetus.
and if it had as much strength, as it has courage, it would be as fiercefull
as any Bear. For this little beast is not afraid to leap into the hunters
face, although it can do no great harm, either with teeth or nails. It is an
argument that it is exceeding hot, because it is so bold and eager. In the
uppermost chap, it has long and sharp teeth, growing Stasimus a servant to
Plautus was, is called Crycetus, a Hamster, because he fills his mouth well,
and is no pingler at his meat.

The fore-feete are like a Moulds, so short, but not altogether so broad, with
them he digeth the earth, The making of his den*
and makes his holes to his den, but when he diggeth so far as he cannot cast
the earth out of the hole with them, then he carries it forth in his mouth.
His den within he makes large, to receive corn, and provision of fruit for
his sustentation, whereinto he diggeth many holes, winding and turning every
way, that so he may be safe both against beasts that hunt him, and never be
killed in his den: And also if a man Neque minus in colligendo industrius, quam
in eligendo, conseruandoque est astutus, optima enim reponit. He is no less
industrious in the gathering of his provision, then crafty and pollitike in the
choice, and keeping it, for it lays up the best; and lest that it should rot
under the earth, it biteth off the fibers and tail of the grain, laying up
the residue amongst grass and stubble.

It lies gaping over his gathered grain, even as the covetous man is described
in the Satyr sleeping upon his money bags. It grows fat with sleep like
Dormice, and Conies. The holes into the cave are very narrow so that with
sliding out and in, they wear their hair. The earth which comes out of their
holes does not lie on heaps like molehils,

So that nature has wonderfully foreseen the poverty of al creatures: neither
is it otherwise amongst me^, for that which they cannot do by equity, they
perform by fraud. This also comes in the speech of the common people, against
one that will thrive. The young country wenches concerning this matter, do chaunt
out a verse not unpleasant, which I am contented to express in Iambickes,
consisting of four feet: Hamester ipse cum sua
Prudens catusque coniuge
Stipat profundum pluribus
Per tempus antrum frugibus
Possitque solus vt frui,
Lectis aceruis hordei
Auarus antro credulam
Extrudit art comugem
Serua, inquit, exiens, for as,
Coeli serena and pluuias,
Sed foeminis quis insitam?
Vincant dolis astutiam?
Nouum parans cuniculum.
Furatur omne triticum.
Egens maritus perfidam
Quaerit per antra coniugem,
Nec se repellat blandulis
Demulcit inuentam sunis,
Ille esse iam communiae
Seruata dum sinit bona.
At perfidus multiplices
Opponit intus obices.
Rursus fruuntur mutuis
Antris, cibis, amplexibus.


This beast does devour all kind of fruit, His meat and food.
and if he be nourished in a house he eats bread and flesh: he also hunteth
the field mice. When he takes his meat, he raises himself upon his fore
feet: he is also wont with his forefeete to stroke his head, ears, and
mouth, which thing the Squirrell and the Cat do also, and as the Beauer
amongst those creatures which live as well by water, as by land: but although
in his body he seems but small, notwithstanding he is by nature apt to fight
and very furious being The anger and fury o^ this beast.
In the spirit and assaulting of his mouth he is wayward and threatening, from
whence our countrymen were accustomed to say of any one which was angry, he
breaths his wrath out of his mouth like a Hamster: Dis spruest vuie ein
hamster: neither is he easily affrighted although he be far unequal unto those
in strength with whom he is in combat.

Wherefore some do give it in the place of a Proverb, that our Countrymen
do call a man which is madly rash Ein tollen hamster, as foolehardy, as a
hamster. He flies from any one that does sharply resist him, and does greedily
follow after them that fly from him. I my self saw one of these who by
assaulting a horse gat him by the nose, and would never leave his hold until
he was killed with a sword: He is taken by diverse means, Of the taking of this
beast.
for

Before his usual cave (as I have said) he is taken by the path which is
worn, by a pot which is put into the earth, and afterward made plain about it
like other places of the field: there is earth cast into the bottom of the
pot to the deepenesse of two fingers, above every where covering the pot there
is placed a stone, which is held up by a piece of wood, to which there is
bound below a fragment of bread: In the space between the Misena and Silesia
do use, The use of their skins.
and account them very honorable, of a black and red color, with broad gards
or edges of Renensian crowns: for it does out-weare in length three or four
garments made either of linen, or woollen cloth.

In Turingia and Misena this beast is frequent, notwithstanding not in all
places, for in Turingia his chiefest abode is about Efurdanus, and Salcensis in
Misena, about Lipsia, and the field Pegensis, the plentifullest and most
fertilest places of both those regions. In Lusatia about Radeburge he is diged
out of the places where painick grows. At Mulberge and Albis, he is found in
the Vine-yardes, for he is also fed with ripe grapes. Our contrymen are wont
to burn a living Hamster in a pot being shut for the medicines of horses. It
has been seen that one of these has leaped up and caught a horse by the
nose, never letting go his hold until she was cut off with a sword. The skin
is of three Turingia where the soil is good, and there is also great store of
grain.

OF THE NORICIAN MOVSE.
THe Morician mouse is called in Latin Citellus, and it keeps like the wild
mice in the caves and dens of the earth. The name, description and di^position.
The body is like to a Domestical Weasils, long and slender, the tail very
short, the color of the hair like to a gray Conies, Agricola.
but more bright. It wants ears like a mole, but it has open passages
insteade of ears, wherewithal it hears Pile and Zisel, and of this German
word was the Latin Citellus feigned; and it appears by Agricola, that there
are two kinds of these; one greater, which are called Zysell and Zeiseile, and
another lesser (called Pile) which may be the same that is also called
Bilchmuss, Genelius.
and differs from other, because it is used for meat. These are bred in
Croatia, and in the country about Vennice. They have a strange smell or savor
which is said to be hurtful to the head: They eat both salted and hung in the

OF THE MOVSE PONTIQVE


Olaus mag: Agricola
THe name of this mouse is given unto it from the Island out of which it was
first brought, named Pontus, and for this cause it is also called Fenicus,
because it was first of al brought into Germany from Venice. It is called also
Varius by Idorus, from whence comes the German word Vutrck, from the
diversity of the color Graeu vuerck. It is Pundtmuss, as it were Po^ticus mus,
or rather, of Bundt, because they were wont to be brought in bundles to be sold
fifty together, and they were sold for twenty Groates, Volaterranns, and
Hermol^us are of this opinion, that the white ones in this kind, be called of
the Italians Armellines, and by the Germans Hermelin, but we have promised
already to prove that Hermelin is a kind of Weasell, which in the winter time
is white, by reason of extremity of cold, and in the summer returns into her
color again, like as do the Hares of the Alps. This Pontique Mouse differs
from others only in color, for the white is mingled with ash color, or else
it is sandy and black, and in Pollonia at this day they are found red and
ash color. Their two lower most teeth before are very long, and when it goes,
it draws the tail after it like mice, when it eats it uses the forefeet
instead of hands, and feeds upon Walnuts, Chestnuts, Filbeards, small Nuts,
Apples, and such like fruits. In the winter time they take sleep instead of
meat: And it is to be remembered, that the Polonians have four kinds of
precious skins of Mice which they use in their Garments, distinguished by
four several names. The first of grisell color called Popieliza. The second
Gronosthaij, a very white beast all over, except the tip of the tail which is
al black, and this is the Hermelin.

The third is called Nouogrodela from the name of a Town, and this is white
mingled with grisell, and this is also a kind of Pontike Mouse. The 4.
Vuieuuorka, of a bright Chestnut color, and this is the Squirrell, for they
call Squirrels, Weasels, and Hermelin al by the name of mice. These Pontique
Mice have teeth on both sides, and chew the end. In the winter time as we have
said they lie and sleep, especially the white ones, and their sense of taste
does excel al other (as Pliny writes,) they build their nests and breed like
common Squirrels.

Litzschna. the 3. a little worse are called Crasna, the 4 next to them
Pocrasna, and the last and vilest of all Moloischna: with these skins they hem
and edge garments, and in some places they make canonical Garments of them
for priests, unto which they few their tails to hang down on the skirts of
their garments; of which custom Hermolaus writes very excellently in these
words. Instruxit, and ex muribus, luxuriam suam vita, alios magnis frigoribus,
alios medio anni tempore, a septentrionibus petendo, armannus corpora, and de
bellamus animos. That is to say, The life of man has learned to be prodigal
even out of the skins of Mice, for some they use against extremity of cold, and
they fetch others out of the farthest Northern parts, for the middle part of
the year: Thus do we arm and adorn our bodies, but put down and spoil

Beside, there is a flying Ponticke or Scythian Mouse, which we may call the
broad-Squerrell-Mouse, whose skin is here expressed as you may see, and for
the description thereof, I have thought good to add an Epistle of Antonius
Schnebergerus the Lituanian of Vilna unto Gesner, in these words following:

I send unto thee a little skin, the upper place of the hairs thereof being of
a white Popyelycza Latayacza, that is, A Pontique-flying-Mouse: It is always
so moist, that it can never be dressed by the Skinner, or Lether-dresser.

The people use it to wipe sore running eyes, having a persuasion that there is
in it a sigular virtue for the easing and mitigating of those pains: but I
think that the softness was the first cause which brought in the first use
thereof, but if the hairs do not cleave hard to the skin, it cannot be done
without danger. Also the hairs hanging as it were in a round circle against or
above the two former feet, they call wings, wherwithall they are thought to
fly from tree to tree. Thus far Antonius* Gesner after the receite of these
skins, being willing Littuania had not the skill how to dress it.

After they were dressed they were so soft that they stretched above measure,
so that every one of them were square, that is to say, their length and breadth
were equal, for they were two palms or eight fingers broad: and no more in
length, the head and tail excepted, wherefore it may well be called a square
Mouse, or Sciurus quadratus, because we are sure of the former, but not of the
flying; the tail was as long as four or five fingers are broad, being rough
like the tail of other Squirrels, but beset with black and white hairs, the
whole color both of the belly and upper part was whitish as we have said, but
black underneath, the hair is so soft as any silk, and therefore fit for the
use of the eyes.

The ears shorter and rounder then a Squirrels, the feet did not appear by
the skin: the nether part was distinguished from the upper part, by a certain
visible line, Heluetians wear these skins in their garments. It is reported by
Aelianus, that the inhabitants of Pontus by making supplication to their Gods,
did auert and turn away the rage of Mice from their cornfieldes, as the
Egyptians did, as we have said before in the story of the vulgar Mouse.

OF THE MOVSE CALLED


THe word Hanaka of the Hebrews remembered in the II. chap. of Leuitticus, is
diuersely interpreted by the translators, some call it a reptile beast which
always cries: some Mygale, and S. Ierom Mus araneus, that is, a Shrew.
Dioscorides calls it Miogale. The Germans and Heluetians call it Mutzer, in
some parts of Germany, from the figure of the snout it is called Spitzmus, by
some Zissmuss, from the fiction of his voice, and some Gross Zissmuss.

The Hollanders call it Moll musse, because it resembles a Mole. Mathaeolus
for the Italians Toporagno, that is a Mole-Shrew. The Heluetians call it
Bisem-muss, that is a Muskemouse, because it being dried in a furnace smells
like musk. The skin pulled from the flesh, smells best by it self, and yet
the flesh smells well also, and so do the excrements. But to return to the
Greek name why it should be called Mygale, there is not one opinion amongst the
learned: but I do most willingly condescend to the opinion of Aetius, who
writes that it is called Mygale, because in quantity it exceeds not a Mouse,
and yet in color it resembles a Weasell, and therefore it is compounded of two
words Miss, a Mouse, and Galen, a weasell. Amyntas is of opinion that it is so
called, because it is begot betwixt a Mouse and a Weasel, but this is neither
true nor probable.

For it is likely that Weasels and Mice will couple together in carnal
copulation, whose natures are so contrary, the one living upon the death of an
other, that is the weasell upon the Mouse? And beside the difference of
quantity betwixt them, makes it impossible to have such a generation. The
other deriuation of Migale, which is made by Rodolphus writing upon Leuiticus,
fetching Mygale from Mus gulosus, that is, a devouring Mouse, it is against the
order of all good Linguists, to derive Greek words from Latin,

There is no less inquiry about the Latin name, why it should be called Mus
araneus, seeing aranea signifies Spider. This Mouse says Albertus, is a red
kind of Mouse having a small tail, a sharp voice, and is full of poison, or
venom. For which cause Cats do kill them, but do not eat them. Sipontinus
writes thus, of this Shrew. Mus araneus, exiguum animal, atque leuissimum est,
quod arane modo tenuissimum fiium, and gladij aciem concendit. That is to say,
this Shrew mouse is a little and light creature, which like a Spider climeth up
upon any small thread, or upon the edge of a sword: and therefore you see, they
derive the Latin name, from his climing like a Spider.

But in my opinion it is more reasonable, to derive it from the venom and
poison which it contains in it like a spider. For which cause Syluaticus
writes thus, Mugali id est, draco marinus, and animal venenosum, pusillum muri
simile: nam and araneum piscem, propter venenum pungentibus insitum spinis,
veteres ophim, id est, serpentem nominarunt, and hodie quam vulgo draconem vel
dracenam. That is to say, there is a fish of the Sea, and a little beast on the
earth like a Mouse, which by a general word are called Mugale, and the spider
fish called at this day a Dragon, or Dragonist, was in ancient time called a
Serpent, because by his prickly finnes, he did poison those which were stricken
by him. And concerning the description of this beast, it may be taken from the
words of an ancient English Physician, called Doctor William Turner.

I have seen (says he) in England, the Shrew-Mouse of color black, having a
tail very short, and her snout very long and sharp, and from the venomous
biting of this beast, Raton Pequenno, the Illirians Viemed kamys, and the
Polonias Kerit. They were wont to abound in Britany, as Hermolaus writes.

They are also plentiful in Italy beyond the mountains Apenine, but not on
this side (as Pliny writes) yet in the hither parts of Italy and Germany,
there are many found, especially in the country near Trent, in the valey
Anania, where this is admirable, that by reason of the coldness of that country
their bitings are not venomous. Samonicus.
For the Scorpions there are not venomous, although in other places of Italy
they poison Vegetius. Aetius
in most places like a mouse, although the color be not always constant.

The eyes are so small, and beneath the proportion of her body, that it has not
been unjustly doubted of the auncientes whether they were blind or no, but in
their best estate their sight is very dull. And for this cause the ancient
Egyptians did worship it: for as they held opinion that darkness was before
light, so they deemd that the blind creatures were better then the seeing. And
they also believed that in the waine of the moon the liver of this beast
consumed. It has a long and sharp snowt like a Mole, that so it may be apt to
dig. The teeth are very small, but so as they stand double in their mouth, for
they have four rewes of teeth, two beneath, and two above, which are not only
apparent by their desection or anatomy, but also by their bitinges, for their
wounds are Quadruple, Gesner at the sight of one of them, which he relates on
this manner.

The color (says he) was partly red, and partly yellow, mingled both
together, but the belly white. The hinder feet seems to clean to the body or
loins. It smells strongly, and the savor did bewray or signify some secret
poison.

The tail about three fingers long, beset with little short hairs. The
residue of the body was three fingers long. The eyes very small and black, not
much greater then Moles, so that next to the Mole they may justly be caled, the
least sighted creatur among al four-footed-beasts, so that in old age they are
utterly blind by the providence of God, abridging their malice, that when their
teeth are grown to be most sharp, and they most full of poison, then they
should not see whom nor where to uent it.

They differ as we have said in place and number, from all foure-footed-beasts,
so that they seem to be compounded and framed of the teeth of Serpents and
mice: The two foreteeth are very long, and they do not grow single as in
vulgar mice, but have within them two other small and sharp teeth. And also
those two long teeth grow not by themselves 2. Arnoldus.


It is a ravening beast, feygning it self to be gentle and tame, but being
touched it biteth deep, A^ia^us.
and poisoneth deadly. It bears a cruel mind, desiring to hurt any thing,
neither is there any creature that it loves, or it loves him, because it is
feared of al. The cats as we have said do hunt it and kill it, but they eat not
them, for if they do, they consume

If they fall into a cart-road, they die and cannot get forth again, as
Marcellus, Nicander, and Pliny affirm And the reason is given by Philes, for
being in the same, it is so amazd, and trembles, as if it were in bands. And
for this cause some of the ancients have prescribd the earth of a cart-road, to
be laid to the biting of this mouse for a remedy thereof. They go very slowely,
they are fraudulent, and take their prey by deceit. Many times they gnaw the
Oxes hooues in the stable. They love the rotten flesh of Ravens, and therefore
in France when they have killed a Raven, they keep it till it stinketh, and
then cast it

Marcellus
The medicines of the Shrew.
The Shrew, which falling by chance into a Cart-roade or tracke does die upon
the Pliny
with sores called fellons, or biles, which does pain them with a great
inflammation, so that it be three times environed or compassed about the party
so troubled. The Shrew which dies in the furrow of a cart-wheele, being found
and rolled in potters clay or a linen cloth, or in Crimson, or
scarlet-wollen-cloth, and three times marked about the impostumes, Pliny
which will suddenly swell in any man's body,

The tail of a Shrew being cut off and burned, and afterward beaten into
dust, and applied or anointed upon the sore of any man, which came by the
biting of a greedy and ravenous dog, will in very short space make them both
whole and sound, so that the tail be cut from the shrew when she is alive, not
when she is dead, for then it has neither good operation, nor efficacy in it.
The former hoofes of a horse being scraped, Hippocrates.
and the same fragmentes or scantlinges thereof being beaten in the duste or
earth *which has been dug up by a Shrew, in four measures of water, powered
down the mouth of a horse which is troubled with any pain or wringing in his
bowls, will soon give him both help and remedy. The Shrew being either
applied in drink, or put in the manner and form of a plaster, or hanged upon
the sore which he has bitten, is the most excellentest, and most medicinable
cure for the helping and healing thereof. A preservative against poison, would
be an excellent remedy, that neither man nor any other living creature, should
be bitten if they should leave or would want that superstition called an
enchantment against poison, being hanged about the neck, whereof we will
speak more in

That the biting of a Shrew is venomous, and of the reason of healing in this
kind.
In Italy the biting of a Shrew is accounted for a very strong poison, and that
except there be some medicine very speedily applied for the curing and healing
thereof, Pliny
the party so bitten will dye. These Shrewes are truly so venomous and full of
poison, that being slain or killed by Cats, whose nature is to kill whatsoever
Mice they take, they will not

But the biting of a female Shrew is most obnoxious and hurtful when she is
great with young, but most dangerous of all when she biteth any one which is
great with young, either a woman, or any other beast whatsoever, her self being
also with young, Marcellus.
for then it will hardly be cured.

If a Shrew shall bite any creature while she is great with young, the pushes
or biles will in time be broke which they make, and will come unto a very great
and malignant wound and sore. If the Shrew do also bite any creature during the
time she is with young, Dioscorides
she will presently leap off, notwithstanding she biteth more dangerous.
There is nothing which does more apparently explane and show the biting of a
Shrew then a certain Auicenna
and a fiery redness therein, in which a black push or like swelling with a
watery matter, and filthy corruption does arise, and all the parts of the body
which do join unto it seem black and blue with the marvelous great pain,
anguish, and grief, which arises and proceeds from the same.

When the push or bile which comes by the occasion of a Shrew cleaves or is
broken, their proceeds and yssueth forth a kind of white flesh, having a
certain rind or skin upon it, and sometime there appears in them a
certain burning, and sometimes the same is eaten in and falls out, but in
the beginning there is a most filthy Dioscorides
and eaten in, and then the flesh falls forth: the wringings also of the
inward parts, the difficulty of voiding of the urine, and a cold corrupted
sweat, does follow and accompany the same.

But Auicenna affirms, that in what place soever this beast shall bite, the
sores thereof, with great anguish will pant or beat, and that in every hole
wherein his venomous teeth have entered, there will a certain fiery redness
appear, the skin whereof being broken, there will come a very white and
matery sore, which will breed much pain and trouble in all the parts of the
body for the most part. The sores or wounds which are made also by this beast
are very manifestly known by the marks of the fore-teeth standing Aeginetta
being at the first pure, clear, and exceeding red, but afterward corrupt,
blackish, and full of putrefaction.

There do also diverse bunches arise in the flesh usually after the biting of
this beast, which if any man shall break, he shall see the flesh which lies
under them corrupted, and divided with certain cleftes or rifts in the same.
Moreover the nature of this beast is such, that for the most part he does covet
to bite those whom he can come unto by the stones or genitall, Auicenna.
not only men, but also all other brute beasts whatsoever: and thus much shall
suffice concerning the biting of this beast.

Wormwood being beaten or bruised small, straynd in a fine linen cloth, and
mingled in Wine, Dioscorides.
given to the party either man or Woman in Wine to drink who is bytten by a
Shrewe, will procure him present ease and remedy. The same also is an excellent
remedy for the bitings or stingings of a Sea-Dragon. Vinegar is very
medicinable for the bitings of the Shrew and of Dogs, as also for the Fish
called by the Latins Scolopendra, Pliny.
(which voydeth all her bowels out until the hook come forth, wherewith she
is taken, and then sucketh them up again) the Scorpion and all other venomous
Serpents.

But the Grecian Physicians affirm, that the same ought to be mingled with
other Medicines for the helping of the aforesaid diseases, as to take the ashes
of the Shrew being burnt, the Gum or liquor of the Herb called
Fennell-giant, dried barley beaten into small powder, Mustard-seede pounded
small with the Herb called Purple, or Mothmullein, and mingle them altogether
with Vinegar, and being so applied they will presently cure the aforesaid
stings or bitings.

Garlike being bruised, and the juice thereof anointed upon the place which was
bitten by a Shrew, Auicenna.
will presently expel the pain, and wholly cure the sore. For the expelling
Aetius.
then apply Garlike being beaten into Oil thereunto, and anoint the places
about the sore, as also the sore it self very diligently, and in very short
space of time it will cause the same to fall away of it own accord. For the
healing also of the bites of this beast. Take Garlike, the leaves of a fig
tree, and Cummin, mingle them very well altogether, Dioscorides.
til they come to a mollifiyng or temperat substance, then take the same, and
fashion it in the form or manner of a plaster, and it will very speedily and
effectually curethe sore.

The seed or leaves of Cole-worts, being beaten together with vinegar, and the
herb Assafoetida, Geoponica.
is very good and profitable to be applied either to the bites of this beast or
a ravening Dog. The dung of a Dog being taken and anointed upon either man
or Horse which has been bitten by a Shrew, will be an excellent remedy both
for the curing and healing them of the same. The Hoof of a Ram being dried,
beaten into powder, and afterward mixed with Honey, will be likewise very good
for those which are bitten with the same beast, so that they be first tempered
and fashioned in the manner of a plaster, and then applied thereunto. The
little white stalks which proceed from a black Fig being beaten with the
leaves of the Herb called Mothmullein, Wax, and Vinegar, until they come
unto a mollifying juice or salve, will be an excellent remedy against the
biting of the Shrew, being anointed thereupon.

The young or tender stalks of a wild Fig tree, be they never so few or
small, being first steeped in Wine, then lapped in a leaf of the same Tree,
and so applied unto the stings and bites of Scorpions, and the Shrew, will in
very short time cure and heal the same. Pliny
Provided always that the wound be well and diligently bathed or washed,
before any thing be put or applied thereunto.

Dioscorides, Auicenna, and Actuarus do affirm, that the excellentest, and
medicinablest cure for the bites of a Shrew is this, to take the Spleen of the
same beast, and beat it together with Vinegar, and the Gum called Galbanum,
then to anoint it or rub it upon the sore, and it will presently expel away
all pain, and in some short space altogether Aetius.
If the red bunches or Ulcers which do usually grow about the bites of a Shrew
do fortune to break, take very sharp and strong brine or pickle, and rub it
both about, and within the sore, and afterward apply barley being burned and
beaten into small dust or powder thereunto, which medicine although it seem
somewhat grievous and painful, yet it is very good and profitable for the
expelling either of the stinges of Scorpions, or the bites of the Shrew or
ravenous dog.

The genitall of a Hare being beaten into powder mingled with Vinegar, Pliny
and anointed upon the bites of a Shrew, does speedily cure them. Wild Mallows
being mingled with those Mallows that grow in the Garden, have in them a very
effectual force and power to cure all stinges or venomous bitinges, especially
of Scorpions, Shrewes, Waspes, and such like stinging creatures.

The Shrew being cut and applied in the manner of a plaster, does effectually
cure her own bites. The Shrew being killed and anointed all over with Oil,
and dirt, or mire, applied unto the Ulcers or red swellings which come by her
venomous teeth, will very speedily procure them to break. The Shrew being cut
or beaten into small pieces, dried into powder, mixed with Vinegar, and
fashioned in the form of a plaster, will very

But there are some which do think it nothing convenient to mingle the Shrew
with any other thing whatsoever, but that it is only after this manner to be
applied by it self as to take it barned or dry it, and then to pound it in
powder, and so to sprinkle it in the wound or sore, which in very short time
will easily heal it. The Shrew falling into the furrow of a Cart wheel does
presently dye: Aelianus
the dust thereof in the passage by which she went being taken, and sprinkled
into the wounds which were made by her poison some teeth, is a very excellent
and present remedy for the curing of the same. Mathaeolus alleges out of
Nicander, that the dirt which cleaves unto the Wheels of a Chariot being
Aetius
will be very medicinable for the healing of them, which thing he himself
thinks a mere fable, and not to be believed. If the pimples or bladders
which arise in the bites of a Shrew shall be thought convenient to be broken,
for the performing of the same, take the skin of a baked or roasted
Pomgranate, and spread it upon the aforesaid red pimples, as whot as possible
may be suffered for some small time, and it will cause the ulcers to break,
and all the corruption to issue forth.

If it grow unto an Impostume, Auicenna
take the little berries or pellets which are within the Pomgranate, being very
well baked, and apply them unto the sore some short time, Aeginetta
and they will very easily cure the same. Mustard-seede being mingled with
Vinegar, anointed Dioscorides
and pained in their limbs with the bites of Shrewes. Wormwood being used in
the like manner, will cure those which are bitten by a Shrew.

The genitall of a Lamb or Kidde being mingled with four drams of the Herb
Aristologia or Hart-wort, and six drams of the sweetest Mirth, is very good
and medicinable for curing of those which are bitten or stung with Shrewes,
Scorpions, and such like vnemous Beasts. The leaves of Coleworts being dried,
mingled with flower, and tempered together, until they come into the form of a
plaster, will very much help against the venomous bites of the Shrew. The
seed of Colewortes, and the leaves of the same Herb being mingled with
Vinegar, and the Herb called Assa foetida beat or pounded together, do very
well and speedily cure the bites of the Shrewes, Ruellius
as also of a ravenous Dog, if the same in due time be applied thereunto. The
liquor also of the leaves of Coleworts being given in any kind of drink, is
good and wholesome for the curing of the aforesaid bites or wounds. Dioscorides
The Nuts of a young Cypres Tree being mixed

The root of a white or black Thistle, being beaten or bruised and given in
drink, does very effectually help or cure those which are bitten by a Shrew.
The like virtue has the Herb called Rocket in it, and also the seed thereof
being given in any kind of drink. Aegenetta
The gum or liquor which proceeds from a kind of Ferula being given in wine
to drink, does very much help and cure those which are bitten by a Shrew. The
same virtue also in it has the root of the herb called Gentian or
bitterwort, being given in wine to drink. One or two drams of the yoongest or
tendrest leaves of the Laurel tree, being beaten small and given in wine to
drink, does speedily cure the sores or wounds which are bitten by a Shrew:
Ae^ius
the same being also used in the said manner, and given in some certain potion
unto horses to drink, does quickly help and heal them. But there are some
which before all other medicines do commend this for the best, and chiefest,
that is, Auicenna
to take the juice which proceeds from the leaves of the laurel tree, and
the leaves Pliny
or stung by a Scorpion, or any other venomous creature. The herb called
Baltsamint or Costmary, the herb called Bartram, Aegmetta
or wild Pellito, the herb called Betonie, the herb called water-minte, or
water Cresses, the sweet and delicious gum called Storax, as also the herb
called Veruin being each of them severally by themselves either given in wine
to drink, or applied in the manner of a plaster or anointed upon the bits,
or wounds which come by the venomous teeth of a Shrew, Auicenna
will very effectually cure the pain thereof. The biting of a field mouse or
Shrew, is very troublesome, and grievous to all laboring beasts, for
instantly after Albertus
as chiefly horses and mules but especially and for the most part mares, which
are great with young. There are some which do affirm that if horses, or any
other laboring creature do feed in that pasture or grass in which a Shrew
shall put forth her venom or poison in, Absyrtus
they will presently die. In what place soever a Shrew shall bite in any
creature it will be compassed with an exceeding hard swelling, the beast also
being so bitten, does express his grief or sorrow with much pain, and
straining his body does likewise swell all over, his eyes do in a manner
weep, the swelling in his body does Hierocles
or filthy putrefaction, he voydeth poison out of his belly, and does vomit
all sustenance up as soon as ever he receaueth it. If an Ass being great with
young be bitten by this beast, it is a very great chance if she escape death.

But if the Shrew do bite any beast when she is great with young it is known
by these signs, or marks, there will certain red pimples compass the sore
round about, and also spread themselves over all the body of the bitten beast,
and will in short space destroy him, except there be procured some present
remedy. The Normans in France do suppose the Shrew to be a beast so full of
venom, and poison, that if he shall but pass over either an Ox, V^getius
or a horse lying down along upon the ground, it will bring such a dangerous
disease upon them, that the beast over which she shall pass shall be lame
about the

For the curing of beasts which are bitten by a Srew, thou shall boil the
seed of Parsley together with Wine and Oil, and thou shall cut the place which
swells with a Penknife, by which the poison may issue forth, and the wound
being pointingly pulled or torn may wax raw: Hippocrates
if by these the inflammation do wax more fervent and hot, thou shall eat
the sore with iron instruments burning with fire, taking away some

There is also another excellent medicine for the curing of the Shrew, which
Startonicus himself does much commend, which is this: to lance or scarifie the
wound as soon as it is bitten, but especially if it be compassed with an
inflammation, afterward to sprinkle salt and Vinegar up on it, then to
encourage or provoke the beasts the next day following by some sweet water or
liquor to run or go some little iourny, first having anointed the sore with
fullers-earth being beaten small and mixed with vinegar, and then daily to
nourish or bath it with water which comes from bathes where some have washed
themselves, Hierocles
and this in very short time being so used will very well and altogether cure
the beast. Against the biting of a Shrew Garlike is accounted for an excellent
remedy being mingled with Nitre, Pelagon affirms, will only heal the bites
of a Shrew, and that the grief of the sore, by the use of any other medicines
does rather increase then decrease.

The flower which is made of red Weat, the Herb called Dill, Vegetius
the liquor or Rozen which runs out of the great Cedar, and two pound of the
best Wine being mingled altogether, given in a potion and poured down the
throat of any laboring beast which is

There is also another potion for the curing of the bites of this beast which
is this, to take cloves of Garlike being bruised small, salt, Cummin, and Wine,
of each the like quantity, these being given to any beast to drink, does
presently cure him, as also any man being anointed upon the wound, but not
given to drink. Hippocrates
The herb called Narde or Pepper-wort being beaten to the quantity of two
ounces and a half, and mingled with some sweet smelling Wine, will presently
help any beast which is bitten by the Shrewe, being poured through his Nose,
and his sore being at that instant time anointed with Dogs dung: the same is
also very medicinable or wholesome for men which are troubled with the said
biting.

Pliny


There is a very good remedy against the bitinges of Shrewes, or to preserve
Cattle from them, which is this, to compass the hole wherein she lies round
about, and get her out a live, and keep her so till she dye, and wax stiff,
then hang her about the neck of



OF WILD FIELD-MICE.
The Epithits of wild mice describing their kinds,
THis wild Mouse called by the Latins Mus agrestis, Mus Syluestris,
Syluaticus, Subteraneus, and some say (...), (although I rather take that word
to signify a glare worm.) It is called also Exignus Mus, and Rusticus. The
Graecians call it Myss Arourayos, the Germans field-mouse, and erdmouse, that is
a mouse of the earth, Nualmuss, and Nu^lmuss, Schorrmuss, Schoermowss,
Stossmuss, and L^ckmuss, Mullott. There is of these mice two kinds, a greater
and a lesser. The picture of the greater we have described hear, forbearing
the lesser, because in all parts it resembles this, except in the quantity.

Their several parts.
This greater kind is not much lesser then a Rat, having a long broad tail like
it. The ears of it are round. The head round and great, and the snout or chaps
do not stand out long. They are of two colors in both kinds, some red and some
black. They have a beard betwixt their mouth and their eyes, and the lesser
mice have a short tail. A Physician taking Bassianus Landus to disect one of
these mice, found it to be true which he says, that their maw and guts lie al
straight and upright. We have showed already, Whether Mice engendered of the
earth, can procreate other. Aelianus Pliny
that all kind of mice are generated out of the earth, although also they
suffer copulation. And in Egypt it is very common about the Thebaijs, and the
places where Nylus over flows, that in the decrease and falling away of the
Waters, the sun engendereth many mice upon the slime of the earth, so that
it is ordinary to see one time their forepartes to have life, flesh, and
motion, and the hinder parts deformed, and nothing but earth.

And about this matter there is some disputation among the Authors, for there
be Philosophers which affirm, that every creature as well perfect as
imperfect, may be

But Aristotle confesses the first generation, and denies the second, and
says although they do generate by copulation, yet it is not Idem sed animal
spece diuersum, a quo nihil amplius gigni possit; And therefore Ieronimus
Gabucinus ends this controversy, saying. Mures ex putredine nati, generant
quidem and ipsi, sed quod ex eis generatur, nec mus, est nec foemina: nec
amplius generat, that is; Mice engendered of putrified matter do also engender,
but that which is begotten of them is neither male nor female, neither can it
engender any more, that it may not proceed in Infinitum, like a mouse
engendered by copulation. But concerning the beginning of these wild
field-mice, and their increase, The damage done by wild field-Mice
Aristotle speaks in this manner: we have received (says he) the wonderful
generation of wild fielde-mice, abounding in every place, and especially in
corn fields, which by their multitude, do instantly eat up and devour a great
deal of grain, insomuch as it

And as the increase of these mice was extraordinary, so also was the
destruction, for men could not drive them away, as in former times by smoking
them, or else by turning in swine to root out their nests from the earth, or
by sending Foxes, or wild-cats among them, but their multitude did always
prevail, and yet after a few days, the showers of the clouds destroyed
them. And Pliny says, that this ought to be no marvel, that there should be
so great a harvest and store of these mice, seeing that men yet never knew how
to hinder their generation, or to kill them being engendered, and yet for all
that they

Pliny writes, as we have showed in our former discourse, that the inhabitants
of Troas, were driven from their habitation by these field-mice, because they
devoured al their fruits, and when they died there was a worm engendered in their
heds. Diodorus Siculus in his fourth book of ancient Monuments records,
that there were certain people of Italy, which by incursion of fielde-mice
were driven to flight, and to forsake their patrimonies, for they destroyed the
roots of the corn, like some horrible drought, or some Cossa a Town of
Vmbria in the days of Pliny, which at this day is called Orbi tellus, was
destroyed by fielde-mice, (as Volatteranus writes.) Niphus also says, that
he saw in one night, all the Corne-fieldes at Calenum destroyed by these mice.

There are such a number of these mice in Spain, that many times their
destruction caused pestilent diseases, and this thing happened amongst the
Romans when they were in Cantabria, for they were constrained to hier men by
stipends to kill the mice, Strabo.
and those which did kill them, scarce escaped with life. The inhabitants of
Gyarus, an Island of the Cyclades, after they had long resisted the violence of
these mice, yet at length they were Plilistines were punished with mice, before
they sent away the Ark of the Lord, and how the Aeolians and Troyans were
annoyed with them, until they had sacrificed to Apollo Smintheus, and how the
mice of Heraclea, at the time of Grape-gathering, do go out of the country and
return again in the Autumn. When Sanacharib, king of the Arabians and
Egyptians, invaded Egypt, it is said by Herodotus, that Vulcan in the night
time sent upon his armey such an innumerable swarm of wilde-mice, that before
morning they had eaten assunder their Quiuers, Arrows, Bows, and all warlike
instrmentes, so that the next day, for the want of weapons, and fear of their
enemies, they were constrained to take their heels Calcidensians were driven
out of Elymnium, a city of the mountain Athos, and thus much shall suffice for
the harm^ of these mice. They make their dwellings and habitation in the earth,
Places of their abode.
according to this saying of Virgill: Sape exiguns mus
Sub terra posuitque domos, atque horria fecit.
Yet now and then they come out of the earth, although it be but seldom. They
heave up hills like Mols, and they eat and devour the roots of corn and
Herbs. They make not very deep holes, but dig under the turfes, and upper
face of the earth, so that when a man walks upon it he may perceive it by the
sinking in of his footesteps: if the hole be opened with a Spade, they close it
again as a Mole does, but not so speedily, for they defer it two or three
days together, and therefore if it be watched they may kill her at her return
by treading upon her; concerning the manner of taking them, these observations
following may be put in practice.

Driving away of these mice.
These kind of Mice are driven or chased away with the ashes of a Weasell, or of
a cat mingled with water, and by sprinkling or scattering seed or corn
abroad, or by some things well sodden in Water: but the poisoning of those
Mice is in the sent or savor of bread: Plinius.
and therefore they think it more profitable to touch the seed or Corn
lightly with the gall of an Ox. Apuleus does affirm, that to soke the grain
or corn in the gall of an Ox before you sprinkle it abroad, Paliadius
is very good against these fielde-mice: also (as it is read in Geopon Graec.)
it does very much commend the gall of Oxen, wherewith as he says, if the seed
or corn be touched, they shall be freed from the molestation or trouble of
these field-mice.

Notwithwanding in the Dog-daies Hemlock-seede ith the herb Hellebor is
better, or with wild cucumber, or with Henne-bane, or being beaten with bitter
Almonds, and Auicen does affirm also, that Hen-baneseede does kill these kind
of Mice, without the mixture of any other thing. Very many do stop the passages
of them with the leaves of Rododaphne, who do perish in the time they are
laboring to make their passage, by the gnawing of them.

Apuleius also says, that the people of Bithynia have had much experience of
these things, who stopped the passages of these mice with these Rododaphne
leaves, so that they desire to come forth by touching the same often with their
teeth: which truly so soon as they shall touch or come unto, they shall
presently dye. But they use a kind of incantation which is this that follows.
I do adjure all ye mice which do remain or abide hear, that ye Luno to
witness, I will tear every one of you into seven pieces: when as thou have
write this charm, bind paper fast to the place wherein the Mice haunt, and
that before the rising of the Sun: so that the charecters or marks may
appear on the outside cleaning to a natural stone of that place. I have
written this (says the Author) lest any thing should seem to be ouerskipped:
neither do I allow or prove such things can be done, but I rather counsel al
men that they do not set their mind to any of these which are more worthy of
derision then imitation. If thou shall fill the passages of these rusticall

Marcellus. The medicines of field mice. Scholiastes.
These country Mice, that is to say those Mice which are found in the fields,
being bruised and burned to ashes, and mingled with fresh honey, does comfort
or restore the sight of the eyes by diminishing the darkness or dimnesse
thereof, in what field soever you shall find any thing, dig them up by the
roots with a little stake or post.

OF THE WOOD-MOVSE.
PLiny does oftentimes make mention of this woode-mouse or rather a The
description.
but he does it only in medicines; but that it does differ from this country
or field-mouse we have shown in the Chap. going before, because it does not
habit or dwell in Countries or tilled places, as the Country or field-mice
do, but does inhabit in Woods and forests. The wood-Mouse is called in
Greek as the Countrey-mouse: but I think it to be a kind of Dormouse, which
proceeds from the kind of wood-mouse. Pliny truly does make the same remedy
or medicines of a Dormouse, as he does of a Wood-mouse, as I will a little
after rehearse or recite unto you. Also I should have thought that a Sorex had
bin the same, because it is a wood-mouse, but that, that one place of Pliny did
hinder me, where he commends the ashes of a Wood-mouse to be very good for
the clearenesse of the eyes, and by and by after did show or declare that the
ashes of the Sorex were good also in the same use, as I will recite or rehearse
below in the medicines or remedies of the wood-mouse. Agricola a man of great
learning, does interpret or judge the wood-mouse to be that mouse, to the
which they do appoint the name derived from Auellana: but he does account that
to be the Sorex, which I will show or declare beneath to be the Shrew. I do
Albertus does write, saying that there is a certain kind of Mouse which does
build or make her habitation in trees, and of a brown or swart color, and
having also black spots in her face, which only is called by the universal
name of a wood-Mouse. Of the same kind Pliny does mean, (if I be not deceived)
when he writes, that the mast of a beech-tree is very acceptable to Mice, and
therefore they have good success with their young ones. The other which is
peculiarly named the Sorex, which (says Pliny) does sleep all the winter time,
and has a tail full of hair: whose shape or form we propose and set
evidently before you. But that I may more distinctly handle those things which
Pliny has showed to us concerning the wood-Mouse, I will write her down
seperately,

The ashes of a wood-mouse being mingled with honey, does cure al fractures of
bones, the brains also spread upon a little piece of cloth, and covered with
wool is good also, The medicines of the Woodmouse Pliny
but you must now and then spread it over the wound, and it does almost make it
whole and strong within the space of three or four days: neither must you
mingle the ashes of the wood-mouse with honey to late: honey also being mingled
with the ashes of earthwormes, does draw forth broken bones. Also the fat of
these beasts, being put to kibes Marcellus
and also the oil of a wood-mouse with Honey, is as effectual as the other.
They say also that the heads and tails of Mice mixed with the ashes of them
and anointed with Honey, does restore the clearenesse of the sight, but more
effectually being mingled with the ashes of a Dormouse or a Wood-mouse.

Of the Nut-Mouse, Hasell-Mouse, or Fildburd Mouse.


THis beast is a kind of Sorex, and may be that which the Germans term Ein,
gros haselmus, a great Hasell-mouse, so called because they feed upon
hasell-Nuts, and Filburds. The Flemings call it Ein Slaperat, that is a
sleeping Rat, and therefore the French call it by the name Lerot, whereby also
we have showed already, they understand a Dormouse.

For this sleeps like that, and yet the flesh thereof is not good is to be
eaten. The color of this Mouse is red like the Hasell, and the quantity full
as great as a Squirrell, or as a great Rat: upon the back and sides it is more
like a Mouse, and upon the head more red. His ears very great, and pilled
without hair. The belly white, so also are his legs. The nether most of his
tail toward the tip white. His Nostrils and feet reddish. The tail wholly
rough, but most at the end with white hairs.

The eyes very great hanging out of his head, and all black, so that there is
not in them any appearance of white. The beard partly white, and partly black,
both above and beneath his ears, and about his eyes, and the upper part of his
tail next his body all

The Countrymen finding in the Summer their caves and dens, do wisely forbear
to destroy them, knowing that they will bring into them the best Nuts and
Fill-herds can be gotten, and therefore at one side they stick up a
certain long rod, by direction

OF THE LASCITT MOVSE.
THis Mouse is called by the Germans Lascitts, and also Harneball, because of
the similitude it holds with the Ermeline Weasell. The skin of it is very
precious, being shorter then the Ermeline two fingers breadth. And for as much
as else, there is no difference between the Lascitt Mouse Lascitt Weasell,
except in the quantity. My opinion is that they are all one, and differ only
in age.

And I am rather led to affirm thus much, because there are skins, annually
brought to the Mart of Frankford, out of Polonia (called Lascett,) which are no
other then the weasels, of Nouo grodela, whose white skins are intermixed with
griffeld, and thus much shall suffice to have said of this Mouse.

OF THE SOREX.
Of the name and kind.
I Am of opinion that this kind of Mouse belongs to the Hasell Sorex; only
this hinders, that he makes the Sorex to have rough hairy ears, and the
Sorex of Germany has bald ears. For answer whereof this shall suffice, that
the other 3. notes being so great and pregnant, there is no cause why the want
of one and that so little as the hairs on the ears, should deprive it of his
natural due and kind. The Italians and the French use this word Sorex, Alunnus.
for a domestical vulgar Mouse, and so peradventure did the ancients before
them; but it is greater then the domestical mouse, although Plinyes Sorex be
neither greater nor lesser. The Spaniards call a Sorex, Sorace, or Raton
Pequenno. The Illirians Viemegka Myss, by which word also they understand a
Shrew-mouse. The fibers of the intrals of this Sorex do increase and decrease
with the Moon, so that the number of them do always answer the number of the
days of her age.

Her ears as we have said are full of hairs, but in the lowest part or tip
thereof. The reason of her name is taken from the skreeching voice she makes
in gnawing. For it is a very harmefull biting beast, cutting asunder with her
teeth like a saw. Some do derive the Greek word from Huras, which aunciently
did signify a mouse, and therefore they call this Syrax, and Saurex, but I
list not to stand any longer upon the name, seeing the beast it self
affords little worthy matter to entreat of.

It is reported by Varro, that in Arcadia there was a Hog so fat, that a
Sorex did eat into her flesh, and made her nest and brought forth young ones
therein, which may very well be; for such is the nature of a fat Swine, that he
will hardly rise to eat his meat, or ease himself of his excrements: And
besides, fatness stops sense, burying both the Nerves and Arteries very
deep: so that in the body of a man, his fattest part is least sensible.
Lycinius the Emperor going about to restrain the insolency of the Eunuckes and
Courtiers, called them Ineas, Sorisesque palatinos, that is mothes and Sorexes
of the court.

There was an ancient garment (as Pliny writes) called Vestis soriculata,
Egnatius.
and this was very precious in my opinion, because it was guarded or fringed
with the skins of the Sorex. If this beast fall into any Wine or Oil, she
corrupts the same, and it is to be recovered by the same means, as we have
formerly described in the vulgar Mouse. It should seem there was great store
of them in the days of Heliogabalus, for he commanded (as Iampridius writes)
to be brought unto him, not only a thousand of these beasts, but also a
thousand Weasels, and ten thousand vulgar Mice, as we have showed before

When the South-sayers were about their diuinatious, Pliny writes, that if
they heard the squeaking of a Sorex, they brake off, and gave over their
labor, holding it unprofitable to go any further therein, and it is also
reported, that the voice of this Mouse, gave occasion to Fabius Maximus, to
give over his Dictatorship, and unto Caius Flaminnius, to give over the
Mastership of the horsemen, such fear of silly beasts, was begotten in the
minds of gallant and magnanimious spirits, by the unprofitable and foolish
behavior and doctrines of the Magitians.

It is said by Nigidius, that these Sorises do sleep all the Winter and hide
themselves like the Dormouse. They also when they eat any corn, do screetch
and make a greater noise then other Mice, whereby they bewray themselves in the
dark unto their enemies, Parmeno in Terrence, Ego me^ meo iudicio miser, quasi
sorex perij. Saint Austine, and Saint Origin, do also make use of this
proverb, the one in his book of order, the other in a Homily upon Genesis,
which caused Erasmus to write in this manner, Sed videber ipse meis, iudicijs
captus, that is, I have overthrown my self with my own tale. These Sorices
do make hollow the trees wherein Emets or Ants breed, and there is perpetual
hatred betwixt the Bittors, and these, one lying in wait to destroy the others
young.


Serenus and Pliny, say that if a woman with child do eat the sinnewes of a
Sorex if her eyes be black, so shall the infants be likewise; Si praegnans
artus captiui Sorices edit
Dicuntur foetus nigrantia lumina fingi.
The fat of these beasts or of Dormice is very ptofitable against the Paulsie.
The powder of the heads and tails, anointed with Honey upon the eyes,
restores the clearenesse of sight, and with honey atticke, the powder and fat
of a Sorex burned, helps running eyes, and the same powder mingled with oil,
cures bunches in the flesh.

There is another mouse called by Mathaeolus, Mus Napelli, that is a
Wolfe-bainemouse: Of the mous called Mus Napelli.
although there be some of opinion, that it is not a creature, but another
little Herb growing near unto it for a counter poison.

And Marcellus also makes mention of Napellus, and Antinapellus, whereunto I
should easily condescend, but that the eyesight of Mathaeolus leads me to
the contrary. For he writes that he took one of them in the top of a high
mountain in ITALY* And Sylnaticus calls this mouse, Mus Suring, or Sucsinus,
and calls it a counter poison to Wolfe-bane, and that God might show thus
much unto men, he causes it to live upon the roots, in testimony of his
natural virtue, destroying poison and venomous hearb^.

THE INDIAN MOVSE, AND DIVERSE. other kinds of mice, according to their
Countries.


I Do find that diverse times mice do take their names from regions Mice of the
Last
therefore we will breefely comprehend al their surnames of whatsoever regions
they are in one order or Alphabet. In the Oriental parts of the world, there
are great mice, (as ALEXANDER writes) of the quantity of Foxes who do harm
both men and beasts, and although they cannot by their biting kill any man, yet
do they much grieve and molest them.

Americ^s Vespucius writes, that he found in an ysland of the sea being
distant from Vlisbona Egyptian mice.
The hair of the EGYPTIAN mice is very hard, and for the most part like a
Hedgehogges: and there are also some which walk bolt upright upon two feet, for
they have the hinder legs longer, and their fore legs shorter, their
procreation is also manifold; and they do likewise sit upon their buttockes,
and they use their forefeet as hands. But Herodotus affirms these mice to be
of AFFRICKE, and not of EGYPT; amongst the AFFRICAN or CARTHAGENIAN pastures
(says he) in AFFRICKE toward the Orient, there are three kinds of mice, of
the which some are called Bipedall or Two-footed, some in the CARTHAGENIAN
language Zetzeries, which is as much in our language as hills, some Hedg-hogges.

Cyrenean mice.
There are more kinds of mice in the CYRENAICAN region: some which have broad
Pliny.
and that some of them have as broad a countenance as a Cat; some have sharp
bristles, and bear the form and countenance of a viper, which the inhabitants
call Echenetae, but improperly, as it appears by the words of Aristotle in
his book of wonders.

Herodotus also affirms the like of those Mice, to be in shape and color
like Vipers: but Pliny and Aristotle do both disallow it, and say that in
those juice there is nothing common to vipers, but only to hedge-hogges, as
concerning their sharp bristles.

There are also some Mice in Egypt which do violently rush upon pastures and
corn: of which things Aelianus speaks, saying in this manner; when it
begins first to rain in Egypt, the Mice are wont to be borne in very small
bubbles, which wandering far and near through all the fields do affect the
corn with great calumitie, by gnawing and cutting a sunder with their teeth
the blades thereof, and wasting the heaps of that which A wonder in the
Egyption Mice.
do depart into a certain mountain: The least of all these in age do stand
in the first order, but the greatest and eldest do lead the last troops,
compelling those which are weary

But if in their journey the least or yoongest do chance through travail to
wax weary, all those which follow (as the manner is in wars) do likewise
stand still, Aelianus
and when the first begin to go forward, the rest do continually follow them.
It is also reported that the Mice which inhabit the Sea do observe the same
order and custom.

The Africane Mice do usually die as soon as ever they take any drink: but
this is commonly proper unto all mice, (as Ephesius affirms) where it is
written, Medicine by african mice
above concercerning

The kinds of Affrican mice are diverse, some are two footed, Pliny
some have hair like unto hedge-hogges, some faces of the breadth of a
Weasell* but some call these mice Cirenacian, some Egyptian, as I have before
declared. The Arabian Mice.
In Arabia there are certain mice much bigger then Dormice, whose former
legs are of the quantity of a hand breadth, and the hinder of the quantity
of the joint to the end of the finger: I do understand them to be so short,
that nothing thereof may seem to appear without the body except the space of
the joints of the finger, as it is in Martinets.

The armenian Mice.
or diversely docked with the shape of the same creature. The Author writes,
that Pliny makes mention of the Armenian mouse, but I have read no such
thing: therefore he does perchance take the Armenian mouse for the Shrew. In
Cappadocia there is a kind of mouse which some call a Squirrell. Aelianus
writing of the Caspian mice, Of the Caspian mouse.
Amyntas (says he) in his book entitled De mansionibus, which he does so
inscribe, says that in Caspia, there do come an infinite multitude of mice,
which without any fear do swim in the floods, which have great and violent
currentes, and holding one another by their tails in their mouths (as it is
likewise reported of Wolves) have a sure and stable passage over the water.

Caspians cannot resist, they do by this means endeavor to restrain their
turbulent incursions, for they remove all things which may hurt birds having
crooked talents, who come presently so flying in such great flocks, or
companies, that they may seem to be clouds to expel the mice from their
borders, and by a proper gif^ incident unto them by nature, do drive away
hunger from the Caspians, neither in quantity are these Mice inferior to the
Egyptian Ichneumons: they are also ungentle, and they do no less devour with
the strength of their teeth, then the Mice of Teredon in Babylon do iron, whose
soft skins the Merchants carry to the Persians. The Indian mouse, or Pharoes
mouse, (as some learned later writers do write) is no other then the
Ichneumon. Antonius musa Brasauolus, took the before expressed figure of an
Indian mouse, (for so he did call it) which before that time was shown by
Bellonius, and I gessed it to be an Ichneumon; and truly in the snout (if you
take away the beard) and in the ears it does agree, but in the tail it does
differ, which does rather resemble a cats: and in many other things, which by
conferring them are easy to be marked, and as I conceived it, I have set it
down.

Of the Moschatte, or Mus-kat.
THis beasts name is derived from the hebrew word Bosem, which signifies
sweet odor, for the Germans call the same Bisem, and the beast it self
Bisemthier. And the Graecians derive their Moschos of Moo, and ozo, to seek,
and to smell, and of Mesou Cheisthai, to proceed out of their middle; because
the true liquor comes out of the nauel, as we shall show: but I rather think
they derive it from the Arabian words Mesch, and Misch, and Almisch. The
Italians, French, and Spaniards use Musci, and Muschi, which is derived from
the later Latins; and beside the Italians call it Capriolo del Musco, and the
French Cheureul du musch, the musk it self is called in Italy Muschio, of the
Latin Muschum, and Muscatum: the Illirians Pizmo, and the Germans Bisem. The
Arabians were the first that wrote any discovery of this beast, and therefore it
ought not seem strange that all the Graecians and Latins Simeon Sethi, and
Aetius) which say he has also one horn, but herein is a manifest error,
because no man that ever saw one of these beasts does so much as make mention
thereof; and therefore the original of this error came from the words of Auicen,
who writes that his teeth bend inward like two horns. Cardan writes that he
saw one of these dead at Myllan which in greatness, fashion, and hair resembled
a Roe, except that the hair was more thick, and the color more gray. Now the
variety of the hair may arise from the region wherein it was bred. It has two
teeth above, and two beneath, not differing absolutely from the Roe in any
Gazella, they are lesser, thinner, and more elegant creatures then the Roes
are. Paulus Venetus writes thus of this beast. The creature out of whom the
musk is gathered, is about the bigness of a cat, (he should say a Roe) having
gross, thick hair like a Heart, and hoofes upon his feet. It is found in the
province of Cathay, and the kingdom of Cergoth, which is subject to the great
king of Tartars.

Likewise there was a most odiferous musk cat at Venice, which a marcha^t there
had to be seen, brought as he said out of Cathay, and for proof whereof he
showed the way that he went, namely through the E^xine sea, Colchis, Iberia,
and Albania, even to the entrance of Scythia. For the country Cathay is a part
of Scythia, beyond Imaus, neither ought this to seem wonderful, for in that
place there was a Region, called by Ptolomeus, Randa marcostra, wherein he
places the eleventh table of Asia. This region is watered by the river Sotus,
and therein abounds spicknard, and the inhabitants call the country wherein
the best Muskats are bred, Brassauola
Ergimul, and the greatest city of that Country Singuy. The same Author
writes also, that Muskattes are brought out of Egypt, and out of many places
of Affricke. In Thebeth also there are many Cities, and beasts about those
cities, called Gadery, which do bring forth the musk, and the Inhabitants hunt
them with Dogs. The province of Canicluet, does Ierom also writes thus:
muscus and Oenanthe, and pegrigrini muris pellicula, by which skin of the
strange mouse, Tame musk cats.
he means the little bag, or skin wherein the musk of the Muskat is encluded.
The princes of Europe do nourish these tame, being brought out of the new found
world, and many other rich men especially in Italy, be delighted with the
odorefirous savor which comes from it. ( Brassauolus says) that he saw a
Merchant offer one of these to be sold unto Alphonsus du. of Feraria, which had
the Nauel full of musk. And Catherinus Zenus, an ancient Noble man of Venice,
had a Roe of this kind, which he left after his death unto his heirs; and by
this it does plainly appear, that the Muskcat, is neither like a Catte, nor
a mouse, and that al those which have affirmed so much thereof, have bin
deceived by their own coniecturall deriuation of Moscus or Muscus, or by the
error of some writer of the ancient Magnitudo Capreoli a Roe, have inferted
Catti, a Cat. And thus much shall suffice for the description of this beast, and
for the Regions where it is bred, except I may ad the relation of Ludovicus
Romanus, who affirms, Their strength nimblenesse and quicknes Alex. Benedictus
that the muskats of Calechut are brought out of the country Pegus. These Roes
of the new found land are wonderful nimble and quick, and so swift, that they
are sildome taken alive, but after they are taken by pulling out their longer
teeth they wax tame. When they are prosecuted with the hunters, and with
Dogs, they defend themselves with their teeth. In some places they Of the
Musk and the use thereof.
and therefore the use of it is more plentiful then of any other thing, for
they carry it about in Gatmentes.

They make perfume of it; they anoint beads whereupon they tell their
prayers, they also make bals of it, and include it in Gold or Silver, carrying
it about, either to be seen, or because they are delicate and wanton, or to
show their riches and abundance, or to preserve themselves from putrified and
stinking airs, or else against cold and moist diseases of the brain. With
this the luxurious women perfume themselves, to entrap the love of their
wooers: for as the thing it self is a vice or sickness of the beast, so also
by men it is used to vice and wickedness; yet the Venetian matrons will never

We have showed already, that it grows in the navel, The place where the
Musk grows.
or in a little bag near unto it, and it is true by Gyraldus and Varinus,
that when the beast begins to be luxurious, and prone to the rage of venery
and carnal copulation, then the blood flows to the navel, and there puts
the beast to pain, because it swells above measure. The beast then
abstaineth from all meat and drink, and rowleth himself upon the ground, and
so by the weight of his body presses forth the humor that troubled him, which
after a certain time does coagulate and congeale together, and then rendereth
such an acceptable savor, as you see it has.

The relation whereof you shall hear out of the words of Serapion. In the
wild Roes (says he) which wander too and fro in the mountains freely,
without the government The natural expression of Musk
a great while together, for it delights him, whereby the stones grow white
through his rubbing and therefore in time he wears the bag a sunder, making
issue unto it for the corruptible matter to come forth, which presently runs
out upon the sores, no otherwise then if it had bin launced.

Then the wound grows to be whole again, and the beast departs, until the
like exsuperance of blood come into the same place again. For every year this
happens them. The inhabitants of the country know all the hunters of these
wild beasts, and therefore note them where they empty their bellies. For the
humor so pressed out as before is declared through the heat of the sun
congealeth and dries upon the stone, growing more commendable and pleasant
through the Suns heat; Then come the inhabitants, and in little bottels made
of the skinns of these beasts, which before they have killed, and so put the
musk into them.

This they sell for a great price, because it is thought, (and that worthily)
to be a gift fit for a king. But if this musk be taken out of the creature by
violence, then will he bring forth no more, yet express it by his own
natural art he bears again, and again. The greatest cause of this humor,
is the sweetness of his food, and the air wherein they are bredde, therefore
if one of them be brought into this part of the world, with musk in his cod,
it will grow to ripenes in a temperate air, but if it be brought without musk
in the cod, then it will never yield any among us: And besides that it lives
but a little while. And therefore my opinion is, that this excrementall humor,
is unto it like a menstruous purgation, for the want whereof it dies speedily.
Every part of this beast is called musk

The pretiousnes of this thing deserves a further treatise for thy better
direction and instruction of the knowledge hereof, The best musk declared by
these several countries.
both for the choice of that which is best, and for the avoiding and putting
away of that which is adulterate. At Venice at this day it is sold in the
cods, and the Indian musk is better then the Affrican. The brown is always
better then the black, except it be of Catha, for that of Catha is black, and
best of all. There is some that is yellowish, or betwixt read and yellowe,
after the very same color of Spicknard; this also is of the best sort,
because the beasts that render it, do feed upon Spicknard.

Syluius.
Therefore this is good to be chosen, because it cannot be adulterated, and
besides the taste of it is bitter, and as soon as ever it is tasted, it
presently ascends to the brain, where it remains very fragrant without
resistance, and is not easily dissolved. It is not bright within, Auicen.
but muddy, having broad grains and equal throughout, like the wood of
Baulme. But according to the regions, they choose musk in this sort.

Of the Indian musk, that of the Region of Sceni, (called Antebeuus,) they set
in the first place, and next unto it, the beasts of the Sea side; The musk of
Cubit is known by the thin bladder of the beast wherein it is contained,
Elluchacem.
but that of Gergeri, is less Aromaticall and more thick. The musk of Caram
is in the middle place betwixt both, wherwithall they mingle powder of Gold and
Silver, to increase the weight. The musk of Salmindy is worst of all, because
it is taken out of his blather or cod, and put into a glass. There are some
which prefer the Tumbascine musk, and they say, that the odor thereof
comes from the sweet herbs whereupon the beast feeds: and the like is
said of the Region of Sceni, but the odor is not equal to the other. And the
Tumbascines, do not gather the musk after the fashions of others: For they
draw not forth this matter out of the cod, nor yet gather it in calm weather.
The Cenians, they press forth the matter out of the ventricle, and when they
have it forth mingle it with other things, and that in cloudy and tempestuous
weather: afterward they put them up in glasses, and stop the mouth close, and
so they send it to be sold, unto the Sarizines, and to Amanus, and to Parsis,
and to Haharac, as if he were a Tumbescine, When this beast goes furthest from
Auicen says, there is some kind of musk like a Citron, but such has not
been seen in this part of the world, for our musk is most commonly like the
color of iron, and the savor of it, Serapto.
like a Cirenian Apple, but stronger; and consists of little pieces, but it
is better that hangs together and has a savor of the wilderness, but if it
be adulterated with Snakes or Byrds-dung, then will it be lesser pleasant in
the savor, and also pinch and offend the nose.

The hunters of Tebeth, and Seni, as we have showed already, do kill their sweet
Rose, and afterward take out from them their bladder of musk, which musk
being exerped before it be ripe, smells strongly and unpleasantly. And then
they hang it up a little while in the open and free air, wherein it ripeneth
as it were by concoction in the sun, and thereby receives an admirable
sweetness. And the like do diverse Gardeners use toward Apples, and fruits
of trees which are gathered before they be ripe. For by laying them

There is not much perfect musk brought into this part of the world, but the
strength of it comes from the virtue of the cod wherein it is put, and so it
is brought to us, but the best is brought out of the East, where grows
Spicknard and sweet Herbs. Rodericus Lucitanus says that our musk is
compounded of diverse things, the ground whereof is the blood of a little beast
like a Cony, which is brought out of Pegun a prouence of India. But the means
whereby to try it may be this, after it is waied, they put it into some moist
or wet powder, and after a little while they weigh it the second time, The
trial of Musk.
and if it exceed the former weight, then do they take it for sound, perfect,
and good, but if it do not exceed,

Some Merchants when they are to buy musk stop it to their noses, Simion Sethi
Syluius
and holding their breath run half a stones cast, afterward they pull it from
their Nose, and if they perceive the savor of the musk, then do they but it,
and take it for good, but if not, they refuse it for corrupted. In some
Churches they make perfumes with musk, and by mingling Stirax, Alloes, Amber,
and juice of Roses, they make a perfume called Regium Suffimigium, the Kings
perfume; likewise unto sweet waters, drawn out of the furnaces of Chymis,
whereunto they add simple Rose Water, and for the richer sort of people musk
and Camphory.

Andreus Furnerius in his French book of adorning man's nature, teaches a
composition to be made of certain Oils, Soap, and Musk, And also ointmentes
and musked oils. He also shows how to make little round bals of musk, and
other confections, Platearius
and afterward to draw a thread through the middle of them, and so wear them
about ones neck.

Some put it into silken wool, through which they first draw a thread, and so
dissolve it in rose water, afterward make it up in medicines, and use it as
aforesaid. It may be preserved in a vessel of Lead, close stopped along time,
for the lead which is cold and moist, The preserving of musk
agrees well with the nature of the musk, and therefore if a leaden vessel be
wanting, so as ye be forced to use glass and silver, then must you put two or
three pieces of lead into it, for Contra foetorem eluctatur, and quasi luctando
reuiuisset, it strives against the filthy stink, and as it were reuiueth in
that contention, says Isidorus, Albertus, and Platearius.

But concerning the adulterating of musk, I will say more in this place.
Benedictus The adulterating of musk and the means to descry it.
First of all the mountibanks do corrupt it by mingling with it the liver of a
calfe. Also by a root called Makir, and an herb Salich. Many times the dung
of Mice is sold for musk, and so great is

It is also adulterated by mingling with it a little Goats blood fried, or
brown bread fried, so that three or four parts of these, will receive
seasonable taste from one part of the musk. It is also adulterated in the skin
by putting pieces of the skin into it, and it may be known from the true
musk, because it will weigh twice so heavy. The Sarazens use this shift above
all others, and there is one principal way of making counterfeit musk, which
is this, they take Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, Gilliflowers, and Spikenard,
of every one a handful, all these being beat diligently together, and dried
and sifted, they are mingled with the warm blood of a Dove, and afterward
dried in the Sun, then are they seven times sprinkled over, or moystened,
with the Water of muske-Roases, and betwixt every sprinkling they are dried; At
length they mingle therewithal a third or fourth part of true musk, and then
sprinkle it over again with Muske-rose-water, so divide it into three or four
lumps, and take the white hairs from

Benyuine, white-waxe taken out of a new Hiue of Bees, the rotten part of
Eue-tree, and a little Musk, are mingled altogether to make a counterfeit
Amber, for it will smell like ciuet, or musk, or else Stirax, and the powder
of Lygnum-aloes with Ciuet, and Rose water, but the fraud in one and other is
easily deprehended, for both the odor and the color are different from the
true Amber, and also it will sooner wax soft in water, then that which is
natural.

Some do corrupt their Musk with the seed of Angelica, or rather with the
root of it, because the root smells sweet like Musk, but the cosinage may
be easily discovered, by putting it into water. For the Angelica will sink,
and ^he Musk will swim. Arnoldus Villanouanus, that in the presence of
Assafoetida or Castoreum, the best musk will have a horrible and intolerable
savor, although they touch not one another which cannot be ascribed to any
known reason, but to some secret in nature. The sweetness of the Arabian
musk is described by A^ciatus in this verse; Et celebris suaui, est vnguine
muscus Arabs. There be diverse Herbs which smell sweet like musk, as
Angelica, Dorsis, Muske-Giliflowers, Herbs rese^bling musk.
Muske-Grapes, the leaves of a winter Cherry, and an Herb growing near
Basil without a name, like wild Parsley, the Damasine-rose, and many other.
Wild cats and Martins do also render an excrement much like musk, and there
are Hares called Moschiae, which leave such an intolerable smell in the
impression of their footesteppes, that the Dogs by touching them grow mad,
as we have showed in the story of the Hare: And thus much for the description
of this beast, now follows the medicines.

The medicines of the Muske-cat.
A very little part or quantity of a Muske-cat is of great virtue and efficacy;
wherefore

A musk-cat and the herb called Mercuries-fingers or Dogges-bane, being given
in purging medicines to drink, do greatly renew and refresh the decayed
strength or force of those which have been before times weakened with diverse
and continual medicines in their m^bers. The same is also very profitable for
those which are effeminate or defective, and ecclipsed in their mind or
courage, as also for those which are weak and feeble in their joints, not by
any hurt, or any other casuallity being enfeebled, Symeon
but being always so even from their childhood. A musk-cat is an excellent
remedy for those which are troubled with fear in their heart, and also for
those which do quiver or shake either for fear or any other thing throughout
all the parts of their body. The same is a very profitable and medicinable cure
for those which are grieved with any ach or pain in their head or with any
enormity Isidorus
without any thing mixed in it or compounded in wine, is very good and wholesome
for the healing and curing of those who have any pain or grief in their
stomach, which comes by the occasion of any cold.

A muske-catte being put unto the body of any man in the form or manner of a
plaster, does confirm and make strong both his heart* and all the rest of his
bowels, Dioscorides
or interior parts: it does moreover increase both strength and power in all
his members, yea and in the very bones, the efficacy thereof is of such power
and virtue. The same being laid or anointed upon the head, is very effectual
for the expelling or driving away of the rheum which falls from the head
into the nostrils, and by that means procures heaviness Auicenna


The same being used in the aforesaid manner does temperate and confirm the
brains of any man, besides it eases and helps those which have pain about
their heart, by the which they suppose their very heart to ache. The smell of
this beast is both profitable and hurtful, for unto those which are cold of
constitution, the scent is very pleasant in regard that is it hot of it self,
and is very delightful in their sauors: but unto those which are hot Rasis
and does alalso stir up in them that pestiferous disease called the falling
sickness: but unto women which are of a hot or fiery constitution it is more
hurful and noisome, for it breeds in them a very pestiferous disease which
choketh their matrice or womb, Brasauolus
and causes them oftentimes to swound, it is called by some the mother. The
sneezings of a muske-cat is an excellent remedy against the resolution of the
sinnewes or the palsy. A muske-cat is very good and wholesome for the helping
and curing of those which are troubled with any deafness or astonishment in
any part of their bodies, as also for the driving away of melancholicke and
sorrowful passions out of men's minds, and for the incitating delightful
mirth and pleasure in them.

A musk-cat being mixed and mingled with dry plasters which are used for the
healing

A muske-cat is an excellent remedy for those which have a desire to vomit and
cannot, it does also renew an appetite or stomach in those until their
victuals which do loath and abstain from all sustenance, and does loosen and
dissolve all thick puffinges or windiness in the interior parts or members of
any one.

A muske-catte being mingled with a causticke medicine, Platearius
is very profitable and

A medicine or suppositary being made of ambergryse, and mingled with a sweet
gum coming out of Syria and Styrax, and then mixed both together with a
muske-cat and so bea^en, until they come unto a certain salve, and laid unto
the secret parts of a woman is very good for the aforesaid disease. A^ice^na
There is a certain juice or moistness in a musk cat which being pressed
forth or dissolved, and mixed with the Oil called Palma Christy, and anointed
upon the yard of any man, does stir him up to lust and venery. If the least
part of a musk-cat be eaten by any one which is troubled with a stinking
breath, i^ will presently expel and take away the stink thereof. And thus much
shall suffice concerning the cures and medicines of the musk-cat.

OF THE MVLE.
(...) several (...).
THe Mule is a beast, called by the Hebrews Pered, from whence comes the
feminine Pirdah 3. of King. and there be some that say the reason of the Hebrew
word is, from the separation and sterility of this beast, for it is Pered, quia
non pareat. The Chaldey word is Cudana, the Arabian Beal, but Genesis 36. for the
Hebrew word Iemin, many translate Kegal, but the Grecian Septuagints
Hemionous. The Graecians also call a Mule Astrahe, from the strength of his
body. The Latins call a Mule Mulus, and Semiasinus, that is half an Ass,
because on the one side he is a Horse, and on the other side an Ass, and
therefore in his conditions he more resembles an Ass then a Horse, whereupon
lies this tale. A certain Lydian Mule ^eeing his Image in the water, grew to
be afraid of the greatness thereof, and thereupon took his heels and ran away
as fast as he could; neither could he be stayed by all the wit of his keepers:
Plutarch
At length the mule remembering that he was the son of an Ass, he stayed his
course and came back again neighing. The Italians call a mule Mulo, and the
female Mula, like the Latins, and the Spaniards. The French mulet, and the
female Mule, from whence comes the English word Mule. The Germans multhire,
or mulesel. The Illirians meseck, and the Flemings mul.

(...) kinds o^ Mules.
There is another kind of mules in Syria, diverse from those which are procreated
by the copulation of a mare and an ass, and they receive their names from the
similitude of their faces. For there is no other cause, why wild Asses should
be called Asses, but only their similitude and tame Asses. And as among wild
Asses some of them are singularly swift, so also among these Syrian mules,
there are some excellent speedy coursers. These mules procreate in their own
kind, and admit no mixture, which Aristotle proved by nine of them which were
brought into Phrygia, in the days of Pharnacas, the father of Pharnabazi.
Theophrastrus also reports, that in Cappadocia, the mules engender among
themselus, which Aristotle remembers in his wonders, and he might well have
spared it, for they are a kind of cat^el among themselves. Aelianus.
There be flocks of Asses and mares in India, where the mares do willingly
admit the Asses in copulation, and bring forth red mules, the best of all other
for running.

The generation of Burdens.
But among the Indian Phyllians, their Asses, mules, Oxen, and Horses, are no
bigger then Rams. As the mule is begotten betwixt an Ass and a mare, so the
Burdon is begotten betwixt a Horse, and a shee-Asse, wherefore the Italians
call him Mulo Bastardo, that is, The p^ts of mu^^s and their ^^^our.
a bastard mule. For as the mule, more resembles the Ass then the horse, so
the Burdon more resembles the horse then the Ass, the reason is, because all
kinds follow



They change their teeth and have in number six and thirty, their Neck is
like the Neck of an Asses, long, but not standing upright, their bellies simple
and of one quantity. They want a gall like all foure-footed-beastes, and there
is a thing in their heart like a bone, as we have showed before in the story of
the Ass.

The food of Asses.
They eat such food as Horses, and Asses do, but they grow fat by drinking,
yet they drink not like a Horse by thrusting in their Noses into the water,
but only touch it with their lips. Mizaldus Dioscorides


They love Cucumbers above all other meats, but the flowers and leaves of
Rododaphne are poison to Mules and Asses, The lenght of a Mules life.
and to many foure-footed-beastes. Both a Mule Athens, at what time Pericles
builded the Temple of Minerua, where by reason of his age, he was dismissed
from all labor, yet afterward he would not forsake his companions, but went
with them, exhorting them with neighing to undergo the labor cheerfully;
Whereupon there was a public decree, that the said Mule should have an
ordinary of prouender appointed him in Prytanium, Aristotle Aelianus
and that no body should drive him away from their Corn when he eat it,
although it were in the Market place.

The generation of Mules.
We have showed already that this Beast is engendered betwixt an Assea Mare, and
The election of a Mare to bear Mules.
of sound bones, and of singular good shape, wherein he must not so much expect
her velosity or aptness to run, as her strength to endure labor, and
especially to bear in her womb a discordant Foale, begotten by an Ass, and
to confer upon it both the properties of his body, and the disposition. For
when Mares do unwillingly receive the genitall seed of the Ass, the Fool does
not grow to perfection in the Mares belly, Pliny
until she have borne it thirteen months, whereby it resembles more the
sluggish and dull nature of his father, then the vigor of his mother. But for
the helping of their copulation, they pull certain hairs out of the tail of
the female, and afterward bind

The choice of a mule.
There is no lesser regard to be had of the Stallion, lest the want of judgment
in the choice of him do frustrate the experiment; Seeing therefore they are
engendered betwixt a Mare and an Ass, or betwixt a Mare and a wilde-Asse, and
the Mule, begotten betwixt the wild Ass and the Mare does excel all others,
both for swiftness of course, hardness of foot, and generosity of stomach:
yet is the tame Ass better for this breed then the wild Ass, for he will be
more beautiful in outward form, and more tractable in disposition; And the
Mules engendered by wilde-Asses, may be compared to these; yet can they never
be so tamed but they retain some qualities of their Wilde-Father; And
therefore a Mule begotten betwixt them (I mean betwixt a wild male Ass and a

And therefore it is most commodious and necessary to get such a Stalion Ass
to the procreation of Mules, whose kind by experiment is excellent, and
outward parts every way acceptable, such as these are; a long and great body,
a strong Neck, strong and broad ribs, a wide breast full of muscles, loins
full of sinnewes, strong compacted, legs of color blackish or spotted, for
the mouse color is too vulgar, and is not fit in a Mule. For it is but folly
in a man to allow and approve, every color he looks upon, and Collumella
writes) when there are spots upon the tongue and pallet of a Ram, such also
are found in the wool of the Lamb he begets.

And so also if an Ass have diverse colored hairs upon his eye brows, or
upon his ears, the foale he brings forth has such colors in his skin; And
hereunto agree both Paladius, and Absirtus saying; He that will have a good
breed of Mules, must get an Ass of Elegant form, a great stature, square
members, a great head not like a horses, his face, cheeks, and lips not small,
his eyes standing out of his head, and not little or hollow, broad Nosthrils,
great ears, not hanging down, but standing upright; a broad and long neck, a
broad breast, rough with the pleights of his muscles, and strong to endure the
kickings of the mare: great breasts, plates and other parts under his
shoulders, and so down to his legs, which ought to be strong, broad, and
corpulent, and standing far assunder, so as he may easily cover the mare.

A great back, and broad backe-bone, neither hollow nor standing up with
bunches, bearing a direct line upon the middle. His shoulders not low but
standing up, the hipbone full and long, not bending too narrowely nor pinde
buttockt, nor standing out sharp, and they are best which have the shortest
tails.

Iuvenall: Namque hic mundae, nitet vngula Mulae. His voice clear and not
hoarse, for so the mare will be terrified from copulation. His color ought to
be likewise clear, as all black, having no white belie, or somewhat looking
toward purple, and having one black spot upon his mouth, or rather a black
tongue and such as have bin brought up with horses.

Absirtus
they must cover the female with a cloth of that color wherewithal they desire
the young one to be foaled, as we have showed already in the discourse of
Horses, whereby there are raised many excellent kinds and rases; or else they
bring in their presence at the time of their copulation some great male Horse
or Ass, by the fight whereof they are made

If the wild Asses be at any time heavy, and not willing to cover the Mare,
then let there be another female Ass brought into the presence, by the sight
whereof his lust so burns that he rages almost to madness for copulation:
And therefore being denied, the Ass does more willingly leap upon the Mare,
whom before he loathed. Again, it must be regarded, that the Stalion be tied
and bound fast, so that he may not cover the Mare after she is with foal, nor
yet have access unto her, least by kicking and biting he cause abortment, for
many times they break their bonds asunder, and greatly trouble the females
with young, therefore they are accustomed to some labor, which takes down
the heat of their lust: yet at the time that they are to cover the Mares, you
must use all diligence to awaken the drousie nature of the beast, so that with
greater spirit the

The Asses of Lybia will not cover mares that have manes until they be shorn
off, for it seems they disdain that their females should have more
ornaments then themselves, which are their husbands.

We have showed already in the discourse of the Ass, that mares do not
willingly admit any Stalion Ass to cover them, except it be such a one as did
suck a Mare, which we called a horse-suckling or Equimulgus. For this cause
men that propound unto themselves to nourish rases of Mules, take the colt of
an Ass so soon as it is foald and put to it a mare giving milk in some dark
place, wherein the mare not doubting any fraud, is deceived, and willingly
yealdeth her vdders to the Asses foale; whereunto being accustomed

If the Ass be small which is a Stalion, he will quickly wax old, and his
issue be the worse, therefore they must provide the largest and strongest
Asses, and nourish them with the best hay and barley, that so his strength may
abound before his copulation. He ought not to be under three years old, nor
yet brought unto a Mare which never knew male, for such a one will beat him
away with her heels and mouth, and bring him into perpetual hatred with that
kind; wherefore they use to bring some vile and vulgar Ass into the presence
of the Mare, as it were to woo her, and provoke her to copulation, that so if
she beat him away it may be no hinderance to the Stallion, but if she seem to
admit him, and desirous of copulation, then they take him away, and bring the
appointed Stalion into his room, and so the Mule is engendered.

For the effecting of their copulation, there must be a place appointed for the
purpose, betwixt two walls, having a narrow passage, that so the Mare may not
have liberty to fight with the Ass, and the Mares head must be tied down to a
Manger or rack, the ground being so fashioned, that her forefeet may stand
much lower then her hinder, and so ascend backward, to the intent that the ass
may more easily leap upon her back, and she receive the seed more deeply.
When the Mare has brought forth the Mule, she gives it suck half a year,
and then drives it away, which ought to be brought up in some Mountains or
hard places, that so the hoofes may grow hard and indurable.

Having thus discoursed of the generation of Mules, it now follows that we
should enquire whether Mules thus engendered betwixt an Ass and a Mare, does
likewise bring forth in their own kind. Obseruatumest (says Pliny) e duobus
diuersis generibus tertij generis fieri, and neutri parentum esse similia,
eaque ipsa qu^ ita nata sunt, non gignere, in omni animalium genere, id circo
mulas no parere. That is to say; It has been observed, that out of two diverse
kinds, a third has been engendered, and yet like to neither of the parents,
and those so engendered did not procreate others in the universal kind of
beasts, or among al creatures; And therefore Mules conceived betwixt Asses and
Mares, do not bring forth young. Whereupon Camerarius made this pretty riddle
of a mule. Dissimilis patri, matri diuersa figura
Confusi generis, generi non apta propago,
Ex alijs nascor, nec quisquam nascitur ex me.
Democritus is of opinion also, that Mules cannot conceive, and that their
secret places are not like other beasts, and the issue of confused kinds can
never engender, but especially in a Mule, because it is made of diverse seeds,
(I mean diverse in quantity, and almost contrary) for the seed of the Ass is
cold, and the seed of the Mare is hot.

Aristotle disputing of this matter concerning those kinds that are procreated
of diverse parents, writes in this sort, those beasts join in copulation,
whose kinds although they are diverse, yet are not their natures very
disagreeable. If the quantity and stature be alike, and the times of going with
young be equal, yet they remain barren that are so begotten, of which cause
Empedocles and Democritus yeald reason: Empedocles obscurely, and Democritus
more plainly, but neither of the^ both well; for they allege the same
demonstration about all beasts out of their kind. Democritus says, that the
passages of the Mules are corrupted in their wombes, because their beginning
does not consist of one and the same kind; but this is no reason, for that it
happens also to other beasts that do engender.

Empedocles he yealds a reason out of Plutarch, about the joining together of
the seeds, and therefore compares it to a commixtion of tin and Brass
together, but he says he does not understand their meaning, and therefore
proceeds to express his own opinion in these words. Frist (says he) every
one of the Males do beget one of their own kind, but the females cannot
conceive, and this is no great wonder, because that Horses Colts-teeth, they
remain steril and barren al their life long: for so does the generatiue power
of the Asses body rest upon a tickle and Nice-point, apt to rise, or easy to
fall away to nothing.

And in like sort, is a horse prone to barrenness, for it wants nothing but
cold substance to be mingled with his seed, which comes then to pass when
the seed of the Ass is mixed with it, for there wants but very little, but
that the Asses seed waxes barren in his own kind, and therefore much more
when it meets with that which is beside his nature and kind.

This also happens to Mules, that their bodies grow exceeding great, especially
because they have no menstruous purgation, and therefore where there is an
annual breeding

The excrements of their body in this kind they purge with their urine, which
apeareth because the male-mules never smell to the secrets of the female, but
to their urine, and the residue which is not voided in the urine, turns to
increase the quantity and greatness of the body, whereby it comes to pass,
that if the female mule do conceive with foale, yet is she not able to bring
it forth to perfection, because those things are dispersed to the norishment
of her own body, which should be employed about the nourishment of the foale:
and for this cause, when the Egyptians describe a barren woman,

Alexander Aphroditius writes thus also of the sterility of mules. Orus. An
Emblem.
Mules (says he) seem to be barren because they consist of beasts diverse in
kind, for the commixtion of seeds, which differ both in habit and nature, do
evermore work something contrary to nature, for the abolishing of generation;
for as the mingling together of black and white colors do destroy both the
black and white, and produce a swart and brown, and neither of both appear in
the brown; so is it in the generation of the mules, whereby the habitual and
generatiue power of nature is utterly destroyed in the created compounde, which
before was eminent in both kinds, simple and several. These things says he.

Alcmaeon as he is related by Plutarch, (says) that the male mules are barren
by reason Empedocles and Diocles say, that the womb is low, narrow, and the
passages crooked that lead into it, and that therefore they cannot receive
seed, or conceive with young* whereunto I do also wilingly yield, because it
has bin often found that women have been barren for the same cause. To
conclude therefore, mules bear very sildome, and that in some particular
Nations if it be natural, or else their coltes are prodigious, and accounted
monsters.

Concerning their natural birth, in hot regions where the exterior heat does
temper the coldness of the Asses seed, there they may bring forth. And
therefore Columella and Varro say, that in many parts of Affricke, the Colts of
Mules are as familiar and common, as the Colts of mares are in any part of
Europe.

So then by this reason it is probable unto me, Mules engender.
that mules may engender in all hot Countries, as there was a mule did
engender often at Rome; or else there is some other cause why they do engender
in Affricke, and it may be that the Affrican mules are like to the Syrian mules
before spoken of, that is, they are a special kind by themselves and are
called mules for resemblaunce, and not for nature. It has been seen that a
mule has brought forth twins, but it was held a prodigy. Herodotus in his
fourth book records these two stories of a mules procreation, when Darius
(says he) besieged Babylon, the Babilonians scorned his army, and getting up
to the top of their Towers, did pipe and dance Darius and the whole army,
amongst whom one of the Babilonians said thus: Quid istic desidetis o Persae,
quin potius absceditis, tunc ex pugnaturi nos cum peperint Mulae. O ye Persians
why do you sit here, wisdom would teach you to depart away, for when mules
bring forth young ones, then may you overcome the Babilonians. Thus spoke the
Babilonian, believing that the Persians should never overcome them, because of
the common proverb, Epean emionoi tekosin, when a mule bears young ones. But
the poor man spoke truer then he was aware of, for this followed after a year
and seven months: While the siedge yet lasted, A history of Mules.
it happened that certain mules belonging to Zopyrus, the son of Megabiz^s
brought forth young ones, whereat their master was much moved, while he
remembered the aforesaid song of the Babilonian, and that therefore he might be
made the Author of that fact, communicated the matter with Darius, who
presently entertained the device, therefore Zopirus cut off his own nose and
ears, and so ran away to the Babilonians, telling them that Darius had thus
used him, because he persuaded him to depart Babylon, (which he said) was
inexpugnable and invincible. The Babilonians seeing his wounds, and trusting to
their own strength, did easilye give credence unto him, for such is the nature
of men, that the best way to beguile them is, to tell them of those things they
most desire, for so are their hopes persuaded before they receive any
assurances. But to proceed, Zopyrus insinuated himself further into the favor
of the Babilonians, and did many valiant acts against the Persians, whereby he
got so much credit, that at last he was made the general of the whole Army,
and so betrayed the City unto the hands of Darius: thus was Babylon taken
when Mules brought foor^h. Another mule brought forth a young one, at what time
Xerxes passed over Hellespont, to go against Graecia with his innumerable
troops of soldiers, and the said mule so brought forth, had the genitals both
of the male and female.

Unto this I may add another story out of Swetonius, in the life of Galba
Caesar. As his father was procuring Augurismes or deuinations, an Eagle came
and took the bowelles out of his hands, and carried them into a
fruit-bearing-oake; he enquiring what the meaning of that should be, received
answer, that his posterity should be Emperors, but it would be very long
first, whereunto he merrily replied; Sanecum mula pepererit; I sir, when a mule
brings forth young ones: which thing afterward happened unto Galba, for by
the birth of a mule, he was confirmed in his enterprises when he attempted the
Empire, so that, that thing which was a prodigy and cause of sorrow and a
wonder to all other people, was unto him an ominous confirmation of joy and
gladness, when he remembered his grandfathers sacrifice and saying. Therefore
it was not ill said of Democritus; Mula Mules are not the proper work of
nature, but an adulterous invention of human policy, robbing nature: for
(says he) when a certain Median found his Ass covering of his mare, The
invention of mules Aelianus.
whereupon afterward she fell to be with foal, and seeing the young one to
comunicate with both natures, they drew it into a custom to cover the Mares
with their Asses for the engendring of such a breed.

Some are of opinion that mules first began among the Paphlagonians, which
before the Troyan war were called Eneti, and afterward Veneti: but in Genesis
36. we find that Anna the father in law of Esau, keeping his fathers Asses,
did invent Gemim, that is, mules. Aristotle the quantity o^ a mules ^oa^e.
The young one so generated, is called Ginnus and Pumilio, for it is a very
dwarf, according to the observation of Martial: His tibi de mulis non est
metuenda ruina
Altius in terris pene sedere soles.
Such as these were kept in the Court of the Duke of Ferraria, and although in all things Burdones before spoken of in the story of the horse. Mules are
begotten both by Mares, she-Asses, and Bulls, but yet those are the best that
are begotten betwixt an Ass and a mare. And thus much for the generation of
mules.

They are nourished with the same meat that Horses and Asses are, annoyed with
the same sicknesses, and cured with the same means, generaly blood-letting is
good for them, and for their diet Bullimunge. In Scythia they can ablde no
cold, and therefore the horses are there used instead of Mules. In some
countries the Horses can abide no cold, but the Asses and Mules bear it out
(as Herodotus writes,) and as we have showed before in the story of the Ass:
when the Graecians were at Troy, and were destroyed by a consuming pestilence,
the first of all their company that dyed were their Dogs and their Mules,
and the reason of it was, because the pestilence arising out of the earth, they
by the sense of smelling, which is very quick in both kinds, did first of all
draw in that poysonne from the earth.

Collumella says, that the medicines for the Oxen do also cure mules,
Sicknesses of Mules and their cures.
yet there are

The female Mule may be burned in the feet, or let blood after the manner of
Horses, and some Countrymen give in their food the herb Veretrum, or else the
seed of Hyoscanus or Henne-bane beaten to powder and drunk in wine. For the
languishing of the Collumella
let the load be taken off, and turn her forth to wallowe in some convenient
place. If that suffice not, take some fat, and put it into her chappes, that so
she may suck it down, Rutius.
and pour wine after it.

Pelagonius
or unto the third part two pintes of Vinegar, and therewithal anoint the
mules neck. As we have showed that the pains of a horses belly and guts are
best of al cured by the sight of a Mallard, swimming in the water, whereby they
are speedily deliuerd from all manner of torment, so the same has as great or
greater operation to cure the pains of the mules belly. It is reported by
Auicen that mules fall into madness, and in that madness bite their master
mortally. They are likewise subject to the gout, and especially to swellings
about the crown of their pasternes, but they are cured as horses and Oxen.

They live long, ordinarily to fifty years, and sometimes to fourscore, the
reason thereof is given by Coelius: Animalia quae frequenter coeunt preuioris
sunt vitae, inde fit, vt; that is to say, Those beasts and creatures which
often times join in copulation have but short lives, and from thence it
comes, that mules live longer then horses.

The Epithets of a Mule are these; packe-bearer, durty, Spanish, rough, The
epithits and conditions of Mules.
and by-formed. There is an Adage or proverb called Mulus Marianus, and by it
is signified a man which is apt both for to obey and to rule; it was taken from
Marius the great Roman Soldier and commander, whose fashion was, when he
had commanded any of his Soldiers to fetch a burden, or do any vilde service,
he himself would put his hand unto it. It signifies properly a bearing
back, or colt-staffe, as we say in English, whereupon poor men carry their
burdens, and from thence it was translated into a proverb to Scipio did
besiege Numantia, he did not only determine to look into the weapons of his
Soldiers, but also to his horses, mules, and chariots. Then Marius brought
forth an horse, nourished by himself very delicately: Besides the the horse a
mule of a very comely body, far excelling all other mules both in gentleness
and in strength. Therefore seeing the Emperor was delighted with the beasts of
Marius, and would now and then make mention of the mule, at length it came to a
common jest, to call a double diligent servant Mulus Marianus. The Italians do
commonly call those men mules which are base borne, and not by lawful marriage.

Concerning the disposition of mules, it is well observed by Aristotle, that
mules are always tame, Alunnus The inward disposition of Mules.
and if at any time they be more wild, they abate their vntamable nature by
drinking of wine, because by the operation of the wine, their heels and hard
parts do resolve and grow soft; by the same reason that Apes by drinking of
wine loose their nails, and men accustomed to drunkenness fall into palsies:
for there is such a dispersing and Pliny.
and are nothing so tractable as horses. For Varro says, that they have so
much confidence in their heels, that by them alone, they kill wolves when they
come

Use of Mules in their several works Cardan
Mules were wont to be used for plowing, and for carrying both of men and
burdens, but now in most parts of Europe, Judges and great Princes ride upon
them until they be old, and then they sell them to the poor men, who turn
them into the mountains where they suffer them to run wild til their hoofes
be hardened for long travails, and then they take them up again. They have
been also accustomed to ploughing, according to these verses; Quantum mularum
sulcus praecedit in aruo
Tantumis praecurrit.
For the mules did plough more speedily, and come to the lands end more
quickly then either the Ox or Horse. And Martial says, that they were used
in carts to draw timber according to these verses: Vixque datur long as,
mulorum vincere mandras
Quaeque trahi multo, marmora fune vides.


They were also used in race at the games of Olympus, as we have already showed
in the story of the horse, but that custom dyed quickly, because that the
Arcadians could not endure mules. The price of mules was great, for Crispine
(says Iuvenal) gave six thousand pieces of money for a mule, and yet he says
it was not well worth six pound, the verses of Iuvenal are these: Crispinus
mulum, sex millibus emit aequantem
Sane paribus sestertia libris
Vt perhibent qui de magnis maiora loguutur.
The Cappaedocians paid to the Persians every year besides Silver and Gold,
fifteen hundred Medians paid twice so much. The dwarfish mules called Ginni
were also much set by, not for use, but only for delight, as dwarfs are kept
in Noble men's houses. When Pysistratus the son of Hippocrates first of al
affected Tyrany at Athens, and labored to get the government to himself, as he
came out of his country being drawn with a chariot by mules, he wounded
himself and his mules very grievously, and so drove them into the market
place, showing his wounded body and beasts unto the Athenians, telling them
that so he was wounded by his enemies, and that he escaped death very
narrowely, but if it pleased them to grant him a guard of soldiers to defend
his body, he would take revenge upon their and

To conclude this story of mules, I do read in Aelianus, that Serpents do love
to feed on the flesh of dead mules, and two things are very eminent in the
nature of mules, one of their understanding, and the other of their friendship.
Concerning the first, Plutarch relates this story of a mule that was
accustomed to carry salt, who upon a season going through a water, fell down
underneath his burden, so that the salt took wet, afterward the beast
perceived how by that means, his extreme load melted away, and so became
lighter and lighter; afterward the Mule grew to this custom, that whenever
he came loaded with salt over that water, he fell down in it for the easing of
his carriage, his Master perceauing his craft, on a day he loaded him with
Woole, and spunges, and so the beast coming over the water fell down as he
was wont to do with his salt, and coming out of the water, he felt his load
to grow heavier then it was wont to do, in steed of lessening, whereat the
beast much mused, and therefore never afterward durst lie down in the water,
for fear of the like increase of his load. The other observation of their love
and friendship, arises from the Proverb Mutuum muli scabunt, that is, Mules
scratch one Senes mutuum fr^^at, old men rub one another; which did arise upon
this occasion, as Adrian the Emperor so passed a long on a day by a bath, he
saw an old soldier in the bath rubbing himself upon a marble stone for want
of a man to help him, whereupon in pity of his case he gave him maintenance
for himself and a man: afterward other old soldiers seeing how well their
fellow had sped, went likewise into the bath before the Emperors eyes, and
rubbed themselves upon the Marble, thinking to get as much favor and liberty
as their fellow had gotten, but the Emperor seeing them, and perceauing their
fetches, bid them rub one another, and thereupon came that proverb. And thus
much for the natural discourse

The medicines of the Mule.
The dust wherein a Mule shall turn or roll himself, Pliny.
being gathered up and spread or sprickled upon the body of any one who is
ardently and fervently in love will presently assuage, and quench his inflaming
desire. A man or woman being poisoned and put into the belly of a Mule or
Cammell which is new killed, will presently expel away the force of the venom
or poison, and will confirm and make strong their decayed spirits, and all
the rest of their members: Ponzettus
For as much as the very heat of those beasts is an Antidote or preservative
against poison.



The same is an excellent remedy for those whose feet are worn or wrung
together through the pinching of their shoes, to help themselves withal,
Auicenna
and for those which are lame, and those which are troubled with those grievous
sores called Fistulaes. If any man shall take either in meat or drink the
marrow of a Mule, to the weight or quantity of three golden crowns, he shall
presently become blockish and altogether inexpert of wisdom and
understanding, and shall be void of all good nutriment, Albertus Aesculapius
and manners. The ear laps or ear lages of a Mule, and the stones of a mulet
being borne Sextus
and power that the aforesaid medicine has for the making of a woman barren.
The same effect against conception has the bark of a white popular tree,
being beaten together with the reins of a Mule, then mingled in wine and
afterward drunk up. If the herb called Hearts tongue, be tied upon any part
of a woman, with the spleen of a mule, Auicenna
but as some have affirmed by it self only, and that in the day which has a
dark night, or without any Moon shine at all, it will make her altogether
barren and notable to conceive. If the two stones of a mule be bound in a piece
of the skin of the same beast and hanged Albertus
they will make that she shall not conceive so long as they shall be bound unto
her. The left stone of a weasell being bound in the skin or hide of a mule, and
steeped or soked for a certain space or time in wine, or in any other drink,
and the drink in which they are so steeped given to a woman to drink, does
surely make that she shall not conceive. The stones of a mulet being burned
upon a barren and unfruitful tree, Aesculapius
and put out or quenched with the stale or urine of either man or beast which
is gelded, being bound and tied in the skin of a Mule, and hanged upon the arm
of any woman after her menstrual fluxes, will altogether resist and hinder her
conception. The right stone of a Mule being burned and fastened unto the arm
of a woman which is in great pain and travail, Sextus.
will make that she shall never be delivered until the same be losened and
taken away: but if it shall happen that a maid or young virgin shall take this
in drink after her first purgation or menses, she shall never be able to
conceive, but shall be always barren and unfruitful.

The matrix or womb of a female Mule taken and boiled with the flesh of an
Ass or any (...)
and so eaten by a woman which does not know what it is, will cause her never
to conceive after the same. The worm which is called a gloworme, or a Globird,
being taken out of the womb or matrice of a female Mule and bound unto any
part of a woman's body, Kirami^^s
will make that she shall never be able to conceive.

The dust or powder which proceeds from the hoofes of a male or female Mule
being mixed or mingled with oil which comes from Mirtleberies, Pliny
does very much help those which are troubled with the gout in their legs or
feet. The dust of the hoofes of a Mule being scorched or burned, and the Oil
of Myrtle berries being mingled with Vinegar, and moist or liquid Pitch,
Marcellus
and wrought or tempered in the form or fashion of a plaster, and opposed or
put unto the head of any one whose hairs are too fluent and abundant, does
very speedily and effectually expel the same.

The Liver of a Mule being burned or dried unto dust, and mixed with the same
oil of Myrtle berries, and so anointed or spread upon the head, is an
excellent and profitable remedy for the curing of the aforsaid enormity.

The dust or powder of the hoofes of a female Mule is very wholesome and
medicinable for the healing and curing of all griefs and pains which do
happen or come unto a man's yard, Sextus
being sprinkled thereupon. The hoof of a Mule being borne by a woman which is
with child, does hinder her conception. The filth or uncleanness which is in
the ears of a Mule, being bound in the skin or hide of a little or young Heart,
and bound or hanged upon the arm of a woman after her purgation, does cause
that she may not conceive. The same being in like manner mingled or mixed with
oil which is made of Beauers stones, Marcellus.
vinegar, and water, and given to any one to drink that is troubled with the
heart swelling, and it will very speedily and effectually cure the pain
thereof.

The dung of a Mule being burned or dried and beaten small, and afterward
sifted, or seirced and washed or steeped in wine, and given to any woman to
drink, whose menstruall fluxes come forth before their time, will in very short
space cause the same to stay. The stale or urine of a male or female Mule being
mingled with their dirt or dung, ^ippocrates.
is very good and medicinable for those to use which are troubled with corns
and hard bunches of flesh which grow in their feet. Assafoetida being mingled
with the urine of a Mule to R^s^^.
The stale or urine of a mule being taken to the quantity of eight pounds, with
two pounds of the scumme or refuge of silver, and a pound of old and most
clear oil, al these being beaten or pounded together until they come to the
thickness of the fat or sweat which falls from men's bodies, and boiled
until they come unto so liquid and thin a juice, Aegi^eta
that they will speedily and effectually cure and help those which are
troubled with the gout or swelling in the joints.

If a woman shall take the sweat which proceeds from a horse, and anoint it
upon a woollen cloth and so apply it as a plaster or suppositary unto her
secret parts, it will make Ra^^^.
There is an excellent remedy for those which are pursie or shortwinded which
comes also by the mule: which is this, to take or gather the froath or foam
of a mule, and to put it into a cup or goblet, and give it in warm water for a
certain space or time to be drunk, either to the man or woman which is
troubled with this enormity, Marcel^^s
and the party which does so use it, shall in short space have remedy, but the
mule will without any lingering of time, or consuming of time in pain and
sorrow dye.

The milt of a male or female Mule being drunk in a potion or juice made of
honey water and vinegar, to the value or quantity of three cruces or cups full,
Pliny
is commended for an excellent cure and medicine for those which are troubled
and grieved with that pestiferous and deadly disease called the falling
sickness, otherwise Saint John's evil. There is an excellent remedy for those
which are troubled in the voyding of their water, which is this, to take the
ring-wormes or Tetters which do grow upon both the legs of a Mule above
their knees, and which do stick thereupon in the manner of a dried thick
skin, and to burn or parch them, Marcellus
and afterward to put or place them upon him which is troubled with the
strangurie, or can not void his water but by dropsmeale, so that there be
great care had to cover close with cloven or clefted clothes, or

The hairs of a Mule and an Ass being mingled together and dried, Trallianus
and put into some certain perfume, and so given to any one to drink which is
troubled with the falling sickness, will presently expel and drive it quite
away. In the place or part of man's body wherein a male or female mule shall
bite, Ponzettus affirms, there will presently arise, and grow small pushes,
or little blisters which are always full of red and pale humors, and filthy
corruption, which can almost be healed and cured by no salve, potion, or
medicine,

But it is affirmed by others that the biting of mules is to be cured after the
same manner as the biting of a Cat, which is thus: First, to wash and clarify
the wound or bitings where the corruption is with vinegar mingled with oil of
roses, and then to take penyroiall, or the herb called Neppe and boil it,
and stroke or rub the wound very softly with it, and it will in time wholly cure
it. And thus much shall suffice at this time concerning the cures and medicines
of mules.


HEraclides, Coelius, Volateranus, and Euphorion, do all write that once the
Isle of Samos was a desert place, and that there were in it certain beasts
called Neades, whose voice was so terrible that they shook the earth
therewith, and from those strange and great voices came the vulgar Greek
proverb, Meizoon mia toon Neaedoon maius vna Neadum. That is, One of the
Neades was a great wonder, for it was used in ostentation to show that there
was nothing in the Suidas and Aelianus, who affirm that their bones were to be
seen in their days. And this title I thought good to insert into this
history, leaving the Reader to consider whither he will take them for Elephants
or for any other greater beast; for my opinion if it be desired, I think them
rather (if there ever were any such) that they were Elephants of greater
stature then ever since were seen,

Of the Ounce, the description whereof was taken by Doctor Cay in England.


THere is in Italy a beast called Alphec, which many in Italy, The name of this
beast.
and Germany call Leunza, and some Vnzia, from whence Albertus and Isidorus make
the Latin word Vnctia, and I take it to be the same beast which is called
Lozanum, and for the description of it, I can follow no better author then
Doctor Cay, The description of Doct. Cay.
who describes it in this fashion.

The Ounce (says he) is a most cruel beast, of the quantity of a village or
mastiffe Dog, having his face and ears like to a lions, his body, tail, feet,
and nails like a Cat, of a very terrible aspect, his teeth so strong and
sharp, that he can even cut wood in sunder with them: he has also in his
nails so great strength, that

The rest of the head is spotted all over with a most frequent and black spot
(as the rest of the body) except in that part which is betwixt the nose and the
eyes, wherein there are none, unless only two, and they very small: even as
all the rest are lesser then the rest in the extreme and lowest parts: the
spots which are in the upper parts of the thighs, and in the tail, are
blacker and more singular, but framed in the sides with such an order, as if
all the spots should seem to be made of four. There is no order in the spots,
except in the upper lip, where there are five rows or orders.

In the first and uppermost two which are severed; In the second, six, being
joined in in that manner, as if they should seem to be in one line: These two
orders are free, and not mingled amongst themselves. In the third order there
are eight joined together, but the lower lip although they do keep the
quantity, do not observe the order. The nose is blackish, a line being softly
led through the length, and only through the top of the outside thereof. The
eyes are gray, the former teeth are only six, not very unlike to men's teeth,
except those which are placed in the middle are lesser, and they in the
uttermost part are greater, as also higher then those which are low.

In this beast the teeth are both great, sharp, and long, being joined to the
rest in the lower iaw, and in the upper severed with so great space, that the
lower teeth may be received therein. These when the beast lives are covered
with his lips, but when he is dead they are otherwise, his lips being through
dryness shrunk together. His foreteeth are very The meat and nature.
though lesser, and one of either sex was brought out of Mauritania into England
in a ship, for they are bred in Libia. If they have any appointed time of
copulation, it is near the month of June, for in that month the male covers
the female. We have showed already that Lions may be tamed, and that also has
bin manifest in London, both in the tower and in the city, for there the Lions
did play with their keepers and kiss them without harm, (as Docter Cay says
he saw them do) but these beasts were so fierce and wild as they could never be
tamed, for when soever their keeper should change or remove them from place to
place, he was constrained first of al to strike them so hard with a club upon
the head that Arr) twice, and also bigger then any dogs, proceeding out of a
large breast and wide arteries, much like to the howling of a great mastiue,
that is shut up in a close room alone against his will. Some say it is longer
then a dog, but it did not so appear in England, for we had many mastiue dogs
as long as it, but yet was it every way greater then any other kind of dogs. It
is but a vain report, that some have said when a man or beast is bitten with
an Ounce, presently mice flock unto him and poison him with their urine.

For it was seen in England that two of the keepers were wounded and shreudly
bitten by one of the Ounces, and there followed them no other harm then that
which followweth the biting of an ordinary Dog, or like a small incision with
a knife. He never fights but at the head, and that trecherously if he
perceive his adversary to be to strong or to great for him, and that by
counterfetting quietness, benevolence and peace, as if he meant no harm: for
so he served a great Mastiue Dog in England, at the first sight he seemed to
applaud his coming, looking cheerfully upon him, and wagging his tail,
presently he fell down on his belly as it were to inuit the Dog to com
near him by his submission, lastly he got close unto him, creeping as though
he would play Docter Cay speaks of the Ounce, and beside him no other Author
that I know. The gall of this beast is deadly poison, it hates all creatures,
and destroys them, especially men, and therefore it may well be said to be
possessed with some evil spirit. It loves none but his own kind. And thus
much for the Ounce.

OF THE ORYX.
THis Beast in Pliny and Oppianus is called Orynx and Oryx, and my conjecture
is, that his name is derived from Oryssein which signifies to dig. Saint
Ierom and the Septuagints for Theo. Deuteronomy. 14. and Isa. 51. translate Orix: but
David Kimhi and the better learned men interpret it a wild Ox But the Haebrew
Dischon may in my opinion be so translated, yet herein I refer it to the
learned Reader.

It is certain that it is of the kind of wild Goats by the description of
it, differing in nothing but this, that the hair grows auerie not like
other beasts, falling backward to his hinder parts, but forward toward his
head, and so also it is affirmed of the Ethiopian Bull, which some say is the
Rhinocerot. They are bred both in Lybia and Egypt, and either of both countries
yedeth testimony of their rare and proper qualities. In quantity it resembles
a Roe, having a beard under his chinne. His color white or pale like milk,
his mouth black, and some spots upon his cheeks, his backe-bone reaching to
his head, being double, broad, and fat; his horn, standing upright, black,
and so sharp, that they cannot be blunted

Aristotle and Pliny were of opinion that this beast was Bisulcus and
Vnicornis, that is, clouen-footed, and with one horn: The original of their
opinion, came from the wilde-one-horned-goat, whereof Schnebergerus a late
writer writes thus: Certum est minineque dubium in Carpatho monte, versus
Russiam Transyluaniamque reperirifer as similes omnino rupicapris, exc^pto quod
vnicum cornu ex media front enascitur, nigrum, dorso inflexum, simile omnino
rupicaprarum cornibus: that is to say, It is without al controversy that there
are wild beasts in the mountain Carpathus toward Russia and Transyluania,
very like to wild goats, except that they have but one horn growing out of
the middle of their heads, which is black and bending backward like the horns
of wild goats. But the true Oryx is Oppianus, and it differs from that of
Pliny both in stature and horns. Aelianus says, that the Orix has four
horns, but he speaks of the Indian Orix whereof there are some yearly
presented to their king, and it may be both there and elsewhere, diversity of
regions do breed diversity of stature, color, hair, and horns. Simion Cethi
affirms of the Muskat that it has one horn, and it is not unlikely that he
has seen such an one, and that the Orix may be of that kind.

But concerning their horns, it is related by Herodotus, Pollux, and Laur:
Valla, that there were made instruments of music out of them, such as are
Citherns or Lutes, upon whose bellies the Musicians played their music, by
striking them with their hands, and that those beasts were as great as Oxen,
and all this may be true, notwithstanding we have showed already that they are
as big as Roes, for Pliny speaking that by relation or by sight, it is likely
that he had seen a young one.

There be also Sea-beasts called Oryges and Orcae, and there is in Egypt an
ORIX which at the rising of Canis Syrius or the little Dog is perpetually
sorrowful, and for this cause the LYBIANS do mock the EGYPTIANS for that they
fable; the same day that the little Dog Star rises, their ORIX speaks. But
on the contrary themselves acknowledge, Plutarch Elianus.
and change of weather.

The Egyptians also say, that when the Moon comes near to the East, they
look very intentiuely upon her, as upon their sufferaign Goddess, and make a
great noise, and yet they say they do it not for her love, but for her hate,
which appears by knocking their Legs against the ground, and fastening
their eyes upon the earth, like them which are angry at the Moons appearance:
And the self same thing they do at the rising of the Sun.

Orix the Egyptians discipher an impure or Godless wretch: for seeing that all
creatures are nourished by the Sun and Moon, and therefore ought to rejoice
at their appearing, only this filthy wretch disdaineth and scorneth them.

The reason why they rejoice at the little Dogge-starre is, because their
bodies do perceive an evident alteration of the time of the year, that cold
weather and rain are ouerpassed, and that the vapors of the warm Sun are now
descending upon the earth, to cloth it withal manner of green and pleasant
herbs and flowers.

Columella, was wont to be impaled among Dear and Hearts, the flesh whereof was
eaten, and used for the commodity of his Master: This was impatient of cold.
It grew til it was four years old, and afterward through age decreased, and
lost all natural vigor.

But to return to the Orix intended, from which we have digressed; their Horns
whereof we late spoke, are not only strong and sharp like the Horn of the
Unicorn and the Rhinocerot, but also solid, and not hollow like the horns of
Hearts. The courage and inward disposition of this beast, is both fearful,
cruel and valiant, I mean fearful to men and beasts, but fearelesse in it
self: For says my Author; Neque enim canis latratum timet, neque apri
efferuescentem feritatem, neque tauri mugitum refugit, neque Pantherarum
tristem vocem,: That is to say, He fears not the barking of the Dog, nor
the foaming wrath of the wild Boar, he flies not the terrible voice of the
Bull, nor yet the mournful cry of the Panthers, no, nor the vehement roaring
of the Lion himself, and to conclude, he is not moved for all the strength of
man, but many times kills the valiantest hunter that pursues him.

When he sees a Boar, a Lion, or a Bear, presently he bends his horns
down to the earth, whereby he conformeth and establishes his head to receive
the brunt, standing in that manner till the assault be made: at which time he
easily kills his adversary, for by bending down his head, and setting his
horns to receive the beast, he behaueth to the ground, and so their dead
bodies are many times found by wild and savage men. They fight with all, and
kill one another, also they are annoyed with LYNCES, I mean the greater LYNCES:
of the cruelty of this beast Martial made this distichon: Matutinarum non
vltima praeda ferarum
Saevus Oryx, constat qui mihi morte canum.
It is reported of this beast, Oppianus. Pliny. Albertus.
that it lives in perpetual thirst, never drinking by reason that there is no
water in those places where it is bred, and that there is in it a certain
bladder of lickor, whereof whosoever tastes, shall never need to drink. This
beast lives in the wilderness, and notwithstanding his magnanimious and
irresistable strength, wrath, and

Concerning the picture of this beast, and the lively vissage of his exterior
or outward parts, I cannot express it, because neither my own sight, nor the
the writings of any credible Author, does give me sufficient direction to
deliver the shape thereof unto the world, and succeeding Ages upon my credit:
and therefore the Reader must pardon me herein. I do not also read of the use
of the flesh or any other parts of this beast, but Strabo who affirms the
Aethiopians Silli do use the horns of these beasts in wars instead of
swords and spears: for incredible is the hardness and sharpenes of them, which
caused Iuvenall to write thus: Et Getulus Oryx hebeti lautissima ferro
Coeditur.
For although of the own length they are not able to match a pike, yet are they
fit to be put upon the tops of pikes, as well as any other artifical thing made
of steel or iron, and thus I will conclude the story of this beast.

OF THE OTTER.
THere is no doubt but this beast is of the kind of Beuers, because Lodra, of
the na^es (...) thereof.
and the Latins besides Lutra, Fluuiatulis Canicula, A Dog of the Waters, and
some call them cats of the waters. The Italians besides Lodra call it also
Lodria, and Lontra. The French Vne Loutre, or Vnge Loutre. The Sauoyans Vne
Leure; the Spaniards Nutria, and the Ilyrians Widra* the Graecians Lytra,
because it shereth assunder the roots of the trees in the enhydris, although
properly that be a snake living in the Waters, called by Theodorus and
Hermolaus, Lutris. Albertus calls it Luter, and Anadrz for Enydris. Also
Boatus by Syluacicus, and the Graecians call filthy and thick waters Lutrai;
for* which cause, when their Noble ancient Women went to bathe themselves in
water, Stephanus
they were bound about with skins called Oan Loutrida, that is, a sheep
skin used to the water. The French men call the dung of an OTTER Espranite de
loutres, Pliny.
the steps of an OTTER Leise Marches, the whelps of an OTTER Cheaux, by
which word they call also the whelps of Wolves, Foxes, and Badgers.

Although they be a kind of Beauer as we have said already, yet they never go
into The places o^ their ^bod
and they abound almost in all Nations, where there are rivers or fish-pooles,
as namely in Italy, France, Germany, Heluetia, England, and Scandiuania.
Likewise in all SARMATIA, in the bay of BORISTHINES. They are most plentiful
in ITALY, where the River PADVS is joined to the sea. Also they abound in
NAPLES. Their outward form is most like unto a BEAVER, Hermo^aus.
saving in their tail, for the tail of a BEAVER is fish, but the tail of an
OTTER is flesh. They are less then BEAVERS, some compare them unto Olaus.
They are bigger then a cat and longer, but lesser then a Fox, and therefore in
my opinion they are well called dogs of the water. They exceed in length, for
in Swetia and all the Northern rivers they are three times so long as a Beauer.
They have a rough skin, The several parts.
and the hair of it very soft and neat, like the hair of a Beauer, but
different in this, that it is shorter and unequal, also of color like a
Ches-nut, or brownish, but the Beauers is white or ash color. It has very
Bellonius to write, that if his tail were off, he were in all parts like a
Beauer, differing in nothing but his habitation. For the Beauer goes both to
the salt waters, and to the fresh, but the Otter never to the salt.

Although it live in the waters, yet it does no suck in water, but air; that
is, The framing of their den.
it does not breath like fishes through the benefit of water, and therefore it
makes his dens near the water, wherein also they are wont to bring forth their
young ones: They make their dens so artificially even as the Beuer, with bows,
and sprigs, or sticks, couching together in excellent order, wherein he sits
to keep him from wetnesse. It hunteth fishes, and although it breaths like
another foure-footed-beast, yet will it remain a great while under the water
without respiration, for the greediness of fishes it runs many time into
His prey and food.
it is suffocated for want of breath, before it can sheare asunder the nets and
make way for himself to come out.

For in the hunting of fish it must often put his nose above the water to take
breath: it is of a wonderful swiftness and nimblenesse, in taking his prey,
and fills his den so full of fishes that he corrupts the air, or men that
take him in his den: and likewise infecteth himself with a pestilent and
noisome savor, whereupon as the Latins say of a stinking fellow; he smells like
a Goat, so the Germans say of the same; He smells like an Otter. Agricola.
In the winter time he comes out of the caves and waters to hunt upon the land,
where finding Bellonius writes thus of him, Albertus.
he keeps in pooles and quiet waters and rivers, terrifieng the flocks of
fish, and driving them to the bank-sides in great number, to the holes and
creekes of the earth, where he takes them more copiously, and more easy: but
if he want prey in the waters, then does he leap upon the land, and eat upon
green herbs: he will swim two miles together against the stream, putting
himself to great labor in his hunger, that so when his belly is full, the
current of stream may carry him down again to his designed lodging.

The females nourish many whelps together at their vdders, until they be
almost as big as themselves, for whom the hunters search, as for the dams among
the leaves and boughs which the ouerflowings of waters in the winter time,
have gathered together and laid on Olaus Mag. Lutrae mordaces quadrato ore.
Otters are most accomplished biters.

It is a very crafty and subtle beast, yet it is sometimes tamed, and used in
the Northern parts of the world, especially in Scandinauia to drive the fishes
into the fisher men's nets: for so great is the sagacity and scence of smeling
in this beast, that he can directly wind the fishes in the waters a mile or
two off, and therefore the Fishers make great advantage of them, yet do they
forbear his use because he deuoureth more then needs, for he is never so
tamed that he forgeteth his old ravening, being tamed, on the land he is very
full of sport and game. I marvel how it Albertus. Fiber fortior est lutra,
and acutissimis dentibus, qua propter eam vel expellit, vel occidit. The Beauer
is much stronger then the Tragus writes that this notwithstanding Carthusian
Friars or Monks (whether you will) which are forbidden to touch al manner of
flesh, of other foure-footed-beasts, yet they are not prohibited the eating of
Otters. ^.
These Otters are hunted with special Dogs, called Otter-Houndes, and also
with special instruments called Otter-speares, having exceeding Assa called
Benioyn, a strong herb which being hung in a linen cloth near fish ponds,
drives away al Otters and Beuers. The hair of the skin is most soft, neither
does it leese his beauty by age; for which cause as also for that no rain can
hurt it when it is well dressed, it is of great price and estimation, Albertus
and is sold for seven or eight shillings: thereof also they make fringes in
the hems of garments, and face about the collers of men and Women's garments,
and the skin of the OTTER is far more precious then the skin of the
BEAVER; and for this cause the SVETIAN merchants do transport many into
MOSCOVIA and TARTARIA for clokes and other garments.

Thereof also in Germany they make caps, or else line other caps with them, and
also make stocking-soles; affirming that they be good and wholesome against the
Palsy, Use of their Skins*
the megrim, and other pains of the head. The blood of an OTTER is prescribed
against

There be certain beasts which are kinds of OTTERS, which because they live
in the Waters, and yet being unknown to us in England, I have thought good to
express them in this place by their Greek and Latin names. In the first
place that which the Graecians call Latax, broader and thicker then an Otter,
and yet lives in the Waters or else goes to the waters for his food, yet
breaths air and not water like Otters. The hair of this beast is very
harsh, betwixt the similitude of a Sea-Calfe and a Heart, and it has also
strong and sharp teeth, wherewithal in the night season they shere asunder small
boughs and twigs: It is called also Fastoz, Lamyakyz, and Noertza.

Satyrium, and Fassuron, and Chebalus, whose skin is black, and very precious
and very much used for the edging of the best garments, these live also in
ponds, lakes, and still waters.

There is a third kind called Satherium, Kacheobeon, and Kachyneen, and
Martarus, having a white throat, and being as big as a Cat; and finally unto
these may be added Porcos, a foure-footed-beaste living in the Waters in the
River Isther: And Maesolus another foure-footed-beast living in some Ryuers of
INDIA, being as big as a Calfe.

Of the Panther, commonly called a Pardall, a Leopard,
THere have been so many names devised for this one beast, that it is grown a
difficult thing, either to make a good reconciliation of the authors which are
wed to their several opinions, or else to define it perfectly and make of him a
good methodicall History: yet seeing the greatest variance has arisen from
words, The several names of Panthers.
and that which was devised at the first for the better explication and
description

First of all therefore for as much as all the question has arisen from the
Greek and Latin names, it is most requisite to express them, and show how
the different construction began. The Graecians do indifferently call it
Pordalis, Pardalis, and Panther, the Latins Panthera, Pardalis, Pardus, and
Leopardus, and these names are thus distinguished by the learned. Pordalis they
say signifies the male, and Pardalis the female, and also Panthera among the
Latins for the female, and Pardus for the male, and these are understood
Leopardus the Lepard or Libbard, is a word devised by the later writers,
compounded of Leo and Pardus, upon opinion that this beast is generated betwixt
a Pardall and a Lion, and so indeed it ought properly to be taken, if there
be any such. Pliny is of opinion that Pardus differs from Panthera in nothing
but in sex, and other say that betwixt the Lions and the Pardalles there is
such a Leopardus, a Leopard or Libbard, but when the Pardal coureth the
Lioness, then is it called Panthera a Panther.

In this controversy the Hebrew and Arabian names which are generally
indifferently translated Panthers or Libbards, do take up the strife and
almost end the controversy, for Namer in Hebrew, and Alphec or Alfhed in
Arabique, are so translated both in holy scripture, and also in Auicen, as may
appear by these places following Esa. 11. Habitabit Lupus cum agno, and
(Namer) Pardus, cum hedo a^cubabit. That is to say, The Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Pardall, Libbard, and Panther, shall lie with the Kid. So in
Daniel chap. 7. among the four beasts coming out of the Sea, the prophet
sees Namer a Leopard. In the 13. Reuela. of S. John, he sees another beast
rising out of the sea, having ten horns, and he says it was like Pardalet,
which Erasmus translateth Pardo, a Leopard. Jeremy 5. Pardus (Namer) vigelat
super ciuitatem little, vt omnen inde egredientem discrepat. That is, a panther
or Pardal watches at the gates of the City, that he may tear in pieces every
one that comes forth. Factus sum eis sicut Leo, and sicut Pardus (sicut
Namer) directus ad viam suam. For Namer in that place the Graecians translate
Pardalis, a Pardall. In the 13. Jeremy Si mutare potest Aethiops pellem suam,
aut Pardus maculas suas, and vos poteritis been facere, cum didiceritis malum.
If the Blackamoore can change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may you
do well which have learned to do it. Canticles Coronaberis de vetrice saner, and
hermon, de cubilibus Leonem de montibus Pardorum. That is, Thou shall be crowned
from the top of Siner and Hermon, from the dens of the Lions, and the Mountains
of the Leopards. Now according to Brocardus the Mountain of the Leopards is
distant from Tripolis in the holy land two leagues. Rasis and Auicen, two
Arabians do call the Panther and Leopard by one name, Alpheth, or Alphil, so
that by comparing all these together the Panther, Pardall, Libbard, and
Leopard, are but one beast, called by diverse names. A more exa^t definition of
Pa^d^l^ and Leopard^.
For the farther manifesting heerof, it is good to examine, what is said of the
Pardal and Leopard in particular, that so having expressed that, it may be
clear by the discourse succeeding* that there is no difference betwixt them
and the Panther, or very small. First of all therefore it said of the Pardus,
that it differs not from the Panther Aristotle writes thus of it, Cutis
chamaeliontis distincta maculis vt Pardalia. The skin of the Chamaelion is
spotted like a Pardals, and in the relation of Lampridius, where he shows
how Heliogabalus was wont to shut up his drunken friends: Cum Leonibus,
Leopardus, and vrsis, ita vt experge facti in cubiculo eodem Leones, vrsos
Pardos cum luce, vel quod est grauius nocte inuenierent, ex quo plerique ex
animati sunt, and so forth:

By which words it is apparent that those which in the first place he calls
Leopards, in the last place he calls Pardals, and the only difference
betwixt the Leopard, Pardall, and Lion, is that the Leoparde or Pardal have no
manes: and therefore they are called Ignobiles leones. Isidorus, and Solinus
write in this manner: Pardus secundum post Panthera^est genus varium ac
velocissimum, and praceps ad sanguinem, saltu enim ad mortem ruit, ex ad
vlterio Pardi and Leenis, Leu pardus nascitur, and tertiam originem efficit.
That is to say, the Pardal is the next kind to a Panther, being diverse colored
and very swift, greedy after blood, and ketcheth his prey by leaping: the
Leopard is bred betwixt the Pardal and the Lioness, and so that makes a third
kind, by which testimony it apeareth, that these names make three several
kinds of beasts, not distinct in nature but in quantity,

The greatest therefore they call Panthers, as Bellunensis writes. The second
they call Pardals, and the third least of all they call Leopards, which for the
same cause in England is called a Cat of the Mountain. And truly in my
opinion, until some other can show me better reason I will subscribe hereunto,
namely that they are all one kind of beast, and differ in quantity only
through adulterous generation. For in Afric there is great want of waters,
and therefore the lions, Panthers, and other beasts do assemble themselves in
great numbers together at the running rivers, where the Pardals, and the lions
do engender one with another: I mean the greater Panthers with the lyonesses,
Baytius.
and the greater lions with the Panthers; and so likewise the smaller with the
smaller, and thereby

The Pardal is a fierce and cruel beast very violent, Pliny.
having a body and mind like ravening birds, and some say they are engendered
now and then betwixt dogs and Panthers, or betwixt leopards and dogs, even as
the Lycopanthers are engendered betwixt wolves and panthers. It is the nature of
these pardals in Afric to get up into the rough and thick trees, where they
hide themselves amongst the boughs and leaves, and do not only take birds,
but also from thence leap down upon beasts and men when they epsy their
advantage, and all these things do belong unto the panthers.

Concerning the Leopard the word it self is new and lately invented, Of the
Leopard.
for it is never found among any of the ancients before Julius Capitolinus, or
Sparsianus. Syluaticus, pardalis and Leopardus, and the Italians generally call
a pardal Leopardo, and never pardo, except some of the Poets, for brevity sake
in a verse. The leopard is like to a lion in the head and form of his members,
but yet he is lesser and nothing so strong, by the sight of a leopards skin
Gesner made this description of the beast.

The length (says he) from the head to the tail, was as much as a man's
stature, and half a cubite. The tail of it self three spans and a half, the
breadth in the middle three spans, the color a bright yellow distinguished
into diverse spots, the hair short and mossie.

The price of the skin was about five nobles or forty shillings, for they
differ in price, Ambrose, that if the walls of ones house or sheep-coat be
anointed with the juice of Garlic, both panthers and Leopards will run away
from it, Albertus.
but of this matter we shall say more afterward.

or fifth iump, he falls so angry and fierce, that he destroys whomsoever he
meets, yea many times his hunter. Therefore the hunters have always a regard
to carry with them a lamb or a kid, or some such live thing, wherewithal they
pacify him after he he has missed his game, for without blood he will never
be appeased: and thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the difference
betwixt Panthers, Pardals, and Leopards, and their several names in Greek and
Latin, from whom almost all nations do derive their denomination, The names
in other languages.
for the Italians call it Leonpardo, the French Leopard, and Lyopard, the
Germans Leppard, and Lefarad, and Pantherthier, the Spaniards Leonpardal, and
Leopardo. The Illyrians Leuhart, the Caldeans Nimra, and some make no differenc
betwixt this Pardalis, or Pordalis, (for they signify both one) seems to me
in most probability to be derived from the Hebrew word Pardes, signifying a
Garden, because as colors in a Garden make it spotted and render a fragrant
smell, so the Panther is diverse colored like a Garden of sundry flowers, and
also it is said to carry with him a most sweet savor whither soever he goes,
and therefore in ancient time they made their Iuory tables standing upon
pictures of Panthers, whereof Iuvenall writes thus in one of his Satyrs.

Olim ex quauis arbore mensa fiebat
At nunc diuitibus caenandi nulla voluptas
-- -- -- nisi sustinet orbs.
Grande ebur and magno sublimis Pardus biatu
Dentibus ex illis quos mittit porta Hyenes
Iam nimios capitique graves, etc.
For the same cause Pardalis was the name of a notable Harlot, for as the
Panthers by their sweet smells draw the beasts unto them and then destroy
them, so also do harlots deck and adorn themselves with all alluring
prouocations, as it were with inchaunted odors, to draw men unto them, of whom
they make spoil and rapine: There is a precious stone also called Lapis
Pantherus brought out of India, Euax. Syluaticus Albertus Vartoman
whereupon if a man look before the Sun rising he shall see diverse colors,
namely, black, red, green,

Countries of Panthers.
The Countries breeding Panthers are Abasia in the kingdom of Melacha, in the
I Will Sumatra. Likewise in ASIA, especially Syria, for there are none in Europe,
all Affricke over they are plentiful, as in Lybia and Mauritania, where abound
al store of wild beasts. Likewise beyond Catadupa, for Apollonius and his
companions saw there many Lions and Panthers. In Arabia the furthest part,
namly the promontory of Dyra toward the south, are the strongest Pardals of
the world, as says Strabo:) Likewise in the Mediteranean region beyond Barygaza
toward the South, unto Dachinabades, and toward the East are al sorts of wild
beasts, both Tygres and panthers: (and Diodorus writes) that in that part of
Arabia Lybia.

Also it is said by Volateranus and Gyllius that the panther of Lycia and Caria
are very long, but yet weak and without carriage, being not able to leap
far, yet is their skin so hard as no iron can pierce. Betwixt the river
Ganges and Hiphasis, Apollonius saw many panthers. Leo Affri^
The Indians also breed many and make them tame, and leopards do live in the
woods of BARBARIA. The several parts of Panthers.


It is apparent by that which is already said, that the Panther is the name of
the greater pardall, and the Leopard of the lesser, which the Arabians call
Alnemer, and Alfhead, Alnemer is bigger then a Linx, but like a Leopard, having
greater and sharper nails and feet, Oppianus describes both kinds in this
manner. There are (says he) two kinds of pardals, a greater and a lesser, the
greater are broader backed, and bigger in quantity, the lesser being less in
quantity, but not inferior in strength: both of them have the same shape and
color of body, except in their tail: for the greater pardall has the lesser
tail and the lesser the greater: either of them have solid and sound thighs, a
very long body, bright seeing eyes, the Apples whereof do glister under their
eyelids, which are gray and red within like to burning coals, their teeth
pale and venomous, their skin of diverse colors, yet bright and pleasant, the
spots standing like so many black eyes upon it, Thus far Oppianus. Such skins
are oftentimes sold in the marts of Europe which are brought in bundles twenty
or thirty together, and it is not to be forgotten, which Volateran cites out
of Aelianus, that there is in this kind of pardals a beast called Bitis, not
unlike to the vulgar Leopards in all parts, except that it wants a tail; and
they say that if this beast be seen by a woman, it will instantly make her to
be sick; but to proceed to the residue of the parts of these beasts, we must
remember that which Aristotle writes in his physiognomy; as is recorded by
Adamantius: Leo perfectissimam maris that is to say: Among all beasts the lion
does most resemble the male, and the pardall the female, except in the legs
which she uses to take her prey.

It has a little face, a little mouth, little eyes, somewhat white, plain,
and not much holow, a long forehead, ears rather round then smooth or broad, a
neck very long and slender, the breast not well set out with ribs, because they
are small, the back long, the buttockes and thighs very fleshy, the parts
about the small of the belly or loins are more smooth, less hollow and
bunchy; the color diverse, and the whole body in articulate, and not well
compounded for the outward sight: and it is to be remembered (says Carden) that
all ravening beasts are like a Cat, as Lions, panthers, Linces, and pardals,
for they have in

The Persians call a pardall Barbact, and Scaliger describes it thus. In his
red or yellow hair he is like a Lioness, but set with diverse black spots
both in length and breadth, as if they were painted. It has a brown face,
aspersed with black and white, and it is to be remembered, that as other
beasts are either all black, or all red, or all white, or all of one color by
nature, so also it is natural to pea-cockes and panthers, to have diverse
colors in them, for there are in Hircania panthers with little round spots
like eyes, both black, Albertus. Pliny.
white, blew, and green, as both Solinus and Claudius testify, which caused
Martial to write Picto quod iuga delicata collo pardus sustinet. There is a
land called Terra eremborum inhabited by the Troglodites and Sarazens in Lybia,
where the vper face of the earth is campared unto the panthers skin, because
through the heat of the sun it is burned, and died as it were into diverse
colors, so that ye shall see diverse spots of white, black, and green earth, as
if it were done of purpose by the hand of man. The teeth of the panther are like
sawes, as are also a Dogs and a Lions: their tongue of such incredible
sharpness, that in licking it grateth like a file.

Aristotle.
Their former feet have five distinct claws or fingers, and their hinder feet
but four, for little ones among foure-footed-beasts have five fingers upon their
hinder fret: when they go, they hide their nails within the skin of their
feet, as it were in sheaths, never bringing them forth but when they are in
their prey, to the intent they should never be broken nor dulled. Their tails
have no long hairs at the end like a Lions or Oxes, and the Leopa^d has a
wider mouth then the pardall.

The female is oftener times taken then the male, the reason is given by
Volateran, because she is enforced to seek abroad for her own meat and her
young ones. The place of their abode is among the mountains and woods, The
food of Panthers.
and especially they delight in the Mauritania, where they are not very swift
of foot, and therefore they give themselves to take Apes, which they attain
by this policy: when they see the apes, they make after the^, who at their
first approaching climb into the tops of trees, and there sit to avoid the
Panthers teeth, for she is notable to follow the^ so hie, but yet she is more
cunning then the Apes, and therefore diuiseth more shifts to take them, that
where nature has denied her bodily power, there she might supply that want by
the gifts of the mind. Forth therefore she goes, and under the tree where the
Apes are lodged, she lies down as though she were dead, stretching out her
limbs, and restraining her breath, shutting her eyes, and showing all other
token of expiration. The Apes that sit on the tops of the Tree behold from
on high the behavior of their adversary, and because al of them wish her dead,
they more easily believe that which so much they desire, and yet dare not
descend to make trial. Then to end their doubts, they choose out one from
among them all, whom they think to be of the best courage, and him they send
down Ulysses endeavored all the contumelies and reproaches, both of his maids
and wives suitors, until he had a just occasion given him of revenge, so does
the Panther the disdainful dealing of the Apes: whereupon came the proverb,
Pardi mortem assimulat, Thanaton pardaleos hypocrimetai, against a cunning
dissembling fellow, such a one as Brutus was,

So great is the love of this beast to all spices and aromaticall trees, that
they come over all the mountain Taurus through Armenia and Silia, when the
winds bring the savor of the sweet gum unto them, Their love (...) ^pices.
out of Pamphilia from the tree Storax: whereupon lies this story. There was a
certain panther which was taken by king Arsaces, and a Golden collor put upon
his neck, with this inscription: Rex Arsaces deo Nisaeo, that is, King Arsaces
to the God Bacchus: for Bacchus was called Nisaey of a city Nisa in India.
This Beast grew very tame, and would suffer himself to be handled and stroked
by the hands of men, until the spring time that he winded the savor of the
Aromatical trees, and then he would run away from all his acquaintance,
according to his kind, and so at last was taken in the nether Taurus, which
was many hundred miles distant from the kings court of Armenia.

The savor or ^mel of Panthers.
We have showed already how they love the gum of Camphorey, watching that tree,
to the end to preserve it for their own use, and indeed as Aelianus says:
Admirabilem quantam odoris suavitatem olet pardalis, quam been olendi
praestatiam deuino munere donatam, cum sibi propriam plane tenet, tum vero
caetera animalia eius hanc vni praeclare sentiunt: that is to say, the Panther
or Pardall smells most sweetly, which savor he has received from a divine
gift, and does not only feel the benefit of it himself, but also bewray it
unto other beasts: Aristotle. Vol^teranus.
for when he feels himself to be hungry and stand in need of meat, then does

And Solinus says, that the sweetness of his savor works the same effect
upon them in the open fields, for they are so mightily delighted with his
spotted skin and fragrant smell, that they will always come running unto him
from all parts, striving who shall come nearest him to be satisfied with the
sight, but when once they look upon his fierce and grim face, they all are
terrified and turn away: for which cause the subtle beast, turns away his
head and keeps that from their sight, offering the more beautiful parts of
his body, as an alluring bayt to a mouse and destroy them: and from hence there
are some which are of opinion, that he receives his name Panthera, of
congregating together all kind of beasts to look on him, for Pan signifies
all, and Therta signifies beasts. Isidorus.
Albertus is of opinion that the report of the Panthers savor or sweet smell
is but a fable, because (he says) it is written as a Maximum among
Philosophers, that Caetera animalia praeter hominem neque suaviter neque
moleste odoribus affici, that is: That no creatures (man excepted) can be said
to smell either sweetly or sowerly, and Theophrastus writes: Animal nullum
penetus that is: There is no creature that can be said to be so odorifirous,
except the pardal seem to smell well to the scents of other beasts: for it is
certain that there be some savors and smells which beasts do follow and refuse,
being led thereunto only for the choice of their meat: for by their noses
they choose that which is convenient and agreeable to their natures, but that
they should be drawn by any smells or savors merely, and for no other cause but
the pleasure of the scents, as it is a reasonable part in man, so it is
unreasonable, to attribute the very same unto a beast.

Yet herein by the favor of Albertus I descent from him, for it being granted
which all men yield unto, that either the spots of his skin, which seem to be
as many eyes as colors, Albertus, and al other learned men that I know do
confidently affirm, that many wild beasts do forsake their meat to hear
music, and also the Badger does forsake his own den when he perceives the
Fox has emptied his bellye therein.

Therefore I will conclude this point with admiration of the work of the
creator, to consider

Among all kinds of Beasts the male is most courageous and fierce, except in
Bears and panthers, for the female panther is more generous then the male. At
the time of their lust, they have very peculiar voices, which caused the poet
to write thus: Their time of lust.
Panther caurit amans, Pardus hiando felit.

Panthers live together in flocks or herds, Their love and hatred, enemies
and friends
and greatly delight in their own kind but in no other that I know, and
therefore I wonder from what Author Isidorus wrote. Panther; That the panther
is friendly to al beasts except the Draggon. It was not in vain that the poets
feigned the Nurses of Bacchus to be turned into panthers, and that they
devoured Peutheus because he railed upon Bacchus: for as a Lion does in most
things imitate and resemble the very nature of man, so after the very
selfsame manner does the panther of a Woman, for it is a fraudule^t though a
beautiful beast, or (as Adamantius writes) Pantherae ingenium molle est,
effoeminatum, iracundum, in sidiosum, and frandulentum, timidum simul and
audax, his moribus corporis etiam forma respondit: that is, The disposition of
the Panther is wanton, effeminate, The descr^pt^^n of (...).
outrageous, treacherous, deceiptfull, fearful, and yet bold: and for this
occasion, in holy scriptures it is joined with the Lion and the Wolf, to make
up the triplicity of ravening beasts: and therefore also we read, that the
wisest among the EGYPTIANS when they will signify a cunning man covering the
secret corruption and evil disposition of his mind, pretending good, and yet
intending evil, they picture a PANTHER, for we have showed already how he
does cover both his head and his body to take his

The ^aming of Panthers.
This beast is never so tamed but that he faleth into his wild fits again.
Their love to their young ones is exceeding great, for if at any time while they
are abroad to forage, they meet with hunters that would take them away, they
fight for them unto death, and to save them from blows, interpose their own
bodies, receiving mortal wounds, but if they find their young ones taken out
of their den in their absence, they bewail their loss with loud and
miserable howling.

Demetrius the Philosopher relates this story of a Panther, that lay in the
high way to meet with a man to help her young ones out of a ditch or deep
pit wherein they were fallen, at length there appeared in her sight the father
of Philinus a Philosopher, who presently Aelianus.

A notable story of a Panthers ^^ue to his companion.
There was (says he) a man which brought up a tame Panther from a whelpe, and
had made it so gentle, that it refused no society of men, and he himself loved
it as if it had bin his wife. There was also a little Kyd in the house brought
up tame, of purpose to be given unto the Panther when it was grown to some
stature or quantity, yet in the mean season the Panther played with it every
day: at last it being ripe, the master killed it and laid it before the
Panther to be eaten, but he would not touch it, whereupon he fasted till the
next day, and then it was brought unto him again, but he refused it as before,
at last he

We have said already, that they most of all resemble Women, and indeed they
are enemies to all creatures. The Leopards of BARBARY do little harm to men
that they The harms of Panthers.
except they meet them in some path way where the man cannot decline the
beast, nor the beast the man, there they leap most fiercely into his face, and
pull away as much flesh as they can lay hold upon, and many of them with
their nails do pierce the brains of a man.

Leo. Afer. Albertus.
They use not to invade or force upon flocks of sheep or Goats, yet wheresoever
they see a Dog they instantly kill and devour him. The great Panther is a
tetror to the dragon, and so soon as the Dragon sees it, he flies to his
cave. Auicen.
The lesser Panthers or Leopards do overcome Wolves being single, and hand to
hand as we say, but by multitude they ouermaister and destroy him, for if he
endeavor to run away, yet they are swifter and easily overcome it.

There is also great hatred and enmity betwixt the Hyaena and the Panther, for
in the presence of the Hyaena, the Pardall dares not resist, and that which is
more admirable, Pliny.
if there be a piece of an Hyaenaes skin about either man or beast, Orus
the Panther will never touch it, and if their skins after they be dead be hung
up in the presence of one another, the hair will fall of from the Panther, and
therefore when the Egyptians would signify how a superior was overcome by a
superior, they picture those: two skins. The ter^or of Panthers. Pliny Rasis
Aesculapius.
If any

Leopards are afraid of a certain tree called Leopardi arbor, Leopards-tree.
Panthers are also afraid of the scull of a dead man, and run from the sight
thereof: yet it is reported that two year before the death of Francis King of
France, two Leopards, a male and a female were let escape in France into the
Woods, either by the negligence or the malice of their keepers, that is a male
and a female, and about Orleance tore in pieces many men and Women; at last
they came and killed a bride which was that day to have been married, and
afterward there were found many carkases of Women destroyed by them, of which
they had eaten nothing but only their breasts: Such like things I might
express

For this cause we read in ancient time how the Senators of Rome gave laws
of punishment against them that should bring any Panthers into Italy, Laws
against Panthers
especially any Affrican beasts: and the first that gave dispensation against
those laws was Cneius Aufidius the peoples Tribune, who permitted them for the
sake of the Circensian games: and then Scaurus in the office of his aedility
brought also in an hundred and fifty: After him Pompey the great four hundred
and ten, and lastly Augustus that ever remembered and renowned Emperor, four
hundred and twenty. Thus laws which were first made by great

It was not in vain that the blessed martyr of Jesus Christ Ignatius, who was
afterward torn in pieces by wild beasts at Rome, did write thus in his
epistle to the Roman christians concerning his handling by the Roman Soldiers,
as he was brought prisoner out of Syria to Rome. A Siria Romam vsque cum
bestijs depugno per terram and mare die nocteque From Syria (says he) to Rome
I have fought with beasts, being night and day held in bondage by ten
Leopards, I mean ten Souldious, who notwithstanding many benifits I bestowed
upon them, yet do they use me worse and worse: and thus much for the cruelty of
Panthers and Leopards.

We have showed already how they become tame, and are used in hunting, The
nature of tamed Panthers.
unto which discourse (somewhat out of the place) I will add a true narration
of two Panthers or Leopards nourished in France for the king, whereof one was
of the bigness of a great Calfe, and the other of a great Dog, and that on a
day the lesser was brought forth for the King to behold how tame and tractable
he was, and that he would ride behind his therefore he turns his face away
from him, and betwixt his Legs reaches him a piece of bread or flesh, and so
he gently takes him into his chain and callar again, leading him away to his
house, and as soon as the man was mounted the beast also knew his seat and
leaped up after him.

And the same party also related, that when as a Lion was turned forth to a
Bull, the Lion very quietly without stirring lay down and did no harm, or
offer any violence or combat with the Bull: but afterward when as the two
Leopardes were turned forth to the same Bull, they instantly ran and took the
Bull by the throat, and without all doubt they had strangled and pulled out
his throat, (had not their keepers which had long Assirians about Jerusalem to
a Leopard, watching at the gates of the City to destroy all that came out
thereat.

The taking of Panthers.
Having thus discoursed of the nature, parts, kindness, love, and hatred of
these beasts in general, it now follows to express the best means to
avoid and destroy them, that so we may not only know our enemy but also
learn the way to ouermatch and curb him.

There is a kind of Henbane which is called Pardalianches or Libbard*bane which
the Pharnacus, Dioscorides
and the mount Ida, were wont to lay in the Mountains for the destoying of
Leopards, Pardals, and Panthers. This Herb is not much known at this day, yet
I take it to be the same which grows in many places of France and Sauoy, and
it is called Tora, by the root thereof beaten to powder and stopped up in
flesh, not only beasts, but also Wolves and Swine, as wild Boares are
destroyed if they taste thereof, when the beast perceives himself poisoned,
presently he seeks for man's dung, for without that he cannot be delivered;
wherefore the Hunters do also place near unto it some vessel of it hanging in
a tree, with the mouth or way open that leads into it, wherinto the greedy
beast leapeth, and being in, cannot get forth again, but rather dies with
hunger, Pliny. Aristotle
or else is taken and killed, or else the vessel is hanged up so high that the
beast

Therefore the Panthers of Hircania do more often perish by poison then by
other violence of Swords, Spears, or Dogs: for by this poison the beast many
times falls to such a looseness of his belly, and withal such a weakness
thereby, that he is taken alive. Likewise in Armenia there are certain Fishes
which are poison to Lions, Bears, Wolves, Lynces, and Panthers, the powder of
this fish the inhabitants put into the sides

When they are hunted and forced in the presence of the hunters, then they
leap directly unto their heads, and therefore the hunter takes great care
both of his standing and also of holding his spear, for if he receive not the
Panther in his leap and gore him to the heart, or else otherwise wound him
mortally, he is gone, and his life is at an end. Oppianus also shows that he
is taken as Lions are, especially by these means following, for when the
hunters perceive the way or path which he uses to his water, therein they make
a deep ditch (but not so great as they make for a Lion) wherein they erect a
wodden he describes the same means to take great fishes by the sight of
little Fishes swimming in a net.

In hunting of wild beasts the wary Wood-man must make good choice of his
horse, Oppianus
not only for the mettell and agility which are very necessary, but also for
the color, as we have already expressed in the story of the Horse: for the
gray Horse is fittest for the Bear, and most terrible to him, the yellow or
fire color against the Bore, but the brown and reddish color against the
Panther.

The Moors also use other devises to take Panthers and all such noisome
beasts, they enclose in a house in a little house certain rotten flesh, which
by the savor thereof when it stinketh, draws the wild Beasts unto it: For
they make a door, or a gate of reeds unto

The Christians of AFFRICKE did institute a general hunting of Leopards,
enclosing the ends of the ways through which the beasts were to pass: The
Leopard when he was stirred ran too and fro distracted, because in all his
passages he found Horsemen ready to resist him, neither left they any way for
him to escape: at length wearied with

Among the Chaonians there was a certain young Noble man which loved a Virgin
called Anthippe, the which two lovers were walking together a good season in a
Wood; It happened while they were there, that Cichyrus the Kings Son
prosecuted a Pardall in hunting, which was fled into that Wood, and seeing him,
bent his arm against him and cast his Dart: the which Dart missed the mark
and killed the Virgin Anthippe, the young Prince thought that he had slain
the beast, and therefore drew near on Horseback to

The Chaonians after they understood this fearful accident, and the reason of
it, compassed in the place where he fell with a wall, and for the honor of
their dead Prince builded Cichyrus after his own name. Their love of Wine.


Leopards and Panthers do also love Wine above all other drink, and for this
cause both Bacchus was resembled to them, and they dedicated to him: Bacchum
tauro assimulant and Pardali, quod homines ebrij belluarum istarum ingenia
referant, and omnia violenter agant, quidam enim iracunda fiunt Taurorum
instar, and pugnaces ferique vt Pardales: says Plato in his second book of
laws; they resemble and compare Bacchus to a Bull, or Pardall, because drunken
men in all their actions do imitate the disposition of these wild beasts, both
in their folly and violence: For some of them are wrathful like Bulls, and
some of them wild apt to fight, like Pardals: Bac^hus was also called Nebrides,
because he wore the skin of a hinde-Calfe, which is spotted almost like a
Panther: and therefore a fearful man, or a drunken, variable and in constant
man, is said to wear a skin of diverse colors: Bacchus was for their love of
Wine; for all writers do constantly and with one consent affirm, that they
drink wine unto drunkenness: the manner and end thereof is eligantly
described by Oppianus in this sort: When the inhabitants of Lybia do observe
some little fountain arising out of the sand, and falling down again, (as in
the manner of small springes which can not increase into great rivers) whereat
the Panthers and Pardals use to drink early in a morning, before it be light.
After they have been at their prey in the night time, the hunters come and
pour twenty or thirty pitchers of old sweet wine into the said fountain,
then a little way from it they lie down and cover them selves with clothes,
or with straw, for their is no shelter either of tree or bushes in that
Country.

In the morning the Panthers ardently thirsting, and being almost dead for want
of drink, come unto the same fountain, and tasting of the wine drink thereof
great abundance, which presently falls to work upon their brains, for they
begin first of all to leap and sport themselves, until they be well wearied,
and then they lie down and Oppianus.

Use of their parts.
Concerning the use of their several parts I find little among the
auncientes, except of their skins, for the foote-men and ancient soldiers
of the Moors, did not only wear them for garments, but also sleept upon them
in the night time. The shepherds of Ethiopia called Agriophagi do eat the
flesh of Lions and Panthers, although it be hot and dry.

The medicines of the Panther, or Leopard.
Auicenna
If the skin or hide of a Leopard being taken and flead be covered or laid
upon the Albertus
or shaking in the joints, as also by them which are troubled with the bearing
and continual moving or turning of the heart, is a very profitable and
excellent remedy for the same.

The same fat or sewet of a Leopard being mixed or mingled with the Oil which
proceeds from the Bay Tree, and then mollified both together, and so
anointed upon any one which is troubled with the scurfe or Mangy, the scabs
whereof does cut or pierce the Rasis
does presently and without any grief or pain cure the same. The twigges of a
Vine-tree being dried and beaten into small dust or powder, and mingled
together with the fat or grease of a Leopard, and so anointed upon the face
of any one who is grieved with akings and swellings thereon, will not only
cure and heal the same without any pain or sorrow, Arcteus Galen
but also preserve the same free from blemishes in the time of healing. The
grease also of a Leopard by it self, being anointed upon the head of any one
who does shead or cast his hair or is troubled with the Foxes evil, does
immediately help and cure the same. The blood of a Panther being anointed
upon the veins or sinnewes of either man or woman who is grieved with any
swelling or akings therein, is very profitable and curable to expel the same
away. The brains of a Leopard being mingled with a

OF THE POEPHAGVS.
THere is a beast in India called Poephagus, because he feeds upon herbs
and grass like a Horse, whose quantity he does exceed double, for he is twice
so big, his tail is most thick and black, the hairs whereof are thinner
then the hairs of a man's head: and therefore the Indian women make great
account of them, for with them they Magis studiose quam celeriter fugam
peragit. That is, He has a good will to run apace, but cannot perform it: but
if he be followed upon good swift Horses, or with nimble Dogs, so as he
perceives they are near to take him, and he by no means can avoid them,
then does he turn himself, hiding Aelianus.
for the other recompense their labor for their pains. Volateranus relates
this a little otherwise, and says that the beast biteth off his own tail,
and so delivers himself from the hunter, knowing that he is not desired for
any other cause.

Nicolaus Venetus an Earl, writing of the furthest part or province of Asia,
Aene. Silui.
which he calls Macinum, and I think he means Serica, because he says
it lies betwixt the India and Cathay, there are a generation of white and
black Oxen which have Horses tails, but reaching down to their heels, and
much rougher. The hairs whereof are as thin as the feathers of flying Birds,
these he says are in great estimation, for the Knights and Horsemen of that
Country do wear them upon the top of their lances and spears for a badge or
cognizance of honor, the which I thought fit to be remembered in this place,
because I take them to be either the same with these Indian beasts, or very
like unto them.

The Porcuspine or Porcupine.
I Can not learn any name for this beast among the Hebrews, and therefore by
probability it was unknown to them: The Graecians call it Acanthocoiros and
Hystrix, The several names. Bellonius.
that is, sus setosa, a hairy, or bristly, or thorny hog, for their quils
which they bear upon their back, are called both Pili, setae, villi, pinnae,
aculei, and spinae, that is, both hairs, bristles, rough-haire, pins,
prickles, and thorns. The Arabians call it Aduldull, and Adualbul, adubul,
adulbus, and some Aherha which by Auicen and his Glossographer, is defined to
be Montanus Ericius habeus spinas sagittales, Bellonius
an Hedghogge of the Mountain, having qvils or thorns upon his back which he
shoots off at his pleasure. The Graecians at this day call it Scan^^charos
which is derived or rather corrupted of Acanthocoiros. The Italians call him
Porco-spinoso and Histrice or Istrice, without an Aspiration, the Spaniardes
Puerco-espin, the French Porc espic, the Illirians Porcospino, the Illirians
Morskaszwijnija, imitating therein the Germans which call a Sea-Hogge Ein
Meerschwyn: The Germans in some places call it Taran, and in other places
Dornschweyn, that is a Thorny-hogge, by a fained name in imitation of other
Nations, and also Porcopick following the Italians, Spaniardes, French,
English, and Illirians: I will not stand to confute them, who write that this
beast is a Sea-beast, and not a beast of the land, nor yet those that make
question whether it be a kind of Hedghog or not, for without all controversy
as the Arabians, Pliny, Albertus, Bellunensis, and other do affirm, the
vulgar Hedghog is Ericius Syluestris, and the Porcupine Ericius Montanus.

These are bred in INDIA and AFFRICKE, and brought up and down in Europe to be
seen for money: Likewise about the City Cassem in TARTARIA, by the sight of
one of these it appeared that it was three foot long, the mouth not unlike to a
Hares, but The quils and spears.
The general proportion of his body is like a Swines, and they never exceed
the stature of a Swine of half a year old.

The four for most teeth hang over his lips, and that which is most admirable
in him, the quils or thorns growing upon his back in stead of hair, he uses
for hands, arms, and weapons.

They first grow out of his back and sides, which are of two colors, that is
partly black Solinus writes thus, and also Paulus Venetus: Cum capiuntur,
spinis suis sape homines, and canes ledunt: nam canes in eos prouocati adeo
irritant fer as illas vt simul concurrentes terga sua, quibus spinae innituntur
vehe^enter commoueant, atque inuiciniores homines, and canes vibrent. That is
to say, When they are taken they many times hurt both Dogs

The Hunters to save their Dogs do devise engines and traps wherein to take
them: beside the quils that grow upon their backs, they have also some upon
their heads and Necks, which they never cast off, but keep them on as a
Horse does his mane. The pilgrims that come yearly from Saint Ieames of
Compostella in Spain, do bring back generally one of these quils in their
caps, The den and food.
but for what cause I know not. The pace of this beast is very slow and
troublesome unto it, and therefore it is hardly drawn out of his den, which it
diggeth like a Badger, from which it never goes far, but feeds upon those
things which are near unto it: It is a filthy beast, smelling rank because
it lives so much in the earth, being wild it never drinks, and I think it
eats Apples, roots, and rindes of trees, and peradventure snailes, and such
reptile creatures, but being tamed, it eats all kind of fruit, likewise
bread, pycrust, and such things broken small. It drinks also water, but
above all other wine mingled with water: In the day time it

In my opinion for cold rather then for any other reason, although there be
some that affirm it lies hid in the Summer time, and comes abroad in the
Winter time, contrary to the course of all other beasts, and therefore such a
paradox does want the testimony of some credible writers, which should affirm
it upon their own experience, Aristotle and Pliny, who hold the first opinion,
then Albertus and Agricola who incline to the later. In all other things both
of their lying hid, of their procreation, of the coming out of their cave and
nourishing their young ones, they imitate the manners and conditions of Bears.

Concerning the use of their parts I find none but only of their quils, for
with them it is said if men scrape their teeth they will never be loose,
likewise women were wont in ancient time to use them for parting asunder their
hair in the top of their crowns.

The use of the flesh and other parts.
The flesh of this beast is like a hedg-hogs, neither very natural for meat
and nourishment, Platina writes to be eaten by them, that cannot contain
urine in their beds: yet the Graecians attribute no such quality unto this,
but to help the stomach and loosen the belly they attribute to the sea-hogge,
and against the leprosy scabs, and incontinencie of urine to the hedg-hog, but
peradventure the saying of Pliny (Quae de Herniaceis dicuntur omnia tanto magis
valebunt in Histrice) leads them to attribute these things to the Porcuspine.
The powder of their quils burnt, drunk or eaten in meats or broth do promote
and help conception: Thus says Auicen,

Of the Raeyner, or Rainger.


THis beast is called by the Latins Rangifer, by the Germains Rein, Reiner,
Raineger, Reinssthier, by the French Raingier, and Ranglier, and the later
Latins call it Reingus. It is a beast altogether unknown to the ancient
Graecians and Latins, Of the several names.
except the Machlis that Pliny speaks of be it: but we have showed already in
the story of the Elk, that Alces and Machlis are all one. This beast was first
of all discovered by Olaus Magnus in this Northern part of the world, toward
the Norwa^, Swetia, and Scandinauia, at the first sight whereof he called it
Raingifer, quasi Ramifer because he bears horns on his head like the boughs
of a tree. The similitude of this beast is much like to a Heart, but it is much
bigger, stronger, and swifter. It bears 3. orders or rows of horns on the
head, as by the direction of Valentinus Grauius, and Benedictus Martinus are
here expressed.

This beast changes his color, according to the time of the year, and also
acording to the quality of the place wherein he feeds, which appears by
this, because some of them are found to be of the color of Asses, and shortly
after to be like Hearts. Their breast is full of long bristles, The color and
several parts.
being rough and riged through the same. The legs hairy, and the hooves
hollow, cloven, and moouable, which in his course he spreads abroad upon
the deepest snowes, without pressing his footsteppes far into them: and by
his admirable celerity he auoideth all the wild beasts which in the valleys
lie in weight to destroy him. He bears very high and lofty horns, which
presently from the root branch forth into two stems or pikes, I mean both the
horns severally into two, which again at the top disperce themselves into
pikes like the fingers of ones hand; In the middle of the

The horns are white, distinguished with long apparent veins, differing both
from the horns of Elks, and the horns of Hearts, from Elks in height, and from
Hearts in breadth and from them both in color and multitude of branches: When
he runs he lays them on his back, for when he stands still, the lowest
branches coming forth of the roots of the horns, do almost cover his face
with these lower branches.

In the winter time when he is a thirst, and comes to the frozen waters he
breaks the ice: The use of their lowest horns.
being wild he lives upon such fruits as he finds in the woods, especially
the Norway, toward Mosiberg, and other hills. He is taken by the
Countrey-people for private uses, for he is profitable after he is tamed, both
for the plow and travails in iournies. The people called Lappi or Lappones, do
use them instead of horses and Oxen, for they have a kind of Cart made in form
and fashion of a fishers boat, whereunto they join these beasts to draw them,
and the Carter has a convenient seat fitted for him on the forepart thereof,
wherein he sits with his legs fast tied to the cart, to the intent he be not
cast off when the beast runs speedily: he carries the raines whereby he
governs them in his left hand, and in his right hand a cart when it is in
danger of falling, and in this course they will continue indefatigable twenty
Germain miles a day, which is more then threescore English miles. At night when
the beasts are vnyoaked, of their own accord, without guide or leader they will
go to their feeding places, or accustomed Asaph, All the beasts of the field
are mine, and the flocks of thousands which run wild on the hills. The
females want horns, and their milk is the greatest part of food to those
Northern people: they have bin seen at Auspurge in Germany sadled and
bridled, Muscouia, Polonia, Bohemia, Scandinauia, and Massouia, yet they can
endure no heat, for being brought into Bohemia they die.

Their carts which they draw must be made with a sharp edge at the bottom
like a boat or ship as we have said already, for they are not drawn upon
wheels, but like draies and sleads upon the earth. There was a Laponian which
brought one of these into Germany in December, and he professes he never felt
so much heat of the Sun in all his life as he did at that time, which is our
coldest time in the year, and therefore how great is the cold which both men
and beasts endure in that country.





The king of SVVETIA had ten of them nourished at LAPPA, which he caused every
day to be driven unto the mountains into the cold air, for they were not
able to endure Laponia into Swetia, where they are wonderfuly anoied with
wolus, but they gather themselves together in a ring, and so fight against
their enemies with their horns. They are also in their own natural country
annoyed with Gulons, and generally all beasts that live upon the spoil of
flesh, are enemies unto them, and desire to destroy and eat them. In their
pace, both slow and speedy, the Articles of their legs make a noise like the
craking of Nuts. Their was one of these beasts given unto the Duke of Saxony in
the year of our Lord 1561. In Scandiuania they use them for the carriadge of
mettels, drawing of Chariots and riding, and the nerves of them when they are
dead make bows, and for want of nails, they do fasten plankes and

OF THE RHINOCEROS.
WE are now to discourse of the second wonder in nature, namely of a beast
every way admirable, both for the outward shape, quantity, and greatness, A
praeface to the succeeding story.
and also for the inward courage, disposition, and mildnes. For as the Elephant
was the first wonder, of whom we have already discoursed, so this beast next
unto the Elephant fills up the number, being every way as admirable as he, if
he do not exceed him, except in Adam went out of Paradise, there was never any
that was able perfectly to describe the universal conditions of all sorts of
beasts, and it has bin the counsel of the almighty himself, for the
instruction of man, concerning his fall and natural weakness, to keep him
from the knowledge of many divine things, and also humane, which is of birds
and beasts, Fishes and foul, that so he might learn, the difference betwixt
his generation, and his degeneration, and consider how great a loss unto him
was his fall in Paradise; who before that time knew both God himself and al
creatures, but since that time neither knows God as he should know him, nor
himself as he shall know it, nor the creatures as he

But for my part which write the English story, I acknowledge that no man must
look for that at my hands, which I have not received from some other: for I
would be unwilling to write any thing untrue, or uncertain out of mine own
invention; and truth on every part is so dear unto me, that I will not lie to
bring any man in love and admiration with God and his works, for God needs
not the lies of men: To conclude therefore this Praeface, as the beast is
strange and never seen in our country, so my eyesight cannot add any thing
to the description: therefore harken unto that which I have observed out of
other writers.

That there is such a beast as the Rhinoceros.
First of all that there is such a beast in the world, both Pliny, Solinus,
Diodorus, Aelianus, Lampridius, and others, do yeald erefrigable testimony.
Heliogabalus had one of them at Rome. Pompey the great, in his public
spectacles did likewise produce a Rhinocerot (as Seneca writes) When Augustus
rode triumphing for Cleopatra, he brought forth to the people a seahorse and a
Rhinocerot which was the first time that ever a Rhinocerot was seen at Rome
(as Coelius writes.) Antoninus Pius the Emperor, did give many gifts unto the
people, amongst which were both Tigers and Rhinocerots, (says Julius
Capitalinus in his life.) Martial also celebrateth an excellent epigram of a
Rhinocerot, which in the presence of Caesar Domitian did cast up a Bull into
the air with his horn, as if he had bin a tenyce ball, the epigram is this:
O quam terribilis exarsit pronus in tram,
Quantus erat cornu, cui pila Taurus erat.
Lastly to put it out of all question that there is such a beast as this
Rhinocerot, the picture and figure here expressed, was taken by Gesner from the
beast alive at Lysbon in Portugale, before many witnesses, both Merchants and
others; so that we have the Testimony both of antiquity and of the present age,
for the Testimony of the form and fashion of this beast, and that it is not
the invention of man, but a work of God in nature, first created in the
beginning of the World, and ever since continued to this present day.

Concerning the name of this beast, the Graecians because of the horn in his
Nose call him Rhinoceros, that is a Nose-horned-beast, and the Latins also have
not altered that invention, ^.
for although there be many beasts that have but one horn, yet is there none
that have that one horn growing out at their Nose but this alone: All the
residue have the horn growing out at their foreheads. There be some that have
taken this Rhinoceros, Monoceros the Unicorn, because of this one horn, but
they are deceived, taking the general for the special which is a note of
ignorance in them, and occasion of ^rr^ur unto others; yet it is better to take
the Rhinoceros for the Monoceros, because there is nothing in the special
which is not contained in the general, according to the maxim of Logic:
Nihil est qui specie, quod non prius fuit in genere: And yet that is also
absurd, considering that Monoceros is not only a word of generality for all
one-horned-beastes, but of particularity a name for the Unicorn, whereby is
meant the Indian-Asse, as we shall show in the story of the Unicorn.

This beast in the Haebrew is thought to be called Reem, or and Karas, and
therefore Munster so translateth it. Deutro. 33. Tauri decor eius, cornua
Rhinocerotis, cornua eius in eis ventilabit nationes ad summum vsque terrae.
His beauty is like the beauty of a Bull, Rhinocerot, with the which he shall
winnow the nations to the tops of the hills.

And Tertullian writing against the heretic Praxeas, does so translate it. If
a man compare together the Greek word Rhinoceros, and Reem, and Karas, or
Rimna and Karas, he will easily think that either the Graecians have joined
together the two Haebrew words, as Rhinoceros quasi Reem Karas, or Rimna
Karas, or else the Haebrewes have parted asunder the Greek word, for Reem and
Rimna may very well come of Rhino, and Karas of Keros, yet herein I leave the
Readers to their own judgment. The Indians call this beast in their tongue,
Oppianus. The quantity and several parts.
Scandabenamet, as Festus writes, but we will leave the name and come to the
description of it.

In quantity it is not much bigger then an Orix: Pliny makes it equal in
length to an Elephant, and some make it longer then an Elephant, but withal
they say it is lower, and has shorter Legs. Strabo in his 16. book speaking
of the Ethiopian Region, near India, calls these Rhinocerots Ethiopian
Bulls, and says that they are bred only in that Country, and by the relation
of Artemidorus he writes thus: Outoi de micron apoleypont^^ ton elephantoon oi
rinokerotes, osper Artemidoros phesi, epi seirau, to mekei, kai per eorakenai
phesas an Alexandria, alla schedon ti osoon to vpsei apogetou aph'emoon
oruthentos, etc. That is to say, The Rhinocerotes are exceeded by the
Elephantes in length, but in hight they almost equal them, (as Artemidorus
said) he saw by one that was at Alexandria, and the color thereof was not like
a Box-tree, but rather like an Elephantes, his quantity* greater Strabo.

Whereunto we may add the description of other parts out of Oppianus, Pliny,
and Solinus. His color like rind or bark of a boxe-tree, (which does not
differ much from and Elephant) and on his forehead there grow hairs which
seem a little red, and his back Tortaeise set over with skales, having no
hair upon the back. In like manner, the Legs are scaled down to the hooues
which are parted into four distinct claws, upon his nose their grows a hard
and sharp horn, crooking a little toward the crown of his head, but not so
high: flat and not round, so sharp and strong, Vt quicquid impetieret, aut
ve^^ilet, aut perforet, and ferrum etiam and saxa transigat: says Oppianus and
Aelianus* that is, whatsoever it is set to, either it casts it up into the
air, or else boreth it through though it be Iron or stones.

Eucherius says that the Rhinorerot has two horns in his nose, but that is
utterly false, as you may see by the picture: Although Martial seem to
express so much in these verses; Namque grauem cornu gemino sic extulit vrsum
Iactat vt impositas Taurus in astra pilas.
The Rhinocerot cast up a Bear into the air, even as a Bull would do a ball
which were laid upon his two horns: we shall not need to apply Gemino cornu
to the Bull, as Politianus Eucherius lies not in the number, but in the place,
and that it may appear that this horn is not a fained thing, Pausanius above
two thousand year ago writes thus; Rhinoceroti in summo naso cornu singular
est, and aliud supra ipsum non magnum in capite nullum. I do marvel how it
came to pass that men which can mock and deride others cunningly should be
called prouerbially Nasuti homines, except the proverb were taken from the
Rhinoceros, who by reason of his crooked horn is said to have a crooked nose;
for indeed a deformed nose is more subject to derision then any other part or
member of the body, Martial to write thus: Maiores nunquam rhonchi iuvenesque
senesque,
Et pueri nasum Rhinocerotis habent.
And thereupon Horace also says thus: Naso suspendis adunco. Oppianus says,
that there was never yet any destinction of sexes in these Rhinocerotes: for
all that ever were found were males and not females, but from hence let no body
gather that there are no females, for it were impossible that the breed should
continue without females, and therefore Plinius and Solinus say, that they
engender or admit copulation like Elephants, Camels, and Lions.

Rhinocerot which was at Lisborne, was brought into the presence of an
Elephant, the Elephant ran away from him. How and in what place he overcomes
the Elephant we have showed already in his story, namely, how he fastneth his
horn in the soft part of the Elephantes belly. He is taken by the same means
that the Unicorn is taken, for it is said by Albertus, Isidorus, and Alunnus,
that above all other creatures they love Virgins, and that unto them they will
come be they never so wild, and fall a sleep before them, so being asleep
they are easily taken and carried away.

Unicorns horn to the Rhinocerots horn, but they are deceived by imitation of
Isidorus and Albertus: for there is none of the ancient Graecians that have
ever observed any medicines in the Rhinocerot. The Indians make bottels of
their skins, wherein they put their Lycion, or succum medicatum, and therefore
I will conclude this story, with the riddle of Fraunciscus niger made upon the
excellency of the horn that grows upon the nose.

Dic mihi quae superis sint acceptissima dona, Whereunto the answer is made in
the next verse: Principium nasi Rhinocerotis amant.

OF THE SHEEP.
THe Haebrewes have diverse names, whereby they signify a sheep, and all that
kind, as Zon, and Zoneth, for which the Septuagints do always render Probata,
The several names.
sheep or little cattle. The Arabians Genas. The Chaldeans Ana. The Persians
Gospand, also Rachel in Haebrew: the plural whereof is Rechelim which
signifies sheep: Kebesch, and Kabsa, Kibsa, Esaias 53. Tahel, Neelamah, that is
a dombe sheep, where the Hebrews have Rachel, there the Chaldes translate
Rachlak. The Arabians Akalak. The Persians Chomeschan thu. Kebes and Kibsa
signify a Sheep, male and female under a year old, and Aijl, and Eel for a
sheep above a year old male and female. In Leuit. 22. the Chalde translateth
for Kebij, Imar. The Arabians Egel: The Persians Bara, and Keseb in Haebrew is
the same that Kebesch. Seh also signifies a sheep, although it be sometime
taken for a Lamb or Kid. Likewise Thalch and Theleh Esa. 40. signifies a Lamb
that sucketh. And Epiphanius writes, that by the same word the Haebrew
Astronomers signified the sign Aries in the Zodiac. The Sarazens at this day
call a sheep Ganeme, and cattle Garien, and the dung of cattle Hara Garien. The
Graecians Oijs, and Probaton, the Latins Ouis, and by excellency Pecus, the
Italians Pecora, the French Brebis, the Spaniards Oueia, the Germans Schaff,
the Illirians Owcze, or Skop. These and such like I might add more concerning
the names of this beast, and the abundance of the names thereof in the Haebrew
tongue, is a notable testimony of the singular account which God himself made
of this beast. The Latins have so honored it that after it they have named many
of their children, and stories make mention of most noble and gallant men, so
called. Such was Ouinius Camillus, Seuerus Ouinius, Fabius Maximus Ouiculus,
Oilycus, Oileus Ajax, Oie, the wife of Charhippus, and many such other, if it
were necessary to this story to relate them, but I will not trouble the Reader
with any such unnecessary circumstances. I will therefore first of al begin with
a relation of the sheep The description of diverse kids of sheep according to
their country Strabo.
and so in the end make a more particular discovery of our own at home. For the
difference of regions do very much enlighten the description or history of
sheep. It is reported that about Erythrea, one of the Islands of the Gades,
there is such abundance of good pasture and herbs so grateful to sheep, that
if they be not let blood once in thirty days, they perish by suffocation, and
that the milk of those sheep yields no whay, wherewithal they make
abundance of cheese, although they pour water into it. The herbage of that
Island is dry, and yet profitable to catle and milch beasts, and from thence
came the original of the fat cattle of Geryon. The sheep of Graecia are
lesser then the sheep of Egypt, and the Oues Pirrhicae, were like Boues
Pirrhicae, namely, of exceeding stature, which name was deryued from Pyrrhus
their master and owner. Among the Psillians Aechylides in his books of
husbandry affirms, that the sheep of the Isle Chius, are very small, and yet
their Milk makes very lawdable cheese. In Spain their best sheep have black
fleeces: at Polentia near the Alps they are gray or hony-wolled in Asia and
Boetica, called Erythrea, they are red like Foxes, and from thence came the
term of Erythreae Oues. At Canusium the sheep are yellow, or Lion tauny, and
so also at Tarentum. Istria and Liburnia, yeald sheep having wool which is so
course and rough, that it may rather seem to be hair then wool, and
therefore never fit for fine garments, nor for any other use, except by the
singular art of spinning in Portugal. And the like to this is the wool of the
sheep of Piscenae, and in Homer writes) had the use hereof (although the
thread were rough) in their works of Tapistry, and this was dressed diverse
ways, for the French in Europe dress it one way, and the Parthians in Asia
another way.

The sheep of Apulia gave the name to Lana Italica, for excellent wool, and
yet was it short and course, good for nothing but for clokes to ride in, and
wear in rainy weather^ unto these I may add the Calabrian, Milesian, and
Arentinean sheep, yet in the days of Varro they covered their sheep with
other skins to keep the Wool both from loss, and other infection, so that it
might be the better washed, dyed, and prepared, for these were nourished most
of all in houses.

The French Sheep about Altinas, and also those that are scabbed or folded in
the plain and barren fields of Parma and Mutina. The sheep of Heluetia feed in
the tops of the Mountains, whiles the Goats keep beneath among the trees and
gather fruits on the sides of the hills. The Flemmish sheep have a soft and
curled hair.

There be in general two kinds of Sheep, one called Tectum, the other
Colonicum, as if you would say house-sheep, and field-sheep, for the Grecian
sheep which before we have Tarentinae, and were also called Terintinae, because
of their soft wool lived in houses, and they were also called Pellitae, but the
field-sheepe having by nature a greater, courser, and rougher hair, are
suffered to lodge abroad in the fields.

Likewise the sheep of Myletum and Attica, and the region Gadilonea, reaching
to Armenia, have very soft and gentle wool, which thing sildome comes to
pass in Pontus or Capadocia. In Scotland also in a place thereof, called by
Hector Boethius Buthuguhania are great store of sheep, bearing good wool,
from whence almost all that country fetch their breed. The Sheep of Ethiopia
bear no wool at all, but in stead thereof their hair is rough like Camels
hair. Amongst the Abidene, and the Beudiani, both Aelianus and Nicomachus the
Son of Aristotle do testify, that all their sheep are black, and that
Gortynis their Sheep are red and have four horns: In the fortunate Islands
of the red sea all their Sheep are white, and none of them have crooked
horns. In Beotia there are four Rivers which work strange effects upon
Sheep after they drink of them; namely, Melas, Cephisus, Penius, and Xanthus.
The Sheep drinking of Melas and Penius grow black, of Cephisus white, and yet
Pliny says, that this River comes forth from the same fountain that Melas
does. They which drink of Xanthus grow red: I might add hereunto another
special observation of difference betwixt the Sheep of Pontus and Naxus, for
in Pontus they have no gaul, and in Naxus they have two gauls.

In some parts of India their Sheep and Goats are as big as Asses, and bring
forth 4.

There are two kind of sheep in Arabia, which are distinguished by the length
and breadth of their tails: the one sort have tails three cubits long, by
reason whereof they are not suffered to draw them on the ground for fear of
wounding; and therefore the Arabian Sheep brought into England about the year
1560. whose pictures were taken by Docter Cay, and therefore I have expressed
them in the page following with their description.

The Arabian sheep with a broad tail.


The Arabian sheep with a long tail.


The description of the Arabian sheep.
THis Arabian sheep (said he) is a little bigger then our vulgar sheep in
Enland, but of the same wool, figure of body, and color, only the shins, and
forepart of their face, are a little red: the broad tail in the top was one
cubit, but lower it was narrower, and like the end of a vulgar sheep tail.
They being brought on shipboard into England, were taught thorough famine and
hunger, to eat not only grass and hay, but flesh, fish, bread, cheese, and
butter. Heroditus says, that such kind of sheep are no where found but in
Arabia: the longe-tailed sheep he calls Macrokercos, and the broad tailed
sheep Plateukercos: yet Leo Afer His arietibus nullu^ ab alijs discrimien est,
praeter quam in cauda qua^ latissima^ circu^ ferunt quae cuique quo opinior
est, crassior obtigit, ad eo vt nonnullis libras december, aut vigintipendat, cu^
sua sponte impinguantur. There is no difference betwixt these Rams and other
except in their broad tail, which evermore as it grows in fatnes grows in
breadth, for if they fat of their own accord, it has bin found that the tail
of one of these sheep have weighed ten or twenty pound, and not only there,
but also in Egypt, where they cram and feed their sheep with Barley, Corn,
and Bran: by which means they grow so fat, that they are notable to stir
themselves, so that their keepers are forced to devise little engines like
childrens cares, whereupon they lay their tails when they remove their beasts:
and the Leo Afer affirms, that he saw in Egypt in a town called Asiota,
standing upon Nilus, a hundred and fifty mile from Alcair, a tail of one of
these sheep that weighed fourscore pound, and whilst he wondered at it,
scarcely believing that which his eyes saw, there were some present; that
affirmed it to be an ordinary thing, for they said according as he writes; Se
vidisse quae semi ducentes libras expendissent: That is, they had seen some of
them weigh a hundred pounds, and except in the kingdom of Tunis in Africa, and
Egypt, there are none such to be found in all the world, and by it, it
appears, that all the fat of their bodies goes into their tails* Among
the Garamants their sheep eat flesh and milk, and it is not to be forgotten
which Aristotle, Dionisius, Afer, and Varro do write, namely that all sheep
were once wild, and that the tame sheep which now we have, are derived from
those wild sheep, as our tame goats, from wild goats; and therefore Varro
says, Flocks of wild sheep
that in his days in Phrigia there were flocks of wild sheep, whereof as out
of Africa and the Region of the Gadits, there were annually brought to Rome
both males and females, of strange and admirable colors, and that his great
Uncle bought diverse of them and made

The Subus does also appear to be a kind of wild sheep, Oppianus.
for after that Oppianus had discoursed of the sheep of Creete, he falls to
make mention of the Subus, which he says is of a very bright yellow color
like the sheep of Creete, but the wool thereof is not so rough, it has two
large horns upon the forehead, living both on the water and on the land,
eating fish, which in admiration of it in the water gather about it and are
devoured, as we shall show afterward in his due place. The Colus also spoken
of before and called Snake,

And first of all the description of their outward parts: The several parts of
sheep
the sheep ought to be of a large body, that so their wool may be the more,
which ought to be soft, deep, and rough, especially about the neck,
shoulders, and belly, and those that were not so the ancient Graetians called
Apokoi, the Latins Apicae, that is, peild sheep, for want of wool, which
always they did reject as unprofitable for their flocks: for there is no
better sign as Pliny says, of an acceptable breed of sheep, Quam crurium
breuitas, and ventris vestitus. The shortness of the legs, and a belly well
clothed with wool.

The female is to be admitted to the male after two years old. Till they are
five year old they are acounted young, and after seven unprofitable for breed.
In your choice of sheep Nam melior est ea aetas, qua^ sequitur spes, qua^ ea,
qua^ sequitur, mors, and probata est progenies, si agnos solent procreare
formosos (says Petrus Crescen:) that is, that age is better which hope
follows, then that which death follows: and it is a good breed of sheep
which brings forth beautiful Lambs. And concerning their wool, it is to be
observed, that the soft wool is not always the best, except it be thick
withal, for Hares have soft but thin wool, and in sheep it ought to be
contrary, and therefore the most fearful have the softest hair, the sheep
of Scythia in the cold Sauromatia they have hard wool. Florentinus prescribes
that the fine wool of a sheep is not curled but stands upright, for he
says, that curled wool is easily corrupted or falsified.

The head of the sheep is very weak, and his brain not fat; the horns of
the female are weak if they have any at al, for in many places they have none,
like Hinds, and in England there are both males and females that want horns:
And again the Rams of England have greater horns then any other Rams in the
world, and sometimes they have four or six horns on their head, as has bin
often seen. In Affricke their male-sheepe or Rams are yeaned with horns, and
also their females: and in Pontus neither males nor females have ever any
horns.

Their eyes ought to be great, and of a waterish color, and all beasts that
want hands have their eyes standing far distant on their heads, especially
sheep, because they had need to look on both sides, and because they are of
a simple and harmless disposition,

There be some that write, that Virgill calls sheep Bidentes, because they
have but two teeth, but they do it ignorantly, for we may read in Seruius,
Nigidius and Nonius, that Boares are called Bidentes, and al beasts of two
years old, for they were first of all called Bidennes quasi Biennes, by
interposition of the letter D. according to other words, as we do not say
reire, but redire, nor reamare, but redamare, nor reargure, but redargure, and
so Bidennis, for Biennis, because sacrifices were wont to be made of sheep
when they Ambidens, and Bidens, because he has teeth both above and beneath.
The belly of a sheep is like the belly of a beast that chew the cud. The
milk proceeds from the ventricle or maw. The stones hang down to the hinder
legs. The females have their vdders betwixt their thighs, like to Goats and
Cowes: some of them have galls, according to the ordinary custom of nature,
and some of them have none at al, for in Pontus where by reason they eat
worme-wood they have no gal. Likewise in Calsis: some we have showed have two
gals, and the Scithian sheep have gals at one time and not at another, as (
Aelianus writes) for he says in the very cold Countries, when snow and
winter covers the earth, there sheep have no gals, because they keep within
doors and use no change of meat, but in the summer when they go abroad again
to feed in the

There is a Region in Asia called Scepsis, wherein they say their sheep have
little or no melts. The raines of a sheep are equal, and there is no beast
that has them covered with fat like unto it. Sheep are also apt to grow
exceeding fat, for in the year 1547. there was a fat sheep given to the king
of France in Pickardy, whereof the inward hooues or cloves of his forefeet were
grown to be as long as 8. fingers are broad, the tops whereof were recurued
backward like the horns of a wild goat. Concerning their tails we have
spoken already, for the vulgar sheep have hairy tails like Foxes and wolves.
And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of their several parts.

In the next place we are to consider the food and diet of sheep, and then
their inclination, The food of sheep and institution of shepheardes.
Bucolisi, Opiliones, and Aepoli, as we have showed already in the story of
Goats; and the Gentiles do report, that the knowledge of feeding of Oxen and
sheep came first of all from the Nymphs, who taught Aristaeus in the Island
of Co. The Graecians therefore call a shepherd Poimem, that is a feeder, of
Poimanaime to feed; and the poets also use Poimantor for a shepherd, and the
shepherds Dogs that keep the flock from the wolf, Pominitay kunes, for the
sheep being not kept Virgill: Nam lupus insidias exptorat ouillia circum. And
Ovid likewise says: Incustoditum captat ouile Lupus.

The whole care therefore of the shepherd must be, first for their food,
secondly for their fold, and thirdly for their health, that so he may raise a
profitable gain, either to himself or to him that owes the sheep. To begin
with the food. Their diet does not much differ from Goats, and yet they have
some things peculiar which must now be expressed. It is good therefore, that
their pastures and feeding places look toward the sun setting, and that they
be not driven over far or put to too much labor: for this cause the good
sheapheard, may safely feed his sheep late in the evening, but not suffer them
to go early abroad in the morning. They eat all manner of herbs and plants, and
sometimes kill them with their bitings, so as they never grow more. The best is
to give them always green meat, and to feed them upon land falowed or
plowed to be sown with corn: and although by feeding them in fat pastures
they come to have a softer wool or hair, according to the nature of their
food, yet because they are of a moist temperament, it is better

In dry pastures they are more healthy then in the fenny, and this is the cause
why it is most wholesome for them to keep in plowed grounds, wherein they
meet with many sweet and pleasant herbs, or else in vpland meadows, because
all moisture breeds in them rottenness: he must avoid the woods and shadowy
places even as he does the fens, for if the sun come not upon the sheep food,
it is as hurtful unto him as if he picked it out of the waters: and the
shepherd must not think that there is any meat so grateful unto his cattle,
but that use and continuance will make them to loath it, wherefore he must
provide this remedy, namely to give them salt oftentimes in the summer when
they return

In the winter time when they are kept within doors, they must be fed with the
softest hay such as is cut down in the autumn, for that which is riper is
less nourishable to them: In some countries they lay up for them leaves,
especially green Ewe leaus, or Elm, three-leaued-grasse, sowed-vines, and
chafe or pease, when other things fail: where there are store of vines they
gather their leaves for sheep to eat thereof without al danger and very
greedily, and I may say as much of the Olive, both wild and planted, and diverse
such other plants, all which have more virtue in them to fat and raise your
beasts if they be aspersed with any salt humor: and for this cause the sea
wormwood excels all other herbs or Myndius writes, that in Pontus the
sheep grow exceeding fat by the most bitter and vulgar wormwood. Beans
increase their milk, and also three-leaued-grasse, for that is most
nourishable to the Ewes with young. And it is observed for the fault which in
latin is called Luxuria segetum, and in English rankenesse of corn, there is
no better remedy then to turn in your sheep in May when the ground is hard, if
not before, for the sheep loves well to crop such stalks, and also the corn
will thrive never the worse, for in some places they eat it down twice, and in
the country about Babylon thrice, by reason of the great fertility thereabouts,
and if they should not do so, Pliny.
it would turn or run al into stalk and idle unprofitable leaves. The same
ecstasy is reported to follow sheep Eryngia, that we have expressed already in
the history of goats, namely, that they all stand still, and have no power to
go out of their pastures, til their keeper come and take it out of their
mouths It is reported that they are much delighted with the herb called
Laserpitium which first purges them, and then does fat them exceedingly: It is
therefore reported that in S. Cyrene there has bin none of this found for many
years, because the publicans that hier the pastures, are enemies to sheep.
For at the first eating thereof the sheep will sleep, and the goat will fall a
neezing. In India, and especially in the region of the Prasians, it raineth
many times a dew like liquid honey falling upon the herbs and grass of the
earth: wherefore the shepherds lead their flocks unto those places, wherwithal
their cattle are much delighted, and such as is the food they eat, such also is
the taste of the milk they render; neither need they to mingle honny with
their milk as Manna, the Graecians Aeromelos, and Drosomelos: The Germans
Himmelhung: and in English Honny-dew; but if this be eaten upon the herbs in
the month of May, it is very hurtful unto them. We have showed already that in
some parts of Affricke and Ethiopia their sheep eat flesh and drink milk,
and it is apparent by Philostratus, that when Apollonius travailed toward
India, in the region Pegades, inhabited by the Orite, they fed their sheep
with fishes, and so also they do among the Carmanian Indians, which do inhabit
the Sea-coastes: and this is as ordinary with them, as in Caria to feed their
sheep with figs, because they want grass in that country: and therefore the
flesh of the sheep do taste of fish when it is eaten, even as the flesh of
sea-soules. The people of that country are called Ichthyophagi, that is
fish-eaters: Likewise the sheep of Lydia and Masidonia, their sheep grow fat
with eating of fishes. Aenius also writes of certain fishes about the bigness
of Frogs which are given unto sheep to be eaten. A^eanus
In Arabia in the province of Ade^ their Oxen, Camels, and sheep, eat fishes
after they be dried, for they care not for them when they be green: the like I
might say of many Virgill; Si tibi lamitium curae, primum aspera sylua
Lappaeque tribulique absint.
Because the same thing as he writes makes them bald, and oftentimes
scratcheth their skin asunder, his words are these; Scabras oues reddit cum
tonsis illotus,
Ad hesit sudor, and her suti secuerunt corpora,
Vepres.
Although a sheep be never so sound, and not much subject to the pestilence,
yet must the Virgil prescribes his shephard to feed his flock in the morning,
according to the manner of the country wherein he lived, for the middle part of
the day was over hot, and not fit for cattle to eat in: yet other nations,
(especially Germany and England) and these Northern parts of the world may not
do so. The whole cunning of shephards is excellently described, The description
of a sheapheardes ear out of Virgil.
for the ordering of their sheep in these verses following; Ergo omni studio
glaciem, ventosque niuales,
Quo minus est illis curae mortalis egestas,
Auertes: victumque feres, and virgea laetus
Pabula: nec tota claudes foenilia bruma.
At vero Zephyris cum laeta vocantibus aestas,
In saltus vtrumque gregem (oues and capras) atque in -- pascua Mittes.
Carpamus: dum mane novum, dum gramina canent:
Luciferi primo came sydere frigida rura
Inde vbi quarta, sitim cali collegerit hora:
Et ros in tenera pecori gratissimus herba est.
Ad puteos, aut alta greges ad stagna iubeto
Et cantu querulae rumpent arbusta cicadae:
Aestibus at medijs vmbrosam exquirere vallem
Currentem ilignis potare canalibus vndam.
Ingentes tendatramos: aut sicubi nigrum
Sicubi magna Iouis antiquo robore quercus
Tum tenues dare rursus aquas: and pascere rursus
Ilicibus crebris sacra nemus accubet vmbra.
Temperat: and saltus reficit iam roscida luna:
Solis ad occasum: cum frigidus era vesper
Littoraque halcyonen resonant, and acanthida dumi.
When they return from their feeding, the shepherd must regard that he put
them not milked while they are hot, until they be cold a little, so likewise in
the morning, let them be milked so soon as day appears, and the little Lambs
be turned out unto the^ which were shut from them. But if their appear upon
the grass Spiders-webs, or cob-webs which bear up little drops of water, then
they must not be suffered to feed in those places for fear of poisoning, and
in times of heat and rain, drive them to the hiest hills or pastures, which do
most of all lie open to the winds, for there shall the cattle feed most
temperately: They must avoid all sandy places, and in the month of April, May,
June, and July, they must not be suffered to feed overmuch, but in October,
September, and November, let them have their full, that so they may grow the
stronger against the winter time. The Romans Apulia, they wintered them in
Samnius; and therefore ( Varro says) the flocks of Apulia betimes in the
morning in the summer season are lead forth to feeding, because the dewy grass
of the morning is much better then that which is dry in the middle of the day,
and about noone when the season grows hot, they lead them to shaddowey trees
and rocks, until the cool air of the evening begin to return, at which time
they drive them to their pasture again, and cause them to feed toward the sun
rising, for this is a general rule among the shepehards: Quod mane ad solis
occasum, and vespere ad solis ortum pascantur oues. That is, That in the
morning they feed their sheep toward the sun setting, and in the evening
toward the sun rising, and the reason of it is: Quia infermissimum peccori
caput, auerso sole pass cogendum. Jacob watered his Sheep, and the Daughters
of Iethro their sheep, at what time Moses came unto them, therefore it is best
oftentimes to mingle their water with salt, At cui lactis amor, cytisum
lotosque frequentes,
Ipse manu salsasque ferat praesepibus herbas
Hinc and amant fluvios magis: and magis vbera tendunt,
Et salis occultum referunt in lacte saporem.
There be many that trouble themselves about this question; namely, The reason
why the sheep of England do not drink
for what cause the sheep of England do never thirst, except they see the
water, and then also seldom drink, and yet have no more sheep in England then
are in any other country of the world: Insomuch Aristotle was deceived, who
thinks that the Northern sheep had mor need of water then the Southern. In
Spain those sheep bear the best fleeces of wool that drink least. In the
Island of Sephalene as we have showed in the story of the Goat, all their
cattle for want of water do draw in the could air, but in the hotter countries
every day once at the least about 9. or ten at clock in the morning they water
their sheep; and so great is the operation of drink in sheep, that diverse
Authors do report wonders thereof, as Valerius Maximus, and Theophrastus, who
affirm that in Macidonia when they will have their sheep bring forth white
Lambs, they lead them to the river Aliatmon, and when they will have them to
bring forth black Lambs, to the river Axius as we Scamander does make all the
sheep to be yellow that drink thereof: Likewise there are two Rivers in
Antandria which turn sheep from black to white, and white to black, and the
like I might add of the River Thrases, of the two Rivers of Beotia, al which
things do not come to pass by miracle, but also by the power of nature, as may
appear by the History of Jacob, when he served his father in law Laban.

For after that he had couenanted with Laban to receive for his stipend all the
spotted sheep, the Scripture says in this manner: Then Jacob took rods of
green Poplar; and of Hayesell, and of the Chestnut tree, and pilled white
strakes in them and made the white appear in the rods. Then he put the rods
which he had pilled, into the gutters and watering troughes, when the sheep
came to drink, before the sheep, and the sheep were in heat before the
rods, and afterward brought forth young of party color, and with small and
great spots. And Jacob parted these Lambs, and turned the faces of the flock
toward these partie-coloured Lambs, and all manner of black among the sheep
of Laban, so he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not with
Labans flock. And in every Ramming time of the stronger sheep, Jacob laid
the Upon this action of the Patriarch Jacob it is clear by testimony of holy
Scripture, that diverse colors laid before sheep at the time of their carnal
copulation, do cause them to bring forth such colors, as they see with their
eyes: for such is the force of a natural impression, as we read in stories,
that fair women by the sight of Blackamores, have conceived and brought forth
black children, and on the contrary, black and deformed women, have conceived
fair and beautiful children; whereof there could be no other reason given in
nature, but their only cogitation of and upon fair beautiful men, or black
and deformed Moors, at the time of their carnal copulation.

So that I would not have it seem incredible to the wise and discrete Reader,
to hear

Of the copulation of sheep.
Now then it follows in the next place to discourse of copulation or
procreation; for there are diverse good rules and necessary observations,
whereby the skillful shepherd must be directed, and which he ought to observe
for the better increase of his flock. First of all therefore it is clear,
that Goats will engender at a year old, and sometime sheep

There be some that allow not the lamb that is yeaned before the parents be
four year old, and so they give them four years to engender and breed,
namely till they be eight year old, but after eight years, they utterly cast
them off: and this opinion Albertus who writes thus: Oues parere vsque ad
annum octauum possunt, and si been curentur vel in vndecimum facultas pariendi
protrahitur, quod tempus est tota fere vita, oues in quibusdam tamen terris
marinis vbi sicca and salsa habent pascua viuunt per vigintie annos and
pariunt. That is to say, sheep may breed until they be eight year old, and
if they be well kept until they be eleauen, which time is for the most part
the length of their days, although in some countries Aristotle also says,
that they bring forth young ones all the time of their life.

The time of their copulation as Pliny and Varro write, is from May 'till about
the middle of August, and their meaning is, for the Sheep of those hot
countries. For in England and other places the Shepheardes protract the time of
their copulation, and keep the Rams and Ewes asunder till September or
October, because they would not have their Lambs to fall in the cold Winter
season, but in the spring and warm weather: and this is observed by the
ancient Shepards, that if the strongest Sheep do first of all begin to
engender and couple one with another, Aristotle Albertus.
that it betokens a very happy and fortunate year to the flock, but on the
contrary, if the younger and weaker Sheep be first of all stirred up to lust,
and the elder be backward and slow, it presageth a pestilent and rotten year.

They which drink salt Water are more prone to copulation then others, Helps
for the copulation of sheep.
and commonly at the third or fourth time, the female is filled by the Male.
There is a great similitude and likeness betwixt Sheep and Goats. First, for
their copulation, because they

In their conception they are hindered if they be over fat, for it is with
them as it is among Mares and Horses, some are barren by nature, and others by
accident, as by over much leanenesse or overmuch fatness. Plutarch makes
mention of an ancient custom among the Graecians, that they were wont to drive
their Sheep to the habitation of Agenor, Agenor was a wise and skillful King,
Master of many flocks, whose breed of Sheep was accounted the best of all
that Nation, and therefore either they sent their females to be covered by his
Rams, or else they signified a happy conjunction of the Rams and Ewes
together. Pliny writes that if the right stone of a Ram be tied or bound fast
when he leapeth upon an Eew, Means to make the Rams get males or females.
he will engender a male, but if the left stone be tied he will beget a female.

Near the City Patrae there are two Rivers, one of them called Milichus, and
the other Charadrus, and the cattle that drink of this water in the spring
time, do beget males, and

Both males and females are begotten as well by the virtues of waters, as by the
virtue of the Rams, and likewise by the virtue of the wind: for when the
North wind blows for the most part males are conceived, but when the South
wind females: and therefore Aristotle says:) In admissur ae tempore obseruare
siccis diebus habitus septentrionales, vt contra ventum gregem pascamus, and
eum spectans admittatur pecus, at sifeminae generandae sunt, austrinos flatus
captare, vt eadem ratione matrices ineantur. That is to say, In the Ramming
time you must observe the blowing of the Northern wind in dry days, and not
only feed the flock against the wind, but also cause the Ram to leap the
Eew with his face to the North: but if you would engender females, then must
you in like manner observe the South wind. Unto this experiment do Palladius,
Aelianus, and Col^umella, agree, and these things are necessary to be
observed about the engendering of Lambs.

Now after that the Ewe is filled by the Ram, the diligent shephard must have
as great regard to keep her from abortement, or casting of her Lamb: therefore
Aristotle says, if Albertus.
and the remedy thereof, for the avoiding of that mischief, is prescribed by
Pliny. Tonitrus (says he) Solitarijs ouibus abortus inferunt remedium est
congregare eas vt coetu inventur, that is to call them together in times of
thunder, is a remedy against abortment. Therefore he requires of a skillful
shepherd a voice or whisell intelligable to the sheep, whereby to call them
together if they be scattered abroad feeding, at the first appearance and note
of thunder. It is also reported, that there are certain veins under the
tongue of a Rambe, the color whereof do presadge or fore-shew, what will be
the color of the lamb begotten by them: for if they be all white, or all
black, or all party colored, such also will be the color of it that they
engender.

The yeaning of lambs. Bathius
Ewes bring forth for the most part but one at a time, but sometimes two,
sometimes three, and sometimes four, the reason whereof is to be attributed
either to the Orchades, which always bring forth two at one time, and many of
them six. There are also sheep in Magnetia, and Afric, that bring forth
twice in the year: And Aristotle in his wonders writes, that the sheep of
Vmbria bring forth thrice in a year, and among the Illirians there are sheep
and Goats, that bring forth twice in the year, two at a time, yea sometimes
three, or four, or five, and that they nourish them altogether, with their
abundance of milk, and besides some of their milk is milked away from them.
Egypt is so plentiful in grass that their sheep bring forth twice in a
year, and are likewise twice lipped: so likewise in Mesapotamia, and in all
moist and hot countries.

Many times it falls out that the Ewe dies in the yeaning of her lamb, and
many multipara, betwixt a Goat and a Ram, Albertus
is a Musmon begottten, and betwixt a Goat bucke and an Ewe is the beast
Cinirus engendered, and among the Rhaetians many times there are mixed monsters
brought forth, for in the hinder parts they are Goats, and in the foreparts
sheep: for Rams when they grow strong, old and wanton, leap upon the
female Goats, upon which they beget such monsters, but they die for the most
part immediately after the yeaning.

Sometimes wild Rams come to tame sheep, and beget upon these Lambs,
which in color and wool do most of all resemble the father, but afterward
when they bear yongue, their wool begins to be like to other vulgar
sheep: when the Ewe is Embruoulcos.

Custody of Ewes and young lambs and means to increase their milk.
Having thus brought the sheep to their delivery for the multiplication of
kind, it then rests to provide that the newborn lamb may be secured from
Dogs, Wolves, Foxes, Crows, Ravens, and and all enemies to this innocent
beast, and also to provide that the Ewe may render to her yongue one sufficient
food out of her vdder; therefore they must be well and extraordinarily fed.
We have showed already the use of Salt,

For this cause some prescribe to be given to their sheep the herb Lanaria,
which they affirm to be profitable to be given to increase milk, some the
stone Galacites to be beaten to powder, and anointed upon the Ewes vdder, and
some prescribe to sprinckle water and salt upon them every morning in the
house or field, before the Sun rising.

But herein I leave every man to his own judgment, hoping it will not be
offensive

Now therefore it follows to entreat likewise of the Wintering of sheep, Of
the Wintering and stabling of sheep.
for as there is more cost to keep them in cold weather then in warm, so it
does require at our hands some discourse thereof. Then it behooves you to
provide for them warm folds and stables whereof the Poet writes in this
manner: Incipiens, stabulis edico in mollibus herbam
Carpere oueis, dum mox frondosa reducitur aestas:
Et multa duram stipula filicumque maniplis
Sternere subter humum, glacies ne frigida laedat,
Molle pecus scabiemque ferat turpeisque podagras.


Whereby it is evident that the cold Winters do beget in sheep diverse and
many

The Tarentine, Grecian and Asian sheep, were wont to be altogether kept in
stables within doors, lying continually upon plancks and boords boared
through, Palladius Pet. Crescent.
that so their precious fleeces might be the better safe-garded from their own
filth and urine, and three times in the year they let them out of their
stables, to wash them and anoint them with oil and wine: and to save them
free from serpents, they burned in their stables, and and under their cratches,
Galbanum, Ceder-wood, woman's hair, and Hearts horns: and of these Tarentine
and Grecian sheep, Columella writes in this manner. It is in vain

Every one of them all the Winter long, were fed with three pintes of Barley,
or Pease, or Beans, three times a day, beside dried Ewe leaves, or vine
leaves, or hay late mowen, or fitches, or chafe. Besides, there cannot be any
milk taken from the dams, for at the first yeaning there is no more then to
serve the little or least lambs, and after a few days, even while they smell
and taste of their dammes belly, they were to be killed for want of suck, that
every lamb which was to be preserved for breed might have two dammes or Ewes
to suck, and so the poor Ewe was forced to a double misery; first to loose
her young one, and afterward to lend her paps and milk to a stranger. And
moreover, they were forced to nourish more males then females, for that at two
year old they were either gelded, or killed, to sell their beautiful skins
to the Merchants, for their wool was Disce and odoratam stabulis incendere
cedrum
Galbaneoque agitare graves nidore chelydros.
Saepe sub immotis praesepibus, aut malat actu
Vipera delituit; coelumque exterrita fugit
Aut tecto assuetus coluber.


In consideration whereof, and of all the pains about the housing of these
tender sheep, the Poet teaches the Shepherd or sheepe-master to kill the
serpents, and dash Cape saxa manu, cape robora pastor
Tollentemque minas, and sibila colla tumentem.
Deijce.


Concerning the ancient forms of their sheep stables, The fashion of sheep
coats or stables.
I find this to be recorded by the ancients. First, they made them low and not
of any high or lofty building, so stretching them out in length and not in
height, that it may be warm in the Winter time, for although there be no
creature better clothed by nature then a sheep, yet is there not any more
impatient of cold, nor more apt to take harm thereby. It must not be
ouer-broad yet so as the Ewe and her lamb may lie both together, and the
breathing place not left open at the top of the house or the sides, for that
will let in too much air, but at the door or porch of their entrance, and that
very low, that so the fresh air may quickly and easily come to their low heads
and bodies, and also their breath the better avoid out of the stable.

They also had a care to cover all the flower with straw or dry boared boords,
or some such other matter, whereby they might stand continually dry and warm,
and also clean

The manner how in old time they bought and sold sheep.
And these were the cures of the ancients about their flocks of sheep. For
upon them they lived, they bought and sold, and herein also it is profitable
to observe the ancient manner of their bargains about these creatures: for
when a man came and bought sheep, he made this protestation to the seller:
Tanti sunt mihi emptae? To whom the seller sunt: Then the buyer draws his
money with these words; Sic illasce o^es, qua de re agitur sanas recte esse,
vti pecus ouillum, quod recte sanum est, extra luscam minam ^. ventre glabro,
neque de pecore morboso esse, habereque recte licere, haec si recte fieri
respondes? etc.

First, the Buyer says, shall I buy these sheep for thus much money: and so
draws his money, to whom the Merchant or seller answers, you shall: Then
says the chapman or buyer again to him, do you promise me then that these
sheep are as sound as sheep should be, without fault of wind or limb,
without blindness, without deafness, without peild bellies, not coming out
of any infected flock; and so as it shall be lawful for me to enjoy them
without all men's contradiction, If these things be true, then I will strike up
the bargain: and yet does not the seller change the property of his sheep,
nor loose

There is no need that I should give any rules about this business, for the
ancients were wont to set one Shepherd over a hundred rough or course wolled
sheep, and two Shepherds over a hundred fine wolled sheep: the common
flocks were seauentie, or foure-score, and the Shepherd that followed them,
was charged to be both vigilant and The general discipline of Shepherds*
and therefore his discipline was: Duci propior esse quam domino, and
incogendis, recipiendisque ouibus, ad clamatione, ac baculo minetur nec vnquam
telum emittat neque ab his longius recedat, nec aut recubet, aut concidat, nam
nisi procedit, stare debet quoniam grex quidem custodis officium sublimem
celsissimamque oculorum, veluti speculam, desiderat, vt neque tardiores, and
grauidas dum cunctantur neque agiles and foetas dum procurrunt seperari a
cateris sinat, ne fur aut bestia hallucinantem pastorem decipiat: says
Columella, He must rather be a guide unto them then a Lord or master over them,
and in driving them forward, or receiving them home after they have stragled,
he must rather use his chiding voice and shake his staff at them, then cast
either stone or dart at them: neither must he go far from them abroad, but the
sheep are meek and gentle, and for the most part keep round together: Yet it
is better to make many flocks then one great one, for fear of the pestilence.

In the story of the Dogs we have showed already how necessary a sheapheards
Dog is to the flock, to defend them both from Wolves and Foxes, and therefore
every shepherd must observe those rules there expressed, for the provision,
choice, and institution of his Dog: and to conclude this discourse of the
sheapheard, when the Lambs are young he must not drive their dams far to
pasture, but feed them near the Town, village or house, and his second care
must be to pick and cull out the aged and sick Sheep every year, and that
in the Autumn or Winter time, least they dye and infect Antiphanes is
profitable to be followed; Illar tantum mactare debes oues ex quibus nullus
amplius fructus, vel casij vel veleris, vel lactis, vel agnorum perniet. That
is to kill those sheep from whom you can never expect any more profit by their
Lambs, milk, Cheeses, or fleeces.


IN the next place it is necessary for the wise and discret sheapheard to
avoid all the means whereby the health of his flock should be endangered,
and those are either by reason of their meat and food that they eat, Of the
diseases of sheep.
or else by reason of natural sicknesses arising through the corruption of
blood, and a third way is by the biting of venomous beasts, as Serpents, and
Wolves, and such like; and a fourth way, Scabbes, Gowtes, swellings, and such
like outward diseases.


THere is an herb which the Latins call Herba Sanguinaria, pilosella, numularia,
and by the Germans and English called Faenegreek, and by the French because of
the hurt it does unto sheep, they use this circumscription of it: L'herbe qui
tue les brebis. The Herb that destroys Sheep. It is called also
Serpentine, because when Snakes and Adders are hurt therewith, they recover
their wounds by eating thereof; when a Sheep has eaten of this Herb, the
belly thereof swells abundantly, and is also drawn together, and the Sheep
casts out of

If in the spring time Sheeepe do eat of the dew called the Hony-dew, it is
poison unto them and they dye thereof: Likewise canes in the Autumn do make
their belly swell

The female Pimpernell does likewise destroy Sheep, except as soon they have
eaten of it they meet with the Herb called Ferus oculus Wilde-eye, but
herein lies a wonder, that whereas there are two kinds of this Herb, a male
and a female, they should earnestly desire a male, and eagerly avoyde a Female,
seeing that both of them have the same taste in the palate of a man, for they
taste like the raw roots of Beets.

There is an Herb in Normandy called Duua, not much unlike Rubarbe, or great
Gentian, but narrower leaves and standing upright, the Nearue whereof in the
middle is red, and it grows about the waters, and therefore I conjecture it
may be Water-Sorrell, or Water-planton, whereof when Sheep have eaten, they
fall into a disease called also Duua, for there is bred in their liver certain
little black Worms or Leeches, growing in small bags or skins, being in
length half a finger, and so much in breadth, wherewithal when the beast is
infected, it is incurable; and therefore there is no remedy but to take

In cases when their bellyes swell, or when they have Worms in their belly
which they have devoured with the Herbs they eat, then they pour into their
bellies the Vrin of men, and because their bellies presently swell and are
puffed out with wind, the Sheapheards

Of the colds of Sheep.
SHeep are known to be subject to cold, not only by coughing after they have
taken it, but also by their strength before they take it, for the Sheapheards
do diligently observe that when any frost or ice falls upon a Sheep, if he
endure it and not shake it off, it is a great hazard but the same Sheep will
die of cold, but if he shake it off and not endure it, it is a sign of a
strong, sound, and healthy constitution: Likewise for to know the health of
their Sheep, they open their eyes, and if the veins appear red and small,
they know they are sound, but if they appear white, or else red and full, they
know they are weak,

Of Scabs, and the causes of them.
The original cause of Scabs.
THe true original of Scabs is either as we have said already leanenesse, or
these signs and tokens, for the tickling or itching humor, lying betwixt the
skin and the flesh, causes the poor sheep either to bite the place with his
teeth, or to scratch it with his horn, or to rub it upon a tree or wall, or if
he can do none of these stamp hard upon the ground with his forefeet, for
which it is good presently to separate the sheep so affected from the flock.

The description and cure whereof is thus expressed by Virgill: Turpis oues,
tentat scabies, vbi frigidus hymber,
Altius ad vivum persedit, and horrida cano
Bruma gelu: vel cum tonsis illotus ad haesit
Sud^r, and her suti secuerunt corpora vepres.

Per fundunt, vdisque aries in gurgite villis
Mersatur, missusque secundo, defluit amni.
Aut tonsum tristi, contingunt corpus amurca:
Et spumas miscent argenti, viuaque sulphura,
Idaasque pices, and pingues vnguine ceras,
Scillamque helleborosque graves, nigrumque bitumen.
Non tamen vlla magis praesens fortuna laborum est,
Quam si qui^ ferro potuit rescindere summum
Vlceris os: alitur vitium, viuitque tegendo,

Abnegat.
which may be englished in this manner: When the poor sheep through wet shewers,
cold winter, summers sweat, or prickings of thorns, does incur the filthy
disease of scabs, then it concerns his master to wash him in sweet rivers
over head and ears, yea to cast him in to swim for his own life, or else to
anoint his body after it is clipped with the spume or froth of oil, and of
silver with Brimstone, and soft Idean Pitch, with wax, Hellibor, black-earth,
or the flesh of shrimps, or if it be possible to cut off the top of the wound
with a knife.


THis disease the Frenchmen call Letac, and of all other it is one of the most
contagious, for our english proverb justifies, one scabbed sheep infecteth a
whole flock, and Textor writes thus of it. Oues frequentius quam vllum aliud
animal infestantur scabie, quam facit macies vt maciem exiguitas cibi, huic
morbo nisi occurratur vnica totum pecus coinquinabit, nam oues contagione
vexantur. That is to say, Sheep are more oftentimes infected with scabs then
any other creature, whereinto they through for leanes, as they fall into
leanesse through want of food; and therefore if a remedy be not provided for
this evil, one of them infected will defile all the residue, for sheep are
subject to contagion: for remedy Varro writes,) and furthermore to wash sheep
oftentimes with this medicine does preserve them from scabs before they be
infected: and others add unto this medicine little sticks of Cypress wood
soked in water, and so wash them therewith, some again make another medicine of
Sulphur or Brimstone, Cypress, white lead, and Butter, mingled altogether, and
so anoint their sheep therewith. Some again Arabia they were never wont to use
other medicine then the gum of Cedar, wherwithall they purged away by ointment
all scabs from sheep, Camels, and Elephants: but to conclude, there is no
better medicine for this evil then vrin, Brimstone, and oil, as Diophones
writes.

Another medicine for the Scabs.
TAke the leeze of wine, the froath of Oil, white Hellibor mingled with the
liquor of sod hops, also the juice of green Hemlock which is expressed out of
the stalk before it has seed, after it is cut down and put into an earthen
vessel with any other liquor mingled with scorched salt, so the mouth of the
vessel being made up close, set it in a dunghill a whole year together, that so
it may be concocted with the vapor of the dung, then take it forth, and when
you will use it, warm it, first of al scraping the vlcerous or scabbed part
with an Oyster shell, or else with a sharp pumise stone, until it be ready to
bleed, and

Another medicine for the same.
TAke the froath of oil sod away to two parts, I mean 3. parts into two, put
therinto the stale vrin of a man, which has bin heated by casting into it hot
burning Oyster-shels, and mingle a like quantity of the juice of Hemlock, then
beat an earthen pot to powder, and infuse a pint of liquid Pitch and a pint
of fried or scorched salt, al which being preserved together, do cure the scabs
of sheep so often as they are used.

Another medicine.
A Drink being made of the juice of hops, and the herb Camaelion, and given
unto them cures them. Likewise the same being sod with the roots of black
Camaelion, and anointed warm upon the place, according to Dioscorides have the
same operation. Likewise Pliny writes, that the scabs of sheep may be cured
by salt water alone, either taken out of the sea or made by art, and forasmvch
as there is great danger in the decoction thereof, least that the water
overcome the salt, of the salt overcome the water, he prescribes a mean how to
know it, namely the equal and just temperament thereof, for (says he) if it
will bear up an Egg then is it well tempered, so that the Egg will swim and
net sink,

Of the holy fire which the Sheapheards call the Pox, or the Blisters, or Saint
Anthonies fire.
THis evil is incurable, for it neither admits medicine nor resication by
knife, and Quod infusum tantum velet, vt and blandiatur igneam saeuitiam
differens magis occisionem gregis, quam prohibens. That is, It seems to close
with raging fire, as it were to flatter it a little, rarher deferring the death
of the beast, then doing away the disease. It is therefore prescribed by the
most memorable Author of all the Egyptians, that men do oftentimes look upon
the backs of their sheep to see the beginning of this sickness, and when they
find a sheep affected herewith, they dig a ditch or hole fit for him at the
entering Columella writes) that this evil has bin driven away, and by no
other means.

Of the warts, and cratches of Sheep.
THis disease is called by the vulgar sheapheardes the Hedghog, and it does
anoye the sheep two manner of ways; first when some gauling or matter arises
upon the paring of the hoof, or else a bunch arise in the same place having a
hayre-growing in the middle like the hair of a dog, and under that a little
worm, the worm is best drawn out with a knife, by cutting the top of the
wound, wherein must be used great wariness and circumspection, because if the
worm be cut asunder in the wound, there issues out of her such a venomous
pustulate matter, that poysoneth the wound, and then there is no

Of the falling sickness.
Hippocratus writes) by opening of the brain it will evidently appear, by the
over great moystnesse thereof.

Of the pains in the eyes.
IT is reported by Theophrastus and Pliny, that for clouds and other pains in
the eye of a sheep, horned-poppy and Chamaelia are very wholesome.


FOr the remedy of this disease take Peniroial, or Margerum, or wild Nep made
up together in wool, and thrust into the nose of the sheep, there turned
round until the beast begin to neeze, also a stalk of black Hellibor boared
through the ear of the sheep, and there tied fast for the space of four and
twenty hours, and then taken out at the same time of the day that it was put
in, by Pliny and Collumella is affirmd to be an excelent remedy against the
Phlegm.


THere is sometimes an inflammation or swelling in the jaws of sheep, which
the Latins call tonsillae, coming by reason of a great flux of humors from
the head unto that place, which may be cured two manner of ways, first, by
incision or opening the skin where the bunch lies, whereby all the watery
tumors are euacuated, and the beast cured, or else if through the coldness of
the weather or some other accident you list not to cut the skin, then anoint
it with liquid pitch, prepared in such manner as is before expressed for the
scabes, by operation whereof, it will be dissolved and dispersed: When this
evil arises in the beginning of the spring, many times it is cured without
all remedy,

For the cough, and pain in the lungs.
Shepherds for these diseases do take the powder of the root of Foale-foot,
and mingle it with salt, so give it unto the sheep to lick, whereby they are
persuaded, that the lungs of the beast are much comforted and strengthened, and
furthermore against the cough, they take blanched Almonds, and beat them to
powder, and so tempering them in two or 3. cups of wine, do infuse it in at the
sheeps nostrilles, and likewise veruine which is called

Of sighing, and shortness of breath.
FOr sheep that are affected with much sighing, they use to bore a hole with
an iron through their ears, and remove the sheep out of the place where they
feed to some other place, and if it come from the sickness of the lungs, then
the herb called Lungwort or Creswort, is the most present remedy in the world:
If the root thereof be drunk in water, or a piece thereof tied under the
sheep tongue, or (as Celsus says) give unto it as much sharp vinegar as the
beast can endure, or half a pint of a man's stale urine warmed

Of the loathing of Sheep, and increasing of their stomach.
IF at any time the sheep forsake his meat, then take his tail and pull off
from it all the wool* afterward bind it as hard as ever you can, and so he
will fall hard to his meat again: and Pliny affirms, that the same part of
his tail which is beneath the knot will die

Of the fluxes of sheep, and looseness of the belly.
FOr this disease the Sheapheardes take no other thing but the Herb
Tormentia, or Set-foyle wherwithall they stop all manner of laxes, but if they
cannot get the same Herb, then they take salt and give it unto them, and so
having increased their thirst, they give unto them black wine, whereby they are
cured.

Of the melt of Sheep.
IN April and May through the abundance of thick gross blood, the melt of
sheep is stopped and filled, then the sheaphards will take two of their
fingers, and thrust them within the nostriles of the sheep, there rubbing them
until they make them bleed, and so draw from them as much blood as they can.

Of the sickness of the Spleen.
FOr as much as a Horse, a Man, and a Sheep, are troubled with the same
diseases, they are also to be cured with the same remedies, and therefore
Spleen-wort given unto sheep, as to a man and a Horse (as we have already
expressed) is the best remedy for this

Of the Feauers of Sheep.
SOmetimes a shaking rage through an incensed and an unnatural heat of the
blood in the sheep begets in him a Fever, the best remedy whereof is to
let him blood, according to these verses; Quin etiam iam dolor balantum lapsus
ad ossa,
Cum furit, atque artus depascitur arida febris:
Profuit incensos aestus auertere: and inter
Ima ferire pedes salientem sanguine venam,
Quam procul aut molli succedere saepius vmbrae
Videris, aut summas carpentem ignauius herbas,
Extremamque sequi, aut medio procumbere campo
Pascentem, and serae solam decedere nocti.
Continuo ferro culpam compesce: priusquam
Dira per in cautum serpant cantagio vulgus.


Of the pestilence or rottenness of Sheep.
Seneca writes, that after the City Pompeij in Champania was overthrown by
an earthquake in the winter time, there followed a pestilence which destroyed
six hundred sheep about that city in short time after, and this he says did
not happen through any natural fear in them, but rather through the
corruption of water and air which lies in the upper face of the earth, and
which by the trembling of the earth is forced out, poisoning first of all the
beasts because their heads are downward and feed upon the earth; and this
also will poison men if it were not suppressed and overcome by a multitude of
good air which is above the earth. It were endless to describe all the evils
that come by this disease, how Virgil; Balatu pecorum, and crebris mugitibus
amnes,
Arentesque sonant ripae collesque supini
Iamque cateruatim dat stragem: atque aggerat ipsis

Donec humo tegere, ac foueis abscondere discunt,
Nam neque erat corijs vsus: nec viscera quisquam
Aut vndis abolere potest, aut vincere stamma.
Nec tondere quidem morbo, illuvieque peresa
Vellera, nectelas possunt attingere putres.
Verum etiam inuisos si quis tentarat amictus
Ardentes papulae, atque immundus olentia sudor
Membra sequebatur: nec longo deinde moranti
Tempore, contactos artus sacer ignis edebat.


It is reported by John Stowe, that in the third year of Edward the first, and
in Anno 1275. there was a rich man of France, that brought a sheep out of
Spain (that was as great as a calfe of two year old) into Northumberland,
and that the same sheep fell rotten, or to be infected with the Pestilence,
which afterward infected almost all the sheep of England: and before that time
the pestilence or rottenness was not known in England, but then it took such
hold, and wrought such effects, as it never was clear

Of Lice and Tikes.
IF either Lice or Tikes do molest sheep, take the root of a Maple tree,
beat the same into powder, and sees it in water, afterward clip off the
wool from the back of the sheep, and pour the said water upon the back,
until it has compassed Mandragora, and some the roots of Cypress, and I
find by good Authors, that all of them are equiuolent to rid the sheep from
these anoyances: to conclude therefore the discourse of sheeps diseases, it is
good to plant near the sheepe-coates, and pastures of sheep, the herb
Alysson, or wild gallow-grasse, for it is very wholesome for Goats, and
sheep, likewise the flowers of worme-wood dried and beaten to powder given
unto sheep with salt, does assuage all inward diseases and pains, and also
purge them thoroughly.

The Juice of Centorie is very profitable for the inward diseases of sheep,
and likewise viscus and stelis. Sheep also delight in the branches of
maiden-haire, and generally the wool of sheep burned to powder and given them
to drink, is very profitable for all their inward dise^ses: And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken of the several infirmities and sicknesses of sheep,
which I desire the English Reader to take in good part, wondering very much at
the many fold wits, and stirring pens of these days, wherein I think our
times may be compared to the most flourishing times that ever were since the
worlds beginning; yet none

I know there are many Noble men, Knights, and Gentlemen of the land, and those
also which are very learned, that are great masters of sheep and cattle, and
I may say of them as the Prophet David says: Their Oxen are strong to labor,
and their sheep brings forth thousands and ten thousands in their fields:
Whereby they are greatly inritched, and yet not one of them have had so much
commisseration, either toward the poor cattle in whose garments they are
warmed, or charity to the world.

For the better direction to maintain the health of these creatures, as to
publish any thing in writing for the benefit of Adams children, but such
knowledge must rest in the

Horses, Dogs, and almost every creature, have gotten favor in Gentlemen's
wits, to have their natures described, but the silly sheep better every way
then they, and more necessary for life, could never attain such kindness, as
once to get one page written or indighted for* the safeguard of their natures, I
do therefore by these presence from my soul and spirit, inuit all Gentlmen and
men of learning, not only to give their minds to know the defects of this
beast, but also to invent the best remedies that nature can afford, for it is a
token of highest mercy unto brute beasts to feed them when they are hungry,
and to recover them when they are sick.

Columella and Varro two great Romans, and such as had attained to some of the
greatest place of the Commonwealth, being men of excellent wits and capacity,
yet had their names been forgotten and they never remembered, if they had not
written of rustic and country matters, and it is no little honor unto them to
have left that behind them in Mandrabulus, that having found a great treasure
in the earth, in token of Juno, one of Gold, another of Silver, and a third of
Brass; and besides the ancient Romans made the penalties of the laws to be
Oxsen and Sheep, and no man might name an Oxen until he had named a sheep.

Among the Trogladites they had their Wives common, yet their Tyrants had laws
to keep their wives to themselves, and they thought it a great penalty for the
adultery of their wife, if the adulterer paid them a sheep.

The Poets have a pretty fiction, that Endimion the Son of Mercury fell in
love with the Moon, who despised him, and that therefore he went and kept
Sheep: afterward the Moon fell in love with his white Sheep, and desired
some of them, promysing to Probus writes) divided his flock into two parts,
the whiter on the one side which had the courser Wool, and the blacker on the
other side which had the finer Wool, so the Moon chose the white one, and
granted him her love, whereupon Virgill thus writes: Pan munere niueo lunae
captum te luna fefellit.

It may appear also in what great regard Sheep were in ancient time, for
that their Priests made holy Water and sacrifices for their santification,
whereof I find these relations, in Gyraldus, Virgil, and others. At the
lustration of Sheep there was another manner of sanctifieng then at other
times, for the Sheapheard rose betimes in the morning, and sprinkled his Sheep
all over with Water, making a perfume round about the Pan, for they did believe
that by this lustration the health of their Sheep was procured, and all
consuming diseases driven away.

It is reported that when Sheep of strange colors were sprinkled with this
water, it signified great happiness to the princes of the people, and they
were gifts for the Emperor, whereupon Virgill made these verses; Ipse sed in
pratis, aries iam suaue rubenti
Murick, iam croceo mutabit vellera luto.
When men went to receive answers of the Oracles, they slept all night in the
skins of Sheep. There was a Noble sacrifice among the Pagans called
Hecatombe, wherein were

It is reported of King Josias, that he sacrificed at one time twelve hundred
Oxen, and eight and thirty hundred sheep, so great was the dignity of this
beast, that God himself placed in the death thereof one part of his worship:
and whereas it was lawful among the heathens to make their sacrifices of
Seepe, Goats, Swine, Oxen, Hens, and geese, they made reckoning that the
lamb and the Kid was best of all, for that God was not pleased with the
quantity but with the quality of the sacrifice. The ancient Egyptians for
the honor of sheep, did neither eat nor sacrifice them, and therefore we
read in holy Scripture, that the Israelites were an abomination to the
Egyptians, because they both killed, and sacrificed sheep, as all Divines have
declared. There is a noble story of Clitus who when he sacrificed at the
Altars, was called away by King Alexander, and therefore he left his sacrifices
and went to the King, but three of the sheep that were appointed to be offered
did follow after him, even unto the Kings presence, whereat Alexander did very
much wonder (and that not without cause,) for he called together all Clitus,
for as much as the sheep which by appointment were dead, that is, ready to
die, did follow him into the presence of the King, in token that he could never
avoid a violent death, and so afterward it came to pass; for Alexander being
displeased with him because (as it is said) he had raild on him in his
drunkenness, after the sacrifice commanded him to be slain, and thus we see how
divine things may be collected from the natures of sheep. These things are
reported by Plutarch, and Pausanias. Another note of the dignity of sheep, may
be collected from the custom of the Lacedemonia^s: When they went to the wars
they drove their goats and their sheep before them, to the intent that before
they joined battle they might make sacrifice to their Gods: the goats were
appointed to lead the way for the sheep, for they were drove Cataeades, and on
a time this miraculous event fell out, for the wolves set upon the flocks, and
yet contrary to their ravening nature, they spared the sheep, and destroyed
the goats; which notable fact is worthy to be recorded, because that God by
such an example among the heathen Pagans, did demonstrate his love unto the
good in sparing the sheep, and his hatred unto the wicked in destroying the
goats, and therefore he reserved the sheep to his own Altar: Idibus alba
Ioui, grandior agna cadit So says Ovid: Nigram hiemi pecudem zephyris
falicibus albam So says Virgil. And again: Huc castus Hibilla
Nigrarum multo pecudum te sanguine ducet.


To Jupiter and to the sun, they were wont to sacrifice white sheep or
lambs, but to Pluto and to the earth, they sacrificed black sheep or lambs,
in token of deadnes: Therefore Tibullus writes: Interea nigras pecudes
promittite Diti And Virgil says: Duc nigras pecudes ea prima piacula sunto.

When the Graecians sent their spies to the tents of the Troyans, to discover
what order strength, and discipline they observed: Nestor and the ancients of
Greece, vowed unto the Gods for every one of the captains a several gift,
that was, Oin melainan, thelen hyporrenon, that is a black sheep great with
young: the reason whereof is given by the Scholiast, they vowed (says he) a
black sheep, because the spies went in the night time, blackness being an
emblem of darkness, and a sheep great with young because of good fortune, for
they Troy. In Apolonia there were certain sheep that were dedicated to the
sun, and in the day time they fed near the river in the best pasture, being
lodged every night in a goodly spacious cave near the City, over whom the
greatest men both for wealth, strength, and wit, were appointed every night to
watch by turns for their better safeguard, and the reason of this custody, and
the great account made of these sheep, was for that the Oracle had commanded
the Apolonians to do so unto them, and make much of them: Afterward Euenius a
noble man among them keeping watch according to his turn, fell asleep, so that
threescore of the said sheep were killed by wolves, which thing came in
question among the common magistrates to know the reason of that fact, Coelius
Herodotus
and how it Euenius being no ways able to defend it, was condemned to have
both his eyes put out, that so he might be judged never more worthy to see the
light with those eyes, which would not wake over their charge, but wink and
sleep when they should have been open: and to conclude, I will but add this
one thing more, that whereas the Egyptians worshipped the sheep for a God, God
permitted the same unto the Jews to be eaten among common and vulgar meats, and
also to be burned at the Altar for sacrifice; and whereas the said Egyptians
did not only eat but sacrifice swines flesh, God himself did forbid his
people that they should never eat nor taste of swines flesh as an abominable
thing: by which he signifies how contrary the precepts of men are to his own
laws, for that which he forbids, they allow, and that which they allow, he
forbids; and therefore how far the people of God ought to be from
superstition, and from the traditions of men, is most manifest by this
comparison, for that was never sanctified that came not into the Temple, and
that was never lawful which was not approved by God: and those things which
in his law have greatest appearance of cruelty, yet are they more just and
equal then the most indifferent inventions of men, which seem to be stuffed
out with mercy, and gilted over with compassion.

And these things most worthy Readers, I have thought good to express in this
place

I am sorry that our times are so far poisoned with covetousness, that there
is no regard of God, man, or beast, but only for profit and commodity: for as
for the service of God we see that the common devotion of men, and practice of
their religion, is Job, namely that they do not serve God for nothing, and
they had rather with ^iues have the devils favor in rich garments and delicate
fare, then with Lazarus with misery and contempt, enjoy the favor of God, and
to set up their hopes for an other world. As for men we see that the son
loves his Father but for patrimony, and that one man makes much of an other,
for hope to receive benefit and recompense by them; and therefore it is no
marvel if the silly beasts have obtained so little mercy, as to be loved, nor
because they are Gods creatures, but for that they are profitable and
serviceable for the Apolonians aforesaid for the Oracles sake, but for their
fleeces and their flesh. Therefore if you have any compassion, learn how to
help their miseries, and publish them to the world for the general benefit,
for he cannot be good which is not merciful unto a beast, and that mercy does
easily die which grows but in one heart of one mortal man.

There were a company of people in Egypt called Lycopolitae, who worshipped a
wolf for a God, and therefore they alone among all the Egyptians did eat
sheep, because the Wolf did eat them; even so I can make no better reckoning
of those men that nourish sheep for their profit only, then I do of the
Lycoplitaes, which worshipped a Wolf, for such men have no other God but their
belly, and therefore I trust these reasons shall

Now in the next place we are to discourse of the vtilities that comes by
sheep, Of the s^ueral (...) by (...).
for as it is the meekest of all other beasts, so as the reward of
meekness, there is no part of him but is profitable to man: his flesh, blood,
and milk is profitable for meat, his skin and wool both together and assunder
for garments, his guts and intrals for Music, his horns and hooues for
perfuming and driving away of Serpents, and the excrements of his belly and
egestion or dung, for the amending and enriching of plowed lands, and for these
occasions did the Egyptians worship it for a God, for that they could see no
creature in the world, but had some parts altogether unprofitable unto men, but
in this they found

First of al therefore to begin with their flesh, although Physicians have
their several conceits thereof, as Galen, (who says) that the flesh of Hares
is better then the flesh of Oxen and Sheep: and Simeon Sethi. who being forced
to confess the goodness of Mutten or Sheepes-flesh in the beginning and
middle of the spring, (yet writes) that it is full of superfluities and evil
juice, and hurtful to al flegmy and moist stomachs* Crescentiensis also
writes, that the flesh of a Sheep has an unpleasant taste through overmuch
humidity, and fit for none but for country-labouring-men: Indeed I grant the
opinion of Platina, who writes thus concerning Rams: Ouem arietem dentibus ne
atting as, non modo enim eius caro non prodest, verum etiam vehementer ouest,
that is, That Rams flesh we ought never to touch, for it is not only
unprofitable, but it is much hurtful: yet in England the flesh of Rams is
usually eaten, either through the craft or subtilty of the butchers, or else
through covetousness. But in many houses (as I have heard) there is a kind of
Venison made of the flesh of Rams, which is done by this means: First they
take the Ram (and beat him with stripes on all parts til the flesh grow
read, for such is the nature of the blood, that it will gather to the sick
affected places, and there stand to

But for the taking away of that Rammy humor and rank moistnes which is
found in the Male-sheep, they use to geld them when they are young and suck
their dammes, or else within the compass of a year after their yeaning,
whereby the flesh becomes so temperate, sweet, and sauoury, as any other
flesh in the world; and if they pass a year,

It were needless for me to set down the division of a dead sheep into his
quarters, shoulders, legs, loins, rackes, heads, and purtinances, for that
they are commonly known, and the relation of them can minister small learning
to the reader, but every part has his use, even the blood that is taken from
him when his throat is cut, has his peculiar use for the norishment of man,
and above al other things the fat of his loins commonly called his sewet
wherein it excels al other beasts whatsoever for their reins, are covered
al over with fat.

of their milk.
Their is no less use of their milk not only for young, but for old persons,
and as well Fierra.

Quod praestat? Caprae, post? Oues, inde boues. Evermore the milk of an Ewe is
best that is newest and thickest, and that which comes from a black Sheep
is preferred before that which is milked from a white, and generally there is
no beast whereof we eat but the milk thereof is good and nourishable,
therefore the milk of sheep is preferred in the second place, and there is no
cause that Erythrea, the milk of a Sheep yeildeth no whaie, and that they can
make no cheese thereof, but by mingling abundance of water with it; they make
abundance of cheese in the Apenine hills, and in Lyguria: the Cheese of Sicilia
is made of Goats and sheep milk, and generally Cheese made of sheep milk
is the better the more new it is. The nature of a sheep is to give milk eight
months together, and in Italy they make Butter also of the milk of sheep, all the Summer time unto the feast of Saint Michaell they milk them twice a day,
but after that, until they coople with their Rams they milk them but once a
day, the faults of cheeses made of their milk is either because they are over
dry or hollow, and full of eyes and holes, or else clammy like burd-lime, the
last proceeds from the want of pressing, the second through overmuch salt,
and the third by overmuch drying in the Sun. And thus much shall suffice to have
spoken of those things in sheep which

In the next place we come to discourse of their wool, and of the shearing or
clipping of sheep, for although their flesh be precious, yet it is not
comparable in value of their fleeces, for that when they are once dead they
yield no more profit, but while they live, they are shoarne once or twice a
year, for in Egypt they are shoarne twice a year, and also in some parts of
Spain. And it appears that in ancient times there were great feasts at
their sheepe-shearings, as is apparent in the holy scripture in many places,
and especially by the History of Absalon, who after he had once conceived
malice against his Brother Ammon, he found no opportunity to execute the same,
until his sheep shearing-feast, at which time in the presence of all his
brethren the kings sons (even at dinner) when no man suspected harm, then did
Absalon give a sign to his wicked Servants to take away his life,

It appears by the words of Pliny who writes thus, Oues non vbique
tondentur durat quibusdam in Locis vellendimos, qui etiam nunc vellunt ante
triduo ieiunas habent, quo languida minus radices lanae retinent: That is,
Sheep are not every where shoarne, for yet unto this time in many places they
do commonly observe the old custom of pulling the wool off from the sheep
back, and they which do now pull the wool and not sheare it, do always
cause their sheep to fast three days before, that so being made weak the
roots of the wool may not stick so fast, but come off more easily.

And indeed I am confirmed in this opinion by the Latin word Vellus which
signifies a fleece, which can be derived from no other Radixe or Theme, nor
admit any A ^ellendo, that is, from pulling.

Cato also in his book of Originalles writes thus, Palatini collis Romae
altera pars velleia appellata fuit, a vellenda lana ante Hetruscam tonsuram
incolis monstratam, That is, to say: There was one part of the hill Palatine at
Rome, which was called Velleia from the pulling of wool, for it was their
custom there to pull their wool, before the inhabitauntes learned the
Hitrutian manner of shearing sheep, by which testimony we see evidently the
great torment that the poor sheep were put unto when they lost their fleeces,
before the invention of shearing, for it is certain by the ancient pictures
and statues of men that there was no use of shearing either hair or wool,
from men

But the hair of men grew rude, and in length like women's, and sheep never
lost their fleeces but by pulling off, and therefore Varro writes, that four
hundred and fifty years after the building of Rome there was no Barber or
sheep-shearer in all Italy, and that Publius Ticinius Menas was the first that
ever brought in that custom among the Romans, for which there was a monument
erected in writing in the public place at Ardea, which until his time was
there sincerely preserved.

Now concerning the times and seasons of the year for the shearing of sheep,
it is not only hard, but also an impossible thing to set down any general
rule to hold in all places. The best that ever I read is that of Didimus. Nec
frigido ad huc, nec iam aestiuo tempore, sed medio vere Oues tondendae sunt,
That is, sheep must neither be shoarne in extreme

In some hot countries they sheere their sheep in April, in temperate
countries they sheere them in May, but in the cold countries in June, and
July, and generally the best time is betwixt the vernall equinoctium, and the
summers solstice, that is before the longest day, and after the days and
nights be of equal length, there be some that sheere their sheep twice in a
year, not for any necessity to disburden the beast of the fleece, but for
opinion that the often shearing causes the finer wool to arise, even as the
often mowing of grass makes it the sweeter. Columella
In the hot countries the same day that they sheere their sheep they also
anoint them over with oil, the leeze of old wine, and the water wherein hops
are sod, and if they be near the sea side, three days after they drench them
over Palladius Celsus
but if they be not near the sea side, then they wash them with rain water
sod with salt; and hereby there comes a double profit to the sheep: First,
for that it will kill in them all the cause of scabs for that year, so as they
shall live safe from that infection: and secondly, the sheep do thereby grow
to bear the longer and the softer wool. Some do sheare them within doors,
and some in the open sun abroad, and then they choose the hottest and the
calmest days, and these are the things or the necessary observations, which I
can learn out of the writings of the ancients about the shearing of sheep.

Sharing time in England.
Now concerning the manner of our English nation, and the customs observed by
us about this business, although it be needless for me to express, yet I can
not contain my self from relating the same, considering that we differ from
other nations. First

The quantity in the least is a pound, except the sheep have lost his wool,
in the middle sort of sheep two pounds or three pounds, as is vulgar in
Buckingham, Northampton, and Leicester shieres; But the greatest of all in some
of those places, and also in Rumney marsh in Kent, four or five pounds: and it
is the manner of the Shepherds and sheep masters to wet their Rams, and so to
keep their wool two or three years together growing upon their backs, and I
have credibly heard of a Sheep in Buckingham-shiere in the flock of the L.P.
that had shorn from it at one time, one and twenty pound of wool. After the
shearing of our sheep, we do not use either to anoint or wash them, as they
Thomas Tusser.

Wash Sheep for the better where water does run,
And let him go clanely and dry in the Sun
Then sheare him and spare not, at two days an end,
The sooner the better his corpse will amend,
Reward not thy Sheep when ye take off his coat
With twitches, and flashes as broad as a groat:
Let not such ungentleness happen to thine
Lest fly with her gentles do make him to pine,
Let Lambs go vnclipped till June be half worn,
The better the fleeces will grow to be shorn,
The Pie will discharge thee for pulling the rest,
The lighter the Sheep is, then feeds it best.
And in another place of the husbandry of sheep he writes thus: Good farm
and well stored, good housing and dry,
Good corn and good dairy, good market and nigh,
Good Sheapheard, good till man, good Jack and good Gill,
Makes husband and huswife their coffers to fill:
Let pasture be stored and fenced about,
And tillage set forward as needs without.
Before you do open your purse to begin,
With any thing doing for fancy within,

With ragged and aged as evil as it:
Let carren and barren be shifted away,
For best is the best, whatsoever you pay.
And in another place speaking of the time of the year for gelding Rams, and
selling of wool which he admonishes should be after Michelmas, he writes
thus: Now geld with the gelder, the Ram and the Bull,
Sew ponds, amend dams, and sell Webster the wool.
Put Lamb fro Ewe, to milk a few,
Be not to bold, to milk and fold,
Five Ewes allow, the every Cow,
Sheep wrigling tail, has mads without fail.
And thus far Tusser, The value of English wool and the use thereof
besides whom I find little discourse about the husbandry of Sheep in any
English Poet. And for the conclusion or rather farther demonstration of this
part, concerning the quallity of our English wool, I can use no better
testimony then that of worthy M. Camden, in his Brittania, for writing of
Buckinghamshire he uses these words: Hac tota fere campestris est, solo item
argillacos tenaci and foecundo, Papulosis pratis innumeros ouium greges pascit,
quarum mollia and tenuissima vellera ab Asiaticis vsque gentibus expetuntur.
That is to say, The whole county of Buckingham is of a clammy, champaigne,
fertile soil, feeding innumerable flocks of sheep with his rich and well
grown pastures or meddowes, whose soft and fine fleeces of wool are desired
of the people of Asia; For we know that such is the trade of Merchandise and
transportation of English cloth, the rare finenesse, and smoothness thereof
is admired in Asia; namely, in Palestina, and other kingdoms of the Turk, and
therefore they have English houses of Merchants, both at Aleppo, Tripoli, and
other places. Again speaking of Lemster ore, or Lemster wool in Herfordshire,
Sed ei precipua hodie gloria est a lana in circum vicinis agris (Lemster ore
vocant) cui excepta Apula and Tarentina, palmam deferunt Europoei omnes. The
greatest glory of that soil is in their wool, which arises from sheep,
feeding in the fildes and pastures adjoining thereunto, (which wool they call
Lemster ore) and all Christendom yealdeth praise and price unto it next after
the Apulian and Tarentinian wool.

And indeed so sweet is the gain that comes by sheep, that in many parts of
the land there is a decay of tillage and people, for their maintenance, and
therefore the said M. Camden says most worthily, even like himself, that is
honest and impartial in all his writings, for in the beginning of his
description of Northamtonshire, where I think above all parts depopulation and
destroying of towns is most plentiful, (so that for Christians now you have
sheep, and for a multitude of good house-holders, you shall have Hythodaeus
after the commendation of the Sheep and Wool of that Country: Ouibus oppleta
and quasi obsessa, quae (vt Hythodaeus ille dixit) tam miles esse tamque exigno
ali solebant, nunc (vtifertur) tam educes atque indomita esse corperunt vt
homines deuorent, ipsos agros, domos oppida vascent, ac depopulentur: which
words I cannot better english then in the words of an Epigrammatarian in our
ages, for to this effect, according to my remembrance he writes, Sheep have
eat up our pastures, our meddowes, and our downs,
Our Mountains, our men, our villages and Towns;
Till now I thought the common proverb did but jest,
That says a black sheep is a biting beast.
Concerning the goodness of english wool, and the difference of it from
others, the reason is well given by Gesner and Cardan: Lanae earum molles and
crispae sunt, ideoque nunc vt olim That is to say, The wool of English sheep is
soft and cur^ed, and therefore it is now commended as highly as ever was the
Meletian wool in ancient time, and not without just cause, for they are
neither anoid with the fear of any venomous beast, nor yet troubled with
Wolves, and therefore the strength of their nature and peaceable quiet wherein
they live, does breed in them the better wool; and besides they never drink,
but quench their thirst with the dew of heaven: And thus much for the discourse
of English wool. The wool of ^ther countries.


I am never able sufficiently to describe the infinite commodities that come
unto men by wool, both for gardens, for hangings, for couerings, for hats, and
diverse such other Chambdens report, the Tarentinian and Apuleian wool must
have the first place, because the sheep of those countries live for the most
part within doors, and besides that, are covered with other skins. In Spain
they make greatest Pollentia near the Alps, of the wool whereof Martial
makes mention, as also of the Canucine red wool, and therefore Ouis Canucina
was an Emblem for precious wool, his verses are these: Non tantum pullo,
lugentes vellere lanas,
Roma magis fussis vestitur gallia ruffis
Canucinatus nostro syrus assere sudet.


We have spoken already of the wool of Istria and Liburnia, which if it were
not for the Strabo writes, that the wool of Mutina, whereby he means all
the country that lies upon the river Seutana, is very soft and gentle, and the
best of Italy; but that of Liguria and Myllain, is good for no other use but
for the garments of servants.

About Padu^ their wool is of a mean price, yet they make of it most precious
works of Tapistry, and Carpets for tables, for that which was rough and thick
in ancient time was used for this purpose, and also to make garments, having
the shags thereof hanging by it like r^gs. There is a city called Feltrum, and
the wool thereof by the Merchants is Feltriolana, felt-wooll, they were wont
to make garments hereof neither wouen nor sewed* but baked together at the
fire like hats and caps, whereof Pliny writes thus: Lanae and per se coactae
vestem faciunt, and si addatur acetum etiam ferro resistunt imo vero etiam
ignibus nouissimo sui purgamento quippe ahenis coquentium extracte indumentis
vsu veniunt ga^^earum vt arbitror inuento, certe gallicis hodie nominibus
discernuntur. Wool has this property, that if it be forced together it will
make a garment of it self, and if vinegar be put unto it, it will bear off
the blow of a sword, dressed at the fire and purged to the last, for it being
taken off from the brazen coffer whereon is was dressed, it served for
clothing, being as he thought an invention of the Gals, because it was known
by French names, and from hence we must see the beginning of our felt-hats. The
Betican wool is celebrated by Iuuenall, when he speaks how Catullis fearing
shipwreck, was about to cast him out into the water; Infecit natura pecus, sed
and egregius fons,
Viribus occultis and Boeticus adiuuat aer.


For the color of Wool in that country grows mixed, not by any art, Of the
colors of wool
but naturally Lauoditian wool is also celebrated, not only for the softness
of it, but for the color, for that it is as black as any Raven, and yet there
are some there of other colors, and for this cause the Spanish wool is
commended, especially Turditania, and Coraxi (as Strabo writes,) for he says
the glass of the wool was not only beautiful for the purity of the black,
but also it will spin out into so thin a thread as was admirable, and therefore
in his time they sold a ram of that country for a tallent. I may speak also
of the wool of Parma, and Altinum, whereof Martial made this disticon;
Velleribus primis apulia: Parma secundis
Nobilis altinum tertia laudat ouis.
Simatulis lana, wool of Seawater-colour, some color taken from an Amethist
stone, some from brightness or clearness, some from Saffron, some from Roses,
from Mirtles, from Nuts, from Almonds, from Wax, from the Crow, as
Colorcoraxicus, and from the purple fish, as from the Colassiue, or the Tyrean,
whereof Virgill writes thus; Hae quoque non cura nobis leuiore tuendae,
Nec minor vsus erit, quamuis Milesia magno,

From hence comes the chalk color, the Lettice color, the Loote-tree-root,
the red color, the Azure color, and the star-colour. There is an Herb called
Fullers-herb, which does soften wool, and make it apt to take color, and
whereas generally there are but two colors, black and white that are simple,
the ancients not knoing how to die wool, did paint it on the outside for the
triumphing garments, in Homer wore painted garments. The Phrigian garments were
colors wrought with needle-worke, and there was one Attalus a King in Asia,
which did first of all invent the weauing of wool and gold together, whereupon
came the name of Vestis Attalica, for a garment of cloth of gold.

The Babilonians and the Alexandrians loved diversity of colors in their
garments also; Mettellus Scipto made a law of death against all such as should
buy a Babilonish garment, that was carpets or beds to eat upon for eight
hundred Cesterses. The shearing of cloth or garments made of shorn cloth, did
first of all begin in the days of S. Augustine, as Fenistella writes. The
garments like poppies had the original before the time of Lucilius the Poet, as
he makes mention in Tarquatus. There was a fashion in ancient time among the
Romans, that adistaffe with wool upon it, The lasting of wool.
was carried after virgins when they were going to be married: the reason
thereof was this (as Varro writes) for that there was one Tanaquilis or, Cayea
cecilia, whose distaffe and wool had endured in the Temple of Sangi many
hundred years, and that Seruius Tullus made him a cloak of that wool, which
he never used but in the temple of Fortune, and that that garment afterward
continued lastly of the lasting and enduring of wool and garments, for it
ought to be no wonder unto a reasonable man, that a woollen garment not eaten by
mothes, nor worn out by use, should last many hundred years, for seeing it
is not of any cold or earthly nature, but hot and dry, there is good cause why
it should remain long without putrification: and thus much instead of many
things for the wool of sheep.

As we have heard of the manifold use of the Wool of Sheep, so may we say
very much of the skins of Sheep for garments and other uses: and therefore when
the wool is detracted and pulled off from them, The vs^ of ^^^ep-skins
they are applied to Buskins, Brest-plates, Shoes, Gloves, Stomachers, and
other uses, for they are also dyed and changed by tincture into other colors,
and also when the wool is taken off from them, they dress them very smooth
Tocetour, called once Tripontium in the county of Northampton: and if any part
of it will not stretch but remain stiff and thick, thereof they make writing
tables, whereon they write with a pensil of iron or Brass, and afterward
deface and race it out again with a sponge or linen cloth: Here of also (I
mean the skins of sheep) comes the coueringes of books, and if at any time
they be hard, stubborn, and stiff, then they soften it with the sheepes-sewet
or tallow.

The bones of Sheep have also their use and employment for the hafting of
knifes. The Rhaetians of the urine of sheep do make a kind of counterfeit of
Nitre. And Russius says, that if a man would change any part of his Horses
hair, as on the forehead, take away the Ruellius


The Swallows take off from the backs of Sheep flocks of Wool, wherewithal
the Of the dung of sheep.
it being excellent and above all other dung necessary for the benifit and
increase of Corn, except Pigeons and Hens dung which is whotter, and the sandy
land is fittest be amended with Sheeps dung, also piants and trees if you
mingle therewith ashes.

Now we are to proceed to the gentle disposition of Sheep, and to express
their inward quallities and moral uses, The inward qualities of sheep and
their moral uses Hermolaus
and first of all considering the innocence of this beast, I marvel from
whence the Gortynian Cretian custom proceeded, which caused adulterers for
their punishment to ride throughout the whole City crowned with Wool, except
that so they might signify his tender and delicate effeminacy; and therefore
as some are crowned

By the behavior of Sheep at their rutting or ramming time the Sheapheardes
observe tempests, Aratus.
raines, and change of weather. If they be very lustful and leap often upon
their females, but if they be slow and backward, then is the poor naked man
glad, for that thereby he conceiueth hope of a gentle Winter, and temperare
weather. Also if in the end of Autumn they stamp upon the ground with
their feet, it betokens Pleiades or seven Stars. Which thing is thus
poetically expressed by A^ienus; -- Si denique terram,
Lanigerae fodiant caput aut tendantur in arcton,
Cum madidus per marmora turbida condit,
Pleiadas occasus, cum brumae in frigora ce^it,
Frugifer Autumnus, ruet aethra concitus Imber.
Concerning the simplicity of sheep, I must say more, and also of their
innocence, yet the simplicity thereof is such, and so much, that it may well be
termed folly, or Animal ineptissimum, for Aristotle writes thus of it: Repit
in deserta sine causa, hyeme obstante ipsum saepe egreditur stabulo, occupatum
a niue, nisi pastor compulerit, abire non vult, sed perit desistens, nisi mares
a pastore ducantur ita enim reliquum grex sequitur. That is, Without cause it
wandereth Albertus writes, that one of them interposeth his body to shadow
the other.

Their dam o^ Ewe loves her Lamb, and knows it by smelling to the hinder
parts, and if at any time ^he dam do not love or make reckoning of her young
one, they give her Scholiast affirms* natural affection increases in her. Of
the foolishness of sheep, there was an Emblem to signify by a man riding upon
a golden fleece, one ruled by his servant or wife; Tranat aquas residens
pretioso in vellere Phryxus,
Et flauam impauidus per mare scandit ouem.
Ecquid id est? vir sensu hebeti sed diuite gaza.
Coningis aut serui quem regit arbitrium.
Aristophanes reproving the stolidity of the Athenians, calls them sheep:
And Origin writing upon Leuiticus says: Ouiu^ immolatio affectuum stultorum,
and irrationabilium correctio. The sacrificing and killing of sheep, is nothing
else but the correction of our foolish and unreasonable affections. We have
showed already in the story of the goat, of a Goat that nourished a Wolves
Whelps, which in the end did destroy her, and the self same is ascribed also
to a sheep.

They observe great love and concord with Goats, and live in flocks together,
Love and hatred of sheep
and for this cause it happens that more goats are destryed by Wolves then
sheep, for that the Goats forsake their fellows, and straggle abroad for
food, but the sheep very sildome: Aristotle
and it is observed that if a Wolf kill a sheep, and afterward any garments
be made of Cardan gives this reason: Haud mirum videri debet ouis pellem a
lupo dilantatae pruritum mouere, nam ob vehementem metam, tum etiam ob
contrariam naturam mali afficitur, et si mori enim vltimu^ sit supplicium, mag
is tamen afficitur corpus in vno quam in altero genere, metuit homo magis in
mari fluctuans quam coram hostibus. It ought not (says he) move any man to
wonder that the wool of a sheep torn asunder by a wolf should beget and
breed itch, for that affection arises from both, from the vehemence of the
fear before it be dead through the sight and sense of the wolf, and also by
reason of a contrary nature that it is oppressed and devoured by, and although
death be the last punishment, yet we see diverse affections follow

The same Cardan affirms* that sheep are afraid of wolves even after death,
for the Wool of a sheep skin will fall of in the presence of a Wolf. Unto
this subscribeth Oppianus, or rather Albertus received it from Oppianus, and
furthermore (it is said) that if the strings of a Sheep and Wolves guts be
fastened to one and the same instrument, they will never make good Harmony; and
furthemore if a drum be made of a Sheeps skin, and another of the Wolves
skin, the drum of the Sheep skin will jar and sound unpleasantly in the
presence of the Wolves skin: but of these things I have no certain grounds,
only I say that there may be natural reason from the substance and matter,
both of one and other, why this accident may chance without discord and hatred
of each other, but from the difference and solidity of the matter; as for
example, the guts of a wolf are strong and hard, and will abide greater strain
then the guts of a sheep, if therefore Coelius


The Poets do ascribe unto their Gods Laneos pedes, feet made of Wool, for
that they come softly and suddenly without noise to take vengeance upon
male-factors; and therefore when they discribe Saturn tied up a whole year
with bands of Wool, their

There is a story in Suidas and Hesychius, of one Crysamis, who was very rich
in Sheep in the Island of Cous, and there came every year an Eele and stole
away his best Sheep among all the flock, at last he met with it and slew it;
afterward the ghost of the Eele appeared to him in the night, warning him (for
fear of other harm) to see him buried. Chrysamis neglected it, and therefore
he and all his family perished. By which story I cannot guess any other
meaning, but that some man stole away his Sheep, and for that he took upon
him a private revenge, most inhumanly suffering him to lie unburied, and Esop,
who writes that on a time as the Sheapheardes were making merry in a cottage,
and eating a Sheep, the Wolf came and looked in, saying unto them: Atqui ego
sitantum facerem, quantum cieretis tumultum. If I should eat a Sheep as you
do, you would all rise in an uproar: which is fitted against them that make
good laws and observe none themselves.

OF THE RAM.
Having thus made a general description of the sheep, wherein we have spent no
more time then was fit and convenient, The several names of Rams.
we are now forced to the several species and kinds, and first of al, order
and nature teaches us to discourse of the male, which in our English language
is called a Tup or Ram, derived I do not doubt from the French Ran, although
also they call him Belier, the Germans Hoden and Hammell, the Italians
Montone, and Ariete, the Spaniardes Carnero, the Heluetians Ramchen, the
Graecians in ancient time Krios, Ariacha, Ceraste, and now in these days
Kriare, the Haebrewes Ail, or Eel, the Chaldees plurally Dikerin, the Arabians
Kabsa, and the Persians Nerameisch. Now concerning the Greek and Latin names,
there is some difference among the learned about their notation, Etymology, or
deriuation; for although they all agree that Aries est dux and maritus pecorum,
yet they cannot consent from what root, stem, or fountain, to fetch the same.
Isidorus brings Aries ab aris, that is, from the Altars, because the
sacrifising of this beast was among all other sheep permitted, and none but
this except the Lambs. Other derive it of Aretes, which signifies virtue,
because that the strength and vigor of Arneios.

Some Latins call him also Nefrens, and plurally Nefrendes, for distinction
from the weather or gelded sheep, for the stones were also called Nefrendes,
and Nebrundines, and the Epithets of this beast are, horne-bearer, insolent,
violent, fighting, fearful, writhen, swift, wool-bearer, leaping, headlong,
warrior, and in Greek, meek, gentle, and familiar, and is not known by the
name Ctilos, for that it leads the whole flock to the pastures, and back
again to the foldes. And thus much may suffice for the name and
demonstratiueappellation of this beast, now we will proceed forward to the
other parts of

First of all for the election of Rams fit to be the father of the flock, The
chief of Rams for breed.
and to generate and increase issue, and therefore Varro and others call him
Admissarius Aries, a stallion Ram. They were wont to make choice of such an
one from an Ewe that had brought forth twins, for that it is conceived, he
will also multiply twins; for first in the choice of a Ram they look unto his
breed and stock from whence he is descended, and then to his form and outward
parts, as in Horses, Oxen, Dogs, Lions, and almost all creatures. There are
races and stocks which are preferred one before another, so is it also in
Sheep, and therefore require that he be Boni seminis pecus, a Ram of a good
breed, Collumella advises that his wool, palate of his mouth, and toongue be
all of one color, for if the mouth and tongue be spotted, Palladius
such also will be the issue and lambs he begets, for we have showed you
already, that the Lamb for the most part follows the color of the Rams
mouth, such a Ram is thus described by the Poet: Illum autem quamuis aries sit
caudidus ipse,
Nigra sub est vdo tantum eui lingua palaeto
Reijce, ne maculis infuscet vellera pullis

And therefore forasmuch as the young ones do commonly resemble the father,
Crescentiu^
and bear some notes of his color, let your Ram be all black or all white,
and in no case party-colored, and for the stature and habit of his body let
it be tall and straight, a large belly, hanging down and well clothed with
wool, a tail very long and rough, a broad forehead, large stones,
crooked-winding-hornes toward his snowt, having his ears, covered with wool,
a large breast, broad shoulders and buttockes, his fleece pressed close to his
body, and the wool not thin nor standing up. And for the horns, although in
all Regions Rams have not horns, yet for windy and cold countries the great
horned beasts are to be preferred, Columell^^
for that they are better able through that defense to bear off wind and
weather, yet if the climate be temperate and warm, it is better to have a Ram
without horns, because the horned beast being not ignorant what weapons he
bears on his head, is apter to fight then the polde sheep, and also more
luxurious among the Ewes, for he will not endure a rival or
companion-husbande, although his own strength and nature cannot cover them
all: but the pold Ram on the otherside is not ignorrnt how naked and bare and
unarmed is his head, and therefore like a true coward, sleeps in a whole

There is no beast in the world that so much participateth with the nature of
the sun as the Ram, for from the autumnall Equinoctium unto the Vernall,
Albertus The re^emblance betwixt the ^un and the Ram
as the sunn keeps the right hand of the Hemisphere, so does the Ram lie upon
his right side; and in the summer season as the sun keeps the other hand of
the Hemisphere, so does the Ram lie upon his other side. And for this cause
the Lybians which worshipped Ammon, Macrobius
that is the sun, did picture him with a great pair of Rams-horns. Also,
although in the heavenly or celestial sphere or Zodiac there be nothing
first or last, yet the Egyptians have placed the Ram in the first place, for
their Astronomers affirm that they have found out by diligent Aries in the
midst of heaven, and because the middle of heaven is at it were the crown or
vpper-most part of the world, therefore the Ram has the first and uppermost
place, because it is an Equinoctial sign, Coelius. The sign of the Ram in
the Zodiac.
making the days and nights of equal length, for twice in the year does
the sun pass thorough that sign, the Ram sitting as it were judge and
arbiter twice every year, betwixt the day and night.

There be poetical fictions how the ram came into the Zodiake, for some say,
that when Bacchus led his army through the deserts of Lybia, wherein they were
all ready to perish for water, there appeared to him a goodly ram, who showed
him a most beautiful and plentiful Poetical fictions and ridles.
afterward Bacchus in remembrance of that good turn erected a Temple to
Jupiter, Ammonius also in that place for so quenching their thirst, placed
there his Image with Rams horns, and translated that ram into the zodiac
among the stars, that when the Sun should pass through that sign, all the
creatures of the world should be fresh, green and lively, for the same cause
that he had delivered him and his host from perishing by thirst, and made him
the Captain of all the residue of the signs, for that he was an able and wise
leader of soldiers. Other again tell the tale somewhat different, for they
say, at what time Bacchus ruled Egypt, there came to him one Ammon, a great
rich man in Africa, giving to Bacchus great store of wealth and cattle to
procure favor unto him, and that he might be reckoned an inuenter Bacchus gave
him the land of Thebes in Egypt to keep his sheep and cattle, and afterward
for that invention, he was pictured with rams horns on his head, for
remembrance that he brought the first sheep into Egypt, and Bacchus also
placed the sign of the ram in heaven: These and such like fictions there are
about all the signs of heaven, but the truer observation and reason we have
showed before out of the Egyptians learning, and therefore I will cease from
any farther prosecution of these fables. Dydimus Aristotle


They ought to be two year old at least before you suffer them to join in
copulation with the Ewes, and for two months before to be seperat and fed
more plentifully then at other times, that so at their return they may more
eagerly and perfectly fill the Ews: and Salomons seal, for all these are
virtuous to stir up and increase their nature. And likewise one kind of the
Satyrium and salt water, as we have said in the discourse before going.

Now, at the time of their copulation they have a peculiar voice to draw and
allure their females, differing from the common bleating, whereof the poet
speaks. Bloterat hincaries, and pia balat ouis: This beast may continue in
copulation, and be preserved for the generation of lambs till he be eight
year old, and it is their nature the elder they be, to seek out for their
fellows the elder Ewes or females, forsaking the younger by a kind of natural
wisdom. Now concerning the time of their admission to copulation, although we
have touched it in the former Treatise, yet we must add somewhat more in this
place. In some places they suffer them in April, The best tim of copulatio^.
and some in June, that so they may be past danger before winter, and be
brought forth in the Autumn when the grass after harvest is sweet, but the
best is in October for then the winter will be ouerpassed before the lamb comforth
of his dams belly. Great is the rage of these beasts at their copulation, for
they fight Arrietare among the writers is a word to express singular violence,
as may apeare by these verses: Arietat in portas and duros obijce posts, Their
rage in Ramming ^ime.
and Siluis of Dioxippus, Arietat in primos obijcitque immania membra. And so
Seneca in his book of Anger. Magno imperatori aretequamacies inter se
arietarent, cox exiluit: and indeed great is the violence of rams, for it is
reported that many times in Rhatia to try their violence, they hold betwixt the
fighting of rams a stick or bat of Corne-tree, which in a bout or two they
utterly diminish and bruise in pieces. There is a known fable in Abstenius of
the wolf that found a coople of rams, and told them that he must have one of
them to his dinner, and bad them agree betwixt themselves, to whose lot that
death should happen, for one of them must die, the two rams agreede together,
that the wolf Arietes, wherwithal they push down the walls of cities, Martial
and warlike inue^tions called Rams
as the Readers may see in Vitruuius, Valturnis and Ammianus, for they say that
the warlike ram was made of wood, and covered over with shells of Torteyses, to
the intent it should not be burned when it was set to a wall, and it was also
covered with the skins of sacke-cloath by rows artificially contrived, within
the same was a beam which was pointed with a crooked iron, and therefore
called a ram, or rather because the front was so hard that it overthrew walls,
when by the violent strength of men it was forced upon them, and whereas it was
shaped over with Tortoise shells, it was for the true resembla^ce Culcitrae,
Laquei, Lupi ferrum, made like a pair of tongs, whereby as Polyaenus writes,
many times it came to pass, that when the wall was overthrown Cerle hosts
sponte ab obsessis destructa moenia metuentes ingredi in vrbem non audebant.
And thus much for the force of rams both their true and natural strength, and
also their artificial imitation by men. Now on the otherside the wise
shepherds want not devises to restrain the wrath of these impetious beasts.
For Epicharmus the Syracusan says, if there be a hole bored in the backer part
of his crooked horn near his ear, it is very profitable to be followed, for
seeing that he is captain of the flock, and that he leads all the residue,
it is most necessary that his health and safeguarde be principally regarded,
and therefore the ancient shepherds were wont to appoint the captain of the
flock from the prime and first appearance of his horns, and to give him his
name, whereof he took knowledge and would lead and go before them at the
appointment and direction of his keeper.

When he is angry he beats the ground with his foot, and they were wont to
hang aboard of a foot broad, wherein were drouen many sharp nails with the
points toward the head, so that when the beast did offer to fight, with his
own force he wounds his forehead. They were wont also to hang a shrimpe at
the horn of the ram, and then the Morral uses of ramshorns Aelianus


And concerning their horns which are the Noblest parts of their body most
regarded, yet I must speak more, for there was wont to be every year among
the Indians a fight betwixt men, wild beasts, bulls, and tame rams: and a
murderer in ancient time was wont to be put to death by a ram, for by art the
beast was so instructed, never to leave him till he had dashed out his brains.

It is reported of a rams horns consecrated at Delos, Plutarch.
brought from the coasts of the red sea, that weighed twenty and six pounds,
being two cubits, and eight fingers in length. There was a ram in the flocks of
Pericles, that had but one horn, whereupon when Lampon the poet had looked, he
said: Ex duabas quae in vrbe vigerent factionibus, fore vt altera obscurata ad
vnum periclem, apud quem visum foret portentum resideret ciuitatis potentia,
Coelius
That Pericles from whose possessions that monster came, should obscure the one,
and take the whole government of the city. Cardan


It is reported by Rasis and Albertus, that if the horns of a ram be buried
in the earth, they will turn into the herb sperrage, for rottenness and
putrification is the mother of many creatures and herbs. There was as
Aristotle reports in his wonders, a child borne with a rams head: and it is
affirmed by Ovid, that Medea enclosed an old decrepite ram in a brazen
vessel, with certain kind of medicines, and afterward at the opening of the
said vessel, she received a young lamb, bred upon the metamorphosis of

Concerning Phrixus, whereof we have spoken in the former part of our
discourse of the sheep, there is this story. He was the ^he son of Athaman,
and Nepheles: Afterward his mother being dead, he feared the treachery of his
mother in law, and step-dame Inus, The story of Phrixus and the ram with a
golden fleece. Apollonius.
and therefore with his sister Hell, by the consent of their father, he swam
over a narrow arm of the sea upon the back of a ram, carrying a golden
fleece, which before that time his father had bestowed upon him.

His sister Hell being terrified with the great roaring of the Water, fell off
from the rams back into the sea, and thereof came the name of Hellesponte, of
Hell the Virgin, and Pontus the sea, but he came safely to Colchis to king
Hetes, where, by the voice of a Ram Phryxus, and also that golden ^eece was
hanged up and reserved in the Temple of Colchis, until Jason by the help of
Medea aforesaid, did fetch it away, and the ram was placed among the stars in
his true shape, and was called Phrixeus, of Phrixus, who was the father of the
Phrygian Nation.

Of this fabulous tale, there are many explications and coniecturall tales
among the learned, not unprofitable to be rehearsed in this place. Coelias and
Palaphatus say, that the ram was a ship, whose badge was a ram, provided by
Athaman for his son to sail into Phrygia: and some say, that Aries was the
name of a man that was his foster-father, Hermol^us.
by whose counsel and charge he was delivered from the stepmother Inus.

Alchymye, and that thereby Phrixus got away. But in Athens there was reserved
the image of this Phrixus, Apollonius Gyraldus. The fleece of Colchis
offering the ram (upon which he was borne over the Sea) to the God
Laphystius: and whereas there are in Colchis certain rivers out of which there
is gold growing, and oftentimes found, whereupon some of them have received
their name, as Chrysorrhoa, and the men of that country said to be greatly
enriched thereby, Tzetzes.
they gave occasion of all the poetical fictions about the golden fleece. There
are in some places of Affricke certain sheep, whose wool has the color of
gold, and it may be, that from this occasion came the talk of golden fleeces.
It is said that when Atreus reigned in Pelopomesus, he vowed to Diana the best
whatsoever should be brought forth in his flock, and it fortuned that there
was yeaned a golden lamb, and therefore he neglecting his vow did not offer
it, but shut it up in his chest. Afterward when he gloried and boasted of that
matter, his brother Thrystes greatly envied him, and counterfetting love to his
wife Aerope, received from her the golden lamb. Then being in possession
thereof, he contradicted Atreus before the people, affirming Atreus, whereunto
he yielded, but Jupiter by Mercury discovered the fraud, and so Thyestes took
him to flight and the lamb was commanded to be offered to the sun, and so
I conclude this discourse with the verses of Martial: Mollia Phryxei
secuisticolla mariti
Hoc meruit tunicam qui tibi saepe dedit.
And seeing that I have entered into the discourse of these poetical fables,
or rather Riddles which seem to be outwardly clothed with impossibilities,
Transmutation of rams.
I trust that the Reader will give me leave a little to prosecute other
Narrations, as that Neptune transforming himself into a ram, deceived and
deflowred the Virgin Bisabpis, and the ancients when Ovid writes, he was
called Jupiter Ammonius: Vnde recuruis
Nunc quoque formatis lybis est cum cornibus Ammon.


There be some that say that at what time Hercules desired very earnestly to
see Jupiter, whereunto he was very unwilling, yet he cut off a rams head, and
pulled off his thicke-woolly-rough-skinne, Herodotus
and put it upon him, and so in that likeness appeared to Hercules, and for
this cause the Thebanes to this day do not kill rams, but spare them like
sanctified Jupiter, and say, that Jupiter was called Ammonius aries, because
that his answers were mystical, secret and crooked, like a rams horn. Strabo.


Sacrificing of Rams among the Gentiles
Now concerning the sacrificing of rams, we know that God himself in his word,
permitted the same to the people of the Jews, and therefore it cannot be but
material for us to add something also to the discourse before recited in the
story of the sheep. The gentiles when they sacrificed a ram, they roasted his
intrals upon a spitte or broach, and there were certain days of sacrifice
called Dies Agonales, wherein the principal ram of every flock after combat
or fighting was slain and sacrificed for the safeguard of the residue Ianius,
and others by the king: Ita rex placare sacrorum
Numina lunigerae coniuge debet Ouis.
There was at Tanagrum a statue of Mercury, carrying a ram (and therefore he is
called Krophoros Hermes, and by that name was worshipped of all the Tanagreans.
Now there was a cunning workman of Calamis that made that statue, for they
say, that when the City was grievously afflicted with a pestilence, Mercury by
carrying a ram about the walls, delivered the same, and therefore they did not
only procure that statue for Mercury, but also ordained that every year one
of their most beautiful young men should carry a sheep on his shoulder round
about the walls. In January they sacrificed to Jupiter a ram, and in February a
Weather. Gyraldus.
Pliny writes a strange Riddle which is this. Cinnamomum There is Cinnamon
growing in Ethiopia, and yet it is not reaped by men, except the God thereof
gave permission or leave, whereby some understand Jupiter whom they called
Sabin, and the Latins Assabinus. Now Pliny says, Pliny.
that if they had sacrificed forty and four Oxen, Bucke-goats and rams, with
their intrals, they purchased leave to gather that Cinnamon. When the Romans
observed their Soli-Taurilia, they sacrificed a Bull, a Goat, a ram, and a
Bore, but unto Jupiter they held it not lawful to offer a ram. Ulysses offered
to Neptune a Ram, a Bull and a Boar, and to conclude this discourse of the
rams sacrifices, I find a story worthy the noting, recorded by Paulus Venetus,
although it be altogether superstitious and full of humane blindness and
error.

There is a City of Tartary called Sachion, the inhabitants whereof are
Mahometanes and ydolaters, as soon as any of them have a son borne, he
presently commends him to one ydols tuytion and protection or other: and that
year together with his young son he nourishes a ram tamed in his own house:
at the years end, he offers his son

Rhaetian rams, and in some places of Italy, namely, that after they be five,
six, or seven year old, they bring forth under their great horns two other
little horns, and that these rams are weak of body, and have but rough and
course wool. In other places if at any time they chance to bear mo horns
then two, it is prodigious and unnatural. And thus much of the Ram.

Of the Weather-sheepe.
ALthough this beast have all things in common with the ram aforesaid, for he
is a male-sheepe, and in nature differs not from him, but only by the Art of
man, I might very well have confounded and conjoined his story with the
praecedent: but seeing that al Nations do distinguish him from the ram, because
of one property or defect in him, for that he is not Veruex quasi versa
natura, for that his natural seed is changd and turned in him, for his stones
are taken away, and so he remains libbed and gelded, being an Eunuch among
beasts. The Graecians call him Krion Tomian, that is, a gelded ram, for they
have not one word to express him. The Latins do also call him Sectarius, and
Festus renders this reason thereof, Quia eum sequantum agni, because the
little lambs love his company and follow him: and indeed by reason of his
unaptness to generation, the Ewes forsake his company, and the rams cannot
endure him, therefore instead of other he associateth himself with the lambs.
In Frischling, and also Hammel, which word seems to be derived from the
Arabian word Lesan Alhamell, a rams tongue. The Italians call him Castrone,
Custrato, and Montone, the French Mouton, and the Illyrians Beram.

Concerning the gelding of rams or making of Weathers, I have not much more to
say, then that which is already expressed in the general tractate of the
sheep, and for the manner I do refer the Reader, not only to that part, but
also to the discourse of the calfe and Ox, wherein I trust he shall find
satisfaction for this point, whether he will do it by a knife, by reed, by
finger, or by hammer, for all those ways are indifferently proponed. The best
time for the gelding of rams, ought to be in the waine or decrease of the moon
at five months old, so as he may neither be troubled with extremity of cold or
heat. And

Being thus libbed or knit, their horns grow not so great as the other males
vngelded, but their flesh, and lard, or sewet is more acceptable then of any
other sheep whatsoever, except they be over old, for that it is neither so
moist as a lambs, nor yet so rank as a rams or Ewes, where Baptiste Fiera made
these verses: Anniculus placeat, vel si sine testibus agnus,
Pinginox est hordo quin calet olla vores.
Hunc anno se duriper pascua montis anhelat.
Maluero, si auri villere dives erit.
Platina also writes thus of the flesh of Weathers, Veruecem caro satis
salubris est and melior quam agnina, calida enim and humida habetur, ad
temperamentum tendeus, illa vero plus humiditatis quam caliditatis habet, That
is to say: The flesh of Weathers is wholesome enough, and better then the flesh
of Lambs, because it is hot and moist, but that has in it more moisture then
heat, and therefore this tends to a better temperament. Munster writes, that
the inhabitants and people of Valuis take this flesh of Weathers and salt it,
afterward dry it in the air where no smoke may come unto it; afterward they
lay it up in straw,

As the flesh of these beasts grows the better for their gelding, because
they live more quietly and peaceably, for that their fore-heades grow weak and
tender, and their horns small, so also it is reported that their tails grow
exceeding large and fat. In some Regions, as in Arabia Foelix, and other
places, and because the report should not seem feined by me, I will describe
it in the Authors own words, Paulus Venetus writes thus of the Weathers of
Scythia, and in the region Camandu, subject to the great Tartar. In Tartariae
regione Camandu vrietes non minores asinis sunt, cauda tam longu and latu vt
triginta librarum pondus aequent. In Camandu a territory of Tartaria there are
Rams like Asses, in stature and quantity, whose tails are so long and broad,
that they balance in weight thirty pound. Vartoman writes. In adibus regis
Arabium fuisse praepingus veruecem, cutus cauda adeo obesa fuit vt libras
quadraginta appenderet, and propi Reame vrbem Arabiae foelicis, veruecum genera
reperiuntur, quorum caudam animaduerti pondo esse librarum quadragintu quatuor,
carent cornibus, adeoque esse obesi and pingues vt vix incedere possunt. Circa
Zeclam vrbem Aethiopiae verueces non nulli ponderasissimas trahunt caudas, vt
pote pondo sedecim librarum. His caput and collum nigricant, caeteris albi
sunt. Sunt etiam verueces prorsus albicantes, quorum That is to say, In the
house of the King of Arabia, there was a Weather very fat, whose tail waighed
forty pound, and near unto Reamia, a City in Arabia Foelix, there are a breed
or race of Weathers, whose tails for the most part waied four and forty
pound. They want horns, and are so fat that they can scarcely go. Also about
the City Zecla in Aethiopia, the Weathers draw long tails, waighing sixteen
pound. Whereof some have their heads and neck black, and all the other parts
of their body white, some of them again al white, having a tail but of a
cubit long like a curious and planted Vine, their crestes and hair hanging
from their chinne to the ground. Thus far of the Arabian Weathers. Of the
Indians he writes thus in another place. Circa Tanasuri vrbem Indiae tanta
est pecudum copia vt duodeni veruices singulo aureo vaeneunt. Conspiciuntur
illic verueces alij, cornua haud ab similia daemis habentes, nostris long
maiores ferocioresque. Candae veruecem in perigrinis regionibus tantae sunt,
quantus nullus apud nos veruex. Contingit hoc quia hutindissimum hoc animal,
and inter quadrupedia frigidissimum eumque coetera essa vetendi nequeant, ne
pinguedine immensa, extensis etiam assibus and neruis non parum, quae humida
natura velut pisces semper incremento apta sunt. That is, About the city
Tarnasar in India there is such great plenty of cattle, that they sell twelve
Weathers for a noble, and yet there are Weathers which have horns like to the
horns of Dear, being longer, greater, and fiercer then our Rams, and their
tails in foreign and strange

Thus much say they of the tails of Weathers, now I know such is the solidity
of diverse Readers and people, that for these reports, they will presently give
both these Authors and me the Whet-stone for rare untruths and fictions; I do
not marvel, for such (I dare assure my self) do not believe all the
miracles of Christ, having short and shallow conceiptes,

The use of the several parts of this beast, is no other then that which is
already reported of the sheep and Ram, and therefore I will not stand to
repeat that which is so lately related, and for the remedies or medicinal
virtues, I find few that are special except those which are common between this
and other of his kind. It seems by Plautus that a Weathersheepe is accounted
the most foolish of all other, a coward and without courage, for Ego ex hac
statua veruecea, volo erogitare, meo minore quod sit factum filio. That is, I
will demand of this blockish weathers picture, (meaning his foolish servant)
what is become of my younger son.

These were among the Pagans sacrifyced, but not among the Jews, for they have
not so much as a name for it, and it is probable that seeing it is an imperfect
beast, God forbade it to his sanctuary: when the gentiles brought a Lamb at the
side of a Weather to be sacrificed, they called them Ambegni, and so also a
Lamb and an Ox. Alciatus makes this pretty emblem of a Weather which with a
Hedghog is the arms of Millaine, wherewithal I will conclude this discourse;
Festus
Bituricis veruex, Heduis dat sucula signum.
Ais populis patriae debita origo meae est.
Quam Mediolanum sacram dixere puellae
Terram: nam vetus hoc Gallica lingua sonat.
Culta minerua fuit, nunc est vbi numine Tecla
Mutato matris virginis ante domum.
Laniger huic signum sus est, animalque biforme.
Acribus hinc setis, lanitio inde leui.


OF THE LAMB.
THe Lamb is diversely termed by the Haebrewes, as is already showed in the
story of the sheep, The several names
(in some part) and now more particularly, Seh signifies a Lamb, Keseb and
Kebes a Lamb of a year old, also Gedi, according to the opinion of David
Kimhi, in Greek Arniou, and Arna, and Amnos, and at this day Arni, the
Italians Agna, Agno, Agnello, the Spaniards Cordero, the French Agueau, and
Agnelet, the Germans Lamb and Lamblein, and as the first year we call it in
English a Lamb, so the second year a hog Lam-hog, or Teg if it be a female, the
third year Hoggrils and Theaues; the Latins call it Agnus, of the Greek word
Agnos, castus quia est hostia pura and immolationi apta. That is, chaste for
that a Lamb is pure and clean, and fit for sacrificing.

And the common epithits expressing the nature of this beast are these, rough
yearling, weak, unripe, sucking, tender, butting, fat, milke-eater, merry,
sporting, bleating, affable Heaypnous, because of the sweet smell that is found
in them when they are young and suck their dams.

Aristotle
We read that the Lambs of Afric, both males and females are yeaned with
horns, the reason whereof is showed in another place, Aelianus
and it is common and natural thing to them all as soon as they are fallen out
of their dams belly, they presently leap and run about their dams, Of the meek
disposition of Lambs.
and also learn to know them by whom they are nourished, according to the
Lucretius: Praetrea teneri tremulis vocibus hoedi,
Corniferas norunt matres, agnique petulci.
S. Ambrose writes thus of the inclination of a Lamb to his mother, and the
love of her milk. Agnus simplicissimus ouium recognoscit vocem parentis, cum
amatre quandoque oberrat, frequenter eam balatu excitat multisque licet
versetur in millibus ouium and festinat ad eam nam quamuis cibi and pontus
desiderio tenetur transcurrit tamen aliena vbera, licet humore lactis grauida
exundent soluisque materni lactis fontes requirit. The Lamb is a most simple
beast, and erreth many times from his mothers sides, having no other means to
provoke his mother to seek him out but by bleating, for in the midst of a
thousand sheep it discerns the voice of his parent, and so hasteneth to her
when it hears her; for such is the nature keep in the Lambs, that so they
may be clear day and night from all violence of the Rams, for at night they
lodge single and alone by their dams sides. The like regard is to be had if
they do not suck their mothers, they must anoint their lips with butter or
Hogges-grease and milk, and for two months after their yeaning it is not good
to rob them of any milk, but suffer them to suck all that their dammes can
breed, Dydimus
for so their Lambs will grow more strong, and also their Wool more fine.
And when they are to be weaned they must first of all be brought out of love
of their mothers milk, least after their separation they languish, and loose
all natural joy, whereby they are never likely to come to good: afterward let
them be hearded or drove to field, Varro
but after their yeaning it is profitable when they are a week old to give
them salt, and so the second

They are also the best and strongest which are bred in the spring time, and
much fatter, and more able then those which are yeaned in the Autumn. And yet
there are some that affirm, that they which are bred in the Winter are fatter
then those which are bred in the Summer, for if strength of nature be able to
live out the Winter at the first yeaning, much more will they be able to endure
when they are elder, Pliny
in the first sucking of a Lamb, the beestinges must be milked out, for they
are apt to fall into many diseases, such Democritus
and their milk mixed with rain Water, and so given to the sick Lamb, and
if they will not take it willingly, then infuse it into her throat with a
horn, and if they be troubled with scabs, take Hysope and salt, of each an
equal quantity, and if the mouth be broken out and blistered, then rub the
aflicted place therewith, afterward wash them with vinegar, and then anoint
them with liquid Pitch and hogs grease; there must also be a care had to keep
them from Lice.

Concerning the use of their several parts, we have already showed in the story
of sheep, and therefore we neeede not prosecute it in this place. Their skins
are fitter to cloth men, Apulia, and al those parts which are beyond Rome.
Narbon, and Spain yeald plentiful store of black Lambs, and their skins are
sold by Merchants: and white skins are plentiful in England.

Their flesh is nourishable and convenient for food, but yet inferior to
weather mutton, for that it contains more moisture then heat. To conclude
this discourse of the Lamb, the greatest honor thereof is for that it pleased
God to call his blessed Son our Arneia soi lelaleken agnus tibi locutus est. A
Lamb has spoken this unto you, and it was a prouerbiall speech to express a
divine revelation of some business, that men cannot attain unto by ordinary
and common means, because either it is concealed, or else it concerns
things to come. For it is reported by Suidas that once in Egypt there was a
Lamb that spoke with a man's voice, upon the Crown of his head was a regal
Serpent having Wings, which was four cubits long, and this Lamb spoke of
diverse future events.

The like is said of another Lamb that spoke with a man's voice, at what time
Romulus and Remus were borne; and from these miraculous events, came that
common proverb: and so for this story I will conclude with the verse of
Valerius: Aspena nunc pauidos contra ruit agna leones. There is in Moscouia
nere volga, a certain beast of the quantity and form of a little Lamb, the
people call it Boranz, and it is reported by Sigismundus in his description of
Moscouia, that it is generated out of the earth like a reptile creature,
without seed, with dam without copulation, thus lives a little while and never
stirs far from the place it is bred in, I mean it is not able to move it
self, but eats up all the grass and green things that it can reach, and when
it can find no more, then it dies.

OF THE MVSMON.


I Have thought good to reserve this beast to this place, for that it is a kind
of sheep, and therefore of natural right and lineage belongs to this story,
for it is not unlike a sheep except in Pliny.
and this is the same which the ancients did call Vmbricae oues, Vmbriam
sheep, for that howsoever in hair it diffreth from sheep, yet in simplicity
and other inward gifts it comes nearer to the sheep. Strabo calls it
Musmo, yet the Latins call it Mussimon. This beast by Cato is called an Ass,
and sometimes a Ram, and sometimes a Musmon. The picture which here we have
expressed, is taken from the sight of the beast at Caen in Normandy, and was
afterward figured by Theodorus Beza. Munster in his description of Sardinia
remembers this beast (but he says) that it is speckled, whereat I do not much
wonder, seeing that he confesses that he has

Some say it is a horse or a mule, of which race there are 2. kinds in Spain,
called by the Latins Astuxcones, for they are very small; but I do not wonder
thereat, seeing that those little horses or Mules are called Musimones, because
they are brought out of those Countries where the true Musmones (which we may
interpret Wild sheep or wild goats are bred and norished.) There are of
these Musmons in Sardinia, Spain, and Corsica, and they are said to be gotten
betwixt a Ram and a goat, as the Cinirus betwixt a Buck-goat, and an Ewe. The
form of this beast is much like a Ram, saving that his breast is more rough and
hairy: his horns do grow from his head like vulgar Rams, but bend backward
only to Pliny makes mention of a beast which he called Ophion, and he says
he found the remembrance of it in the Grecian books, but he thinks that in
his time there was none of them to be found in the world: herein he speaks
like a man that did not know GOD, for it is not to be thought, that he which
created so many kinds of beasts at the beginning, and conserved of every kind
two, male and female at the general deluge, would not afterward permit them to
be destroyed till the worlds end, nor then neither: for seeing it is apparent
by holy scriptures, that after the world ended, al Creatures and beasts shall
remain upon the earth, as the monuments of the first six days works of
Almighty God, for the farther manifestation of his glory, wisdom, and
goodness, it is an unreasonable thing to imagine that any of them shall perish
in general in this world. The Tardinians call these beasts Mufflo, and Erim
Mufflo, which may easily be derived from Ophion, therefore I cannot but
consent unto them, that the ancient Ophion is the Musmon, being in quantity
betwixt a Heart and a sheep, or Goat, in hair resembling a Sardinia. It
frequenteth the steepest mountains, and therefore lives on green grass and
such other herbs. The flesh thereof is very good for meat, and for that cause
the inhabitants seek after it to take it. Hector Boethius in his description
of the Hebredian Islandes says, that there is a Beast not much unlike to a
sheep, but his hair betwixt a goats and a sheeps, being very wild and never
found or taken but by hunting, and diligent inquisition. The name of the Island
is Hiethae, and the reason of that name is from this breed of sheep called
Hierth in the Vulgar tongue, yet those sheep agree with the Musmon in all things
but their tails, for he says, that they have long tails reaching down to the
ground, and this name comes from the German word Herd a flock, and thereof
Hirt comes for all sheep in general. Now follows

The medicines of the Sheep in general.
The bodies of such as are beaten, and have upon them the appearance of the
stripes, being put into the warm skins of sheep when they are newly pulled off
from their backs, Galen.
eats away the outward pain and appearance, if it continue on a day and a
night. If you sees together a good season the skin of the feet, and of the
snowt of an Ox or a sheep till Siluius commended against the burstnes of the
belly.

The blood of sheep drunk, is profitable against the falling sickness: Also
Hippocrates prescribes this medicine following, for a remedy or purgation to
the belly, Pliny
first make a perfume of Barley steeped in oil upon some coals, and then sees
some mutton or sheeps flesh very much, and with decoction of Barley set it
abroad all day and night, and afterwa^d sees it again and eat or sup it up
warm, and then the next day with honey, Frankincense, and Parsely, all beaaen
and mingled together, make a suppository, and with wool ^ut it up under the
party, and it shall ease the distress. The same flesh burned and mix^^ Nitre
causes the scars of the flesh to become of the same co^^ur that it was before
the wound, it being mixed with toasted salt, scatters the bunches in the
flesh, and with the dust of women's hair, cures fellons in the fingers, or any
part of the bodies. The sewet of sheep or goats, being mingled with the juice
of rennish wine grape and shining horse-flies, does without all scruple or
doubt, ease the pain of the (...) be anointed the^^ upon. The f^^ of sheep
does very easily expel the roughnes

The ^ewet of sheep or any other small beast, being mixed with the herb
called Melander, and pounded with Alum, afterward baked together, and wrought
into the manner of a ^eare-cloath, Marcellus
does very much ease those which are burned by fire in any parts of their
body, being well applied thereto. The sewet of a sheep being also applied to
those which ^^anc^kibes* in the heels, or chilb^anes in their feet, will
presently heal them.

The sewet of a sheep mixed with women's hair which is burnt to powder, does
very effectually cure those which have their joints or articles loose, being
anointed thereupon.

Pliny
The fat of Goats or sheep moistened with warm water, and boiled together,
being anointed upon the eyes, does speedily cure all pains, spots, or
blemishes in the same whatsoever. The fat of a sheep boiled and drunk with
sharp wine, is an excellent remedy against the cough. The same medicine is
also effectually used for the expelling of horses coughes. The sewet of a sheep
being boiled with sharp wine, does very speedily cure the obstruction of the
small guts, bloody flixe, and any cough of what continuance soever. Marcellus


The same being in like manner drunk while it is hot, is accounted for an
excellent remedy against the collicke passion. The sewet of a sheep, or of a
male-Goat, being mingled with the fime or dung of a female goat, and Saffron,
does very effectually cure those which are troubled with the gowt or swelling
of the joints, being anointed upon the place so grieved. It is al^o reported
that the outward sewet of sheep (between the flesh and the skin) between
the hinder legs, is very wholesome for the curing of sundry pains and
diseases. dioscorides.


Sheep sewet or the fat of any other small beast being gathered from the
reins, mixed with salt, and the dust of a pumeise st^ne, being applied unto
the yard of any man, does very speedily cure all pains, Aches, or swellings
therein. The fat of sheep

Sheep sewet mixed with Goose grease and certain other medicines, being
taken in drink, does help abortments in women. The liver of a Sheep is
accounted an excellent remedy against the shedding of the hair on the eye
liddes, being rubbed thereuppon. The same being also baked or boiled, is
accounted very profitable for sheep eyes, if it be well rubbed thereon. The
marrow of sheep is very good to anoint all aches and swellings whatsoever.

Hippocrates.
The horns of sheep or of goats pounded to powder, mingled with parched barley
which has been well shaled, and altogether mixed with oil, being taken in a
certain perfume, does help women of their seconds, and restores to them
their menstruall ^uxes. Sheep horns burned and beaten in wine until they be
tempered like a pill, the right foot being anointed with the right horn, and
the left foot with the left, will mittigate the sorrow of those which are very
sore pained and troubled with the gowt. Rasis


Rhewmaticke, or watery eyes, being anointed with the brains of sheep are very
speedy and effectua^ly cured. The brains of the same beast is exceeding
profitable for the breeding of young childrens teeth, being anointed upon the
gums. The lungs or light of

Pliny
The lunges or lights of the same beast concocted upon the uppermost skin of
any man, and applied very hot thereunto, do diminish the black or blew
places therein, which have bin receeiued by the occasion of any stripes or
blows. The lungs of sheep being new taken out of their bellies, and applied
while they are hot unto beaten or bruised places, Marcellus
does quite abolish the signs thereof* and in shortspace procure remedy. The
lungs of sheep or small Cattle being roasted and taken by any man before he
drinks, will resist all kind of drunkenness.

The lunges of sheep taken out of their bellies, and bound about the heads of
those which

The lungs of sheep being boild with Hemp seed, so that the flesh be eaten,
and the water wherein it is sod be drunk, does very effectually cure those
which are grieved with excoriations in their bellies, and the bloody flixe. The
lunges of sheep being applied while they are hot, does heal the gowt.

The liver of white sheep well boiled, made moist with water, thoroughly
beaten and applied unto the eyelids, does purge Rhewmatick eyes, Hippocrates.
and cause them to be of a more clear and ample sight. If a woman bearing
young, shall be puffed up with wind, give her the liver of a sheep or goat
beaten into small* powder while it is hot, being pure and without mixture for
four days together to eat, and let her drink only wine, and this will very
speedily cure her.

The gall of a sheep mingled with honey, heals the Ulcers of the ears, and
procures easy hearing. The gall of a sheep mingled with sweet wine, Pliny.
if it be tempered in the

The gall of a sheep being mixed with common oil, or oil made of Almonds,
does also heal the pains of the ears, being powered thereinto. Cankers, or
the corusion of the flesh, being anointed with the gall of a sheep, is very
speedily and manifestly cured. Albertus.
the Dandraffe or scurfes of the head being anointed with the gall of a sheep
mixed with fullers-earth which is hardened together while the head burns, are
very effectually abolished,

The gal of little cattle, but especially of a lamb, being mixed with honey is
verily commended for the curing of the falling evil. The melt of a sheep new
taken out by magical precepts is accounted very good for the curing of the
pain in the melte, Pliny.
he saying which may be healed that he makes a remedy for the melt. After
these things the magitians command that the grieved party be included in his
Doctor or Bedchamber, and that the doors be sealed up, and that a verse be
spoken thrice nine times. The melte of a sheep being par^hed and beaten in
wine, and afterward taken in drink, does resist all the obstructions or
stopping of the small guts. The same being used in the like manner is very
medicinable for the wringing of the guts.

The dust of the uppermost of a sheep thigh, does very commonly heal the
loosenes Marcellus.
The same medicine is made by the dust of sheep jaws, a Harts-horne, and wax
mollified or assuaged by oil of roses. The upper parts of the thighs of
sheep decocted with Hempe-seed, do refresh those which are troubled with the
bloody flix, the water whereof being taken to drink. For the curing of a horse
waxing hot with weariness and longitude of the way: mingle goats or sheep
sewet with Coriander, and old dil, the Coriander being new gathred, and
diligently pounded in the juice of Barley, and so give it thoroughly strained
for three days together.

The huckle-bone of a sheep being burned and beaten into small duste, is very
much used Galen
The skins which comes from the sheep at the time of their young, does
very much help very many inormities in women, as we have before rehearsed in
the medicines arising from goats. The milk of sheep being hot, is of force
against al poisons, except in those which shall drink a venomous fly called a
Wag-legge, and Libbards bane. Otmell also does cure a long lingering disease,
a pint of it being sodden in three cups of water, until all the water be
boiled away: but afterward you must put thereunto a pint of sheep milk or
Goats, and also Honey every day together.

Some men do command to take one dram of swallows dung in three cups full of
Goats milk or sheep milk before the coming of the quartern Ague. Goats
milk or sheep milk being taken when it is newly milked from them, and
gargarized in the mouth, Pliny
is very effectual against the pains and swellings of the Almondes. Take a
(...) of sheeps milk, and a handful of sifted Anni-seeds, and let them sees
together, and when it is somewhat cold let it be drunk, and it is very good to
loosen the belly. Medicine being made of Goats milk and sheep milk, and so
being drunk, is very good for the shortness of breath. Marcellus


A hot burning grauel stone being decocted in sheep milk, and so given to one
that has the bloody flixe, is very profitable to him. Goats milk or sheeps
milk given alone Furnerius. Crescontien:
or sodden with Butter, is very profitable to those that are brought very weak
with the passions of the stone, and fretting of the guts. To wash ones face
with sheep milk and goats milk, is very good to make it fair and smooth.
Euenings milk of sheep that is, the last milk that they give that day is very
good to loosen the belly, and to purge chollor. Pliny
The hairs of the head of a Dog burned into ashes, or the gut of the privy
place sodden in oil is a very good and soueraign remedy for the looseness of
the flesh about the nails, and for swelling of flesh over them, being anointed
with butter made of sheep milk and honey. An oil sodden in honey, and butter
made of sheep milk, and honey melted therein, is very profitable to cure
Ulcers. Old Cheese made of sheep milk, is very good to strengthen those
which have bin troubled and made weak with the bloody

There was a certain physician being skilful in making medicines, dwelling in
Asia by Hellespont, Marcellus
which did use the dung of a sheep washed and made clean in Vinegar, for to
take away warts and knots rising on the flesh like warts, and kernels, and hard
swellings in the flesh. Also he did bring Ulcers to sicatrising with that
medicine which were blasted or scaulded round about, but he did mingle it with
an emplaister made of wax, rosin, and pitch.

dioscorides.
The dung of sheep also does cure pushes rising in the night, and burnings or
scauldings with fire, being smeared over with Vinegar without the commixture of
any other Pliny.
as Rasis and Albertus say. The dung that is new come from the sheep being
first worked in thy hands, and applied after the manner of an emplaister does
eat away many great warts growing in any part of thy body. The dung of a sheep
being aplyed to thy feet, Vegetius.
does consume or wast away the hard flesh that grows thereon.

Sheeps dung does also cure al kind of swellings that are ready to go into
carbuncles. It is also good being sodden in oil and applied after the manner of
an emplaister, for all new wounds made with a sword as Galen says: Aut si
conclusum seruauit tibia vulnus, Pliny

Stercus ouis placidae iunges, adipesque vetustos,
Pandere quae poterunt hulcus, patuloque mederi.
The dung of sheep and Oxen being burned to powder, and smeared with Viniger,
is very good against the bitings and venemousnes of spiders: And again it is
very effectual being new come from them, and sodden in wine against the
stingings of Serpents. Sheeps dunge being mixed with honey, and applied to
horses whose hoofes are broken, is very efectual.

The dung of Oxen and Sheep being burned to powder, and intermixed therewith,
is very effectual against Cankers, and also the bones of the Lambs thighs,
being burned into ashes, is very profitable to be applied to those ulcers which
cannot he brought to cicatrise.

The oil of Cypress and honey, is very effectual against Alopecia, that is,
the fauling off of the hair. An emplaister made of sheep dunge and the fat
of a Goose and a Hen is very effectual against hair rising in the root of
the ear, as Rasis and Albertus say. Sheep dung being applied hot is very
effectual against the swellings of women's paps or dugs.

Sheep dung being put into the decoction of Wood-bine, or Honey and water,
Obscurus
and so drunk, is very profitable against the Yellow-ganders. If the Spleen be
outwardly anointed with Sheep dung and Vinegar, it does lessen the rising of
it. Rasis
The dung of Oxen and Sheep which is very moist, does ease all manner of
goutes. Pliny
The thin or outmost skin which is taken from the privy part of Sheep, is
very profitable against the disease called the flowers in Women. The dung also
has the same operation. Rasis says otherwise, which is, Albertus
that the dung being drunk with Honny is available against the Dropsy.

To take the weight of a penny of Ox dung and Sheep dung, and a grain of
Myrrh, and two ounces and a half of Wine, does stay or resist the coming of
the Kings evil. Pliny
The filth which is taken out of the ears of these beasts is said to be very
effectual against the flowers. It does make a barren woman to conceive with
child also, as Serenus says in these verses: Pendentem spumam molli de ducet
ab ore,
Aut ouis in stabulis fract as cum ruminat herbas,

The sweat of a Horse being made warm and mixed with Vinegar, Syluaticus
is very convenient against the falling sickness, and is used against venomous
bitinges. And also the sweat of Sheep is very much profitable unto it.
Collumella
If the hoof or Anckle-bone of an Ox chance to be cut with a Plough-snare,
Pitch and fat with Sulphur is very good, but you must roll round about the
wound Wool. Unwashed Wool does very much profit those that are frenzy being
applied with a fume that stops humors from coming down from the head.

Unwashed Wool being bound upon the forehead, is very good for the waterish
humor Marcellus
is very good to stop the fluxes of blood in any part of man's body. Unwashed
Wool being tied on the outside of the knuckles or joints, does stop the blood
or humors from running too and fro. It is also said to be very good being
dipped in Honny, (and so rubbed upon the teeth or Gummes) for to make one
breathe or gasp easier. Unwashed Wool being smeard over with Honey, and rubbed
upon the teeth, does make them look white presently after.

Unwashed Wool being mixed with Niter, Brimstone, Oil, Vinegar, and with Tar,
Galen
being applied twice a day, does ease all pains of the knuckles and Anckles.
Sheep dung and other things with unwashed Wool is very effectual against
the stone in the bladder, as it is spoken above in the cure and remedies of
Sheeps dung. Unwashed wool does cure all the diseases in the privy parts of men
or women being aplyed thereunto. The black Wool of Sheep, is very profitable
for all swellings in the stones or Cods of men. The gall of Bulls put upon
unwashed Wool, is very profitable for the flowers of women:

White fleeces of Wool being either applied alone, or with Brimstone, is very
good for hidden pains and griefs. Fleeces of Wool given in a fume with
Brimstone, is very good for the remedy of the Kings evil. Wool being dyed of
a purple color, and so applied, is very good against the pains of the ears.
There are moreover very many remedies made against diseases by unshorn Wool,
besides the expelling of cold, being taken in Oil, Wine, or Vinegar, for as
much as the same being applied to the members which are out of joint, or to any
pains in the Nerves, does very speedily and tenderly heal the same. Pliny


Sheep Wool being mixed with Hearb-Grace and Sheeps-greace, is very much
applied unto those which are bruised, or have hard swellings in any parts of
their body. Unwashed Wool being often put into the sores which are bitten by
mad Dogs, does perfectly cure them in seven days. Sheep Wool in cold
Water does bring remedy unto those whose skin is loose about the Nails. The
same being steeped in hot Oil may be well applied unto moist or running sores:
but mingled with Honey is very medicinable Dioscorides does also affirm that
Sheep Wool being unwashed is curable for all kinds of wounds whatsoever.

The same is very much applied unto those whose bones are bruised or broken, if
it be mixed with the brains of wanton Dog, Serenus
and bound hard upon the grieved place in a linen cloth. The Carthagenian
Sheapheards do use the unwashed Wool of Lambs of the age of four years,
for the curing of the Temples, or the crown of the head. If the plough share
chance to hurt the huckle-bone or hoof of an Ox, take hard Pitch and
Bacon-greace mingled with Brimstone, and rolled in unwashed Wool, and mark the

Unwashed Wool being taken in some certain perfume does cure those which are
Frantike, and restore them to their former wits. Spleene-wort being boiled in
Honey and mixed with unwashed wool which was steeped in Oil or Wine, is very
good for the aforenamed disease being bound about the forepart of the head in a
broad linen cloth. Sheeps wool being also applied in the same manner, is an
excellent cure for those which are troubled with a certain watery rheum or
running in the eyes, as also the ache in the forepart of the head.

Galen
Unwashed wool boiled in Vinegar and applied unto the ears, does expel all
filth

The same being also steeped in Oil and put in the Nose, does restrain the
bleeding thereof. Wool being plucked or wrested from the back of Sheep, and
kept unwashed, does cohibite the abundance of blood, being steeped in pure
liquid Oil of Roses. The same being taken from the back of a Ram, does stay
over much bleeding at the Nose,

Unwashed Wool in cold water, does cure diseases in the privy parts of any
man or Woman whatsoever. The Wool of black Sheeps is commonly reported to
be a very commodious and helpful for those whose Cods or stones are much
swelled. The gall of an Ox being mixed with unwashed wool, does help the
purgation or menstruall fluxes of women: but Olympies the Thebane affirms,
that Isope and Nitre ought to be mixed with this wool for the helping of the
same. Unwashed wool being applied unto the secret parts of women, does cause a
dead child to come forth. The same does also stay the issues of women. The pure
or clear fleeces of sheep either applied by themselves, or mingled with
Brimstone, do cure al hidden or secret griefs whatsoever: and Pliny commends
them above al other medicines whatsoever. Fleeces of wool mingled with
quicksiluer, Serenus
are very profitable to be taken for the same diseases in certain perfumes.
The root of a Mallow being dug up before the rising of the sun, and wrapped
in vndyed wool, does cure the Wens or mattry impostumes of those sheep which
have lately brought forth Pliny
but some do steep it in vinegar and Nitre, to make the operation more
effectual.

The dust of wool being burnt, does bring forth the matter or corruption lying
hid under scabs, restrain the swellings in the flesh, and brings all ulcers
to a chop of scar. Wool being burnt has a sharp force, and likewise hot
together with the slendernes of the parts, it does therefore very speedy
cleanse and purge the sores in the flesh, which are moist and to much full of
matter. It is also put in drying medicines. It is burned as if there were many
other things in it, filling a new pot, which may be covered with a cover which
is bored through with many holes like unto a sieve. The powder of unwashed wool
is anointed upon diverse sores, and is very curable for them as bruised, new
wounded, and sores half burnt, Galen
and it is used for the curing of the diseases in the eyes, as also for the
healing of the fistulaes Serenus says in these verses; Succida cum tepido
nectetur lana Lyaeo,
Ambust aeue ciuis complebit vulneris ora,
Aut tu succosae cinerem perducito lanae.
The hairs which grow about the secret hole of sheep being burned, beaten and
drunk in sweet wine, does help the shortness of the breath, and ease the
pursines of the stomach. The wool of a little sheep being pulled from betwixt
his thighs and burnt, and afterward dipped in vinegar, does very speedily
cure those which are troubled with the headache, Marcellus
does heal all passions in cattle. The Grecian plaster (called
Encapharmacum) consisted of nine several things, and amongst the rest of
unwashed wool. The filth which sticks to the sheeps wool and grows
thereunto, from which the thing which the Graecians call Oesypon is made, has
the force of digestion like unto butter, and also alike ability of concoction.
In a certain medicine of Andromachus, for the curing of the disease of the
secret parts, unwashed wool is added to the rest: but Lepas (as Galen says)
for unwashed wool does add goose grease in the same quantity. Some do also
for unwashed wool use the marrow of a young Aesypus, and therefore being by
diverse Authors set down diversely concerning the making and virtue thereof, I
have thought good to set down the truest and excellentest way to make the same
(as Dioscorides) whom in this I suppose best to follow reports. First to take
new shorn wool which is very soft, and not trimmed with sope-weed, and wash
it with hot water, then to press all the filth forth of the same, and cast it
into a cauldron which has a broad lip, and afterward to pour the water in,
and to stir it up and down with a certain instrument with such great force as
it may foame again, or with a wooden rod still greatly to turn and trouble
it, so that the filthy froath or spume may more largely be gathered together,
afterward to sprinkle it over with sea water, and the fat remaining which
Aesypus then being gathered together, is to be mollified with men's hands, and
if there be any filth therein, it must out of hand be taken away, and all the
water by little and little excluded, and being fresh poured in, let it be
mingled with ones hands, until the Aesypus being touched with the tongue of
any one, may lightly bind it, but not savor either sharp or tartly, and the fat
may seem very white, and then let it be hid in an earthen vessel, but let
there be great care had that they be done in the hot sun. But there are some
which use another manner of way to make the same which is this, to cleanse the
fleeces, and wash away all filth, and press it forth of the same, and boil
them in water over a soft fire in a brazen vessel, then to wash the fat which
swimmeth on the top being gathered together with Water, and being strained in
another platter which may have some hot water in it to hide or ouercast it with
a linen cloth, and lay it forth in the sun until it be very white and thick
enough.

Some also do use another way, as this, to wash the fat being strained with
cold water, and Aesypus, described by Aetius in these words, take (says he)
the greasy wool which grows in the shoulder pits of sheep, and wash them
in hot water, being thick and soft, and squize all the filth forth of the same,
the washing whereof you shall put in a vessel of a large mouth or brim, casting
afterward hot water in the same, then take the water in a cup, or in some
other such like instrument, and pour it in and out, holding it up very high
until there come a froath upon it, then sprinkle it over with sea water, if
you shall get any, if not, with some other cold water, and suffer it to stand
still, when it shall wax cold take that which Aesypus be made white and fat,
containing no impute or filthy thing in it at al, then dry it in the sun, being
hid for some certain days in an earthen vessel, and keep it.

But all these things are to be done when the sun is very hot, for by that
means it will be more effectual and whiter, and not hard or sharp. There are
moreover some which gather it after this manner. They put new shorn wool
which is very filthy and greasy in a vessel which has hot water in it, and
burn the water that it may somewhat wax hot, afterward Aesypus, for it has
strength mollifieng and releasing with some sharpnes, but it is counterfeited
with wax, sewet, and Rozen, and it is straight ways perceived and for as much
as the true Aesypus reserueth the scent of the unwashed wool, and being rubbed
with any ones hands is made like unto Ceruse, or white lead. Even the filth and
sweat of sheep, cleaving to their wool, has great and manifold use in the
world, and above all other that is most commended which is bred upon the
Athenian or Graetian sheep, which is made many ways, and especially this way:
first they take off the wool from those places Aesypus or unwashed wool the
Graetians make great account, and for the variety of dressing or preparing it,
they call it diversely, sometime they call it Oesupum Pharmaicon, sometime Oesupon
Keroten, Oesupon Kerotoeide, Oesupon Hugron, and such like. Of it they make
plasters to assuage the Hypochondriall inflammations and ventosity in the
sides: Some use Aesopus for Oesypus: but ignorantly, and without reason, it is
better to let it alone, but in the collection hereof it must be taken from the
sound and not from the scabby sheep* But when we cannot come by the true
Oesypus, then in stead thereof we may take that which the Apothecaries and
ointment-makers do ordain; namely, Meliloti: vnc: 4. Cardamomi vnc. 2.
Hysopiherb. vnc. 2. with the unwashed wool taken from the hams or flanks of a
sheep. Myrepsus uses this Oesipus against all gouts and aches in the legs or
articles, and hardness of the spleen. Galen calls it Ius Lanae, and
prescribes the use of it in this sort. Make (says he) a plaster of Oesypus
or ius lanae in this sort, take wax, fresh-greace, Scammonie, old oil, one
ounce of each, of Fenny-greeke six ounces, then sees or boil your oil with
the ius lanae, and Fenny-greeke very carefully, until it equal the oil, and
be well incorporated together, and then again set it to the fire until with
the perscription aforesaid, and also he teaches how to make this Ius lanae,
for (says he) take unwashed wool and lay it deep in fair water until Galen.

The use of this by reason it is very hot, is to display ulcers and tumors in
wounds, Dioscorides
especially in the secrets and seat, being mixed with Melitote and butter, and
it has the same virtue against running sores. The same also with barley meal
and rust of iron, equally mixed together, is profitable against al swelling
tumors, Carbuncles, Tetters, Serpigoes, and such like, it eats away al proud
flesh in the brims of ulcers, reducing the same to a natural habit and
equality, also filling up the sore and healing it, and the same virtue is by
Dioscorides attributed to wool burnt, also in bruses upon the head when the
skin is not broken, a poutesse made hereof, is said by Galen to have
excellent force and virtue. The Oesypus, Marcellus
also being instilled into the head with oil, it cures the megrim, and
furthermore it is used against all soreness of the eyes, and scabs in their
corners, or upon the eyelids, being sod in a new shell, and the same virtue is
attributed to the smoke or soote thereof, if the eyebrows or eyelids be
anointed herewith mixed with Myrrh and warmed, it is thought Marcellus
prescribes it in this manner, you must take Oesypus or sweat of sheep from
under the wool of their shoulders, and adding unto it a like quantity of
Myrrh, beat them together in a mortar, and with a warm cloth anoint the
bare places.

If there be any bruise in the eyes, then you must annoint them first with
Goose-grease, and the blood of a Mallard, and afterward with the sweat of a
sheep, and the same cures al ulcers in the mouth, ears, and genitals, with
Goose-greace. This is also mixed with a seare-cloth, and laid against the
Pthists (as Aetius writes) with a moist cloth against the the pleurusie, also
a plaster hereof made with Goose grease, butter, Alum, and the brain of a
Goose, is very profitable against the pains in the raines, and all other
infirmities of the back, and for the same cause it is applied to women, for it
provoke their mouthly Plinius
take this Oesypus with Honny and the froath of lead, also white lead, women's
milk, and this sheep sewet, cures the gout, at the least maruailously
asswageth the pain thereof, and some physicians for this evil take grease,
goose-greace, and the fat of Bulls, add to Oesypus, also unwashed wool with
the gall of a Bull laid to a woman's secrets, helps her monthly purgation, and
Olimpias added thereunto Nitre. The dung which cleaves to sheeps tails made
into small bals, and so dried, afterward beat into powder and rubbed upon the
teeth, although they be loose, falling out, or ouergrown with flesh, yet Pliny
says they will be recovered by that fricassing. If he which is sick of a
dropsy drink this sweat or Oesypus in wine with Mirrh of the quantity Oesipus.

The medicines of the Ram.
Even as the skins of other sheep newly plucked from their backs and applied
warm, do take away the ach swelling, and pains of stripes and blows from
bodies, so also have the skins of rams, the same property. Arnoldus commends
a plaster made of a rams skin Alysius. If a man take the stones of a fighting
cock, and anoint them with Goose grease, and so wear them in a piece of a
rams skin, it is certain that it will cohibite and restrain the rage of
venerial lust, and a woman wearing about her the right stone of dunghill cock,
in a rams skin, shall not suffer abortement. The washed fleece of a ram wet in
cold oil, putryfieth the inflammation of the secrets, and likewise the black
wool of a ram wet in water, and then in oil, and so put to the sick places,
keeps the fundament from falling, and also asswageth the pain. Also the
wool of a fighting ram taken from betwixt his horns, and perfumed into a
smoke, eases the pain, and some take the powder thereof in vinegar for that
Malady. The say that Lais and Salpe cure the bitings of mad dogs, and also
Tertian and Marcellus says, that if one take the wool from a rams forehead,
and burn in the cover of a new pot, and afterward beat it to powder in a
mortar, and so put into vinegar, and therewithal the forehead being anointed,
it eases the headache Also the dust of rams wool mixed with water, cures the
pain in the yard. The matter of the liver sod, has the same operation: and
Sextus writes, that if the wool be taken from the head, ribs, and cods, and
also worn by him that has a tertian ague, it perfectly cures him, and if a
man's fingers ends and toes be tied with the unwashed wool of a ram, it will
stanch the bleeding at any part, especially the Nose. Also

The broth of the rumpe of a ram is commended against blisters. The flesh of a
ram being burnt and anointed upon the body of any leprous person, Auicenna
or any whose body is troubled with ring-wormes or itches, is very effectual
to cure them. The same force has it against the bites of Scorpions, and
stingings of Serpents, and Algerarat: it also being taken in wine, good for
the bitinges of mad dogs, and heals the white skins in the eyes. The fat of a
sheep or Weather has the same in it, as Porke-greace, and cures the
suffocation of the womb, and all other diseases incident unto the secret parts,
and also helps places in the body being burnt by fire. The fat of a ram being
mingled with red Arsenicke

The sewet of a ram mingled with the powder of a pumise stone and salt, of each
a like quantity, Sextus
is said to heal fellons and inflammations in the body. The lunges of small
cattle, but especially of a ram, does restore chaps or scarts in the body to
their right color. The same virtue has the fat of a ram being mingled with
Nitre. The gal of a ram mingled with his own sewet, Marcellus
is very good and profitable for those to use who are troubled with the gout or
swelling in the joints. The horn of a ram being burned and the dust of the
same mixed with oil, and so pounded together, being often anointed upon a
shaven head, does and add unto them these kinds of spices, Cinnamon, Ginger,
Mace, and Cloves, of each one, half an ounce: these being beaten to powder,
mingle them with the brains in an earthen platter diligently tempering of them
by a burning cole, not very big, for fear of burning, which might easily be
done, but there must great care be had that it be not too much dried, but that
it might be so boiled that it be no more dried then a calfes brains being
prepared for meat.

It shall be sufficiently boiled when you shall well mingle them at the fire,
then keep it hid, and for three days give it daiely to the sick person
fasting, so that he may abstain from meat and drink two hours after. It may
be taken in bread, or in an Egg, or in whatsoever the sick party has a
desire unto: but there must be regard that he be not in a clear

There are those which are helped in a short space, some in six or eight
weeks by this Medicine being received. But it is convenient that it be
required for three months, Marcellus
and then it will have the more power therein. The lunges of a Ram while they
are hot applied unto wounds wherein the flesh does to much increase, does
both repress and make it equal. The lungs of small cattle, but especially of
Rams being cut in small pieces and applied whiles they are hot unto bruised
places, do very speedily cure them and reduce them to the right color.

The same does cure the feet of such as are pinched through the straightness
of their Sextus
The juice of the lungs of a ram while they are roasted upon a Gridiron being
received, does by the unction thereof purge and drive away the little black
warts which are wont to grow in the hair or privy parts of any man.

The liquor which distilleth from the lunges of a ram being boiled, Aesculapius
does heal Tertian Marcellus
does make them loose in their bellies. The stones of an old ram being beaten
in half a penny weight Pliny
The dust of the hoof of a ram mingled with honey, does heal the bitings of a
Shrew. The dung of Weathers mingled with vinegar and fashioned in the form of
a plaster, does expel black spots in the body, and takes away al hard bunches
arising in the flesh. The same being applied in the like manner, cures S.
Anthonies fire, and heals burned places.

The fil^h or sweat which grows between the thighs of a ram being mingled
with Mirrhe and the Herb called Hart-wort, and drunk of each an equal part,
is accounted a very excellent remedy for those which are troubled with the
Kings evil. Sextus
But Pliny commends

The medicines of the Lamb.
The best remedy for bitings of Serpents is this, presently after the wound to
apply some little creatures to the same, Aetius.
being cut in small pieces, and laid hot unto it, as cocks, Goats, Lambs, and
young pigges: for they expel the poison and much ease the pains thereof. An
ounce of Lambs blood being fresh before that it does congeale mixed with
Vinegar, and drunk for three days together, is an excellent remedy against
the vomitting or spetting of blood. The like force in it has the blood of a
Kidde. The blood of a Lamb mingled with wine, does heal those which are
troubled with the falling sickness, Pliny.
let them be laid under her, and this without all doubt will make her apt to
conceive. The skins of Serpents being anointed with water in a bath, and
mingled with lime and Lambs sewet, does heal the disease called S. Anthonies
fire. The marrow of a Lamb melted by the fire, with the oil of Nuts and white
sugar, distilled upon a clean dish or platter, and so drunk, does dissolve
the stone in the bladder, and is very profitable for any that pisseth blood. It
also cures al pains or griefs of the yard, bladder, or reins. The skin of
a Lamb being dawbed or anointed with liquid-pitch, and applied hot unto the
belly of any one that is troubled with excoriations of the bowels or the bloody
flix will Hippocrates.
and her belly is moved, it is convenient to apply lambs skins being hot unto
her belly and they will in short space cause them to come forth. A garment made
of lamb skins is accounted very good for the corroborating and strengthening of
young men. The skins of lambs are more hot then kids skins, and are more
profitable for the confirming of the back and the reins. The little bone
which is in the right side of a Toad being bound in a young lambs skin being
hot, does heal both quartaine and al other feauers being aplied thereunto. The
dust of lambs bones is very much and rightly used for Ulcers which have no
chops or stars in them. The dust of small cattels dung being mingled with Nitre,
but especially of lambs, has in them great force to heal Marcellus Pliny.
they never forget to take of the same along with them. The lungs of lambs do
very effectually cure those whose feet are wrung or pinched by their
shoo-soles. The lungs of lambs or rams being burned, and the dust thereof
mingled with oil, is very profitable for the curing of kibes or ulcers, being
applied thereunto. It has the same virtue being raw and bound upon the sore.
Marcellus
The runnet of a lamb is of very great force against al other evil medicines.
The runnets of small cattle but especially of a lamb, is very effectual against
al kinds of poison. The runnets of a kid, a lamb, and a hind-calfe are
conveniently taken against Wolfe-bane drunk in wine. The runnet of a hare, a
kid, Pliny.
The runnet of a lamb drunk in water is accounted for a safeguard to young
children who are vexed with thick and concrete milk: or if the default shall
happen by curded milk it will be soon remedyed by a lambs runnets given in
Vinegar. A Lambs runnet hid or poured into water, does speedily cohibit the
bleeding of the nose, when nothing else can stay it. The gal of small Cattle but
especially of a Lamb being mixed with honey, are thought to be very medicinable
for the curing of the falling sickness. The places which are infected by
cankers, being anointed over with the gal of a lamb

There is also by the Magicians delivered unto us a speedy means for the curing
of the melt, which is this, to take a Lamb new born, and instantly to pluck him
in pieces with ones hands, Marcellus.
and when the melt is pulled out to put it hot upon the melt of the party so
grieved, and bind it on fast with swaddling clothes, and continually to say, I
make a remedy for the melt: then in the last day the same being taken from his
body to put it to the Wall of the be^ wherein the diseased party is wont to
lie, it being first daubed with dirt, that it might the better stick, and to
sign the dirt with seven and twenty marks, saying at every mark, I make a
remedy for the melt, this remedy being done three times it will heal the
diseased party although he be very weak and full of danger. But this is the
opinion of the Magicians, which I here set down that they should rather see
their folly then believe, knowing them to be mere fopperies. For making the
wool to grow slower, the gelders of cattle anoint the blood which comes from
the stones of gelded Lambs, which being anointed, does profit very much for
hairs being pulled away, as also against poison. Pliny
The dung of Lambs before they have tasted of any grass, being dried in the
shadow, and rubbed to powder and applied in the manner of a plaster, does
heal and ease al kinds

OF THE STREPSICEROS.


THere is in Creete near the Mountain Ida, Bellonius
a kind of sheep called by the Sheapheardes Strepsiceros, which is not
different from the vulgar sheep, except only in the horns, for they bend not
like other, but stand straight and upright like the Unicorn, and beside are
circled about with certain round speeres like a Goats horn: This lives in
flocks, and we have here beside the figure of the beast, expressed Docter Cay
of England, in these words following.

The horns of this Strepsiceros are so lively expressed by Pliny, and so fitly
fitted to bear Harpes, that they seem not to ask any further narration of
words. I will therefore only add this, they are hollow within, and long,
about two Roman feet and three palms if you measure them, as they are
straight; but if you take their scantling and length as they crook a little,
then are they about three foot long, they are in breadth where they join to
the head, three Roman fingers and a half, and their whole compass in that
place is



But whether his nostrils were so also I could not conjecture, by reason that
the age and long use of the piece had defaced the nose which was dried up, and
also the hair was worn away, so as it was bald, but by that which was most
apparent unto it. I rather inclined that it resembled a Heart, from hence it was
that the drawer made the nostrils less then might answer the proportion of
the face, and that which is seen betwixt the horns it is a piece Cretican or
Idean sheep is a Strepsiceros because the horns thereof do not bend at all,
although it answreth not the name, but the true horns of the Strepsiceros do
as I have said resemble the ancient fashion of harpes, among our forefathers,
especially the handle being taken away, and the face of the beast placed
instead thereof. Unto this I may add another horn, which is to be seen in the
Castle of the L. William Wernhere count of Cimbria, being black, hollow, and
of the length of ones arm, and as thick as a great Ferdinandus the Emperor.

OF THE SQVIRRELL.
THe name of this beast is by the Graecians called Sciuros, and it was given
them from the fashion and proportion of their tail, which covers almost the
whole body, for that which is fabulously said of the Sciapodes to have seete
that

The first Author that ever wrote of this beast was Oppianus, who lived in the
days of Antoninus Caesar, and the Latins have no proper or native name for
it, but borrow from the Graecians, although some of the later writers call it
Pirolus, and Spiurus, I think they would say Sciurus, for so it is vulgarly
termed in Latin: some also call it Sculurus a currendo, because of his nimble
running upon boughs, Sciurus is not far fetched, the French words Escurieu,
and Escureau, from whom the Germans borrow their words Eychorn, or Eichorn, or
Eych horn, or ^ich hermlin, that a weasill of the tree, and Das Eychorn.

The Italians call it Schiriuolo, and the Venetians (as Massarius testifies
Schiriati, the Spaniards Harda, and Esquilo, and some do interpret Coma dreia
for a Squirrel: The Illyrians Weweeka, and some of the Polonians Wije Wijerka,
and so they turn the mouse Varius as we have said else-wherein that story, and
some of the Germans call it Werck, and Veeh, and Fech.

Now Albertus and Agricola say, that there is no difference betwixt the mouse
Varius and the Squirrel, but only in the region which altreth the color, and
therefore we have expressed the same figure thereof, remitting the Reader to
that which is said in that history, for this (say they) in Germany is red after
it be a year old, but before the time it is Polonia it is of a red-ash-colour,
or branded grysell, in Russia of an ordinary ash color, and for the quantity,
food, and manner, or natural inclination, it has the same in all parts with the
mouse Varius.

Varinus and Hesychius say, that the Graecians call this beast also
Campsiouros, and Hippouros, and some call the Cappadocian mouse Neexis a
Squirrell; the Jews at this day call a Squirrell Coach, for it is apparent
that in ancient time til they came into these parts of the world into Graecia
and Europe, they never knew or saw this beast. And this shall suffice to have
said of the name.

A Squirrel is greater in compass then a Weasil, but a Weasil is longer then a
squirrel, the back parts and all the body is red, except the belly which is
white. In Heluetia they Coecum, that is, as I take it without a passage out of
it into any other Vesalius writes.

They use their forefeet instead of hands, for they sit upon their buttockes,
and move their meat to their mouth with them, in this point resembling every
little vulgar mouse, yet being put to the mouth, they hold it in their teeth.
They will eat Nuts and Almondes very greedily, and also Apples, Buckmasts,
Acornes, and sometimes herbs, especially Lettuce, and al other sweet fruits.
Their feet are cloven like mice, and their hinder parts very fleshy to sit
upon. In the summer time they build them nests, (which in our country are
called Drayes) in the tops of the Trees, very artificially of sticks and
moss, and such

The mouth of their nest is variable, sometimes at the sides, and sometimes at
the top, but most commonly it is shut against the wind, and therefore I think
that she makes many passages, stopping and opening them as the wind turns.
In summer time they gather together abundance of fruits and Nuttes for winter,
even so much as their little Dray will hold and contain, which they carry in
their mouths, and they lodge many times two together, a male and a female (as
I suppose.) They sleep a great part of the winter like the Alpine mouse, and
very soundely, for I have seen when no noise of hunters could awake them with all their cries, beating their nests on the outside, and shootinge boltes and
arrows thorough it, until it were pulled assunder, wherein many times they are
found killed before they be awaked.

They are of incredible agility and motion, never standing still as it appears
by them which are tamed. When they leap from tree to tree, they use their
tail instead of wings, which is most apparent, because many times they leap a
great distance and are supported without sinking to man's appearance.

And again I have seen them leap from the top of very high trees down to
the

Bows are requisite to remove them when they rest in the twistes of trees, for
they will not be much terrified with all the hollowing, except now and then they
be struck by one means or other. Well do they know what harbor a high oak is
unto them, and how secure they can lodge therein from men and Dogs, therefore
seeing it were too troblesome

If they be driven to the ground from the trees to creep into hedges, it is a
token of their weariness, for such is the stately mind of this little Beast,
that while her limbs and strength lasts, she tarrieth and saves her self in
the tops of tal trees, then being descended, she falls into the mouth of
every curre, and this is the use of Dogs in their hunting.

The admirable wit of this beast appears in her swimming or passing over
the Waters, Olaus Magnus in his description of Scandinauia, where this is
ordinary among Squirrelles, by reason of many rivers, that otherwise they
cannot passover, also they carry meat in their mouth to prevent famine
whatsoever befall them, and as Peacockes cover themselves with their tails in
hot Summer from the rage of the sun, as under a shadow, with the same
disposition does the Squirrell cover her body against heat and cold.

They grow exceeding tame and familiar to men if they be accustomed and taken
Semiferi rather then Cicures.

They are very harmeful, and wll eat al manner of woollen garments, and if it
were not for that discommodity, they were sweete-sportful-beastes, and are very
pleasant play-fellowes in a house.

It is said, that if once they taste of Garlic, they will never after bite any
thing, and Cardan to tame them, their skins are exceeding warm, and well
regarded by skinners, for their heat is very agreeable to the bodies of men,
and therefore they are mixed also with the skins of Foxes. Their flesh is sweet
but not very wholesome except the Squirrel were a black one: It is tender and
comparable to the flesh of Kids or Conies, andl their tails are profitable to
make brushes of.

The medicines are the same for the most part which are before expressed in the
Dormous saving that I may add that of Archigenes, who writes that the fat of
a Squirrell warmed on a rubbing cloth, and so instilled into the ears, does
wonderfully cure the pains in the ears. And so I conclude this history of the
Squirrell with the Epithets that Martial makes of a Peacocke, a Phoenix, and
a Squirrel, in a comparison of a bewtifull Virgin Erotion.

Cui comparatus indecens erat pauo.
Inamabilis sciurus and frequens Phoenix.



THis Getulian or Barbarian Squirrell, is of mixed color, as

They are very pleasant and tame, and it is very likely that it is a kind of
Egyptian or Affrican mouse, whereof there are three sorts described by
Herodotus, the first called Bipedes, the second Zegeries, and the third
Echines, of which we have already spoken in the story of diverse kinds of mice,
and therefore I will here end the discourse of this beast.

OF A WILD BEAST IN THE newfound world called Su.
THere is a region in the newfound world, called Gigantes, Pantagones; now
because their country is cold, being far in the South, they cloth themselves
with the skins of a beast called in their own tongue Su, for by reason that
this beast lives for the most part near the waters, therefore they call it by
the name of Su which signifies water. The true image thereof as it was taken by
Theuetus, I have here inserted, for it is of a very deformed shape, and
monstrous presence, a great rauener and an vntamable wild beast When the
hunters that desire her skin set upon her, she flies very swift, carrying
her young ones upon her back, and covering them with her broad tail: now
for so much as no

This cruel, vntamable, impatient, violent, ravening, and bloody beast,
perceiving that her natural strength cannot deliver her from the wit and
policy of men her hunters, (for being enclosed, she can never get out again,)
the hunters being at hand to watch her downfall, and work her overthrow,
first of all to save her young ones from taking and

Of the Subus, a kind of wild Water-sheepe.
THis beast is called by Oppianus Soubos, and thereof the Latins call it
Subus* Bodine in his interpretation of Oppianus, does make it one beast with
the Strepsiceros, but because he expresses no reason thereof, I take it that
he was deceived by his conjecture, for we shall manifest, that either the
color or seat of living, cannot agree with the Strepsiceros, (for he says)
only it is the same beast which Pliny calls a Strepsiceros.

But we know by the description of Oppianus, that this beast is of
red-gold-colour, having two strong armed horns on the head, and lives
sometimes in the Sea, and water, sometime on the land. Of all kinds of sheep
this is the worst and most harmefull, ravening after life and blood, for it
goes to the water, and therein swimmeth: when the silly simple Fishes see this
glorious shape in the waters, admiring the horns, and especially the Golden
color, they gather about it in great flocks and abundance, especially Shrimps,
Lobsters, Mackarell, and Tenches, who follow him with singular delight on
either side, both the right and the left, pressing who shall come nearest, to
touch and have the fullest sight of him; so they accompany him in ranks for
love of his so strange proportion. But this unkind and ravening beast,
despising their amity, society, and fellowship, makes Subus or water-sheepe.

Of the Swine in general.
BEing to discourse of this beast, The several names.
although the kinds of it be not many as is in others, yet because there are
some things peculiar to the Bore, and therefore he deserves a special story
by himself, I will first of all deliver the common properties in a general
Narration, and afterward descend to the special. For the names of this beast,
A weaning Pigge, a sheate, a Yealke, and so forth: likewise, a Hog, a Sow, a
Barrow, a Libd-Hog, a libd-Sow, a Splayed Sow, a Gelt Sow, a Basse, for the
elder swine, so in other Nations they observe such like titles. The Haebrewes
call a Bore Chasir, and a Sow Chaserah, the Chaldees Deuteronomy. 4. for Chasir
translate Chasira, the Arabians Kaniser the Persians Mar-an-buk, the
Septuagints Hus, and S. Hierome, Sus. The Arabians also use Hazir, and
Acanthil, for a hog, Achira, and Scrofa.

The Graecians do also use Sus or Zus, Choiros, and Suagros. The wild hog is
called Kapro^, Apex. Silu^^^^
The Italians do vulgarly call it Porco, and the Florentines peculiarly Ciacco,
and also the Italians call a sow with pig Scrofa and Troiata or Porco fattrice.
The reason why that they call a Sow that is great with Pigge Troiata, or
Troiaria, is for the similitude with the Trojan horse, Alun^u^. Erythraeus
because as that in the belly thereof did include many armed men, so does a sow
in her belly many young pigs, which afterward come to the table and dishes of
men. A Barrow hog is called Maialis in Latin, and the Italians Porco castrato,
and Lo Maiale. The French call a swine Porceau, a sow Truye Coche, a Bore,
Verrat, a pig Cochon Porcelet, and about Lions, Caion. The barrow hog they call
Por-chastre. The Spaniards call swine Puerco, the Germans saw, or suw, su
schwin, schwein, a sow they call Mor and looss, a Bore Aeber, which seems to
be derived Aper, a barrow hog Barg, a splaied sow Gultz, a pig Farle, and
Seuwle, and a sucking pig spanfoerle. In little Britain they call a hog
Houch, and thereof they call a Dolphin Merhouch. The Illyrians call Swine Swinye,
and Prase. The Latins Sus Porcus, and Porcellus, and Scrofa, and these are the
common and most vulgar terms of swines: If there be any other they are either
devised or new made, or else derived from some of these.

Concerning the Latin word Sus, The etimology of the Greek and Latin names.
Isidorus deriueth it from Sub, because these beasts tread under foot grass
and grain, and indeed for this cause the Egyptians kept their Swine in the
hills all the year long, till their seed time, for when their corn was
sown, they drove them over their new plowed Lands, to tread in the grain,
that the Fowls and Birds might not root it or scrape it forth again, and for
this cause also they spared Swine from sacrificing. But in mine opinion, it is
better derived from Hus the Greek word: For the Latin Porcus, is thought to
be fetched from por rectus, because his snowte is always stretched forth, and so
he feeds, digging with it in the earth, and turning up the roots of trees:
but I better approve the notation of Isidorus, Porcus quasi spurcus quia cano
and limo se volutat. That is, because it rowleth and walloweth in the mire.
Porcetra or Porceta for a sow that has had but one farrowe, and Scropha for
a sow that has had many. The Graecians Hus is derived from Thuein, which
signifies to kill in sacrifice, for great was the use of sacrificing this beast
among the Paynims, as we shall show afterward. The ancient Graecians did also
term swine Sika, and when the Swine herds did call the beasts to their meats,
they cried Sig, Sig: as in our Country their feeders cry Tig, Tig, Choiros of
their feeding and nursing their young ones. And indeed from Swine we find
that many men have also received names, as Scipio Suarius, and Tremellius
Scrofa, A ^istory of the ^amily of (...).
whereupon lies this history, as he writes when Licinus Nerua was Praetor,
his great Uncle was left Questor in his absence for Macedonia, until the
Praetor returned. The enemies thinking that now they had gotten opportunity
and advantage against their besiegers or assa^lants, caused an onset to be
made, and a fight to be offered, then his Uncle exhorting the Roman Soldiers
to Arms, told them, Se celeretar hosts disiecturum vt sorosa porcellas, That
he would as easily cast them off and scatter them, as a sow does her pigges
sucking her belly, which he performed accordingly, and so obtained a great
victory, for which Nerua was made Emperor, and he was always evermore
afterward called Scrofa.

Macrobius tells the occasion of the name of the family of Scrofa somewhat
otherwise yet pertaining to this discourse. Tremellius (says he) was with his
family and children, dwelling in a certain village, and his servants seeing a
stray Sow come among them, the owner whereof they did not know, presently they
slew her, and brought her home. The Neighbor that did owe the Sow called for
witnesses of the fact or theft, and came with them to Tremellius, demanding
his Scrofa or Sow again. Tremellius having understood by one of his servants
the deed, laid it up in his Wives bed, and covering it over with the clothes,
caused her to lie upon the Sowes carkase, and therefore told his neighbor he
should come in and take the Scrofa, and so had brought him where his wife lay,
Coelius Names of men taken from swine.
and swore Scrofa was given to that family. There was one Pope Sergius, whose
christen and first name was Os porci, Hogs snowt, and therefore he being
elected Pope, changed his name into Sergius, which custom of alteration of
names, as that was the beginning, so it has continued ever since that time
among all his successors. Likewise we read of Porcellus a Grammarian, of
Porcellius, a Poet of Naples, who made a Chronicle of the affairs of
Frederick Duke of Vrbine, Porcius, Suillus, Verres the Praetor of Sycilia,
Syadra, Sybotas, Hyas, Hyagnis, Gryllus Porcilla, and many such other give
sufficient testimony of the original of their names, to be drawn from Swine,
and not only men, but people and places; as Hyatae, Suales Chorreatae, three
names of the Dori in Greece: Hyia a City of Locris, Hyamea a City of Mesene,
Hyamaion a Troy, Hyampholis a City of Phocis; whereby to all posterity it
appears, Alex. ab alex
that they were Swineheardes at the beginning; Exul Hyantaenos inuenit regna
per agros Hy^pe, Hyops a City in Iberia, Hysia a City of Boeotia, and Pliny
calls the tall people of Ethiop, which were 8. cubits in height Sybotae, and
the like I might add of many places, Cities, people, fountains, Plants,
Engines, and devises, plentiful in many Authors, but I will not trouble the
Reader any longer with that, which may be but thought to be unnecessary. Only
I cannot contain my self from the fiction of a Swines name and Testament, or
last will, for the mirth and wit thereof, as it is remembered in Coelius, and
before in S. Ierom, and lastly by Alexander Brassicanus, and Geo. Fabritius, I
will express both in Latin

M. Grunnius Corocotta Porcellus testamentum feci, A fiction of of a hogs will
and testament
quod quoniam manu mea propria scribere^on potui, scribendum dictaui. Magirus
cocus dixit veni huc ever sor domi, soliuer sor fugitive porcelle, ego hodie
tibi vitam adimo. Corocotta porcellus dixit si qua feci, si qua peccaui, si qua
vascula pedibus meis confregi, rogo domine coque, veniam peto, roganti concede.
Magirus coquus dixit, transipuer adfer mihi de culina cultrum, vt hunc
porcellum cruentum f^ciam. Porcellus comprehenditur a famulis ductus sub die
16. Call. lucerninas, vbi abundant cymae. Clibanato and piperato consulibus, and
vt vidit se moriturum esse, horae spatium petijt, coquum rogauit, vt
testamentum facere posset. Inclamauit ad se sues parents, vt de cibarijs suis
aliquid di mitteret eis, qui ait, patri meo verrino Lardino, do lego, dari
glandis modios 30. and matri meae veturrinae Scrofae do, lego, dari laconicae
siligines modios 40. and sorori meae Quirinae, in cuius votum interesse non
potui, do, lego, dari hordei modios, 30. and de meis visceribus dabo, donabo
futoribus setas, rixatoribus capitinas surdis auriculas, causidicis and
verbosis linguam, bubularijs intestina, esiciarijs femora, mulieribus lumbulos,
pueris vesica^ puellis caudam, cinaedis musculos, cursoribus and venatoribus
talos, latronibus vngulos, and nec nominando coquo, do, lego, ac dimitto popam
and pistillam, quae mecum detuleram a quer ceto vsque ad haram, liget sibi
collu^ de rest. Volo mihi fieri monumentum ex literis aureis seriptum. M.
Grunnius Corocotta porcellus vixit annos D.CCCC.xc. 9. quod si semis vixisset,
mill annos Compleuisset. Optimi amatores mei vel consules vitae, rogo vos vt
corpori meo benefaciatis been condiatis, debonis condimentis nuclei, piperis,
and mellis, vt nomen meum in sempiternum nominetur. Mei domini, and

Lucanicus signauit, Tergillus signauit, Nuptialicus sig.
Celsanus sign. Lardio sign. Offelicus sign. Cymatus sign.
In English without offense I may translate it thus; I, M. Grunter Hogg-son,
little pig have made this my last will and Testament, which because I could not
write with my own hand, I have caused it to be endited by other. Magirus the
Cook said unto me, come hither thou underminer of houses, thou rooter up of
land, fearful, fugitive little Pig, I must this day take away thy life. To
whom Hog-son made this answer, If I have done any harm, if I have offended, if
I have trod in pieces any vessels of worth under my feet, then I entreat thee
good M. Cook pardon me, and grant me my request. But Magirus the Cook said,
run (sir-kitchin-Boy) and bring me a knife out of the Kitchen, that I may let
this little pig bleed: presently I the little Pig was taken by the servants,
and by them led the xiv.

Item I give unto this (unworthy to be named Cook) the Knife and the pestle,
that I brought out of the spinny of an Oak, into my stye, and so let him tie
his Neck with a halter. Also my will is, that there be made for me a monument,
wherein shall be engraven in Golden Letters, this inscription or title, M.
Grunter Hog-son, Little-Pig, lived nine hundred ninety nine years and a
half, and if he had lived but one half year longer he he had lived a
thousand years. And you my Lovers and best counselors of my life, I beseech
you do good to my dead carkase, salt it well with the best season of Nutmegs,
Pepper, and Honny, that so my name and memory may remain for evermore. And you
my Masters and kindred which have been present at the making of my will, I
pray

Witnesses; Wood-Hogs mark, Bristle-backes mark, Towne-Boares mark,
Mountaine-Hogs mark, Bacon-Hogs mark, Swill-Hogs mark,
Marsh-Hogs mark.
I have expressed this discourse for no other purpose but to show the Rea. what
proper feigned names have been or may be given to Swine, and so not to hold
him any longer in this discourse, The epithets of Swine.
I will proceed from the names to the natures of this beast. And first of all
to begin with the common and vulgar epithets, which are as so many short
definitions Horace, Amica sus luto, a durt-louer, cloven footed, beastly,
clamorous, Acron-eater, rough, horrible, fearful, sluggish, filthy, unclean,
impatient, loud, glad of food, miry, fat, wet, follower, moist, greedy, tender,
and milke-sucker, according to the Poets sayings; Lacte mero pascum pigrae mihi
matris alumnum,
Ponat: and Aetolo de sue dives edat.
Swine are in the most countries of the world. Countries wherein swine do not
breed.
Yet Aristotle and Aetian report, that there are none in Indian, and Arabia
Scein: and moreover there is in the people of those countries

Pliny affirms, that there are Boares among some of the Indians which have
horns, and the like is affirmed of the Ethiopians. The Swine of Sycily are
accounted the best of all other for food. In Bauaria they are lean, but in
Burgundy or the nether Germany, they are fierce, strong, and very fat. Those
which are carried into Hispaniola, Pet. Martyr
are said to grow to the stature of Mules.

Now concerning the several parts of Swyne, it is most certain that inwardly
they do more resemble a man's body then an Ape, for as al writers do affirm,
that outwardly the proportion of Apes come nearest to men, according to the
Poets verse; Simia quam similis turpissima bestia nobis. Aristotle, much marrow
in their bones, and their skin is all over rough and hairy, The anathomy and
several parts
and yet the hair not so thick as an Oxes, yet much longer and stiffer,
standing up upon the ridge of the back, the color of Swine is uncertain and
varieth not only after the diversity of the Country, but in every Country it
is diverse in it self, some are white, some branded, some sanded, some red,
some black, some pyed, some none of these, and some al of these;

Betwixt the skin and the flesh there lies a fat called Lardo larde and
Aruina. Their brain is very fat, and in the waine of the Moon it is less
then any other beasts. Their eyes are hollow, and stand very deep in their
heads, and therefore cannot by Art of man be taken out without danger of death,
and if one of them be at any time perished, it is hazard but the Swine dies.

Their eie-browes move more downward toward their Noses, and are again drawn
up toward their temples, and their forehead is very narrow, by which in ancient
time they judged or deemed a fool or foolish unwise disposition, as by
standing up of the lips about the canine teeth, betokens a contumelious and
clamorous rayler, and thick lips, and a

The snout is long and strong, and yet broad to cast up the earth for food,
having on the tippe a rising gristle round, and more piked, at the top betwixt
the Nostriles, Aristotle
wherewithal it first enters the earth by digging. Upon their under chap
there are teeth which grow out of their head, and the Boares have some which
the females have not: For even as the Elephant has two teeth growing
downewarde, so has the Boar twoe growing upward. The male as we have said,
has more then the female, and neither of both do loose or change them by any
corse of nature. As the Horse has his mane, so has a Swine certain bristles
on his Neck (called therefore by the Graecians Lophia,) this neck is broad
and thick, and in it lies the strength of the beast, and therefore it is
observed by the Physiognomers that a man with such a neck is an angry fool.

The collop next to the neck called vulgarly Callasum, ought to be broad and
stiff. It is said of sore hearts that they have their gall in their ears, and
indeed in the ears of Swine there is found a certain humor not much unlike
to a gall: yet less liquid, and therefore by reason of the density or
thickness thereof, comparable to the humor of the Spleen. The ventricle is
large to receive much meat, and to concoct it perfectly, we call it vulgarly
the bucke, and there are in it but few smooth ribs or crestes, and in the liver
parts which are very great, there is a certain hard thing white like a stone.
The females have twelve vdders or dugs under the belly, but never less then
ten, if they want of twelve, and the Boares have their stones on their seat
behind them joined together, which being taken Polimenta.

But in the female there is a great miracle of nature, for the place of
conception is only open to the vdders or downward, but when her lust comes
on her, Aristotle.
by often tickling and striving she turns it about to meet with the Boares
instrument in generation.

And this bag is called Apria, which hangs in the female inward, as the
stones of the Boar do outwardly. In some places there are Swine which are not
clouen-footed, but whole hooued like a Horse, yet this is very seldom or
accidental, for the most part al are clouen-footed, Aristotle affirms, that
there are Swine whole hooued, in Illiria, Poeonia, and Macedonia, and Albertus
says, that he has bin informed of some such seen in England, and also in
Flanders.

The Anckles are doubtful, as it were in proportion betwixt the Anckle of a
whole and of a cloven hoose. Now by this that has been said and shall be
added, we must make up the description of a perfect Swine, for the better
knowledge of the Reader, which may be this, The choice of outward (...) likes
of the best Swyne.
of a straight and small head. The best form is to have large members, except
the

There be some that for the choice of their Swine do make this observation,
they choose them by their face, by the race, and by the Region, by the face,
when the Boar and Sow are of good and beautiful aspects; by the race, if they
bring forth many and safely, not casting Pigges, by the Region when they are
not bred where they be of a small, slender, or vile stature, and especially
this is observed in the Male, because that in all beasts they are oftentimes
more like the sire then the Damme; therefore it is better in Swine to have a
thick, round, and well set Hog, then a long sided one, howbeit some approve
Hogs with long Legs. The buttockes ought to be fleshy, the belly large and
prominent, and

Likewise in cold Countries they must choose their Swine with rough and thick
hair, but in warmer and more temperate Climats, any hair be it never so small
will serve the turn, especially if it be black. And thus much shall serve in
this place for their several parts and members: Now we will proceed on to
their nourishment and copulation.

The ^ood o^ (...).
It is most certain that Swine are of a hot temperament, and for that cause it
comes to pass that they do not loose their Winter hair, for by reason of
the fat near to their skin, there is abundance of heat which keeps fast
the roots of the hair. Their

They delight also in Bucke-mast, and that meat makes the Swines flesh light,
easy of digestion, and apt for the stomach: In some Countries Hawes have the
same virtue to fat Hogs, (...)
that is in Acornes, for they make them weighty, straight, neat, and sweet.
The next unto this Holme Berries do fat Hogs, saving that they procure
looseness, except they be eaten by little and little. There is a tree which
has such bitter fruit (called Haliphlocus) whereof no beast will taste,
hereof Hogs will taste, but in extreme famine and hunger, Pl^^ius
when they are without all other food and meat.

The fruit or Apples of Palme-trees (especially such as grow in salt grounds
near the Sea sides, as in Cyrene of Africa, and Judea, and not in Egypt,
Cyprus, Syria, Heluetia, and Assiria) do fatten and feed Hogs: And indeed
there is scarce any food whereof they do not eat, as also no place wherein
they pick not out some living, both in Mountains, and Fens, and plain
fields, but best of all near waters, wherein by the banks sides they gather
many sweet and nourishable morsels.

There are no better abiding places for Hogs then are the woods, wherein abound
either Oaks, Beeches, Corke-trees, Holme, wild Olives, Tamariske, Hasels,
Apples, or Crab-trees, white Thorn, the Greek Carobs, Pine-trees,
Corne-trees, Lote-trees, places of their abode.
Prune-trees, Shrubs, Hawes, or wild Pears, or Medlers, and such like; for
these fruits grow ripe successively one after the other, for there is no time
of the year wherein some of them are not to be gathered soft and norishable,
whereby the herds of swine may be maintained.

But if at any time this food cease, and not to be found, then must there be
some other provision out of the earth, such as is corn, or grains, and turn
your Hogs to moist places where they may pick up worms, and suck up fat fenny
water, which thing is above all The Dog (says S. Peter) is returned to his
vomit, and the Sow that was washed to wallow in the mire. For this cause also
you must suffer them to dig in the water, and to eat Canes and wild
Bul-rushes, likewise the roots and tops of Watercresses; and you must provide
to lay up for them in water Acornes, and not spare corn to give it them by
hand, as Beans, Pease, Fitches, Barley and such like: And Columella (from whom
I have taken these instructions) adds moreover, that in the spring time
before your Hogs go abroad to bite at the sweet and fresh-growing-hearbes, Varro
least they provoke them to looseness, you must give them some sodden drink,
wash or swill, by virtue whereof that mischief must be avoided, for if it be
not, such leanness will follow, that it will overthrow

In some Countries they also give them the scapes or refuse Grapes of Vintage,
Aelianus.
and moreover the fruits of yew tree, which is poison to Dogs. Aristomachus
the Athenian by many and sundry praises aduanceth three-leaued grass, and
among other, for that as when it is green it is commodious for sheep, so
being dried it is wholesome to swine. They love green corn, yet it is reported
that if swine eat of it in the Isle of Salamine, their teeth by the law of the
country are beaten out of their mouths. It is wholesome to give them crude or
raw barley, especially to a Bore when he is to covple with a sow, but unto a
sow with pigge sod.

There is in Bauaria a kind of Scallion which bears a red-purple-flower,
like to the Buchspicke, because it grows in woods among Beeches. They eat
also flesh, and abstain not from fat Bacon, and herein they differ from most
of the ravening creatures, for Dogs will not taste of Dogs flesh, and
Bears of Bears, yet will Hogs eat of Swines flesh, yea many times the damme
eats her young ones: And it is found that swine have not abstaind from the
flesh of men and children, for when they have been slain by thieves, before
they could be found, Albertus. Aelianus.
the greatest part of their body was torn in pieces and eaten by wild swine.
And indeed as we see some Hens eat

They also eat Snailes and Salamanders, especially the Bores of the mountains
in Cilicia, and although there be in Salamanders a very deadly poison, yet
does it not hurt them at all, but afterward when men or beasts taste of such a
swines flesh, the operation of the poison works upon them mortally: neither
is this any marvel, for so it is when a Frog eats of a Toad: and whereas if
a man eat Hemlocke, presently al his blood congealeth in his body and he dies,
but if a Hog eat thereof, he not only not dies, but

Aristotle reported one great wonder of a place about Thracia (as he says)
wherein for the compass of twenty paces there grows Barley, whereof men eat
safely, but Oxen, and sheep, and other creatures avoid it as mortal poison,
and swine will not vouchsafe to taste of men's excrements that have eaten thereof,
but avoid them carefully.

As swine delight in meat, so also they delight more in drink, and especially
in the Summer time, and therefore they which keep sucking Sowes, must regard
to give them their belliful of drink twice a day, and generally we must not
lead them to the waters as we do Goats, and sheep, but when the heat of Summer
is about the rising of the Dog Star, we must keep them altogether by water
sides, that so they may at their own pleasure, both drink and lie down to
wallow in the mire, and if the coasts be so dry that this cannot be obtained
or permitted, then must they have water set in troughes and vessels, whereof
they may taste at their own pleasure, for otherwise through want of water they
grow liver and lung sick.

Columella
The miery water does most quickly make them fat, and they will drink wine or
beer Pliny of the son of L. Apronius who had bin a Consul, for his body
grew so fat that it was taken from him his body remaining immouable. And in the
spring time Swine of their own accord grow so fat, that many times they cannot
stand on their legs their bodies be so heavy, nor go any whit, so that if they
are to be removed, they are not to be drouen but to be carried in a cart.

Varro and Crescentiensis do report admirable things of the fatnes of swine For
first Varro The great fatnes of swine.
that he received knowledge from a credible honest man in Portugal, of a
Swine that there was killed, the offall whereof with two ribs was sent to
Voluminous a Senator, which weighed twenty and three pounds, and the fat
betwixt the skin and the bone, was a foot and three fingers thick. Unto this
he adds the story of the Arcadian Sow, who suffered a mouse to eat into her
fat, and breed young ones therein, after she made a nest: which thing he
likewise affirms of a Cow. And Crescentiensis reports of an other
Lusitenian Swine, which after the death, weighed five hundred seventy and five
pounds, and the Lard of that Hog was one foot and three fingers broad. And
the like may be said of a Hog at Basil, nourished by a certain Oile-man, in
whose Larde or fat, after his death were found many passages of mice too and
fro, which they had gnawed into his

The meat and best manner to fatten Hogs.
Hogs grow fat in short time. In ancient days (as Pliny writes) they put
them up to fatting threescore days, and first of all they made them fast three
days together, after six days they may senciblie be perceived to grow fat.
There is not any beast that can better or more easily be accustomed to al
kinds of food, and therefore does very quickly grow fat, the quantity and
stature of their body considered, for whereas an Ox or Cow, or Heart, and
such like Beasts ask long time, yet a Swine which eats of all sorts of
meat, does very quickly even in a month or two or three at the most, prove
woorthye the knife and also his masters table, although in some places they
put them up to fatting a whole year together, and how much they profit and
gather in their feeding, it is very

And there must be had great care of their drink. In Thracia, after they put
up a Hog to fatting, they give him drink the first day, and then let him fast
from drink two days, and so give him drink by that proportion, till the
seventh day, afterward they observe no more diet for their Swine, but give
them their fill of meat and drink till the slaughter day. In other Countries
they diet them in this sort: After Beans and Pease they give them drink
abundantly, because they are solid and hard, but after Oats and such like,
as meal, they give them no drink, least the meal swim up and down in their
belly, and so be eiected into the excrements without any great profitte. There
is nothing

They must not be used to one simple, or unmingled, or uncompounded meat, but
with diverse compounds, for they rejoice in variety and change like other
beasts, for by this mutation of food, they are not only kept from inflammation
and windiness, but part of it always goes into flesh, and part into fat.

Some use to make their stye wherein they are enclosed to be very dark and
close, Aelianus
for their more speedy fatting, and the reason is good, because the beast is
more apt to be quiet. You shall have Bakers that will fat their Hogs with
bran, and in Elsatia a country of Germany, they fat them with Beane-meale, for
thereby they grow fat very speedily, and some with barley meal wet with flat
milk. And in the Alps they fat them with Whaye, whereby their fat and flesh
grows more white and sweet then if they were fatted with Acorns, yet whay is
very dangerous: for such is the ravening intemperancy of this beast

Ba^ly is very nourishable to them, whether it be sod or raw, and especially
for Sowes with Pigge, for it preserves the young ones til delivery, and at the
farrowing causes an easy and safe pigging. And to conclude this part, Millers
and Bakers fat with meal and bran, brewers with Ale or Barley steeped in Ale,
Oyle-men with the refuse of Nuttes and Grapes.

Some again there be that grew fat with the roots of Fern. Al^ertus.
When a Sow is very fat she has always but little milk, and therefore is not
apt to make any good tidie pigs, and Frisia near Germany, they fat Oxen and
swine with the same meat, for there you shall have in one stable an Ox, and a
Hog tied behind him at his tail, for the Ox being tied to the rack eats
Barley in the straw and chafe, which he swalloweth down without chewing, and so
the softest thereof is digested in his belly, and the other comes forth whole
in his dung, which the Hog licketh up and is therewithal fatned. And it is to
be remembered, that swine gelded or splaied, do sooner fatten then any other.

To conclude, they love the dung of men, and the reason thereof is, because the
seat

Concerning their generation or copulation, Of the copul^tion and b^eed of
Swine.
it is to be noted that a Bore or male swine will not remain of validity and
good for breed past three year old, by the opinion of all the ancient, for
such as he engendereth after that age, are but weak and not profitable to be
kept and nourished. At eight months old he begins to leap the female, and
it is good to keep him close from other of his kind for two months before,
and to feed him with Barley raw, but the sow with Barley sodden. One Bore is
sufficient for ten Sowes, Homer like a wise husbandman prescribes, that the
male and female Swine be kept assunder till the time of their copulation.

They continue long in the act of copulation, and the reason thereof is,
because his lust is not hot, nor yet proceeding from heat, yet is his seed
very plentiful. They in the time of their copulation are angry, and
outrageous, fighting with one another very irefully, and for that purpose they
use to harden their ribs by rubbing them voluntarily upon Trees. They choose
for the most part the morning for copulation, but if he be fat and young, he

They engender oftentimes in one year, the reason whereof is to be ascribed to
their meat or some extraordinary heat, which is a common thing to all that live
familiarly among men, and yet the wild swine couple and bring forth but once
in the year, because they are seldom filled with meat, endure much pain to
get and much cold, for Venus in men and beasts, is a companion of satiety, and
therefore they only bring forth in the spring time, and warm weather, and it
is observed that in what night soever a wild Hog or sow farroweth there will
be no storm or rain. There be many causes why the tame domestical Hogs
bring forth and engender more often then the wild, first because they are fed
with ease, secondly because they live together, without fear, and by society
are more often provoked to lust, on the otherside the wild swine come sildome
together, and are often hungrey, for which cause they are more dull and less
venereous, yea many times Aristotle and the ancient Graecians Chlunes, and
Monorcheis.

The times of a ^ows bo^^g
But concerning the sow, she begins to suffer the Bore at eight months of
age, although according to the diversity of regions and air, they differ in
this time of their copulation, for some begin at four months, and other
again tarry till they be a year old, and this is no marvel, for even the male
which engendereth before he be a year old, begets but weak, tender, and
unprofitable Pigges. The best time of their admission is from the Calends of
February unto the Vernall Equinoctial, for so it happens that they bring forth
the young in the summer time, for four months she goes with young, and it is
good that the pigges be farrowed before harvest, which you purpose to keep all the

After that you perceive that the sowes have conceived, then separate them from
the bores, least by the raging lust of their provoking, they be troubled and
endangered to abortment. There be some that say, a sow may bear young till she
be seven year old, but I will not strive about that whereof every poor
swineheard may give full satisfaction. At a year old a sow may do well, if
she be covered by the bore in the month of February.

But if they begin not to bear til they be twenty months old, or two years,
they will not only bring forth the stronger, but also bear the longer time
even to the seventh year, and at that time it is good to let them go to
rivers, fennes, or miery places, for even Albertus reports, that in some
places of Germany a sow has bin found to bear young eight years, and in other
till they were fifteen years old* but after fifteen year it was never seen
that a sow brought forth young pigges. If the sow be fat, she is always
the less prone to conceive with young, whether she be young or old.

When first of all they begin to seek the Bore, they leap upon other swine,
and in process cast forth a certain purgation called Apria, which is the
same in a sow which Hippomanes is in a mare, then they also leave their
heard-fellowes, which kind of behauior or action, the Latins call by a
peculiar Verb Subare, and that is applied to Harlottes and Horace: Iamque
subando,
Tecta cubilia tectaque rumpit.
We in English call it Boaring, because she never rests to show her desire
till she come to a bore, and therefore when an old Woman lusts after a man,
being past lust by all natural possibility, she is called Anus subans. And the
beast is so delighted with this pleasure of carnal copulation, that many times
she falls asleep in that action, and if the male be young or dull, Plinius.
then will the female leap upon him and provoke him, yea in her rage she
s^tteth many times upon men and Women, especially if that they do wear any
white Apria and privy place be wet and moistened with Vinegar. They have their
proper voices and cries for this time of their boaring, which the bore or male
understands presently.

They are filled at one copulation, and yet for their better safegarde, and to
preserve them from abortment, it is good to suffer the bore to cover her twice
or thrice, and more over, if she conceive not at the first, then may she safly
be permitted three or four times together, and it is observed that except her
ears hang down flagging, and carelessely, she is not filled but rejects the
seed, but if her ears fall downward, and so hang all the time that the Boar
is upon her, then is it a most certain token that she is filled, and has
conceived with young.

After four months (as we have said) the Sow farroweth her Pigs, that is to
say, in the fifth month, as it were in the seventeenth week: For so is this
beast enabled by nature to bear twice in the year, and yet to suck her young
ones two months together. And there is no clouen-footed-beast that bears
many at a time except the Sow, except in her age, for then she begins to
loose her Apria or purgation, and so many times miscarrieth, Niphus.
that by overmuch humor turned into a natural seed, it breeds much young,
and for little humor it brings forth a few Pigges, Aristotle The number
which a Sow bears.


Their ordinary number which they bring forth and can nourishe is twelve, or
sixteen at the most, and very rare it is to see sixteen brought up by one
Sow. Howbeit it has been seen that a Sow has brought forth twenty, but far
more often seven, eight or ten. There is a story in Festus of a Sow that
brought forth thirty at a time, his words be these;

The Sow of Aeneas Lauinius did bring forth thirty white Pigges at one time,
wherefore the Lauinians were much troubled about the signification of such a
monstrous farrow, at Alba, in remembrance of the thirty white Pigges. And Pliny
affirms, that the Images of those pigges and the Sow their damme, were to be
seen in his days in public places, and the body of the Damme or Sow
preserved in Salt by the priests of Alba, to be showed to all such as desired
to be certified of the truth of that Story.

But to return to the number of young pigges which are ordinary and without
miracle bred in their dammes belly, which I find to be so many as the Sow has
dugges for, so many she may well nourish and give suck unto, and not more, and
it seems a special work of God which has made this tame beast so
fruitful, for the better recompense

Iuuenal has a comparison betwixt a white sow and an Heighfar. Scropha
foecundior alba, more fruitful then a white Sow, but belike the white Sowes
do bring more then any other color. Now the reason of the Poets speech was
because that there was an Heighfar in the days of Ptolomy the younger, which
at one time brought forth six Calves; Whereupon came the proverb of Regia
Vaccula, for a fruitful Cow, for Helenus tells this to Aeneas. Upon the Sow
and thirty pigges there is this answer of Lauiniens concerning Alba: Cum tibi
sollicito secreti ad fluminis vndam,
Littoreis ingens, inuenta sub ilicibus sus,
Triginta capitum foetus enixa iacebit,
Alba solo recubans, alibi circum vbera nati,
Is lecus vrbis erit, requies ea certe laborum.
And Iuuenal says thus of it; Conspicitur sublimis aper cui candida nomen,
Scropha dedit laetis phrygibus mirabile sumen,
Et nunquam visis triginta clara mamillis.


When the young one comes forth of the Dammes belly wounded or imperfect, by
reason of any harm therein received, (it is called Metacherum) and many times
swine engender Monsters, which comes to pass oftener in little beasts then
in the greatest, because of the multitude of cells appointed for the receipt of
the seed, by reason whereof, sometimes there are two heads to one body,
sometimes two bodies and one head, Dionisius the Tyrant went to War against
Dion, for all their parts was perfect but their ears, as it were to teach how
inconsiderately against all good counsel, the Tyrant undertook that voyage;
Such are commonly found to be bred among them, also now and then of an
unspeakable smalenesse like Dwarfes, which cannot live, having no mouth nor
ears, called by the Latins Aporcelli: If a Sow great with Pigge do eat
abundantly of Acornes, it causes her to cast her farrow and to suffer
abortement, and if she grow fat, then is she less fruitful in Milk.

Now for the choice of a Pigge to keep for store, it must be chosen from a
lusty and

But this is to be observed for reconciliation of both opinions, namely, that
in hot Countries such Hogs are preferred that be bred in the Winter, but in
cold such as are bred in March or April: within ten days after their
farrowing they grow to have teeth, and the Sow ever offers her foremost
Dugge to the pigge, that comes first out of her belly, and the residue take
their fortune as it falls, one to one, Tzetzes says) keeps him to his
first choice. And if any of them be taken away from his Dugge that is killed or
sold, that dugge presently dries and the Milk turns backewarde, and so
until all be gone, one excepted, and then it is nourished with no more then
was ordained at the beginning for it. If the old Sow want Milk at any time,
the supply must be made by giving the young ones fried or parched Corn, for
raw Corn or drink procures looseness, and it is best for them to be suckled
in the place where their Damme usually abides.

For weaning of them it is not good to let more then five or six suck of her
at one time,

The office and first institution of Swine-heardes.
This beast loves society and to live in heardes or flocks together, and
therefore the ancients have invented Hogge-keepers, whom they call
Swyne-heardes, wherein there was wont to be considered these instructions,
first he accustomed them to the sound of his horn, for by that he called them
abroad out of their foldes to their feedings, for they never suffered above
twelve together at the trough or parcel of meat. It becomes a Collumella)
to be vigilent, diligent, industrious, and wise, for he must carry in his head
the state of all that he nourishes, both old and young, barren and fruitful,
and consider the time of their farrowing, wheather they be near at hand or far
off, that so none may be lost through the want of his observation, being
farrowed, he must consider and look upon them to see which are fit for
store, and which are not, what are their natures and probabilities, how much
milk their dam is able to afford them, and how many she is to bring up,
especially to regard that every Sow bring up no more then her own pigs, for
swine being out of the sty do mingle one with another, and loose their own
young ones, and when she lies down to give them suck, she lends her paps
as well to strangers as to her own, and therefore herein must the care and wit
of the heards-men appear, for if there be many he must shut up every Sow with
her young, and if that cannot be, then with a little Pitch or Tar let him give
several marks to the several farrowes, that so his memory may not be
confounded. Another remedy to avoid the confusion of young Pigs one among
another, is so to frame the threshold of the stye, that the pigs may not be
able to go in and out, for the Sow can more easily go over, and so she may be
eased of their company, and they safely included at home, and so shall no
stranger Collumella Palladius
and the other ready to be delivered by themselves, free from al incursion and
violence. These deuisions or separations ought to be some 3. or 4. foot high,
so as they may not be able to leap over to one another, and not covered, to
the intent that every swine heard both man and Boy may freely look over to
them, and tell them if any chance to be missing, or else help a poor pig when
it is over laid by his dam.

Whenever the Swineheard cleanses the sty, then let him cast in sand or some
other drying thing into it, that all the moisture and wetnesse may be drunk
up. The damme ought not to be permitted for the first ten days to go forth of
the stable, except to drink, Tremellius Scrofa, tending to the commendation of
the custody or nourishing of Swine, for thus he writes: Agriculturae ab initio
sui studiosus, nec de pecore suillo mihi mino cura est, quam vobis magnis
pecuarijs. Cui enim ears non est communis? quis enim nostrum fundum colit quin
sues habent, and qui non audierit putras nostros dicere ignanum and sumptus sum
esse, qui succidiam in carnario suspendit potius ab laniario quam ex domestico
fundo? That is to say, I have been long given to follow husbandry, and I have
always had as great care of my Swyne, as other men of greater cattle.
Tremellius.

Another part of a good Svvinehard is, to look to the gelding of his Svvyne,
and splaying of the females, for if all be suffered to procreate and engender
it is more danger that Swine would in short time eat up men, rather then men
Swine. The Latins call such a Hog gelded Macalis, and Porcastrus, that is
Porcus castratus, the Germans ein barg, or Boetz, from whence seems to be
derived our English Barrow-hog (for so we call a gelded-male-hog) and a female
Basse. Pliny
The best time therefore to geld them is in the old Moon, or as we say in the
waine of the Moon, but Hesiod prescribes, that an Ox and a Boar should be
gelded in the second quarter and first day thereof, and Aristotle is of opinion
that is skilleth not what age a Boar be when he is libbed; but it is clear
by the best experienced among these beasts, there are two times of gelding
them; one in the spring, and the other in the Autumn, and this is to be done
after a double manner; First, by making two incisions or wounds upon his
stones, out of which holes the stones

The second way is more perilous, yet more cleanely; for first of all at one
wound or incision they take out one stone, then that being forth, with their
knyfe they cut the small skin which parts the stones in the cod, and so
press forth the second stone at the first wound, afterward applyeng to it
ordinary medicines, such as we will describe in the treatise of their diseases.

And the opinion of Varo is, that it is good to lib them at half a year old,
or at a year old, or at three or four year old, for their better fatting;
but best at a year, and not under half a year. When the stones are taken
forth of an old Bore, suppose two, or three or four year old, they are called
by the Latins Polimenta, because with them they polished

The female also is gelt or splayed, (although she often bore pigs) whereof
they open the side (near her loins) and take away from her Apria, and
receptacles of the Boares seed, ^^s^us
which being sewed up again, in short time is enclosed in fat; this they do by
hanging them up by their forelegs, and first of all they which do it most
commodiously, must cause them to fast two days before; and then having cut it,
they sew up and close fast again the wound or incision, and this is done in
the same place of the female, that the stones are to be taken out in the male
(as Aristotle writes) but rather it appears by good examination and proof,
that it is to be cut out on the right, against the bone (called os sacrum.
Abenzoor
) And the only cause of this Sow-gelding is, for their better growth and
fatning;

The nature of this beast ^^^manius Pliny
This beast is a most vnpure and unclean beast, and ravening; and therefore we
use (not improperly) to call Obscoene and filthy men or women, by the name of
Swyne or Sowes. They which have foreheads, eyelids, lips, mouth, or Neck, like
Swyne, are accounted foolish, wicked, and wrathful: al their senses (their
smelling excepted) are dull, because* they have no articles in their hearts,
but have thick blood, and some say, that the acuteness and ripeness of the
soul, stands not in the thickness of the blood, but in the cover Tirrhene
sea, had entered a Haven, and went on land, Aelianus
they came to a Swines stye and drew out thereof diverse Swine, and so carried
them on shipboard, and loosing their Anckers and tacklings, do depart and
sail away. The Swine heardes seeing the pirates commit this robbery, and not
being able to deliver and pirates were justly drowned in reward of the theft,
and the stolen Swine swam safely back again to their masters and keepers. The
nature of this beast is to delight in the most filthy and noisome places, for
no other cause, (as I think) but because of their dull senses. Their voice is
called Grunnitus gruntling, Sordida sus pascens ruris gramina grunnit, which is a
terrible voice to one that is not accustomed thereunto, (for even the Elephants
are afraid thereof) especially when one of them is hurt or hanged fast, or
bitten, then all the residue as it were in compassion condoling his misery, run
to him and cry with him, and this voice is very common in swine at all hands to
cry, except he be carried with his head upwards, toward heaven, and then (it
is affirmed) he never cries, the reason whereof is given by Aphrodisien:
Achelous which gruntleth like a hog, whereof Iuuenal speaks, saying: Et quam
remigibus grunnisse Elpenor a porcis. And this voice of swine is by Caecilius
attributed to drunken men. The milk of Swine is very thick, and therefore
cannot make whay like a sheep, howbeit it suddenly coagulateth and congealeth
together. Among diverse males or Boats when one of them is conqueror, the
residue give obedience and yeald unto him, and the chief time of their fight
or discord is in their lust, or other occasions of food, or strangeness, at
which time it is not safe for any man to come near them, for fear of danger
from both parties, Strabo reports in general of all the Belgian Swine, that
they were so fierce, strong, and wrathful, that it was as much danger to com
ner them as to angry wolfes. Nature has made a great league betwixt Swyne and
Crocodiles, for there is no beast that may so freely feed by the banks sides of
Nilus, Herus
as the swine may, without all hurt by the Crocodil. Other Serpents, especially
the smaller Serpents which are oftentimes devoured by Swine, Aristotle says,
that when many of them are together they fear not the wolf, and yet they
never devour any wolf, but only with their scarring and gruntling noise fear
them away. When a wolf gets a swine, Calcaguinus Varro Plinius Sextus
he deuoureth him, and before he can eat him, draggeth him by the ears to
some water to cool his teeth in his flesh (which above measure burn in
devouring his flesh.) It has Nigidius affirms, that Dogs will run away from
him that has pulled off a ticke from a swines back. The people of Mossynaecum
did engender man with Woman public like swine, and Stobaeus writing against
women says, that some of them are derived from one beast, and some from
another, and namely a woman descended of a Sow sits at home, and does
neither good nor harm: but Simonides writes otherwise, and namely that a
woman borne of a Sow sits at home suffering all things to be impure,
unclean, and out of order, without decking, dressing, or ornament, and so she
grows fat in her unwashed garments. And there are many fictions of the
transforming into swine. Homer faineth that the companions of Ulysses were all
by Circes turned into swine, which is interpreted in this manner; Circe to
signify unreasonable pleasure, Ulysses to signify the soul, and his
companions the inferior affections thereof, and so were the companions of
Ulysses turned into swine by Circe, When unreasonable pleasures do overcome our
affections and make us like swine in following our appetites: and therefore it
was the counsel of Socrates, that no man should at banquet eat more then
sufficient, and those which could not abstain from them, should forbear their
company that persuaded them to eat when they were not hungry, and to drink
when they were not thirsty, and therefore he supposed that it was said in jest
that Circe turned men into swine. When as Ulysses by his own abstinence and
Mercury his counsel, was delivered and saved from that most savage
transformation, Horace thus to write; Ulysses si bibisset pocula Circes -- Cum
socijs
Vixisset canis immundus vel amica luto sus. Xenophon

And from this came the original proverb of Porcellus Acarnanius for a tender
and delicate person, used so to fulness, that al penury is death unto him. Sweet
savors as we have showed already, are very hurtful to swine, especially the
sweet oil of Marioram. Whereupon came the proverb Nil cum amar acino sui, and
Lucretius speaks hereof in this sort; Denique amaracinum fugitat sus and
timet omne,
Vnguentum: nam setigeris subus acre venenum est:
And for this cause Tullius Cicero says, Illi alablastrus putaet vnguenti
plena. That is, A box of Alablaster full of ointment is displeasing to this
beast, for as the Scarabee or Horse fly forsakes sweet places to light and sit
upon horse dung, even so does Swine. There be many of the ancients that have
delivered merrily Anima suis prosate, that the Swines soul is in their body
but in stead of salt to keep the flesh from stinking, Coelius
even as for no other purpose many among men seem to live and retain soul in
body. They are very clamorous, and therefore are used for talking and prattling
fellows, whereupon the Greek Poet Lucilius translated Erasmus alludeth, when
he says in this manner, under Alia Menecles alia porcellus loquitur; Sucula,
bos, and capra mih^, periere Menecles,
Ac merces horum nomine pensa tibi est.
Nec mihi cum Othryade quicquam estue fuit-ne negoci,
Nec fures vllos huc cito Thermopylis.
Sed contra Eutychidem nobis lis: proinde quid hic mi
Aut Xerxes facit, aut quid Lacedaemonij?
Ob pactum and de me loquere, aut clamauero clare,
Multo aliud dicit sus, aliud Menecles.
And to conclude, in Latin they say Sus mineruam, when an unlearned dunce goes
about Pallas, or as we say in English, the foul Sow teach the fair Lady to
spin.

There are in Swine many presages and foretokens of foul weather, as
Swine-heardes have observed: as first if they lie long wallowing in the mire,
or if they feed more greedily then they were accustomed, or gather together in
their mouths, hay, stubble, or straw, as Aratus writes; or if they leap and
dance, or frisk in any unwonted sort: and for their copulation in years that
will prove moist, they will ever be boring, but in dryer years they are less
libidinous.

The greatest harm that comes by Swine is in rooting and turning up of the
earth, and this they do in corn fields, for which we have showed that the
Ciprians made a law to beat Homer writes that Irus threatens Villisses,
because his companions eat up all his corn, to knock out their teeth; yet
sometimes the husbandmen admit them of purpose, both into their land before it
be plowed, and also into their vineyards. It is said that the Egyptians
forbear to sacrifice them, because they tread in their corn in their fields
after it is swelled out of the earth, so as the Birds cannot gather it up
again, as we have showed before. The Jews and the Egyptians accounted this
beast most unclean. The Jews not as the vain gentiles imagined because they
worshipped it, for that it taught men to plow the earth, but for the law of
God. And the Egyptians hold it a profaigne thing, and therefore they had an
ancient law, that no Swyne-heard should come into their temple, or that any man
should give him his Daughter in Bacchus, and at other times it was unlawful,
either to offer them, or to eat them: but it seems by many Authors that
their first sacrifices were of Swyne, for we read of ancient customs in
Hetruria, that at their marriage feasts they offered and sacrificed a Sow to
Venus, and at other times, especially in harvest they did so to Ceres. The
Latins do hold a Swine very grateful and sacred to Jupiter, because as they
believed that a Sow did first of all lend her paps to him, and therefore all of
them worship a Sow, and abstain from her flesh. Likewise in Mysia and
Phoenicia, there were temples of Jupiter, wherein it was forbidden to sacrifice
or kill Swyne by a public law, like as it was among the Jews. When the Kings
of Sparta were first of all chosen Jupiter a Swine, it must be after or at a
triumph: they were also sacrificed to Neptune, because they were impetuous and
ranging beasts; and a Boar was holy to Mars, according to this saying of
Pomponius in Attellana. Mars tibifacturu^, si vnqua^ re^^ireo, bidente verre.
And there was a custom among the Athenians when a man had slain an hundred
enemies, he was permitted to offer up to Mars, some part of a man at Lemnos,
and afterward they grew out of liking of this vain custom, and in stead
thereof sacrificed a barrow or gelded hog, and when they housled their army,
they did it with hogs, sheep, or Bulls, and nothing else, and they compassed it
about 3. times with pomp and stately procession, and at last slew and offered
them to Mars. They were wont to sacrifice a hog for a man that had recouerd his
wits after he had bin mad, and also they sacred Swyne to Siluanus, according to
these verses; Caedere Siluano porcum quadrante lauari: And again: Tellurem
porco Siluanum lacte piabant. Their pagan God Terminus, had an Ewe and a young
Sow offered to him (as Ovid writes) although by the laws of Numa, al Ceres
and Bacchus, we have showed already, how they were offered, and the reason of
their sacrificing was, because they were hurtful to all green corn and
vines; Ceres auida gauisa est de sanguine porci,
Vlta suas merita caede nocentes opes,
Nam sata vere n^no teneris lactentia succis,
Eruta setigerae comperit ore suis,
And again in another place he writes thus: Prima putatur hostia Sus meruisse
mori,
-- quia semina pando,
Er verit rostro, sp^nque interceperit anni.
Ceres was in April, wherein the priests with Lamps and Torches, and
apparelled in white garments, did first of all kill a female Swine, and then
offer her, and sometime this was a Sow with farrow, because thereby in a
mystery they prayed the fruitefulnesse and fecundity of the earth, and for
these and such like causes we read of titles put upon them, as Porca
pracidanea, for the sow that was slain before the reaping, and Porca praesa,
for the sow that was offered at a funeral for the safety of all the family,
wherein the dead man lived. They also sacrificed a barren sow to Proserpina,
because she never bore children, and to Juno in the calends of every month:
And thus much for their sacrificing. Now we are to come to the use of swine and
their several parts, first of all it is certain that there is no beast less
profitable being alive then a hog, and yet at his latter Cicero said well Sus
quid habet praeterescam, cui quidem ne putresceret, animam ipsam pro sale datam
esse dicit Chrysippus. A hog has nothing in him beside his meat, and that
therefore the soul thereof was given to it in stead of salt to keep it from
stinking: for indeed in Lions, Dogs, Bears, Horses, and Elephants, all their
virtue lies in their minds, and their flesh is unprofitable and good for
nothing, but the Swine has no gifts at all in the mind, but in the body, the
life thereof keeping the flesh and body from putrefaction. And there is no beast
that God has ordained for domestical provision of food and meat to man, except
Hares and conies, that is so fruitful as Swin are, Gillius
God (as we have touched already) Leuit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14. forbad his people of
Israel to eat hereof, because it was an unclean beast not chewing the cud;
and furthermore the observation Procopius is memorable, that whereas the
Egyptians did worship with divine worship, both Oxen, Kyne, and sheep, and
would not eat of their flesh or kill them in sacrifice, yet did eat, and kill,
and sacrifice Swine. The Jews were permitted and commanded to eat Oxen and
sheep, and abstain from the flesh of Swine; thus manifesting how different his
ways and thoughts are from the ways and thoughts of men. The Lord does not
this for policy, but to try the obedience of his people, places therein one
part of his worship, and therefore by his prophets. Esa. 65. and 66. calls
the eating of Swines flesh abomination, and threatens thereunto a certain
unavoidable judgment and damnation. The woman and her seven sons which were
apprehended by King Antiochus, and by him tempted to eat swines flesh which
they refused to do, (being against the law of their God) Jason 2. Macab. 6. We
read that Heliogabalus did abstain from swines flesh, because he was a
Phoenician, and they forbore to eat it. The women of Bracea in Affricke, do
never taste of Cowes flesh or Swines flesh.

The Arabian Scenites never eat hereof, and Swine cannot live in their
Countries ( Tesias and Aelianus affirm) that in India there are no Swine,
either tame or wild, and that the Indians do as much forbear to eat of
Swines flesh, in detestation thereof, as they do of man's flesh.

Now concerning the flesh of Swine, diverse opinions are held about the
goodness and evil thereof, yet Hippocrates writes, that Porcinae carnes
prauae sunt quum fuerint crudiores and ambustae, magis autem choleram generant,
and turbationem faciunt, Suillae carnes optima sunt omnium carnium. That is,
The flesh of a Boar being raw or roasted is worst of all other, because it
engendereth Cholor and wild windy matter in the stonlocke; but the flesh of a
Sow is the best of al flesh, with this prouiso, that it neither exceed in
fatness, leanness,

There is a merry and a witty answer of a memorable Noble Man to an old
Gentlewoman (if not a Lady) who dispraised Bacon at the Noble Man's table, and
said it was a churlish, unpleasant meat. The Lord understanding a privy
Emphasis in that speech against himself, (for his name was written with those
Letters and sillables) answered her; you say truth, if the Bacon be a piece of
an old Sow, (as peradventure she seemed to be at that time.) The best opinion
about the concoctiue quality of this flesh is, that then it is best, when it is
in middle age, neither a pig, nor an old Hog, for a pigge is over moist, like
the Damme which is the moystest of all other earthly Beasts; and therefore
cannot but engender much phlegm: and for this cause the fattest are reproved
for a good diet, for

And the old Swine are most hard of concoction, (yea though they be scorched
or senged at the fire) because thereby is increased in their flesh much acrimony
and sharpness, which in the stomach of man turns into Choler: for they bite
all the vessels reaching to the stomach, making a deriuation of all those ill
humors into the belly and other parts.

I do not like their opinion, which think that it is better cold then hot, for
fear of inflammation, this rule is good in the flesh of Goats (which are
exceeding whot) but in Swyne where is no predominancy but of moisture, it is
better to eat them hot then cold, even as hot Milk is more wholesome then
cold. Hippocrates does prescribe the eating Coelius Aurelianus, forbids the
same in the palsy or falling sickness.

Galen is of opinion that Caro porcina potentissime nutrit: nourishes most
strongly, and potently; whereof he gives an instance for a reason taken from
Champions, Combatants, or Wrestlers, if the day before they Wrestle or fight,
they feed on an equal quantity of any other flesh, they feel themselves weak
and feeble, in comparison of that is gathered from Swyns flesh: and this (he
says) may be tried in laborers, Myoners, Diggers, and Husbandmen; which
retain their strength as well (if not better) by eating of Swynes flesh or
Bacon as any other meat: For as Beef in thickness and solidity of substance
to the eyes appearance, excels Porke or Bacon, so Porke and Bacon excels

A Goat is less dry then an Ox, and yet compared to a man or a Swyne, it
excels both of them; for there is a great resemblance or similitude betwixt
a man's flesh and of it avoided, and old swine notwithstanding their primitive
and natural moisture, yet grow very dry, and their flesh is worst of al,
because in nature, humidity helps the concoction thereof.

All swines flesh being concocted engendereth many good humors, yet withal they
ontaine a kind of glutinous humor, which stops the liver and reins,
especially in those which by nature are apt to this infirmity: And although some
are of opinion, that the wild Bore is more norishable then the tame swine,
because of his laborous course of life, and getting his prey; yet it appears
that the tame swine by their resty life, and easy gathering of their meat,
are made more fit for nourishment of man, for they are more moist: and swines
flesh without convenient moisture (which is many times wanting in wild

And if any man ask how it comes to pass, that swine which both feed and
live so filthily, should be so norishable to the nature of man; some make
answer, that by reason of their good constitution of body, they turn ill
nutriment to a good flesh: for as men which be of a sound, perfect, and
healthy disposition or temperature, are not hurt by a Salernum, prescribed that
in their verses to the king of England, and also Ilia porcorum bona sunt, mala
sunt refequorum. And Fiera describes the eating of Hogs-flesh in this manner:
Sus tibi coenoso coena domesticus ore,
Grata ferat nobis mensa hyemalis aprum.
Ille licet currat de vertice montis, aquosae
Carnis erit, pluri sed tamen aptacibo est.
Hinc feritas siluaeque domant, and inania saxa,
Post melius posita rusticitate sapit.
And whereas Hippocrates commended swines flesh for Champions or Combatants, it
is Bilis the Champion thorough eating of swines flesh, fell to such a height
of choler, that he cast it upwards and downwards.

When the womb of a woman is vlcerated, let her abstain from all swines
flesh, especially the eldest and the youngest. It is not good for any man to
taste or eat this flesh in the Summer time, or any hot weather, for then only
it is allowed when extreme frostes have tempered it for man's stomach, and the
stomach for it: the flesh of wild swine is most of all hurtful to them that
live at ease, without exercise, because that they are immoderately given to
sleep. Some are of opinion that a sow which is killed immediately after the
Boar has covered her, is not so wholesome as other: Heliogabalus observed
this custom, to eat one day nothing but Phesant Hens, another day nothing but
Pullen, and

There was in ancient time a dish of meat called Troianus, the Troyan Hog,
Erasmus Macrobius
in imitation of the Troyan horse, for as that was stuffed within with many
armed men, so was this with many several meats, and whole beasts, as Lambs,
Birds, Capons, and such like, to serve the appetites of the most strange
belly-Goddes, and Architects of gluttonny: and therefore Cincius in his
oration, wherein he persuaded the senators and people to the law Fannia,
reprooueth this immoderate riot in banquets, In apponendo mensis porcum
Troianum, and indeed it wanted not effect, for they forbad both Porcum
Troianum, and Callum aprugnum.

There was another (Rauen-monster-dish, (called Pinax) wherein were included
many Beasts, Fowls, Eggs, and other things which were distributed whole to
the guests, and no marvel, for this Beast was as great as a Hog, and yet
gilded over with silver. And Hippolochus in his Epistle to Lynceus, speaking of
the banquet of Caramis, says thus, Allatus est nobis etiam porcus dimidia
part diligenter assus sieve tostus, and dimidia altera part tanquam There was
brought to us a Hog, whereof the one half was well roasted, and the other half
or side well sod, and this was so industriously prepared by the Cook, that it
did not apeare where the hog was slain or received his deadly wound, nor yet
how his belly came to be stuffed with diverse and sundry excellent and delicate
things. The Romans had a fashion to divide and distribute a Hog, ^obiscus
which appears in these verses of Martial: Iste tibi faciet bona saturnalia
porcus,
Inter spumantes ilice pastus apros.
And of the eating of a sucking pigge, Martial also writes in this manner:
Lacte mero pastum pigrae mihi matris alumnum
Ponat, and Aetolo de sue dives edat.
I might add many other things concerning the eating and dressing of Swines
flesh, both young and old, but I will pass it over, leaving that learning to
every Cook, and Kitchin-boy.

Concerning Bacon, that which is called by the Latins Perna, I might add many
things, neither improper, nor impertinent, and I cannot tell whether it should
be a fault to omit it in this place. The word Perna after Varro, seems to be
derived from Pede, but in my opinion, it is more consonant to reason, that it
is derived from the Greek word Pterna, which is the ribs and hips of the hog,
hanged up and salted, called by Martial Petaso, and by Plautus Ophthalmia,
Horaeum, Scombrum, and Laridus: Palladius.
Quanta pecus pestis veniet, quanta labes larido. The time of the making of
Bacon, is in the winter season, and all the cold weather, and of this Martial
writes very much in one place: Musteus est, propera, charos ne differ amicos
Nam mihi cum vetulo sit pesatone nihil.
And again. Et pulpam dubio de petasone voras
Cretana mihi fiet, vel massa licebit
De menapis lauti, de petasone vorant.
Strabo in his time commended the Bacon of the Gauls, or of France, affirming
that it was not inferior to the Asian or Lycian, an old city of Spain (called
Pompelon) nere Aquitania,

The milk of a sow is fat and thick, very apt to congeal, and needs not any
runnet to turn it; it breeds little whay, and therefore it is not fit for
the stomach, except to procure vomiting, and because it has bin often proved,
that they which drink or eat sow milk fall into scurffes and Leprosies, (which
diseases the Asians hate above all other) therefore the Egyptians added this to
all the residue of their reasons, to condemn a sow for an unclean and filthy
beast: And this was peculiarly the saying of Manethon.

With the skins of swine which the Graecians did call Phorine, The use of
their skins
they made shoo-leather, but now a days by reason of the tenderness and
looseness thereof, they use it not, but leave it to the sadlers and to them
that cover books, for which cause it is much better then either sheep or
Goats skins, for it has a deeper grain, and does not so easily fall off.
Out of the parings of their skins they make a kind of glue, which is
preferred before Taurocollum, and which for similitude they call Choerocollum.
The fat of swine is very precious to lickor shoes and boots therewithal. The
amber that is in common use

Some mix the blood of Hogs with those medicines that they cast into Waters
to take fishes, and the hunters in some Countries when they would take Wolves
and Foxes do make a train with a Hogs liver sodde, cut in pieces and
anointed over with honey, and so anointing their shoos with swines grease,
draw after them a dead catte, which will cause the beasts to follow after very
speedily. The hairs of swine, are used by Cobblers and Shoomakers, and also
with them every Boy knows how to make their nosebleede. The dung is very
sharp, and yet is it justly condemned by Columella for no use, no not to
fatten the earth, and Vines also are burned therewithal, except they be
diligently watered,

In Plinies time they studied to enlarge and make their Luttuce grow broad,
Theophrast.
and not close together, which they did by slitting a little the stalk, and
thrusting gently into it some Hogs dung. But for trees there is more especial
use of it, for it is used to ripen fruit and make the trees more plentiful.
The Pomegranats and Almondes are sweetened her^by, and the Nuts easily caused to
fall out of the shell. Likewise, if Fennel be unsavory, by laying to the root
thereof either Hogs-dung, or Pigeons dung, it may be cured; and when any Apple
tree is affected and razed with worms, by taking of Swines dung, mixed and
made soft like mortar with the urine of a man laid unto the root, it is
recovered, and

When the Apple trees are loose, pour upon their roots the stale of Swine, and
it shall establish and settle them, and wheresoever there are swine kept, there
it is not good to keep or lodge horses, for their smell, breath, and voice, is
hateful to all magnanimious and perfect spirited horses. And thus much in
this place concerning the use of the several parts of swine, whereunto I may
add our English experiments, that if swine be suffered to come into Orchards,
and dig up and about the roots of the Apple trees, keeping the ground bare
under them, and open with their noses, the benefit that will arise thereby
Tussers husbandry, Tus. husb.
in his own words, as follows: and first of al for their breeding in the
spring of the year he writes in general: Let Lent well kept offend not thee,
For March and April breeders be.
And of September he writes thus: To gather some mast it shall stand thee upon,
With servant and children yer mast be all gone.
Some left among bushes shall pleasure thy Swine,

For rooting of pasture ring hog ye have need,
Which being well ringled, the better does feed.
Though young with their elders will lightly keep best,
Yet spare not to ringle both great and the rest.
Yoke sildome thy swine, while shacke time does last,
For diverse misfortunes that happen too fast.
Or if you do fancy, whole ear of the Hog,
Give ear to ill neighbor, and ear to his Dog.
Keep hog I advise thee from meddow and Corn,
For out alowd crying, that ere he was borne.
Such lawless so haunting both often and long,
If Dog set him chaunting, he does thee no wrong.
And again in Octobers husbandry he writes: Though plenty of Acornes, the
Porkelings to fat,
Not taken in season may perish by that.
If rattling or swelling get once in the throat,
Thou loosest thy porkling a Crown to a groat.
What ever thing fat is, again if it fall,
Thou venterest the thing and the fatness withal.
The fatter, the better, to sell or to kill,
But not to continue, make proof if you will.
In Nouem. he writes again Let hog once fat, loose none of that,
When mast is gone, Hog falls anon,
Still fat up some, till Shroue-tide come,
Now Porke and sowce bears task in a house.
Thus far of our English husbandry about swine: Now follows their diseases
in particular.

Of the diseases of swine.
HEmlocke is the bane of Panthers, Swine, wolves, and all other beasts that
live upon devouring of flesh, for the hunters mix it with flesh, and so
spreading or casting the flesh so poisoned abroad in bits or morsels to be
devoured by them. The root of the white Chamaelion mixed with fried
Barly-floure. Water and oil is also poison to swine. Pliny. Aelianus.
The black Ellebor works the same effect upon horses, Oxen, and swine, and
Scythia by the relation of Pliny and Aristotle, are not hurt with any poison
except Scorpions, and therefore so soon as ever

Of the Measils.
The Measilles are called in Greek Chalaza, in Latin Grandines, for that they
are like haile-stones spread in the flesh, and especialy in the leaner part of
the hog, and this disease Aristotle writes, is proper to this beast, for no
other in the world is troubled herwith: for this cause the Graecians call a
Measily hog Chaluros, and it makes their flesh very loose and soft. The
Germans call this disease Finnen, and Pfinnen, the Italians Gremme, the
French ^ursume, because the spots appear at the root of the tongue like white
seeds, and therefore it is usual in the buying of hogs in all Nations to
pull out their tongue and look for the Measils, for if there appear but one
upon his tongue, it is certain that all the whole body is infected. And yet
the Butchers do all affirm, that the cleanest hog of al, has three of these,
but they never hurt the swine or his flesh, and the swine may be full of them,
and yet none appear upon his tongue, but then his voice will be altered and
not be as it was wont.

These abound most of all in such Hogs as have fleshy legs and shoulders very
moist, and they be not over plentiful, they make the flesh the sweeter, but if
they abound, it tastes like stocke-fish or meat over watered. If there be no
appearance of these upon their tongue, then the chap-man or buyer pulls of a
bristle from the back, and if blood follow, it is certain that the Beast is
infected, and also such cannot well stand upon their

The roots of the bramble called Ram, beaten to powder and cast into the
holes, where swine use to bath themselves, do keep them clear from many of
these diseases, and for this cause also in ancient time they gave them
Horseflesh sodden, and Toads sodden in water, to drink the broth of them.
The Burre pulled out of the earth without iron, is good also for them, if it be
stamped and put into milk, and so given them in their Pliny says, that he or
she which gathers the aforesaid Burre, must say this charm: Haec est herba
argemon
Quam minerua reperit
Suibas his remedium
Qui de illa gustauerint.
At this day there is great-praise of Maiden-haire for the recovery of swine,
also holy Thistle, and the root of Gunhan and Hearts tongue.


SOmetime the whole heard of swine falls into leannes, and so forsake their
meat, yea although they be brought forth into the field to feed, yet as if
they were drunk or weary they lie down and sleep all the day long. For cure
whereof, they must be closely shut up into a warm place, and made to fast
one whole day from meat and water, and then give them the roots of wild
Cucumber beaten to powder, and mixed with Water, let them drink it, and
afterward give them beans pulse, or any dry meat to eat, and lastly warm
water to procure vomit, as in men, whereby their stomachs are emptyed of al
things both good and bad, and this remedy is prescribed against all incertaine
diseases,

Of the Pestilence.
THese beasts are also subject to the Pestilence by reason of earthquakes and
sudden infections in the air, and in such affection the beast has sometime
certain bunches or swellings about the neck, then let them be separated, and
give them to drink in water the roots of Daffadill: Quatit agros tussis anhela
sues
Ac faucibus angit obesis tempore pestis.
Lactuca foetida cut in pieces, sodden in water, and put into their meat.

Of the Ague.
IN ancient time ( Varro says) that when a man bought a Hog, he couenaunted
with the seller, that it was free from sickness, from danger, that he might buy
it lawfully, that it had no maunge or Ague.

The signs of an Ague in this beast are these.
WHen they stop suddenly, standing still, and turning their heads about, fall
down as it were by a Megrim, then you must diligently mark their heads which
way they turn them, that you may let them blood on the contrary ear, and
likewise

Of the Crampe.
When swine fall from a great heat into a sudden cold, which happens when in
their travel they suddenly lie down through weariness, they fall to have the
Crampe, by a painful convulsion of their members, and the best remedy

Of Lice.
THey are many times so infested and annoied with lice, that their skin is
eaten and gnawne through thereby; for remedy whereof, some anoint them with a
confection made of Cream, Butter, and a great deal of salt: Others again,
anoint them after they have washed them all over with the Leeze of wine, and
in England commonly the country people use staues-aker, red-Oaker, and grease.

Of the Lefragey.
BY reason that they are given much to sleep in the summer time, they fall
into Lethargies, and die of the same: the remedy whereof is, to keep them from
sleep, and to Wake them whenever you find them asleep.

Of the headaches.
THis disease is called by the Graecians ( Scotomia) and Kraura, and by Albertus,
Fraretis, herewith all swine are many times infected, and their ears fall
down, their eyes are also dejected, by reason of many cold humors gathered
together in their head, whereof they die in multitudes, as they do of the
pestilence, and this sickness is fatal unto them, if they be not helped
within three or four days. The remedy whereof (if their be any at al) is to
hold Wine to their Nostrils, first making them to smell thereof, and then
rubbing Pliny and Aristotle write.)

Of the gargarisme.
This disease is called by the Latins Raucelo, and by the Graecians Brancos,
which is a swelling about their chaps, joined with Fever and Headache,
spredding it self all over the throat, like as the squinancy does in a man,
and many times it begets that also in the swine, which may be known by the
often moving of their feet, and then they die with in three days, for the
beast cannot eat being so affected, and the disease creeps by little and
little to the liver, which when it has touched it, the beast dies, because it
putrifieth

This disease in hogs, is not known from that which is called Struma, or the
Kings evil at the first appearance, as Aristotle and Pliny write: the
beginning of this disease is in the Almonds, or kernels of the throat, and it
is caused through the corruption of water which they drink, for the cure
whereof they let them blood, as in the former disease, and they give them the
yarrow with the broadest leaves. There is a herb called Herba impia, all
hoary, and outwardly it looks like Rosemary, some say it is so called because
no beast will touch it, this being beaten in pieces betwixt two tiles or
stones, grows marvelous hot, the juice thereof being mixed in milk and
Wine, and so given unto the Swyne to drink, cures them of this disease, and if
they drink it before they be affected therewith, they never fall into it, and
the like is attributed to the herb Trimity, and Viola Martia, likewise the
blew flowers of Violets are commended for this purpose by Dioscorides.


THese are little bunches rising in the throat, which are to be cured by
letting blood in the shoulder, and unto this disease belongs that which the
Germans call Rangen, and the Italians Sidor, which is not contagious, but very
dangerous, for within two days the beast does dye thereof, if it be not
prevented: this evil grows in the lower part or chap of the swines mouth,
where it does not swel, but waxing white, hardens like a piece of horn,
through pain whereof the beast cannot eat, for it is in the space betwixt the
sore and hinder teeth, the remedy is to open the Swines mouth as wide as one
can, by thrusting into it a round bat, then thrust a sharp needle through the
same sore, and lifting it up from the gum, they cut it off with a sharp knife,
and this remedy helps many if it be Rangen crute, but the most sure way is
the cutting it off, and like unto this there is such another growing in the
upper chappe of the mouth, and to be cured by the same remedy; the cause of
both does arise from eating of their meat over hot, and therefore the good
Swineheard must labor to avoid that mischief, the mischief of this is
described by Virgill: Hinc canibus blandis rabies venit, and quatit aegros,
Tussis anhela sues, as faucibus angit abesis.



FOr all manner of pain in their lungs, which come by the most part from want of
drink, are to have lung-wort stamped, and given them to drink in water, or
else to have it tied under their tongues two or three days together, or that
which is more probable, because it is dangerous to take it inwardly, to make a
hole in the ear, and to thrust it into the same, tying it fast for falling
out, and the same virtue has the root of the white Hellibor, but the diseases
of the lunges are not very dangerous, and therefore the Butchers says, that
you shall sildome find a Swyne with sound lungs or Livers: sometime it falls
out that in the lights of this beast there will be apparent certain white spots
as big as half

Of the diseases in the Spleen.
BY reason that this is a devouring beast, and through want of Water, it is
many times sick of the Spleen, for the cure whereof you must give them
Prewnes of Tameriske Strata iacent passim, seuia quaeque sub arbore porna.

The virtue of these Prewnes of Tameriske is also very profitable against the
diseases of the Melte, and therefore it is to be given to men as well as to
Beasts, for if they do but drink out of pots and cups made out of the wood of
the tree Tameriske, they are easily cleared from all diseases of the Spleen:
and therefore in some Countries of this great tree they make hog-troughes and
mangers, for the safeguard of their beasts, and where they grow not great, they
make pots and cups. And if a Hog do eat of this Tameriske but nine days
together, at his death he shall be found to be without a Spleen, (as
Marcellus writes.) When they become loose in their bellies, which happens to
them in the spring time by eating of green Herbs, they either fall to be
lean, or else to dye, when they cannot easily make water, by reason of some
stoppage, or sharpness of Vrin, they may be eased by giving unto them
spurge-seed. And thus much for the diseases of Swine. For conclusion whereof I
will add heereunto the length of a Swynes Aristotle and Pliny, if it be not
cut off by sickness or violent death; for in their days they observed that
Swyne did live ordinarily to fifteen years, and some of them to twenty: And
thus much for the natvre of Swyne in general.

The medicines of the Hog.
The best remedy for the bitings of venomous Serpents is certainly believed to
be this, to take some little creatures, A^^us
as pigs, Cocks, Kyds, or Lambs, and tear them in pieces, applying them
whiles they are hot to the wound as soon as it is made, for they will not
Marcellus
and moystned both together, does very much ease the pain of the teeth being
poured into that ear, ^n which side the grief shall lie.

The liquor of swines flesh being boiled, does very much help against the
Buprestis. The same is also a very good antidote against poison, and very much
helps those which are troubled with the gout. Cheese made of Cowes milk
being very old, so that it can scarce

The Indians use to wash the wounds of the Elephantes which they have taken
first with hot water, ^^^^ianus
afterward if they see them to be somewhat deep, they anointed them with
butter: then do they assuage the inflammation thereof, by rubbing of Swynes
flesh upon them, being whot and moist with the fresh blood issuing from the
same. For the healing of the wounds of Elephants, butter is chiefly commended,
for it does easily expel the iron lyrage hid therein, but for the curing of
the ulcers, there is nothing, comparable to the flesh of swine. The blood of
swine is moist, and not very hot, being in temper most

Galen
For although it be somewhat inferior unto man's blood, yet at the least it is
like unto it; by knowledge whereof, we hope we shall bring by the use
thereof, more full and ample profit unto men. For although it do not fully
answer to our expectation, notwithstanding there is no such great need that we
should prove men's blood. For the encouraging of a feeble or diminished Horse,
Eumelus reports, the flesh of swine being hot, mingled in wine, and given in
drink, to be exceeding good and profitable. There also arises by Swyne
another excellent medicine against diverse perilous diseases, which is this; to
kill

Then to cast in the scrapings of the same Juniper, and stir the berries of the
Juniper in the same to the quantity of seven and twenty, but in the stirring of
the same, let the clotes be still cast out. Afterward mingle with the same
these herbs following, Agrimony, Rue, Phu, Scabious, Betony, Pimpernell,
Succory, Parsley, of each a handful. But if the measure of the blood exceed
three pintes, put unto it two ounces of Treacle: but if it shall be bigger, for
the quantity of the blood you shall diminish the measure of the Treacle(. But
all things ought to be so prepared that they may be put to the blood coming
hot from the Bore.) These being mixed altogether, you must draw forth a
dropping liquor, which you must dry in the sun, being diligently kept in a
glasse-vessell for eight days together, which you must do once every year for
it will last twenty years. This medicine is manifestly

Let him therefore who is troubled with any of the aforesaid diseases, drink
every morning a spoonefull, or four or five drops of the same liquor, and
sweat upon the same, and it will in very short time perfectly cure him of his
pain. Some also do use Almonds pounded or beaten in the blood against the
plague, the liquor being extracted forth by the force of fire. A young pig
being killed with a knife, having his blood put upon that part Marcellus
The blood of a Sow which has once pigged being anointed upon Women, cures
many diseases in them.

The brains of a Boar or Sow being anointed upon the sores or Carbuncles of
the privy members, does very effectually cure them, the same effect also has
the blood of a hog. The dugs of of a woman anointed round about with the blood
of a sow, Pliny
will decrease less and less. A young pig being cut in pieces, and the blood
thereof anointed upon a Woman's dugs, will make them that they shall not
increase. Concerning the grease of swine, it is termed diversely of all the
Authors, for the Graecians call it Stear Coirion, and Oxungion, for the
imitation of the Latin word Axungia: but Marcellus also applies Axungia to
the fat of other creatures, which among the ancient Authors I do not find: for
in our time those which in Latin, do call that fat Axungia, which increases
more solid^ between the skin and the flesh, in a hog, a man, a Brocke or
Badger, a Dor-mouse, a Mountain-mouse, and such like. The fat of swine they
commonly call Lard which grows betwixt the skin and the flesh, in expressing
the virtues of this, we will first of al show howit is to be applied to cewers
outwardly, and then how it is to be received inwardly, next unto butter, it
has the chiefest commendations among the ancients, and therefore they invented
to keep it long, which they did by casting some salt among it, neither is the
reason of the force of it obscure or uncertain, for as it feeds upon many
wholesome herbs

The Apothecaries for preparation of certain ointments, do geld a male sucking
pig, especially such a one as is red, and take from his raines or belly certain
fat, whith the Germans call Schmaer, and the French Oing, that is, Vnguentum,
the husbandmen use Swynes grease to anoint the axe trees of their carts and
carriages, and for want thereof they take putryfied Butter, and in some
countries the gum that runs out of pine trees, and Fer

The auncientes deemed that this is the best Grease which was taken from the
raines of the Hog washed in rain water, the veins being pulled out of it, and
afterward boiled in a new earthen pot, and so preserved. The fat of Swine is
not so hot and dry as the fat of other beasts, the chief use of it is to
moysten, to fasten, to purge, and to scatter, and herein it is most excellent
when it has been washed in Wine, for the stale salt Grease so mixed with
wine, is profitable to anoint those that have the pleurifie, and mingled with
ashes and Pitch, eases inflammations, fistulaies, and tumors, and the same
virtue is ascribed to the fat of Foxes, except that their fat is hotter then
the Swynes, and less moist: likewise ashes of Vines mingled with stale grease
of Hogs, cures the wounds of Scorpions and Dogs, and with the spume of Nitre,
it has the same virtue against the

By Serenus it is prescribed, to be anointed upon the kneese, against the
stiffness of the Neck. Mingled with Quick silver and Brimstone, it is
sufferant against the itch and scabs. This Lard being sod with the fat, and
applied to the body, does mightily expel corruptions that cleave to the skin.
The fat of Swyne with Butter and Oil of Roses, is instilled into the broken
skins of the brain for the cure of them.

Likewise Buglosse plucked up by the root, and the roots cut off, and
curiosly washed, beaten and pounded into a ball, and mixed with Swynes grease,
is good to be laid Serenus: Terrae lumbricos inretritos,
Queis vetus and ranis sociari exungia debet.
When bones are broken, if they be anointed with the sod grease of Swine, and
so bound up fast together, after they be well set and closed, grow wonderful
fast, sure, and solid again. Serenus writes thus of it; Si cui forte lapis
teneros violauerit artus,
Necte aedipes vetulos, and tritam chamaecisson.
By this fat, (he means the fat of Swyne) because presently after he makes
mention of the dung of Swyne to be good for the same cure. Being mingled with
pitch, it scatters all bunches and fellons. The hardness of the breasts,
ruptures, conuulsions, and Cramps, and with whit Helsibor, it closes up clifts
and chinks, in the flesh, and makes the hard skin to be soft again. It is
very profitable against inflammations of ulcers, especially the fat of the boar
pig, mixed with liquid gum.

Women do also use the fat of a Sow that never bore pig to clear their skin,
and to mix it with pitch, and one third part of Asse-grease against the scabs.
The same mixed with white Lead, and the spume of silver makes the scares of
the body to be of the same Combustis igni,
Hordea vel friges atque oui candida iunges,
Ad sit adeps porcae mira est nam forma medelae,
Iunge chelidonias ac sic line vulnera succis,
Quodque recens vssit glacies axungia simplex,
Mulcet and ex facili grata est medicamina cura.
Fresh grease is very profitable for those members that are surboted or riuen
of their skin, and likewise to anoint them that are weary with long iournies.
The ashes of women's hair burned in a shell, and mingled with the fat of Swine,
are said to ease the pain of S. Anthonies fire, and to stanch blood, and to
cure ring-wormes. The gall of a Swine, or of a Bore, and the lights with the
fat, fills up the ^ibes, and the stalks of Cabiges with the roots burned,
and mingled with Swines grease being applied to the sides, do cure the daily
pains thereof: And thus far of the use of this grease for the bodies of men.
Now also it follows in a word to touch the use thereof for the bodies of
beasts. When the horns of Oxen or Kine are broken, they take a little Lint,
Salt, Vinegar, and Oil, and lay them upon the broken horn, pouring in the
liquid, and binding the rest close on the outside,

The ears of Dogs in the summer time are exulcerated by flies, into the
which sores it is good to instill liquid pitch sod with swines grease, and this
medicine also is good to deliver beasts from the tickes, for they fall off as
many as touch it. When Lambs or Kyds are troubled with the Sheep pox, some
use to anoint them with Swines grease and the rust of Iron, that is two parts
of Swynes grease, and one part of rust, and so warm them together. Also for
the scabs upon Horses heels, that are called the scratches,

When a Horse cannot hold his Neck right, it is good to anoint him with Oil,
wine, Honny, and Hogges-greace, the manner of some Leeches is, when they have
made a suppuration by Oxen in burning, they first of all wash it with stale
Urine, and afterward mingle an equal quantity of pitch and Hogs grease
together, wherewithal they anoint

Sometine the blood of Oxen falls down into their feet, wherein it
congealeth and breaks forth into scabbes, then must the place first of all be
scraped with a knife, and the scabs cut away, afterward with clothes wet in
Vinegar, Salt, and Oil, moystened and pressed hard, and last of all by an
equal quantity of Hogs-Greace, and Goats sewet sod both together, it will be
cured by laying it unto it. And thus much for the remedies of Swines grease
toward beasts. The husks of Beans being beaten small to powder, and mixed
with swines grease, is very profitable against the pain of the hippes, and the
Nerves.

Some Physicians take the grease of Swine, the fat of Geese, the sewet of
Bulls, and Oesypus or sweat of sheep, and anoint therewithal gouty Legs,
but if the pain remove not, then do they add unto it Wax, Myrtle, Gum, and
Pitch, and some use it mixed with old Oil, with the stone Sarcephagys,
sinck-foyle beaten in wine with lime or ashes. This swines grease beaten in
water with cumin, is prescribed by Simeon Sethi against the gout. It remedieth
the falling of the hair, and the pain in the heads of women, mingled with one
forth part of gals, and the like virtue it has with wild Roses, Lingulaca and
Hippocampinus with Nitre and vinegar. When the corners of ones eyes are
troubled with worms, by annoynting them with the fat of a Sow with pig,
beating them together both within and without, you shall draw all the Worms
out of his eyes.

When one has pain in his ears whereby matter yssueth forth, let him beat
the oldest

If there arise any bunch in the Neck or throat, sees Lard and Wine
together, and so by gargarising that Lyquor, it shall be dispersed, according
to the verses of Serenus: Inrigore ceruicis geminus mulcebitur vnguine poples,
Hinc longam paritur neruos medicina sequetur.
And it is no marvel that the virtue of this should go from the knees to the
Nerves, seeing that Pliny affirms, that from the anointing of the knees the
savor goes into the stomach, there is so great affinity or operation of Rue
upon the stones, that in ancient time they were wont to cure burstnesse by
annoynting the cods with wild Rue and Swynes

Also this Grease with rust of Iron, is good against all the imperfectious in
the seat. Butter, Goose-greace, and Hogges-greace, are indifferently used for
this infirmity. Also this is used to keep Women from abortementes that are
subject thereunto, being applied like an eye-salue. In the diseases of the
matrix, especially Ulcers, they first of all dip Spuuges or Wool in warm
Water, and so cleanse the places infected, and afterward cure it with Rozen and
Swynes Grease, mingled together, and often using it in the day and night by way
of an oyntmnet: but if the exulceration be vehement, after the washing they put
Honny unto the former confection, and some make a p^^fume with Goats Horn,
Galls, Swynes Grease, and Gum of Cedars. And. Fernerius says, that
Beuprestis, and against Quickesiluer. The sewet of a Sow fed with green
Herbs, is profitable to them that are sick of a consumption of the lunges,
according to this verse of Serenus; Porderit and veteris saeui pila sumpta
suilli. This may also be given them in Wine, either raw or decocted, or else in
pills to be swallowed

When the tongue and Chappes wax black by a peculiar sickness of the mouth,
which the Physicians call Morbus epidemius, it is most wholesome to rub the
tongue with the inner side of the rines of Bacon, and so draw out an extreme
heat: and it is said if a man be deeply infected, whose tongue is thus
rubbed, the said Bacon rine being eaten by any Dog, will procure his death. The
fat of Wolves and the marrow of Swyne is good to anoint bleare-eyes withal. By
swallowing down the marrow of Swine, the appetite to carnal copulation is
increased.

The ashes or powder of Hogs bristles which are taken out of plaisterers
pensils, wherwithall the liver of a Bore pigge when the Fibers are taken from
it, if the weight of two pence be drunk in wine.

The brain of a Sow tosted at the fire, and laid to a Carbuncle, either
disperseth or emptieth it. Likewise the blood and brains of a Bore or a sow,
or Bore-pig being mixed with honey, does cure the Carbuncles in the yard, and
the brains alone, opens the gums of children, to let out their teeth, as
Serenus writes, Aucteneris cerebris gingivis illine porci. There are naturally
in the head of a Hog two little bones that have holes in them, one Marcellus.
Galen also writes, that if the pole of the swines ear be hanged about ones
neck, it will preserve him from all cough afterward.

They were wont as Dioscorides writes, to sees a Gudgen in a swines belly, by
the eating whereof, they stayed the falling down of the seat. If a man eat the
lunges of a Boar, and a sow sodden and fasting, they will preserve him from
drunkenness all that day, and Siclamine, and there withal to rub the head
well in a Bath. To keep hair from growing upon the brows when it is once
plucked off. Take the gall and fat of a Bore, and put them into a
smooth-thicke-earthen-pot, and of the sharpest Vinegar and oil of Almonds,
four oun^es a piece, pour that into it, and then bind the mouth of the pot
close with a thick linen cloth, so letting them stand seven days together,
afterward open them again, and you shall find upon the top a certain scum
like Gold, wherewithal anoint those places, which you would have remain
balde, after that you have beaten it together in a mortar: likewise the gall of
a Barrow hog or Bore pigge, does scatter Apostumes and bunches in any part
of the body. The gall of a Hog dried in an Oven, and laid upon a Carbuncle, as
much as will cover it, it cleaves fast to the

It is likewise good against the ulcers of the ears, except the Ulcer be of
long continuance, and then it is good to use a sharper gall, such as is a
sheep, an Oxes, a Bears, or a Goats, they mingle herewithall sometimes oil
of roses, but for old wounds in the ears, It is good to take one part of the
best honey, and two parts of the sharpest Vinegar, and so let them boil on the
fire three walmes, afterward set them far off from the fire, until it leave
seething or boiling, and then put Nitre unto it, so long til you know by the
Vapor that the Niter is settled, then sees it again upon a gentle fire, so
as it boyleth not over, and lastly put into the ears of this gal of a Bore,
or of a Goat, and then sees it the third time, taking it from the fire, when
it is Lukewarm, infuse it into the ears, and this gall

There are also certain slifters or clifts in the hooues of horses, which are
cured in one nights space, by applying unto them the gal of a Barrow-hog,
mingled with the yolks of Eggs. The blather of swine will provoke urine, and
of a Boar pig sod, roasted or boiled, and so eaten and drunk, causes a man to
contain his urine, which never could before. When the head of a man is
exulcerated and runs, take the bladder of a Barrow-hog, with the Urine, and
cast the same into the fat cut small, afterward mingle it so with salt, that
it may appear all white, then bind it up fast, and dig a hole in the Garden
about a cubit deep, wherein bury and cover the said gall, and so let it rest
forty or fifty days in the earth, till the matter therein contained be
putrified, then take it out and melt it in a dish, and keep the ointment that
arises of it. Then wash the head all over with lie, unto the intent that it
may not be offended thorough the Acrimony thereof, mingle it with new wine or
with water, and then when it is dry after such washing, anoint it with

They were wont to give the stones of swine against the sauling sickness, but
then they were first dried, and afterward beaten to powder, and given to the
sick party in swines milk, so he was commanded to abstain from wine many
days before, and after he received it for many days together. In Savoye they
take the stones out of a young hog when they geld him, and scorch them at the
fire so long, till they may be crushed to pieces, and this they prescribe to
be drunk in wine against the Collicke.

Some give the powder of Bores stones to men and women, to increase copulation
Magicians or wise men of the East, prescribed to be drunk for the incontinency
of urine, the powder of a Bore pigs stones out of sweet Wine, and then to make
water in a Dogs kennell, which while he is doing, to speak to himself these
words: Ne ipse vrinam faciam vt canis in suo cubile, but I will leave this
superstition, as not worthy to be Englished. Some take the bladder of a Sovv
burned to powder, and drunk for this infirmity, and some a certain liquerish
poison, which droppeth from the Navel of a Bore pig, immediately after it is
farrowed.

Bacon beaten together, and made like meal, is good against a continual
cough, or staieth bleeding at the mouth. Bacon broth is also mingled with
other medicines against the gout, and they make an implaister of Bacon to
scatter grauelly matter in the bladder. The bones of Bacon about the hippes,
are kept to cleanse and rub teeth, and by burning Gagnerius prescribes an
emplaister to be made of cheese, and the feet of swine against the shrinking up
of the sinnewes.

The ancle bone of a sow being burned until it be white, and bruised and taken
in drink, does cure the swellings of the neck, and pains of long
continuance. The Ancle bone of a Sow burned and bruised, and given to drink
only in Water, is a remedy against the

The ashes of the ancle bone of a sow or Bore, does cure Corns, cleftse, or
other rifts in the skin, and the hardness of the skin that is in the bottom
of the feet. It is also showed, that if the bone shall be hung about the neck
of those that are trobled with quarterne agues, that then they shall be far
better, but of what bone he speaks, it is uncertain, but as he remembers it
is the next bone before the fat of the anckle bone.

The bones that are taken from the hoofes of sowes, burned and beaten to powder
are very good to rub and cleanse the teeth: Also the bones next to the ribs of
Bacon, being burned, are very good to fasten the teeth. The bones that are
taken from the hooues of in drink, does stay the incontinency of urine, and
also the bloody flixe. Take as much Mercurial sodden, as ones hand can hold,
sod in two pintes of water unto one pint, and drink the same with honey and
salt, and the powder of a Hogs hoof, and it shall l^ose the belly. The milk
of a Sow drunk with sweet wine, helps women in travel, and the same being
drunk alone, restores milk in Women's breasts, It is also good against the
blody flix and Tissick. The stones of swine beaten to powder, and drunk in
swines milk, are good against the fauling sickness. The wise men were wont to
prescribe the left foot or leg of a Camaelion to be bound unto the feet
against the gowt.

There are also many uses of the dung of swine, and first of al it being mixed
with Vinegar, is good against the bittinges of venomous beasts, and Aetius
makes an emplaister Nigella, and beat into a pint of old wine, so as all the
juice may go out thereof, then infuse it into the Nostril of the beast, and
lay swines dunge to the sore, so also it may be applied unto men, whereunto
some do ad Honey Atticke, and the urine of a man, and so it is to be applied
warm, it being also warmed in a shell, and dried to powder, mixed with oil,
and laid to the body, eases outward pains. It is likewise profitable
against burnings, itch, scabs, and blisters, and trembling of the body,
according to these verses of Serenus: Stercoris ex porco cinerem confundit
olimphis
Sic pauidum corpus, dextra pascente foueto.
Si cui forti lapis teneros violanerit artus
Non pudeat luteae, stercus perducere possae.
It is also good to stay bleedinges at the nose, if it be laid to the
Nosthrils warm, and to stay the bleedings of beasts, if it be given them in
wine, the same being mixed and covered with honey, is anointed upon horses for
the Quinsey or swellings of the throat. If the breasts of a woman do swel
after her delivery of child, it is good to anoint them with Nero the Emperor
was wont to use that medicine, when he would try the strength of his body, in
a running Chariot: also the powder of the same being drunk in Vinegar, is
profitable for the rupture and inward bruses, and warmed in Wine against al
manner of flixes and Tizickes For the pains of the loins and al other things
which need mollyfieng rub them first of all with Deeres grease, and then
sprinkle them with old Wine mixed with the powder

The urine of a Swine is also good against al bunches and apostemation being
laid to in wool. The urine of a Bore pig dried in the smoke, and drunk with
sweet Wine, the quantity of a bean, is profitable against the fauling evil.
Against the whitenes of the eyes, and the stone in the reins and bladder. And
thus much for the story of swine in general.

OF THE WILD BORE.


THis beast is termed by no other name then the common swine among the
Haebrewes, namely, Chasir, as you may see in Psalm. 80. where the prophet
speaks of Chasir de sylva, That is; the Bore out of the wood. The Graecians
call him Capros and Syagros, and Clunis, although some take Clunis for a Bore
of an exceeding great stature. Aristophone says, that there are some of this
kind which are called Monij, which word by S. Cyril upon the prophet Osey is
interpreted a wild Ass, but I rather incline to their opinion which say,
Chlunis Monyos, and Chauliodon are poetical words for cruel Bores. Aristotle
is of opinion, these bores being gelt when they are young, grow greater and
more fierce, whereunto Homer also yields as he is thus translated: Nutrijt
exetum, sylvis horrentibus aprum
Instar non bruti sed dorsi montis opaci.
But this is to be understood of such Bores, as by accident geld themselves by
rubbing upon any tree. The French call this Beast, Sanglier and Porc Sanglier;
the Italians Cinghiale and Cinghiare, and Porco. The Spaniards Puerco
Syluestre, and Puerco montes, and I'auali, the Germans Wild Schuuein. The
Illyrians Worpes, and the Latins Aper, for Porcus signifies Aper the wild.
The reason of this Latin name Aper, is derived from Asper, because he lives
among the sharp thorns and woods, but I rather think that Aper is derived from
Capros the Greek word, or else Aper a feritate, from his fierceness and
wildenes, by changing one letter into another.

The epithets
The Epithites of this beast are many, both in Greek and Latin, such as these
are; sharp, wild, Arcadian, Attalantean, troubler, bloody, toothed, hard,
Erymanthean, cruel, outrageous, fierce, strong gnashing, lightning, yellowe,
raging, Acorne-gatherer, quick, rough, rough-haired, horrible, Maenalian,
Mercean, Meleagron, threatening, wood-wanderer, cruel, Sabelican,
bristle-bearer, foaming, strict, filthy, Tegean, Thuscan, fearful, wry-faced,
truculent, deuourer, violent, Vmbrian, wound-maker, impetuous, mountaine-liuer,

But of all these Epithites there are only three, Erimanthean, Calidonean, and
Myssean, which do offer unto us peculiar stories, according as we find them in
the poets, which we will prefix by way of morral discourse before we enter
into the natural story of this beast. First of all, Erymanthus was a hill of
Arcadia, wherein was a wild bore, that continually did descend down and
depopulate their Cornfieldsd, Hercules coming that way, and hearing of that
mischief did kill the said Bore, and carried him upon his back to Eurystheus,
whereat Eurystheus was so much afraid, that he went and hid himself in a
brazen vessel, whereof Virgill speaks thus: Erymanthi placaret syluam, and
lernam tremefecerit arcu And of this Erymanthean bore Martial speaks:
Quantus erat calidon, and Erymanthe tuus. Of the Calidonian Bore there is this
story in Homer. When Oeneus the Prince of Aetolia sacrificed the first fruits
of his country to the Gods, he forgot Diana, wherewithal she was very angry,
and so sent among the people a savage Boar, which destroyed both the Country
and Inhabitants: against whom the Calidonians and Pleuronians went forth in
hunting, and the first of all that wounded the wild Beast was Meleager the
son of Oeneus, for reward whereof, he received his head and his skin, which he
bestowd on Atalanta a virgin Arcadia, with whom he was in love, and which did
accompany him in hunting: where withal the sons of Thyestius, which were the
Uncles of Meleager, were greatly offended* (for they were the brothers to his
mother Althea,) those men lay in wait to destroy him, whereof when he was
advertised, he killed some of them, and put the residue to flight; For which
cause the Pleuronians made war against the Calidonians: in the beginning of
which war Meleager fell out with his mother, because she did not help her
country: At last when the City was almost taken, by the persuasion of his wife
Cleopatra, he went out to fight with his enemies, where, in valiant manner he
flew many of them, others he put to flight, who in their chase running away,
fell down upon steep rocks and perished. Then Althea the mother of Meleager,
began to rage against her son, and flunge into the fire the torch which the
fates had given unto her to lengthen his days, so when she Ancaeus the
companion of Jason to Colchis was slain. This Bore is also called a Meliagran
and Attalantean Bore, of whom Martial writes thus: Qui diomideis metuendus
Setiger agris
Aetola cecidit cuspide talis erat.
And again in another place: Lacte mero pastum pigre mihi mortis alumnum
Ponat and Aetolo de sue dives edat.
It is said that this Bore had teeth of a cubit long, and the manner of his
hu^ting was expressed Tegea, for which cause he is called the Tegean Bore. Upon
the one side of the Bore against his middle, were painted Atalanta, Meleager,
Theseus, Telamon, Peleus, Pollux, and Iolaus the companion of al Hercules
travels. Prothus and Cometes, the sons of Thiestius and brethren of Althea,
on the other side of the Bore stood Ancaus wounded, and Epecus sustaining his
hunting spear; next unto him stood Castor and Amphiaraus, the son of
Oicleus. After them Hippothus, the son of Cercion, Agamedes, the son of
Stymphelus, and lastly Pirithous. The teeth of this Bore were taken away by
Augustus after the time that he had overcome Anthoney, which he hung up in the
Temple of Bacchus, standing in the Gardens of the Emperor. And thus much for
the Calidonian Bore.

Myssean bore, I find this story recorded of him. When Adrastus the Phrygian,
who was of the kings blood, had unawares killed his brother, he fled to Sardis,
and after his expiation dwelt with Cresus. It happened at that time that there
was a wild Bore came out of Olimpus, and wasted a great part of the country
of Myssea: the people oppressed with many losses, and terrifyed with the
presence of such a beast, besought the king to send his own son Attys with
much company to hunt and kill the Bore. The king was affraide thereof, because
in his dream he saw a vision, his son perishing by an iron spear; yet at
last he was persuaded, and committed the safeguard of his body to Adrastus.
When they came to the wild beast, Adrastus bent his spear at the Bore, and
while he cast it to kill him, the son of Cresus came betwixt them, and so
was slain with the spear, Adrastus seeing this misfortune, (that his hands
which should have defended the young prince, had taken away his life) fell into
extreme passion and sorrow for the same, and although the king, knovving his
innocence, forgave him the fact, yet he slew himself at the Funeral of
Attys, and so was burned with him in the same fire. And thus much for the
Myssean Bore.

Now we will proceed to the particular story of the wild Bore, and first of
all of the countries breeding Bores. The Spaniards say, that in the new found
world, there are wild Bores much less then ours, which have tails so short,
that one would think they had bin cut off, Of the wild bores parts and other
accidents.
they differ also in their feet, for their hinder feet are not cloven, but
stand upon one claw, and their forefeet are cloven like common swines.

Their flesh also is more sweet and wholesome then common swines flesh, whereof
Peter Martyr gives reason in his Ocean Decads, because they feed under palm
Trees, near the Seashore, and in Marshes. Olaus Magnus writes, that in diverse
places of Scandinavia, they hunt wild Bores which are twelve foot long. The
wild Bores of India according Pliny have teeth, which in their compass
contain a cubit, and besides their teeth growing out of their chaps, they have
two horns on their head like Calves horns. In the Islands Medera, there are
abundance of wild Bores, likewise in Heluetia; and especially in those parts
that join upon the Alps, where they would much more abound, but that the
Magistrates give liberty to every man to kill and destroy them. There are no
Bores in Affricke, except in Aethiopia, where their Bores have all horns, and
of those it was that Lycotas the Countriman saw in a public spectacle at
Rome: Niueos lepores and non sue cornibus apros.

That is, Hares whire like swine, and Bores that have horns. It is a
wonderful thing Creet, and no less admirable that the Bores of Macidonia are
dum and have no voice: And thus much concerning the Countries of Bores.

Now concerning their color, it is observed, that wild Bores for the most
part are of a black and brown color, especially at the top of their hair,
and somewhat yellow underneath, and yet Pausanias writes, that he has seen
Boares all white; howbeit that is not ordinary. Their blood is sharp and
black like black wine, and such as will never be thick, their eyes like to
the eyes of wrathful beasts, as Wolves, and Lions. Their tuskes are most
admirable, for with them while they are alive, they cut like sharp knives, but
when they are dead, they have lost that cutting property, the reason of it is
in the heat of the tooth, for it is certainly affirmed by hunters of wild
Bores, that when the Beast falls Oppianus ^^^nus
and lay it upon the tuske, the heat thereof will make it shrink up and turn
together like a hot iron, and if Dogs do chance to touch them, they burn
their hairs from their back, whereby the ardent and fiery nature of this
beast is manifest, as an everlasting monument of the work of God, and yet
notwithstanding all their wrath they have no gall, (as Pliny writes) their
head and face are their strongest parts, and therefore upon them they receive
the hunters blows as upon a bucket.

Their tears which they send forth of their eyes are very sweet, and of all
other things they cannot abide their own urine, for it is thought to be so
hot, that it burns them, and they can never run away in flight, (...) of
^^^de.
till they have emptied their bellies thereof. The place of their abode is for
the most part in the marshes and woods, for the Scythians did Tragus says,
that there is a kind of green corn in Germany, which is armed with very
sharp stalks and points at both ends like Barley, this the people do sees
and eat like pease.

Now forasmuch as wild Bores are destroyers of their Corn, they sow that
grain near the woods sides where the Bores abide, whereby they defend and
safeguard their better corn. Bores do also eat the worms of the earth, which
they dig out with their noses, and in Pamphilia and the mountains of Cylicia,
they do eat Salamanders without hurt or danger to themselves, and yet if men
chance to eat of their flesh which have so devoured them, they die afterward
through the poison: whereby it manifestly appears, that there is danger in
eating wild hogs flesh. Hemlock and Henbane is also poison to swine, which
they never eat but unawares, and having eaten it presently they loose their
strength in their hinder parts, whereby they are feign to draw them after them,
and in that manner they craul to the water sides, where they gather together
Snailes and sea-crabs, by eating whereof they are restored to their former
health. Iuy is also a medicine for the diseases of Boares, and old age makes
them altogether unfit to be preserved. Therefore in ancient time when they
kept Bores in parks, whereof Fuluius Hirpinus was the first beginner, Lucius
Lucullus, and Quintus Hortentius, the immediate followers, I say they never
kept bores past 4. year The generation of wild Swine.
so that they may bring forth in the spring time of the year, and they choose
the most unused, narrow, hollow, and steep places to couple in. The male
abides with the female thirty days together, and the female bears her young
ones, both for the number and the time answerable to the vulger swine. When the
Boar is in copulation before hand, while he works the sow, he carries a
mouth as white as any horse, which as in the horse it rises through vehement
stirring, so in the bore it rises through vehement heat and fearuer In the
time of their lust they are very sharp, eager, and cruel, fighting withal
males Virgill: Per syluas tum saeuus aper, tumpessima Tigris,
Ipseruit dentesque sabelicus exacuit sus,
Et pedibus subegit terram, fricat arbore costas,
Atque hinc atque illinc humeros ad vulnera durat.
Being inflamed with venerial rage, he so sets upright the bristles of his
neck, that you would take them to be the sharp fins of Dolphins; then champeth
he with his mouth, The fight of Boares.
grateth and gnasheth his teeth one against another, and breathing forth his
boiling spirit, Hybridae, that is, by way of contumely, bastards: And it is to
be observed, that never any wild beast being tamed does engender copulation,
except they be tamed very young, only wild Bores do quickly mingle with
vulgar swine. The female of this kind has no teeth standing out of her mouth
like the male, except very short ones, and therefore the residue are more like
a saw then the teeth of a Boar, for it is a general rule; Nulli dentes exerti
quibus serrati. Scaliger affirms, that he saw a Bore that belonged to the
Lord of Saluimont, of an exceeding great stature, tamed by his master, who at
the sounding of the horns, would come running like a dog to hunting, and go
abroad with his master among the Dogs, contending with the most swift in race
to attain the prey.

Cyaxares unto Syrus, that Swyne when they see the Hunter, although they be
many, yet run away with their pigs; but if the Hunter follow one of the young
ones, then does the dam turn again, and withal her force endeavor to
destroy him that would deprive her of her young ones. Before the Bores do fight
they go and whet their teeth, but while they are in contention, if it happen
that a Wolf comes in sight, then they forsake their mutual combats, and all
of them join together to drive away the Wolf. The Bear dares not to enter
upon the wild Bore, except behind him and unawares. Hesiod says, that Vulcan
pictured upon the shield of Hercules, the images and shapes of many wild
beasts fighting one with another, neither of both yealding to other, till both
of them fell down dead, which caused Alciatus to make this Emblem of a vulture
standing by to see their contention, and suffered them to kill one another
without parting, whereby afterward she Dum saeuis ruerent in mutua vulnera
telis,
Vngue leaena serox dente timendus aper,
Accurrit vulter spectatum, and prandia captat,
Gloria victoris praeda futura sua est.
It is reported that Bores will swim single and alone like fishes, and some of
them two together like Wolves, Swimming of Boares.
and many times in flocks and herds like Roes, for such is their ardent nature
and desire of meat, that they fear not the highest Mountains, nor the deepest
waters. Publius Seruillus Rullus, was the very first among all the Romans that
did set at his table a whole Boar, most delicately dressed and stuffed with
variety of diverse costly dishes, which Bore by Varro is called Aper Millianius,
that is, Millilibrarum, of a thousand pound worth; against which intolerable
gluttony and cost, Iuuenall Quanta est gula quae sibitotos,
Ponit Apros animal propter conuiuia natum.
Apitius in the beginning of his eight book, prescribes the manner how to
dress the flesh of wild Bores, wherewithal if any be delighted let him read
that book, for it is not my purpose in this Treatise, to blot any paper with
any long instruction for Cooks and Belligods, neither were it any part of this
natural History, nor yet agreeable to my calling or enterprise, and therefore
I will only add this observation of Misaldus, that Bores flesh salted in
poudring tubs, does change both color and taste, at that time of year, wherein

Of the hunting of wild Bores.
Now in the next place we will proceed to talk, concerning the hunting of
Boares which is not only a pastime for Lords and Princes, but also a necessary
labor for meaner men; for as the harm that comes by bores is exceeding
great, and so much the greater by how much he is poorer that does sustain it,
so the vtility to learn the means of destroying this beast is more
commodious, because the common proverb is more true in this then in the vulgar
swine, that they never do good till they are dead.

It is reported of Dioclesian when he was agent for the Romans in France, there
came an old Woman called Dryas unto him, and reproved him for his
covetousness, telling Dryas replied unto him, Noli Iocare Dioclesiane, na^
imperator eris cum apru^ occideris. That is, Jest not O Dioclesian, for thou
shall be Emp. when thou have killed Aper, (that was a Bore as he thought,) and
therefore he gave himself to the hunting of Bores, never sparing any time that
was offered unto him, always expecting the event of that speech, whereof he
was frustrated until he killed Arius Aper, the governor of the judgment
hall, and then afterward being Emperor he knew that the women did not mean a
Boar, but a man. Now therefore the hunting of Boares, and the manner of their
taking is many ways, either by violence in chase, or by policy in ditches
and traps, or else by impoysoned baits. The best time of their hunting is in
the midst of winter as some say, but I think the Winter is the worst time,
because then they are strongest, and seeing all Swine are impacient of heat,
the Summer will quickly end their life, if then they be chased. It behooves
therefore the hunter of Boares to be very wary, and therefore the auncientes
ordained that such a one should wear a rough garment of a broune color, and

But if the boar have either made water before, or got liberty and rest in the
chase to ease himself, then will his taking be very difficulte and tedious,
such is the nature of this courageous beast, that he never cease running till
he be weary, and being wearied desembleth the same by sitting upon his
buttocks, and offers combat to his Hunter, and yet he is not wont to strike a
man until he be wounded first by him. When the Boar is first raised out of
the Wood, he snuffeth in the wind, lifting up his Nose to smell what is with
him, and what is against him.

The hunting spear must be very sharp and broad, branching forth into certain
forkes or horns, so as by no means the Boar shall break through them upon
the Hunter,

Now concerning the instruction of dogs, and the choice of such hounds as are
appointed for the hunting of boares, you must note, that every Dog is not fit
for the same, but great mastiues, such as are used for the baiting of bears.
For the boar first of all terrifyeth the Dog with his voice, and if he be not
ready to fight but to run away, then are the Hunters in worse case then at the
beginning. Therefore they must be sure to have them well instructed before they
give the onset, and be likewise at hand to encourage them. When they come
first of all to the place wherein they conjecture the boar is lodged, if there
be no appearance either by his footsteps, or by the wounds of his teeth upon
the trees and boughs, then let them let loose one of the best hounds, and
casting about the

The Dog presses into the thickest bushes where commonly the boar lodges,
and when he has found the beast he stands still and bayeth, then must the
Hunter come and take up that Dog, for the Boar will not stir very easy out
of his lodging, and go and set up his nets and toils in all the by places,
whereby it is likely the beast will pass, and these must he hang to some
trees, for posts in the earth will not suffice, always make king the inside
of them very light, that the beast may suspect no harm. The nets being thus
set up, let him return again to his dogs, loosing them all; and every hunter
arming himself with darts and a boares spear, so let the most skillful
follow the dogs close to exhort them and set them on, the residew follow one
after another a good distance, scattering themselves into sundry angles, for
their better safeguard and end of their sport: for if they should come all
together, the Boar might light upon them and wound some of them, for upon
whosoever he falls in his rage he hurts them: furthermore when the dogs
begin to come near to his lodging, then must they be set on more eagerly,
and so hartened that they be no ways appalled at the rasing of the Boar, for
his manner is to make force at the foremost dog that is nearest to him, so
must he be followed in

When the Boar sees this, he forsakes the first man and rusheth upon the
second, who must look to defend himself with all dexterity, composing his
body, and ordering his weapons according to artificial Bore-hunting, and in
the mean season the vanquished hunter must arise again, taking fresh hold on
his spear, and with all courage setting upon the adversary beast, to wound
him either in the shoulders or in the head, for it is no

When he feels himself thus wounded that he cannot live, if it were not
for the crosses and forkes upon the Boare-speare, he would press in upon
the vanquisher to take revenge for his death; For so great is the fervent wrath
of this beast, that he spares not to kill and wound, although he feel upon him
the pangs of death: and what place soever he biteth either upon dog or man, the
heat of his teeth inflicteth a dangerous inflaming wound: and for this cause
if he does but touch the hair of dogs, he burns it off, but if it be a
female that is raised, (for there is as great a rage in females as in males
though not so great power) then must the hunter take heed he never fall to the
ground, for as the male hurts not but when a man stands or lies high, so
the female hurts not

There is also another manner of hunting wild Swyne, which is this: first of
all they set up their nets in all passages, through which it is likely the
beast will go, then do the men and dogs with a gallant cry, filling the woods
and fields, raise them out of their lodgings. In the mean season, setting
some valiant hunters to keep the nets. When the beast perceives that he is
sought after, up he starteth, looking about him like an evil spirit where he
may devour, but being terrified with the cry of men, and pursued by a
multitude of they not be afraid to approach unto him, and with such hunting
instruments as they have, show the magnitude and courage of their mind, by
attaining their game by the strength of hand, when they are deprived from the
help of Art: And to conclude, the same devises, diligence, labor, prosecution,
and observations, are to be used in the hunting of the Boar, which are
prescribed for the hunting of the Heart. It sildome falls out that the pigs of
wild swine are taken, for they run and hide themselves among the leaves, and
in the woods, sildome parting from their parents until their death, and as we
have said already, the dams fight for their young ones most irefully. For it is
not with these as with the vulgar Swine, that they beat away their young ones
for following them, but because they conceive but sildome, they suffer their
pigges to accompany them a whole year: (...) m^^nes to take Boares.
whereby to take them without pursuit of Dogs, and first of all the same engines
which we have prescribed for taking of the Heart, are also in use for taking of
the Boar, and Petrus Crescenticusis shows how a multitude of Boares may be
taken together in one ditch; and first of all (he says) near to the place
where Boares make their abode, they sow in some plain fields a kind of fatting
corn which hogs love, and about that field they make a high and strong hedge of
the boughs of trees in the one part, whereof they leave a great gap, yet not
altogether down to the ground At the time of the year when the grain waxes
ripe, the Boars gather thereinto in great number: now right over against the
said gap on the other side, there is another little low place of the hedge
left, over which the swine may easily leap. Armenia, there are certain black
venomous fishes, which the inhabitants take and mix with meal and cast them
abroad where bores and wild Swine did hant, by eating whereof as also Hemlock
and Henbane, they are quickly poisoned and dye: And thus much we have showed
out of Xenophon and other Authors, the several ways of hunting and taking of
wild Swyne. Men that have perished by Boares in hunting.


Now forasmuch as the hunting thereof has bin often showed to be dangerous
both to men and dogs, I will a little add some histories concerning the death
of them, which have bin killed by Boares. For if that comes not to pass
which Martial writes; Thusscae glandis aper populator, and ilice multa,

Quem meus intrauit splendenti cuspide culter,
Praeda iaces nostris inuidiosa focis.
I say if the Boar be not killed by men, the hunter is constrained many times
to say with the Lydia in the same Poet; Fulminio spumantis apri sum dente
perempta. Apulaius reports, of one Leopolemus, that he loved the wife of
Thrasillus; now to the intent that he might possess her, he took her husband
abroad with him to the hunting of a boar, that under color thereof he might
kill him, and say the bore slew him: Being abroad, the nets raised, and the dogs
loosed* there appeard unto the^ a bore of a monstrous shape, wonderful fat,
with horrible hair, a skin set with standing bristles, rough upon the back,
and his mouth that offered him the first encounter, and yet remembering his own
vigor and strength, turning back again upon them, first overthrowing them,
and grinding them betwixt his teeth like Apples, at length he meets with
Thrasillus, and first teareth his cloth from his back, and then likewise tore
his body in pieces, and this man I remember in the first place to be killed by
this monster-Boare, wheather he was a beast or a man. Martial in his book of
spectacles remembers a story of Diana, who killing of a wild Sow with pig,
the young ones leaped out of her belly, and this I thought good to remember
here, although it be somewhat out of place; Inter caesariae discrimina saeua
Dianae,
Fixisset grauidam cum leuis hacta suem,
Exiliet partus misere de vulnere matris,
O lucinae ferox hoc peperisset fuit?
Anseus the father of Agapener was killed by the Calidonian Boar, as we have
said already. Carmon was slain by a boar in the Mountain Tmolus. There was
one Attas a Syrian, and another an Arcadian, and both these were slain by
Boares, as Plutarch writes in the life of Sertorius. It is reported of one
Attes a Phrygian, that as he kept his Sheep he did continually sing songs in
commendation of the mother of the Gods, for which cause she loved him, honored
him, and often appeared unto him; wherein Jupiter fell to be offended, and
therefore sent a Boar to kill Attes. Rea after his death lamented him, and
caused him to be buried honorably. The Phrygians in his remembrance did every
year in the spring

Adonis also, the Lemon of Venus is feigned of the Poets to be killed by a
Boar: and yet Macrobius says, that it is an alegory of the sun and the
Winter, for Adonis signifies the Sun, and the Boar, the Winter: for as the
Boar is a roughe and sharp beast, living in moist cold, and places covered
with frost, and does properly live upon winter fruits, as Acornes, so he is the
fitter emblem for Winter, that is, a deuourer of the Suns heat, and warmth,
both which fall away by death from all living creatures. When Tuthras a King of
Myssia went to hunt in the Mountain Thrasillus, he started a huge great Boar,
which he and his gaurd followed and hunted unto the Temple of Diana Orthosia,
wherinto the Boar entered for sanctuary.

The poor Beast seeing the Hunters at hand, cried out with the voice of a man:
Parce o rex pecudi deae. O King spare Dianayes Boar: but the King being
nothing at all moved therewith, slew him in the Temple; which wickedness the
Gods could not endure, and therefore first of all she restored the Boar to
life, and afterward afflicted the King with madness, who was therefore
driven into the Mountains, and there lived like a beast.

When Lysippe his mother knew hereof, she went to him into the Woods, and
carried Cyranius the prophet, who instructed him to pacify the Gods by a
sacrifice of Oxen, which when it was performed the King recovered again his
right mind; and so his mother Diana, and set thereupon the picture of a Boar
in Gold, with a man's mouth. There was also a custom in ancient time for
champions and their fathers brethren and kindred, to swear by a Boar cut in
pieces. And thus much for the natural and morrall story of the Boar, which I
will conclude with those verses of Horace, describing the prodigious habitation
of Boares in the waters, and Dolphins in the woods, as if one had changed with
another; Delphinum syluis appingit, fluctibus aprum,
Qui variare cupit rem prodigialiter vnam.


The medicines of the wild swine.
There are declared a M^things concerning the remedies of Goats, but a larger
and more ample power shall be shown of a wild beast of the same kind. Also the
same regard shall be had concerning the remedies of a tame Sow and a wild Boar,
yea of all other tame and wild beasts, that is, that the same or things like
to either of them may be ended, differing only according to more or less,
because the same parts of wild beasts living, are less moist and cold then
those that are tame. That which we repeat here concerning the common remedies
of a bore and sow tamed, in some of the parts of them, to wit the blood, the
brain, the cheek bone, the lungs or lights, the liver, the gall, the anckle
bone, the hoof, the dung and urine, is not in the sow repeated before.

The brains of a bore taken with blood, is very much commended against the
bitings of serpents. Again, the brains and blood of a boar, does help
those that fear the coming of carbuncles. The lard and fat of a bore being
sodden and bound fast together, does with a wonderful celerity make firm
those bones that are broken. The fat of

The fat of a wild Bore mingled with the fat of the lungs or lights, does very
much profit those which have their feet broken or bruised by any mischance. The
fat of a Bore being mixed with oil of Roses, is very good for those that are
troubled with blisters or pushes, it being anointed thereupon. The brains of
a Bore is very profitable for carbuncles, and the pains of a man's yard. The
brains of a Boar being bruised very small in honey, and put thereto, does
wonderfully make it sound. The brains of a Bore sodden and drunk in Wine,
does ease all the pains and greefes. There are more things spoken concerning
the remedies of the brain in the medicines of the sow. The ashes of the

Also the same thing does make firm those bones that are broken. The lungs or
lights of a Bore mixed with honey, and put upon the feet after the manner of a
mollyfieng emplaister, they shall be freed from all exulcerations. Dioscorides
also does commend the lungs or lights of Sowes, lambs, and Bears. The liver
of a Bore being new killed and scorched by a fire, and beaten to powder, and so
being taken in wine, is an especial remedy against the bitings of Serpents
and Dogs. The liver of a Bore being old and drunken in wine with rue, it is
very much commended against the bitings of serpents. The Fibers of the liver of
a bore, and those especially which are nearest to the enteraunce of the

The liver of a bore is good to revive those whose spirits are drousie. The
liver of a bore does much profit, being stopped in the ears, for those that
are trobled with Apostumes or any running sores therein. The liver of a bore
being new killed and drunken in wine, is very effectual against the looseness
of the belly. There are certain little stones in the liver of a bore, as there
is in a common or vulgar sow, or at leastwise like unto little stones, and they
are also white, which being sodden and taken in wine are very effectual
against the disease of the stone. Thou shall read many more things concerning
the remedies of the liver of a bore in the medicines of the sow. The gall of a
bore is very much commended

The gall of a bore being mingled with Rosin and Wax, does cure those ulcers
which do increase bigger and bigger. The gall of a bore, and Lambs milk,
being mingled together, and dropped in the ears, is very profitable for all
pains therein. The body of a man being anointed with the gall of a bore, does
stir him up to carnal copulation. The gall of a bore being mingled with suet,
and applied upon every joint of the body, does immediately cure all pains of
the gout. We have declared also many things in the medicines of the Sow,
concerning the remedies of the gall of a bore. The stones of a boar being
eaten, is very good against the fauling sickness, or the stones of a bore
being taken in Mares milk or water, is also very effectual against the same
disease. The hoofes of a bore

The hooues of a bore being burned, and beaten to powder, and given in drink,
is very effectual against the stopping of urine. The hooues of a bore or sow
being burned and given to drink in wine, is very much commended for those that
cannot hold their urine in their sleep. The dung of a sow (which lives in
the woods) belng dried and drunk in water and wine, does stay the voiding of
blood, and does ease also old pains of the sides And again being taken in
Vinegar, it does stay al ruptures and convulsion, and also being mingled with
the sirrup of roses, it does remedy or help those places which are out of
joint.

The dung of a Bore being new made and hot, is a special remedy against the
flux of blood which yssueth forth of the Nostrils. The dung of a Bore being
mingled in Wine, and applied after the form of an emplaister, do presently
draw away and make sound any thing which cleaves to the Body. It being also
bruised and sodden with honey, and

An emplaister made of the dung of a Bore, is very profitable against all
venomous bitings, for it draws forth the poison. All other ulcers are filled
up and cleansed with the dung of a Bore, except those which arise in the
thighs. The dung of a bore dried and beaten to powder, and sprinkled upon
drink, does cure all pains of the sides. Again, it being dried and beaten
to powder, and administered in wine, does not only cure the pain in the
Spleen, but also the pain in the kidneys. The dung of a bore being burned to
the ashes, Pliny, Marcellus.
and given to drink in wine, does ease all pains in the knees and legs. The
dung of a bore new made and anointed upon those places that are out of joint,
is very profiable Scyatica.

It also being sodden in Vinegar and Honey, does mittigate all pains that
rise in the feet or anckles. The dung of a Bore burned to ashes, and sprinkled
upon wine lukewarm, and so given to drink, does help all those that are
troubled with the bloody flixe. The rest of the remedies which concern the
dung of a Bore, thou shall find in the medicines of the sow. The urine of a
Bore mingled with honey and Water, and so taken, in a special remedy for those
that are troubled with the fauling sickness.

Again, the urine of a Bore being taken in sweet Vinegar, does drive out those
things which are dried in the bladder. The urine of a Bore being kept in a
glass, does cure all diseases and pains in the ears, but it is especially
profitable for those which cannot hear. The urine of a Bore being kept in a
glass, Sextus.
and made lukewarm, and dropped into the ears is a special remedy for all
Apostumes that are therein. The urine of a Bore which is kept long, is far
more profitable, if so be, that it be kept in a vessel of glass. Again the
urine of a Bore being dried in smoke, and moistened with honey, and so poured
into the ears, does cure the deafness of the ears. The urine of a Bore and
oil of Cypress, each of them being equally mingled and made Luke warm, is
also good for the same disease.

The urine of a wild Bore also is of the same force and virtue. The bladder of
a wild Sextus.
and hung up until the waterish humor comes forth, and then boiled and
given to those which are Truculent with the Stranguri, is very profitable and
good for them.

Marcellus.
The bladder of a boar being dried and given in drink, is very profitable for
those

Now forasmuch also as hunters are hurt by some, I thought it good to set down
what remedies is fit for them. Therefore the wounds made of them are
dangerous, because they are not only deep, but also large and great, and it
is also impossible to bring them to agluttination with medicines, for the lips
of the wounds which is made by contusion, are cut off, and burned. They use a
mutual gnashing and striking of their teeth together, as it were against a
whetstone, to take reueng upon those which pursue and follow them. Therefore
they cause a certain scab to grow upon the lips of the wound, wherefore it is
meet to use a suppuratiue and not a gluttinatiue manner of cure in them. It is
meet to use in running and moist ulcers, not hot things but cold, both in
Winter and Summer. For it is an easy matter for a Boar to hurt a Horse in
the inside of his knee in the time of his hunting, which does breed to a
waterish ulcer, and there does also follow a swelling. To this cold things is
to be applied, and it is to be cured by anointing it with a medicin which is
called Diachalcanthes, or the head of a Dog, being burned without the tongue,
and beaten into powder, and so to be applied after the manner of a Cataplasme.
And thus much concerning the medicines of the Bore.

OF THE TATVS, OR GVINEAN BEAST.


THis is a foure-footed strange Beast, which Bellonius says, he found in
Turchia, among the mounte-bankes and Apothicaries. It is brought for the most
part out of the newfound world, and out of Guinia, and may therefore be safely
conveyed into these parts, because it is naturally covered with a hard shell,
divided and interlined like the fins of fishes, outwardly seeming buckled to
the back like coat-armor, within which, the beast draws up his body, as a
Hedghog does within his prickled skin; and therefore I take it to be a
Brasilian Hedghog. It is not much greater then a little pig, and by the snout,
ears, legs, and feet thereof, it seems to be of that kind, saving that the
snout is a little broader, and shorter then a pigs, and the tail very long like
a Lizards or rats, and the same covered al over with a crust or shel. The
gaping of the mouth is wider then a swines; and one of these being brought into
France, did live upon the eating of seeds, and fruits of the Gardens, but it
appears by that picture, or rather the skin stuffed, which Adrianus
Marcillius the Apothecary of Vlmes, sent unto Gesner, from whence this pictture
here expressed was taken, that the feet thereof are not cloven into two
parts like swine, but rather into many like Dogs, for upon the hinder feet
there are five toes, and upon the forefeete four, whereof two are so small that
they are scarce visible. The breadth of that same skin was about seven fingers,
and the length of it two spans, the shell or crust upon the back of it did not
reach down unto the rumpe or tail, but broke off as it were upon the hips,
some four fingers from the tail. The Merchants as I have herd and Citizens
of London keep of these with their Garden worms.

Of the Aiochtochth.
THere is another beast that may be compared to this, (whereof Cardanus
Aiotochth. It is a strange creature, found in Hispania noua, near the river
Aluaradus, being not greater then a Cat, having the bil or snowt of a Mallard,
the feet of a Hedgehog, and a very long neck. It is covered al over with a
shell like the trappinges of a horse, divided as in a Lobster and not
continued as in an Oyster; and so covered here with, that neither the neck
nor head appear plainly, but only the ears; and the Spaniards for this
cause call it Armato and Contaexto: There be some do affirm that it has a
voice like swine, but the feet thereof are not indeed so cloven, that they
remain unequal, but are like to a horses, I mean the several cloves. There
are of these as I have heard to

OF THE TIGER.
The names of Tigers.
THe word Tigris is an Armenian word, which signifies both a swift Arrow, and
a great river, and it should seem that the name of the river Tigris was
therefore so called, because of the swiftnes thereof, and it seems to be
derived from the Haebrew word Gir and Griera, which signify a dart. Munster
also in his Dictionary of three languages Tigros for a Tiger, and Alai. In the
4. of Job, the word Laisk by the Septuagints is translated Murmeleon, and by S.
Ierom Tigris. The Jews call the same beast Phoradei, which the Graecians call
Tigris; and all the people of Europe to whom this beast is a stranger, call it
after the Greek name, as the Italians Tigre and Tigra, the French Un Tigre,
and the Germans Tigerthier. Of the river Tigrys.


Now, concerning the name of the river Tigris, which because it joins in
affinity with this beast, it is necessary that I should say something in this
place, because that we Josephus, makes many compasses and windings in the
world, and at last fauleth into the red sea, and they further say that there
is no river of the world that runs so swiftly as this: And therefore Tigris
vocatur, id est Sagitta, quod iaculum vel Sagittam velocitate aequet: That is,
It is called a Tiger, a Dart, or Arrow, because it runs as fast as an Arrow
flies: and for this cause we find in Theocritus, that a river in Sicilia was
called Asis, thrt is: Spiculum, a dart.

Some of the poets do derive the name of the river Tigris from this Tiger the
wild beast, whereupon these Histories are told. They say, that when Bacchus
was distracted and put out of his wits by Juno, as he wandered too and fro in
the world, he came to the river ^ylax (which was the first name of this water)
and being there desirous to pass over, but found no means to accomplish it,
Jupiter in commisseration of his estate did send unto him a Tiger, who did
willingly take him upon his back, and carry him over; Afterward Bacchus
called that swift river by the name of that swift beast, Tiger. Others do
report the tale thus. When Dionisius fell in love with the Nymph Alphesiboea
whom by no means either by promises, entreaties, or rewards he could allure
unto him, at last he turned himself Medus, who when he came to age, remembering
the fact of his father and mother, called the name of the river Tigris, because
of his Fathers transformation. But to leave this matter as not worth the
standing upon, whether

First of (...) therefore Tigers like Lions are bred in the East, South, and
hot countries, Countries breeding Tigers.
because their generation desires abundance of heat, such as are in India
and near the red Sea, and the people called Asangae or Besingi which dwell
beyond the river Ganges, are much troubled and anoyed with Tigers. Likewise the
Prasians, the Hercanians and the Armenians. Apolonius with his companions
traueling betwixt Hiphasis and Ganges, saw Barigaza and Dachinabades, which is
beyond the Mediteranian region of the East, there are abundance of Tigers and
all other wild beasts, as Arrianus writes. In Hispaniola, Ciamba, and
Guanassa, Peter Martyr says, by the relation of a Spaniard inhabiting there,
that there are many Lions and Tigers.

The Indians say, that a Tiger is bigger then the greatest horse, Quantity of
Tigers.
and that for strength and swiftness they excel all other beasts. There be
some which have taken them for Tigers, which are called Thoes, greater then
Lions, and lesser then the Indian Tigers, as it were twice so big as Lions;
but I rather agree to the relation of Arrianus, Strabo, Megastines, and
Mearcus, for they say that a Tiger fears not an Elephant, and that one of
them has been seen to fly upon the head of an Elephant and devour it: and
that among Prasians when four men led one of these Tigers tamed, by the way
they met with a Mule, and that the Tiger took the Mule by the hinder leg,
drawing him after him in his teeth, notwithstanding all the force of the Mule
and his four leaders; which is unto me a sufficient argument not only of his
strength, but of his stature also: and if any have been seen of lesser stature,
they have been mistaken either for the Linxes, or for the Thoes.

The similitude of the body of this Beast is like to a Lionesses, for so is the
face and mouth; The several parts.
the lower part of the foreheade, and gnashing or grinning teeth, and all kind
of creatures which are ravening, are footed like a cat, their neck short, and
their skins full of spots, not round like a Panthers, nor yet diverse colored,
but altogether of one color and square, and sometimes long, and therefore this
beast and the Panther are of singular note among all the foure-footed: yet
Solinus and Seneca seem to be of opinion that their spots are sometimes of
diverse colors both yellow and black, and those long like rods in these
sayings: Tibi dant variae pectora Tigres. And again: Vhera viergata
faraecaspia. And Cilius says: Corpore virgato Tigris. It were needless to
speak of their crooked claws, their sharp teeth, and divided feet, their
long tail, Oppianus.
agilitye of body, and wildenesse of nature which gets all their food by
hunting. It has been falsely believed, that all Tigers be females, and that
there are no males among them, and that they engender in copulation with the
wind; whereupon Camerarius made this witty riddle in his Rhetorical exercises:
A fluuio dicor, fluuius vel dicitur ex me
Iunctaque sum vento, vento velotior ipso
Et mihi dat ventus natos, nec quaero maritos.


The Epithits.
The Epithites of this beasts are these: Armenian Tigers, sharp, Ganietican,
Hercanian, fierce, cruel, and wicked, untamed, spotted, diuers-coloured,
straked, bitter, ravenous, Affrican, greedy, Caspian, Carcesian, Caucasean,
Indean, Parthean, Marsian, streight-footed, mad, stiff, fearful, strong,
foaming, and violent, with many such others, as are easy to be found in every
Author. The voice of this beast is called Ranking, according to this verse:
Tigrides indomitae rancant, rugiuntque leones. Now because that they are
strangers in Europe as we have said already, never breeding in that part of
the world, and as sildome seen, we must be constrained to make but a short
Their food.
For the manner of their food, they prey upon all the greatest beasts, and
sildome upon the smaller, as Oxen, Hearts, and Sheep, but Hares and Conies they
let alone.

It is reported by Plutarch, A history
of a tame Tiger that was brought up with a Kid* the said kid was killed and
laid before him to eat, but he refused it two days together (...) the third
day opressed with extremity of hunger, by her ranking and crying voice (...)
made signs to her keeper for other meat, who cast unto her a cat, which
presently it pulled in pieces and devoured it. The like story unto this we have
showed already in the Panther. Generally the nature of this beast, is according
to the Epithites of it, sharp, untamed, cruel, Indians do every year give
unto their king tamed Tigers and Panthers, and so it comes to pass, that
sometimes the Tiger kisseth his keeper as Seneca writes.

In the time of their lust they are very raging and furious, according to these
verses of Virgill: Per sylvas tum saeuus aper, tum pessima Tigris
Heu male cum libyae, solis erratur in agris.


Their copulation and generation.
They engender as Lions do, and therefore I marvel how the fable first came,
up, Indian Dog is engendered of a Tiger and a Dog, and so also the
Hercanian dogs: Whereby it is apparent, that they do not only conceive among
themselves, but also in a mingled race. The male is sildome taken, because at
the sight of a man he runs away, and leaves the female alone with her young
ones, for he has no care of the Whelps, and for this occasion I think that
the fables first came up that there were no males among the Tigers. The female
brings forth many at once like a Bitch, which she nourishes in her den very
carefully, loving them, and defending them like a Lioness from the Hunters,
whereby she is many times ensnared and taken. It is reported by Aelianus, that
when they hear the sound of Bells and Timbrils, they grow into such a rage and
madness, that they tear their own flesh from their backs.

For the taking of Tigers, The taking and killing of Tigers. Plutarch Calistines
the Indians near the River Ganges have a certain, Herb growing like
Buglosse, which they take and press the juice out of it, this they preserve
beside them, and in still silent calm nights, they pour the same down at the
mouth Dardanus, are likewise fabled to be begotten by the Northern wind, so the
Tigers by the West wind.

Therefore they are never taken but in defense of their young ones, neither is
there any beast that lives upon preying so swift as they: Solam Tigrim Indis
in superabilem esse dicunt, Philostratus
quoniam fugiendi celeritate, quae ventos equare dicitur, e conspectu aufugit.
Only the Tiger, the Indians say can never be conquered, because when he is
hunted he runs away out of

The Hunter seeing her at hand, casts down one of her Whelps: the
distressed angry beast knowing that she can carry but one at once, first
takes up that in her mouth, without setting upon the Hunter, contented with
that one, returns with it to her lodging; having laid it up safe, back
again she returned like the wind to pursue the Hunter for the residue, who
must likewise set her down another if he have not got into his ship, for
except the Hunter be near the Water side, and have a ship ready, she will
fetch them

For this occasion, the hunters do devise certain round spheres of glass,
wherein they picture their young ones very apparent to be seen by the damme,
one of these they cast Johannes Ledesma a Spaniard this excellent story of a
male and female Tiger. In the Island Dariene, standing in the oxidental Ocean of
the new found world, some 8. days sail from Hispaniola, it fell out (says
he) in the year of our Lord 1514. that the said Island was annoyed with two
Tigers, a male and a female, for half a year together, so that there was no
night free, wherefore they sought out all the ways and paths of the Tigers to
and from their dens, that so they might take vengeance upon the raueners for
the loss of so much blood: At the last they found a common beaten way, this
they cut asunder and dug deep into a large dungeon: having made the dungeon,
they strewed upon the top of it little sticks and leaves so covering it to
dissemble that which was underneath, then came the heedlesse Tiger that way,
and fell down into the ditch upon such sharp irons stakes and pointed
instruments as they had there set, with his roaring he filled all the places
thereabout, and the Mountain sounded with the echo of his roaring voice.

The people came upon him, and casting great and huge stones upon his back
killed him, but Maedea thus speaks in Ovid; Hoc ego si patiar tum me de
Tigride natam,
Tum ferrum and scopulos gestare in cord videbor.
And for this cause it was fained, not without singular wit by the Poets, that
such persons as satisfy the fullness of their wrath in extremity of revenge,
are transformed into Tigers. The same Poet compares the wrath of Perseus
standing betwixt two advantages unto a Tiger, betwixt two preies or herds of
cattle, being in doubt whether of them to devour, Tigris vt auditis diuersa
valle duorum,
Extimulata famae mugatbus armentorum,
Nescit vtro potius ruat, and ruere ardet vtroque,
Sic dubious Perseus dextra leuaue feratur.
In ancient time these Tigers were dedicated to Bacchus, as all spotted beasts
were, and that the said Tigers did draw his Chariot whilst he did hold the
raines; therefore Ovid says thus;^ Bacchus iu curru quem summum texer at vuis,
Tigribus adiunctis aurea lor a dabat.
And Horace in this manner; Hac te merentem Bacchipater tuae,
Vexere Tigres in docili iugum collo trahentes.
Tigers, notwithstanding their great minds and vntamable wildness have been
taken, and brought in public spectacle by men, and the first of all that ever
brought them to Rome was Augustus, when Quintus Tubero, and Fabius Maximus were
Consuls, at the dedication of the Theater of Marcellus; the which Tigers were
sent unto him out of India, for presents (as Dion writes.) Afterward
Claudius presented four to the people; and lastly Heleogabalus caused his
chariots to be drawn with Tigers, whereunto Martial alleuded Picto quod
inga delicata collo,
Pardus sustinet improbeque Tigres,
Indulgent patientiam flagello.
Ledesma of whom we spoke before affirms, Eating of Tigers.
that he did eat of the Tigers flesh that was taken in the ditch in the Island
Dariene, and that the flesh thereof was nothing inferior to the flesh of an
Ox, but the Indeans are forbidden by the laws of their Country, to eat any
part of the Tigers flesh, except the haunches. And thus I will conclude this
story of the Tiger, with the Epigram that Martial made of a Tiger, devouring
of a Lion.

Lambere securi dextram and consueta magistri,
Tigris ab Hyrcano glorta rara iugo.
Saena ferum rabido lacerauit dente Leonem
Res noua non vllis cognita temporibus.
Ansa est tale nihil syluis dum vixit in altis.

OF THE UNICORN.


WE are now come to the history of a beast, whereof diverse people in every age
of the world have made great question, because of the rare Virtues thereof;
therefore it behooves us to use some diligence in comparing together the
several testimonies that are spoken of this beast, for the better satisfaction
of such as are now alive,

Now the virtues of the horn, of which we will make a particular discourse by
it self, have bin the occasion of this question, and that which does give the
most evident testimony unto all men that have ever seen it or used it, has
bred all the contention; and if there had not bin disclosed in it any
extraordinary powers and virtues, we should as easily believe that there was a
Unicorn in the world, Many beasts with horns, improperly called Unicorns.
as we do believe there is an Elephant although not bred in Europe. To begin
therefore with this discourse, by the Unicorn we do understand a peculiar
beast, which has naturally but one horn, and that a very India have but one
horn, and some have three, and whole hooues. Solinus, Aelianus. Oppranus.
Likewise the Bulls of Aonia, are said to have whole hooues and one horn,
growing out of the middle of their foreheads.

Likewise in the City Zeila of Ethiopia, there are Kine of a purple color, as
Ludouicus Romanus writes, which have but one horn growing out of their heads,
and that turns up toward their backs. Caesar was of opinion that the Elke
had but one horn, but we have showed the contrary. It is said that Pericles
had a ram with one horn, but that was bred by way of prodegy, and not
naturally. Simeon Sethi writes, that the Musk ca^ has also one horn growing
out of the forehead, but we have showed already that no man is of that opinion
beside himself. Aelianus writes, that there be Birds in Ethiopia having one
horn on their foreheads, and therefore are called Vnicornus: and Albertus says,
there is a fish called Monoceros, and has also one horn. Now our discourse of
the Unicorn is of none of Whether there be any Unicorns in the World.
because of the nobleness of his horn, they have ever bin in doubt: by which
distraction, it appears unto me that there is some secret enemy in the inward
degenerate nature of man, which continually blinds the eyes of God his
people, from beholding and believing the greatness of God his works.

But to the purpose that there is such a beast, the Scripture it self
witnesses, for David Et erigetur cornu meum tanquam Monocerotis. That is, my
horn shall be lifted up like the horn of a Unicorn; whereupon all Divines
that ever wrote have not only collected that there is a Unicorn, but also
affirm the similitude to be betwixt the kingdom of David and the horn of the
Unicorn, that as the horn of the Unicorn is wholesome to all beasts and
creatures, so should the kingdom of David be in the generation of Christ; And
do we think that David would compare the virtue of his kingdom, and the
powerful redemption of the world unto a thing that is not, or is uncertain and
fantastical, God forbid that ever any wise man should so dispight the holy
ghost. For this cause also we read in Suidas, that good men which worship God
and follow his laws, are compared to Unicorns, whose greater parts as their
whole bodies are unprofitable and vntamable, yet their horn makes them
excellent: so in good men, although

We have showed already in the story of the Rhinocerot, that Reem in Haebrew
signifies a Unicorn, although Munster be of another opinion yet the
Septuagints in the translation of Deuteronomy. 33. do translate it a Unicorn, for the
Rhinocerot has not one horn, but two. (...) brew^^^ in (...) prove ^^^cornes
Rabbi Solamon, David Kimhi, and Saadius do always take Reem and Karas for a
Unicorn, and they derive Reem from Rom, which signifies Altitudinem height,
because the Horn of the Unicorn is lifted upon high. Hereunto the Arabians
agree which call it Barkeron, and the Persians Bark. The Chaldeans Remana. In
the 39 of Job, the Lord speaks in this manner to Job: Numquid acquiesset
Monoceros vt seruiat tibi, aut vt moretur iuxta prasepia That is to say, will
the Unicorn rest and serve thee, or tarry beside thy cratches? cans^ thou bind
the Unicorn with a halter to thy plough to make furrows, or will he make plain
the clots of the valleys? Likewise in the prophecy of Esaias the 34. chap. and in
many other places of Scripture, whereby God himself must needs be traduced, if
there be no Unicorn in the world.

Besides the Arabians, as And. Bellun. writes, call this beast Alcherceden,
and say that it has one horn in the forehead which is good against poisons.
The Graetians call it Monokeros, from whence Pliny and all the ancient
Grammarians do call it Monoceros, yet the deuines both elder and later do name
it by a more learned proper Latin word Vnicornis. Alicorno, Vnicorno, Liocorno,
Leocorno the French Licorne, the Spaniards Vnicornio, The hands of Unicorns
the Germans Einhorne, and the Illirians Gednorozecz: And thus much for the
name. All our Eropean Authors which write of beasts, do make of the Unicorn
diverse kinds, especially Pliny, Ludouicus Romanus, Paulus Venetus, Nicholaus
Venetus, Aeneas Sylutus, Albertus Magnus, out of whose words we must gather the
best description that we can of the Unicorn. The Arcean Indians (says Pliny)
do hunt a certain wild beast which is very cursed vntamable, having one horn,
which in the head resembles a Heart, in the feet an Elephant, in the tail a
Bore, and in the residue of the body a Horse: Countries of Unicorns.
the horn he says, is about two cubits long, and the voice like the lowing of
of an Ox, somewhat more shrill, and they deny that this beast is ever taken
alive. Aelianus writes hereof in this manner, there are (says he) certain
Mountains in the midst of India, unto the which the passage is very
difficult, where are abundance of wild beasts, and among other Unicorns, which
the Indians call Cartazonons, who in their ripe age are as big as a Horse, and
their mane and hairs are yellow, excelling in the celerity of their feet and
bodies, having feet Aelianus,) by comparing of whose words with Pliny, it is
apparent they describe in these words but one and the same beast, and so also
does Phyles; whereby I gather, that it is no other beast then the wild Ass, or
at the least the wild Ass comes nearest to the Unicorn of all others, for
they agree in these things, first, in that both of them have one horn in the
middle of the forehead, secondly, in that both of them are bred in India,
thirdly, in that they are both about the bigness of a Horse, fourthly in
their celerity and solitary life, fifthly and lastly in their exceeding strength
and vntamable natures; but herein they differ both in their feet and colors,
for the feet of the wild Asses are whole and not cloven like the Unicorns,
and their color Aelianus says, that the horn also differs in color from
the Unicorns, for the middle of it is only black, the root of it white, and
the top of it purple, which Bellonius does interpret, that the superficies or
upper face of the Horn is all purple, the inner part white, and the inward
part or middle black; but of this Indian wild Ass we have spoken already,
and therefore I will add nothing in this place but the words of Philostratus
in the life of Apolonius, who writes in this manner.

There are many wild Asses which are taken in the Fens, near the river
Hiphasis, in whose forehead there is one horn, wherewith they fight like Bulls,
and the Indians of that horn make pots, affirming that whosoever drinks in
one of those pots, shall never take Appollonius looked upon one of those
beasts, and considered his nature with singular admiration.

Now there was one Damis in his company, who asked him whether he did believe
that the vulgar report of the Unicorns horns were true or no, Appollonius made
him this answer: Ad hibeo si huius regionis immortalem regemesse intellexero,
qui enim mihi aut alteri cui quam poculum ita salubre potest dare, nonne very
simile est ipsum quotidie illo vti, and ex eo cornu frequenter vel ad crapulam
vsque bibere, nemo enim vt puto illum caluminiabitur qui in tali poculo etiam
inebrietur. That is to say, I would believe that report if I found in this
country a king that were immortal and could never dye, for if a man would give
me such a cup or any other man, do not you think that I would believe he
drunk in the same cup? and who would blame a man if he drunk in such a cup
till he were drunk, for it were lawful to use that horn unto surfeiting,
whereby we may gather the mind of that wise man concerning the Asses horn, and
the Unicorns; namely, that they may give one some ease against accidental
diseases, although they cannot prolong a man's life the space of one day: these
things said he. There be beasts (says Aristotle) as the Oryx and Indian Ass,
which are armed with one horn, and the cloven footed Orix is no other then
the whole footed Ass, for in the middle of their forehead they have one horn,
by which both sides of their Cum medium pariter comune vtrique extremo sit.
Because the middle is equally distant from both the extremes, and the hoof of
this beast may well be said to be cloven and whole, because the horn is of the
substance of the hoof, and the hoof of the substance of the Horn, and
therefore the horn is whole, and the Hoof cloven; for the cleaving either of
the horn or of the hoof comes through the defect of nature, and therefore
God has given to Horses and Asses whole hooues, because there is greatest use
of their Legs, but unto Unicorns a whole and entire Horn, that as the ease
of men is procured by the helps of Horses, so the health of them is procured
by the horn of the Unicorn: The use of a Unicorns horn.
These things (says Aristotle,) And Strabo also writes, that there are Horses
in India, which have Hearts heads, with one horn, of which horn their Princes
make Cups, out of which they drink their drink against poison, and therefore
by this which has been said it appears unto me, that either the Indian Ass
is a Unicorn, or differs from it only in color; and the objection of the
hooues is answered by Aristotle. Unto this discourse I will add the travails
of Ludouicus Roman, wherein he saw two Unicorns at Mecha in Arabia, where
Mauhomets Temple and Sepulcher is. There are preserved Unicorns, which by way
of miracle they bring forth to the people, and truly not without cause for the
sight is worthy of admiration.

Now their description is on this sort: one of them and the elder was about the
stature of a Colt of two years and a half old, having a horn growing out of
his forehead of two cubits length, and the other was much less, for it was but
a year old, and like a Colt of that age, whose Horn was some four spans long,
or there abouts. The color of them was like a Weaseled-coloured-horse, the
head like the head of a Heart, the neck not long, and the mane growing all on
one side.

The Legs slender and lean, like the Legs of a Hind, the hooues of the
forefeet Ethiopia, did send them to the Sultan of Mecha, with whom he is
constrained, to observe perpetual amity. Now these Unicorns are of another
kind then the Unicorns of Pliny and Aelianus, because their Unicorn has a
whole Hoof, and this cloven, but this objection was answered before: and
although Pliny and Aristotle do acknowledge no other Unicorn then the Orix,
whose Horn is black, as hard as Iron, and sharp at the point, yet it is
clear that there is another Unicorn besides that.

Now Paulus Venetus says, that in the kingdom of Basman, which is subject to
the great Cham, that there are Unicorns somewhat lesser then Elephants, having
hair like Oxen, heads, like Boares, feet like Elephantes, one Horn in the
middle of their foreheads, and a sharp thorny tongue, wherewith they destroy
both man and Beast, and besides headdeth, that they muddle in the dirt like
Swine. Now if it were not for the Horn in the middle of the forehead, I would
take this Beast for a Rhinocerot, but because the Horn of the Rhinocerot
grows out of the Nose, I deem this to be a second kind of Unicorn, for
there is no man that shall read this story, but will think that the learned
Author had reason to discern betwixt the eyes and the forehead, and therefore
there can be no exception taken to my observation.

Nicolaus Venetus an Earl says, that in Masinum or Serica, that is, the
Mountains betwixt Cathay, (as Aeneas Syluius writes) there is a certain Beast
having a Svvines head, an Oxes tail, the body of an Elephant (whom it does
not only equal in stature, but also it lives in continual variance with
them) and one horn in the forehead: now this if the Reader shall think it
different from the former, I do make the third kind of a Unicorn, and I
trust there is no Wiseman that will be offended at it: for as we have showed
already in many stories, that sundry Beasts have not only their divisions,
but subdeuisions, into subalternal kinds, as many Dogs, many Dear, many
Horses, many Mice, many Panthers, and such like, why should there not also be
many Unicorns. And if the Reader be not pleased with this, let him either show
me better reason, (which I know he shall never be able to do) or else beside
least the uttering of his dislike, bewray envy and

Other discourses of the horn.
Now although the parts of the Unicorn be in some measure described, and also
their Countries, namely, India and Ethiopia, yet for as much as al is not said
as may be said, I will add the residue in this place: And first of al there
are two kingdoms, in India one called Niem, and the other Lamber or Lambri;
both these are stored with Unicorns: And Aloisius Cadamustus in his fifty
Chapter of his book of navigations, writes that there is a certain region of
the new found world, wherein are found live Unicorns; and toward the East, and
South, under the Equinoctial there is a living creature (with one horn which
is crooked, and not great) having the head of a Dragon, and a beard upon his
chin, his neck long, and stretched out like a Serpents, the residue of his
body like to a Hearts, saving that his feet, color, and mouth are like a
Lions: Pbiles.
and this also (if not a fable or rather a monster) may be a fourth kind of
Unicorn; And concerning the horns of Unicorns, now we must perform our
promise, which is to relate the true history of them, as it is found in the
best writers. This therefore growing out of the forehead betwixt the eye lids
is neither light nor hollow, nor yet smooth like other horns,

There are two of these at Venice in the Treasury of S. Marks Church, as
Brasavolus writes, one at Argentarat, which is wreathed about with diverse
sphires. There are also two in the Treasury of the King of Polonia, all of
them as long as a man in his stature. In the year 1520. there was found the
horn of a Unicorn in the river Arrula, near Bruga in Heluetia, the upper
face or outside whereof was a dark yellow, it was two cubits in length, but
had upon it no plights or wreathing versuus. It was very odoriferous
(especially when any part of it was set one fire) so that it smelled like
musk: as soon as it was found, it was carried to a Nunnery called Campus
regius, but afterward by the Governor Heluetia it was recovered back again,
because it was found within his teritorie. Now the virtues of this horn are
already recited before, and yet I will for the better iustifiyng of that which
I have said concerning the Unicorns horn, add the testimony of our learned
men which did write thereof to Gesner, whose letters according as I find them
recorded in his work, so I have here inserted and translated word for word.
And first of all the answer of Nicholas Gerbelius unto his Epistle, concerning
the Unicorns horn at Argentoratum, is this which follows, for, says he,
The horn which those Noblemen have in the secrets of the great Temple, I have
often seen and handled with my hands; It is of the length of a tall man, if so
be that you shall thereunto add the point thereof: for there was a certain
evil disposed person among est them, who had learned

For which wicked offense, both he himself was cast out of that company, and
not any ever afterward of that family might be received into this society by
an ordinance gravely and maturely ratified. This pulling off of the top brought
a notable deformity to that most splendant gift. The whole horn from that
part which sticks to the forehead of this beast, even unto the top of the
horn is altogether firm or solid, not gaping with chops, chinks or creuises,
with a little greater thicknes then a tile is vsua;lly amongst us. For

The weight of this horne^^ of so great a massinesse, that a man would hardly
believe it, and it has been often wondered at, that a beast of so little a
stature could bear so heavy and weighty a burden. I could never smell any
sweetness at all therein. The color thereof is like unto old yuory, in the
midst betwixt white and yellow. But you shall never have a better pattern of
this, then where it is sold in little pieces or fragments by the oilemen. For
the color of our horn is life unto them, But by whom this was given unto that

Another certain friend of mine, being a man worthy to be believed, Gerbellius
A second history of a Unicorns horn
declared unto me, that he saw at Paris with the Chancellor, being Lord of
Pratus, a piece of a Unicorns horn, to the quantity of a cubit, wreathed in
tops or spires, about the thickenesse of an indifferent staff (the compass
thereof extending to the quantity of six fingers) being within and without of a
muddy color, with a solid substance, the fragments whereof would boil in
the Wine although they were never burned, having very little or no smell at all
therein.

When Ioannes Ferrerius of Piemont had read these things, he wrote unto me,
that in the Temple of Dennis, near unto Paris, that there was a Unicorns
horn six foot-long, wherein all those things which are written by Gerbelius in
our chronicles were verified both the weight and the color: but that in
bigness it exceeded the horn at the City of Argentorate, being also holow
almost a foot from that part which sticks unto the forehead of the Beast,
this he saw himself in the Temple of S. Dennis, and handled the horn with his
hands as long as he would. A third Hystory of a Unicorns horn.
I hear that in the former year (which was from the year of our Lord 1553.
when Vercella was ouerthrown by the French, there was brought Paulus Poaeius,
describes an Unicorn in this manner; Another description of the Unicorn.
That he is a beast, in shape much like a young Horse, of a dusty color, with
a maned neck, a hayry beard, and a forehead armed with a horn of the quantity
of two cubits, being separated with pale tops or spires, which is reported by
the smoothnes and yuorie whiteness thereof, to have the wonderful power of
dissoluing and speedy expelling of all venom or poison whatsoever.

For his horn being put into the water, drives away the poison, that he may
drink without harm, if any venomous beast shall drink therein before him.
This cannot be taken from the Beast being alive, forasmuch as he cannot possible
be taken by any deceit:

The horn of this beast being put upon the Table of Kings, and set amongst
their iunkets and bankets, does bewray the venom if there be any such
therein, by a certain sweat which comes over it. Concerning these horns,
there were two seen, which were two cubits in length, of the thickness of a
man's Arm, the first at Venice, which the Senate afterward sent for a gift
unto Solomon the Turkish Emperor: the other being almost of the same quantity,
and placed in a Silver pillar, with a short or cutted paint, which Clement the
Pope or Bishop of Rome, being come unto Marssels, brought unto Francis

Petrus Bellonius writes, that he knew the tooth of some certain Beast in
time past, sold for the horn of a Unicorn, Of adulterated Unicorns horns.
(what beast may be signified by this speech I know not, neither any of the
French men which do live amongst us) and so a small piece of the same being
adulterated sold sometimes for 300. Ducats. But if the horn shall be true and
not counterfeit, it does notwithstanding seem to be of that creature which the
Auncientes called by the name of an Unicorn, especially Aelianus, who only
ascribes to the same this wonderful force against poison and most grievous
diseases, for he makes not this

But it cannot be denied, that this our Unicorns horn was taken from some
living wild Beast. For their are found in Europe to the number of twenty of
these horns pure, and so many broken; two of the which are shown in the
treasury of Saint Marks church at Venice (I heard that the other was of late
sent unto the Emperor of the Turks for a gift by the Venetians) both of them
about the length of six cubits: the one part which is lowest being thicker, and
the other thinner, that which is thicker, exceeds not the thickness of three
inches just, which is also attributed unto the horn of the Indian Ass, but
the other

I do also know, that which the King of England possesses to be wreathed
inspires, even as that is accounted in the Church of S. Dennis, then which they
suppose none greater in the world, and I never saw any thing in any creatures
more worthy praise then this horn. The substance is made by nature, not Art,
wherein all the marks are found which the true horn requires. And for so much as
it is somewhat hollow (about the measure of a foot which goes out of the
head, and the bone growing from the same is comprehended) I conjecture that it
never falls, as neither the horns of a Muskcat, a wild Goat, and an Ibex
do: but the horns of these beasts do yearly fall off, namely, the Bucke, the
Heart, Field-goat, and Camelopardall. It is of so great a length, that the
tallest man can scarsely touch the top thereof, for it does fully equal seven
great feet. It weighs thirteen pounds with their assize, being only weighed
by the guess of the hand, it seems much heavier. The figure does plainly
signify a wax candle, (being folded a wreathed within it self) being far
more thicker from one part, and making it self by little and little less
toward the point, the thickest part thereof cannot be shut within ones hand,
it is the compass of five fingers, by the circumference, if it be measured
with a thread, it is three fingers and a span.



There are found oftentimes in Polonia certain horns which some men guess to
be of the Unicorns, by a doubble Argument. First, because they are found
several, Of the Unicorns horns found in Polonia.
never by twaines which as yet is heard, although sometimes they may be found
with the scull and Antonius Schnebergerus a Physician of great learning amongst
the Sarmatians, and an excellent obseruer of nature, writ unto me some five
year past, to see some of these horns, having sent them by the labor of my
very good friend Ioachinnus Rhaeticus, a most excellent physician in Sarmatia,
and incomparable in the mathematick Arts in this age.

The first of these horns (says he) I saw being of the length of my fadome,
with a duskishe or darkish color: the point there of being exceeding sharp
and smooth. The compass about the root of the horn did exceed six spans. The
outside was plain, with

This horn was found under the earth, (not deeper then a foot, in a solitary
and high place, as between two hills, through which a river runs,) by
Countri'men that were digging to lay the foundation of a house. But the horn
was smitten with an Axe, and severed into very small pieces: but that Noble and
excelent man Ioannes Frikasz (in whose field the horn was found, being
distaunt from Cracouia two miles) by all diligence he

But there was found all the beast, as by the greatness of his bones might
easily be perceived, being bigger in quantity then a horse. It is most certain
that it was a Foure-footed-beast, by the bones of the shoulders, thighs and
ribs. But if this Horn were the tooth of an Elephant, as some do suppose, you
would marvel why two (which I have heard) were never found together. But the
teeth or rather horns of Elephants are neither concerning one of those four
horns which I saw. The other was like unto this, but less pure; for the
color was outwardly most black, inwardly most white, being found in the
River. The third, and fourth most hard, so that a man would think it were by
the touching thereof stone or iron, being solid even unto the point, for I
have not seen them wholly, but the part of one, to the length of a cubit; of
the other, to the length of half a cubit with a dark color, being almost of
the same thickness as the two former: But for as much as the two former have
no riftes or chinkes in them, these have by their longitude, being like herbs
bending or wreathing in their stalks.

There was another found in a certain field, so much appearing out of the
earth, that Schnebergerus, who also adds this. That there are more of these
to be found in Polonia, and therefore for the most part to be contemned.

There are moreover found in Heluetia some of these horns: one in the river
Arula against the Town of Bruga, the other in the last year, in the river of
Birsa, but it was broken, Cymbrians, William Warner in a tower near unto the
City Rottauit, who gave unto Gesner a good piece thereof, who found another
piece as he was a fishing at Birsa in the river. And it is no great marvel
that they are found there, where through length of time they are broken into
small pieces, and carried by the force of the waters into diverse places.

But it is most diligently to be observed, whether they are found in the earth,
as also to be known whether that great horn be of this beast, which hangs
alone in the great temple at Argentaur, by the pillar, for it has hanged there
many years before, as now it-appeareth, for that does plainly seem the same
magnitude, thickness, and figure which Schnebergerus has described in his own
horn that we have allowed before for wild oxen. The ancients have attributed
singular horns to the Unicorn, whom some have called by Aristotle and Pliny
call a Unicorn, Aelianus a Quadrucorne. Oppianus does not express it, but he
seems to make it a two horned beast. Simeon Sethi does also write that the
Musk-cat or Goat at which brings forth Musk, has one horn. Certain later
writers (as Scaliger reports) say, that there is a certain Ox in Ethiopia
which has one Horn coming out in the midst of his forehead, greater then
the length of a foot, bending vpwardes, the point being wreathed overthwart,
and they have red hair, whereby we gather that the horn of all Unicorns is
not pure. But the reason why these horns are more found in Polonia then in any
other place, I cannot well guess, whether from thence we shall suspect them to
be of certain Vries, which at this day abide Sarmatia; in times past, there
were many more, which have lived both in greater and larger woods, neither were
they killed with so often Hunting: some whereof it is most like have come to
great age, as appears by their great and stately horns, which things we
leave to be considered of others. I suppose that the Apothe caries never have
the true horn of a Unicorn, but that some do sell a kind of false
adulterated Horn, other the fragments of this great and unknown Horn, of
which we have spoken, and not only of the horn, but also of the bones of the
head; some of which are so affected by longanimity of time, that you may take a
threefold substance in them, although it be broken by a certain distance, one
being for the most part whitish and pale, the other whiter and softer, the
third stony and most white.

I hear that in the new Islands there was a Horn bought in the name of a
Unicorns

And thus much shall suffice concerning the true Unicorns horn, and the
Virtues arising there from. In this place now we will proceed to the residue of
the history, reserving other uses of this horn to the proper medicines.

These Beasts are very swift, and their legs have no Articles. The natural
properties of Unicorns
They keep for the most part in the deserts, and live solitary in the tops of
the Mountains. There was nothing more horible the^ the voice or braying of it,
for the voice is straind above measure. It fights both with the mouth and
with the heels, with the mouth biting like a Lion, and with the heels kicking
like a Horse. It is a beast of an vntamable nature, and therefore the Lord
himself in Job says that he cannot be tied with any halter, nor yet
accustomed to any cratch or stable. He fears not Iron or any iron
Instrument, (as Isidorus writes) and Philes. Aelianus.
but with his female, when once his flesh is tickled with lust, he grows
tame, gregall and loving, and so continues till she is filled and great with
young, and then returns to his former hostility. He is an enemy to the Lions,
wherefore as soon as ever a Lion sees a Unicorn, he runs to a tree for
succor, that so when the Unicorn makes force at him, he may not only avoid
his horn, but also destroy him; for the Unicorn in the the swiftness of his
course runs against the tree wherein his sharp horn sticks fast,
Aethiopia, in an Haebrew Epistle unto the Bishop of Rome.

It is said that Unicorns above all other creatures, do reverence Virgins and
young Maids, and that many times at the sight of them they grow tame, The
taking of Unicorns
and come and sleep beside them, for there is in their nature a certain
savor, wherewithal the Unicorns are allured and delighted: for which occasion
the Indian and Ethiopian hunters use this stratagem to take the beast. They
take a goodly strong and beautiful young man, Albertus. Alunnus. Tzetzes.
whom they dress in the apparel of a woman, besetting him with diverse
odoriferous flowers and spices.

The man so adorned, they set in the Mountains or Woods where the Unicorn
hunteth, so as the wind may carry the savor to the beast, and in the mean
season the other hunters hide themselves: the Unicorn deceived with the
outward shape of a woman and sweet smells, comes unto the young man without
fear, and so suffers his head to be covered and wrapped within his large
sleeves, never stirring but lying still and a sleep, as in his most acceptable
repose. Then when the hunters by the sign of the young man perceive him fast
and secure, they come upon him, and by force cut off his horn and send him
away alive: but concerning this opinion we have no elder authority then
Tzetzes, who did not live above five hundred years ago, and therefore I leave
the reader Tzetzes, do most constantly believe it.

It is said by Aelianus and Albertus, that except they be taken before they
be two years old they will never be tamed; and that the Thrasians do
yearly take some of their Colts, and bring them to their King, which he
keeps for combat, and to fight with one another: for when they are old, they
differ nothing at all from the most barborous, bloody, and ravenous beasts.
Their, flesh is not good for meat, but is bitter and vnnourishable: And thus
much shall suffice for the natural story of the Unicorn, now follows

The medicine arising from the Unicorn.
Concerning the horns of the Unicorn, I have sufficiently already written, as
the auntientes have delivered in their remedies: but in this place I will
handle the remedies which late writers have attributed thereunto, as also our
own observations of the same I remember that in times past, I saw a piece of
this horn of the weight of nine inches with a certain Merchant in the marker,
being black and plain, and not wreathed in circles or turnings, but at that
time I did not so much observe it. Now amongst our Apothecaries I do not only
find small or little fragments, out of which they issued (as they say) some
certain marrow, which are rounder, whiter, and softer.

But both the same color, as also the substance being put too much, and eaten,
if it be easily crummed, and not stuffed as other horns, does signify the same
not to be good or perfect, but counterfetted and corrupted: as perhaps the
horn of some other beast brent in the fire, some certain sweet odors being
thereunto added, and also imbrued in some

But that which is so used and drunk in wine does bring upon it a certain
dark or obscure color, the whiteness which before remained upon the same
being quite lost, expelled, Venetians (being as I hear say, compounded with
lime and soap) or peradventure with earth or some stone: (which things are wont
to make bubles arise) and afterward fell it for the Unicorns horn.

Wherefore it shall be more safe to buy it out of the whole horn if it may be
done, or of greater crumbs, and which may well describe the figure of a horn,
then small fragments Noramberg, in a stately mart town amongst the Germans,
declared the way unto me how to deface the color of an adulterated Unicorns
horn, being made by some with Iuory, either macerated or boiled with certain
medicines (by Set-foile as I suppose, and other things) by which means having
scraped it, I found within the true substance to be yuory. Antonius Brasauol^s
writes, that all men for the most part do sell a certain stone for Unicorns
horn, which truly I deny not to be done, who have no certainty there in my
self: notwithstanding also it may come to pass, that a very hard and solid
horn, about the point of a sword especially (which part is preferred to
inferior, as also in Hearts horns) to which either stones or iron may yield,
such as authors attribut to the Rhinocerot. And other Unicorns Orpheus
concerning Hearts horns rightly doubted, whether the same or stones were of
greatest strength: I think it more to be doubted in the kind of Unicorns, for
the horns of Hearts are not only solid (as Aristotle supposed) but also the
horns of Unicorns, as here I have said.

The horn of an Unicorn is at this day used, although age or longinquity of
time bath quite abolished it from the nature of a horn. There are some which
mingle the Rhinoceros with the Unicorn, for that which is named the Rhinoceros
horn, is at this day in phisical use, of which notwithstanding the Authors
have declared no effectual force. Some say that the Unicorns horn does sweat,
having any poison coming over it, which

It is in like manner reported, that a kind of stone called the serpents tongue
does sweat having poison come over it. I have heard and read in a certain
book written with ones hands, that the true horn of a Unicorn is to be
proved in this manner. To give to two Pigeons poison (red Arsnick or Orpin) the
one which drinks a little of the true Unicorns horn will be healed, the other
will die, I do leave this manner of trial unto rich men. For the price of that
which is true, is reported ^^ this day to be of no less vallew then Gold.
Some do sell the weight thereof for a floren, or eight pence: some for a crown,
or twelve pence. But the marrow thereof is certainly of a greater price, then
that which is of harder substance. Some likewise do sell a dram thereof, for two
pence half penny, so great is the diversity thereof. For experience of the
Unicorns horn to know whether it be right or not: put silk upon a burning
cole, and upon the silk the aforsaid horn, and if so be that it be true the
silk will not be a whit consumed.



The same is also praised at this day for the curing of the falling sickness,
and affirmed by Aelianus, who called this disease cursed. The ancient writers
did attribute the force of healing to cups made of this horn, wine being
drunk out of them: but because we cannot have cups, we drink the substance of
the horn, either by it self or with other medicines. I happily sometime made
this Sugar of the horn, as they call it, mingling with the same Aloisius
Mundella writes) against the the bitings of ravenous Dogs, and the strokes or
poison some stings of other creatures: and privately in rich men's houses
against the belly or mawe worms; to conclude, it is given against all poison
whatsoever, as also against many most grievous diseases. The King of the
Indians drinking out of a cup made of an Indian Unicorns horn, and being
asked wherefore he did it, whether it were for the love of drunkenness, made
answer, that by that drink drunkenness was both expelled and resisted, and
worser things John's evil, otherwise the cursed disease. The horn of an
Unicorn being beaten and boiled in wine, has a wonderful effect in making the
teeth white or clear, the mouth being well cleansed therewith. And thus much
shall suffice for the medicines and virtues arising from the Unicorn.

OF THE VRE-OXE.
THis Beast is called by the Latins Vrus, by the Germans Aurox, The several
names.
and Vrox, and Gross vesent, by the Lituanians Thur, the Scythians Bubri, and
these beasts were not known to the Graecians, (as Pliny writes) of whom
Seneca writes in this manner; Tibi dant variae pectora tigres,
Tibi villosi terga Bisontes,
Latisque feri cornibus vri.


And Virgill also makes mention of them in this Georguke, writing of the
culture or tilling of vines; Texendae saepes etiam and pecus omne tenendum:
Precipue cum fons tenera, imprudensque laborum,
Cui semper indignas hyemes, solemque potentem.

Illudunt.
These wild beasts or Vre-oxes are wild Oxen, differing from all other kinds
already rehearsed in the story of Oxen, Bugles, Bisons, or any other, although
some have unskillfully taken them for Bisons, and Sir Thomas Eliot in his
Dictionary, does English Vrus a Bugil, but beside him no body, that I know, and
for this cause he is reprehended by other. Now although there be nothing in
this beast but ordinary, yet seeing it is a creature so well known, we have
the less reason to omit his shape and story, least we should justly be
condemned of negligence and carelessness.

In outward proportion of the body it differs little from the Bull, It is
very thick, and his back somewhat bunched up, and his length from the head to
the tail is short, no ways answerable to the proportion of his stature and
sides: the horns (as some say) are but short, yet black, The several parts
broad, and thick, his eyes red, a broad mouth, and a great broad head, his
temples hairy, a beard upon his chin, but short, and the color thereof black,
his other parts, as namely in the face, sides, legs, and tail, of a reddish
color.

These are in the wood Hercynia, in the Pyreney Mountains, and in Mazouia
near Lituania. Places of their abode
They are called Vri of Oron, that is the Mountains, because their savage
wildnes is so great, that they sildome descend from those sauegardes. They far
excel Bulls, and other wild Oxen, coming nearer to the quantity or stature of
Elephants, then to the Bull. In resemblance a man would think them to be
compounded of a Mule and a Heart, for their outward resemblance so seem. It is
said they could never be tamed by men, although they were taken when they were
young, yet they love other heardes of cattle, and will not forsake them easily
after they have once joined themselves unto them, whereby many times they are
deceived and killed, 20. 30. or forty at a time. Caligula Caesar brought of
these alive to Rome, and did show them in public spectacle to the people, and
at that time they were taken for wild Bulls. Some affirm that there are of
these in Prussia, and that they are so wild, Countries of their breed
cruel, and vntamable, as they fear or spare neither man nor beast; and when
they are set upon and wounded by the hunters in the woods among the trees,
feeling their hurts and perceiving their blood issuing out of their body, they
rage above measure, for having no means to take revenge upon the hunter, by
reason that he stands behind some great tree, for very wrath and fury they
kill themselves with their own headlong force upon the same tree. It is said
that their foreheades are so broad and large, that two men may easily sit
betwixt their horns. They are able to take up an Armed man and his horse, and
to toss him into the air like a Bull, and the heads of these or such like
beasts are to be seen publicly fixed up in common places at Mentz and
Worms, which are worth the observation, because in all proportion they are
twice so big as the vulgar Bull or Ox.

Now although their large bodies and manes do also appertain to the Bisons,
yet it is not unfit to attribute the same also to the Vre-Oxe. For if it be in
the pleasure of any man to make it also a kind of Bison, I will not deny that
this must be remembered, that both the body of this beast is much larger, and
also the aspect not so grim or fierce as is the Bison.

There are many of these found also in Angremannia, and the Confines of
Lapponia, Their stature
and other Northern parts of the world, where they are called by the Illirian
term Zubrones, and these are so high as a tall man can hardly lay his hand
upon the top of their backs, although he strain himself very much.

And some of them are fifteen cubits in length, of whom beside their admirable
strength, their velocity and nimblenesse is also remarkable, for it is said of
them, that when they empty their bellies, they can turn about to take their
dung or excrement upon their horns before it fall to the ground, which they
cast upon the hunters or pursuers, Dogs or men, whereby they blind and burn
them. They which accustom or practice to kill and hunt these beasts, are
greatly commended and rewarded when they have killed many of them,

In ancient time before the invention of iron weapons, they did take them in
those countries in ditches, and great caves of the earth, whereunto the
strongest and most active young men did apply themselves, having both Dogs and
all other needful instruments to take away the life of this beast; and if it
did not happen that he fastened his horns into some tree, then was all the
labor lost, for they could never come near to touch him, only when in his
speedy swift fury among the woods, he ran his horns into the body of some Oaks
or such like, whereby he was stayed, (for it is not so easy to pull them
forth, as to fix them, because they are rugged, crooked, and stand upward)
then he was overtaken and killed by some hunter or other. And if at any time
he met with a hunter, it was fatal

Sigismundus Baro, that honorable man writes thus hereof, that in Masonia
near Lituania it is bred, and called Thur, and they are a kind of wild Oxen,
not differing from the vulgar, (except as aforesaid) but in their color, and a
spotted struck or line which goes al along their backs. And those Vre-oxen are
kept as it were in parkes and chases, having a peculiar disignment by the King,
and the inhabitants of certain villages to keep and watch them. Sometimes
when they meet with a common or vulgar tame Cow, they leap upon her and fill
her, but such a Calfe lives not long, but dies as if it were not perfect, and
if it do chance to live, it never resembles the sire, nor yet is admitted into
their society and Sigismundus the Empe. he received for a gift one of these
killed, and bowelled, Use of their parts.
having the skin of the forehead cut off and taken away, whereat he wondered
much, but durst not ask the question or reason thereof; yet afterward he
understood that there were girdles made of that part of the hide, whereby the
women in that Country were persuaded that they should be made apt to conceive
and bring forth children: and Bona the mother of Sigismund gave unto him 2.
girdles for that purpose, whereof he said he bestowed one upon the Queen of
Romans, who did take the same at his hand very graciously and thankefully.
And it is certain, that out of the hides of these beasts are made girdles,
which are two fingers

The flesh of these beasts is rank and heavy, and if it be eaten fresh it
causes looseness, but if be salted a day or two it it is nothing inferior to
Beef, for so the humidity is taken away. With the horns are made drinking
Cups, and for that purpose the richer sort of people do edge or lip them over
with silver and gold: they hold or contain as much as two ordinary pitchers of
water. Other take off the points and fasten them to spears, being very sharp,
and not easily blunted or broken, and other make of them cut into slices or
panes the best Lanthornes in the world. And thus much for the Vre-Oxe, unto
whose History it is needful for me to add the story of diverse other wild
Oxen not yet described.

Strabo says, that there are Oxen called Rhizes, among the Hesperian
Aethiopians, who in outward proportion are much like the vulgar bulls, but in
other parts, as quantity, strength, Histories of other wild Oxen.
and vigor, comparable to the Elephants.

Theuetus writes, that betwixt Floridia and Palma, in the new found World,
there are very many strange shaped Beasts, and among other a kind of Wild
Bull, whose horns are a foot long, but on his back he has a tumor or bunch
like a Camel, and is therefore called Bos Camelita, his hair all over his body
is very long, but especially under his chin, and his color like a yellow Mule,
and this beast is a continual enemy to a Horse. Like unto these are the tame
Scythian Oxen, and some other in Asia, who carry packes upon the bunches of
their backs, and also bend their knees like Camels.

OF THE LYBIAN OX.
THere is so great an innumerability of Libian Oxen, of so (...).
Then comes the hunter and kills her, and takes forth her liver, and also
cutteth off her dugs or vdder, and does likewise pluck off her skin, and
leaves her flesh for the Birds and wild beasts to feed upon. There is another
kind of Ox in Libia, whose Horns does bend downward, and for that cause they
are feign to feed going backwards. Of the sayings Herodotus and Aelianus, I
have spoken before. Philes does write that they are called Oxen going backward,
because the broadnes of their horns does cover their eie-sight, so that it
stands them in no use to go forward, but is very commodious to go backward.
There is an Ox which lives in the woods of Afric, which does resemble a
domestical Ox, yet less in stature, of a brown or russet color, and also
most swift of foot. This beast is found in the deserts, (...) African
or in the Marches or limits of the deserts. Their flesh is also of a perfect
or absolute savor and taste, good for the nourishment of men.

OF THE INDIAN WILD OXEN.
THe horns of the Oxen of the Garamantons do grow downwards toward the earth,
(...)
and therefore when they feed they bow the hinder part of the neck, (as
Solinus writes) and as we have spoken before in the diversities of wild Oxen.
The woods also in India are filled with wild Oxen. In the province of India
where the Gymnits inhabit, are great multitudes of Oxen which live in the
forests or woods. In the kingdoms which are upon the borders or Confins of
India, (...) ^onet.
(in the mid of the day) are many fair and great Oxen which live in the woods.
There are Mountains in the in most regions of India, which are very hard to
come ^^lianus
Goats, Oxen, and so forth. The great King of India does elect or choose a day
every year for the runnings and combats of men, and also fightings of beasts,
who setting their horns one against another, do fight irefully with admirable
rage, until they overcome their adversaries. They do also labor, and strive
withal their nerves and sinnewes, even as if they were champions, or fought
for some great reward, or should get honor by their battle.

Wild bulls, tame Rams, Asses with one horn, Hyaenaes, and lastly
Elephantes, as if they were capable of reason, they wound them among
themselves, and the one does oftentimes overcome and kill the other, and
sometimes fall down together being both wounded. I have also recited before in
another place of the entreaty of Oxen, those Indian Oxen which are said to be
most swift in their joints in running too and fro, when they are at combat,
because there we had not distinguished whether these were wild Oxen or not: but
it does appear in this place, that they are wholly taken for wild Oxen: and
the thing it self does manifest that domestical Oxen are not so swift nor so
strong.

The Oxen in India have altogether whole hoofes, and also but one horn.
Aethiopia also does breed Indian Oxen, that is to say, Oxen that are like to
those of India, Plinius.
for some Solinus says, that there are found in India some Oxen which have but
one horn, and othersome which have 3. horns with whole hoofs, and not cloven.
The Indian Oxen are said to be as high as a Cammell, and their horn four
foot broad. Ptolomaeus does report, that he saw a horn of an Indian Ox which
did hold in the breadth of it thirty gallons.

There are also Oxen which are bred in India, which in greatness are no bigger
then a Bucke, or Goat, they do run yoaked together very swift, nor do end their
race with less speed then the Goat-land horses, and I did not take them to be
Oxen living in the woods, for our Rangifer and Oxen which live in the woods,
are the swiftest of al beasts in this kind, Aristotle
and most apt to combats and runnings, and they may partly be called Oxen
having one horn, and partly Oxen having three horns, neither are they found
in Scandinauia, but Asia, as we believe that Indian Oxen are of the same kind.
Solinus does not rightly call those Indian Oxen, which Aelianus calls
Aethiopicos, as I have declared above in the story of the Ethiopian Oxen, for
their horns are moouable. Ctesias does write, that there are sprung up among
the same beasts, that beast which is called Mantichora: which is manifested by
Aristotle in his History of Foure-footed beasts. Hermolaus also and others
have not considered this error. Among the Arachotans there are Oxen which live
in the woods, which do differ from those that are bred in the City, as much
as wild swine from tame. Their color is black, bending a little downwards,
and their horns broad and upright. There is a City in India called Arachotus,
taking the name from the river Arachotus, which do flow out of Causacus, what
those beasts Bison, for as there may be spoken something concerning the
difference of the plants of the woods, so also concerning the beasts that are
bred in the City, and those that are bred in the woods.

OF THE WEASELL.


Mustela, a weasel, for so we were wont plainly to name those which were common
and domestical and to add names to those which are more seldom seen, or
live in the woods for difference sake.

The word Choled in Leuit. 11. is translated a Weasel of all interpreters. The
Rabbis do call them Chuldah, and commonly Mustela, as David Kimhi writes. The
Chaldaeans do translate it Chulda, the Arabians Caldah, the Persians Gurba, and
Hieron Mustela. Oach is an Haebrew word, whereupon it was once translated
Ochim, plurally in Esaias. 13. Babylon subuertetur, and implebunt domes eorum
ochim, Munsterus cercopithecos vertit. That is to say, Babylon shall be
overthrown, and their houses shall be filled with Ochim, that is, Weasels, but
Munsterus does call them Munkeys. David Kimhi, and the Master of Thalmud, do
call it Nemiah, that is, like to a Cat, but commonly they call it a Martin, or
Firum, and Furon. Concordances of the Haebrewes does interpret Koph,
Circopithecum, or Cephum, and Culdah, that is to say Mustela; a Weasill, as the
Jews do think. The Chaldae has translated a Martin Ochijn. Symmachus also
has left or forsaken the Haebru word. Aquila does translate it Typhones, that
is, a Whirle-winde, Hieronimus does translate it Draco, that is; a Dragon.

Koah is truly interpreted to be a kind of Lizard, or a Chamalion. In
Leuiticus 11. We also read in Albertus, His, and Hyrzus, (two Barbarous words)
for a Weasell, which he himself does not understand: but I have discerned or
taken this signification out of the words of Aristotle: for Albertus does most
unlearnedly expound Hyrcum a Hare, being deceived, because both the living
beasts do oftentimes remove their young ones from one place to another in their
mouths. Fethis also does seem to be according to Aristotle, no Gale, that is
to say; a Weasell. For Feyton (says he) it has wit like a Fox, that is to
say, in setting upon Hens or Chickins, and the other shape and form of it is
Katiz, that is to say Ictis, a Ferret. Nim fitza also is even to this day
called a Weasell among the Graecians. Ibanauge is also called a Weasell,
Ibinuers is a little foure-footed-beast. Si^^gaticus
Bellula also does seem to signify a Weasell, by a feigned word proceeding
from the French or Italians, which do call also Belettam, Balottam pro mustela
for a Weasell, but some of the later Graecians do abuse it in tearming it a
Catte, as I have spoken before in the History of the Cat.

Theodorus Gaza in Aristotle does interpret it sometimes a Weasell, and other
sometimes a Cat; neither can I sufficiently gather wherefore he does so change
it, seeing that that the Graecians call Cattum, for a Cat Aeluron, and the
Latins Felem. Some say, that Mustela for a Weasell has bin interpreted or
declared of late days, being only led (if I be not deceived) with the
affinity of the German word, for the Germans do call Mustela a Wisel. The
Graecians do usually take to this day Mustela for a Weasell, as I have read in
the Oration of Suidas. Scopa
A Weasell is called in Italy Donnola, or Ballottula. It is apparent by the
words of Auicen that Donnula, and otherwise Dannula is Barbarously used Pro
mustela for a Weasell: Albertus and Niphus do write Damula for a Weasell, by
the which word the later writers do very obscurely understand Dama for a
VVeasell, which is of the kind of Goats living in the woods. Damma or Dammula,
is a small and weak beast, (as Isidorus writes) speaking of those that are
wild and will not come to hand. When it does bring forth young, it does
presently devour the seconds or those that come after birth Albertus
and yet it is a prey it self to other Foure-footed-beastes. You may also
seem to take a little Dear, or a kind of young Goat, or a VVeasell, for
that kind of Beast which does devour her seconds: But we read that neither of
these do it.

The Lizard is said to devour her first litter which she littereth in her old
age. VVo also call Domestical VVeasels Foinos. A weasell is called in France,
Belotte or Belette, and Albalotte. Some as I do hear which do inhabit about
the towns of Meta, do call them Baccal. Carolus Figuli does interpret a weasel
in French Fouinum, or Marturellum, of which I have showed before that there is
two kinds, and also that there is weasels living in the woods. In Spain also
they are called Comadreia. The people of Rhetia which speak Latin, do keep
the Latin name. The Germans do call them Wisel or Wisele. Georgius Agricola
Heluetia do call it Hermelin, and some do call it by a corrupt word Ha^^lin,
but those ought only to be named so which are altogether white, and are found
in winter time. But here in England it is called a Weasell, and some do write
it Wesyll, or Weasyll: but the white weasell is called Mineuer, by the
transposition of the letters of the French word, it is called Herminne, and
among the Illyrians Kolczauna.

Some do think at this day that the beast whose shape and form we have given
for a Weasell, is the Shrew-mouse, but not rightly, for their only reason is,
that the bitings of it does poison and harm almost in like manner. Albertus
also does write, that the Sea Weasell is called the fielde-Shrew, which is
utterly false and untrue: For the Shrevv is called among the Graecians Mygale,
Male or Female. They do now also commonly call Ichnumon the Indian Mouse, and
othersome the fallow Dear; But Damula, or Donula, is of the Italians and some
later Barborous Writers, altogether called a common Weasell, and not Ichneumon,
which is a peculiar Beast to the Egyptians.

Now the reason of the Latin name Mustela, Carolus Figulus is of opinion,
Niphus The etymology of Weasels.
that it is derived of Mys and Stelio, two Greek words, because it deuoureth
Mice, and both the Steal, or Stellen, to rob or filtch, from the Greek word
S^ellein; so that it is so called, because this Weasell is a still, and secret,
stealing, and devouring Beast. Calepin says, that Mustela is Quasi longior
mus. This Beast is also called by Aristotle Habeninum, and it is said that it
hunteth Moles or blind Mice.

The epithets hereof are, fearful, In-creeper, and swift, The epithits color
and several parts
and beside these I find not any material or worthy to be rehearsed. Now
concerning their outward proportion, it is as we have here described, a long
and thin body, but the color thereof varieth, for some of them are brown
and branded, some black, and some clean white, which we have showed already
to be the Ermyn: for in some places of Germany, Heluetia, and the Alps, the
Weasels in the Winter become all white. But for as much as there are Geor.
Agricola writes, they are all white, whereat no man ought to wonder, seeing
the Hares of Heluetia do in the Winter time turn white, and of these white
Weasels, or Armins there are abundance in the Northern parts of Europe, where
their Summers are short, and their Winters long: and these white Weasels differ
nothing from the common vulgar Weaselles of other colors, except that their
hair stick faster to their backs; and it is observed, that in Russhia the
Noblest Women are apparailed with these Scandinauia (called Lanzerucca) which
is fourscore Mile long, wherein are abundance of white VVeasels, and the
Kings tents among the Tartareans are said to be covered all over with the
skins of Lions without, and the walls to be hung with these Armins or white
VVeasels within; and although the price of these skins be very dear among
them (for sometimes so many as are used in one Garment will cost two thousand
Crowns) yet do the people earnestly seek after them, accounting it no small
honor, to wear so much wealth upon their backs.

Now the reason why these beasts came to be called Armilini, is from Armilla a
chain, because they did wear them in fringes about their Garments like
chains; and although Armins and those Mice which are so called, only by way
of resemblance, as we have shevved already in their stories. And of the
Pontique Mouse, I may add thus much more, that they live in the winter time in
hollow trees, wherein they become as white as Snow all oouer, except their
tails, and are in quantity like Squirrels, but in the end of May they turn
somewhat red, because that then they give themselves to copulation and
generation of young ones, when they lay aside their whiteness, and live many
days together in carnal copulation, among the green and fresh Herbs,
leaving behind them such rank and unsavory smells, as are very odious to a
good scent: And it is said that every three year their Helsyngia.

There are certain little Foure-footed-beastes called Lemmar, or Lemmus, Of
the Lemmars.
which in tampestuous and rainy weather, do seem to fall down from the
clouds, and it was never yet found, whether their beginning arose first from
heaven or earth, but this is certain that as soon as ever they have fallen to
the ground, some of them have bin opened, and in their bowels have bin found
green herbs, and therefore I marvel why ever it should be believed that
these beasts are bred of some seculent matter in the clouds; but if any man
ask me from whence then have they their beginning, I answer from the earth,
even as Locusts and Catterpillers, who are said in holy scripture to be carried
to and fro with the winds, and so these beasts being destitute of natural food
in their places of generation, do advance themselves into the wind, and so are
carried into other strange and unknown countries, where they fall like Locusts
upon every green thing, living until they have devoured all, but when once
they taste of new grown Herbs, they perish and die, by Armlins or Armins, do
eat and devour them.

Now the skins of these beasts are exceeding delicate having in them diverse
colors, and therefore the people flea them off from their bodies, and sell them
by thirty or forty in bundles for great price, but of these skins I have said
enough, both here and else where. The wild weasels differ not from the vulgar
domestical weasell, their foreteeth are short, and not long like a Mouses, the
face broad, their genital part like a foxes, their tail short, their legs and
claws short, strong and sharp, and it is reported by Strabo, that the Weasels
of Mauritania are as big as Cats, but their gaping and opening of their mouth
much longer and wider. There is an Island called Dordocelena, on the one side
whereof (as Pliny writes) Beotia.

They make themselves caves and holes in the earth, rocks, and walls, wherein
they lodge, into the which they frame two passages or doors, Places of their
abode
one into the South, the other into the North (resembling herein the Squyrrels)
that so they may be free from the wind on which side so ever it blows,
sometimes they get into stackes of Hay and straw, and their they lodge: those
weasels which live near houses sleep not much, for they have bin seen abroad
all the winter time, not only the vulgar but the Armins, neither are they
unthankful unto the country men in whose houses they lodge, for they kill,
eat, and douour all manner of Mice, Rats, and Molds, for because of their long
slender bodies, they are apt to creep into Aelianus writes, that if they come
unto dead men, they will pull out their eyes in such manner as they do Eggs,
and therefore such carkases are to be watched against them. Amyntas writes,
that the Shrew-mouse is conceived betwixt a mouse and a weasell, which opinion
is not only ridiculous but impossible, for how is it likely that a mouse will
engender with that beast which lies in wait to destroy her. It is also said
that a weasell fights with those serpents that hunt after Mice,

Their copulation and conception.
There is nothing in this beast more strange, then their conception and
generation, for they do not engender nor couple in their hinder parts, like
other foure-footed-beasts, but at their ears, and bring forth their young ones
at their mouth, and for this cause Aristeas writes, the Jews were forbidden
to eat them, for this their action was an emblem of folly, and of foolish men,
which can keep no secrets but utter all that they hear (thus says he) but we
that are christians knew other reasons, why the Jews were forbid to eat
them. The Egyptians make of it another sign, for they say that their copulation
at the ear, and generation at the mouth, are emblems of speech which is first
taught to the ear, and then uttered by the tongue: there be other again that
hold this to be a fable: And Pope Clemen Collipara, and this they would
confirm by another fable of Medusa, whose head after it was cut off, it is
said to bring forth Chrysaor and Pegasus; some do allege for this opinion,
that the Crovves and the Ibis do conceive at their mouths, but this is
certain, that they have places of conception underneath their tails like other
Four-footed-beasts, and therefore how it should come to pass, that their young
ones should come forth at their mouths, I cannot easily learn. It may be that
the opinion thereof first arose from the sight of some old one carrying her
young in her mouth, for the young ones are very small like Mice, and therefore
it is likely that they remove them to and fro as Catres do their young ones,
for they are in continual fear, least they should be taken and destroyed by
men, or by some other Enemy beast.

The dung of weasels does smell many times like musk, the reason whereof we have
showed you in another place, al of them in general have a most rank and filthy
savor. It is a Galanthis the maid of Alckmena, as Perottus observes out of
Ovid. When Alckmena was in long travel and childe-birth, it is said that the
maid perceiving she was hindered by Lucina, craftily obtained not only the
knowledge of the cause by Lucina, but also the remedy; whereupon she eased her
Lady, (like a true and faithful servant) of many pains. Lucina seeing that he
was beguiled by Galanthis, and that her crafty wit had ouer-reached a Goddess,
she turned her into a VVeasell for her punnishment, that as she had sinned by
revealing the counsel of the Goddess, so she should be punnished to bring
forth al her young ones at her mouth, as weasels do; and for this occasion the
Domestical weasel like a maid does continually live in houses, and Galanthis:
thus say they of metamorphosing and transforming.

Others some say, that when Alckmena was in travel of Hercules, having endured
long torments, she was delivered by the sight of a weasel which came in her
presence, and therefore the Theban Graecians do religiously worship a weasel,
for they say that as it was norisht by Heccate the Goddess, so it did norish
Hercules; but herein they take Gale for Galanthis aforesaid, that is, a
weasel; for Alckmenaies maid, and seeing we have begun to talk of
transformations, I will add another thing out of Stobeus, not impertinent to
this common place, for he writes in the dispraise of women, that the
diversity of their dispositions persuades him that some of them are derived
from one beast, and some from another: Venus, loathing her husband, hurts her
neighbors, robs her self, and deuoureth consecrated and hallowed things,
even after the manner of weasels, which will take a booty from the altar: Thus
says he, which I believe to be true in the comparison, but not in the
generation or transmutation of women from weasels.

I do marvel how it came to pass that a weasell was called, an unhappy,
unfortunate, and unlucky beast among Hunters, for they held opinion here in
England, The signification of a Weasels occurrence.
that if they meet with a weasel in the morning, they shall not speed well that
day, therefore the Graecians say Galesteir, and Altiatus has an excellent
Emblem, whereby he insinuates that it Omen. Now although I would have no wise
man to stand in fear of such a superstitious conceit, yet I will subscribe his
verses, more for variety and elegancie, then for truth: Auspicijs res coepta
malis been cedere nescit
Foelici quae sunt omine fact a iuuant
Quicquid ages mustela si, tibi occurret omit
Signa malae haec sortis bestia praua gerit.


It should seem that the beginning of this opinion did come from the
punishment of a certain general of the Corinthians navy, who being perjured in
breaking his faith to that Heraclides, which whether they be true or false, are
but a silly and slender foundation to build upon them a Prophetical opinion,
or presage future evils, and so I will leave the morral part of the weasel, and
return again to the natural. They have knowledge like mice and rattes, to run
out of houses before their downefal. They live in hatred with the serpent that
hunteth mice, for by eating of Rue they drive them out of houses, wherein they
inhabit; and this is a wonderful work of God, that this silly beast should
have the knowledge of the virtue of that herb, and not only arm her self
with it, because it is hateful to Serpents, and they in no wise in nature able
to abide it, but also by it to restore to life again her young ones after
they are dead.

There is a poison in Weasels which destroys the Cockatrice, for when the
VVeasel finds the Cockatrices hole or den, she lays her poison in the mouth
thereof, whereby Pliny and Solinus; wherefore all manner of cattle do fear
weasels. They hunt all manner of birds, pulling out their throat as a wolf
does a sheep. They will play with Hares till they have wearied them, and
then destroy them, they are in perpetual enmity with swine, Ravens, Crows, and
Cats, for although Cats sometimes set upon them, yet they cannot overcome them.
In many places of Italy they are nourished tame, for as Ferrets are used to
fetch Conies out of the earth, so are weasels by tying a stringe about their
neck to fetch young Pigeons out of Doue-cotes, and birds out of their nests.
If the powder of a weasel be given unto a Cock, Chickens, or pigeons, it is
said they shall never be annoied by weasils.

Likewise if the brain of a weasel, be mingled with a rennet in cheeses, it
keeps Stellius in a house where VVeasels are gathered together, and then by
oil of bitter Almonds, or salt Ammoniak they are killed, but if one of their
tails be cut off, all the residue do forsake the house. And thus much shall
suffice concerning the History of VVeasels, now follows the medicines arising
out of their bodies.

The medicines arising from the Weasel.
A weasel being applied unto those which are troubled with Agues or Quarterne
Feauers, Vrsinus.
does in short time cure them. It does also being mingled with other things
make a wonderful pleasant mollifying medicine for those which are troubled with
the gout or any other infirmity in the joints, and eases those which have a
continual ache in the head, leaving a certain matter on the top thereof, and
stroking it from the foreheade to the hinder part of the head.

For the curing also of the gout, this is an excellent remedy. To take a little
young whelp alive well fatted, and a living weasel in nine pintes of oil, and
unto the same two or three pounds of Butter, A^tius
and to boil them together, until the Beasts be made lanke or lither,
Auicenna attributes certain things to weasels flesh only, which the classical
Authors rather ascribe to the powder of weasels which are these: to be applied
to the gout, being drunk in wine against the falling sickness, and the
headache, but it is accounted an especial remedy against the bitings of
Scorpions.

The flesh of a weasel being taken, is a very good and effectual preservative
against al poisons. The same being taken in meat, the head and feet only cast
away, does help those which are troubled with VVennes or bunches in the
flesh, being first anointed with the blood of the same beast. The blood of a
weasel is very well applied to broken or exulcerated sores in the flesh. Auicenna
The same virtue has the whole body of a weasel boiled in wine, Theophrastus
fashioning the same in the form of a plaster, and this being in good order
applied, will in very short time expel it quite away.

A house weasel is wont to be burned for diverse remedies, and to be imbowelled
with salt, and dried in a shade. But there are some late writers which affirm,
Dioscorides
that a weasell is better being dried or burned for the said disease, then used
in the aforesaid manner, some also which are more foolish, think it best, being
only salted, but it is more proper, being used in the first manner.

The bodies of creatures which are dry by nature being dried by the sprinkling
of salt upon them, are unmeet for food, for a certain man going about to
salt a Hare, made it like unto a dried weasel. Some have written that the flesh
of a Hedgehog dried, does very much profit those which are troubled with an
outward or inward leprosy: which if it can effect, it will more strongly have
a drying force or power: even as the flesh of a weasell being dried and drunk
in wine, expels poison. A vulgar weasell being kept very

A young weasel being prepared, as is before said, that is to say imbowelled
with salt, Gallen.
is of good force against all il medicines. A weasel used in the same manner
does presently cure the bites of serpenst. A weasel being brent and dried,
especially the belly thereof is accounted an excellent remedy against the
bitings of any other wild beast. Some small part of the belly of a young
weasel to the quantity of two drams being stuffed with Coriander, and drunk in
wine, is given to those that are smitten by serpents, and is curable for them.
The flesh of a weasel being burnt, mingled with rue and wine, and so drunk, is
very medicinable for the curing of the bites of al creatures. Pl^^
The young whelps of weasels being imbowelled with salt, is very profitable for
the healing of the deadly stinging or biting Phalaugium.

The whelp of a weasel does cure the venomous bitings of the shrew. Albertus
The flesh of a weasel being dried, does strongly dry and seperat, by both
which forces those are heald which are troubled with the falling sickness having
drunk it in wine. This virtue is also attributed unto the blood of weasels. A
weasel being dried and drunk in wine, does heal those that are troubled with
the palsy or shaking of the joints. Concerning the powder of weaselles there
are many things read: But Galen writes, that he never burned this creature,
that he might try the excellency thereof. The blood and powder of a weasel are
very profitable, being anointed on those whose bodies are vexed with the
leprosy, acording to the saying of Serenus in these verses: -- Elephanti
Morbo aduersus erit cedri de cortice succus,
Mustelaeue cinis vel fusus sanguis ab illa.
The powder of a weasel, being mingled with the blood of a young swallow does
heal the Quinsie or Squincy, the inflammation of the jaws, as also those
which are grieved with the strangurie, being either taken in bread or in
drink. The same is also very effectual for the expelling of wens or bunches in
the body, and heals those which are troubled with the falling sickness,
being daily taken in drink. The same diseases are both healed by this medicin,
to burn a living weasel altogether in an earthen pot, Myrepsus
and to mingle with the powder Pliny, Auicenna, and the rest of the ancient
writers commend the blood of a weasel only to be very medicinable for these
diseases following; namely, the falling sickness, the Foule-euil, Serenus
and the headache.

The powder of a weasel being mingled in water, and given to one that is mad
or frenzy to drink, is reported by some to be very good and profitable for
him, if so be that they can compel the Frantic person to perceive it. The
powder of a weasel is very effectual for the expelling or taking away of the
pin and web in the eyes. Pliny.
There is a speedy remedy

A Weasell being brent, and the powder thereof wrapped in some seare-cloath
which is anointed over with the oil of Flower-de luces, does help and heal
al sores or impostumes proceeding from the head to the ears being applied
thereunto. A Weasell being beaten to powder, mingled with wax, and in the
manner of a seare-cloath applied unto the shoulders, does expel al pains,
aches, or greefes therein whatsoever; it does also purge or cleanse sores very
effectually, (...)
according to these verses of Serenus following: Obscaenos si pone locos noua
vnlner a carpant,
Horrentum mansa curantur fronde ruborum.
Et si iam veteri succedit fistula morbo,
Mustelae cinere immisso purgabitur vlcus,
Sanguine cum recini, quem bos gestauerit anti.


A Weasell being burned in an earthen pot, is very medicinable for the curing
of the gout. The powder thereof being mingled with Vinegar, and in that manner
thereunto aplied. Dioscorides
The dust of a living Weasell brent, mingled with wax and rose water, and
anointed with a Feather upon gouty legs, cures the same disease. The brain
of a Weasel being kept very long, and thorougly dried, afterward mingled with
vinegar, and so drunk, does very effectually cure the falling sickness.

Rasis.
The brains of a Cammell mingled with the brains of a weasel being both well
dried, Raech, concerning which, I have spoken in the Horse, he is cured by some
Horse-coursers by a small quantity of a Weasels skin, (being about the
bigness of a foresaid golden crown) which is given to him inwardly, whether
in a potion by some horn, or cut small and mingled with chafe, I know not.
Some do give to the horses troubled with the aforesaid disease the tail of a
white weasell being half black, and half white, cut exceeding small in their
chafe or prouender. If a serpent or any other venomous creature shall stinge or
bite an Ox, let the wounded place be stroked or smoothed with the skin of a
weasel, and it shall in short time be perfectly

The blood of a Weasel being anointed upon any impostume arising behind the
ear, A^^higines
does instantly cause the swelling to cease, or being broken, does speedily
heal the sore. The same also being anointed upon any impostumes in the head
either whole or broken, does very effectually cure them. The blood of a weasell
being anointed upon wen^ S. John's evil. The blood of the same beast, is an
excellent remedy for the expelling of the Fowle-euil. The blood of a weasel
being anointed upon broken or exulcerated bunches in the flesh, does not only
mittigate the pain but also heal the wounds. The blood of a weasel being
anointed upon the jaws, does heal all pains or sores therein whatsoever.
The powder and blood (...)
The same being anointed upon the nerves or sinnewes which are shrunk
together, does easily mollify them again, and loosen the grievous pain
either in the joints or articles. The liver of a weasel mingled with his own
brains, being both well dried, and taken in any kind of drink, does very much
profit those which are troubled with the disease called S. John's evil. The
liver of a weasell being thoroughly dried, and afterward taken in water to
drink, does heal the disease called the foul evil, taking hold of sense and
mind together: but there must great care be had that this medicine be ministered
unto the sick party, even when the disease is coming on him. The gal of a
hare being mingled with the liver of a weasel to the quantity of three drams,
one dram of oil of Beauers stones, four drams of Myrrh, Galen
with one dram of vinegar, and drunk in honey, or bastard wine, does heal those
which are troubled with a dizzinesse or certain swimming in the head. The
liver of a weasell is reported to Sextus
The liver of a weasel being bound to the left foot of a woman, does altogether
hinder her from conception The gall of a weasell is a very excellent and
effectual remedy against the venom or poison of aspes, being taken in any kind
of drink. The yard of a weasell, Heart, or Do, being dried, beaten to powder,
and taken in wine, or any other drink, is an excellent medicine for the curing
of the bites or stings of serpents. The yard of a weasell or Ferret, is
commended for a very excellent remedy against the strangury, or disease called
the collike and stone. The stones of a male weasell, or the secret parts of a
female weasel, Pliny
is reported by some to be very medicinable for the curing of the falling
sickness. The stones of a weasell being bound unto any part of e woman while
she is in travail of child birth, does altogether hinder her from her
delivery. By the left stone of a Weasell being bound in a Kiranides.
being tied upon any part of a woman in the hide of a Mule. The heel of a
living weasell being taken away and bound unto a woman, does make her that she
shall not conceive so long as she shall so bear it. The powder of a dogs head
dried, being put into any broken or exulcerated sores, does eat away all the
corruption or dead flesh increasing therein. The same virtue has the powder of
weasels dung, being used in the said manner.

Aegi^^tta
and does also cure the disease called by some the Foxes evil. The biting of a
weasell is reported by some to be very venomous, and in his ravening or
madness, not to be less hurtful then the bitings of mad dogs. For weasels
and Foxes are very often mad. But Arnoldus is of a contrary opinion, and
affirms that the weasell does more hurt by his biting, Auice^^^
then by any venom he can put forth. Others also do affirm, that there is
venom in weasels, for this cause, that in all kind of Weasels when they are
angry, the force of their smell is so rank and strong. The best way to drive
away Mice, is by scattering the powder of weasels or cats dung up and down,
the savor whereof Mice cannot abide, but the same being made into some certain
kind of bread will smell more strongly. That the bites of a weasell are
Aristides, of a certain man, who being bitten by a weasell, and ready to die,
gave a great sigh, and said that if he had dyed by a Lion or Panther, it would
never have grieved him, but to dye by the biting of such an ignoble beast, it
grieved him worse then his death. The biting of a weasell, Aelianus
does bring very quick and grievous pain, which is only known by the
color, being dusky or bluish: and it is cured by onions and garlike, either
applied outward or taken in drink, so that the party drink sweet wine
thereon. Unripe figs also mingled with the flower of the grain called Orobos,
does much profit the same. Treacle in like manner, being applied in the manner
of a plaster, speedily cures them. Garlike being mingled with fig tree leaves
and cynamon, and so beaten together, are very well applied to the said bites.
It comes

OF THE WOLF.
A Wolf is called in Hebru Zeeb, The several names.
as it is said in Genesis 49. and among the Chaldeans Deeba, and Deba among the
Arabians Dib. A^s^ulapius.
The female Zebah a she wolf, and the masculin Zeebim, but in Ezekiel. 22. it is
called zebeth, that is to say, a wolf. Alsebha (says And. Bellun.) is a common
name for all Fourfooted-beasts, which do set on men, killing and tearing them in
pieces, devouring them with their teeth and claws, as a Lion, a wolf, a
Tiger, and such like, whereon they are said to have the behavior of Alsebhaie,
that is wild beasts which are fierce and cruel. From hence happily comes it,
that not only Albertus, but also some ignorant writers do attribute unto a
Aristotle has uttered concerning a Lion.

Oppianus among the other kind of wolves has demonstrated one which is bred in
Cilicia. And also he does write that it is called in the mountains of Taurus
and Amanus, Chryseon, that is to say, Aureum, but I conjecture that in those
places it was called after the language of the Haebrews or Sirians, which do call
Sahab, or Schab aurum, and Seeb lupum for a wolf, or Dahab, or Debah, for
Aurum: They also do call Deeb or Deeba for a wolf. Dib (otherwise Dijs) is an
Arabian or Saracenican word: Also the translation of this word in the book of
medicines is diverse, as Adib, Adip, Adhip, and Aldip: but I have preferred the
last translation, which also Bellunensis does use. Aldip alambat does signify
a mad or furious wolf. The wolf which Oppianus does call Aureum, as I have
said even now, does seem to agree to this kind, both by signification of the
name Aurum, and also by the nature because it Oppianus does write, does seek
his food out of hollow places, as a Hyaena or Dabha does out of graves where
the dead men are buried. The golden colored wolf is also more rough and
hairy then the residue, even as the Hyaena is said to be rough and maned. And
also these wolves necks in India is maned, but it differs according to the
nation and color where there are any wolves at al.

Lycos a wolf among the Graecians, and Lugos, and Lucainia, and Lycos, among
some of the Arabican writers is borrowed from them, as Munster has noted in
his lexicon of 3. languages. In Italy it is called Lupo. In French Loup, in
Spain Lobo, in Germany Vulff, in England Wolf. In Illyria Vulk, as it were by
a transposition of the letters of the greek word The notatio^ of Lupus and
Lions.
it is not vain or idle to touch both them and the deriuation of them, before
we proceed to the natural story of this beast. Lupus as some say in Latin is
Quasi leopos, Lyon-footed; because that it resembles a Lion in his feet, and
therefore Isidorus writes, that nothing lives that it presses or treads
upon in wrath. Other derive it from lukes the light, because in the twilight of
the evening or morning it deuoureth his prey, avoiding both extreme light as
the noone day, Named apellatiues derive ^^om a wolf.
and also extreme darkness as the night. The Graecians do also call them
Nycterinoi kanes, dogs of the night. Lupa and lupula were the names of noble
deuouringe Harlots, and from thence comes Lupanar for the stews. It is
doubtful whether the Romulus and Remus were a harlot or she Wolf, I rather
think it was a harlot then a Wolf that cursed those children. For we read of
the wise of Fostulus, which was called Laurentia, after she had played the
whore with certain shepherds, to be called Lupa. In all Nations there are
some men's names derived from wolves, therefore we read of Lupus a roman poet,
Lupus Seruatus a priest or Elder, of Lupus de oliueto a Spanish Munke, of
Fulvius lupinus a Roman, and the Germans have Vulf, Vulfe, Heart, Vulfegang.

The Graecians have Lycambes, of whom it is reported he had a Daughter called
Neobole, which he promised in marriage to Archilochus the Poet, yet afterward
he repented and would not perform his promise, for which cause the Poet wrote
against him many bitter verses, and therefore Lycambes when he came to
knowledge of them, dyed for grief. Lycaon was a common name among the
Graecians for many men, as Lycaon Gnotius, an excellent maker of edged tools.
Licaon the brother of Nestor, another the son of Priamus slain by Achilles,
but the famous and notorious among all was Lycaon, the king of Arcadia, the son
of Titan and the earth, whose Daughter Calisto was deflowered by Jupiter, and
by Juno turned into a bear, whom afterward Jupiter pitying, placed for a
sign in heaven, Virgil made this verse; Pleiadas, Hyadas, claramque Lycaonis
arcton.

There was another Lycaon the son of Pelasgus, which built the City Lycosura,
in the Mountain Lycaeus, this man called Jupiter Lycaeus. On a time he
sacrificed an infant upon his altar, after which sacrifice he was presently
turned into a wolf. There was another Lycaon after him, who did likewise
sacrifice another child, and it was said that he remained ten years a wolf,
and afterward becam a man again, whereof the reason was given, that during the
time he remained a beast he never tasted of man's flesh, but if he had tasted
thereof he should have remained a beast for ever. I might add hereunto
Lychophron, Lycastus, Lycimnius, Lysinus, Lychomedes, Lycurgus, Lycus, and of
women's names, Lyca, Lyce, Lycaste, Lycoris, Lycias, and many such others,
besides the names of people, as Irpini, of Mountains and places, as Lycabetus,
Lyceus, Lycerna, Lycaonia, Lycaspus, Lyceum Aristotle's school. Of floods
Lycus, Lycormas. Of plants, as wolf bane, Lupum salictarium lupinus,
Lycantheum, Lycophrix, Lycophone, Lycopsis, Lycoscytalion, and many such
others, whereof I have only desired to give the Reader a taste, following the
same Method that we have observed in other beasts: And thus much shall suffice
to have spoken of the names of this beast. Contries breeding wolves.


The countries breeding wolves, are for the most part these that follow. The
inhabitants of Creet were wont to say, that there was neither wolves, Bears,
nor Vipers cold be bred in their Island, because Jupiter was borne there, yet
there is in a city called Lycastus, (so named for the multitude of wolves that
were abiding therein) It is likewise affirmed of Sardinia, and Olimpus, a
Mountain of Macedonia, that there come no Wolves in them. The wolves of Egypt
are lesser then the wolves of Greece, for they exceed not the quantity of
Arabia, in Sweuia, Rhaetia, Athesis, and the earldome of Tirol in Muscouia,
especially that part that bordereth upon Lithuania. The wolves of Scanzia, by
reason of extremity of cold in those parts are blind and loose their eyes:
there are no wolves bred in Lumbardy beyond the Alps, and if any chance to
come into that country, presently they ring their bells, and arm themselves
against them, never giving over till they have killed him, or drove him out of
the country. In Norway there are 3. kind of wolves, and in Scandinauia the
wolves fight with Elkes. It is reported that there are wolves in Italy, who when
they look upon a man, cause him to be silent, that he cannot speak. The
Frenchmen call those Wolves which have eaten of the flesh of men Eucharnes.
Among the Crotoniatae in Meotis, and diverse other parts of the world,

There are diverse kinds of wolves in the world, The several kinds of wolves.
whereof Oppianus in his admonition to sheapheards makes mention of five, the
first is a swift wolf, and runs fast, called therefore Toxeuter, that is,
Sagitarius a shooter. The second kind are called Harpages, and these are the
greatest raueners, to whom our savior Christ in the gospel compares false
prophets, when he says, Take heed of false prophets which come unto you in
sheeps clothing, but are and these excel in this kind. The third kind is called
Lupus aureus, a golden wolf, by reason of his color, then they make mention
of two other kinds, (called Acmonae) and one of them peculiarly Ictinus.

The first which is swift, has a greater head then other wolves, and
likewise greater legs fitted to run, white spots on the belly, round members,
his color betwixt red and yellow, is very bold, howleth fearfully, having
firy-flaming eyes, and continually wagging his head. Oppi^^us
The second kind has a greater and larger body then this, being swifter then
all other; betimes in the morning he being hungry, goes abroad to hunt his
prey, the sides and tail are of a silver color, he inhabiteth the Mountains,
except in the winter time, wherein he defends to the gates of Cities or
Towns, and boldly without fear kills both Goats and sheep, yet by stealth
and secretly.

The third kind inhabiteth the white Rocks of Taurus and Sylicia, or the tops
of the hill, Amanus, and such other sharp and inaccessible places, being
worthily for beauty preferred before the others, because of his Golden
resplendant hairs: and therefore my Author says: Non lupus sed lupo
praestantior fera. That he is not a wolf, but some wild Beast Acmone, now
Acmon signifies an Egle, or else an Instrument with a short neck, and it may
be that these are so called in resemblance of the ravening Eagle, or else
because their bodies are like to that instrument, for they have short necks,
broad shoulders, rough Legs and feet, and small snouts, and little eyes: herein
they differ one kind from the other, because that one of them has a back of a
silver color, and a white belly, and the lower part of the feet black, and
this is Ictinus??? a gray Kite-wolfe: the other is black, having a lesser body,
his hair standing continually upright, and lives by hunting of Hares. Now
generally al Authors do make some two, some 3. some 4. and some five kinds of
Wolves, all which is needless for me to prosecute, and therefore I will
content my self, with the only naming of such differences as are observed in
them and already expressed, except the Thoes and the sea-wolfe, of whom there
shall be something said particularly in the end of this History. Olaus Magnus
writes, in his History of the Northern regions, that in the Mountains called
Doffrini, which do divide the kingdoms of Swetia and Norway, there are great
flocks or heardes of wolves of white color, whereof some wander in the
Mountains, and some in the valleys. They feed upon little, small, and weak
creatures, but there are also wild common wolves, who

Wolves are ^o^ wild dogs.
There be some have thought that Dogs and Wolves are one kind; namely, that
vulgar Dogs are tame Wolves, and ravening wolves are wild dogs. But Scaliger
has learnedly confuted this opinion, showing that they are two distinct kinds,
not joined together in nature, nor in any natural action, except by
constraint; for he says, that there are diverse Mountfalcon, altogether
refusing the society and service of men, yea sometimes killing and eating them;
and they have neither the face, nor the voice, nor the stature, nor the
conditions of wolves, for in their greatest extremity of hunger, they never set
upon flocks of sheep: so that it is unreasonable to affirm, that wolves are
wild dogs, although it must needs be confessed, The voices of wolves.
that in outward proportion they are very like unto them. Some have thought
that wolves cannot bark, but that is false (as Albertus writes) upon his own
knowledge, the voice of wolves is called Vulatus howling, according to these
verses; Ast lupus ipse vlulat frendet agrestis aper, And again: Per noctem
resonare lupis, vlulantibus vrbes. It should seem that the word Vlulatus,
which the Germans translate Heulen, the French Hurler, and we in English,
howling, is derived either from the imitation of the beasts voice; or from a
night whooping Bird called Vlula, I will not contend, but leave the Reader to
either of both, for it may be that it comes from the Greek word, Ololeuzein,
which signifies to mourn and howl after a lamentable manner, and so indeed
wolves do never howl, but when they are oppressed with famine: And thus I
leave the discourse of their voice with the annotation of Seruius: Vlulare
canum est and furiare. To howl is the voice of dogs and furies. Although there
be great difference of colors in wolves, as already I have showed, yet most
commonly they are gray and hoary, that is, white mixed with other colors, and
therefore the Graecians in imitation thereof, do call their twie-light which is
betwixt day and night, as it were participating of black and white Licophos,
wolfe-light, because the upper side of the wolves hair is brown, and the
nether part white. It is said, that the shaggy hair of a wolf is full of
virmin and worms, and it may well be, for it has been proved, that the skin
of a sheep which was killed by a wolf, breeds worms.

The several parts
and carrying in them apparent tokens of wrath and malice; and for this cause
it is said they see better in the night then in the day, being herein unlike
unto men, that see better in the day then in the night, for reason gives light
to their eyes, and appetite to beasts, and therefore of ancient time the wolf
was dedicated to the Sun, for the quickness of his seeing sense, and because
he sees far. And such as is the quickness of his sense in seeing, such also
it is in smelling, Coelius Stumpsius
for it is reported, that in time of hunger by the benefit of the wind, he
smells his prey a mile and a half or two mile off: for their teeth they are
called Charcharodontes, that is sawed, yet they are smooth, sharp, and
unequal, and therefore bite deep, as we have showed already, for this cause
the sharpest bits of horses are called Lupata.

Syrites, being in color like Saffron or Honny, yet inwardly contain certain
weak shining stars: this is not the stone called Syriacus or Indiacus, which
is desired for the virtue of it against the stone in the blather. The forefeet
have five distinct towes, and the hinder feet but 4. because the forefeet serve
in stead of hands, in Lions, dogs, wolves, Lucabas. For by this successiue
swimming they are better strengthened against impression of the floods, and not
lost in the waters by any ouerflowing waves or billows. The meat and voracity
of Wolves.
Great is the voracity of this beast, for they are so insatiable that they
devour hair and bones with the flesh which they eat, for which cause they
render it whole again in their excrements, and therefore Lupus vorat potius
quam commedit carnes, and pauco vtitur potu. That is, A wolf is rather to
raven then to eat his meat. When they are hungry they rage much, and although
they be nourished tame, yet can they not abide any man to look upon them while
they eat; when they are once satisfied, Aelianus Philes
they endure hunger a great time, for their bellies stands out, their tongue
swells, their mouth is stopped, for when they have drove away their hunger
with abundance of meat, they are unto men and beasts as meek as lambs, til
they be hungry again, neither are they moved to rapine, though they go through
a flock of sheep: but in short time after, their bellies and tongue are calling
for more meat, and then says mine Author. In antiqua^ frigra^ redit, iterumque
lupus existit. That is, They return to their former conditions, and become
Lupi Vespertini, but we have shevved already in the story of the Hyaena, what
those signify.

It is said that Wolves do also eat a kind of earth called Argilla, which
they do not for hunger, but to make their bellies weigh heavy, to the intent,
that when they set upon a Horse, an Ox, a Heart, an Elke, or some such strong
beast, they may weigh the heavier, and hang fast at their throats till they
have pulled them down, for by virtue of that tenetious earth, their teeth are
sharpened, and the weight of their bodies increased; but when they have killed
the beast that they set upon, before they touch any part of his flesh, by a
kind of natural vomit, (...).
they disgorge themselves, and empty their bellies of the earth, as
unprofitable food.

The remainder of their meat they always cover in the earth: and if there be
many Niphus is a very fable; for he professes that he saw an old Wolf come
into a Village, and set upon a Virgin to destroy and eat her, yet he was so
old that he had scarce any teeth in his head, but by good hap company being at
hand, the maid was saved, and the Wolf was killed.

Now those Wolves that are most sluggish and least given to hunting, are most
ready Vinipeta, but the industrious Hunting Wolf Kunegeiseia. It is reported
that a Wolf will never venture upon a living man, except he have formerly
tasted of the flesh of a dead man, but of these things I have no certainety,
but rather do believe the contrary; that like as Tyrants in an evil grieved
estate, do pick quarrels against every man that is rich for the spoil of their
goods, accounting them their enemies, how well soever they have deserved at
their hands. In like manner, Wolves in the time of their hunger fall upon all
Creatures that come in the way, whether they be Men or Beasts, without
partiality to fill their bellies, and that especially in the winter time,
wherein they are not afraid to come to houses and cities.

They devour Dogs when they get them alone, and Elkes in the kingdom of
Norway, but for Dogs it has been seen, that they have lived in a kind of
society and fellowship with Wolves, but it was to steal and devour in the
night time, like as Thieves do cover their malice and secret grudges one to
other, when they are going about to rob true men. Wolves are enemies to Asses,
Bulls, and Foxes, for they feed upon their flesh, and there is no Beast that
they take more easily then an Ass, killing him without all danger, as we have
showed already in the story of an Ass.

They also devour Goats and Swyne of all sorts, except Bores, who do not
easily yeald unto Wolves. It is said that a Sow has resisted a Wolf, and that
when he fights with her, he is forced to use his greatest craft and
suttelty, leaping to and from her know Goats are delighted that so they may
draw them therewith, as to a bait to devour them.

Their manner is when they fall upon a Goat or a Hog, or some such other beast
of small stature, not to kill them, but to lead them by the ear withal the speed
they can drive them to their fellow Wolves, and if the beast be stubborn and
will not run with him, then he beats his hinder parts with his tail, in the
mean time holding his ear fast in his mouth, whereby he causes the poor beast
to run as fast or faster then himself unto the place of his own execution,
where he finds a crew of ravening Wolves to entertain him, who at his first
appearance seize upon him, and like Devils tear him in pieces in a moment,
leaving nothing uneaten but only his bowels.

Textor, Albertus.
not because he fears the ouer-liuers will tell tales, but for that his
insatiable mind thinks he can never be satisfied, and then when al are
slain he falls to eat one of them.

Now although there be great difference betwixt him and a Bull both in strength
and stature, yet is he not afraid to adventure combat, trusting in his policy
more then his vigor, for when he sets upon a Bull, he comes not upon the
front for fear of his horns, nor yet behind him for fear of his heels, but
first of al stands a loofe from him, Aelianus.
with

At last when they perceive him to be dead and clean without life by
suffocation, It is notable to observe their singular subtilty to draw him out
of the mire, whereby they may eat him; for one of them goes in, and takes the
beast by the tail, who draws how they torment and stretch their own bodies,
biting their tails mutually, pinching and straining every joint until they
have compassed their desire, and that no man should think it strange for a
Wolf to kill an Ox, It is reported that Danaus did build a temple to Apollo at
Argos, in the very same place where he saw a Wolf destroy an Ox, because he
received instruction thereby, that he should be king of Greece. Wolves are also
enemies to the Buffes, and this is no marvel, seeing that it is confidently
reported by Aelianus, that in time of great famine when they get no meat, they
destroy one another; for when they meet together, each one bemoaning himself
to other, as it were by consent they run round in a circle, and that Wolf
which is first giddy, being not able to stand,

The ^^aun of Wolves
Pliny affirms that there be Wolves in Italy, whose sight is hurtful to men,
for when a man sees one of them, though he have never so much desire to cry
out, yet he has no power: but the meaning of this is, as we find in other
writers, that if a Wolf first see a man, the man is silent, and cannot speak,
but if the man see the Wolf, the Wolf is silent and cannot cry, otherwise the
tale is fabulous and superstitious, and thereupon came the proverb Lupus in
fabula est, to signify silence. Now although these things are reported by
Plato, Ruellius, Vincentius, and Ambros, yet I rather believe them to be
fabulous the^ true, howbeit Albertus writes, that when a man is in such
extremity, if he have power but Sextus says, that in case one of these Wolves
do see a man first, if he have about him the tip of a wolves tail he shall not
need to fear any harm. There be a number of such like tales concerning
wolves and other creatures, (as that of Pithagoras) A beast making water upon
the urine of a wolf, shall never conceive with young. All domestical
Foure*footed-beasts, which see the eye of a wolf in the hand of a man, will
presently fear and run away.

If the tail of a wolf be hung in the cratch of Oxen, they can never eat
their meat. If a horse tread upon the foote-steps of a wolf which is under a
Horseman or Rider, he breaks in pieces, or else stands amazed. If a wolf
treads in the footsteppes of a horse which draws a wagon, he cleaves fast
in the rode, as if he were frozen.

If a mare with foale tread upon the footsteps of a wolf, she casts her
foal, and therefore the Egyptians when they signify abortment, do picture a
mare treading upon a wolves foot. These and such other things are reported,
(but I cannot tell how true) as supernatural accidents in wolves. The wolf
also labors to overcome the Leoparde, and follows him from place to place,
but forasmuch as they dare not adventure upon him single or hand to hand, they
gather multitudes and so devour them. When wolves set upon wild Bores, Or^^
although they be at variance among themselves, yet they give over their
mutual combats, and join together against the Wolf their common adversary.
For these occasions a wolf has evermore bin accounted a most fyerce and wild
beast, as may further appear by this History following. A history.
When Euristines and Procles intended Delphos to ask counsel of Apollo*: in
what place they should meet with their wives.

Apollo gave them answer, that when they should meet with an extreme wild
beast, as they went into Lacedemonia, and yet the same beast appear meek and
gentle unto them, there they should take their wives. When they came into the
land of the Cleonians they met with a wolf carrying a lamb in his mouth,
whereupon they conceived that the meaning of Apollo was, that when they met
with a wolf in that country, they might very happily and successively take
them wives, and so they did, for they married with the daughters of Thesander
Cleonimus, a very honest man of that country. It is reported Milo Crotaniata,
that valiant strong man, how upon a season rending a tree in sunder in the
woods, (...) destroy ^ by wolves
one of his arms was taken in the closing of the tree, and he had not strength
enough to loose it again, but remained there enclosed in most horrible
torments until a wolf came and devoured him.

The like story unto this, is that which Aelianus reports of Gelon the
Syracusan, a scholar, unto whom there came a Wolf as he sat in the school
writing on his Tables, Coelius. Tzetzes.
and took the writing tables out of his hand. The schoolemaister being enraged
heerewith, and knowing himself to be a valiant man, took hold of the same
tables in the Wolves mouth, and the Wolf drew the master and scholars in
hope of recovery of the tables out of the school into a plain field, where
suddenly he destroyed the schoole-maister and a hundred scholars, sparing
none but Gelon, whose tables were a bait for that prey, for he was not only
not slain, but preserved by the Wolf to the singular admiration of all the
world; whereby it was collected, that that accident did not happen naturally,
but

Men have bin forced to invent and find out many devises for the destroying of
wolves, The taking of Wolves and the reward of the hunters.
for necessity has taught men much learning, and it had been a shameful
misery to endure the tyranny of such spoiling beasts without laboring for
resistaunce and revenge: for this cause they propounded also a reward to such
as killed Wolves, for by the law of Dracho, he that killed a young wolf
received a tallent, and he that killed an old wolf received two talents.

Solon prescribed that he that brought a Wolf alive, should receive five
pieces of money, and he that brought one dead, should receive two. Apollo
himself was called Lycoctonos, Homer calls Appollo Lysegenes, for that it is
said immediately after he was borne of his mother Latona, he was changed
into the shape of a wolf, and so nourished; and for this cause there was the
image of a wolf set up at Delphos before him.

Others say, that the reason of that image was, because that when the temple of
Delphos was robbed, and the treasure thereof hid in the ground, while diligent
inquisition was made after the thieves, there came a wolf and brought them to
the place where the golden vessels were covered in the earth, which she pulled
out with her feet. And some say that a wolf did kill the sacriliger, as he lay
asleep on the mountain Parnassus, having all the treasure about him, and that
every day she came down to the gates of Delphos howling, Apollo was called a
Wolf killer was, for that he was feined to be a shepherd or Heardsman, and
therefore in love of his catle to whom wolves were enemies, he did not only
kill them while he was alive, but also they were offered unto him in sacrifice,
for wolves were sacred to Apollo, Jupiter and Mars: and therefore we read of
Apollo Lycius or Lyceus, to whom there were many temples builded, and of
Jupiter Lyceus the sacrifices instituted unto him called Lycaea, and games by
the same name. There were other holly-daies called Luper calia, wherein barren
women did chastise themselves naked because they bare no children, hoping
thereby to gain the frutefulnesse of the womb, Ovid speaks thus: Excipe
foecunde pascientur verbera dextrae
Iam socer optatum nomen habebit saui.
Propertius and some other writers seem to be of the mind that those were
first instituted by Fabius, Lupercus as appears by these verses: Verbera
pellitus setosamouebat arator
Vnde liceus Fabius sacra lupercus habet.
Inuenal thus: Nec prodest agili palmas praebere luperco. Now concerning the
manner of taking of Wolves, Diverse policies and inventions to take wolves.
the Ancients have invented manic devises and gins, and first of al an iron
Toil which they still fasten in the earth with iron pins, upon which pins they
leave a ring, being in compass about the bigness of a wolves head, in the midst
whereof they lay a piece of flesh, and cover the Toil, so that nothing is
seen but the flesh, when the Wolf comes and takes hold of the flesh,
feeling it stick, pulling hard, he pulls up the ring, which brings the
whole Toil on his neck and sharp pins. This is the first manner that
Crescentiensis repeateth of taking Wolves, and he says there are other devises
to ensnare their feet, which the Reader cannot understand except he saw them
with his eyes.

The Italians call the nets wherein wolves are taken, Tagliola, Harpago, Lo
Rampino, and Lycino, the French Hauspied, and Blondus affirms, that the
shepheardes of Italy make a certain ginne with a net, wherein that part of the
Wolf is taken which is first put into it.

The Rhaetians use to raise up to a Tree a certain engine like a mouse-trappe
but much greater, through which there is a cord where they hang a bate of
flesh or pullin, or some such thing which the wolf loves; when he comes
unto it, he suddenly snatcheth at it, and so pulls the trap upon his own
pate. The Teucreans, Mysseans, and Thraseans, inhabitants of Asia, were wont to
carry short weapons to kill wolves, and they used also the strongest Dogs, who
by the incoragement of the hunters would tear the wolves in pieces, for there
is hardly any Dog so courageous, as to adventure upon a Wolf at single

The Dogs have therefore certain collers made unto them of leather stuffed
full of sharp iron nails, to the intent that their necks may be sauegarded from
the wolves biting. Now Blondus says, that al hunting of Wolves with Dogs is
in vain, except there be also set up certain great nets made of strong cords,
stretched out and standing as stiff as may be immouably fastened to the bodies
of trees, or strong pillars in the earth, and in diverse places of these nets
they must set boughs to cover them, to the end the wolf descry them not; and
at either end of the net must be made a little shed with boughs to cover a
man, wherein the hunter must lodge with his spear, ready to pierce through
the Wolf when he perceives him in the net, for if the wolf be not instantly
wounded, he

When they are far from their nets, they hunt them but gently, and let him
go at leisure, but when they are closer and nearer unto them, they follovv
them with al speed and violence, for by that means many are intrapped and
suddenly killed, and these are those hunting observations which I find to be
recorded in Authors for the taking of Wolves. And this is the nature of this
beast, that he fears no kind of weapon except a stone, for if a stone be cast
at him, he presently falls down to avoid the stroke, for it is said that
Orus vvriteth.

Wolves do likewise fear fire even as Lions do, and therefore they which
travel in woods and secret places by night, wherein there is any suspicion
of meeting of Wolves, they carry with them a coople of flints, where withal
they strike fire, in the approach of the ravening beast which so dazleth his
eyes, and danteth his courage, that he runs away fearfully. It is said that
wolves are afraid of the noise of swords or iron struck together, and it may
well be, for there is a true story of a man traueling near Basil, with a bell
in his hand, who when he saw that the throwing stones at the wolf which
followed him would nothing avail, and by chance fell down, in he meanetime a
bell which he carried about him did give a sound, at which sound the wolf
being affrighted ran away, which when he perceived, he sounded the bell aloud,
and so drove away the wild ravening beast. As the Lion is afraid of a white
Cock and a Mouse, so is the wolf of a Sea-crab or shrimp. It is said that the
pipe of Pithocaris did repress the violence of wolves when they set upon him,
for he sounded the same imperfectly, and indestinctly, at the noise whereof the
raging Horace testifies so much of himself, that by singing he drove away a
wolf, as in these verses; Namque me sylua lupus in sabina,
Dum meam canto tellagen and vltra,
Terminum cur is vagor expeditus,
Fugit niermem.
Quale portentum neque militaris,
Daunia in latis alit aesculetis,
Nec iubetellus gener at leonem,
Arida nutrix.
Aesculapius writes, that if a man do anoint himself with the fat or sewet
taken out of the raines of a Lion, it will drive away from him all kind of
Wolves. There be some that take wolves by poisoning, for they poison certain
pieces of meat, and cast them abroad, whereof when the wolves do Cardus
Varius, and that therewithal also they could kill Rats and Mice. Pausanius
says, that there was a temple of Apollo Lyceus, at Sicycon, and that on a time
the inhabitants were so anoyed with wolves, that they could receive no
commodity by their flocks, whereupon Apollo taking pity of them, told them
that there was in their temple a certain piece of dry wood, commanding them
to pull off the rind or bark of that wood, and beating it to powder, to
mingle it with convenient meat for Wolves, and so cast it abroad in the

The people did as they were commanded by the Oracle, and thereby destroyed all the wolves; but what kind of wood this was, neither Pausanias nor any of the
pristes of Sicycon could declare. In one part of the world the Ewe-tree, and
certain fragments of Juniper. The spindle tree, and Rododaphne do yeald poison
unto wolves mixed in their drink, and besides them we know no trees that are
venomous, and yet plants innumerable, especially wolf bane. And the occasion
why there are more poysonfull herbs then trees, is in the juice or liquor
whereby they are nourished, for where the juice is wholesome and well tempered,
there it increases into a great tree, but where it is imperfect and venomous,
there it never grows tall, nor brings forth any great stock.

Lycos, and by the Latanists blenni, which we may english wolfe-Fishes, and
these the Hunters use to take wolves in this manner, when they have taken a
great many of them alive; they put them into some tub or great mortar, (...)
there kill them by bruising them to pieces, afterward they make a fire of coals
in the mountains where the wolves hant, putting into the same some of these
fishes mixed with blood and pieces of mutton, and so leaving it, to have the
savor thereof carried every way with the wind, they go and hide themselves:
whilst that in the mean time the Wolves enraged with the savor of this fire,
seek too and fro to find it, because of the smell, the fire before they come
is quenched or goes out naturally, and the Wolves by the smoke thereof,
especially by tasting of the flesh, blood and fish which there they find, do
fall into a drowsy dead sleep, which when the Hunters do perceive, they come
upon them and cut their throats. The Armenians do poison them with black
fishes, and some do take a cat, pulling off her skin, taking out the bowels,
they put into her belly the powder of Frogs, this cat is boiled a little upon
coals, and by a man drawn up and down in the mountains where wolves do hant,
now if the Wolves do chance to meet with the train

Poysyning of Wolves
I will not discourse of Wolfe-bane, commonly called Aconitum in Latin,
wherwithall both men and beasts are intoxicated, and especially Wolves, but
referring the Reader to the long discourse of Conradus Gesner in his History of
the Wolf, I will only remember in this place an Epigram of Ausonius wherein he
pleasantly relates a story of an adulterated women, desiring to make away her
jealous husband, and that with speed and vehemence, gave him a drink of
Wolfe-bane and Quicksilver mingled together, either Toxica zelotypo dedit vxor
mecha marito
Nec satis ad mortem credidit esse datum,
Miscuit argenti letalia pondera viui
Cogeret vt celerem vis geminata necem
Diuidat haec si quis faciunt discreta, venenum
Antidotum sumet qui sociata bibet,
Ergo inter sese dum noxia pocula certant,
Cessit letalis noxa salutiferae
Protinus and vacuos alui petiere recessus,
Lubrica deiectis qua via nota cibis.


Concerning the enemies of Wolves, there is no doubt but that such a ravening
beast has few friends, for except in the time of copulation wherein they
mingle sometime with dogs, The enemies of Wolves
and sometime with Leopards, and sometime with other beasts, all Beasts both
great and small do avoid their society and fellowship, for it cannot be safe
for strangers to live with them in any league or amity, seeing in their
extremity they devour one another: for this cause, in some of the inferior
beasts their hatred lasts after death, as many Authors have observed; for if
a sheep skin be hanged up with a Wolves skin, Philes and Aelianus, that if a
raven eat of the carcass of a beast which the wolf has killed, or formerly
tasted of, she presently dies.

There are certain wild Onions called Scille, and some say the sea-Onion,
because the root has the similitude of an Onion, of all other things this is
hateful to a wolf, and therefore the Arabians say, that by treading on it his
leg falls into a crampe, whereby wolf. There are certain Eagles in
Tartaria which are tamed, who do of their own accord being set on by men
adventure upon wolves, and so vex them with their talants, that a man with no
labor or difficulty may kill the beast, and for this cause the wolves do greatly
fear them and avoid them; And thereupon came the common proverb, Lupus fugit
aquilam: And thus much shall suffice to have spoken in general concerning their
taking. Now we will proceed to the other parts of their History, and first of
al of their carnal copulation. They engender in the same manner as dogs and
Sea-calues do, Their Copulation and procreation
and therefore in the middle of their copulation they cleave together against
their will. It is observed that they begin to engender immediately after
Christmasse, and this rage of their lust lasts but twelve days, whereupon
there was wont to go a fabulous tale or reason, that the cause Latona so many
days together wandered in the shape of a she wolf in the mountains
Hyperborei for for fear of Juno, in which likeness she was brought to Delus;
but this fable is confuted by Plutarch, rehearsing the words of Antipater in
his book of beasts, for he says when the Oaks that bear Acornes do begin
to cast their flowers or blossoms, then the wolves by eating thereof do open
their wombes, for where there is no plenty of Acornes there the young ones die
in the dam^ belly, and therefore such countries wherein there are no store of
Oaks, are freed from wolves; and this he says is the true cause why they
conceive but once a year, and that only in the xii. days of Christmas, for
those Oaks flower but once a year, namely, in the spring time, at which season
the wolves bring forth their young ones. Rhaesians among whom wolves do abound,
do affirm constantly, that in the beginning of May, they bring their young out
of their dens, and lead them to the water, sometimes seven, and sometimes
nine, every year increasing their number; so that the first year she
littereth one whelpe, the second year two, the third year Lupus canarius, or
Panther, and the Crocuta. Of the Hyaena and the wolf come the Thoes, of whom
we shall speak in their due place in the end of this story, and the Hyaena it
self seems to be compounded of a The epithets and natural disposition.
and first of al their Epithites which are attributed unto them among several
Authors are most clear demonstrations of their disposition; as sour, wild,
Apulean, sharp, fierce, bold, greedy, who are, flesh-eater, wary, swift,
bloody, blood-louer, degenerate, hard, glutton, hungry, Cattle-eater,
famishing, furious, yellow, fasting, ungentle, dishonest, vntameful, harmeful,
Cattle-hurter, teeth-gnasher, insatiable, treacherer, martial, sorrowful,
mountanie, nightly, robber, strate, rauener, mad, snatcher, cruel, pack-bearer,
blood-sucker, fomer, proud, fearing, sullen, terrible, vehement, houling, and
such other like belonging to the male wolf. Now unto the female there are some
peculiar ones also, as in human, ungentle, martial, obscure, rank, rauener,
Romulian, greasy, terrible, and Volscaen, and the ravening desire of this
wolf does not only apeare in the proverbs of holy scripture already repeated,
as where Christ compares the Heretics to wolves, but also from hand
instruments and sicknesses, for a little hand-saw is called of the Latins and
Germans Lupus, a wolf; because of the inequality of the teeth, wherewithal a
man sheareth asunder violently any piece of wood, bones, or such like thing.

There is a disease called a wolf, because it consumes and eats up the
flesh in the body next the sore, and must every day be fed with fresh meat, as
Lambs, Pigeons, and such other things wherein is blood, or else it consumes
all the flesh of the body, leaving not so much as the skin to cover the bones.
Also the gals on a man's seat, which comes by horse-riding, are by the
auncientes called Lupi, and by Martial, Ficus, whereof he made this disticon;
Stragula succincti venator sum veredi
Nam solet a nudo surgere ficus equo.
There be also instruments called Lupi and Harpages, or Harpagones, wherewithal
Ankers Cambden writes) that the inhabitants which live till they be past fifty
year old, are foolishly reported to be turned into wolves, the true cause
whereof he coniectureth to be because for the most patt they are vexed with
the disease called Lycanthropia which is a kind of melancholy causing the
persons so affected, about the month of February to forsake their own
dwelling or houses, and to run out into the woods, or near the graves and
sepulchers of men, howling and barking like Dogs and wolves. The true signs of
this disease are thus described by Marcellus: those says he which are thus
affected have their faces pale, their eyes dry and hollow, looking drousily and
cannot weep. Their tongue as if it were al scabd, being very rough, neither can
they spit, and they are Lycaon, and men oppressed therewith, Lycaones, because
that there was one Lycaon as it is fained by the poets, who for his wickedness
or sacrificing of a child, was by Jupiter turned into a Wolf, being utterly
distracted of human understanding, and that which the poets speak of him, may
very well agree with melancholy, for thus writes Ovid: Territus ipse fugit,
nactusque silentia ruris
Exululat frustraque loqui couatur.
And this is most strange, that men thus diseased should desire the graves of
the dead. Like unto this is another disease, called by Bellunensis, demonium
leoninum, which is says he, confusio rationis cum factis malis, noxijs and
iracundis a leone dictum videtur malum, quod eo detenti alios homines laedant,
and leonum instar in eos saeuiant, that is; the Lyon-diuel disease is The
apology of Wolves and Lambs.
whereupon came the word Lycophilios, my Author rehearses it thus: Lupis et
agnis faedus aliquando fuit, datis vtrinque obsidibus, lupi suos catulos, oues
canum cho rtem dedere. Quietis ouibus ac pascentibus lupuli matrum de siderio
vlulatus adunt, tum lupi irruentes fidem faedusque solutum clamitant, ouesque
canum praesidio destitutas laniant, that is to say, There was a peace made
betwixt the wolves and the sheep, either side giving ostages to other, the
wolves gave their young whelps, and the sheep gave the shepherds dogs to the
wolves. Now when the young Wolves were among the flock of sheep they houled

The particular disposition of Wolves
Wolves are truly said to be fierce and treacherous, and not generous and
bold, and noble like Lions. They especially rage in the time of their hunger,
and then they kill not them as Niphus says, he tried one day when he was a
hunting near Rome, for his Dog was fighting with a Wolf, and he coming in
with the multitude of hunters, alighted from his horse, drew his sword, and
gave the Wolf a wound, the wolf feeling the stroke of the sword, forsook the
Dog and turned upon the man, making all force at him he could to bite him,
but he professed he escaped with singular danger, more by the help of his
fellow-hunters, then by his own valor; wherefore he concludes that as Wolves
are enemies to al, so they take special revenge of them that harm them, as we
have said before of Lions. Some say that when many of them have obtained a
spoil, they do equally divide it among them al, I am sure the like is reported
betwixt the old Lion and the Albertus says, they do not communicate their
prey like Lions, but when they have fed sufficiently, they hide the residue in
the ground til they hunger again.

When they set upon horned beasts, they invade them behind, and on their
backs; when they set upon sheep, they choose a dark cloudy day or time, that
so they may escape more freely; and to the intent that their treadinges should
not be heard, they lick the bottom or soles of their feet, for by that means
they make no noise among the dry leaves, and if going along they chance to
break a stick, and so against their mind make a noise, then presently they
bite their foot, as if it were guilty of that offense: For the most part they
set upon such Cattle as have no keepers, and raven in secret. If they come unto
Gesner by Michaell Herus, and Instinius Goblerus. It happened (says the first),
that a certain wolf constrained by famine, came unto a village near Millan
in Italy, and there entered into a certain house, wherein fat the good wife
and her children, the poor woman being terrified heerewith, and not knowing
what she did, ran out of the house, pulling the door to after her, and so
shutting the wolf in among her children; at last her husband returned home,
unto whom she related the accident, and how she had shut up the wolf; the man
being more affraide then was cause, least the wolf had devoured some of his
children, entered hastily in a doors,

The second is like unto this, but more admirable, for the great Uncle of
Goblerus being marueilously addicted to the hunting of wild beasts, had in his
land diverse ditches and trenches cast up with other pittes and caves wrought
very artificially for the safe keeping of such beasts as should fall into
them. Now it happened that upon one Sabbath day at night there fell into one of
those pits three creatures of diverse disposition, and adverse inclination, none
of them being able to get out thereof: the first was a Neighbors wife upon her,
now began her grief to be increased, fearing least the wild beast should bite
and wound her, having no means to escape from him, nor no man to help and
rescue her, although she cried as loud as ever she could; wherewithal being
wearied, necessity made her to be patient, being a little comforted to see the
Fox as much afraid of her, as she was of him, and yet she thought the night
full long, wishing for the break of the day, when men stir abroad to their
labors, hoping that some or other would hear her moan, and deliver her from the
society of such a Chamber fellow: while thus she thought, striving betwixt hope,
fear, and grief, lo what befell her more woefully then before, for suddenly a
wolf was taken and fell down upon her, then she lost her hope, and in
lamentable manner thinking of husband and children, how little they conceived of
her extremity, resolved to

Of tamed Wolves.
It has been a question whether Wolves can be tamed or no, some say that they
are Albertus writes, that being taken whelps, they are tamed and will play
like Dogs, yet he says, they never forget their hatered against the hunter
and the desire of Lambs or other beasts which are devoured by Wolves,
whenever he goes abroad. And Stumpsius writes, that even when they are
tamed they are angry with their masters that look upon them while they eat
their meat.

Strabo writes a fable of two woods among the ancient Veneti, one of them
dedicated to Juno, and the other to Diana, and he would make the world
believe, that therein the Wolves lived peaceably and gently with the Hearts,
and did come to the hands of men like familiar and tame Dogs, suffering
themselves to be stroked with their hands. Aelianus and Stephanus do say, that
near the plain of Meotis, there are Wolves which

There be many magical inventions about the parts of wolves, namely, their
heads, teeth, ears, tails and privy parts, which I will not stand to recite in
this place, because I cannot tell what benefit shall come to the knowledge of
them by the English Reader. Wolves are subject to the same diseases that dogs
are, especially the swellings of the throat, madness, and the gout: when they
are sick they eat of an herb which make them cast, some say it is ground Iuy,
some say it is grass, and some otherwise, of this they eat when they have a
pain in their bellyes, and not otherwise. Albertus.
The reason why Dogs and Wolves are more subject to madness then any other
Beast, is because their bodies are chollerick, and their brains increase and
decrease with the Moon. If a man be bitten by a mad Wolf, he is to be cured
by the same medicines that are applied to the bitings of a mad Dog. They live
very long, even until they loose their teeth, therefore in their old age
oppressed with famine they fly unto cities and houses to seek meat. They have
no friends but the Parrots. A Wolf was once the part of the arms of Rome, The
wolf has no friend but the Parrot.
and the judgment seat Athens had in it the picture of a Wolf. There were
ancient coins of money stamped with the image of a wolf, both among the
Graecians, and among the Romans, which were therefore devised, because Romulus
and Remus were said to be nursed by a wolf: with the skins of wolves after
they were dressed by Curriers, we do read that there were garments made, where
withal great princes and Noble men were clothed, the bare being inward next
to their bodies, and the rough being outward, these were used in iournies and
huntings, and they were the proper garment of the gaurds of Tyrants: And this
shall suffice of the vulgar wolf.

OF THE SEA-WOLFE.


ALthough nothing has hitherto been brought to light, concerning the seawolfe
of the ancient writers that I know, yet his form is notable to be observed and
you may choose whether you will call him a Thief or a Sea Monster, much differing
from the wolfe-fish, as that he seems to challenge a particular description
or treatise. It is also a Foure-footed. Beast that lives both on sea and land,
satisfiing his hunger on the most part upon fishes: It has bin seen upon the
Britain Ocean shore, and it does resemble the wolf that lives on the land,
that it is not undeservedly called among the common people a wolf.

Bellonius.
thick and hairy, all the other parts being like to a wolves, as you may easily
see by this expressed picture: and unto this belongs the story of the Wolves
last before expressed which live upon fishes, and divide them familiarly with
men.

OF THE THOES.
THere are two kinds of Thoes, as there are of Panthers, differing only in
magnitude or greatness. But the lesser Thoes is like unto the lesser Panther,
Pliny
a Licopanther, and the Lupus canarius engendered betwixt a Wolf and a Dog,
are all one Four footed beast. The Thoes also are a kind And: Bellu:
And again, there is a kind of Wolf which Aristotle does call Chabez, but
Auicen does write, that it ought to be called Beruet, in the Persian tongue.
And again in another place, where he does write, that the Lion and the Thoes
are utter enemies, and Albertus does translate it, that a Wolf does fight with
the Foure-footed-Beast Toboz, which is a corrupted word, Toboz for Thoes, as
Cabez for Thohoz, and this some men think it to be the Lynx. Thoes is called in
Haebrew Tahas, Alshali is a Foure-footed-Beast like to a Wolf. Adeditach is
also a kind of Wolf, but I do not know whether these names belong only to
the Thoes, or to any other kind of Wolf. Solinus does call Thoas Ethiopian
Wolves, and a little before he said that Lycaon was an Ethiopian wolf, mained
on the Neck, and so diverse colored that a man would think there were no
colors wanting in them.

The people of Schythia likewise say, that the Buff does change his colors,
neither is there any other beast covered with hair, except the Lycaon among
the Indians, (as Pliny also writes) and besides this there is no mention made
of the Lycaon among all the ancient writers. Lycaons are called Dogs, in the
story of the diversities of Dogs. The lesser kind of Thoes are the best, for
some make two kind of Thoes, and some three, and these like Birds, and other
Foure-footed-beastes, change their color, both in VVinter and Summer, so that
sometime they appear bare, and again at other times rough all over, that is,
bare in the Summer, and rough in the VVinter, but it does plainly seem Thoes
but one, which the things that come after does prove and make manifest.
Nearchus says, that those Tigers are not true Tigers, which are commonly
called Tigers, but changable Thoes (as if that every Thoes were not changable)
and greater then the other Thoes.

Arrian
They have no reason which take the Lupus ceruarius for a Thoes, which we have
already showed to be a Lynx, for the Rhaecians which speak Italian, and the
Sauoyans do to this day call him Ceruario, and for the Armenian Wolf the
Cicatus, and the Lupus canarius we have already showed, that it is a Panther,
and therefore it is needless to stand any longer upon those names in this
place. We will therefore take it for confessed, that the Thoes is a Beast
engendered betwixt a Wolf and a Fox, whereof some are greater and Pangeus,
Cittus, Olympus, Myssius, Pindus, and Nisa, beyound Syria, resembling for the
most part a Hyaena, having a longer body, and a straighter tail then a Wolf,
and although it be not so high of stature, yet it is as nimble and as strong
as is the Wolf, and it seems that the very name Thoes is taken from the
celerity and swiftness in running and leaping, for it gets his living by
the quickness of his feet. In the outward face it much resembles a Wolf his
Father, but in the spots and length of his body it resembles a Panther his
mother; they couple in generation like dogs, bringing forth two or four at a
time like wolves, which are blind, and their feet cloven into many toes.

They are enemies to Lions, and therefore they do not live in the same place
where

And further Philes and Selius write, that if they see a man oppressed by any
other beast, they run and fight for him, although it be with the Lion, not
sparing to offer their own lives, and to spend their dearest blood in the
defense of him, who by secret instinct of nature they understand to be ordained
of God, the King and chiefest of all worldly creatures: therefore Gratius
calls this kind, semiferam Thoem de sanguine prolem, and of their taming and
fighting with Lions, he speaks:

-- Thoes commissos leones
Et subiere astu, et paruis domuere lacertis.
They live for the most part upon Hearts, whom they take in the swiftnes of
their course, these they bite and suck their blood, then sufferring them to
run away to some Mountains Licopanthers, and also the beast Pathyon whereof
Albertus speaks, I do take to be two several distinct beasts from the
Thoes, although the quantity and stature agree, and I see no cause if there
be any such beast in the world, but that we may truly say they are a lesser
kind of Panthers: And this shall suffice to have said of these beasts, which
are deemed to be of the kind of Wolves, wherein we have endeavored to say so
much of the general and especial as we could collecte out of any good
Authors; and thus we will shut up the Story of the Woulfe with a short
rememberance of his medicinal virtues.


A Woulfe being sodden alive until the bones do only remain, is very much
commended for the pains of the gout, or a live Woulfe steeped in oil and
covered with wax, is also good for the same disease.

The skin of a woulfe being tasted of those which are bit of a mad or
ravenous dog, does preserve them from the fear or hazard of falling into
water. The skin of a woulfe is very profitable for those which are troubled
with the wind collicke, if it be bound fast about the belley: and also if the
person so affected does sit upon the said skin, it will

The blood of a woulfe being mixed with oil, is very profitable against the
deafness of the ears. The dunge and blood of a woulfe is much commended, for
those that are troubled with the collicke and stone.

The blood of a Bucke, Fox, or Woulfe being warm, and so taken in drink, is
of much force against the disease of the stone. He which does eat the skin
of a woulfe well

The fat of a woulfe does very much profit, being anointed upon those whose
joints are broken. Some of the later writers were wont to mingle the fat of
the woulfe, with other ointments for the disease of the gout. Some also do
mingle it with other ointments, for the paulsey. It does soften also the Vula,
being anointed thereon. The same also being rubbed upon the eyes, is very
profitable for the bleardnesse or bloudshot of the eyes. Pliny. Sextus.
The marks or prints being made with hot irons. The right eye of a wolf also
is profitable for those that are troubled with stiches on the right side of the
belly, and the left eye of a wolf for pains on the left side. The right eye of
a wolf is very good against the bitings of dogs. Also the eye of a wolf is
much commended for those that are lunaticke by the bitinges of dogs.

The teeth of a wolf being rubbed upon the gums of young infants, does open
them, whereby the teeth may the easier come forth. Slundus.
Again, the gums of children are loosened with the tooth of a Dog, being
gently rubbed thereon, but they are sooner brought forth with the teeth of a
Wolf. Some men do commend the tongue of a wolf to be eaten of

The heart of a wolf being burned and beaten to powder, and so taken in
drink, does help those that are sick of the falling sickness. Take one ounce
of the gum of an Oak, and half an ounce of the gum of a pear tree, and two
drams of the powder made of the top of a Hearts horn, and one dram of the heart
of a wolf, al which being mingled together,

The Liver of a Wolf is very profitable for those that are troubled with the
skurfe in Marcellus, being dried and beaten to powder, and a little part of it
mingled in like portions with the powder made of Fene greek, of Lupines,
Wormwood, and of the Herb called Herba mariae, and so mingled that it may be
about the quantity of a cup full, and so given him that day which he is not
troubled with the fever, but if he shall be troubled with it, let him take it
in water for the space of three days, and after he has drunk it, let him
lie for the space of half an hour with his arms spread abroad: and
afterward let him walk very often, but eat very sildome, and let him be sure
he keep himself for the spact of Auicen.
drawing his knees together, and

Auicen does set down a medicine concerning the cure of the hardness of the
Liver, which is, take Opium, Henbane, Oil made of Beauers stones, Myrrh,
Saffron, Spicknard, Agrimony, the Liver of a Wolf, and the right Horn of a
Goat burned, Dioscorides
of each equal parts, and make thereof a Medicine. The Liver of a Wolf being
made in the form of a dry electuary, and given as a lozeng, does also very
much profit against the diseases of the liver.

Gugir a Philosopher does affirm, Galen Pliny
that the Liver of all living Beasts does very much profit against all pains
of the Liver. The Liver of a Wolf being througly dried and drunk in sweet
Wine, does mitigate all griefs or pains of the Liver. The Liver of

The laps or fillets of a Wolves Liver, being applied unto the side, does
perfectly heal any sticth or pricking ach therein. The Liver of a Wolf being
taken in sweet Wine, does heal those which are troubled with a ptisicke. The
Liver of a Wolf being first boiled in Water, afterward dried, beaten and
mingled with some certain

The Gall of a Wolf taken in wine, does heal all pains in the fundament.
The entrals of a Wolf being washed in the best white Wine, blown upon,
dried in an Oven, Syluius Albertus
pounded into dust, afterward rolled in VVormewood, is a good and effectual
remedy Rasis
If any man take the right stone of a Wolf being bloody, steep it in Oil,
and give it unto any woman to apply it unto their secret parts, being wrapped
in Wool, it instantly causes her to forsake all carnal copulation, yea
although she be a common Strumpet. The same being taken in some certain
perfume, Marcellus
does help those which are troubled with

The eyes being anointed with the excrementes of a wolf, are instantly freed
from all couers or spreadi^g skin therein. The powder of the same wolf being
mingled with the sweetest Honey as can possible be had, and in the like manner
rubbed or spread upon the eyes, does expel all dazeling from them. The fime of
a Wolf long rubbed, until it be very light, being mingled with Honny, by the
unction thereof, Galenus
causes the filth or scurfe growing about the eyes to avoid away, and
restores them to an exceeding clearness. The powder of a Wolves head being
rubbed upon the teeth, does make fast and confirm the looseness thereof, and
it is most certain that in the excrementes of the same Beasts, there are
certain bones found, which being bound unto the teeth, have the same force and
efficacy.

The nature of the wolf both in making his water, as also in voyding his
excrements is like unto a Dogs, for while he voydeth his Water he holds up
his hinder Leg, and voydeth his excrementes in some high or steepy place far
from the earth, by which means it falls down upon bushes, thorns, fruits,
Elder-trees, or some other Herbs growing in those places, by which means it
is found never touching the earth. There is furthermore found in the fime of
Wolves certain bones of Beasts which they have devoured, which for as much as
they could not be grinded or chawed, so also can they not be concocted, which
being beaten and bruised small, are by some commended to be excellent given in
drink for the ease of the Collicke, but if the grieved party shall be some
fine or delicate person which cannot endure so gross a Medicine, then mingle
it with Salt, Pepper,

But this dung which the Graecians call Lagonas, and is to be applied to the
groin of the diseased person, ought to be hanged in a band made of wool, but
not of any wool: But it would be more effectual if it were made of the Wool
of that Sheep which was slain by a Wolf. But if the same cannot be got, then
is it fit that there be two bands, one which may be bound about the groine, and
another which may be bound upon the dung to keep it from falling.

There are also some which cast a small quantity of the same dung to the
bigness of a Bean in a little pot, fastening the same to any one which is
troubled with the said disease,

The fime of a Wolf, so that it be not found upon the earth, but upon some
trees, Brambles or Bul-rushes being kept, and when there shall be need bound
unto the arm of him that shall be troubled with the Colic, or to his Neck
being included in a bone, or in Copper, and hung with the thread wherewith
silke-women weaue, does wonderfully

The Dung of a Wolf beaten into the smallest powder then strained and given
unto any in his fit which is troubled therewith to the quantity of half a
spoonefull in hot water, is a very effectual, and approved cure for the stone.
The bones which are found in Wolves, being bound unto the arm of any one which
is troubled with the Collike, having never touched the ground do with great
speed and celerity cure him. The pasterne

The teeth of a Wolf are unequal, wherefore their biting is very dangerous.
A ravening Wolf by his biting brings the same danger, as a ravenous Dog,
they also are cured by the same Medicines, as we have declared at large in the
story of the Dog. The wounds which come by the teeth or Nails of a Wolf are
very dangerous, for the filth which pierces through al clouts or spunges which
are laid upon them: But they are cured Aristotle writes these things
concerning the biting of a Lion, and not of a wolf.

Iohanes Vitus the Hungarian declared that there were certain men in Hungary
bitten by a mad Wolf, and that they were as it seemed presently cured: But
before forty days expired they all dyed by a most bitter or painful disease,
small pieces of flesh increasing through their Urine in the form of Dogs,
with an exceeding pain or torment. It is also reported of a certain Country
man, who when he had stricken a Wolf with his Club, and the Wolf had so torn
his face with his Nails, that he pulled off the skin, he was in short time
healed that there appeared no sign of any harm, but in short time after he
began to be sick, and to howl like unto a Dog, and so perished; by which
it was coniectured that that Wolf was mad. An Ox being bitten by a mad Wolf
or Dog is cured by Garlike being beaten and rubbed upon the wound: the Wolf
himself is also healed of any wound by old Salt flesh applied unto the same.
Auicenna.
Two drammes of Gentian being drunk in Wine, is an excellent cure for the
bites of a mad Dog and ravening Wolves, as also of all beasts tearing with
their teeth or Nails. The bites of Wolves being marked in the bodies of any
Cattle are burned or seared with a hot iron,

OF THE ZEBEL, commonly called a Sabel.
AMong all the kinds of Weasels, Squirrels, Wood-Mice, wilde-mice, or other
little Beasts of the world, there is none comparable to this Zebeth, commonly
called in Latin Zebellus, and Zobela, from whence the Germans call it Zobel,
the Sobol, and Soboel, the Italians Sesi, and Sablines: the skins hereof are
called Zebellinae, and Zobellinae, and sometimes Zibellinae. It is bred in
Muscouia, and the Northern parts of the World, among the Lapones, but no
where more plentiful then in Tartaria, Scythia, and Sarmasia, and it is
therefore called by some Mus Scythicus, the Scythian Mouse. The Frenchmen
because of the similitude it has with a Martin, do call it by a compounded
name Marteis Soublineis. It lives of the most part in the Woods, being lesser
then a Martin every way, and has also shorter Legs: they run up and
down upon trees like Squirrels, easily fastening their claws in the boughs;
when they Ermins, Martins, or Foines, differing herein from the Martins,
because their hair is thinner, and if you stroke them from the head to the
tail, or on the contrary from the tail to the head, they do lie every way
smooth, whereas the Martins do only fall smooth from the head to the tail.

These are more subject to Worms then other skins, except they be
continually Zebel or Sabel skins; Those are the best which have most white and
yellow hairs mingled in them, and the Garments of princes are only fringed
and lined with these Sabel skins, and honorable matrons, ancient Noble Men
and their VViues do likewise use two or three of these to wear about their
Necks, for it is certain that a garment of these skins is much deerer then
cloth of Gold, and I have heard

It is a very libidinous and lustful beast, and at that time stincketh very
rankefully, wherefore it mingleth it self with Martins of all sorts that it
meets: And thus much shall suffice to have discoursed of this little beast.
Now there are diverse other which seem to be of this kind, of which, though I
have not much to say, yet rather then they should be omitted, I will express
their bare names, that so I may give occasion to all our Countrymen that shall
travail into other Nations, to make enquiery after them, that so at their
return if they have any conscience of public good, they may get themselves
eternal fame and names, by communicating publicly their own knowledge,
experience, and learning, which they have gained in these, or other
Foure-footed-beasts.

Of the Noertzs
THis Beast is of the quantity of a Weasell, and by the Germans called Noerts,
Nerts, from which word the Latins have their Noerza, for this Beast. It lives
(as Georgius Agricola writes) in the Woods, betwixt Sweuia and Vistula, the
color of the hairs which is short and smooth, is for the most part like an
Otters. Their skins are sold at Franckford by forty in a heap or bundle,
they are long, and more red then the Ferrets, every bundle most commonly is
sold for six and twenty Nobles. Some think that this is the Latax, spoken off
before, because it gets his living in the waters.

Of the Varmel.
THis Beast is called by the Latins Vormela, by the Germans Wormiein, it is
less then a Ferret, the belly whereof is black, all the residue of the skin full
of white, pale, red, and yellow spots, which adorneth it in admirable manner,
very comely, and excellent to be looked upon, the tail not past half a hand
breadth long, the tip whereof is black, but the hairs of the residue mixed
with white and ash color together.

There is another beast which for the variety of the colors, which are
apparent in his skin, he is called a Salamander, not that which lives in the
fire, but one like unto it, having a gentle hair, distinguished all over into
black and yellow spots, and these because

In India there is a little beast called Chiurca, having a very precious
skin, and this (as Cardan writes) has a bag under the belly, wherein it
suffers his young ones to go in and out, as before we have said of the
Simivulpa, or Foxe-Ape.

There is another little Beast in Hungaria, called Vncken, which dwells in
holes of the earth as Conies do, the outward proportion whereof is like a
weasell, but it is much thinner and longer, the color of the back is red, and
all the residue of the body mouse color. Now although I do not read any
special use of the skin of this beast, yet I thought it good to name it in
this place, because it is reported that the breathing thereof upon Zebel, and
the several kinds of this little beast.

OF THE ZIBETH, OR SIVET-CAT.
THe best description that is of this beast in all the World that I could ever
find, was taken by Doctor Cay, and thus sent as it is here figured to Doctor
Gesner with these words following. There came Doctor Cay) a Zibeth or Siuet
very lately, which was brought out of Africa, the picture and shape whereof in
every point I caused to be taken, which is this perfixed, so that one Egg is
not more like another, then this is to the said Siuet or Zibet. It is greater
then any Cat, and lesser then a Taxus, having a sharp face like a Martin, a
short, round, blunt ear, which was black without but pale within, and on

The throat thereof was black, and a little above the eye there arise three
black lines or strakes: whereof the first or uppermost descends down right
to the throat: the second descends compass in and out of the middle of the
Neck: And the third down to the shoulder, and then a little beneath that
place on the contrary, arise two other black lines like circles ascending in
the compass of the shoulder to the back bone: and all the residue of the body
is distinguished and parted into many colors, having diverse and sundry black
spots scattered abruptly through out the whole circuit: whereof some are
continued and joined together. For that which is upon the back is continued
from the

The first part of his tail to the middle is spotted, and all the residue
black. The hair both on the face, Legs, and feet, is soft, and very gentle
to be handled, falling down, but in all other parts of the body, it is harsh,
deep, and standing upright: the spots does both ascend and descend, the tongue
hereof was smooth and not rugged, and under the tail was the passage for the
excrements after the fashion in other Beasts, and a little beneath the same
was the receptacle or bag containing the Siuet, and a little space after that

This Zibet was in length from the head to the tail, one foot, three palms,
and one Roman fingers breadth, but the breadth thereof under the belly, was one
foot, two palms, and three Roman fingers. It was a gentle and tractable
Creature, and was sold for eight pounds of English money, which was in French
twenty four Crowns, or in Florens forty and eight. These things are said by
Doctor Cay. Now unto this Gesner adds, that he received such another picture
from one Johannes Kentmannus, which he took by another of these Cats in the
possession of the Duke of Saxony, and he said that it was bought by Taters
(every Tater being worth in our English money eight pence half penny) in the
year of the Lord 1545. This Beast is a very clean Beast, I mean a hater of
filthiness; and therefore the place wherein it lies must be swept every day,
and the vessels clean washed. The Siuet or liquor distilled out of the Cod,
must be taken away every second or third day, or else the beast does rub it
forth of his own accord, upon some post in his kennel, if he be tamed or
enclosed. This Siuet is an excrement not growing in the secret part only, but
in a peculiar receptacle by it self, increasing every day the weight of a
groat. The color whereof at the beginning is like butter, but afterward it
grows more sad and brown: one ounce of it if it be pure and not
sophisticated, is sold for eight Crowns at the least. There be impostours
which do adulterate it with an oxes gall, Styrax, and Honny. This is of a
strange savor, and preferred before Musk by many degrees, yet it smells
worst if it be held hard to the Nose: It is said that the liquor running out,
does go back again if any vessel be put to receive it, except it be a Silver
Spoone, or Porringer.

Leo Afer says, these Beasts are wild, vntamable, and live upon flesh, but
the Europaean Merchants buy of the young ones and nourish them tame, with
Branne, Milk, hard Eggs, and other things, and that so they convey them into
Europe out of Afric, emptying their cods twice or thrice a day in the hot
Countries; and that this Siuet is nothing else but the sweat of the Beast under
the ribs, forelegges, Neck, and tail. There were diverse of these Zibets
tamed among other. It is reported of a Consul of the Florentine Merchants at
Alexandria that had one of these so tame, that it would play with a man and
bite his Nose, ears, cheeks, or lips so gently, that it should not be felt,
the reason whereof was given, because it was at the first nourished with the
Milk of a Woman. Cardinal Galeottus had three of these at Rome, which he kept
for their Siuet, and Otho Duke of Bauaria, had also one which he nourished with
Sugar. They are bred in Aethiopia and India about the City Pegus and
Tarnasari. Their Siuet is not sauory till it be washed and cleansed. It is said
to be very excellent against the strangulations of the womb, and it is good
against the collicke, it has also virtue to purge the wombes of women, to
purge the brain, and is applied to many other diseases and infirmities.

FINIS.
An Epilogue to the Readers.
THus have I by the merciful goodness of the Lord arrived at the first of the
four ports of living creatures, whereunto I have purposed to sail by Gods
permission, of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, and all creeping imperfect
creatures, and to discourse to all my Countrymen that part of Divinity that was
never known in English. I take my own Conscience to witness, which is
manifest to my Judge and Savior, J have intended nothing but his glory that is
the Creator of all; and if I thought that hereby the world would not be the
more provoked to acknowledge and obey his soueraign Majesty, whilst that they
behold as in EDEN the assembly of all known and unknown Beasts, but read the
stories to feed curiosity, and behold their figures as Children do Babies, I
would not only desist and go no farther, but also wish that this work were
buried in Oblivion, and the poor lame Paraliticke right hand which wrote and
endited the same, were severed from the body. Therefore (well minded Readers,)
herein you shall satisfy your own consciences and hearts, when the visible
things of the world, do lead you to the invisible things of God, and all
these rows and ranks of living Foure-footed-Beasts are as letters and
Mid-wiues to save the reverence which is due to the highest (that made them)
from perishing within you.

If you think my endeavors and the Printers costs necessary and commendable,
and if you would ever farther or second a good enterprise, J do require al men
of conscience that shall ever hear, read, or see these Histories, or wish for
the sight of the residue, to help us with knowledge, and to certify their
particular experiences in any kind, or any one of the living Beasts: and
withal to consider how great a task we do undertake, traveling for the
content and benefit of other men, and therefore how acceptable it would be unto
us, and procure everlasting memory to themselves, to be helpers, incouragers,
ayders, procurers, maintainers, and abettours, to such a labor and needful
endeavor, as was never before enterprized in England.

If S. PETER did find in one Fishes mouth a piece of money which discharged his
Masters and his Subsidy. Jf ABELL that was the first man that hearded, and
gave himself to the knowledge both humane and Divine, that is to be learned
out of Cattle, was the first man that entered heaven. Jf an Angel opened the
mouth of BALAAMS Ass who spoke like a man, why should not we being commanded
with S. PETER to search all the works of God, look into the mouths of other
Fishes, with expectation of commodity? or why should not we learn the
several uses, Divine and humane, which God has ordained in the natures of
beasts? or why should not we in this our latter age of the world which run and
ride to gain wealth by the harm of the innocent as BALAAM did, have our
accursed Covetousness reproved by the secret voices of Asses, I say no more of
this work but MARTIALS words: Casibus hic nullis, nullis hic delebilis annis,
viuet, Apellaeum cum morietur opus. And so I conclude with the saying of S.
Austen in his Book de Genesis against the Manichees, where he speaks thus of
the Beasts and all creatures, Vsurpa vtilia cave pernitiosa, relinque
superflua, in omnibus tamen cum mensuram and numeros and ordine vides,
artificem quaere.

Farewell.
A Table of the names of all the Beasts contained in this Hystory, in diverse
Languages.
Haebrue.
AChar 503 Adapes 110 Alai 706 Ako 118 Ari 456 Arda 30 Arod 30 Arioth 456
Arkobizanes 2 Ajilzeb 598 Ako 445 Ajal 121 Aldhip 734 Alia, Aielet 121 Arnebet
264 Atud 230 Ben, Bakar 88 Bogia 2 Behemah 192 Caar 20 Chamar 20 Catull 102
Chasir, Chasirah 661 Chuldah, Coled 726 Dischon 570 Dobb. Dubim 36 Egel 88
Egela 68 Ere 30 Erem 278 Ez 230 Gamal 42 Gajedor 20 Gedaijm 247 Gedi 640
Gedioth 247 Haissim 247 Hanakae 534 Izbethsch-neth 230 Karas 712 Keleb 137
Kebesch Kabsa Kibsa 598 Kipod 277 Koph, Kophin 2 Labi 456 Laisch 456 Lamas 137
Lebiah 456 Merodo 30 Namer 576 Neelimah 598 Oach 495 Ochim 6 Oker 121 Par 88
Para 68 Pered pirdah 556 Perot 498 Phorade 706 Rachel, Rechelim 598 Reem 712
Sair Skirim 13 Schanar, Schunara 102 Schaphan 110 Schor 68 Schojanim 456 Scgull
221 Sch 598 Seir 230 Sus Susah 281 Tahaz 750 Tahel 598 Tachasch 33 Tartak 20
Thates Theheh 598 Tinschemet 497 Tigros 706 To 57 Tor, Taur 60 Zanier 101 Zebi
Zebiah 114 Zeir 230 Zijm 6 Zeeb Zeebim 734 Zebah Ibid
Caldey.
ABir 60 Acbera 503 Aldub 36 Ana 101, 598 Alphec 568 Aielah 121 Ariauan 456
Arneba 264 Arebue, Arnebetis 264 Aschuta 498 Bakera 68 Beira 192 Caupeda 278
Chasira 661 Culdah 726 Caudaha 556 Daboube 36 Duba 36 Deeba 734 Deba 101 734
Dikerim Eastoz 495 Gamela, Gemele 92 Gadeia 247 Iacle 445 Imar 598 Ize 220
Kacheobeon 495 Kalba 137 Kophin 2 Leta 456 Meriah 68 Oza 230 Rachlak 598
Ramakin Susuatha 28 Schedin 13 Teias-iaii 230 Thaal 221 Thabia Tabitha 114
Thapsa 110 Tora, Torata 68 Thor. 68 Zephirah 101
Arabian.
ACanthil 661 Aduldus 278 Albednester 44 Alborach 32 Alnegeb 92 Alraneb 110
Asad 456 Bagel 281 Bakar 68 Beal 556 Behitz 192 Chabal 221 Chalcail 221 Dakh
230 Darasch 33 Dib 134 Dubbe 36 Egel 598 Ernab 264 Fer or phar 503 Gemal 92
Genas 598 Hazir 661 Iebu 456 Kabsa 631 Kalbe 137 Kaniser 661 Kony 498 Lanebaraz
498 Leseiathin 13 Maez 230 Metahan 230 Mesch, Misch, Almisch 551 Ohal 445
Pelagoz 498 Sarapha 101 Sasgona 33 Schaah 230 Scrofa 661 Taur 60 Teus 230
Thabin 114 Thaleb 221 Vebar 110
Saracens.
ADuldul 588 Adualbul 588 Adulbus 588 Aherha 588 An-se 230 Arneph 264 Alhamet
638 Alchercheden 712 Bakiron 712 Caldah 726 Ceusud or Coufeud 278 Colty 498
Fara 503 Ganeme Garien 598 Hesel 88 Kep-Kolph 137 Kat 102 Sebey 456 Shymel 92
Sousias 281
Persian.
ASthak 33 Ahu 114 Asteban 230 An mus 503 Angurbah-Dedach Asbacha 281
Begauzerah 110 Bara 598 Behad 192 Busan 230 Buz 230 Buz-galaie 230 Cahali Busan
247 Chare 20 Deuan 13 Gehad 416 Geuazen 121 Gosalai 68 Gospand 598 Gurba 726
Kargos 264 Komeschan-Thu 598 Kotziotu 445 Medagaucha 68 Mar-an-Buk 661 Nadgaeah
68 Nerameisch 631 Sag 137 Schetor 92 Seraphah 101 Scher 456
THE GREEK NAMES
AGargas: Aigastro, 246 Agrim 113 Agelada 68 Aegoceros 445 Aix 130 Aeluros 102
Acanthonocos 278 Acanthocoiros 588 Amnos 640 Ariake 631 Arnos, Arnab 640 Arni.
640 Alke 212 Alogo 281 Allop^ihekos 19 Anebros 121 Alopekon, Alopex, Alopon 221
Analopos 1 Aptolos Ibid. Aspalax 498 Arctos 36 Arctopithekos 19 Astrabe 556
Beiros 36 Bisoon 50 Bolinthus 53 Bonassos 53 Boubalos, Boubalis 57 Bous Boes 68
Camelos 92 Camelopardalis 101 Castor 44 Cercopithecos 6 Cher 278 Chimaron 230
Ceraste 631 Choiros 661 Cynokephalos Damalis 68 Damalai 68 Dasyllys 36 Dasypos
couniclos 110 Dorcas 115 Dromos 97 Dorcalis Dorcadion Ibid. Echin^s 278
Echydris 562 Enarchan 230 Erifon 247 Eriphoi 247 Elaphos 121 Elatica 144
Elephas 192 Galeopithekos 18 Gala Agria 216 Gale 726 Hemionos 556 Hippos 261
Hus 661 Hystrix. 558 Ibanauge 726 Indouros 499 Ictis 216 Ixalon 246 Ixalos 445
Kapron 661 Kallithrix 8 Kattes Katis 102 Kepos Kebos 7 Killos 20 Kriare 631
Kuon 137 Lagis Georchios 110 Laphe Pelaphe 121 Lagos Lagoos 264 Leon 456 Lugx
489 Lycos 734 Lytra 572 Lugos 734 Mygale 534 Leporis 264 Myoxos 326 Mys
aroaraios 542 Megamukos 20 Mimoon 2 Monops Monopios 53 Monios 36 Monokeros. 712
Moschos Mouschari 88 Myss 503 Murmeleon 706 Onos 20 Orthoponticos 499 Oijs 598
Perissas 192 Pithecos 2 Plagtognos, platyceros, Prox 113 Ptox 364 Pardales
Pardalis Panther 575 Poephagos 587 Probaton 598 Rastes 509 Riscos 519 Satyros
13 Schanzochoeros 588 Siphne^s 499 Sciuros 656 Skunax 110 Skele 110 Skilos
Skile 137 Sphinx 17 Suarctos 33 Suagros 61 Tarandos 55 Tauros 60 Theureticos
144 Tragelaphus 118 Tragos 230 Tigris Tigre 706 Zarkadi 115 Zon, Zona 558
LATIN NAMES
Aegop^thecus 16 Africana, id est, Panthera 575 Agnus 640 Alce 212 Allocamelus
102 Alpinus mus 521 Alzabo, id est hyaena 435 Ana 101 Analapos 1 Aper 694
Araneus mus 534 Arctopithecus 19 Aries 631 Armelini 726 Asinus 20 Asini cornuti
in Scythia and Africa 31 Asinus Indicus 32 Axis 32 Bef^i 2 Bison 50 Bison albus
Scoticus 52 Bonasus 52 Bos 68 Bos camelites 724 Boues feri diuersi 721 Boues
feri Indici 724 Boues Libyci 724 Boues Paeonici 72 Boues Troglodytici 50
Bubalus de genere boum, vulgo buffalus 57 Bubalus veterum, de genere ca prearum
Burdo 29 Buselaphus 66 Cacus 92 Callithrixsimia 8 Calopus 1 Camelus
simpliciter, vel Bactriana 92 Camelus dromas vel Arabica 97 Camelopardalis, vel
Camelus Iudica 101 Camp 103 Canic^p^, id es^ cynocephalus 10 Canis 137 Canes
diuersi 164 Canes aquatici, hoc est in aquis mergi and nat^re consueti 154
Canes aucupio seruientes 154 Canes bellicosi Canes bigeneres vel mixti 154
Canes custodes in genere Custodes priuatarum and publicarum aedium 160
Priuatarum 264 Canis defensor hominis Canis fidelis vel post mortem domini
Canis fluuiatilis, id est, lutra 572 Canis Getulis 161 Canis inutilis Canis
melitaei 161 Canis mimicus 161 Canes mixti vel bigeneres 154 Canis nauticus
Canis pastoralis Canis sagax, and de inuestigatione animalum Canes Scotici 149
Canis socius and fidelis Canis velox Canes venatici ingenere Canis venaticus
robustus, aduersus magnas aut fortes feras Canis villaticus 160 Capra 230
Caprae Indicae imagines 235 Caprae syluestres 243 Caprea, capreolus 115
Capreolus moschi 551 Capricornus 246 Caestor 44 Catoblepon 262 Catus seu feles
102 Catus syluestris 107 Catus paludis 572 Centauri 337 Cepus 7 Cercopithecus 6
Cercopitheci Prasiani and alij magni 9 Ceruus 121 Ceruus Palmatus 113 Ceruus
subulo 114 Chaus 488 Chiurca mustelarum generis Choeropitheci 3 Cicalus 675
Citellus vel mus Noricus 532 Colos 108 Cricetus de genere murium 529. Crocuta
440 Cuniculus 110 Cuniculus aut porcellus Indicus 112 Cynocephalus 10 Dama
Plinij, cui cornua in aduersum adunca 243 Dama rentiorum, id est, caprea
platyceros 103 Dama vel damula promustela 25 Dictys 137 Dorcas, id est caprea
115 Dromas camelus, vulgo dromedarius. 97 Eale 19 Echinus terrestris 278
Elephas 192 Emptra 551 Equus 281 Erinaceus vel echines 278 Ericius syluestris
588 Feles seu catus 102 Felis zibethi Fiber seu castor 44 Furo alias furettus,
furunculus, fretta 216 Galeopithecus 18 Genetha 228 Ginnus 29 Giraffa 101 Glis
526 Gorgon and deinceps 262 Gulo 261 Haiit 19 Hinnus 29 Hippelaphus 326
Hippopotamus 388 Hircus 230 Hoedus 247 Hystrix 588 Ibex 445 Ichneumon 448 Ictis
216 Innus 29 Lamia 452 Lardirone Lassicius mus 546 Latax 575 Lauzanum 568 Leo
456 Leopardus 575 Et priuatim de eo Lepus 164 Leucrocuta 442 Lupus 732 Lupus
Arabiae 734 Lupus Armenius 734 Lupus aureus 734 Lupus catus 440 Lupus ceruarius
488 Lupus marinus 749 Lupus vespertinus 435 Lutra 572 Lutrae congeneres Ibid
Lycaon 734 Lycopantheros 750 Lynx 488 Lynx Indica vel Africana 488 Maesolus 575
Mantichora 442 Martes 495 Meles, vulgo taxus 33 Melitaei canes 261 Monoceros
656 Monops 52 Monstrum in ditione episcopi Salceburgens. captum 15 Moschi
capreolus 551 Mulus 556 Mus 503 Mures agrestes 542 Mus alpinus 521 Mus
aquaticus 520 Mus araneus 534 Mus auellanarum 545 Muscaecus, qui and araneus
accipitur etiam pro talpa 534 Mures diuersi 731 Mures diuersi secundum regiones
ordine literarum Mus Getulus 533 Mus Indicus 548 Mus mayor domesticus, vulgo
rattus 519 Mus Lassicius 546 Mus napelli 544 Mus Noricus vel Citellus 532 Mus
peregrinus 548 Mus Pharaonis 448 Mus Ponticus seu Venetus vulgo Varius 532 Mus
syluaticus 544 Mus Venetus 532 Musmon vel Musimon 642 Mustela 725 Mustela
rustica 725 Mustela Sobella 756 Nabis 101 Neades vel Neides 567 Noerza
mustelaru^ generis 756 Onager 30 Onager Indicus 32 Oraflus vel Orasius 101 Oryx
570 Ouis 598 Ouis platycercos and macrocercos 600 Oues ferae 598 Pan 16 Panther
575 Panthera vel pardalis, pardus 575 Papio 439 Pathio 751 Pirolus 656
Poephagus 587 Porcos 572 Putorius vulgo dictus 219 Pygmaei 3 Rangifer vel
raingus 591 Rattus 519 Rhinoceros 595 Rhizes 723 Rupicaprae figura hstioria 244
Sagoin 18 Satherium 575 Satyrum 575 Satyrus simia 13 Satyri daemones 14 Sciurus
656 Sciurus Getulus 659 Serapha 101 Simia 2 Simia callitrix 8 Simia caudata 6
Simia Prasianae and aliae magnae 9 Simivulpa 19 Sobella e genere mustelaru^ 756
Sorex 546 Sphinx simia 17 Spinx fabulosa 17 Spiriolus 656 Strepsiceros 655 Su
660 Svbus 660 Suillus pro Ichnevmone 418 Sus 661 Talpa 498 Tarandus 55 Tatus
705 Taurus 60 Taxus, vide Meles 33 Those 750 Thuro in Tarando and feorsim 55
Tigris 706 Tragelaphus 118 Vacca 63 Varius, id est mus vel sciurus Ponticus aut
Venetus 532 Veruex 638 Vitulus 88 Viuerra 216 Vormela vulgo dicta e genere
mustelarum 756 Vncia 568 Vrsus 36 Vrus 721 Vulpes 221 Vulpes C^ucigera 222
Zabo, id est hyaena 455 Zibethifeles 755 Zobel genoris mustelarum 756 Zubro 50
ITALIAN AND SPANISH NAMES.
AGno 640 Alicorno 712 Asini bastardi vel nani 29 Babuino 10 Ballottula 726
Beccho 230 Bertuccia 2 Biuaro vel beuero 44 Bue 68 Bufalo 57 Camello 92 Camuza
246 Cane 137 Capra 230 Cauretto 247 Capriola vel cauriolo 115 Castoreo 44
Castrone vel castrato 638 Cauallo 281 Cauretto vel capretto 247 Ceruo 121
Ciacco Florentinus 661 Ciauarello 247 Cinghiale vel cinghiare 694 Conigli 110
Daino vel danio 113 Dannola 726 Dromedario 9 Foino 726 Galero 521 Gatto 102
Ghiro vel gliero 521 Histrice 588 Istrice 588 Lardirono vel lardirolo 552
Lasino 207 Leocorno 712 Leofant^ 192 Leone 456 Leonpardo 575 Lepre 264 Lieuora
264 Lionfante 192 Lodralodria vellontra 572 Lonza 568 Lupo 734 Lupo ceruario
488 Lupo chatt 440 Maiale 661 Marturo, vel martaro, vel mar turello 495 Montone
vel ariete 631 Mulo 556 Capriolo del Musco 551 Musco 551 Muserain vel
muzeraigne Rhetis 534 Mustela Rhaetis Latinum nomen retinet Orso 93 Pantegana
Venetis, mus mayor domesticus 119 Pardo 575 Pecora 598 Porca fattrice* 661
Porco 661 Porco castrato 661 Porco syluatico 694 Porco spinoso 588 Rato di casa
503 Riccio vel rizo 278 Samada Maionio 2 Schiriuolo vel schirato 656 Scrofa 661
Simia 2 Sorgo morgange 520 Sorgio moschardino 542 Sorice alias sorgio 503
Sourco 503 Stainbucc 445 Talpa 498 Tasso 33 Rhaetis tasch. Tigre vel tigra 706
Topo 503 Topo ragno 534 Toro 60 Troia vel troiata 661 Vacca 68 Vesina Rhaetis
ibex foemina 445 Vitello 88 Volpe 221 Vnicorno 712 Zebelli vel zibelli 755
Spanish.
Asno 20 Buey 68 Bufano 57 Cabra 230 Cabrito 247 Cabron 230 Cabronzillo montes
115 Camello 92 Capra montez 246 Carnero 631 Castor 44 Cauallo 281 Cieruo 121
Comadreia 726, 656 Coneio 110 Cordero 640 Corz 113 Dromedario 97 Elephante 192
Erizo 278 Esquilo sciurus 659 Furam 226 viuerra Ga^no 113 Gato 102 Gato montes
107 Hebre 164 Harda 656 sciurus Huron viuerra 216 Iauali 694 aper Leon 456
Leonpardo, vel leon pardal 575 Liebre 264 Liron 521 Lobo 734 Marta 445 Mona 2
Mulo 556 Musco 552 Nutra 527 lutra Orso vel oso, vel osso 36 Oueia 598 Perro
137 Puerco 661 Puerco siluestro, vel Puerco montes 694 Puerco espin 588 Raposa
221 Rat 503 Raton 519 Ratan pequenno 546 Sorice. and 546 Sorce 546 Tasugo 33
meles Ternera 88 vitulus Texon 33 meles Topo 503 Vaca 63 Vnicornio 712 Ximio 2
FRENCH NAMES.
AGneau 640 Asne 20 Babion 20 Baccal circa Metas mustelam vocant, (Gallice
puto.) 726 Bedouo 686 meles Belette, belotte, balotto 726 Belier 631 Beuf 68
Beuffle 57 Biche 121 Bieure 44 fiber Blaireau, alias blaureau 33 meles Bouc 230
Brebis 598 Caion 661 Cerf 111 Chameau 92 Chat 102 Cheual 281 Cheureuel chieure
230 Cheureau 247 Cheureul 115 Chien 137 Chiens augues Chien limier Coche 661
Cochon 661 Connin 101 Dain vel daim 113 Dromadere 97 Elephant 192 Eseurieu vel
eschureau 656 Foina vel fouina 495 726 Furon, furet, vel fuson fuset Grisart 33
Herisson 278 Herminne 726 Leopard vel Lyopard 575 Lerot 545 Leure Sabaudis
lutra 572 Loir 521 Loup 734 Loup ceruier 388 Loup chat 488 Vide in Additionibus
and castig. super eadem pagina. Loutre 572 Lieure 264 Licorne 712 Lion 456
Lyron vel rat liron 521 Margotus 521 Marmot 6 Martre 495 Martes soublines 755
Mouton 638 Mulet, mulus, foem, mule 556 Mullot 542 Musc 551 Cheureul du musc
551 Muserain, vel muzeraigne mus araneus 534 Muset, vel musette, idem Sabaudis
534 Ours 36 Porc chastre 661 Porc sanglier 694 Porc espic 588 Porceau 661
Porcelet 661 Poutois vel poytois 219 Pouttet 219 Ran 631 Rangiar vel ranglier
591 Rat 519 Rat d'eau 520 Rat liron vel rat veul 521 Regnard Sagoni 18 Sanglier
694 Sery Burgundis mus araneus 534 Singe 2 Souris 503 Tasson, taisson, taxion
tesson 33 Taulpe 498 Tigre 706 Toreau 61 Truye 661 Vache 68 Veau 88 Verrat 661
Celtica vetus lingua cercepithecos vocabat Abranas
GERMAN.
AEkermauss 520 Aeber 663 Aff 2 Auwerochs 50 Babion 10 Bar oder beer 36 Barg
661 Biber 44 Bilchmuss 532 Bisemthier 551 Bock 230 Bogner 638 Boll 60
Baummarder 495 Baumruter 107 Bracken 150 Brandhirsch 118 Bussel 57 Wild gross
buffel Buchmarder 495 Dam, damlin, damhirsch dannhirsch 113 Dars 33 Doruschwein
588 Eichorn oder eyehoru 656 Einhorn 712 Elch, ellend 212 Elg 212 Erdmauss 542
Esel 20 Farle oder varle 661 Far oder varr 60 Feech oder veech 532 Feldmarder
495 Feldmauss 542 Fiechtmarder 495 Frette oder frettel 216 Frischling 638 Fuchs
221 Fuchsaff 19 Furette 226 Galtz 661 Geiss 265. Indische geissen Gems 246
Genithkatz 228 Gize 247 Grauwerck 532 Greul 521 Halemlin 726 Hagen 60 Hammel
638 Hamster oder hamestervnd 529 Harnball 546 Hass oder haas 264 Haselmauss
Gross haselmuss 545 Heilwider 651 Helfant 192 Hermelin 726 Hesshnnd 150 Hyn
121 Hind, hindkalb 121 Hirs, hirs, hirsch 121 Hodenwider 632 Haupthar 36 Hund
137 Hundsigel 150 Haussmarder 495 Iagbund 137 Ybsch oder Ibschgeis 445 Igel 278
Iltis 216 Iseren verk 78 Kalb 88 Kame el oder kamelthier 92 Katz 102 Wild katz
Kitzlein 247 Knutscher 638 Kornfarle 529 Kunele, kunigle, kunlein 100 Ku 68
Kurshund Corsici canes Lamb 649 Lassitz 546 Lefrat 575 Leidthund 137 Leem oder
lemmer murium genus in Norduegia vocatur 726 Leppard 755 Lew 457 Liechtmarder
595 Lochhundle 136 Loos 661 Luchs oder lux 488 Luckmus 541 Marder oder marter
495 Wild marter 495 Meerk atz Kleine meerkatzen 9 Meerschwyn 588 Mistbellerle
541 Mol oder molmuss 498 Flandrice Molmuss Hollandis. Moor 661 Mulleresell 20
Multhier, mulesel 556 Mulwerff oder molwurf 498 Saxonice Mummelsher 60
Murmelthier, murmentle 521 Mus 563 Muker 534 Nork 768 Nulmuss oder nielmuss 542
Ochs 68 Otter 572 Pantherthier 575 Pile 532 Porcopick 588 Pundten 532 Ranichen
631 Ratz 519 Reh oder reech 115 capreolus. Et pro hinnulo cerui. Rell oder
rellmuss 521 Reen, rein, reyner, reinger, renschieron 591 Rind 68 Rossz 281
Ruden 136 Schaaff 598 Schar oder scharmuss 542 Schormuss 542 Schrettele 13
Schwyn, schwein 661 Wild schwyn 694 Schemmickel oder simme simia Flandris.
Slaepratte 543 Flandricum. Spizmus 534 spanfarle 661 Spurhund 136
Stachelschwein 588 Steinbock 445 Steinmarder 495 Stier 60 Stossmus 542 Suw, su,
saw 661 Sewigel 110 Tachmarder 495 Tachs 33 Taran 588 Thanmarder 495 Thierwolf
749 Tigerthier 706 Varr, far 66 Varle, Farle, verf 66 Vech, feeh 657 Vilfra
261 Visent oder wisent ( alias voesent) 50 Grossevisent 721 Vogelhund 136
Vorstendhund 136 Vos 22. Vulpes Flandrice Vrochs 143 Waldesel 50 Wasserhund 154
Wassermus 520 Weeck 532 Wider 631 Wilprecht 121 cerua Windspiel 136
Turckischewind 136 Wisele 726 Wolff 734 Wormlein 756 Wucherstier, das mucher 60
Zibeth fatz 756 Zysel oder zeisel 532 Zissmenss die grossen 534 Zytku 88 Zobel
755 Zundmarder 595
ILLIRIAN.
BAbion 10 Bauwol 570 Beram 638 Bobr 44 Ceruiro 488 Furioz 102 Gaynus Brussis
martes est 495 Gednorozecz 712 Gelen 121 Gess 278 Gezwecz 33 Iehjenij 121
Iunecz 60 Keret Polonicum 534 Koczka 102 Kolczawa 726 Konij 281 Koza 230 Kozel
230 Koziel Polonicum 247 Kozoroziecz 304 Korytaski 246 Kralik vel krolijk 110
Krticze 498 Kun 495 Lanij 113 Lanij (cerua) Polonicum 121 Lasica Polonicum 546
Lew 456 Lewhart 755 Lisska 221 Loni Bohemicum 52 Los 212 Malox 278 Mezeck 556
Myss 505 Morska koczka 6 Nedwed Bohemice 36 Niemegkamyss 546 Opicze 2 Osel 20
Otzijscax 248 Owcze 598 Pes vel pas 137 Pizmo 551 Pouuod Polonicum 712
Porcospino 588 Prase 661 Rys 488 Rossomak animal apud Lituanos and Moscouitas
261 Sarna 521 Sczurek Polonicum 521 Sczurcz 504 Sysel Bohemice 529 Skop 651
Slon 192 Sniatky Mosconiticum 108 Sobol vel Sobol 756 Srna 115 Swinie 261
Tchorz 219 Tur vel thuro Polonicum 55 Tzuuijerzatko 369 Vijdra Polonicum 767
Vislij canes robustissimi Polonis 136 Vuelblud 92 Weprz 55 Wewer Polonicum 734
Wewerka vel wijewijerka 657 Vuydra 572 Wlka 734 Wul 60, 68 Zagicz 264 Zubr vel
zubro 50
FINIS.

