VERA EFFIGIES S. FRANCISCI XAVERII SOCIETATIS IESV. OBIIT A. M.D.LII. AET. LII.



THE ADMIRABLE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER.

Divided into VI. Books

Written in Latin by Fa. HoratiUs Tursellinus of the Society of JESUS

And translated into English by T. F.

PRINTED AT PARIS. Anno Dom. M.DC.XXXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY DOROTHY SHIRLEY.
RIGHT HONORABLE, HAVING translated the R. Father Horatius Tursellinus History
of S. Francis Xauiers life, out of Latin into English; I am emboldned, setting
all former des^gnes aside, to dedicate the same unto your Honor.

The times will not permit me to express to the World, the Reasons and
Grounds I have in my Heart, for so bold a resolution. The Almighty Spectator
sees and beholds them, in whose divine applause I rest fully comforted, and
content. Yet thus much I neither can, nor will conceal: Your Noble Lineage,
far more ennobled with the rare dispositions of your Mind, has made me not
to rest, until I resolved to leave behind me to the world, this first,
perpetual Monument of the deserved Respect, and Regard, I owe unto Your
Honor.

Hearing also, which is famous over all our Land, with how great Resolution
and Constancy, your Honor had stood firm, and immovable in the Profession of
the Catholic Roman Faith, and this even in the middst of strongest Reasons,
Trials, and Prouocations to the contrary; I could not but design the
Worthiest Champion of the same Faith, to be held up, and embraced in the chaste,
and constant arms, of so Worthy and Renowned a Personage, as your Honor.

This self-same Faith which has been by You so Heroically maintained, did this
Holy and Religious Man S. Francis Xauier, carry on alo^g in these our days,
not only into India, and the utmost Orient; but first of all did bring it also,
into that stout, and Warlike Iapony, now much more ennobled, with the purpled
Blood of so many Glorious Martyrs that have laid down their dearest lives, in
testimony, and defense thereof. And therefore, as he went before in Latin under
the Protection of the Vicar of Christ, Pope Clement the eight; so now it will
not seem amiss, that he appear in English under the Patronage of your
Honorable Favor: And by your Means brought, as it were, out of India into
England, there made known and vievved of all.

You, MADAME, shall be a Patroness to your Patron, and a Mother to your holy
Father S. Francis Xauier, attired in this English Habit, which I have made for
him. If I have lessened him with my Translation, You may comfort your self
with the incomparable vvorth of so renowned a Patron. If I make him less,
yet the King of Trauancoris, together with his subjects, styled him GREAT
FATHER, and by his Royal Edict commanded, that all should obey the GREAT
FATHER as himself. The King of Amangucium in Iapony, joyfully received
Presents from him, and heaped Royal favors upon his son. The King of Bungo
sent for him by letters, honorably entertained, protected, reverenced, and
admired him. John the third King of Portugal, who first moved and caused his
going into India, gave into his hands the Popes letters Patents, whereby he
was made Apostolical Legate in the East, seconded him with his Royal Favor,
commanded his Acts to be sought out, iuridically examined, and proved. When
they came to his hands, he sent them to ROME, and by his Ambassadors, labored
to have him a Canonized Saint; which the^ being hindered by the Kings death,
has been of late performed by Pope Gregory the XV. so as now all Catholic
Princes, and Kings bend their Royal knees, and are humbly prostrate to S.
Francis Xauier, yea the Popes triple Crown lies down at his glorious feet.

Besides, that Which I dedicate to your Honor, is not so much a Saints Life,
as a complete History, artificially co^piled with much pleasing variety, and
elegancy; wherein diverse, and sundry courses are traced forth, for all to
follovv. Bishops and Priests, Ecclesiastical and Laymen, Kings and subjects,
Soldiers by Sea and Land, Rich and Poor, all shall find that which belo^gs
unto them. For this holy Saint, though he were so far gone in contemplation,
that force of Celestial joys made him often cry out, It is enough, O Lord, It
is enough: yet was he for all that, never out of Action, but dealing with al
sorts of people wrought himself out, even All to all.

Moreover, so various is this History, as it cannot be but delightful and
pleasant, by reason of so many Countries briefly and lively described; so many
different dispositions and strange manners; so many Rites and Ceremonies of
false Religions, together with sundry superstitions of Idolatrous Priests;
The ignorant Brachmans in India; The superstitious Cacizes in Socotora; The
arrogant Bongi in Iapony, must needs yield a pleasing, and attractiue delight
to all attentive Readers.

Finally (which is most to be esteemed) there will be found shining throughout
this whole History, all kind of heavenly wonders and miracles; not as Tongues
only from Heaven, a^nouncing Gods Glory, Goodness, Providence, and
Munificence; but as certain divine Marks also, of S. Francis Xauiers most
eminent Sanctity.

Wherefore, as I consider his glorious VVorth, upon my knees I pray unto him
that he would vouchsafe to be a singular and special Patron to your Honor;
but as he he goes vested in this English attire which I have made him, I
humbly request, your Honor would be pleased to be a Patroness unto him.
Wherein I rest confident, and

Your Honors, Humble Servant, and Beadsman, T. F.

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
TRVE it is, Nothing is begun and ended at one, and the self same time; nor
are after-thoughts only, better then the works themselves. Some years past, I
wrote the like of Francis Xauier, with as much exactnes and fidelity, as
possibly I could: but the very shape thereof, when I saw it (being diuulged in
my absence) could I hardly know, it was so defiled and distayned with faults.
Nor came it forth, indeed, more faulty, then mayned. For when as formerly the
King of Portugal had commanded Xauerius famous Deeds to be sought out by his
Viceroy of India; those things only of note, which he had wrought within the
Portugheses dominions, were then collected, and set down: nor yet those
entierely neither, but only such, as could be known, and testified by
sufficient Witnesses that were present. As for his other acts, especially those
which he performed among the Chinese and Iaponians (although very memorable
and illustrious) they were for the most part, as yet, detayned in silence, and
obscurity.

Those therefore in like manner coming at last unto my hands, and being written
by such persons as at that time conuersed with the Iaponians and Chinese; I
was not unwillingly induced to set my self to work again, by translating
them into Latin, and inserting them in their due place amongst the rest. And
although I was herein to undertake the compiling of almost a new work, and
thereby driven at the first into some fear from the enterprise: yet my love,
as well to Xauerius, as my desire of the public vtility, overcame all the
difficultyes with were presented to my fancy. For so great was the copiousnesse
and worth of his new exploytes, that of four Books (least they might grow
ouer-great) it was necessary to make six. Besides, I have in this, done my best
also, to procure, that, as our Xauerius has hereby gotten a new Make; so he
may appear in public, more corrected and exact, although humane frailty can
never be wary enough against errors. So as, he may well be said a most wise
and just Esteemer of things, who judges that to have bin corrected best, which
in this kind may seem to have fewest faults.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS AND CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
THE Preface. Chap. 1. Of the Lineage, disposition, and education of S. Francis
Xauier.. Page 1. Chap. 2. At Paris, by Ignatius of Loyola, he is converted to a
virtuous Life. Page 5. Chap. 3. His fervor in the mortification of his body,
and study of Perfection. Page 11. Chap. 4. He goes to Venice, with extreme
pain of body. Page 15. Chap. 5. At Venice he serves in the Hospital of the
Incurable* and from thence goes to Rome to the Pope. Page 21. Chap. 6. At
Vincenza he says his first Mass, having first prepared himself thereto. Page
27. Chap. 7. He assisteth the Cities of Bononia, and Rome, with his Sermons.
Page 33. Chap. 8. The Province of India is by God assigned to Xauerius. page
39. Chap. 9. Having been with his Holiness, he goes into Portugal, and gives
arguments of great virtue in the way. page 44. Chap. 10. Being lovingly
entertained by the King of Portugal, he exciteth them of Lisbone to devotion.
page 53. Chap. 11. His journey into India is hindered, but all in vain. page
58. Chap. 12. Being ready to take shipping for India, he receaueth from the
King, the Popes Letters patents of Legate Apostolical, and refuses to take
any thing for the charges of his journey. page 62. Chap. 13. In his journey to
India, he gives admirable tokens of his virtue. page 68. Chap. 14. Serving the
sick, he arriueth at Mozambicum. page 73. Chap. 15. In the Hospital of
Mozambicum he helps the sick, being himself at the same time sick. page
78. Chap. 16. Having stayed a while at Melinda, and in the Island of Socotora,
to the great benefit to the Inhabitants, he arriueth at length in India. page
85.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1. In what state be found India. page 94. Chap. 2. Having gotten the
good will of the Bishop, he begins to labor in India. page 101 Chap. 3. He
very dexterously causes those who kept Co^cubins, either to marry them, or to
put them away: and instructs children and ignorant persons in the Catechism.
page 107 Chap. 4. He procures a College at Goa, for the Soci^^ety. page 113.
Chap. 5. He goes to help the Neophytes, or new Christians of Comorinum. Page
117. Chap. 6. He labors in the Promontory of Comorinum. Page 124. Chap. 7.
Having wrought many miracles by himself, and the new Christians, he is for his
extraordinary Humility, commonly called the Holy Father. Page 131. Chap. 8. He
substituteth Deputies in his place to teach the Christian doctrine, and
procures for them a certain sti^end of the King of Portugal. Page 137. Chap.
9. He conuinceth the Brachmans, and conuerteth some of them. Page 140. Chap.
10. Living in the coast of Piscaria with great joy, and fruit of his labors,
he comfort the Neophites, who were much afflicted. Page 147. Chap. 11. He
conuerteth the Kingdom of Trauancoris to the Christian Faith, and defends
the Neophytes from the Barbarians. Page 153. Chap. 12. Neophytes slain for
Religion, become an ornament to the Christian Faith. Page 159. Chap. 13. Being
transported into the Island of Ceilanum, he ^^claymeth the master of the ship
from a bad life. Page 163. Chap. 14. He visits the Scpulcher of S. Thomas the
Apostle. Page 167. Chap. 15. Being beaten by Devils, he notwithstanding
spends a whole night in Prayer. page 173. Chap. 16. He delivers a possessed
person: and takes ^ohn Durus for his companion. page 177. Chap. 17. He
reformeth the bad lives of the people of Ma^^ca. page 180. Chap. 18. In
Amboynum he gives many signs of his pro^heticall spirit, and charity. page
188.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. 1. He reformeth the Inhabitants corrupted behavior, in the Moluc^as.
page 193 Chap. 2. He resolves to help the Inhabitants of Maurica even with
the hazard of his life. page 197. Chap. 3. He brings the savage people of
Maurica to civil behavior, and instructs them in the Christian Faith. page
204. Chap. 4. He labors the second time, amongst the Ternatians. page 208.
Chap. 5. He fortelleth, and is Author of a notable Victory, which the
Portugheses obtained against the Barbarians. page 212. Chap. 6. He again
visits Amboynum, and labors still amongst them. page 116. Chap. 7. He
instructs the Malacensians with all the care he could: and by divine
revelation he understands a Vision which happened to Durus his Companion.
page 219. Chap. 8. At Malaca he procures a Navy to be set forth against the
Acenians, enemies of Christianity. page 223. Chap. 9. Having lost their
Admiral, he foretells the coming of two other ships unto them, and stirs
up the slothful who drew back, to fight courageously. page 229. Chap. 10.
The Portugheses, by Xaurerius solicitation, obtain a great victory against
the Barbarians. page 333. Chap. 11. Xauerius foretells to the Malacensians
the obtaining of the foresaid victory, whereof he had been the sollicitour. page
239. Chap. 12. A Iaponian is by conference with Xauerius, converted to the
faith of Christ. page 244. Chap. 13. Having escaped a tempest at sea, he
prescribes precepts to those of the Society of Comorinum. page 249. Chap. 14.
Returning unto Goa, he establishes matters in India. page 257. Chap. 15. He
reclaimeth two Portugheses from a lewd, unto an honest life. page 257. Chap.
16. Having distributed diverse Provinces to others of the Society, himself
determines to go into Iaponia. p. 261. Chap. 17. At Malaca, he does many
things worthy of memory. page 269. Chap. 18. Being carried in a Pirates bark,
he arriueth at ^^st in Iaponia, in despite both of the Pilot and the Devil p.
276.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. He inquireth of the manners, and Religigions of the Iaponians. page
282. Chap. 2. At Cangoxima he conuerteth many to the Christian faith. page 289.
Chap. 3. He rayseth a dead Maid to life: and cures another of the Leprousy.
page 296. Chap. 4. He receaueth news of the Martyrdom of Fa. Antony
Criminalis. page 299. Chap. 5. The course of Christian affairs being hindered
at Cangoxima, he goes to preach the Gospel at Firandum, and Amangucium. page
302. Chap. 6. Of the great pains which he took in his journey to Meaco. page
309. Chap. 7. Having by presents obtained the King of Amangucium his favor, he
conuerteth many to the Christian Faith. page 315. Chap. 8. Having found out the
Sects of the Iaponians, he conuerteth many of them. page 320. Chap. 9. Going to
the King of Bungo, at his inuitement, he is honorably received by the
Portugheses. page 331. Chap. 10. He is conducted to the Kings Court, in great
pomp, by the Portugheses. page 336. Chap. 11. The King of Bungo uses Francis
with honorable respect, although the Bonzies were against it. page 339. Chap.
12. Xauerius instructs the King and people in the mysteries of the Christian
faith, and curbeth the audacity of the Bonzies. page 346. Chap. 13. In a
disputation before the King, he overcomes the most learned of the Bonzies.
page 351. Chap. 14. Francis his constancy whilst the Bonzies be up in tumult.
page 357. Chap. 15. Xauerius gets a new victory over the Chief of the
Bonzies. page 361. Chap. 16. He procures the Kings of Amangucium, and Bungo to
favor Christianity. page 367.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Intending to pass into China, he determines first to return into
India. page 373. Chap. 2. Going into China, he recouereth, by his prayers, a
Cocke-boate which was carried away by the violence of a tempest. page 376.
Chap. 3. He makes the Port of the Chinese, and his voyage to Malaca, very
famous by his Prophesies. page 383. Chap. 4. At Goa he cures one that was
ready to dye: and takes account of what the Society had done, since his
departure. page 389. Chap. 5. Having procured the Embassage before spoken of,
he goes himself to China. page 397. Chap. 6. He Excommunicateth the Governor
of Malaca. page 403. Chap. 7. The design of going with the Ambassador into
China being broken of, Xauerius notwithstanding sets forward thither. page
413. Chap. 8. He endeavors, though all in vain, to open a passage into
China. page 417. Chap. 9. He agrees with a Chinese, to carry him privately to
Cantona. page 423. Chap. 10. His transporting into China being differed, he
^ortelleth his own death. page 429. Chap. 11 He ends his life in most holy
manner. page 434. Chap. 12. His body is buried in quick Lime. page 440. Chap.
13. His body being found whole and incorrupt, is carried to Malaca, and there
again interred. page 443. Chap. 14. His Body is translated from Malaca, into
India. page 449. Chap. 15. His Funeral is kept at Goa, with all solemnity.
page 457. Chap. 16. The great Concourse of people to behold his Holy Body.
page 462.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. By the King of Portugal his command, Francis his deeds, and miracles
are committed to writing. page 468. Chap. 2. How Xauerius fortelleth things
future, and absent, and sees men's inward Thoughts. page 472. Chap. 3. In his
life time, he works miracles of all kinds. page 479. Chap. 4. Miracles
wrought by him after his death. page 486. Chap. 5. Xauerius his fervent love to
Prayer. page 498. Chap. 6. His purity of Heart, and Chastity. page 508. Chap. 7.
His Love of the Cross, and Evangelical Po^erty. page 511. Chap. 8. His
Obedience, and Humility. page 518. Chap. 9. His magnanimity of Mind, and
Confidence in God. page 527. Chap. 10. His charity to God, and his Neighbors.
page 534. Chap. 11. His sweetness of Behavior, and Conversation, joined with
Gravity. page 546. Chap. 12. His Prudence: and the Precepts he gave to the
Rectour of the College of Goa; and to Gaspar the Low-countryman. page 550.
Chap. 13. Precepts given by Xauerius to John Brauius, and others of the
Society. page 565. Chap. 14. What kind of Governors, and Superiors he
required in the Society. page 572. Chap. 15. What kind of men Xauerius wished,
should be in the Society. page 580. Chap. 16. What manner of Preachers he
required in the Society. page 586. Chap. 17. What manner of Confessors
Xauerius required in the Society. page 599. Chap. 18. What kind of persons
Xauerius required for the instruction of souls. page 608.
THE PREFACE.
COURTEOUS READER.

I purpose here to set down the admirable and renowned Life of S. Francis
Xauier: a man specially borne for the salvation of India, and the furthest
Eastern world. Of all the nine first Disciples of our Holy Father S. Ignatius
of Loyola, he most resembled his Master: and of the Society was the first who
labored in India, Iaponia, and those barbarous Countries, opening the way both
for the Indians unto heaven, and for the Society into India; whereby he brought
no less renown, then left example to his Order. For which cause, the whole
Society not without good reason, desired long since to have so fair a
Pourtraicte, beautified with such admirable virtue, lively drawn in colors
for Ours to behold; seeing the glorious exploits of Predecessors, do commonly
inflame the hearts of generous spirits, with a certain kind of heavenly fire,
which hardly can be quenched, until by imitation they become true patterns of
their noble Virtues.

Now, as on the one ^ide I perceived, that other Authors in their Histories,
had with great honor, touched Xauerius chiefest acts: so was I on the other
^ide not a little grieved, that for the space of above 35. years, there had
bin none who thought upon the setting forth his life (then shining with so many
and so illustrious virtues) in a proper volume by it self, either by giving
that charge, to some other, or by undertaking it themselves. Wherefore being
moved of late, as well through persuasion of some dearest friends, as (which is
more) by the command of Superiors to undertake the same, I was put in some
hope to perform, what others had conceived of my ability therein; and for my
devotion to Xauerius, I was not only not unwilling, but very willing also, as
time should afford, to set upon this task, to the end the memory of a man so
worthy, yea even of immortality it self, and who triumphs now in heaven,
might be renewed, not only to the minds of our own Religious, but to Posterity
also.

Moreover, it seems unto me, this falls out, not so much by humane, as
divine providence, that even at this time his most industrious and laborious
manner of life, should be laid open to the view of Ours, when as we behold
such a glorious harvest of souls brought in from those far countries, which by
him were first cultiuated and manured. For now the news is brought unto us, of
the conversion of many great Princes and Kings of Iaponia, with almost all
their people, to the Christian faith; and of a passage also, through Gods
assistance, made into China for the preaching of the Gospel there, which was
hertofore by the Devils craft wholly stopped, and even ra^pier'd up as well with
walls, as laws. Both which certainly next after God, we must attribute to
holy Xauerius who not only lead the way to our Society for the conversion of
those Nations, but left that enterprise also fully ready, and easy to be
compassed.

Wherefore my intention is to set down here in writing the life of this most
Blessed man, being full of all variety of matter. And though my Will and
Desire be more ready to obey, then either Ability or Hope to satisfy; yet
confiding in Xauerius prayers for whose sake I undertook the work, and also
in the divine power of Obedience, I trust my Forces will in some sort be
answerable to my Will, and my Endeauours to Expectation. The which, if through
my slendernes I be not able to bring to pass; yet shall I gain this much at
least, that my endeauours, how poor soever, may serve to stir up others,
more studious and industrious, to undertake the same And howsoever it falls
out, I will nevertheless reserve this comfort to my self, that I have bin
obedient to my chiefest Father, and (as much as in me lay) endeavored to
preserve the memory of so great, and holy servant of God. For peraduentnre I
may give future Ages to understand from what seed so plentiful a harvest of
new Christians, in those desert places, has sprunge, whereof that most
industrious and skillful Husbandman, who sowed in tears, has with abo^ndant
joy, brought his handful home. And albeit our Predecessors have studied more
how to express the worthy acts of Francis in their deeds, then put them down
in writing; yet will I gather only that which is either extant in approved
Authors, or else is come unto my hands from those who have been present, or have
had them from eye witnesses of the same.

First then, concerning his infancy and childhood I shall set down some few
things, which my self came to know by Martin Azpilqueta of Nauar (some few
months before his death) a man for virtue and learning famous, who was both
kinsman, and in former times companion also to Xauerius. For the rest of his
life, those who conuersed with him, when his virtue did not so greatly appear,
neglected to observe; but when as afterward it began to show it self unto the
world, the King of Portugal commanded his acts to be more carefully observed,
and put down in writing; and for this reason we have not all the parts of his
life furnished alike with virtues and worthy deeds. Nor do I think that those
who knew the life of our Father Ignatius, will take any great delight in
reading the beginnings of Xauerius, or those first acts of his fervent virtue,
as known for the most part unto the^ already, but will rather make have to
those other of his notable Acts in India: yet must they remember, that seeing
from those first beginnings Xauerius became so noble a souldi^r of Christ
(although for just causes his deeds have been related otherwhere) they ought not
therefore ^o be passed over with silence in their proper place. But now let us
come unto his life it self, where we will first speak of his parentage, which
was very Noble, on either side.

TO S. FRANCIS XAVIER the Apostle of India, and Iaponia, upon his Motto, {Satis
est, Domine, satis est.}
Enough, O Lord, Enough, are thy loud thanks,
When drops of Heavens dew hearts bou^dlesse banks
All-ouerflowing are, like Ocean main:
Thy Brest's too narrow for so large a strain,
Enlarge, O Saint, thy souls most inward rooms,
Embosome all that Power, which streaming comes:
Children of thine stand under, who are blessed
In taking in their fill, thy Ouer-feast.
T. F.

OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER.
THE I. BOOK.
Of the Lineage, disposition, and education of S. Francis Xauier. CHAP. I.
IN that part of Navarre, which lies toward Spain, at the foot of the
Pyrenaean mountains, not far from Pamplona the head City of that Kingdom,
there is situate a Castle called Xauerium, fortifyed both by nature and art,
the ancient and proper mansion of the family of the Xauiers, where until this
day is to be seen the place where S. Francis Xauier was borne; for the Nobility
(according to the custom of that Country) dwells for the most part in
Castles out of Towns. His Ancestors, for their warlike prowess, and approved
loyalty to their Kings, have purchased to themselves and their posterity, many
great Honors and Dignities, and have been no less renowned for their own
virtue, then their Sovereigns favors toward them.

His kindred by the mothers side, was very Illustrious and Noble; The antiquity
whereof may for almost a thousand years together, His Nobility of birth.
draw a very fair pedigree of famous Warriors, testified by approved
monuments. His Grandfather by the same line was named Martin Azpilqueta, a man
no less noble for his own virtue, then for the greatness of his Ancestors, who
was now almost the only branch left of that most renowned family. He took to
wife Ioane Xaueria, a Virgin in honor equal to himself. By her he had issue
an only daughter called Mary, the stem and hope of both families; so that,
two of the noblest families of Nauar depended upon the life of this young
Mayde^; who was no less emine^t for beauty the^ virtue as being answerable
therein to her most excellent Name.

She was joined in marriage to John Iassus, a man Noble both for antiquity of
his family and wealth, His Parents.
but especially for his learning and prudence, as being the chief
Priuy-Cou^sellour to King John of Navarre. He now having through the persuasion
of his Father-in-law, removed his dwelling from the Castle Iasso the ancient
Seat of his Ancestors, to Xauerium his wives Ioynter, and having more
fortunate success in marriage then his said Father-in law had, provided better
for the family of the Xauiers then his own. For having by Mary many children
(whereof this our Francis was one) he began to take great care how he might
keep up, two of the most ancient families of Nauar, which were now somewhat in
declining. Whereupon he resolved to leave the Name of his own Family, although
it were neither mean nor obscure, and to give his children, and posterity the
name of his wives kindred; so as some of them were called Azpilqueta's, others
Xauiers. These therefore were the Parents and Ancestors of Francis Xauier,
borne in the year of our Lord 1497. and reign of King John of Navarre, and of
Pope Innocentius the VIII. He was the least of all his brothers, yet as another
David the greatest by Gods holy Providence designed to that perfection of
sanctity whereunto he arrived, by assistance both divine and humane.

From his cradle he was brought up in the bosom of his most virtuous Parents,
His Education.
and by them instructed in all Piety during his childhood. He was also in his
young and tender youth trained up by careful Tutors, in those arts, whereby the
understanding of man is most of all adorned. He was moreover of a very virtuous
disposition, of an excellent constitution, and comlines of person, of a great
and sharp wit, given more to his book, the^ usually children are. None more
innocent, none more pleasant, none more aff^able then he, His virginal
chastity.
which made him beloved of all both at home and abroad. Yet he was not more
gracious in the eye of the world, then of heaven; whereof this is an evident
argument, that notwithstanding such abounding fortunes, and youthly liberty,
joined to a Personage so beautiful and comely, he was always master over
himself, his Chastity still having predominancy oouer all disordinate
appetites. And by Gods particular assistance he ever preserved the flower of
virginal Integrity, without spot or stayne; so that, the Heavenly spouse,
Cant. c. 2
who feeds among the Lillies, may seem even then to have have taken up his
habitation in his breast.

His Chastity (as is the nature thereof) sharpened his wit, and prepared his
mind as a most pure soil, to receive the seeds of wisdom. Therefore making
no account of his brothers words who went about by warlike discourses to draw
him to be a man of arms (the ancient ornament of their Ancestors) he stuck
close to his resolution, He prefers learning before arms.
and whether stirred up by the late example of his Father, or drawn by the
delight of knowledge, or moved by divine instinct, he preferred the glory of
learning, before warlike praises. Yet the desire of Honor, a deep rooted
Evil by succession from his ancestors, intermingled it self with his best
intentions. For, as great Nobility ordinarily aspireth to excellency; so he by
reason of his liberal Education, became of an high, and lofty spirit. And
relying much upon his wit began to look after great and high matters, thereby
to augment the Honor of his Noble Family. For this cause therefore he
resolved, to furnish himself with the greatest knowledge and learning he
could, the only way, as he thought, to increase in himself both dignity and
wealth; a resolution more glorious to the show, then sound in substance.

CHAP. II.
At Paris, by Ignatius of Loyola, he is converted to a virtuous Life.
THE University of Paris was at that time famous both for antiquity, and
learning, and also very much frequented, in respect of her excellent
Professors and Masters, by the long continuance of peace, the best wits of
Enrope resorting thither to furnish themselves with all kind of eminent
knowledge. Francis therefore being not more desirous of learning then glory, as
soon as he thought himself scholar good enough, went also to Paris; where,
as soon as he came, being admitted into the College of S. Barbara, The
College of S. Barbara.
the chief residence of the whole University both for Readers and Scholars,
^e betoke himself wholly to the study of Philosophy, that he might afterward
with more facility and ease ^pply himself to Divinity.

This generous resolution he secondeth with Co^^ancy, a Virtue able to effect
the greatest matters. He studieth Philosophy at Paris.
He ^as not tired out with continual labors; nor drawn ^y any disordered
pastimes, or pleasures (the greatest ^agues of inconstant youth) from his
intended course. ^ut contrary wise in a School so much frequented, ^^^mulation
of choice wits (the greatest incitement to (...)) drew on more eagerly his
desires, bent wholly (...) the attaining of excellency. And the success was not
unanswerable to his endeavor. So as having no less prosperously then
constantly ended his course of Philosophy, he purchased to himself, not only
learning, but also honor due thereunto* For as soon as he had given worthy
testimony of his labors to the moderatours of the University, he took (as the
custom is) degree of Master: He interprets Aristotle at Paris publicly.
and being also preferred to read Philosophy, he did for sometime explicate
Aristotle there publicly, not without praise. Then from Philosophy he passes
to Divinity, and follows it with the same fervor of spirit, and temper of
life. In this mean time, Francis desirous (as is usual) to maintain his
Nobility and Estimation amongst his Equals, fell into extraordinary expenses,
for which cause, Iassus his Father began to think of calling him home.

Xauierius had at Gandia (a noble City of Spain) an elder sister that was
there Abbess of religious virgins, called, by reason of their austerity of
life, Discalceats, a woman of eminent sanctity. She understanding her fathers
intention, and learning also by diuin^ revelation, what a great man Francis
would one da^ prove, entreated him by her letters very seriously, (...) furnish
Francis (who was yet at Paris, in his chiefe^ studies) with all things
abundantly, A Prophecy concerning his Apostleship in the new world.
and to spare no^ cost, though he should spend al he had upon him; for tha^ God
had ordained him to be the Apostle of the new World, and the further Eastern
parts. These letter are yet extant in the Castle of Xaueriu^, as witnesses o^
this Prophesy, the event whereof afterward proved (...) be true. Iassus therefore
taking courage by the predicti^ of his daughter, of whose eminent Sanctity he
had certain proof, from thenceforth allowed Francis all necessary expenses in
abundant manner. But whilst Xauierius, attending more to Honor, then his own
salvation, directs his study of Divinity to humane ends, Gods powerful hand
intercepted his vain endeauours, and turned the same to a more glorious
pursuit of a pious and holy life.

Francis (as we said before) remained still in S. Barbara's College, and had
for his chamberfellow one ^eter Faber, a Sauoyard by Nation, a man of a greater
^it, then descent. At the same time Ignatius Loyola (...) who afterward was the
Institutour and Founder of the Society of Jesus) coming to Paris, gave himself
also to the study first of Philosophy, and afterward of Divinity. As soon
therefore as he met with Faber and Xauerius, their like dispositions and
studies, as many times it happens, brought them presently acquainted; And at
last Ignatius, His acquaintance with S. Ignatius.
being by them courteously received for companion and chamber-fellow, requited
^his their friendship most abundantly. For percei^ing in them both notable
forward wits, and having ^erfectly found out their natures, he began to draw
them by friendly offices, to give them wholesome co^^ell (as occasion served)
and by sweet means to allure them to the perfection of a Christian life: S.
Ignatius his aduises.
insinuating unto them that they should seriously think with the^^elues, that
man endowed with an immortal Soul ^as not borne for this short and miserable
life, but for ^uerlasting blessedness; and to remember that whatsoever they saw
here, was not so much given to mortal men to use and enjoy, as to bring them
to know and love God; that they should prefer those goods which were eternal
and properly their own, before that which was temporal, and only lent unto
them. For what would it avail a man to gain the whole world, and loose his
own soul? If the son of God himself had now left men most certain means
for salvation, what discretion were it to remain among their deadly enemies
darts without those helps, to defend them? Wherefore they should sometimes, and
that every eight day, if they would follow his advise, arm themselves with the
Sacraments of Confession and the holy Eucharist: for being armed with these
heavenly weapons, they might easily withstand their enemy; whereas being naked
without them, they should as it were give him their throats to cut etc.

These admonitions were not alike grateful, and acceptable to them both.
Faber, who had no great desire to any thing of this world, embraced them with
great affection. But Francis having his mind set fully upon desire of greatness,
wholly rejected them. For he was of a very lively, yet tractable nature, if
evil custom had not corrupted it. Being therefore a young man of a great
spirit, with froward and ouer-thwa^^ answers, oftentimes of set purpose carped
at Ignatius and his words, yea, and sometimes also in very reproachful manner
scoffed at his excellent piety: but he on the other side used all the sweet
means he could to reclaim him from his insolency. And not in vain; for
Patience at last overcame Pertinacy. And Xauerius being by little and little
made tractable, by that so gentle and courteous usage began to bear some
respect toward to him, Ignatius gently handles Francis his wildness.
and at last touched by Gods divine spirit, left himself to be wholly ruled,
and guided by him.

But it is a great matter to go to God with a free mind wholly discharged of all
other affections. For Faber indeed contemning all things of this world, and
having now for the space of four years, frequented the holy Sacraments,
according to Ignatius his advise, it was easy to persuade him to cast off all
other cares, and make himself a soldier in that battle wherein Christ
himself carries the prime Banner. But Xauerius still feeding his mind with
vain hopes and imaginations of Honors, although he embraced the same course
of life, yet stiffly resisted the holy Ghost, and would not follow his Captain
Christ, going forth unto him out of the Camp, Heb. 1^.
carrying his reproach. He was for other things pious and tractable, but in
this one thing hard to be dealt with all. For which cause Ignatius begged him
of God more earnestly with tears; which were not lost.

For Francis his heart being thereby very much ^ollified, comes at last to
bend, and receiving a (...) stroke from heaven concerning the salvation of his
soul, upon a time entered into himself, and began silently to think and
examine what Nature on the one side and what Virtue on the other could say for
themselves. Francis his deliberation about cha^ging his course of life.
Shall I, says he, give ear to God who calls, and ^akedly follow my naked
Savior? But then I must undertake an hard, and abject course of life. Shall I
neglect Gods call, and still retain my Reputation, and manner of life, which I
have begun? But then I am in great danger, that if I draw back when God
calls, he will with indignation laugh at my destruction. But how shall I be
able to bear the bitterness, and ignominy of the cross? What then? shall I
rather choose to take part with the enemies of Christ his Cross, whose end is
destruction, Phil. 3.
and glory in their confusion? with what face shall I look upon mine
aquaintance? How shall I endure to hear what my companions will say? But to be
drawn from a virtuous and blessed course of life by men's speeches, is an
argument not only of extreme lightness, but of mere madness also. What
exceeding great sorrow will this unexpected news bring to my friends, and
kinsfolk? But, shall the love either of Parents, or any mortal creature
whatsoever touch me nearer then mine own salvation? nearer then the love of
God, and Christ himself?

With these, and such like contrary cares he stood wavering with a perplexed
and doubtful mind, and having spent some days in these kind of cogitations,
at last, this co^bat was overcome, and he yielded himself to God who had urged
him so hard; and upon a sudden changed into another man he began to look upon
the author and consummatour of Faith Christ Jesus, who (joy being proposed unto
him) sustained the Cross, Heb. 12.
contemning confusion. And first, as by Ignatius help he was raised up, so by
Ignatius help he remained constant in his resolution. And from that time being
as it were borne a new, more joyfully and happily then before, he yielded very
rare, and goodly fruit of Christian perfection, being now more like Ignatius
then himself.

CHAP. III.
His Fervor in the mortification of his body, and study of Perfection.
FOR within a little while he sought with greater desire after mortifications
and contempt of himself, then he had before after dignities and honors: such
(for the most part) is the property of excellent dispositions, to apply
themselves wholly to whatsoever they take upon them. Mortification.
Francis therefore aiming at the highest top of Sanctity, began first (as the
custom is) to combat with his own body. For knowing the flesh ^o have
contrary desires to the spirit, he resolved to ^ring it under, that the
vntamednes thereof might be ^o hindrance to him in the way of Christian
perfecti^n. Wherefore both in his younger days, and all his life after, he did
no less often the^ zealously use the ordi^ary austerity of fasting,
disciplines and hayrecloth, as fit means to tame and moderate disordinate
affecti^ns, and to make satisfaction for sins. And even at ^is very entrance
into this new war-fare, he gave manifest tokens of his noble disposition and
courage.

For being in his younger years accustomed often ^o leap amongst his Equals and
companions in a field ^eere to the City, His agility of body.
(that being then the only sport wherein he took delight) upon a certain time
he took overmuch content in his own agility of body, wherein he far outwe^t
all the rest in leaping; wherefore as soon as he had altered his course of
life, although that offense had been but light, yet he mortifyed himself for it
very severely. He tyeth about parts of his body a little rope
For binding his body very hard with a small cord which caused him intolerable
pain, he went some days together in that manner; and to purge his mind of the
pride he had taken therein, he exercised himself all that while meditating upon
devout matters, that the greatness of the pain might restrain both his mind
and body from the like excesses hereafter. And this hard hand he kept over his
youthful motions, as well to excite and stir up his mind, as to make
satisfaction for his sins. As he was once employed in those pious
considerations, which we call spiritual Exercises, and therein endeavoring by
abstinence to bring under and make subject the unruly motions of his body, out
of a desire he had to obtain a co^plete victory over himself, he was carried
something to far, Four days he abstaines from eating any thing.
abstayning four whole days from eating any thing. A rash attempt indeed, but
yet faultlesse, being excused by the fervor of his new beginning, and
youthful years. For nothing is more hard, or a greater step to virtue, then
the ma^stry over ones self: but for Nouices and new beginners never to exceed,
whilst they follow the battle in their fervor, is a thing rather to be
wished, then hoped for.

Wherefore Xauerius continually striving and with diligent care ouercomming
himself, became every day to grow stronger therein. Coquest of himself.
That which most of all helped him, was his often and devout meditation upon
the life and death of our Savior Jesus Christ, and his unspeakable Charity,
Meditation upon the life and death of Christ
the greatest incitements to the love of God, and christian perfection. And the
more those pious meditations increased in him the love of God, so the more his
heart was set on fire with a desire of saving souls, and suffering of
martyrdom. Which thing went so far at last, that as the son of God had
delivered himself to death for his salvation; so he again, vowed himself
wholly and entierly for ever, to employ himself for his glory, and the
salvation of souls. And to the end that nothing might separate ^im from this
Charity of Christ, His desir of Martyrdom.
by the advice of S. Ignatius he determined, together with the other
companions (who were then nine in number) to bind ^imselfe to God by certain
vows, which might be (...) means to bring him to the crown of Martyrdom.

In the year therefore 1534. they for that purpose assigned the feast of the
Assumption of the B. V. Mary, intending thereby to have her both witness and
patroness of their vows. When that day was come they, having their minds set
on fire by continual meditation, met all together in a Church near Paris
called Mons Martyrum, that the place might add flames to their earnest desire
of martyrdom. Where after they had heard mass and fortified themselves with
the sacred Eucharist, He binds himself to God by vow.
replenished with spiritual joy they make their vows, and dedicate themselves
to God. The sum of their vows was this, that having finished their course of
Divinity, dispossessing themselves of all things, they would in perpetual
poverty employ their service for the glory of God, and the salvation of souls;
and that upon a set day they would go to Jerusalem, there to labor for the
conversion of the Turks, with eminent hazard of their lives. And if by chance
this determination of theirs should be hindered by any accident, at the years
end they would go to Rome, and offer their endeauours to his Holiness toward
the salvation and help of souls, without exception either of time, place, or
mention of provision, or allowance for their journey.

Upon the making of these vows, there followed a new, Yearly renewing of vows
but yet pious custom of often renewing the same, thereby to keep them fresh
in memory, and increase a religious devotion toward the^. They mad^ these
vows not only that year, but also renewed the^ every year upon the same day,
and place, with the same solemnity, alacrity, and fruit as long as they
studied at Paris. But Xauerius used this custom oftentimes by himself with
great fervor, Frequent renouation of vows.
finding by experience that by often renewing his vows, he found his vigor
and strength of mind again renewed, like the youth of an Eagle. And this great
desire of perfection in virtue was no hindrance at all to his studies; but
there was a time when he manifestly showed, that he took more delight in being
a soldier of Christ the^ in his studies, for whose only sake, he now employed
himself therein,

CHAP. IIII.
He goes to Venice with extreme pain of body.
HE had now almost finished his course of Divinity, He breaks of his course
of Divinity not far from the end.
when presently he was to depart for Italy. For the Fathers had agreed among
themselves, that upon a set day* to wit the 24. of January 1537. they would
meet al together at Venice, with S. Ignatius, who was gone thither before upon
certain occasions. In the mean time before the appointed day of their journey
came, France was all (...) in arms, by reason of Charles the fifth his war
^ade upon the Frenchmen: which accident made ^^em hasten their determined
journey, by setting aside (...) care of ending their course of studies. Xauerius
was i^deed much grieved for this hindrance, but yet car^^ed it discreetly,
esteeming it as good to leave his studies for Gods sake, as to follow them.

Therefore upon the 13. day of November, Their manner of travail.
a most ^nseasonable time of the year, having, according to ^^eir vows, given
all they had to the poor, except ^nly their writings, and some little thing to
help them (...) their journey, he together with his other company ^^tteth forth
on the way. Their manner of travailing ^as this. They were clothed in course
and old habits, ^^ery one with a staff in his hand, and a short leather
^^antle upon his shouldiers, like poor pilgrims; about their necks they
hunge their beads, thereby to be known for Catholics as they trauayled
amongst heretics, and their writings they carried at their back in a little
bag.

They used every day to communicate, being the only comfort of all their
labors, thereby both to renew their forces, and revive their spirits being
wearyed with paynfull travail. When they departed from their lodging they
always commended themselves to God, and when they came into it they gave him
thanks. Being upon the way they first spent some time in meditating upon
heavenly matters; then they used some pious discourse together, and now and
then they lightened the labor and wearisomnesse of their journey with singing of
hymns, Psalms, and spiritual Canticles.

In this manner for the most part taking his way into Italy through Loraine and
Germany, to avoid the troubles of the war, he endured the Autumn showers of
France, and the winter coldes of Germany. And although he were not accustomed
to travail on foot yet he cheerfully undertook, and performed this so long
and tedious journey, being laden with his writings; and this in the dead of
winter, and through most foul ways many times eue^ covered over with snow,
Voluntary mortification in his journey.
and frozen up with ice, especially as he passed the Alps. And besides the
weight of his bag, and badnes of the way, he voluntarily used another
mortification which put him to intolerable pain, so great was his courage to
endure all incommodities and labors for the love of God. For before be began
his journey he had for a good while together, (either to exercise himself in
patience, or else to mortify his body) tied about his arms and thighs little
cords, which through continual stirring about necessary business of the house,
had caused the flesh to swell, and thereby gauled him most pitifully. Yet so
great was his desire and courage to suffer, that albeit the journey he was to go
on foot was so long and hard, he would not for all that take of those cords
which did so much afflict him.

When therefore this torment being of it self very paynfull was now seconded
with so hard a journey on foot, the extreme grief which the cords did put him
to, was also very much increased. But he being no less courageous in enduring
torments, then in undertaking them, kept on his way, and did not only co^ceale,
but also conte^ne all the pain he felt thereby. For he hoped that, that might
by use and custom be assuaged as well as other corporal molestations, which he
had made trial of. Through anguish of body he faints in the way.
But when the vehemence thereof daily increased, his confidence being turned
into care, he began to faint not through want of courage but of strength. At
last therefore when he could no longer neither dissemble nor endure the violence
of the pain, being through necessity constrained to ^ield, he sweetly
entreated his companions to pardon ^im, for he was indeed so weary, that he
could not go one step further. They at first wondered to see him who before was
all fervor, upon the sudden to faint, and languish in that manner; but when
the palenesse of his countenance discovered the greatness of his interior
pain, they held him up as he fainted, and asked him what new accident was
befallen him. Then he taking breath awhile, which was before stopped through
grief, was enforced to open unto them the whole matter. They all condoling his
case, but secretly admiring his virtue, entreated him to rest awhile vn^il the
violence of the pain were a little assuaged; then as soon as they thought he
had rested enough, and recovered a little strengh, they brought him fair and
softly to the next Inn, and presently sent for a Physician, who having
diligently viewed, and considered of the soar, resolutely answers that the
cords could not be seen, His malady being held desperate, the Physitia^ gives
him over
much less cut. And although the ends of the cords did appear, yet they had
made such ulcers, that they could neither be unloosed, or cut, without most
extreme pain. Therefore (because the disease surpassed art, and the cause
thereof went beyond all custom) he stood awhile in a maze like one that knew
not what to say. At last fearing the success he could not be persuaded either
by Francis or his companio^s to meddle with it, there was such danger in the
Cure; And so departed without so much as making the least trial.

The Fathers his companions then were in great solicitude and anxiety, not only
for what would become of the Patient, but also for their own journey, which was
hindered by this unexpected chance to the great hindrance of them all. And
Francis grieved no less that his companions were enforced to stay for him,
then for his own infirmity. Despayring therefore of humane, they had recourse
to divine help, each one humbly imploring assistance from Heaven. Their prayers
were not in vain, for God himself played the Physician, and presently applied
a remedy to that desperate Cure. A strange thing, the next morning Francis
rising out of his bed found all the cords broken asunder and fallen of, He is
cured from heaven
all the swelling gone, and nothing to remain of the soars but certain
marks, where the ropes had been. Then being stricken into admiration and
rejoicing not so much for himself as for his companions sake, with a loud
voice gave thanks to Almighty God; whereat his companions came running to him,
asking him the cause of that new joy? Which having understood, and being
astonished at the evident miracle, gave (as reason was) all due praise and
thanks to God; and lifting up their hands to heaven and weeping for joy began
presently to extol the heavenly Fathers providence, and singular bounty
toward them.

Then they presently set on again to their travail, most joyful for that
good success, inciting one another to employ al their labors in the service
of so sweet a Lord; And Francis throughout the whole journey (as he was always
before wont to do) applied himself with such diligence and alacrity in helping
and serving his companions as was wonderful. For as they all strove to the
uttermost (this only being the emulation among them) to excel one another in
cour^esy, In the way he serves his companions.
he either out of fervor of spirit, or natural ci^ility far outwent the
rest. And this care and desire ^f his was no greater to help his companions,
then to procure the salvation of others. Whersoeuer occasion was given him of
helping his neighbors, either with counsel, Upon the way he helps his
neighbors.
advise or example, he with great zeal made his commodity thereof, and embraced
the same as opportunity served. And herein his labor was not in vain; for
many Catholics were thereby reclaimed to a good life, and some Heretics also
reduced to the wholesome way of truth. Which way soever they passed, they left
behind them tokens of sanctity for all to behold, and Catholics to imitate.
And so it happened oftentimes, that even Heretics themselves taken with
admiration at their sanctity, would courteously show them their way, He wins
the heretics affections.
tell them what difficulties they were to pass, and when need was, would
themselves freely conduct them in their journey. Thus true and kindly virtue
shows it self, and puts even savage people in mind of humanity.

Francis therefore by the aid both of heaven and earth, having waded through
all the inco^modities and dangers of the way, upon the tenth day of January the
year following, arrived safe with his companions at Venice. There he found
Ignatius of Loyola with the greatest desire expecting his dearest sons and
companions. Then according to the custom of the society they salute and
embrace one another most joyfully, with the greatest demonstration of love that
might be imagined. And this their joy made them forgetful of all their
toylsome passed labors.

CHAP. V.
At Venice he serves in the Hospital of the Incurable, and from thence goes
to Rome to the Pope.
THE Fathers had already agreed al together to go to Rome there to ask leave
of the Pope to go to Jerusalem to preach the Gospel, and there to remain at
their own liberty. It seemed therefore good unto the^, that until the
extremity of the winter were over past, that they should begin to practice
themselves at Venice in that kind of spiritual warfarre, which afterward they
were to undertake. Wherefore dividing themselves to the public service of the
Hospitals of that City, as into so many Provinces, Francis requested that he
might have the care of the Incurable, a fit means to gain, as he desired, a
most noble conquest over himself; the which office he performed with no less
fervor of spirit, then he had desire thereunto.

As soon therefore as he came thither, he began to go about the beds and
couches of those poor souls, spea^ing comfortably and sweetly to the
afflicted; encouraging them that were given over by the surgeons, with hope of
life everlasting; hartening them that lay ^dying, and moving all most
affectionatly to patience, modesty, and virtuous life, endeavoring by all
means possible to cure their minds, whose diseases were incurable. And
considering moreover, that if he served them in things belonging to their
bodies he might the more easily help them in their souls: He therefore would
himself sweep the hospital, make the beds, rid away the filth, perform even
the most base and abject offices of the place (those being the first grounds of
Christian humility) and finally as the custom is, wash the bodies of the dead,
and bury the^ as they ought to be. And in the midst of all these employments
there appeared in his countenance and looks such, and so eminent a Piety, that
you would have thought he had seen Christ with his eyes in those poor sick
persons, and employed all his labors in serving of him. These things were
done, in the sight of a most frequented Hospital, in the view of a most noble
City, with such unusual cheerfulnes and joy, that many flocking thither
through the report of so new a thing, Francis became a spectacle not only to
God and his Angels, but to men also. In so much that his care and charity
toward the sick, renewed again the most comfortable memory of S. Rock
(whose Name is most famous at Venice) for his singular benignity in that kind.

In the mean time his virtue breathed forth* most delightful odor in the
Celestial Court. With special care he serves a sick man full of ^oares.
For having gotten the care of one that was sick of a consu^ption and the Pox,
the more horror he had of him (a^ being delicate both by nature and custom)
the more diligence he used in tending and serving him. Upon this occasion he
fought many noble combats and got most glorious victories over himself. For
though Reason did withhold the unbridled contradiction of nature; and divine
grace overcome the horror of that pestilent disease: yet for all that, the
loathsomeness of the ulcers, and the intolerable stench thereof, did sometimes,
so ouercharge his stomach (as it often falls out) that he had even an
auersion from his said Patient. But neither could the Devils nor Natures
affront beguile Xauerius. For as soon as he perceived his charity to wax
somewhat cold, sharply rebuking himself of cowardice and want of courage in
this kind he resolved by way of revenge to rid himself of that dainty
disposition. And without further delay armed with the love of Christ his
Savior, after the example of S. Catherine of Sienna, he nobly overcomes
himself, and sucketh out once, He sucketh out the filthy matter.
and again with his mouth the putrified matter out of his Patients loathsome
vl^ers.

This extraordinary virtue was recompensed by God with an extraordinary reward.
For he did not only give him conquest over himself for that present, but ever
after gave him strength and courage to bear all annoyances even of the most
vlcerous and leaprous. ^n so much as from thenceforward, he would not only
without difficulty, but with a kind of delight also ^a^dle and dress such
loathsome diseases as others durst ^ot without horror once look upon,
Conquest of himself.
so important (...) thing it is for the obtaining of true freedom of spirit,
but once nobly to overcome ones self Wherefore ^hroughout the whole course of
Francis his life there appeared a perpetual victory over himself in all
things, and an extraordinary charity toward poor sick and needy persons.
Having laid this foundation he bent all his cares for his intended voyage.

Now therefore the spring coming on, the Fathers thought good to make no delay,
but according to their vow, as speedily as they could hasten toward Rome. But
there fell at that time so extraordinary great raynes, that the ways became
very foul; and Lent was also at hand, Religious regard toward vows.
a very incommodious time for religious men to travail in. Yet for fear delay
should make that less grateful in the sight of almighty God, which was of it
self most acceptable unto him, they all had so religious a care of performing
their vow* that they thought it by no means fitting to expect any longer, but
presently to set forwards. Thus di^ they accommodate, not their vows to
themselves but themselves to their vows.

At the beginning therefore of Lent they all together make have to Rome;
Iorneying on foot in Lent and begging he truly fasteth.
by thus much now more poor then in their former journey, in that without any
penny of Viaticum for their expenses they pu^ themselves on the way, depe^ding
only upon Gods providence. In their journey they daily observed their former
practice of Piety, and the rather because of the holy time of Lent; and
although by reason of their travailing on foot they endured great difficulties
wha^ by the painfulnes of the journey, and their very poor^ diet, which they
also begged as they went, yet every day did they strictly observe their fast,
so that it is har^ to say, whether they observed with more devotion, the
Precept of Fasting, or the Evangelical Counsel of Poverty. Yet through Gods
providence their religious confidence was not any way frustrated. For although
they were much combred with rain and ill weather, yet kept they on their
journey, passing on foot through Lombardy where the ways especially at that
time of year were very foul and troublesome. And sometimes also they were
forced, Taking but a little piece of bread they go on foot a good days journey.
with all patience and cheerfulnes, barefooted to travail thirty miles a day,
refreshing themselves only with a piece of brown bread and water, in most
rayny weather, when the fields were so swelled and over flowen with floods of
water, that in some places they waded even up to the neeke. At last by the
special providence of God, who gave them sufficient forces, and deli^ered them
from all dangers in this their journey, he brought them safe unto the place
they desired.

As soon as they came to Rome, the first thing they did was to visit the
Churches of S. Peter, and S. Paul, and to humbly beseech those most holy
Patrones both of the City and whole world, that God would through their
intercession give prosperous success to their Intentions. Then confiding in
the patronage and favor of so mighty Protectours, they sought means to have
access unto his Holiness (who at that ^^me was Paul the third of the noble
family of the Far^^esi, a man right eminent both for gravity, and pru^ence) and
to desire his approbation of that which ^hey had at first determined. There was
at the same ^^me in Rome, Ambassador for the Emperor, Peter Orttizius a
Spaniard, a man of no less authority, then courtesy. He having brought them to
the Pope, and earnestly commended them unto him, his Holiness as the custom is,
benignely and courteously admits them to the kissing of his feet. Then to
make trial of their learning he caused them to dispute, sometimes in
Philosophy, and sometimes in Divinity in time of dinner, as that most worthy
Princes custom was. Wherein when all of them, but especially Xauerius, had
given great demonstration both of their ability and virtue, presenting their
petition concerning their journey to Jerusalem, the Pope without any
difficulty, yea with great approbation grants them what they demand, and out
of his Fatherly charity to all Nations, took such affection to their virtuous
desires, although mere strangers to him, that for his singular bounty and
liberality, he dismissed them not only with his benediction, but also with a
large Viaticum to bear their charges in that long and tedious journey. But
they not forgetful of poverty even amidst such plenty, put that money given
the^ for their vowed pilgrimage into a Bankers hands to be kept, until they
were ready to go. And in the mean time they lived by begging publicly up and
down the City, more known now for their Religious modesty then their
learning, by reason that abandoning of their own accord the familiarity of
great and noble Personages, they had undertaken that abject and humble course
of life.

CHAP. VI.
At Vincenza he says his first Mass, having first prepared himself thereto.
WHEN they had dispatched all things at Rome with fortunate and speedy
success, in the same manner almost as they came thither, they return again
to Venice intending with the first occasion to imbarke themselves for
Jerusalem. There, inflamed with a longing desire of ^n heavenly life, to unite
and tie themselves more ^irmely to God, they resolve to consecrate their lives
wholly to Christ, as they had long since done their ^oods. Therefore having for
that end prepared them^elues by interior recollection, at a solemn Mass ^hey
vow perpetual Poverty and Chastity in the hands ^f Hierome Verallus who was
then Legate for the Sea (...) postolique. He voweth perpetual poverty and
Chastity.
Francis was never before seen to be ^ore replenished with heavenly joy then
at this time* ^or being very cheerful, as might be discerned by ^is looks, he
gave his whole heart to God, being even ^uer whelned in his soul with his
divine grace; and ^alling to mind his former practice, he from that time, ^ll
his life, every day renewed the vows which once ^e had made.

But whilst he expects an opportunity for his ^ntended navigations he again
applies himself with ^reater fervor then before, to his exercises of
Charity, which he never forgot, although they had been intermitted by reason of
his journey. And the Venetians so much the more admired and esteemed this great
charity of Francis toward the sick, by how much longer, this his labor
continued with them then before. For it fell so out, that the Turks and
Venetians beginning that year to make war upon one another, the passage into
Palestine was stopped, which before was always open for Pilgrims. And the seas
were so beset with the Turkish ships that none could pass out of Italy to the
Eastern coasts without manifest danger of death or captivity. Which accident,
as it first delayed the good Fathers journey to Jerusalem, so it afterward
brake it clean of, God reserving their labors for better uses. For he sent
these his hired servants in such sort into his vineyard, that leaving the
Turkish soil, as barren, and even past bearing fruit, they might employ
themselves, some in pruning the ouergrowne vineyardes of Christians, and others
in cultiuating the deserts of India, and Iaponia, which before that were never
so much as touched. So whilst Francis (not knowing Gods designement) between
hope and fear expected every day some opportunity for his long desired
navigations, many months passed away in his foresaid labors of the Hospital,
in all which time he never became slack in his endeavors nor any whit remiss
in his charitable exercises.

But seeing at last all hope of going to Jerusalem, utterly to fail, he took
it very heavily, and was much grieved, that he was so deprived of all means to
see those holy places of Palestine, and also of the occasion of suffering
martyrdom for Christ: notwithstanding beholding therein the providence of God
(the only comfort of all humane accidents) he bare the same with courage and
constancy, although it gave him otherwise no small resentment. Then they
consulted among themselves what was best to be done, and turning all their
cares another way, it seemed good unto them that they should all take holy
Orders, that so they might attend with more profit to their own perfection,
and salvation of others.

In the month of June therefore, upon the Nativity of S. John Baptist having
used great preparation thereunto, they were made Priests by the Bishop of Arbe
for the other holy Orders they had received a little before.) He is made Priest.
And it is reported of them, that all the time of consecration they were so
overcome with joy that the good Bishop himself participated thereof. For he
af^^rmed afterward, that whilst he did the ceremonies, ^e felt a new kind of
heavenly joy and delight, the like whereof he never had before experienced. By
this (...) all hope of passing into Palestine was so wholly taken away, that
they seemed almost freed from their ^ow: yet that there might not remain the
least ^^ruple in their mynds, they thought good still to ^atch if there might
be any occasion offered of per^^rming the same until the year were fully come
a^out, for so it was expressed in their vow.

In this mean space being forthwith to offer to ^od the first fruits of their
Priesthood, Preparation for his first Mass.
they with^^ew themselves out of the great concourse of that ^ost populous
City, and the better to attend to recollection they separated themselves into
diverse places near by, some one way, some another. Francis, together with
Alphonsus Salmeron, betook himself to Mont Celsus, a village distant some
fifteen miles from Padua: there desirous to be solitary he withdrew himself
far from all men, that he might unite himself nearer to God. And having
found in a private place, a desolate and ruinated cottage, he thatched the
roof thereof with straw, and so made himself a little sorry habitation, wherein
he took so much the more delight, because it represented to him the manger of
Christ his Savior, and his great poverty. Then, that experience might make a
deeper impressio^ in his mind of the poverty of JESUS whilst he was a child,
and of his solitude when he was a man, he taske^ himself to this kind of life:
he eat very sparingly of such meat only as he got by begging, he lay upon the
bare^grou^d with straw under him in the foresaid houell exposed to rain, wind,
and weather; and to stir up his mind with more then ordinary fervor to the
conte^plation of heavenly things he every day imposed upon himself certain
voluntary pennances; Gse 2.
and remembering that God leads a soul into solitude, and there speaks to
her heart, Psalm. 84.
he gave more attentive ear to what his Lord God should speak within him. He
prayed therefore very much and often, and whatsoever spare time he had, he
employed it in reading of holy books, and devout meditation of heavenly
things. What discommodities, and paynfull labors he endured in that place, and
what true and perfect consolation he received, through conversation with the
heauen^y spouse we may easier imagine, then by words express. This is
certain, that the little which he begged would hardly find him bread, to which
if perchance he got a little oil, or other meat, he thought he had then made a
dainty meal indeed.

In this solitary kind of life he passed forty days with exceeding great
comfort, according to the example of his heavenly Master, who remained so many
days in the wilderness. And no doubt but by his conversation with God, through
his exceeding fervor of spirit and inflamed love to his Creator, he received
as many heavenly graces, as he did joys. Sometimes therefore going forth into
public, he began according to Christ his example to teach the people, and to
make them partakers of that which he had received ^^om heaven. After his
solitary life he begins to teach the people.
This was his manner of preaching: re^e^b^ing that Christ was wont to preach in
the fields upon mountains, and by the s^a shores, whersoeuer (...) saw any
hope of doing good, there would he put ^^mselfe amongst assembles of people to
preach, and especially would he teach those, who most of all wanted
instruction, and such as never used to come ^^sermons, that so God might also
be found of them ^^at did not seek him. Therefore gathering together ^^e
people in cross ways and streets, and borrowing ^^stoole out of some shop,
standing thereon he would ^^eake of virtuous and godly life with more fervor
(...) spirit then flourish of words, to such as either stood ^^ere idle, or
else were in their plays and pastimes: (...) so much as some who came to his
sermon only, to get something to laugh at, being moved by the weight of his
speech, and the divine force wherewith he spoke, in steed of laughing, went away
weeping. Nothing caused him to be more admired, or helped on his business
better, then refusing to take money, a token of sanctity most pleasing to all
men. For when all saw that he neither asked any thing of the people about him,
nor would take any thing which was offered him, they could not but think that
he sought the salvation of others, more then his own commodity.

Having thus employed his labors and endeavors in Mont Celsus, with no less
good success in helping of others, then in the perfection of himself, he went
to Vincenza sent thither by Ignatius. Where having again recollected himself
in most diligent mann^r, and thinking it now time to perform that for which he
had long prepared himself, this our new Priest, with plentiful tears of joy,
offers his first, heavenly and wholesome sacrifice to the divine Majesty. You
would say that he did not so much believe that which is contained under those
sacred mysteries, as he saw, and beheld it with his eyes. And such indeed was
the ardent fire which inflamed both his soul and body, that they who beheld
the tears streaming so sweetly from his eyes, could not themselves abstain
from weeping. And this singular feeling of devotion he from thence forward
retained throughout his whole life, in such sort, as if coming every day like
a new Priest to the Altar, he had tasted that first sweetness of those sacred
mysteries.

CHAP. VII.
He assisteth the Cittyes of Bononia, and Rome, with his Sermons.
THE day appointed for their Pilgrimage to Jerusalem was now past, and yet
there was no hope of passage, the Enemies navy still keeping the seas. Therefore
they were, according to the tenor of their vows, to leave themselves to the
disposition of the Pope; And for this cause the ^athers agreed among themselves
that Ignatius Loyola ^^ter Faber, and James Laynes, should go to Rome in name
of the rest, and offer to his Holiness their endeauours and ^^bours for the help
of souls. In the mean time the ^^hers dispersing themselves throughout the
most fa^^^ous Academies of Italy, should instruct the students ^^^vertue, and
draw more to be of their Company, if it should so please God. In this division
the university of ^^^onia fell to Xauier his lot, with no small benefit to^^^at
City. For as soon as he came thither, he went (...) say Mass at the
Sepulcher of S. Dominick, to whom (...) was ever especially devout. And it
happened that ^^ere was present at his Mass Elizabeth Casiline of Bo^^nia, a
religious woman of the most holy Order of (...) Dominick, who perceauing
Francis his great deuo^^on, desired so speak with him. Their discourse was
^^ch that she was wholly possessed with an opinion of ^^s sanctity.

This Elizabeth had an Uncle called Hierome Casiline, a man both learned and
noble, who was also Chanon of S. Petronius, He lodged with Hierome Casiline.
and Rectour of S. Lucies College where he then dwelt. Francis, at her
request, went unto him, and by his courteous speech, and candide behavior got
his affection so, that he most willingly and freely invited him to his house.
Xauie^ humbly accepted of so worthy a man's courtesy for his lodging, but to
eat there he absolutely refused, because he begged his meat, as he was
accustomed. I^ the mean time Casiline observed him, greatly admiring his
virtues, whereof he gave also public testimony. Francis therefore, although his
courage wa^ greater then his forces, because he was at that tim^ sickly and
weak, His diligence in helping his neighbors even when he was il himself.
yet his admirable fervor of spirit abundantly supplied what he wanted in
strength. For such was his great desire of doing good to all, th^^ there was
almost no work of Christian charity, wherein he had not a sweet and loving
hand, no otherwise then if he had enjoyed the greatest health the could be.

Having said Mass every day, as his custom was he afterward employed
himself in serving the si^^ in the Hospitals, and the poor that were in
prison, (...) teaching children, and ignorant persons the principles of
Christian doctrine, His manner of preaching.
and in hearing Confessions He moreover preached to the people in the streets
an^ public high ways, and that not more frequently then profitably. For he
used not the then new flourishing and Rhetorical kind of speech, but followed
a^ together that old, fervent, and Apostolical manne^ of preaching. There was
in him no curious setting ^orth of arguments, nor ornament of words, but all
^eruour of mind and spirit, intermixed with most pithy and grave sentences,
whereto his plainness, and as it were neglect of speech (an evident mark of
truth) ^^^ue great luster and force. The modest and humble ^^mposition both of
his countenance, and whole body ^^^eathed out that sa^ctity which lay hidden in
his soul. The piety which shined forth from his face and looks evidently
demonstrated, that whatsoever he said, came from the bottom of his heart, and
from the fire of Charity, which inflamed his breast. Whereupon his words carrying
more fervor with them then elo^^^ence, were like burning torches to the
understanding of those that heard him, and like a flame of fire (...) their
affections: so as thereby might manifestly ap^^are how fiery the divine word is,
when men speak (...) as God always supplieth them with matter. For ^^^uiers
drift was not to haunt after favor and vul^^^ ^ applause of the people, but to
cause in his audi^^^rs affections, a fear and love of God, and indeed ^^^eeke
truly the salvation of souls, not his own ^^^eeme.

In fine the substance of his sermons was to lay be^^^e The substance and fruit
of his sermons.
the people the most bitter and everlasting torments hich are ordained for the
reprobate in hell, and the ^ost sweet and neuer-ending rewards laid up for the
^^t in heaven; as also to show the deformity of sin, ^^d the beauty, and
louelynesse of virtue, not in cu^^^us, but in weighty and substantial words.
And ^^^ds word being cast and sown in this manner, was received by the hearers
with pro^pt and willing minds, and yielded that fruit which Francis desired.
For many were by the grace of God drawn out of the sink of sin, many also
brought to frequent the Sacraments, great store of money was likewise given in
Alms, whereof notwithstanding he touched not a farthing, Love of Poverty
but causing it to be distributed amongst the needy, himself begged from door
to door, providing thereby both for the necessity of the poor, and mantaining
the dignity of a Preacher. Whence it came to pass (which he chiefly aimed at)
that, not only very many being penitent for their sins, lead afterward a
pious and Christian life, but also (which he cared not for) that his name was
made famous by the speech and good report of all: Yet he was not more admirable
in his sermons, then in his private discourses and exercises.

Casiline his Host, Xauier sparing in his words but wonderfully efficacious.
who as before we said, diligently observed him, gave this testimony: That
Xauier was sparing in his words, but wonderfully efficacious. For he was wont
to discourse with such fervor of spirit of divine matters, that he inflamed
the hearts of his Auditors. When he said mass, especially that of the Passion,
it was ordinary with him to shed abundance of tears, with great inward
feeling. In offering of which sacrifice he saw him once at the time of his
first Memento so abstracted from his senses, Saying Mass of the Passion he is
abstracted from his senses.
that although his minister pulled him oftentimes by the vestment, yet he did
not in any wise perceive him, but remained so a whole hour before he came to
himself again. For he was indeed (as is said of Daniel) a man of desires, and
much prayer. These things therefore drew many of that City, but especially his
Host to the love of his singular piety, and made his memory also grateful and
famous amongst them after his departure.

And thus he left behind him at Bononia, footsheps of long continuance as well
of his sanctity, as of his industrious labors. For Casiline from thence
forward bare great respect to that lodging and chamber of Xauerius, and made
thereof a place for those of the Society to lodge in, as they trauayled to and
fro that way. But in process of time when the Society of JESUS made means for
a house at Bononia, by the special providence of God, The place where he
lodged turned into a Chapel.
there fell unto them, the next house to Xauiers forsaid lodging, and the
Church of S. Lucia wherein he had oftentimes said mass; at what time the said
lodging was, through the memory of that holy man, and devotion of the place,
turned into a Chapel, that it might be a monument both of Xauiers lodging, and
sanctity of life. But when afterward the Church of S. Lucia was repaired, it
was thought good to take in that Chapel to the same, and dedicate it to the
Circumcision of our Savior, so that ^ou would think Xauier being inspired
from heaven, ordained that place for the Society to inhabit.

Francis, having performed all things well at Bononia came to Rome (as was
agreed) about the midst of Lent in the year of our Lord 1539. The fathers at
that time, had begged a lodging at the foot of an hill of certain little
Garde^s (now called Mons Trinitatis) in a place there which Quirinus Garzoni,
an honest and virtuous Citizen of Rome had lent unto them. There they all
lived by begging; and being no less desirous of their neighbors salvation,
then of their own perfection in virtue, they agreed amongst themselves to
employ all their endeauours in advancing Christian Religion, and to labor what
they could in Christ's vineyard, hoping that, that City being the seat of
Religion, and made fertile by the blood of so many Martyrs, would yield most
plentiful fruit of piety.

Taking therefore a right course in the execution of this their virtuous
determination, they first present themselves to the Vicegerent of the Pope, and
to the Pastors of Parishes. And having obtained leave to preach whersoeuer
they would, they divide themselves throughout the principal Churches of the
City. And S. Laurence in Damasus, a very famous and remarkable Church, He
preaches in S. Laurence of Damasus.
fell unto Xauerius, and Fabers lot, to preach therein by turns. In this Church
therefore preaching oftentimes before a frequent and favorable audience, not of
pleasing but profitable and necessary matters, he reaped a harvest
proportionable to his seed, and caused in his auditors not so much admiration
as profit, which is the chief thing in a Preacher. For by his often preaching
he endeavored to allure the people to an honest and te^perate life, and to
frequent the holy Sacraments. And his other companions be^ding all their forces
likewise to the same end, devotion seemed now again to be set on fire in the
hearts of the Romans, and old Rome by little and little to appear again in her
former luster and renown. Yet Xauier was not so employed in helping the people
by his Sermons, as that he forgot the younger sort thereof, but with very
diligent care instructed them, even street by street, in the precepts and
mysteries of the Christian faith; knowing for certain that the chief good of
the whole City depended principally upon the instruction and virtuous
education of children. In the mean time these good Fathers, through their
industry and labors, brought the Society of Jesus to a form of Religion,
which then began, not only to be established at home, but also to be in great
esteem abroad, by reason of the virtuous and industrious labors thereof: In so
much that Ignatius and his co^panio^s were famous throughout the whole world,
God intending to spread this his new flock over all Nations.

CHAP. VIII.
The Province of India is by God assigned to Xauerius.
THE Society of Jesus was not as yet confirmed by the Popes authority, The King
of Portugal demanded some of the Society.
when the fame of Ignatius and his companions moved John the 3. King of
Portugal to demand some of them of his Holiness, and of S. Ignatius, by Peter
Mascar^nas his Ambassador, resident at that time in the City. The reason of
this his demand was, because the Portugheses at that time furnished with the
kings ships, had with no less fortunate success, then valorous attempt by
unknown seas, found out new ways and Countries, never before heard off, and
having subdued many savage and barbarous prople, had penetrated, even beyond
the Rivers of Indus and Ganges, into the vtermost East.

The most pious King therefore knowing of what importance it was to introduce
Christianity into those Nations, resolved with himself to send thither some
virtuous and approved Preachers of the holy Gospel; thinking himself not
worthy the name of a Christian King, unless he procured to bring that savage
people, now under his power, to the faith of Christ, He had heard, by many
letters, of Ignatius and his Companions singular gifts, and great pains in
helping their neighbors. Wherefore desirous of such me^, he gave in charge to
Mascarenas his Ambassador aforesaid, to procure in his name as many of them as
he cold, both of his Holiness (at whose disposition he understood them to be)
and of Ignatius their founde^ and Superior. Mascarenas failed not to perform
with all diligence what his King had commanded, and so dealt with the Pope and
Ignatius; but could obtain only two of them out of so small a number.

The enterprise was indeed no less dangerous, then laborious, because they
were by continual navigations for many months together to pass through the
vast Ocean, and horrible raging seas as it were into another world, where also
they should be hourly in as great danger in laboring amongst those barbarous
and wild people, as they were in coming to them. Phil. c. 1.
But those things which use to affright, and keep back others, drew on these
men of God, and lovers of the Cross, to whom it would be Christ to live, and
gain to dye. Therefore when it was known that two were to go into India they
being all in good hope, and every one wishing it might be himself, did with
silence expect the event of that great business.

At that time Ignatius a man venerable both for his admirable sanctity, and
institution of the Society, governed his companions more by authority, then by
any command he had over them. He therefore at the first allotted out for India
Simon Rodrigues, and Nicolas Bobadilla, not without the pious emulation of
their other companions: but indeed God reserved it for Francis. Rodrigues was
already passed into Portugal, although he were there sick of a quartan ague;
and Bo^adilla was still so sick at Rome, Ignatius his speech.
that he could not go with the kings Ambassador, who then made have away.
Wherefore Ignatius having very seriously consulted with God by prayer, calls
unto him Francis, who had now some little suspicion of the matter. Then with a
cheerful countenance as his ordinary ^ustome was: Francis, quoth he, God
himself has certainly assigned India for you B^badilla, whom I had appointed
for it, being as you see, detained with a long sickness, cannot undertake it.
The rest of our Companions, for the most part, by command of his Holiness, are
employed here in Italy in charitable exercises. You I thought to have kept
with my self for other occasions; but God, who has chosen you out for his
Gospel, has otherwise ordained. Show your self therefore a man, follow God
your Captain who by infallible signs calls you into India: let that
heavenly flame wherewith we have always seen you set on fire, stir you up
now to this worthy enterprise. Take courage answerable to your nobility of
mind, to the greatness of the employment which you are to undertake, and to the
expectation which both heaven and earth has of you. Your known virtue, and
especially that prompt obedience of yours, which is wont to be ready not only
at every command, but also at the least beck, makes me say no more to you
about this matter, seeing, what I have said, may seem more then enough to him,
whom this had been sufficient, Go, follow God who calls you into India.

At these words Francis, with a virginal blush in his countenance, after he
had said that he was ready to undertake all things for Christ his sake, with
tears of joy trickling from his eyes, gave Ignatius next unto God great
thanks, because he had accomplished his desire. For he had felt himself
indeed long since mo^^d by God to procure the salvation of the Indians, and now
by divine instinct he saw the same approved by his authority, whom he took to
be the Interpreter of Gods will. Therefore he would without fail undertake it
how paynefull or dangerous soever it were. For although all other, both humane
and divine helps, should fail him for Gods service, yet certainly his
promptitude of will to obey him should never be wanting, and his obedience and
life should end both together.

There appeared hereby in Francis not only an admirable promptitude in
obedience, Francis his obedience and greatness of mind.
but also a singular courage. For the Society at that time had not any other
place, but only at Rome, where he might have entertaynement or lodging: And in
Portugal and India he was to find such condition as he could best procure for
himself. Moreover his journey into India, and travailing there among those
barbarous people, carried with it no less danger then misery. But he thirsting
after martyrdom, began to hope for that in India, which Jerusalem had denied
him. Wherefore through courage of mind, and confidence in God contemning all
difficulties and dangers, he as readily resigned himself to Ignatius, and with
as great obedience, as though God himself had commanded him. And so departing
from his chamber he prepared himself for his journey, rejoicing much that the
employment which he desired, was thus now put into his hands even by God
himself.

There was not any one of the whole house who did not affirm for certain,
that it was Gods particular providence, that Xauier should be chosen before all
others, to take the essay of that new Province of India. For they then called
to mind his frequent speeches, wherein he was accustomed to extol the great
fruit and harvest in India, and to bewail the misery of so many Indians who
perished through ignorance. Therefore they thought him most fit to remedy their
calamity, who had greatest feeling and compassion of ^t. They also remembered a
certain vision, which Ia^es Laynes affirmed was told him in times past by
Francis himself, when they were chamber-fellowes. For Xauier oftentimes in his
sleep thought he carried for a good while an Indian upon his shoulder, who
seemed so heavy, that being weary with the weight, he was awaked out of his
sleep: Francis his dream of bearing an Indian upon his shoulders.
which at last the event showed to have been rather a presage of a future
verity, then only a dream. Francis therefore carrying with him these hopes and
cogitations into India, and being ready the next day to set forward on so long
a journey, was an argument how little he affected worldly things, who depended
wholly upon God.

CHAP. IX.
Having been with his Holiness, he goes into Portugal, and gives arguments
of of great virtue in the way.
BUT before he began his journey thinking a^ all things would succeed
prosperously and happily with him, if by the authority of Christ's Vicar he
undertook so hard an enterprise, he went unto the Pope, who then was Paul the
third, and having, as the custom is, kissed his feet, he demanded his
benediction, and grant of certain Indulgences, being ready to go into India,
without making any mention of his command. Whereupon the Pope rejoicing for
this expedition, received him courteously and giving him his benediction with
most cordial affection spoke unto him, almost in manner following.

I truly, render infinite thanks unto the divine Goodness, Paul the 3. his
speech.
that in my Popedom, the faith is again to be brought into India, which
having been first planted there by the Apostles, was by little and little
extinguished by the barbarous carriage of those Nations. As for your self, do
you (being raised thereunto not only by our authority, but also by the impulse
of God himself, whose person we bear) undertake this so great charge with
like greatness of mind, remembering that God by men calls you into India;
Think with your self who calls, not who you are. Remember that you are
called by him, Romans c. 4.
who calls as well those things which be not, as those things which be. Nor
does he so much seek men that are fit for his work, as that he makes men
fit by choosing them. Whomesouer he choseth, to him he gives sufficient
courage and strength. For who knows not, that the Apostles were of themselves
unprovided of all things: and yet they being poor fishermen without either
learning or experience in other affairs, what did not they do, being sent, and
guided by God? What Kingdoms, what Nations, what people did not they make
subject to the Cross?

And to say nothing of others, how well did S. Thomas the Apostle carry the
matter for the Christian cause in India, whither you now go under the conduct
of the same God? How many barbarous nations did he win to ciuility? How many
Aultars of false Gods did he overthrow? How many kingdoms did he bring under
the sweet yoke of Christ? Neither ought the terror of miseries, or death it
self make you slack in ad^enturing. For to one that thinks upon life
everlasting, this life is vile; and to a mortal man nothing is more to be
desired, then a good and happy death. To one therefore who contemns, nay
desires death, what can seem hard, bitter, or horrible? Go one therefore, and
by Gods holy conduct, and S. Thomas his example, extend far and wide in the
east the bounds of Christian Religion. The hand of God is not abbreuiated. He
that in times past founded the Church by Apostles, increased and adorned it
afterward by Apostolical men.

Then Francis showing by his countenance his submission of mind, answered
almost in this manner. For my part (most holy Father) I do not know what I can
do in this kind, why I above al others should be chosen for this great work.
This I leave to them to judge of, who have chosen me. For it belongs not to
him that obeyth, to judge what he can do, but to them that command. But I, by
how much I distrust in my own forces, by so much I confide in the assistance
and providence of God, who choseth weak things of the world, 1. Cor. 2.
to confound the strong, that all flesh may not glory in his sight. Therefore I
assuredly hope, that he who has laid this charge upon me, will also give me
forces for the performance thereof, according to his pleasure.

The Pope when he perceived in his countenance, and by this speech a token of
great worth in Xauerius, judging that he who was to propagate the faith among
the Indians, Francis made legate Apostolical of India.
had need of greater authority; of his own accord, gave unto him his own
power, as far as should be needful. For he made Francis his legate
Apostolical in India: And thereof gave letters patents to the King of Portugals
Ambassador to be delivered to his King, wherewith, if he thought it good, he
might honor Francis at his departure into India. Francis therefore, who thought
himself, not sufficient to undergo so great a burden, returned home more glad
that that Honor was differred, then if it had presently been given unto him.
Thence he took leave of his friends not without many tears on both sides, all
being very sorry for his departure: and with him he carried nothing at all, but
his ordinary habit, and a Breuiary. He went from Rome to Portugal in company
of Mascarenas the Kings Ambassador in the year of our Lord 1540. having for
his companion Paul Camertes, who about that time had been by Ignatius received
into the Society.

In his journey he gave no less signs of modesty, then of sanctity. For
although he were given to the ^ontemplation of heavenly things, yet being not
alto^ether unmindful of humane, he showed himself so ^ourteous unto all, that
when he came to the Inn, he would leave the best chambers and beds to other of
his company, contenting himself with the worst things. And when the servants
neglected to look unto their ^aisters horses, or discharge other inferior
servile ^ffices, He looks to others horses.
he would himself do them all, showing him^lf therein rather a servant indeed,
then a companion. ^et none was more pleasant in conversation then him ^lfe,
none more ready in all kind of courtesies. He ^ught by all means to deserve
well of all, he spoke (...) every one lovingly and friendly, he would himself
^sit others in a courteous manner, and always bid ^^em welcome with a
cheerful countenance, who came unto him; he did easily and willingly yield
unto others; his discourse was seasoned with a sweet and pleasing affability.
But (which is hardest of all) he kept such a mean in all these things, that
tempering courtesy with gravity, both his actions and words sauoured all of
sanctity. It was his proper and continual custom to discourse of matters
which were either pious in themselves, or else seasoned with piety, and to
incite all with whom he conuersed, by occasion either of speech or otherwise,
to the hatred o^ vice, and amendment of life; showing them that it was harder
to endure vices, then the remedies thereof. And the wholesome bitterness of these
discourses he always allayed, with the sweet sauce of many courteous offices.

Diverse accidents also made Xauerius his payneful^ care no less admirable for
his deeds, then for his words. Upon a time the Ambassador being angry with his
Harbinger, because he had been negligent in preparing his lodging, reprehended
him sharply for it; but being gotten from his Master (as he wa^ intemperate
both in his passion and speech) he inueighed vehemently against him to his
companions i^ Francis his hearing; He expects a fit time to reprehend.
who thinking it best to dissemble the matter for the present whilst he was
yet in choler, forbear to speak unto him, that his mind being pacifyed he
might the easier be cured. The next day therefore he observed the man, watching
an occasion to reprehend him: and when it grew toward night, the Harbinger, as
the custom was, began to ride on before to provide lodging: whereupon Francis
getting presently on horseback (for most commonly he went on foot for
poverty sake, although he might have had a horse) set spurs to his side, and
made have after him. When he had almost overtaken him, the Harbingers horse by
chance (yet very fitly for his purpose) falling down, lay upon the man with
all his weight, by which misfortune he was in danger to have been slain, but
that Xauerius came at the very point, and saved his life. Then taking that as
an occasion to tell him of his former fault: What, quoth he, would have been
come of thee, if sudden death, which was not far of, had surprised thee,
being out of the state of grace by reason of thy anger yesterday, and
intemperancy of thy tongue, for which thou have not yet satisfied? These words
so stroke the Harbin^er (who now saw manifestly the danger which he had
^scaped) to the heart, that he was sorry for his fault, and being put in mind of
his fury the day before, ac^nowledged his unbridled passion, and intemperan^e
of tongue, and then by Xauerius persuasion gave sa^sfaction to his companions
whom he had scandali^ed.

Francis also did not only comfort and assist with ^ll courtesy his companions
when they were weary with trauayling, but also in their dangers gave them
^uccour, with his prayers, when he could not with ^is hands. One of the
Ambassadors chief pages, al^hough dissuaded by the rest, aduenturing to ride
over a swift river, was brought even to the point to be cast away; for being
now carried into the violent ^streame, and not able to guide his horse, whereby
he became inuolued in the turnings of the waters, was by force thereof carried
away without any hope to escape drowning; whereat when others were greatly
affrighted, By his prayers he saves one from drowning.
Francis his virtue overcame the danger. For encouraging others to pray with
him to God, he himself began with all attention. And his prayers wanted not
their desired effect, for upon a sudden the page getting out of the maine
stream with his horse, to a shallow place where the water ran with less
force, and so taking courage, by Gods assistance, and his companions who called
out upon him, he got at last unto the bank, on the further side of the river,
being as all acknowledged, by Francis his prayers delivered from present death.

Afterward as they trauayled over the Alps, where being not able to take sure
footing by reason of the driving of the snow, and the craggy rocks and paches,
their horses being tired with no small danger to their masters, the
Ambassadors Secretary fell by chance from his horse, and was suddenly
swallowed up in a huge mass of snow. The place was upon a slippery and steepy
rock, under which ran a swift torrent. The greatness of the danger stroke all
his companions into such a fear, that none durst undertake to assist him, He
draws the Ambassadors Secretary out of the snow
least he should rather pull them after him who should go to help him, then
himself be pulled up again; so they being all amazed stood still looking one
upon another. As they thus stood, on comes Xauerius, and regarding another
life more then his own, leapt presently from his horse, and by main strength
drew him up out of the snow, and delivered him from manifest danger, with no
small peril of his own life; whereupon the Secretary being obliged to Francis
for so great a favor, honored him ever after as the author of his life, and
salvation. The Ambassador also himself moved by these wonderful acts, and
also by the sweetness of his most holy behavior, bare great affection unto him.

Francis moreover did not content himself with helping his companions, but
besides, he helped all he met, in as much as he was able, especially at the
lodgings, and Innes, taking all occasions both by instruction, and admonition
to incite them to an honest and Christian life. From that time also his
singular piety has left behind it an example of Evangelical perfection, both
for religious to imitate, and others to admire.

Having past the Pyrenaean mountains they were come to the borders of
Pamplona, where his journey lay not far from his own territory; his mother,
kinsfolks, and friends were not far out of the way; if ^e should let slip
that occasion, he knew well enough that by reason of the great distance from
India thither ^he should morally never after have opportunity to see them. He
passes by his own country without saluting his kindred.
He knew also, that there could not come any hindrance of his journey either by
his mother, she being a virtuous woman (for his good Father was now dead) or by
his knisfolkes. His companions importuned him; the Ambassador himself urged
him to visit and salute them by the way. But Xauerius fearing least some of the
company, through want of consideration, might be afterward deceived by his
example, he could by no means be drawn thereunto. Thus he showing an holy
hate to his friends, both proved himself to be the true disciple of Christ,
and also gave a document to Religious persons, that they should with* far
greater reason hold their friends for enemies, if they went about to hinder
them in the service of God.

But least this unusual thing should offend either the Ambassador, or any
other of the company who were not acquainted with this kind of heavenly
Philosophy, he endeavored by his mild speech and solid arguments to make good
to them what he had done. Having therefore passed Spain with speed, he made
like have with the Ambassador unto Lisbone, where the King of Portugal
resided. But the Ambassador through long and inward friendship, and familiarity
with Xauier had now gotten such an opinion of his virtue that he could not
withhould himself from sending an express messenger with letters before unto
the King, to certify him of Francis his coming, and prayse-worthy qualities,
which caused in the King a great desire to see and honor him; which soon
after he did ariuing at Lisbone, where he was already known, and much desired,
through report of his virtues.

CHAP. X.
Being lovingly entertained by the King of Portugal, he exciteth them of
Lisbone to devotion.
LISBONE is a City, Descrip- of Lisbone.
wherein the Court is kept, not far from the Ocean sea, the greatest without
comparison, of all Portugal; and by reason of an excellent Haven in the mouth
of the river Tagus, which runs by that City, it is a place very populous
for the com^ing thither of Indian merchandise. As soon there^re as he was come
thither, being glad of his ariuall (...) the place from whence he was to
embarke himself (...) India, He cures Simon Rodriquez of a qua^tane.
he found Simon Rodriguez his companion who as we said, was come thither
before, for this ^rney into India) still sick of a quartane ague, and ^apned
that that was his sick day. A strange thing: (...) coming to him upon a
sudden, and embracing the ^ke man, caused in him such joy, that his ague never
^er came again, and so whether through the great^s of the joy, or rather by
Xauiers virtue, he was quite ^de of his sickness. When he had a little rested
him^fe after his travail, being sent for to the Court, he ^nt thither,
together with Simon who was now ^ouered, offering both himself, and all he
was ^e to do for the help of the Indians. The King ha^g understood much by his
Ambassador of Francis (...) great virtue, after he had courteously received
the^ both in a great assembly of the Nobility, spoke unto them in this manner.
The Kings speech.


Fathers, quoth he, I am very glad of your ariuall in Portugal for the good of
India. And I do not doubt but you, are as glad of it, as my self. For there is
opened unto you, to show your virtue, the great and vast Countries of India,
which as I hope, being carefully and faithfully manured, gives great promises
of a most plentiful harvest of souls, so great an inclination the people
every where seem to have to the Christian faith I for my part, as long as I
carry this Crown, will prefer Religion before my Kingdom, and then, shall I
account myself King of those Nations, when I shall hear tha^ they are
obedient to the King of Heaven. Wherefore you cannot do any thing which will
be more grateful to me, and to God also as I hope, then to join all your
forces with me for reducing of the East to the faith of Christ, our common Lord
and Father. If I were to deal with other kind of men then you, I would exhort
you not to fear the difficulties which nature may object, or the threats of
the raging Ocean, or the miseries of so tedious, yea almost infinite journey, or
the encountering with barbarous nations; or that your fervor of piety should
not be slack in going thither, whither others out of desire of gain run
with alacrity. But why do I by words endeavor to inflame your Virtue, knowing
well enough, by the war you have undertaken for Christ, and his Gospels sake,
that out of dangers you bring glory to God, and everlasting salvation to men;
and that you desire nothing more in this life then to dye a worthy death for
Gods sake? It is certain that nature has locked up nothing so close, to the
which true virtue is not able to penetrate. By Gods assistance you will open a
way for the Gospel, not only into India, but also into the furthest Eastern
parts of the world. There remains for you either a life of eminent merit, or
a glorious ^eath. Therefore whilst the Navy is in providing against the spring,
do you also prepare what shall be ^ecessary for your journey. We will take care
that ^ou want nothing, either in Portugal, or India.

Then they giving most humble thanks unto the King, Xauier^ and Rodriquez
answer
answered in this manner. That they had long ^nce manifestly seen the great
desire he had of adua^^ing Gods honor, and had not only heard at Rome by the
report of many, of his liberality answerable to his religious desire: but had
themselves also experienced (...) of late in their journey by many proofs; so
that they ^ught rather to endeavor to correspond to his Maie^ies worthy
merits, then to make any question whe^er he would be like himself or no. And
because ^eir greatest desire was to bring the light of the Gos^ell into India,
and other barbarous nations, he should ^erefore without delay use them in
whatsoever they ^ould do, for the help of those countries. For albeyt ^hey well
knew both themselves and his Majesty, and ^ound themselves to have neither
ability nor forces ^nswerable to so weighty a charge, or to his so great
^eruour: yet their confidence was that God who laid upon them that burden
would supply what was wa^^ing on their behalf. What danger should be refused
^or Gods sake, and where God leads the way? As for themselves, their chiefest
care ought to be of Gods glory, and to prefer a worthy death before any life
whatsoever.

Heerupon there arose a strife between the Kings liberality, and Francis and
Simons modesty. The King^ promising them all things in abundance, performe^
more in deeds, then he spoke in words; and they or^ the other side through the
strict observance of the poverty which they had vowed, would not use the
commodities the King offered them. At last the servants of God remaining
constant in their resolution, overcame the Kings, bountiful nature, and so he
yielded unto them, drawn thereto not through the equity of their cause,
Refusing a fair lodging they go to the Hospital of the sick.
but through admiration o^ their virtue. Departing from the King and refusing a
fair lodging which was freely offered them, they presently went to the
public Hospital of the sick, with great commendation both of their humility
and piety. For it was known well enough, tha^ they desired to lodge there
before all other places, that they might more freely serve the sick for
Christ^ sake. And herein their charity, and diligent labour^ were answerable to
that, which the City expected from them.

Their manner of life in the Hospital was this* In the morning before day,
they spent an hour in prayer and meditation, Their manner of life in the
Hospital.
and having read their diuin^ office they said Mass at break of day. The rest
o^ their time they employed both seriously and cheerfully in helping and
instructing the sick, sometym^ comforting those that were sad and afflicted,
other^ whiles encouraging those that were ready to dye, to that last battle
and encounter; sometimes again hearing their Confessions, and at others times
resolving those who asked their advise in matters concerning their conscience.
Which labor of theirs pas^^d not away either in obscurity or without fruit,
se^^g most of the City drawn by the report of their ^anctity, Many of the
City are recall led to a good life
came thither flocking unto them. And they (...) continually discoursing of
pious matters, and things ^^ncerning everlasting salvation, with great feeling
^^d fervor of spirit, drew many to the hatred of vice ^d love of virtue, and
especially to the frequent use ^f the holy Sacraments. Which pious custom of
fre^^enting the same being then, after a long time, first ^^newed in Lisbone,
The frequent use of the Sacraments is brought into Portugal.
was afterward spread over al Por^^gall, both to the great good of the
Citizens themsel^es and commodity of all their Cities. For innume^^ble people
every where (as the Portugheses are very ^uch inclined to piety) renewing that
most pious (...) holy custom, and taken with the comfort of lea^^ng a godly
life, by divine instinct, intred into sundry ^^gious Orders: some also desired
to be of their So^^ety, which was at that time confirmed by Pope ^^ul the III.

And thus through so great a reformation of be^uiour in the people, the City
began to appear of ^^other form then before. So as now, not only the ^^ eaner
sort, but the Nobility also frequented their ^^dging for the Sacame^ts sake,
and to ask their con^^le in other matters; the poverty of the place and the
^^en, making the same more remarkable, by reason that the chief of the City
resorted often to the lodging of poor strangers; and lastly their contempt of
all worldly things stroke all men into admiration For it was now reported among
the people, that twelve Priests (for two more had joined themselves to the
other ten) had at Rome made a certain Society among themselves; of which
number they seemed to behold in these two, who were present with them, I know
not what resemblance of an Apostolical life. And so the people, whether in
regard of the number of twelve or for a certain likeness to them in their
life, began to call them Apostles (too great a Title indeed) In Portugal he is
called an Apostle.
although the good Fathers withstood, and wholly disclaymed the same what
possibly they could, but in vain for the Portugheses being a nation no less
constant in what they once have begun, then pious in their resolutions, could
not be brought by any means to revoke that, which once they had given to truth,
as they verily believed. Yea this matter went so far, that the same name was
afterward derived to others of the Society, almost throughout all Portugal.

CHAP. XI.
His Journey into India is hindered, but all in vain.
BUT the Portugheses singular devotion, by rather burdenning, than gracing the
Fathers with such a Title, was afterward some hindrance to their Indian
voyage, yet so, that although men were diversely inclined, still Gods will stood
firm concerning Francis. For some of the principal of the City who were much
affected to Xauerius and Rodriguez, valewing the profit of the City, not only
by the present fruit, but also for the hope of fu^ure commodity, contrived
among themselves how they might stay these men in Portugal, esteeming their
own good to be preferred before others. First therefore this matter was
treated off by the chief of the Kingdom, and afterward when it had gotten
many grave abettors and furtherers, at last is brought into the King. Then the
Noblemen every one of them showed how much benefit that Royal City had ^eaped
by Ignatius his companions in so short a space, and what great help all
Portugal might hope from them, if it could enjoy them, not as strangers for a
^yme, but as perpetual inhabitants thereof. And that ^he good of Portugal,
and of that Princely City, as ^eing his chief and Royal seat, ought to be
dearer unto his Majesty then India: Why therefore for the succor of barbarous
Nations should he deprive his own native Country of so excellent helps? Why
should India abroad, rather then Portuall at home, be ^ore dear unto him?
Wherefore if it seemed good unto his Majesty as it did to them, he should plant
those worthy men, as seeds of that generation, in Portugal, and so erect a
Seminary at hand which might supply them, with fit Priests to send into India.

The King approving his Nobles opinion, and judging it meet to provide first
for the^ who were nearest to him, leaving off for the present his determination
of helping India, resolved to detain them both in Portugal to begin a
Seminary of the same Institute. Which as soon as Rodriguez* and Xauerius
understood by their friends, being indeed moved at the unexpected news, they
presently certify Ignatius by letters of the Kings new determination, asking
him what they should do. Who having acquainted his Holiness with the business,
thought it good to leave it wholly to the Kings arbitrament, nothing doubting
but the treating thereof before him, would make him think better of it.
Letters are at the same time dispatched from his Holiness to the King, and from
Ignatius to his companions, wherein the matter was left wholly to his majesty.
But if he would know, what Ignatius his opinion was therein, it seemetd to him
most convenient that a separation should be made, so as Rodriguez might stay in
Portugal, and Francis go forward into India.

The King therefore following Ignatius his Counsel, sends for them both, who
being uncertain what would be resolved off, depended wholly upon the divine
providence. Then the King in a courteous manner, as his custom was, showing
them first what was granted to him from Rome concerning their disposal,
declares what he had now resolved: to wit, That Simon should stay in Portugal
to begin a College at Conimbria which might be a Seminary for members to be
sent into India, and that Francis should go into his designed Province of the
East. Wherefore they should both, with all speed, prepare themselves with like
diligence to their offices, although they were different, knowing that many
times equal rewards are assigned for unequal services, God not respecting so
much the work, as the good will wherewith it is done.

Hereupon Xauerius, being presently changed from his great fear, into great
joy, gave the King many thanks, that he had granted his desire, and had so
prudently tempered the want of his companion^, with the joy he gave him of the
division, that he promised not only to be grateful, but also to use all care
and diligence to be answerable for so great a benefit. But Rodriguez being
frustrated of his hope and desire, and at the first stricken with such an
unexpected declaration, showed by his looks, and countenance to be somewhat
troubled: but presently recollecting himself he answered gravely and quietly,
almost to this effect: That the taking of India from him had stroke him with
such grief to the heart, that he was not able to co^ceale it; yet since
Ignatius, the King, and his Holiness agreeing all in one thing, sufficiently
declared it to be Gods holy will, he would most willingly, at his Majesty's
command, leave off that employment for whose sake he had undertaken it.
Wherefore he remained wholly at the Kings disposal, and was glad that by
beginning a Seminary, he might also in some sort labor for India, since he
might hope to help them by his scholars, whom he could not by himself. Thus
departing from the King, each of them addressed their cares, for the
performance of their charge.

CHAP. XII.
Being ready to take shipping for India, he receives from the King the Popes
Letters patents of Legate Apostolical and refuses to take any thing for the
charges of his journey.
FRANCIS therefore seeing his journey to be approved by such evident signs both
from God and men, began to furnish himself for it, not with provision of
victuals and other things necessary and convenient, but with pious meditations
and profitable considerations. For he would not undertake so weighty a charge
rawly and vnprouidedly, but with serious ponderation and preparation, and by
thinking with himself now whilst he was at leisure, of what he was afterward
to make use, that so he might not spend his time in speculation of that,
wherein he was to employ himself in the practice.

When the time drew near for his journey into India, the King calling him, is
said to have spoken unto him particularly to his effect. The Kings speech.
Francis Xauier, our ships are ready, the time that you have so earnestly
desired of going into India, is now come. For my part ^ have hitherto had so
many, and so great arguments both of your virtue and prudence, that I hold it
needless to use any exhortation unto you, presaging what will follow by that
which is already past. Yet that we may not seem to be wanting in our duty, we
will as the saying is, spur on him, who runs already. First therefore, I
commend unto you the Ethincke Nations which are under our subjection,
endeavoring to unite them to the Church, that my dominions may not be further
extended then Gods Religion. Then out of our fatherly affection toward them, I
deliver and commit the Portugheses that remain in those places to your trust,
in such sort that I would have you supply the place of our benevolence toward
them. You are not ignorant, I know, that Kings have need of many hands and
eyes, for the government of their kingdoms. Wherefore I pray, and beseech you
by that very God, who is your guide and companion in this journey that (as far
as you may with conueniency) you ^ould diligently visit our garrisons there,
and afterward certify us of all things appertaining to Religi^n; that so, all
impediments, if there be any, being ^eedily removed, the Christian Religion by
your ad^^se and labor, and by our assistance and authority, ^ay spread it
self over India and the East. As for my ^^lfe I will loose my kingdom, before
I will leave off ^y desire to advance Religion. For I am resolved to ^mploy all
the means and forces I am able, for the ^ropagation thereof. It is your part to
be answerable ^oth to the charge you have undertaken, and to our ^esire. What
aid or help soever, either the honor of God, or the Christian cause shall
seem to require, ^emaund it confidently, and it shall be granted, and I shall
think my expenses a gain for Religion sake. Wherefore proceed cheerfully, and
seeing that you go, (no doubt, by divine instinct, and conduct,) upon an
enterprise which of al others is hardest, maintain still that courageous mind,
which hitherto you have borne, and carry with you into India that virtue and
sanctity of which all Portugal speaks to be in you.

Then the King taking out of his bosom the Popes Breue said further. And that
you may know what most ample power is granted you, toward the effecting of
what you take in hand, not only by me, but also by Christ his Vicar upon
earth, behold here his Holiness Breue, wherein he makes you his Legate
Apostolical in India, which may be both a testimony of your power, and an
incitement to your virtue.

Then Xauier, who had all this while blushed to to hear his own praises,
receiving the Breue with no less reverence, then modest bashfulnesse, replied.
If I (most excellent Prince) could find that your esteem of me were as true,
as it is good, I should very much rejoice for the opinion of so noble a Person
(...) your Majesty is, and the give great thanks to God the given of all good
things. But assuredly, your singular Goodness is much deceived, the by opinion
of another virtue. I knowing mine own weakness and imperfections, should I
not be thought a mad man, if concerning my self, I should believe others
before my self? Verily Sir, I being a sinful man, and wholly unfit for this
godly enterprise (which I say because it is true, and not for humilities sake)
both your Majesty, and his Holiness do impose a far greater burden upon ^^ee,
then my feeblenes is able to sustain; yet had I rather be oppressed with the
weight of the burden, then ^yther refuse, or cast off that charge, through
pusil^animity, which by Gods will is laid upon me. For God when imposes a
burden, he affoardeth also forces to bear it, and with power gives also
ability for the execution thereof. Wherefore by the help of his hea^enly
assistance, I will do my best to make it appear that I remember, what person I
present in this weakness of mine, since the charge is imposed upon me by God,
his Holiness, and your majesty. And my life shall leave me sooner, then I will
violate my fidelity, either in word in deed.

Having said thus, the King advises him in a most courteous manner to think
well with himself, what (...) might stand in need off in Portugal or India,
for he ^^d given charge to his officers in each kingdom that ^ey should
carefully procure him, whatsoever he desired. And withal he gives him his
Letters Royal, containing no less authority then commendations. Francis then
having given thanks to the King (...) kissed his hand, as the custom is, went
home to (...) his friends farewell, that he might embarke him^^fe. And the King
was no less liberal in deeds then (...) had been in words: for he gave very
strayte com^and to his Captains and Officers, and that they should furnish
Francis and his companions both in ^ortugall and India with all things needful
for their own maintenance, and for the increase of Gods honor and glory. So
as Xauerius, and others of the Society from that time forward, dilated the
faith of Christ in India, Xauier and others of the Society of Jesus are
mantayned in India by the liberality of the King of Portugal.
Malaca, the Moluca's, and Iaponia, maintained by the Kings liberality. But
albeyt all things were plentifully afforded unto them, yet their modesty so
contended with the kings bounty, that they would take nothing but what was
merely needfull^ judging it good, to draw sparingly of another man's liberality,
that it might the longer continue.

Wherefore in procuring their own commodities they in all places spared the
Kings treasure, but especially upon their journey into India. And when France
more for the love of poverty, then for bashfulnes abstained wholly from asking
any thing at all, the Officers of their own accord, showed him what a stra^^
charge the King their master had laid upon them, to furnish him abundantly
with whatsoever he should want, or desire for his journey. And withal entreated
him to give them as soon as might be, a note of what things he required, that
they might be procured (...) time. Francis heartily thanked both the King for
his ^^berality, and them for their diligent care: but inde^^ for his part he
required or desired nothing at all. (...) the Officers had often done thus, and
received alway^ the same answer from Francis, they pressed him by entreaties,
and were very earnest with him that he would at least take some provision. Love
of poverty in his journey.
At last to satisfy their importunity (least his too much standing out might
make him seem obstinate) he so yielded unto the^, that with all he still kept
his former resolution. Then he asked to have a course rugge, or mantle, to
keep him from the extreme cold which he knew they were to endure when the
sailed about the Promontorium bonae Sp^i, and a few little books, whereof he
should have great need in India. And besides this, he could not be brought by
any entreaty to permit any thing else to be provided for him. Therefore Count
Casta^nerius General of the Navy seeing Francis in the Admirall-ship, as the
King had commanded, without any provision for his journey, taking compassion
on him, told him that the King had sent a Page unto him with great charge to
see him abundantly provided of all things fitting for his voyage. But Francis
earnestly entreated the General that nothing might be given unto any, for his
provision. Notwithstanding the Count was earnest with him to take at least a
servant to assist him upon necessary occasions. Nay, quoth Francis, as long as
I have the use of these hands, I hope I shall not need of any other servant. At
which answer of Xauerius the Count had no more to say, as he himself affirmed
afterward when he related this passage to others, and withal highly extolled
him for his singular abstinence. Thus furnished with no other provision then
his confidence in God, at the beginning of the spring he sets forth for
India.

CHAP. XIII.
In his journey to India he gives admirable tokens of his virtue.
IN times past when the Roman Empire stood entire, Ways into India.
and Christian Religion flourished in Asia (for India is a part of Asia there
were most commonly two beaten rodes into India, the one through Syria by the
riue^ Euphates and Tigris, and the Persian gulf; the other through Egypt by
the gulf of Arabia and the Red sea. But no^ those countries being possessed by
the forces and superstition of the Saracens, the passage is not so secure, it
is short, for the Christians of Europe through places annoyed with their
enemies. Wherefore the (...)gheses coasting about by Affricke, which lies upon
the Mediterranean Ocean, and from Affricke (as vast as i^ is) winding about by
Arabia and Persia, A league of Portugal.
sail int^^ India, fetching thereby a mighty circuit. For by the^ turnings of
the sea, India in distant from Portugal mo^^ then four thousand leagues; I
mean those leagues which usually amongst the Portughese mariners conteyne
every one three miles. And in this circuit the Equinoctial line, which through
the heat of the sun is extreme scorching, Prince Henry opens a new way into
India.
cutting of Affricke almost in the midst, must necessarily be twice passed.

The first who with as great courage as skill adue^tured upon this so long, and
hard away, was Prince Henry son to John King of Portugal the first of that
name, (...) man very well experie^ced in the Mathematics. The ^ause of this
his attempt was, that he might by laying ^pen a new way, have for himself and
the Portugheses friendly trafficque with the King of Aethiopia, commonly called
Prestre-Iohn, whom he knew raygned in the furthest part almost of Affricke,
not far from the gulf of Arabia. This designement having prosperous
success, three Kings of Portugal following, to wit Alphonsus the V. John the
II. and Emanuel the I. prosecuting the same by little and little, bravely and
fortunately opened, and fortifyed a way even into India it self. For they
took the Islands, which lie upon the cost of Affricke, and many other
commodious places, where the Portugheses have their garrisons even to this day.
Xauerius therefore making this circuit into I^dia put to sea from Portugal upon
the eight day of (...) April in the year of our Lord 1541. He went in the
(...) ship with Martin Alphonsus Sosa newly made ^^uernour of India. He had of
the Society two com^^nions only F. Paul Camertes a Priest of singular ver^^d
(who being assigned by Ignatius, had accompa^^ed him from Rome) and Francis
Mansilla a Portu^ese, who had in Lisbone joined himself companion (...) him.
They met by the way in this their journey ^ith many things worthy to be
observed, they being ^^deed learned men, and very skillful in Geometry,
^hilosophy, and Astrology. In the mediterranean sea ^^ey discovered many Islands
of note, lying upon the ^^omontory of Affricke some less, some more distant
^^oth from one another, and also from the continent. Amongst these are the
Fortunate Islands (commonly called the Canaries) and the Islands of Promontorij
viridis, The Gardens of the Hesperides.
which some are of opinion were the gardens of the Hesperides, the three
daughters of Atlas, so much spoken of in the Fables of Poets. And by these
remarkable places the Navy passed so near, that most of them were wit^^^
sight. Besides this, the sky being very clear and the sea calm they saw many
unusual and strange kind of fishes, to the great admiration, and delight of
the passengers.

But Xauerius although he did not indeed contemn the knowledge of such things,
yet thinking with himself that he went not to fetch learning or pleasure out
of India, but for the glory of God, and salvation of souls, began himself
within the ship to set forth sights more grateful to God, and more profitable
to men. The chief Admirall-ship was rather like a Town then otherwise, being
full not only of mariners, but also of soldiers, the Governors retinew,
merchants, and servants, to the number of a thousand persons or therabout.
Francis therefore as soon as he was entered into his journey, began together
with his companions to employ himself in the most diligent manner he could in
procuring the salvation of his neighbors, He instructs the mariners, and
the Soldiars in the ship.
by instructing the mariners, and passengers, and soldiers in the Christian
doctrine, partly by reprehending their ill behavior, and partly by exhorting
them to cleanse their souls from all filth of sin. And not in vain. For
thereby the custom of swearing was taken away, many of deadly enemies became
friends, many confessed their sins with sorrow of heart and many were
reclaymed from a bad, to an honest life. Xauerius carried always a cheerful
countenance, He wins by his sociable behavior great sinners.
winning the affections of all by the sweetness of his behavior. And for this
cause some who were even drowned in most abominable vices and villainies, and
who commonly could not endure the sight of a religious man, were much delighted
with Francis his most pleasing conversation. And he knowing well how to deal
with such kind of dispositions, drew them at first, by sweet means, and by
little and little, from their bad courses; and when at length he found them
tractable, then he incited and spurred them on in the way of piety and virtue.
The difficulties of the Indian navigations


In the mean time God afforded him matter answerable to his generous and
virtuous mind. This tedious and laborious navigations (as commonly it happens)
had so extremely worn out the mariners, and other passengers, that now very
many fell sick in the ships, and their victuals greatly increased the same.
For they fed continually upon salt meats, and oftentimes upon musty biscuit:
besides, they had for the most part, no other drink but stinking and corrupted
water, which by reason of the nature of the liquour, and small quantity
thereof, did rather increase then allay the extreme thirst which the salt
meats caused in them. So as the bad humors of such unwholesome diet being
disperced through their veins, engendered in them diseases no less grievous
then deadly. For their gummes swelling after a loathsome manner, and breaking
out into horrible ulcers, did not only put the sick men to great torment, but
also (which was most miserable) made them that they could not eat. And this
contagion by little and little increasing through their grief of mind, and want
of necessary commodities, began to spread it self over the whole multitude,
who were much thronged up in strait places for want of room. For though the
King had, besides necessary provision of victuals appointed for every ship an
Apothecary-shop of excellent drugs, which is no small comfort for sick
persons, yet the same could not suffice the great number of the diseased. The
great fear also of the infection (as it happens) made even friends themselves
to leave off the care of one another, and every man to provide as well as he
could for his own safety. So as the sick being destitute both of physic,
and attendance dyed not more through the co^tagious disease, then for hungar,
which was a worse plague. Besides the filth of the ship did so extremly annoy
these poor wretches, that it was far more troublesome and loathsome unto
them, then unto the others who were in health.

Xauier therefore when he saw the ship, wherein he sailed full of sick persons,
calling to mind what he had accustomed himself unto* at the beginning of his
conversion gave an evident proof of his benignity and virtue. His incredible
courage of mind.
That which hartned him on, would have made another afraid. He saw the hatches
of the ship strowed not only with sick bodies, but also with half dead; he
knew the disease to be very infectious; he saw deaths grisly looks before his
eyes. Yet for all this, turning fear into charity, and knowing it was a kind
of Martyrdom, to hazard ones life by such contagion, for the saving of souls,
he resolved to help the said sick the best he could. And so he presently began
to hear the confessions of those who lay a dying; he cleansed the sick men's
bodies of their filth; he washed their linen, dressed their meat, minced it
small, and fed them with his own hands. He ministered physic to the weak; he
most lovingly cheered up those that were sad; and put them, that were out of
heart, in hope of recovery both of body, and soul. And thus by serving all
indifferently, without regard of persons, and that with diligence and alacrity,
he made even those that were in health to bear him great respect and reverence.

CHAP. XIIII.
Serving the sick, he arriueth at Mozambicum.
ALL did indeed admire the singular sanctity of life which they saw in Xauerius
his continual diligence, his fervent prayer, and meditating at set times, and
his fatherly love and Charity to all, without exception. By which means he
gained both the love and respect of all the rest, but especially of Sosa the
General. For although the King had upon his setting forth very seriously
commended Francis to Sosa, yet his own virtue (a most efficacious kind of
commendations) commended him daily more, and more unto him. For which respect
Sosa both to fulfill his Kings command, In the ship he lives by begging.
and out of his own accord gave him all things largely and bountifully. Yet
Xauerius himself lived always by begging what he wanted of the passengers for
Gods sakes, and through zeal of poverty in himself stirred up others to
charity and bounty. His constancy in keeping of poverty.
Which practice he with such constancy retained, that neither the General
himself nor any of his Honorable retinew could at any time draw him from the
observance of highest poverty. But this one thing got Xauerius much more love
and esteem in the sight both of God and men, to wit, that sparing from his
own belly, he would most freely divide amongst the sick all what he begged of
the passengers, and what was assigned him by the General. For being resolute
in keeping his purpose, he eat very sparingly, and of such meat as required
no great labor to make it ready; not so much to satisfy nature, as to sustain
it.

Yet in this mean time, his new care of helping the sick did not interrupt his
old custom of teaching the Catechism. His enduring of labor.
For every day he both instructed the ignorant slaves, mariners, soldiers,
and other passengers in the mysteryes and precepts of our faith, and also
exhorted them by pious sermons to live Christianlike. And in all these labors
you would have thought him not to be tired out, but to grow stronger thereby.
Which was never more apparently seen, then in this Indian voyage. For besides
his extreme labor, this also was, as it were, added thereto, that whilst he
did all these things, The discommodities of the torrid Zone
he passed the Torrid Zone and the Equinoctial line not long after the time of
the Equinoctium. At which time there is commonly in that tract of the sea,
either through the scorching of the sun which ha^geth over their heads, or by
the reflection thereof upon the still sea, such an intolerable heat, that the
strongest men being almost burnt up, and consumed with heat and sweat, do even
faint away, and languish. And no marvel, seeing the passengers being thrust
up together in close rooms of the ship, can hardly draw their breath, or at
those times scarsely take any comfort, either in meat or drink. For all their
drink, and victuals being usually corrupted by the vapors of the scalding
sun, do for the most part loose their force and goodness for a time, until
they be past the foresaid line. Many times also the winds wholly ceasing, there
follows for many days, and sometimes weeks together, such a calm, that the
ships are not able to move, to the great irkesomnesse and grief of the
passengers. And as the intolerable heat of the sun, continuing almost
throughout the whole Torrid Zone, causes vehem^t fevers amongst them that
pass under it, so does it also bereave many of their lives.

At this time when sickness came upon them so fast, in so great a mortality of
mariners and passengers, as even they who were well, and had nothing to do
could scarce breath, Francis forgetful of him self underwent the burden of
all these inconveniences with courage answerable thereunto, judging it meet as
he saw the sick men's encumbrances to grow greater, so also to increase his
diligence in helping them. And albeit he was ready to languish away also,
through intolerable heat, yet such was his courage of mind such the force of
the holy Ghost (who is ever a most sweet refreshment in heat) that he applied
himself no less carefully then before, both in the service of those that were
sick and ready to die, as also already dead.

Having thus sailed through the excessive difficulties of the Equinoctial
line, and being now passed about two thousand leagues, a greater fear came
upon them the^ before, The Promontory of Good Hope.
since they were to undergo a greater danger. For the Promontory of Good Hope,
a very unfortunate place by reason of most cruel tempests and shipwrackes,
threatened to them no less pestilence and mortality then they had already
endured. This Promontory takes its name of Bonae spei, or Good Hope, for this
reason, that having once passed the difficulties and dangers thereof, you then
may hope for a prosperous navigations. For the^ the African coast growing sharp
in the form of a wedge, runs an huge way into the southern Ocean toward
the frozen climate: so as two most vast seas meeting from both sides of Africa
and continually tossed with contrary winds, make a most hydeous conflict with
themselves. And this happens especially in the months of June and July, at
which time in those parts it is the midst of winter wholly contrary to Europe,
and in which month ordinarily, they must pass that Promontory, who go from
Portugal into India. And although the ships to avoid that raging fury and
violence of the sea, as much as they can, use to keep off a great way from
land, yet do they seem to fly the danger more the^ the damage. For whilst they
fetch a great compass about, the further they go from the Promontory, the
nearer they come to the frozen Zone, and so do neither avoid the cruel
storms, nor yet escape the intolerable cold. Wherefore although they be more
secure from danger of shipwreck, yet by reason of the unusual and vehement
tossing of the ships, the passengers become extremely sea-sick, and vomit.
And as the same could not but augment their disease who were already sick; so
also Francis his labor was of necessity increased thereby: especially when he
himself being all frozen with cold, sea-sick, and full of loathsomenesse in
his stomach, did at the same time perform all those heroical exercises of
Charity. But the divine virtue which was in him overcame the weakness of his
nature, and his noble and constant courage, held in the troublesome vomiting of
his stomach. And so when he was not able to help himself, he failed not to help
those that were sick, even in the most dangerous time of all. Moreou^r, he did
not only affoard all the help and assistance he could for the present, to those
that accompanied him in this Indian navigations; but left also an example for
others of the society who were to go thither afterward, how they should carry
themselves in that journey; which they at this day diligently observe, and are a
great help and comfort to the ships wherein they sail.

Sosa therefore the Viceroy and the other Portugheses having now passed the
Promontory of Good Hope, and the dangers thereof, by fetching the aforsaid
compass, and greatly rejoicing by giving thanks to God, and congratulating
one another as the custom is, they sailed amayne along the other side of
Africa, which lies toward the South and the East. And having gotten beyond
the Promontory, almost 600. leagues, after they had spent sieve whole months in
continual navigations, and Francis in perpetual labor, they arrived at
Mozambicum in the latter end of August, escaping, through a more safe then
prosperous navigations, many and great dangers. For it is ordinarily but half a
years sail into India from Portugal: so as setting out in March, they come
for the most part to Goa in the beginning of September. But if through ill
weather, contrary wind, or calmes their course be hindered (as now it happened)
they are constrained to winter at Mozambicum.

CHAP. XV.
In the Hospital of Mozambicum he helps the sick, being himself at the same
time sick.
MOZAMBICVM (called Prasus in former times) is a little Island in the Eastern
coast of Africa, commodious and convenient rather for the haven, then for the
temperature of the air (for it lies under the Torrid Zone.) There be in this
Island but two Towns, The Ila^d Mozambicum.
one belonging to the Portugheses, the other to the Saracens, their friends. It
is distant from Portugal, if we take our measure not straight on, but by the
windings which ships make thither, above 3000. leagues, and from India about
900. The far greatest part of the journey was now past, and scarce the fourth
part remained. But the navy came later to Mozambicum then it should have done,
because both convenient time, and wind had failed them: So as they were
constrained to stay there all the following winter. At Mozambicum therefore when
the rest refreshed themselves after the tossing of so long a journey, only
Francis who loved labor better then ease, took almost no rest at all, through
the inflamed desire he had to instruct the ignorant, and help the sick. I do
not doubt, but they who shall read this often repetition of Francis his
laborious endeauours, in instructing the ignorant, and serving the sick, will
besides their satisfaction therein, reflect upon that also which my self in
more serious thoughts, have often wondered at, to wit, from whence he had those
wonderful forces, by which he was so often able to undergo at once so many,
and such great labors. But the worthy man being endowed with an incredible
courage both of body and mind, His strength of body and mind.
and Divine Grace ministering strength to his able nature, was of such force and
vigor, that he alone would, and could do in a manner all things for Gods sake.
And whereas he applied himself continually in the same works of Christian
charity without any wearisome tediousness, he never omitted any thing, which
he saw was either good for men or grateful to God.

Therefore as though he had come thither with his forces entire, and no whit
weakened, he presently took up his lodging in the Hospital at Mozambicum,
erected there by the King, as in other places also where the Portugheses have
fortes. His labor was now no less at land, New labor in the wintering places.
in the hospital, then it had bin at sea in the ship. For there was, at that
time, in Town both very great sickness, and a multitude of diseased persons.
And that which greatly augmented this contagion in time of Autumn was this,
that all the ships which had set out from Portugal that year for India*
lighting alike upon ill weather, and pestered with the same sickness, were
forced to stay all winter in that place. This occasion gave an new edge unto
Xauiers industry to undertake the care of that great multitude of sick me^. For
thinking it fitting for him to bestow his charity also upon the other ships,
in as much as he was able, by laboring continually both day and night he
applied himself to help the afflicted, to administer the Sacraments to the
sick, to comfort the sad, and to raise them up that lay a dying to hope and
confidence in God. All therefore that were sick esteemed Francis to be sent them
by God almighty, as the only remedy which the afflicted Navy had. Yet he did
not give himself so wholly to the sick, as to become unmindful of the rest. For
at the same time upon holy days he preached before the Viceroy and others, in
presence of a very great audience, that he might thereby help the souls also
of those who were in health.

Whilst he was thus busied, and wholly employed in helping both sick, His care
of souls
and healhfull in all he could, he understands that a boy, who came in the
same ship with him, was fallen suddenly dead. Whereupon he presently asked
every one (whom he met) whether that boy had learned the principles of the
Christian faith? And when he found that he dyed wholly ignorant thereof, he was
presently stricken to the heart with such grief, that he showed exceeding sadness
in his countenance, although otherwise he was always wont to look cheerfully.
Wherefore Sosa the Viceroy demanding of him the cause of his heaviness, when he
understood what it was by his own relation, asked him, whether he knew that boy
to be ignorant in his Christian faith? No quoth Francis, for if I had certainly
known that, I would not be sad, for I would without doubt have taught him with
the rest. Then Sosa urging him again, why therefore would he afflict himself
so much, seeing it was not his fault? Because (quoth he) there was one in the
same ship with me, who knew not his Christian faith, and I knew it not: Such a
care he had of the good of men's souls, He falls sick.
and of the instruction of children. But how much profit and benefit arose from
his great Charity, the sick found rather by wanting the same then by inioying
it. For within a few days after Xauerius fell sick himself whilst he was
helping others with the greatest fervor he could, wherein indeed, his fortitude
wanted not matter to work upon. So great and dangerous a fever invaded him,
that he was let blood seven times within few days; whereof, for all that, he
did not only make light account, but embraced it willingly, as though it had
bin sent from God. But to the end his generous virtue might be the more
evidently seen, this corporal sickness was seconded with a greater of the
mind; for he fell also into a Phrensy. This held him three whole days, during
which time the Physicians who had care of him, took their solemn oaths, that
in things blonging to the body, and his health (as the nature of the disease
was) he seemed to be out of his wits: but in matters divine, and things
belonging to the soul (wherein phrensy uses chiefly to show it self) he was
to their great astonishment so well in his senses, that he spoke not one word
which might seem to swerve from reason; of such force is the use and custom
of virtue. He refus^th to be carried out of the hospital in to private houses.
And in this sickness Francis was not more obseruant of piety, then of poverty.
He lay in the public Hospital amongst the rest, having his bed and all other
things like unto them. There wanted not men of Nobility and Esteem, who when
he fell first sick strove to take him into their houses, and there to have care
of him, and this as earnestly they entreated of him, as possibly they could.
But all in vain. For being a true lover of holy Poverty, in few words, he
thanked them for their courtely, but would not accept of their liberality. As
long as he was sick, he lay amongst the common multitude without any
difference at all. But the violence of his sickness was more dangerous then
long, which being soon mitigated, he began to be better. This sudden chance
did not any whit diminish his alacrity in his resolution, but rather increased
his diligence; and no wonder, for now he had learn by his own experience how
much sick me^ stood in need of other men's help. Therefore as soon as his fever
began to decline, forgetting himself, (...) sick he ^^lpeth the sick.
he would with never the less diligence go about the Hospital, comfort the
afflicted, hear confessions, and endeavor what he could to help the sick,
though himself were sick, even at that time.

Never did Francis his benignity show it self with more sple^dour and
admiration then at this time. For the Physician visiting (as his custom was)
the sick that kept their beds, light by chance upon Xauerius, who having a
great fever upon himself, stood notwithstanding by them that lay sick, and did
his best indeaauour to serve them, no otherwise then if he had been perfectly
well. The Phisitia^ being amazed at that stra^g accident, stood still a while,
then feeling his pulse, and finding him certainly to have more need of
attendance then they whom he served, entreated and earnestly besought him to
go to bed, and rest himself at least, until his fever had remitted of its
heat, and then he might, if he would, rise again, to help the sick.
Whereupon Francis thinking he was bound to obey the Physician, and yet not to
leave those that were in danger, answered, That this next night he should have
some occasion with a certain sick person who was not well prepared for death,
and was in imminent danger, and having secured his salvation then he would take
his rest. He whom he meant, was one of the poorest mariners of the ship, A
mariner being mad seems to be restored to his sens^s by F. his bed
who falling mad through a burning fever, had not yet made his confession. The
next day therefore the Physician found Francis talking with the said mariner,
who lay in Xauerius bed, and he sat by hearing his confession; for having
found him upon a sudden lying on the hatches he was so moved with compassion
toward him, that he presently laid him in his own bed. And it seems this
strange charity of his was honored with as strange a miracle. For as soon as
this frantic man was laid in Xauiers bed, he returned again to his senses.
And Fran^is prophecy of his death was not without ground. For the very same day
toward night he dyed, after he had received the Sacraments, full of great
confidence in God. And then it was manifestly seen that Xauerius took such
pains with him, because he forsaw him to be in imminent danger, both of life
and salvation.

Now Francis being very glad for this mariners safety, went presently to bed,
for his own health, obeying the Physician in all things, leaving behind him an
example of no less obedience then Christian charity: but as soon as he was
recovered of his fever, he again with no less diligence then before, set
himself to his former labors of helping the sick. And to persevere constantly
in that which he had begun well, and happily, he still kept on the very same
course of these his industrious exercises to the last day of his journey. And
in this half years space (for they wintred so long at Mozambicum) he gave
such proofs of his eminent sanctity, The opinion of Francis his sanctity.
that all, both inhabitants, and they of the navy held him generally for a
Saint. Wherefore they doubted not to hold themselves bound to Xauerius for many
things which succeeded with them prosperously at the same time; ascribing al^o
to his virtue and merits, that in so great a sickness, and amongst such a number
of sick persons, so few had dyed at Mozambicum that winter, thinking for
certain, that his diligent Care lightened their diseases, and his Sanctity
took them away.

Now the time was come that they were to depart, and yet very many of the sick
were not recovered. Moreover the Vice^Roy himself began to feel some
grudgings of an ague; wherefore making all have, he thought it best to leave
them who for want of health cold not follow him (which was almost the whole navy)
in the wintering places, until they having recovered their forces, might be
able to pass into India. And so having easily persuaded Father Paul, and Fa.
Mansilla to stay at Mozambicum with the sick, he determined to take Xauerius
with him, who might be to all both a comfort in this journey, and an assured
help also, if any thing should fall out amiss.

CHAP. XVI.
Having stayed a while at Melinda, and in the Island of Socotora, to the great
benefit to the inhabitants, he arriueth at length in India.
THE next year therefore in the month of April, Sosa the Viceroy preparing a
great Galeon for his Indian journey, puts to sea with a strong band of
Souldiars, commanding the Navy to follow him, as soon as their health would
permit. With him Francis also departed, both the Portugheses and the
inhabitants bidding him farewell with many tears, and great tokens of
benevolence. Sosa having a prosperous gale, had sailed in few days 700. miles,
or thereabout, beyond M^zambicum, The City M^^inda.
and coming to Melinda (a fair town of the Saracens, yet friend to the
Portugheses) he stayed there a while. In this City there be very many
Portugh^se merchants, of whom if any chance to dye there, they are buried with
crosses upon their graves. Also near unto the City there is a goodly, The
Cross in honor amongst the Sara^ens.
and fair Cross of marble gilded, erected by the Portugheses: which when
Xauerius beheld, he exceedingly rejoiced and gave thanks to God for that great
virtue and glory of the Cross, because like a conqueror it triumphed in the
midst of the Saracens, and in the Devils Dominion. This joy of his was
afterward increased by a memorable accident.

A principal Saracen of that City, complaining to Francis that the Religion
of the Saracens grew to decay, demanded of him whether it were so among
Christians. For of 17. Temples which were in Melinda, he wondered to see but
three only frequented, and those but of a very few, not knowing the reason why
their devotion failed. And all that misery, said he, proceeded certainly from
some great sin of theirs. Mahomets Religion going to d^cay.
But Xauerius rejoicing that the presence of the Cross had so weakened the
Devils force, told him, that it was not so much to be admired that Mahomets
superstition did now fail, as that it had held up so long. For God being the
Author of true Religion could not endure the prayers of the superstitious
Saracens: and that indeed was the cause why he would have their Religion also
overthrown. These things coming to the hearing of a chief man of the
Saracens superstition (called in their language Caciz) a great Doctor in the
Mahometa^ law, he protested openly, that unless Mahomet came to them again
within two years, he would quite forsake him, so decayed was all reverence to
his Deity in their perplexed minds. But Francis being not able for want of time
to free them, for the present, whose mynds were wholly led away with
superstition, nor could endure any wholesome counsel; all that he could do,
was to enkindle in them a desire of Christian liberty, very seriously aduising
them to cry often times to God the Creator of man, that he would vouchsafe to
bestow his grace and light upon them.

After a small space, he set to sea again, and with new fervor of spirit held
on his old custom to help the passengers, but especially the sick (who were
not wanting in the ship) in whatsoever he was able. He lends his chamber and
bed to the sick.
In which kind he went as far, as Charity could possibly extend it self. He
was austere and hard unto himself, that he might be bountiful to others. For
a great part of that journey he lay above hatches among the common mariners and
soldiers, that he might lend his cabin and bed to the sick: for his repose he
had a hard Cable rope to lie on, A cable rope is his bed.
and an Anchor for his pillow. From hence forward Francis had new matter of
merit given him both in respect of men, and religion. The Viceroy having sailed
round about the cost of Affricke, arrived at the Island of Socotora, 1700. miles
almost from Mozambicum. This Island lies upon the furthest promontory of
A^fricke, which now they call Guardafu, in time past Aromata, and it is
opposite to the Arabian Gulf, and to the Mecaan sea, so called of the City
Meca, a place notorious for the Sepulcher of Mahomet.

Socotora is about 100. miles compass. It is a land wast, very craggy, and
stony, without any sign almost of tillage. The Ila^d Socotora.
most of tillage. It bears neither wheat, rize, wine nor apples, being wholly
barren; yet it abounds with catle, and Dates, whereof the inhabitants make
their bread. Morouer it is a very intemperate air being burnt up with the
extreme heat of the sun. The people are wholly rude and ignorant, there being
no sign of learning among them, nor a man that can read. They dwell in
Villages, and every village has his Caciz, Gacizes like Curates.
in manner of a Curate. And these Cacizes have no more learning then the rest,
only they do recite by heart certain prayers in a strange language, which they
themselves do not understand. But the inhabitants glorying that they are
Christians, bear great devotion to S. Thomas the Apostle, and derive their
pedigree from them who were in ancient times baptized by the Apostle in that
Island. And although Christianity is at this day extinguished among them, yet
they have many signs of Christian Religion. Their Churches or Temples are
built, and adorned magnificently and devoutly. They have Crosses upon their
Aultars with lamps before them: and because their poverty will not affoard
them bells, they call the people together with wooden ratles (as the custom
is with us in holy Week.) Cacizes famous for abstinence.
Their Cacizes although they be married, are notwithstanding notorious for
their abstinence; as often as they fast, they absteyne not only from flesh, and
whitmeates, but also from fish, which they have in great abundance; so that
they they will rather dye then taste any such thing. Besides they have also
every year two Lents, whereof one lasts two months, and if any be so
profane as to eat flesh at these times, they are forbidden to come within the
Temple. But it is very evident that the Cacizes being themselves ignorant,
there has been none for a long time, either instructed in the Christian faith
or baptized. The miserable condition of the Socotoreans.
And that which increased their misery was the cruel impiety of a Saracen
Prince, who had by force subdued the inhabitants. For he did not only keep
them in miserable subjection, but taking also their little children out of their
arms, endeavored to train them up in the execrable superstition of Mahomet.

Xauerius therefore by beholding these inhabitants and conuersing with them, was
surprised with no less grief, then joy, much lamenting, that degenerating
from their ancestors, ignorant of the Religion which they professed, and
destitute of Catholic Priests, they should be subject to the Saracens, like
sheep to wolves. He endeauours to instruct the Socotoreans by signs
Wherefore all though he having a great desire to instruct them (as much as
time would give him leave) yet was he a stranger, and wanted their language
answerable to his will and desire. But nothing is hard where charity abounds.
Wherefore leaving such signs, as be proper to particular nations, he used such
as be common to all; and so the little while he stayed there, He baptizeth a
great number of children
he instructed those ignorant people in the Christian faith by noddes, and
beckes, and all other signs he could invent. He baptized also many children,
with the free consent of their parents. Presently they began every one to bring
their children unto him, earnestly entreating him, that he would be pleased to
stay with them, assurng him that there was not one in the whole Island who would
not be baptized.

Xauerius therefore although be well saw the rudeness of the people and
discommodities of the place, yet thinking of nothing but their salvation, went
to the Viceroy, and showing him what a forward harvest he had now found,
entreated him, that he might with his good liking remain there some time. But
the Viceroy knowing that that Island was subject to the pillage of the Turks,
thought it not good to put such a man in hazard to be taken captive by them.
Therefore commending him for his singular charity toward those poor souls, He
desires to stay in Socotora.
he advised him, not to suffer himself to be deceived with the show of the
present good. Be not quoth he, over greedy to set upon the first, for fear you
loose that which is better. Why do you so much desire to labor here, where the
labor is greater then the fruit, and where the hopes are less then the
dangers? Another country, another people, other Christians expect you, with
whom you may employ your labors, both with more safety, and fruit.

Then Francis, seeing him of a different opinion, and well considering that he
knew more then himself, answered, that he was wholly at his dispose. Then
conforting the inhabitants, he promised them that he would always, whersoeuer
he was, have a great care of their salvation. And exhorting them to keep, in
the mean time, the true religion in the midst of a corrupted generation, he
gave them assured hope of speedy help. Francis his letter to the King of
Portugal.
In which promise he did not fail. For after he was departed from them, by the
first occasion which was offered him, he directed letters to John King of
Portugal wherein he earnestly commended to his kingly providence the Christians
of Socotora, who straying like sheep without a pastor, and abandoned of al,
were greatly oppressed by tyranny. For in that Island there was a Saracen Prince
who contrary to al right and equity tyrannizeth over the inhabitants, who be
either Christians, or affected to the Christian faith, having had their first
beginning from the disciples of S. Thomas the Apostle, vexing and oppressing
them in a miserable manner; yea taking the children by violence out of their
parents bosoms he endeavors to make them slaves to Mahomet, and the Devil.
He therefore entreated his majesty, as a most religious King, not to permit
them by little and little to fall away from the grounds of Christianity, to the
customs, and rites of the Saracens; and that they might not willingly give
their souls to him, who had by force gotten dominion over their bodies. They
were in danger utterly to be undone, unless his Majesty from Portugal would
help them. And there was no doubt, but God, who had given him such ability,
that he alone of all the Kings in Christendom was able to perform it, would
also give him the will and desire to protect and defend those miserable and
afflicted souls. Wherefore he should with all speed endeavor by his Royal
assistance, to maintain them in the faith of their Savior who had redeemed
both them, and us with his most precious blood: Especially seeing that all
this, might be done without any danger or charges at all. For he needed only to
command his Royal Navy which was yearly to pass that way, to deliver the
Socotoreans by force from the most barbarous Tyranny of that Saracene Lord.

These letters and requests of Francis lost not their desired effect. They
Socotoreans at Francis his entreaty are delivered from the Saracens tyranny.
For the cause seemed no less worthy of consideration to the King, then it had
done unto him, neither did he take it less to the heart. Wherefore with that
speed, which beseemed his religious Piety, he sent thither a navy; and the
war was as fortunate as pious. For they taking Socotora by force, beat out
the Saracens, and freed the inhabitants from the subjection of their
Tyrannical Lord; and moreover placed a strong garrison in the Island, that
their liberty might be no less grateful then secure. But Xauier not content
with this, bestowed upon them afterward a benefit greater then their liberty.
For he sent some of the Society into that Island, who might again cultiuate
that ouergrowne vineyard of our Lord, and deliver them also from the Tyranny of
the Devil, who were already freed from the Saracens.

As soon as the ship departed from Socotora, Francis settled himself again to
his former task of helping the sick; and at last with the same laborious and
charitable exercises, as he began his Indian voyage, having passed the coasts
of Arabia and Persia, he arrived at Goa a famous City of India upon the VI. of
May 1542. which day being the feast of Saint John ante portam Latinam, is very
memorable among the Indians. For upon that very day Xauerius, who by the
special benefit and favor of God, was borne for the good of those nations,
brought with him great light and salvation into India, together with the light
of the Gospel, and by himself revived those lost countries, and opened a way
to others of the Society for the conversion of other nations; the which shall be
plainly seen by that which follows in this History. For hereafter I well set
down Xauiers acts more at large then hitherto I have done. Because those
things which I have already spoken of, are, although not doubtful, yet a little
obscure, because for the most part they want the clear testimony of letters.
But henceforward I will speak of such things, which were left written partly
by himself, and partly by those, who through long and familiar conversation
with him in India, did not only observe them whilst he lived, but had also
particular knowledge of them after his death.

OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE II. BOOK.
In what state be found India. CHAP. I.
INDIA, The description of India.
being a place much spoken of by Poets, and Historiographers, is a Country of
Asia, almost twice as long, as broad, somewhat like in proportion to a man's
tongue. Toward the North it butteth upon the Mount Caucasus; in the West it is
environed with the River Indus, from whence it takes its name; as the East in
like manner, is with the river Ganges; and from the temperate Zone it
stretches it self out, even unto the Southern Ocean. The forsaid rivers
issuing from the mountains of Scythia, and dividing themselves into two main
Torrents, the further they run, the broader they leave the land between
them; and having run almost a thousand miles (that is, very near half the
length of India) they fall finally into the sea. Betwixt the mouths of these
rivers (where India is broadest) it has 800. miles, or there about in breadth.
From thence by little and little it grows narrower, until it comes unto the
Promontory of Commorinum, where in form of a wedge it shoots out a mighty
way toward Asia.

India, in the inward parts of the land, is inhabited by Pagans of the same
Country. Toward the coast which lies upon the river Indus, they have for the
most part Kings of their own nation; but toward Ganges they be Saracens. For
the Saracens having now long since gotten thither out of Arabia and Persia, by
little and little, partly by policy, and partly by force have brought many of the
Indians under their subjection. The Portugheses also having free passage
thither by sea, and by occasion of their often going to those Countries,
unknown to others, have in each Coast thereof taken the possession of many
Towns of good note, for which cause they are very famous throughout India, and
the whole East. The sea coast of India, which for a great part lies under the
Torrid Zone, is continually almost so beaten upon with the sun, that it
remains, even parched and withered up all the year long. Yet the heat is so
tempered by seasonable raynes and Eastern winds, that it is inhabited without
any great incommodity; although in summer (which they have twice a year, by
reason the sun passes yearly the Equinoctial line twice) all things are
burnt up with the foresaid scorching heates.

The Country is fertile, especially of Rize which they use instead of wheat:
next to Rize, they have a certain Palm Tree, whereof they gather not only
green, and dry fruit, but also (which may seem incredible) furnishes them
with wine, vinegar, and oil; yea and besides this, with matter likewise for
houses, ships, ropes, and books; Nature in this manner making one tree a
storehouse almost of all things. They have also abundance of fish and cattle,
and very great store of Pearls, which lying enclosed in shellfishes, the
inhabitants search after with great diligence in the holes of rocks. And this
is the greatest cause why ancient writers speak so much of the wealth of
India, since Riot has set a price upon the Sea's excrements.

The Native people of the Country being black of complexion, cover themselves
from the navel to the knee with fine linen, leaving all the rest of their
body naked. They are ordinarily of a servile, and deceiptfull nature: yet in so
rich a country the people are most commonly poor, their riches being
ordinarily engrossed in a few men's hands, by reason of their Kings, and Princes
tyranny over them. Yet want does not with hold them from excess in their
attire: For all, both men and women, have commonly gold, or copper jewels
hanging at their ears, which by art they draw down to their shoulders, as a
thing they much glory in. Most of them also wear for an ornament bracelets
upon their arms, so effeminate they are become in their attire. Many other
things besides are recounted of their customs, which I hold not worth the
speaking of, with further hindrance to this history.

The head City of India is Goa, Goa the chief City of India.
situate in an Island of the same name, almost right against the Persian gulf,
distant from the mouth of the river Indus some 300. miles, or thereabout. This
City being fortifyed by art and nature (for the Island wherein it stands is
divided from the co^tinent by a strait arm of the sea) for the multitude and
fayrenesse of buildings, for traffic, wealth, and number of Citizens, and
inhabitants, may not unworthily be compared with the chief Cities of Europe.
And therefore both the Archbishop, and the Viceroy of India have therein their
seats, and is very much frequented by the Portugheses. There be very certain
proofs, not only of S. Thomas the Apostles being in India, but also that he
watered the same with his blood, bringing very many therein to the faith of
Christ: but their posterity living mixed with Ethnickes and Saracens, are now by
little and little fallen into abominable superstitions, so as for a very long
time (excepting a few villages, the inhabitants whereof take their name from S.
Thomas) there was almost no sign of Christianity left in India, but only a
bare report thereof, until the Portugheses obtaining Goa, and other Towns of
India, delivered the Indians from the servitude of the Saracens and other
Tyrants, and restored them again to the light of the Gospel. For by living
amongst them they gained the inhabitants to become members of Christ.

At this time John Alboquercius of the Order of S. Francis, a man famous both
for his learning and religious fervor, was ^ishop of Goa (having likewise
authority over all Indi^, by reason that there was never a Bishop therein but
only himself. He with a few others of his own Order, although he labored
more for the Christian cause, then from so small a number could have been
expected, yet through want of Priests, could not do so much good, as necessity
required. There were then no religious men in all India, but the Franciscans,
who were so employed in assisting the Portugheses, that they had no time to
attend to the Ethnickes. Of these, The Fra^ciscans zeal of Religion
Friar James Borban was most eminent, both for his learning, virtue, and zeal
of propagating the Christan faith. For he having converted and baptized
certain Indian children, after he had instructed them in the mystertes of the
Christian faith, and taught them the Portughese language, he used them as his
interpreters in the conversion of Ethnickes; which invention had good suuesse,
answerable to the witty contriuing thereof. He therefore assisted by pious and
worthy persons, began to think upon greater matters; and instituting a
Seminary for the Indians, he employed himself wholly in teaching the students
thereof. Wherefore albeyt the Bishop, and the Franciscans out of their singular
piety, The beginning of a College in Goa.
desired to spread the Christian faith over India, yet they being but few in
number were not able to supply so many places. Therefore the superstition of the
Ethnicks and Saracens bare great sway not only in other towns of the
Portughess but also in the City of Goa it self. For the Pagans and Saracens
being wealthy, and living every where amongst the Portugheses, practiced their
execrable rites publicly even at noone day, the Governors of the Fortes
winking thereat, either because the forces of their new command were not as yet
sufficiently established, or else because their was no body to couince them of
their error, and bring them to the true worship of Christ.

Moreover, if any inferior Ethnickes chanced to become Christians, The
miserable condition of the Neophites.
they were so tormented by the richer sort, that they durst scarce profess
themselves Christians. For the Ethnicke and Saracen merchants, who dealt with
the Kings wares, and customs, were so rich even in Goa, that through favor,
and power they could do much both with the Portugheses, and the Christian
Magistrates. So as the new Christians being oppressed, the conversion of the
Ethnickes grew very cold. The state of the Portugheses themselves was not much
better. In many places there was very seldom use of Sacraments, The loose
behavior of the Portugheses in India.
and of sermons almost none at all. Because in all India there were but two or
three Preachers at the most, and not many more Priests. Wherefore most of the
Portughese garrisons were many times for whole years together, without either
sermon or Mass. And besides this, the beastly and wicked conversation of the
Saracens and Ethnickes, drew them on to much lewdnes. For none were more
corrupted in their behavior then they, nor more forcible to set sensual lust
on fire; and each one giving himself to unclean pleasures, esteemed nothing
lighter almost, then his own wives honesty.

Wherefore the Portugheses, although naturally they be inclined to temperance
and frugality, yet giving themselves amidst so corrupt a nation, to overmuch
banqueting, and to other things which follow thereof, kept commonly with them
in their houses, many harlotts, which they had bought, as slaves. And having
none to reprehend their vices, their lust was grown to such a height, that
they counted it a point of honor, to live lewdly, and esteemed no gain unjust
or disgraceful; so much had covetousness, fortifyed by bad custom, changed
all things. It was ordinary amongst them to pass diverse years, without either
Confession or Communion; and if any did confess more then once in a year,
they were commonly held for hypocrites. In so much that if any one would
perchance, out of remorse of conscience, go oftener to confession, he must do
it privately to avoid the note and speech of others, like Nicodemus who came to
Christ by night. Moreover the Portugheses wives, and harlots being native of
that Country, although they were Christians, yet through ignorance of the
mysteries of the Christian faith, were entangled with the superstition of the
Pagans and Saracens. And their children were like their parents, or rather
worse. This was the state of matters in India when Xauerius came thither; who
being very joyful that he was at last (according to his hearts desire) arrived
there, and understanding of the foresaid things, bent all his endeauours for
the remedying of so many and great evils. And which is to be much admired, in
so great fervor of spirit, he carried himself no less warily then diligently.

CHAP. II.
Having gotten the good vvil of the Bishop, he begins to labor in India.
HE was not ignorant that many Controversies and contentions, with no less
do^mage then scandal to the people, might easily arise between Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastical Pastors if each of them should stand to ^^fend the
uttermost of their right, without yielding my thing at all therein. First of
all therefore thinking it good to cut of all occasion of debate and strife, and
^^hat he might provide good things, not only before God, He goes to the
Bishop of India.
but (...) so before all men, he resolved by all means to gain ^e good will
and liking of the Bishop. Calling therefore ^^on God, and the Archangell Patron
of India, as his ^ustome was, he goes to the Bishop, and having salut^^ him
in an humble and most reverend manner, he shows that he was come into India
sent by Pope Paul (...) III. and John III. King of Portugal to convert the
^th^nickes to the Faith of Christ, and to instruct the ^^eophites (or young
beginners) and the Portugheses in ^^atters of Christian piety. But being
accustomed (...) to obey then to command, he had rather follow ^^others man's
judgment then his own: and for that (...) Grace being the chief Prelate, he
desired to be wholly at his command, and to attempt nothing, but with his
Lordships advice and good liking. Then showing the Popes, By great humility he
wynneth the Bishop of Goas good will.
and the Kings Letters, which testified him to be Legate Apostolical, he cast
himself at the Bishops feet, giving up all into his Lordships hands, and
desiring to make no other use of them, then he should think convenient.

Never, peradventure, was it more evidently seen how soon true Humility
wins men's affections. Alhoquercius admiring to see so great humility, and
modest behavior in such a man, answered to his gentle submission with the like
courtesy; for presently he takes him up in a friendly manner, and gives him
again both the Patents and the Letters, telling him, that (...) would be very
grateful to him, that he, being Legat^ Apostolical, should use the authority
which was given him, according to the Popes and the Kings pleasure: neither did
he doubt but he would make suc^ use of it, as might make good the opinion which
such worthy personages had conceived of him. And from that time forward there
was engendered between the Bishop and Xauerius so great a love and respect
toward one another, that in most friendly manner they imparted to each other
their most private counsayles. Francis therefore being glad that the Bishop
would assist him in the advancement of the Christian cause, began more
cheerfully to employ all his forces in helping the sick at Goa, as being the
task which he had undertaken.

Whe^fore out of hand taking up his abode in the Kings Hospital, he never gave
over serving them who were extreme sick, with all the diligence he possibly
could, sometimes speaking to them a part, sometimes exhorting them all
together, and sometimes admienistring to them the Sacraments of penance and
thholy Eucharist, until their change of behavior gave him hope of amendment
in their lives. His chief labor was to help the^, that were grievously sick,
upon whom he attended very diligently, not only in the day, but also in the
night, which made all to admire his singular charity, and more then fatherly
love toward them, who were mere strangers unto him. For Francis his bed was
commonly said to be at his feet who was sickest in the Hospital; Francis
lies hard by the^ that are dangerously sick.
choosing to lie there all night that he might be presently ready to help if
any occasion of sudden death should chance to happen. And among all these
employments he had no less care in the observance of holy poverty, then in
exercising acts of charity.

Xauerius had yet the same apparel which he brought upon his back out of
Portugal, much like to that which the poorer sort of Priests use to wear in
Portugal. But fearing least his difference in apparel might auert the Indians
affections from him, he resolved to cloth himself according to the custom of
the Priests in those countries. Wherefore knowing that the Society of JESUS has
no particular and proper habit, but such as the Priests where they live are
wont to wear, His love of poverty in his apparel.
out of the familiarity which he had with the steward of the Hospital, he
friendly intreatech him to get him an ordinary Cassocke such as the poor
Priests of that Country were wont to wear. But he not attending so much to
what was requested him, as what he thought convenient, having regard of Francis
his dignity and authority, brings him an habit of Water-chamlet; and this
liberality of his he secondeth with a more liberal speech, telling him that
the Priests do there use such king of habits, by reason of the extreme heate^
of India, and that although it were Chamlet, yet i^ was a plain and homely
wear amongst them. But Xauerus not liking such curious apparel, You may,
quoth he, then if you please give this Chamlet habit to some of the Priests you
speak of; as for me, one ofcourse black linen, if you think good, will be
sufficient, for it is meet for him who has vowed poverty, to have such an
habit, as may be a token and sign thereof.

The Steward being overcome with the verity of this answer, He uses a coat
of black linen without either girdle or cloak.
caused presently an habit to be ma^^ for him of course hempe^ linen down to
the ankles, such a one as he desired. Francis ever after wore this habit,
according to the fashion of those country Priests, without either girdle or
cloak, choosing rather to abate of his apparel, then any whit of his poverty.
And in this, his moderation was not more apparent then his constancy. For the
same kind of habit he used always afterward in India, which practice of his,
bare such authority amongst others of the Society, that according to his
example, He refuses to change his old and ill-fauoured shoos for new.
they kept the same kind of habit a great while. But now adays they use both
girdle and cloak, as the Portugheses do accustom; which fashion many of the
Priests in India do also follow. Afterward the Master of the Hospital
perceiving Francis his shoes to be worn out and broken, and the vpper-leather,
and soales to be clowterly sown together, brought him a new prayre. He
refuses to change his torn and ill favored shoos for new.
But he being every where like unto himself, could by no means be entreated
to change his old shoes for new, saying that his own would still serve him
well enough so immovable he was in his observance of Poverty.

Xauerius was then about 45. years old, which age most commonly excels more
in gravity of judgment, then strength of body. Yet he being of a courageous
spirit, shru^cke not at any labor. For although at that time his principal
care was to help the sick, yet he was no way wanting to them that were in
health when any necessity either spiritual are corporal occured. After he had
done his endeauours with all diligence about the sick, in the morning he was
ready to hear the Co^fessions of them that came unto him, for which cause he
was also oftentimes sent for by the principal men of the City. And such a
multitude desired to confess unto him, that his diligence though it were
extraordinary, He helps prisoners with alms.
was not for all that able to satisfy the tenth part of them. In the afternoon
his custom was commonly to visit those that were in prison, and to relieve
them with alms which himself begged for them; where also teaching them how to
make a good Confession, he by that means heard many of their whole life past.
This example also of Xauerius was not without force with others. For the new
Viceroy took this course once every week, both in a loving manner to visit
the sick, and to comfort them that were in prison, by examining and dispatching
their causes; which custom he continued as long as he stayed in India.

Upon Sundays also Xauierius assisted the leapers (who have an Hospital in
the suburbs) serving the^ as well in other things, He serves leapers.
as in hearing their Confessio^s and ministering unto them the holy Sacrament of
the Altar; wherein he so wisely behaved himself, that there was not one of
the^ who did not receive the holy Sacraments at his hands. When he thought he
had sufficiently helped the sick, he went into a Church of our B. He preaches.
Lady hard by the Hospital to make them also who were in health partakers of
his labors. There on Sundays and holy days in the fore-noone he preached to
the Portugheses, in the afternoon he very diligently explicated to the people
of that country the chief principles of our belief, whereunto resorted more
to hear him then the Church wherein he taught was able to contain. Then he
reconciled and made friends such as were at discord and debate among
themselves. And in his private conferences he omitted no means that might be
good for the Citizens spiritual profit. His private conferences.
Having won the Portugheses by his affability of speech he admonished the^ in
a frindly manner of their vices: and as for other lewd persons he deterred them
from their wickedness, by laying the fear of death and the terror of
hellfire before their eyes, whom as soon as he perceived to be any thing
moved, then he endeavored sometimes by entreaties, sometimes by persuasion to
draw them to make a good confession for satisfaction of their sins and
amendment of their lives: The fruit of his sermons.
whereupon, as it is well known, many were so moved and encouraged, that after
they had made their co^fessions, the began a new life, putting away their
Concubines, and making restitution of what they had unlawfully gotten.

CHAP. III.
He very dexterously causes those who kept Concubins, either to marry them,
or to put them away: and instructs children, and ignorant persons in the
Cathechisme.
BUT he found far greater difficulty and trouble among them concerning their
Co^cubines, then about other men's goods. For at that time the Portugheses of
Goa, were through want of wives of their own nation, greatly entangled with
the love of women-strangers, whereof many were of the country of Sion, or Pegu,
and some others of Iaponia, and China, since these do far excel the Indian
women both in beauty of body and comelines of person. Wherefore the Portugheses
disdaining to marry with them, kept them as their Concubines. Xauerius thinking
with himself that he ought to apply some remedy to this great evil, began to
dispose the^ with all the endeauours he could use. And first he went about to
win the^ by all courteous means; then as he met them in the streets, he
would merrily request them to inuit a poor Priest to their ordinary fare,
which they willingly accepted of.

He now sitting at table, would before, or at their repast, entreat his host to
cause his children to be called: whereupon the little children coming presently
at their fathers call, Francis would take them up in his arms, and hug them in
his bosom, thanking God who had given the Father such children for the hope of
his family, and withal would pray God to grant the^ a good and holy life. Then
would he desire that their mothe^ might be called (a thing which in another
would have bin temerity, but his Sanctity easily excused it:) when she was come
he would speak sweetly unto her, and commend her beauty to his host, thereby to
draw him to take her to his wife, saying, that doubtless she was of an
excellent disposition and lovely countenance, so that she might well be
accounted a Portughese, that the children which he had by her were certainly
worthy of a Portughese to their father. Why therefore did not he marry her? What
wife could he have better? And he should do well to provide with all speed for
his childrens credit, He causes some to marry their concubines, and others to
put them away.
and the woman's honesty.

Which wholesome counsel of his proved not unprofitable. For by his words and
authority, without great difficulty he persuaded many of them to marry their
Concubines being himself witness thereof. But if by chance he lighted upon any
one who had, by some ill favored Indian-woman, children like unto her self,
then as conceiving great indignation thereat he would cry out: Good God! what a
monster have we here? Do you keep a Devil in your house? Can you keep company
with this ugly beast? Can you have children by her? Follow my counsel, drive
this monster, ^his prodigious creature presently out of your house, He (...) to
marry il favored wives thereby to keep them from adultery and concubines.
and seek you a wife worthy of your self: so as putting away his concubine,
he married a wife. Moreover he would not by any means (as much as lay in him)
suf^fer the Portugheses to marry black, or tawny Mores, but such as were fair
and well-fauoured, to the end ^hey might abstain from adultery, and each one
con^^nt himself with his own wife.

In this mean time he left not off to instruct, and draw all men to the love
of piety, and of a Christian life: which labor of his was not in vain. For
this heavenly kind of discipline did so work in the Citti^ens, and in
habitants behauiours, that Goa seemed to ^e quite changed, from what it had bin
a little before: so as by reason of these his pious exercyses in the day, and
continual prayer in the night, he became to be of great credit and esteem
both with the Portugheses and the Indians. But being a man truly virtuous he
used this their esteem which was had of him, not as ^n incitement to pride,
but as a spur to further ver^ue. For he thirsting more after the salvation of
souls then his own praise, was always thinking of some new ways, how to
help them, for the performance whereof there was nothing which he would not do.
And amongst the rest he had one invention which in such a man as he, gave an
admirable example of Christian simplicity, and was also more profitable in
effect, then fair to the show.

He being a man of grave years and authority, went up and down the high
ways, and streets with a little bell in his hand (so far was he from thinking
any thing disgraceful to him, He calls children and servants together with a
little bell and teaches them the Christian doctrine.
that might be grateful to God, and profitable for man's saluations) to call
the children and servants together to Christian doctrine, at the corners of
streets and Cross ways, sometimes stirring up the inahbitants to piety with
these, or such like words: Faithful Christians, for the love which you bear
to Christ, send your Children and servants to the Christian doctrine; which new
invention made infinite of children, slaves, and others to run flocking unto
him from all places; all whom, himself marching before, he would lead into
our B. Ladies Church, singing aloud the Cathechisme unto them, and teaching
them the same, thereby to cause them more willingly to come to hear him, and
so more easily to remember what was taught them in the manner of singing: both
which proved afterward to be so. And herein he used no less prudence then
diligence. For knowing very well, that his labor would then be profitably
employed, if those things which ought to be learned, were well understood, all
that he sunge he would explicate briefly and clearly, according to the capacity
of his auditors.

To the ruder sort, He speaks homely of set purpose.
and to slaves he would purposely speak after a rude and homely manner, that
their own fashion of speech might keep them more attentive, and make deeper
impression in their mynds: which endeavor of his was neither fruitless, not
in vain. The fruit of Catechizing.
For from hence arose that so worthy a custom of teaching, and learning the
Christian doctrine, which is at this day practiced in India. And because men
reaped more fruit by it, then was expected, the Bishop caused the same to be
practiced by others, in the other Church: so as adua^cing himself in this new
piety, those of the Society following Francis his institution, others stirred
up thereunto partly by the Bishops command, and partly by the example of the
Society, it came at last, to be a custom, throughout all India, to the great
advancement of the Christian cause. For his practice so spread it self abroad
both in Goa and other places, that every where, in the schools, high ways,
streets, howses, fields, and ships, there were, in steed of vain and idle
songs, sung and heard the principles of Christian faith, with great delight
Whereupon it grew to a custom, that children who could scarce speak, did
strive to sing most of those verses by heart. And in this exercise Xauerius gave
no ^esse noble proof of his temperance and moderation ^hen of his industrious
labor. For of all that was gi^en him under the title of Alms, he reserved
nothing ^o himself, but gave all to the sick, and poor, in the most private
manner he could, to the end humane praise might not deprive him of any reward
in the sight of God.

Moreover he detested from his heart not only vain glory, Flying of honor.
but also all honors, wherein few are found firm and constant. For when they
used to give him that honor which was due to his virtue, he would not only in
his words and countenance, but also by the gesture and carriage of his whole
body, show a dislike not only of the honor, but also of those who gave it him,
deeming it an unworthy thing for a Christian, who should always have in mind
the reproaches of Christ his master, to take delight in honors. Let therefore
those who hunt after titles of honors, hearken what I am here to say. Xauerius
being a true contemner of all worldly things, and especially of himself, did
no less despise popular applause and honor, then others commonly seek after
it: So as now all might see, that nothing could happen more heavy, or crossely
unto him, then to see his actions praised, or himself honored. But as honor
follows them most of all that fly from it, this his flying from honor, as
ordinarily it happens, made him more honored and admired. All were stricken
with admiration that a Priest of singular learning and virtue, coming as a
stranger out of another world, should do so many and such excellent things, for
no reward at all, no not so much as for praise or glory.

Therefore as before it had happened in Portugal, He is called the Apostle in
India.
so also now it fell out in India, that he began to be commonly called an
Apostle, but indeed with no small grief of mind unto him: yet the rude
multitude prevailed through their constancy or rather pertinacy therein; For
that title of Apostle was so settled upon him, that he could by no means shake
it of; and from him was it afterward derived also to his other Companions: but
they assuming a new Name, whereof we will presently speak, caused that Title,
too glorious and vn^it for them, to be at last forgotten.

CHAP. IIII.
He procures a College at Goa, for the Society.
CERTAIN devout men of Goa having through the persuasion of Fr. James Borban
the Franciscan contracted a league amongst themselves, for the increase of the
Christian faith, as we have before declared, had begun a Seminary there of
Indians, a few months before Xauerius arrival. And having found by experience
the great want thereof, they agreed that it was best to ^aue many children and
youths of most of the cou^^ries of India to be instructed in the rites of the
Christian faith, and to be brought up in learning, who might be sent afterward
each one to his own country, whereof some might be made Priests, others
interpreters. This their pious determination by common consent they bring unto
Ferdinand Rodrigues the Kings Treasurer, (who at that time, in the absence of
Steven Gama the Viceroy of India, was Governor of Goa) desiring his advise,
and assistance therein. Whereupon by his authority a Seminary was instituted at
Goa, and children of most of the Provinces of India (especially those of the
Canarines, to whom Goa it self appertains,) of Cingala, Malauara, Cellano,
Bengala, Pegu, Malaca, China and the Abissines placed therein, and instructed
in the precepts of the Christian faith, who might afterward become Priests or
Interpreters; and if any of them should not prove fit for either of both, they
should notwithstanding be there maintained until they had learned some trade.
And for the better managing of the temporal state of this Seminary, it was
thought convenient, that there should be certain Procurato^s chosen by the
said Company: but for the education and bringing up of the children, it was to
be committed to the Franc^scans.

These things being thus disposed, the Kings Tre^surer in name of the viceroy
of India, and of the Kin^ of Portugal assigned to this Seminary of Goa out of
(...) public treasury a stipend of 800. crowns, which ha^ belonged to the
Pagan Priests, God by his divine providence turning, in this manner, the Devils
treasure^^ his own service. This pension being afterward doubled by the
Treasurer, was confirmed by the Viceroy* and the Kings authority. They began
also to buil^ howses for that end with a Church thereunto adjoining. And because
the said Seminary was founded for the propagatio^ of the Christian faith, it
was in tituled A sancta Fide, of the Holy Faith; the revenues, and alms
whereof were such, that an hundred scholars might well be maintained therewith,
but as yet there were not above threescore. Friar James Borban who was the
first beginner, was Rectour thereof. But it seems this Seminary was ordained
by God for a College of the Society of Jesus, as Borban himself, after he
began to be acquainted with them, more then once foretold, being very glad
that it so fell out. Having ^herfore taken an exact view of Xauerius eminent
ma^^er of life, and greatly approving his industry in the ^ringing up of
children, he of his own accord offered him the government of the Seminary: He
refuses the government of the Seminary.
But he having resolved to travail all India over, to preach the Gospel of
Christ, would not take upon him that burden. Borban was very earnest with him,
laying before his eyes what an important business it was, and showing what great
fruit might ensue thereof, since it being a Seminary of Priests, and
Interpreters, a supply might be continually raised therout, for the help of
Ethinke nations, a matter of the greatest moment that could be devised for the
advancement of Religion.

But when he perceived that he could not prevail, he began both by himself,
and by Sosa the new Viceroy to deal with Xauerius, that in case he neither
could, nor would take upon him the charge and Government, yet that he would at
least commit the same to some one of his Companions. Now Francis every day
expected F. Paul and F. Mansilla from Mozambicum, and others also out of
Portugal. And therefore considering with himself of what use such a College
might prove, at last he accepted of the offer, and made F. Paul Camertes Rector
thereof in his place; and with the good liking both of the Viceroy and Borban,
he sent to Rome for some others of the Society, to be masters to the foresaid
scholars.

Afterward the revenues being by the Kings liberality increased, when they
thought of enlarging their house to receive more scholars, Sosa the Viceroy
furthered them therein, both with his authority and bounty. Whereupon both a new
Church, and other buildings were begun, and in short time finished,
principally by his help and assistance. The Church was dedicated to S. Paul,
whence also the College was called S. Paul's College. And from this time
forward the Fathers were called by the Name of the Society. For when afterward
that College (excepting the Seminary of the Indians) was by the King of
Portugal given to the Society of Jesus, for the instituting of such as were
appointed for India, and the East, the Fathers took their Name from the place.

It is now enlarged by the Kings liberality, and furnished with buildings,
being indeed a worthy monument of the King of Portugal his bounty, and a most
ample Seminary of Preachers and Priests for the help of India and the East; the
Seminary at Conimbria being by his Majesty's order turned into that of Goa. For
besides many students of the Indian Nation, who live in separate houses, there
be to the number of an hundred of the Society, whereof some are there received,
and others sent thither out of Portugal, to be brought up in learning and
virtue, until they be able to help the Indians, and the people of those
Eastern parts by their preaching and example. This place the divine Providence
ordained first of all for the Society in India, before their Name was so much
as heard of in those parts, and it is the mother and head Seat of many other
Colleges which were afterward founded in the East. But now to come again to
the order of our History, (which has bin by us a little interrupted, through
the fit occasion we had to speak of this College which Xauerius procured at
Goa) this Seminary, as we have said, being assigned to the Society, God gave
unto Xauerius a new and fertile harvest in India to manure.

CHAP. V.
He goes to help the Neophytes, or new Christians of Comorinum.
NO sooner had Xauerius restored Christian discipline at Goa which was fallen
to decay but presently with great care he began to think upon the inhabitants
of the Promo^tory of Comorinu^, and the Coast of Piscaria, who had bin lately
converted to the Christian faith, but were left without Priests. Piscaria.
This Country of Piscaria consisting more of villages then towns, is inhabited
by Fishermen (whom they call Paraua's) and abounds greatly with Pearls, from
the fishing whereof it is commonly called Piscaria. But the habitantes not
knowing their own Country Treasures, employ themselves wholly in fishing of
pearls for the Sarace^s. In this coast there is a Town of no small note called
Tutuchurinum, wherein, upon a very slight accident, A deadly war upon a
slight occasion.
was raised a deadly war, and imminent destruction to that nation, and was
also the occasion of their receiving the Christian faith. A Saracen wrangling
with a Paraua (as by nature they are passionate and apt to offer disgrace)
pulled contumeliously a ring out of the Paraua's ear, which he had hanging
thereat, as that country fashion is, and withal tore out the hole in the flesh,
which with them is the greatest disgrace that can be imagined. Whereupon the
Paraua, to revenge the injury, killed the Saracen.

But (as in hoate blood there often follow murders and massacres, whereof there
is no end unless peace be made) the quarrel which first began by wrangling of
two persons upon so slight occasion, through desire of revenge, did afterward
breed a deadly war throughout the whole nation. For the Paraua's having had
many of their side slain, for one Saracen whom they had killed, resolved to
wash away that disgrace with their enemies blood; and privately gathering great
troops out of all the villages, make a sudden assaul^ upon the Saracens, and
massacred a great number of the^. The Sarace^s again being mad with rage
raised al their forces against the Paraua's, resolving to destroy and utterly
extinguish the whole nation. Whereupon they presently make ready as great a
Navy as they could, and with great sums of money corrupt and stir up the
Paraua Kings, against their own subjects; persuading themselves, that thus
enuironing their enemies both by sea and land, they might more easily destroy
them.

The Paraua's now, when they saw themselves thus beset, environed by their
enemies, and betrayed by their own Kings, not knowing what to do in this case,
they began to think of foreign aid, so to help themselves in this
extremity. There chanced at the same time to be present among them a Christian
Knight (called John de Cruz) a man of good account in his own Country, John de
Cruz.
a Malabar by birth, yet more resembling a Portughese then his own Nation; who
for his valor having been made a Christian Knight by the King of Portugal, had
brought at that very time certain horses for a present to the Kings of the
Paraua's. The chief therefore of the Paraua's by reason of their former
familiarity go unto him, and lay open the whole matter before him, asking his
counsel, and advise what they should do? Cruz being a man both grave and
pious, and hoping this fear of theirs might be an occasion to bring in the
Gospel of Christ among them, so as at once, they might be set free from the
misery, both of their war, and their superstition, told them his opinion
was, that in this extremity of danger, they were to fly to extreme remedies:
and seeing, contrary to all justice and equity, they were betrayed by their
own Kings, and hardly charged on all sides by their enemies forces, they
should implore aid of the Almighty King of Heaven, and of the Portugheses
their friends, who were his devoted and religious servants; that so, protected
by the Portugheses and the divine assistance, they might not only defend
themselves, but also triumph over their enemies. For if they would yield
themselves subject to the Christian Religion, and to the Portugheses, they
certainly would fight with all their forces for them, both in regard of
religion, and because they were now become their suiects, and would also by the
help of God, carry the whole business with as good success, as valor. And
having conquered, and overthrown the Saracens, the deadly enemies of
Christians, they might also perhaps, give up the fishing of pearls (as taken
from the Saracens by right of war) unto the Paraua's, in respect they were
become Christians, as a pledge of their Religion.

To this counsel they gave willing ear. And the Paraua's were neither
deceived by the Knight, nor the Knight by them: for all things came to pass as
he had fortold. Now, when the fear of their enemies, and the authority of that
virtuous knight had driven them to enter league with the Portugheses, presently
their chief Magistrates (whom they call Pantagarines) dispatch an Embassage
of certain principal men among them, to the Portugheses at Cocinum* to whom
they gave in charge, that as soon as they came thither, with the first
occasion, they should become Christians; and then, putting the Paraua's under
the protection of the Portugheses, they should demand succor of them against
the imminent fury of the Saracens, and withal, Priests to instruct, and make
the rest Christians.

Cocinum is a goodly City belonging to the Portugheses, Cocinu^.
situated on the sea between the Promontory of Comorinum and Goa, the chief
of all India both for extent and worth, next unto Goa. As soon therefore as the
Paraua's Ambassadors arrived at Cocinum, after almost two hundred miles
journey, they very fortunately find there present Michael Vasaeus the
Suffragan, or Bishops Vicar-generall, a man very zealous for the propagation of
Religion: who courteously receiving them, led them to the Governor, and
commended them and their business no less seriously then effefectually unto
him. The Governor having in a friend^ly manner heard the Paraua's embassage, he
both showed them all courtesy for the present, and promised them also to deal
their matter with the Viceroy of India. And what he said, he performed in a
more example manner, after that the Ambassadors had desired to be ^aptized.
The Viceroy being certifyed of the whole ^usinesse by the Governor of Cocinum,
as he was a ^^an of extraordinary zeal, was very glad of that occasion, and
commanded forthwith that aid should be sent to the Paraua's. The Comorines
are baptized.
In the mean time the Paraua's ^mbassadours being all baptized, were called de
Cruz (of the Cross) for John de Cruz his sake, who had given them that
counsel. And so great is the reward which good counsel deserves, that the
other chief men also of that nation did afterward take the same name.

The Governor therefore by command from the Viceroy prepares out of hand a
strong navy, hastneth to the coast of Piscaria, joins battle with the
enemy; where the matter seemed to surpass all humane forces. For the Saracens
were overthrown at the first onset, and entirely conquered by one battle.
Then the Paraua's being delivered from all fear of war, the Governor turned
his care to procure the salvation of their souls; and sending thither Priests,
there were baptized to the number of 20000. Now the Portugheses returning
Conquerours, were not content with the protection and safeguard of their
subjects, but gave them moreover (as Cruz had foretold) the fishing of
pearls, for congratulation of their becoming Christians. Whereby the case was
now so altered, that the Saracens might not fish, without the Paraua's gave
them leave. Thus, God drawing good out of evil, by the tearing of one ear,
was an occasion of the salvation of a whole Nation.

But humane frailty was not answerable to the will and ordinance of God. For
the Priests (I spoke of) when they had baptized a great number of the Paraua's,
The Comorines are forsaken by the Priests.
being dismayed through the intemperatnesse of the air, and want of victuals,
returned home again. And so those poor new Christians, who perchance had not
been converted to the faith of Christ so much for the love of true Religion, as
for the fear of danger they were lately in, being left destitute of Pastors
and wholly ignorant, fell again into their old superstitions and customs.
Xauerius being certifyed hereof by Michael Vasaeus the Suffragan, his mind was
possessed with various affections; for as he much rejoiced at so great an
advancement of the Christian cause, so was he extremly grieved for their
succourlesse estate; yet was he again comforted through firm hope, that
himself might be able shortly to help and comfort the^. For now the Ethnicks
and Neophites that were about the City of Goa, and who at that time used his
help, were very well provided through the endeauours of F. Borban and others,
and therefore he much desired to succor these, who were left destitute of all
assistance.

Whereupon forthwith he resolved to go to Piscaria, to fish for the souls of
the fishermen themselves which were far more precious then their pearls.
And presently he goes to the Bishop* as his custom was, to whom he declares
what determination he had made, but withal leaves the whole matter to his
discretion. Who approving of what he had determined, wished him a happy journey,
and with all courtesy dismissed him. At whose departure the tears which stood
in Alboquercius eyes showed evidently how much he loved Xauerius for his
humility. The^ Francis having gotten the Bishops approbation, The Bishops love
to Xauerius.
goes to Sosa the Viceroy, and opening the matter unto him, earnestly
equesteth his furtherance for the accomplishment thereof, if he thought it
fitting. The viceroy the^ took God to witness, that he was very sorry for his
departure, but for as much as he doubted not but that his going would be for
the Paraua's souls good, the grief which his abse^ce would cause, would be
thereby made more tolerable; The Viceroyes respect to him.
and withal commanded him to be bou^tifully and freely provided of whatsoever
his journey should require. Xauerius thanked him for his so great courtesy,
telling him that he wanted nothing but only conueniency of transporting
thither; for seeing it was dangerous to go by land, in respect of the many
enemies, he entreated with all speed to go by sea. Sosa presently grants his
request, gives him a ship, and also commands his officers to furnish him
of al things necessary.

But Xau^rius was still like himself, in resolutely and constantly refusing al
commodities, His love of poverty.
either for his sustenance, or journey. So as when the officers offered yea even
thrust upon him necessary provisions, he thanked them kindly, and returned them
all back again. But when they pressed him earnestly, and would have no
denial, he condescended somewhat to their importunities (with no less
commendations for his courtesy in yielding, then for his parsimony in taking)
and accepted of a Iacket of leather, and a pair of boots to defend him from
the heat of the sun, which in those places, being near to the Equinoctial
line, he knew to be exceeding great. These things being known, his friends
began every one to bring him other necessaries for his journey, but he
corteously returned all back again, because as he said, they were rather
hindrances then helps unto him. And so he departed, together with the Governor
of the Coast of Piscaria, who went thither also in the month of October, of
this present year 1543.

CHAP. VI.
He labors in the Promontory of Comorinum.
THE Promontory of Comorinum being almost of equal distance from the Rivers
Indus and Ganges, The Comorine Promo^tory.
stretches forth to the Equinoctial line 400. miles almost from the City of
Goa. Hence India bending it self elbow-wise from the same place, and the coast
of Piscaria lying between the East and the West, runs out almost 200. miles
toward Ganges. The whole country is as poor in victuals, as it is rich in
pearls. For the inahbitants live upon rice, milk, fish, and some flesh, but
they want bread, wine, fruits, and such like things; and commonly there is
among them no use of Physicians, or medicines. The people (according to the
capacity of Barbarians) are of reasonable temperate and quiet dispositions,
Intolerable heat of the sun.
but very rude. There is not any country in India more scorched with the sun
then this. For when the sun beats upon the plain sands, there is such an
intolerable heat that it burns up all things like a fire. Yet, all this
great inte^peratenes both of the air and place, together with the like want of
victuals and physic, Xauerius with an undaunted courage underwent of his own
accord, thirsting more after souls, then others did after pearls.

Now some, who having passed a few labors, and incommodities, Xauiers labors.
and may perhaps, please and sooth up themselves, as though they had suffered
all the inconveniences that could be, for Christ's sake, shall do well to
observe what we shall hereafter set down of Xauerius extreme and infinite
labors, unspeakable miseries, and want of all things in the Promontory of
Comorinum. For we may be very much ashamed of our selves, if we compare our
labors with his toils in this new vineyard of Christ. This long and uncouth
Tract was inhabited by fishermen, who dwelt partly in Villages, and partly in
Towns to the number of thirty, whereof twenty belonged to the Christians, in
which, besides the foresaid 20000. newly christened, who were yet to be
instructed in the preceps of their faith, there were very many others, both
young and old, to be baptized. He was also oftentimes to combat both with the
heat of the sun, and with the sand, which in that parching shore did not only
sink under him, but sorely scorched his feet as he trauayled. But he
discouraged at nothing, went through with that so hard an enterprises with as
great a fortitude as he had undertaken it. For he alone, as if he had had the
courage and forces of many Priests, nothing regarding the heat of the sun,
employed himself continually in traversing the villages and towns of that
Coast, going oftentimes even barefoot through those scorching sands (after his
boots were worn out) and daily baptizing of infants, children, and others
whom he found willing to become Christians; inuenting many strange means to
hinder them from sacrificing unto Idols, in joining men and women together with
the lawful bands of marriage, cathechizing every one according to their
capacity, and making friends those who were at variance, being almost consumed
and burnt up with intolerable heat and sweat, without any compassion of
himself, or care of his own body.

His usual custom was to sleep upon the bar^ ground, to live upon a little
Rice, He dresseth rice for himself,
according to the country fashion, and that but ill dressed also by himself
among so many great employments. Sometimes also although very seldom, he used
a little fish with his Rice, or a little sower milk which the Neophytes o^ new
Christians of themselves brought unto him. Besides this, he encountered with
many great difficulties, which the want of things necessary, and the
incommodity of those places could not but cause in him, being a stranger: yet
above all other difficulties the want of language did most trouble him. For
when he questioned the inahbitants of matters belonging to Religion, they
answered they were Christians, but being wholly ignorant of the Portughese
language, The Comorensians ignorance.
they had not learned the instructions and precepts of the Christian faith.
Xauerius had brought with him two scholars from the College of Goa, who were
of ripe years, and skillfull both in the Portughese, and the Malauarian tongue
which those country people used. But finding by experience that to instruct
children and ignorant people by an interpreter, to be a thing both very
tedious, and of small profit, he choose rather to learn himself their
language, then to use interpreters; so great desire he had of their conversion.

Therefore he caused his said Interpreters to turn the principles of the
Christian doctrine into the Malauarian tongue. Then he (although he were now
grown into good years) becoming again, as it were, a child for Christ,
getting the same by heart, went up and down the streets with a little bell in
his hand calling the children and people together, in some convenient place,
and there taught them those principles he had learned in their own language.
His fervor in teaching made the people learn with more alacrity. Their
forwardnes in learning.
And in the space of a month the children which before were rude and knew
nothing, had gotten almost by heart all what he had taught the^; so that Francis
neither repented himself of his labor in teaching them, nor they of their
diligence in learning. Nay they were so set upon learning, that they never
ceased to solicit him to give them set prayers one after another to learn by
heart, and heerin they would so press him, that he could scarce have leisure to
recite his divine office in quiet, they never making an end of begging of him,
until he had performed their desire.

Xauerius therefore as soon as he perceived all things to succeed well in these
first beginnings, He uses children for the instruction of their Parents and
others.
not contenting himself with the good of a few, bethought how he might help a
greater number. And to the end his instruction might the more dilate it self,
he caused the children by little and little to teach their parents, kinsfolks,
servants, and neighbors those things which they themselves had learned of him.
So as these children, of scholars becoming in a short time masters, were no
small furtherance to the Christian cause. Yet Xauerius although he used these
helps, did not for all that take any less pains himself. For upon sundaies
before a great company, of children, men, and women beginning with the Creed,
he briefly explicated unto them the twelve articles of the Christian faith and
the ten Commandments, some at one time, some at another. He was heard
attentively and diligently, with the astonishment not only of the Christians,
The Christian law in the judgment of the very Ethnikes the^ selves is
conformable to reason.
but also of the Ethnickes, who came in great troops to hear him, admiring
that the Christian Law, was so agreeable and conformable to Reason.

But Xauerius well knowing, that to explicate divine matters as they ought, the
divine assistance was more necessary then humane industry, before every article
of the Creed and each Commandment he caused the people to recite certain
versicles made for the purpose, wherein Christ, and the B. Virgin Mary were
piously inuoked, to assist them particularly both to believe, and practice
those things with they heard taught. Sometimes also he would tell them
confide^tly, that if they could obtain those things of God, which they desired
of him, concerning the observance of the Christian Faith, and his divine Law,
they would afterward receive more good, and abundant benefits from heaven,
then yet they durst in their hearts presume to wish for. He instructed the
Neophites and the Cathecumens altogether with, whom indeed he took more
pains and labor, because they were in more danger of perdition. He baptizeth
whole villages.
But the number was so great of such as became Christians (for oftentimes he
baptized whole villages in one day) that even his hands and arms were so weary
with baptizing, that he could not possibly lift them up. And oftentimes also he
was so spent with repeating such things unto them as appertayned to the
Christian mysteries, that both his voice and forces failed him. His virtue over
come by labor.


Yet for all this his noble virtue and courage sought for no releasement of his
labor, but rather how he might gain new matter of merit: so that you would
have thought his body could not be tired out, nor his courage overcome by any
labor whatsoever. He sought out daily many infants here and there, His
teaching of young children.
and baptized them: yet his chief endeavor was to instruct little children,
knowing very well that the bringing up of tender youth was a matter of great
importance, as forseeing that they being instructed in their infancy, might be
more profitable to the aduancecement of the Christian faith, then their
parents; whereof he had many evident tokens. For he had observed, that these
Neophite-children being very apt to learn their Christian doctrine, were
greatly desirous to teach the same unto others; and that they did so detest the
worshipping of Idols, and all kind of superstition, that if their parents did
offend therein, they would not only reprehend them themselves, but presently
tell Francis of it. And to this forwardnes of the children, his helping hand
was not wanting. For if at any time they told him of any such thing, he would
presently take the children by the hand, and go with them to the house, where
that heinous offense was committed, and as though an alarm had been given to
battle, he would set upon the place where the Idols were, and together with
the children rush upon them, break them to pieces, spit and tread upon the^,
and lastly utterly destroy them, making in this manner the worship of the
Devil, a laughing stock to children.

CHAP. VII.
Having wrought many miracles by himself, and the new Christians, he is for
his extraordinary Humility, commonly called the Holy Father.
AFTER he had sufficiently instructed in the Catechism, the places which first
occured to him, going to the Town of Tutuchurinum, he lodged by the way in an
obscure village of Ethinckes, who contemning their neighbors examples would
not hear of the Christian faith. Whereupon Francis urging them with the
authority of all the coast of Piscaria, they all together answered, that they
could not do it, by reason of their Kings auersion; which was not so indeed,
but a pretense only to set a gloss upon their obstinate Superstition. In which
case Xauerius being uncertain what to do, God out of his providence gave him
an admirable occasion of bringing his designs about. There was a certain
woman of good worth, A woman is by baptism delivered from the danger in
childbirth.
who had now bin very dangerously in travail of Childbirth three whole days;
and her life was desperate. Her husband and kinsfolks were also weary with
praying to their deaf Gods for her safe delivery, and al in vain the which
Francis understanding, and putting his trust in God, went thither in all have
with an Interpreter and gave them some hope of help. Forthwith, having gotten
the consent of the family, he began to deal with her, that seeing there was no
hope of her recovery, she would provide for her soul, and withal he began
briefly to explicate unto her the chief points of the Christian faith. Wherewith
she being touched from heaven, and giving credit thereto, Xauerius demanded,
whether she would be a Christian? Very willingly* quoth she. Then Francis
reading over her the Gospel, baptized her, being even ready to dye. A
wonderful thing. The baptism caused her so easy a delivery, that presently
she brough forth her child without any pain or difficulty. For which
prosperous event he being exceedingly glad, presently baptizeth the infant
newly borne, and then all the other of the house, who were both astonished at
the miracle, and not a little replenished with joy.

This fact being so admirable, and wrought in presence of so many witnesses,
was instantly diuulged* whereupon Xauerius judging it a fit occasion to urge the
people whilst they were thus amazed, began to be instant with the chief men
of the Village, that they should not doubt to embrace that Religion, whereof
they had lately seen so evident a testimony. But they told him first, they
would not do it without their Kings license; He bapzeth a whole village.
yet afterward, having obtained the same of his Lieutenant, they were almost
all baptized, together with many whole familes, so as that Village presently
became Christian.

From thence Francis going to ^Punical (a Town of great resort) was there
lovingly received by the Neophytes where presently having, according to his
custom, bapzed many infa^ts, he began to instruct the people and the children
in the Catechism. There was at the same time in that Town a great mortality,
and sickness among the people, so as very many came daily unto him from all
places, requesting him to visit their houses, and say some prayers over the
sick. And many also who had none to solicit for them, being extremely sick,
crept unto him as well as they could for the same cause. Xauerius being moved
as well out of his own compassionate nature, as by that pittyful spectacle,
had a scruple to deny those poor souls so just requests, fearing lost if he
should be ^lacke therein, the Christian Religion might receive some detriment
thereby. He heals the sick, dliuereth possessed persons.
Therefore he spent much time, and took great pains, in visiting them and
reading the holy Gospel over the sick: and not in vain. For it is well
known, that very many sick in that sea coast were by him cured, and many
possessed persons delivered. And it is certainly reported that he there
restored three dead men to life, besides a young maid of Cangoxima, of whom I
will speak in her proper place.

Pun call, as we said, is a town of good note in the coast of Comorinum. A
youth is raised from death.
In this town there dyed a certain young man of a good family, who being by
his frinds brought to Francis, and laid at his feet with great lamentation,
the good Father took him by the hand, and commanded him in the name of Christ
to arise; whereupon he presently rose up alive. He suppresseth his miracles.
This act Xauerius out of his true humility, suppressed as much as possibly he
could, by dissembling the matter, but all in vain. For there wanted not
witnesses thereof, nor men to spread it abroad, although it were a matter of
great moment whereof they were to be the authors. And this miracle was afterward
confirmed by another the like.

In the same town a Christian woman went to Francis, and with tears bewayling
her misfortune of being left desolate, most humbly besought him, that he would
be pleased to go to her little son who had bin lately drowned in a well. A
boy drowned in a well is raised again to life.
He bad the woman be of good courage, for her child was not dead, and presently
goes along with her, as she desired. As soon as he came to the house he fell
down upon his knees, and having prayed a while he made the sign of the cross
upon the dead body; whereupon the child presently start up from the beer whereon
he lay, not only alive, but also sound, and in perfect health. At which
miraculous accident the Christians who stood about were all astonished, and
cried out for joy. But Xauerius earnestly entreated them by all means possible
to make no words thereof, and so secretly retired himself from thence. They
people could not overcome themselves as he requested, to keep silent so
miraculous an event; and besides that, Xauerius his dissembling the matter,
made his sanctity the more to appear.

Moreover (to speak nothing of others) John Triaga a Portughese, a devout and
grave man, and very familiar with Xauerius, being demanded iuridically by the
Bishop of Goa his Vicar, after the Fathers death, testified, Two restored to
life.
that himself was present at Punicall when Francis raised to life a certain
boy, and also a little girl. And withal testified, that he had understood by
many, that Xauerius had restored another to life in ^ village called Bembari;
whereof himself had sometimes asked Xauerius, and although, out of humility, he
seemed so suppress the matter, yet he might easily perceive it was true, which
he went about to co^ceale. And all this, is very sufficiently testified, under
the deposition and seal of the Viceroy of India, by the King of Portugals
command.

Now, whilst Xauerius thus labors about the sick, and the dead, there
wanted not other many and daily employments, to instruct children, convert the
Ethnickes, baptize those that were converted, bury the dead, and satisfy those
who asked his advice. But the cumbersomnes of the sick, by reason of their
great ^umber, and the bruit which was now spread abroad of those that were
cured, did so greatly increase daily, that it was not possible for one to
satisfy all. Moreo^er, as many times it happens, there arose contentions among
the people, whilst every one did strive to get Francis first to their house.
Therefore to condescend to their just demands without any breach of peace, he
found out an invention, which was as profitable as necessary, to send in his
place certain Christian children fit for that purpose. He cures the sick by
children.
These children by Xauiers appointment going about to the houses, first called
together those of the family and their neighbors, then ^auing recited the
Creed all together, they exhorted the sick to have an assured hope and
confidence in God by whose help they were to recover their health; and all last
when they had stirred up all that were present to devotion, then they added
certain pious and godly prayers.

This invention of his was not in vain. For what by the faith of the children,
and of the standers by and the sick, and of Francis Author thereof, it caused
in the diseased health both of body and soul. In so much that very many
Neophites were thereby confirmed in their belief, and many Ethnickes brought to
the faith of Christ: the force whereof they had experienced by the recovery of
their health. But if any of the said children could get Xauerius Beads, he
thought himself highly honored, for that infallibly they cured all the sick
who were touched therewith; wherefore, as jewels famous for the wonders wrought
by the^, every one did strive to get them; so as being carried about
continually to the sick, they seldom brought them back to Francis, serving
rather to work miracles the^ to pray upon. And by the means of these children
he did not only help those who were sick, but assisted also possessed, and
obsessed persons.

There was one, who being possessed, was wonderfully tormented by the Devil, to
whom Francis being requested to go, but could not by reason of other
employments, sent in his place certain Children (who assisted him in teaching
the Christian doctrine) with a cross, He delivers a possessed person by the
children
and told them what they should do. The children went to the possessed man, and,
as Xauerius had instructed them, gave him the cross to kiss, and they
themselves recited certain prayers which they knew by heart. Whereupon
presently, to the astonishment of all that were present the possessed man was
delivered, not so much by the faith, and sanctity of the children, as of
Francis himself. The report hereof being spread far and near with great
applause to Xauerius, his fame became more remarkable by his humility. Xauiers
humility.
For these miracles which he wrought by divine power, by sending children up
and down, he would not acknowledge as done by himself, but ascribed them to
the faith of the children, and of the sick persons: so as endeavoring by all
means to debase himself, He is called Holy Father.
and to hide his own virtue, he made the splendor of his sanctity the more
appear. Wherefore shining, as he did, not only with that eminency of virtue,
but also with Christian humility, he was now commonly called the Holy Father.
Thus hidden Virtue becomes more glorious.

CHAP. VIII.
He substituteth Deputies in his place to teach the Christian doctrine, and
procures for them a certain stipend of the King of Portugal.
THIS approved fidelity and industry of the He takes children to teach the
catechism with him
neophytes in curing diseases made Xauerius desirous to make the^ his
fellow laborers in instructing the people. Wherefore making choice of such as
were no less diligent then virtuous, he sent them abroad, bidding them teach
the Cathechisme to the rude and ignorant in houses, ways, and streets, in
manner as he had instructed the^. When he saw this course which he had
invented, was able to go on by it self, he with the children went to another
Village, intending in the same manner to instruct the rest of the towns. All
which when he had once gone over, never thinking of rest, but as it were
dallying with his labors, he again returned to the first village, there to
amend what he should find amiss; and in the same manner went over all the rest
which before he had visited.

In the mean time also, thinking it necessary to establish the Christian
faith, nor only for the present but also for the time to come, he left in every
town and village a Copy of the Christian doctrine, willing those that could
write, to copy it out, and the rest to learn it by heart, and to repeat it
over every day. He ordained also in all the forsaid villages, that upon all
holidays, the Neophytes should assemble themselves into one place, and there
all together sing the Christian doctrine. And that these things might be well
and duly observed, thinking it expedient to leave some in his place, he
appointed in every Town and Village, one to have a care of matters concerning
Christian religion, whom in their language they called the Canacaple. And that
this order which was so necessary, might never cease, or decay, he procured of
the Viceroy of India an yearly stipend for the Canacaples. The reason of this
was, that in time of necessity there might always be some to baptize the
infants newly borne when they should be in any danger of death, and to supply
in other things that which could not be well differred, and withal to assist
the Neophytes, when Francis was far of, and could not so speedily come unto
them. So as, in every place he appointed one or two who excelled the rest in
the understanding of the Christian doctrine, grave carriage, fervor of piety,
and integrity of life, teaching them the manner and form of baptism, and
giving them in charge, that if at any time necessity should require, they
should with all speed baptize little infants; and if any matter of importance
besides, chanced to happen, they should presently certify him thereof.

These, every one in his Village, for want of Priests, being as it were the
Curats or Pastors, had the care of the Church, and twice every day they taught
the Catechism both in Latin, and in their own country language: in the
morning to the men, and in the afternoon to the women. They also, as the
Christian custom is, denounced the Banes of Matrimony, making enquiry what
impediments there might be to hinder any from lawful marriage; but their
principal charge was to baptize little infants, who through weakness might be
in danger of death. And when Xauerius made his visit in the said Villages,
these his substitutes presently delivered up unto him the number of children
which were borne that year, of those who kept concubines in their houses, and
of such as had any emnity or discord amongst themselves, that thereby he might
with all speed apply remedy thereto. And by this means he knew, and composed
all difficulties every where; so that making very little stay any where he might
pass on to other places.

To these Canacaples at Xauerius request were assigned 400 crowns yearly, out
of the public Treasury, by the viceroy of India, and afterward confirmed by
the King of Portugal. His letter to the Queen of Portugal.
This said money was accustomed to be paid to Queen Catherin of Portugal, to
buy her shoes, and Pantofles. Wherefore Francis wrote unto her majesty very
pleasantly and piously that she could have no fitter shoes or Pantofles, to
climb to heaven then the Christian children of the Piscarian coast, and their
instructions. Wherefore he humbly entreated her to bestow her shoes and
Pantofles, as a Tribute, unto their teachers and instructors, The liberality
and piety of the Queen of Portugal
thereby to make her self a ladder to heaven, for she might be glad of such an
occasion, then the which she could not perhaps have wished a better. The
Queen, as a woman of notable piety, approved of his request, and very
willingly, and freely assigned the same to the Canacaples, and masters of the
Neophytes. And thus, by Xauerius means, by the Queens liberality, and the
Kings authority, this order was instituted and established, with no less merit
of the benefactors, then profit to the Christian cause.

CHAP. IX.
He conuinceth the Brachmans, and conuerteth some of them.
IN this mean while, The Brachmans and their religion.
Francis had no small ado with the Brachmans. These Brachmans descending from
the race of Kings and Priests, ^re amongst all the nations of India the chief,
both ^or Nobility and Wisdom. They worship one God whom they call Parabram)
the beginning of al things, and perfect in every respect, as being Creator of
heaven and earth. But together with this truth they mingle in numerable fables
to deceive the common people. They say, he has three sons, who govern the
world, and yet have all the same nature, and divinity. This forsooth, is
signified by the girdle the Brachmans themselves wear, at the end whereof there
be three little cords hanging from one knot: having in this manner, either
through the malice of men, or craft of the Devil corrupted the mystery of the
B. Trinity, which was ancie^tly received among them. They have also goodly
Temples dedicated to these Gods, with three Towers, which being separated at
the basis, by little and little do join altogether in the top. They have
their images drawn out in diverse shapes, which in times past they took upon
them, which they call Pagods.

These Brachmans, whom among the Indians are indeed famous for their learning
and abstinence, The Brachmans wickedness and lewdness.
are in the Promontory of Comorinum most notorious for their ignorance, and
lewdnes. For not enduring the poverty which that part of India sustayneth, they
cover their natural lewdnes with abominable deceit, and whilst themselves in
private, sit at their banquets with solemn music of tabers and pipes, they
persuade the simple people that their Gods are a feasting; and withal demand
of them, in their Gods name, whatsoever they want for the maintenance of
themselves and their families, denouncing the vengeance of the Gods against
them, unless they presently perform what they be commanded.

Xauerius therefore conuincing them openly of deceit, began to accuse them to
the people, The Brachmans desire Francis his frie^dship
and to manifest their false dealing: which occasion caused the salvation of
many, who giving over Idolatry became Christians. And the Brachmans being
astonished as well at his great learning, as at the miracles wrought by him,
turning their hate into reverence, endeavored to gain his favor and
friendship, both by guiftes, and all other means they could devise. But his
love of poverty was not overcome by any such favors, and though he rejected
their guiftes, to keep his own liberty free, yet notwithstanding he conserved
good correspondence, and friendship with them. And as he went his circuit about
the towns of the Christians, oftentimes he lodged in their abiding places
(which are also called Pagods, Pagods.
as their Gods are) hoping that some of them might be converted, with the
salvation of many souls.

Upon a time he came to a certain Pagod, where were assembled almost two
hundred Brachmans, Francis his conference with the Brachmans.
who had understood of his coming thither. Having saluted one another, and
many words passed to and fro, Francis demanded of them in full assembly, what
their Gods commanded those to do, who were to come into heaven to them? After
long strife amongst them who should give the answer, it fell at last, by
common consent, to the lot of an ancient man of 80. years of age, the eldest
amongst them; who craftily shifting off the Question, asked Xauerius again,
what the Christians God commanded them to do? But he perceiving the old man's
evasion, told him he would not speak a word of any Christian affairs, until
he had answered his question, as good reason he should. Then the old man being
driven to it by necessity, with open manifestation of his ignorance, said: That
their Gods commanded them two things: The one was, that they should not kill
any Cow, because with kine the Gods were worshipped: The other was, that they
should bestow liberal gifts upon the B^achmans, the chief Priests and
Ministers of the said Gods.

Then Xauerius, moved at the ignorance and impudency both of the man, and the
thing, presently rose up, and entreated them, that they would also now hear
him. And with a loud voice reciting the Creed and the ten Commandments, he
briefly explicateth the same in their country language: The Brachmans approve
of the Christian Religion.
and then he declares the joys of the blessed in heaven, and the torments of
the damned in hell: and finally who they were that should go to the one, and
other place. As soon as they heard this, on a sudden they all rose up, and
every one embracing him, wonderfully extolled the Christian Religion,
containing such agreeable mysteryes and precepts as those were: such is the
force of truth, even with perverse minds, if light from heaven shine upon them.
The ridiculous questions of the Brachmans.
Then they asked him many other things very ridiculous, and such as we who by
Gods goodness understand the Truth, do abhor to hear; to wit, whether the
Soul of man dies together with the body, as other living creatures do? What
should be the cause, why we seem in our sleep to be with our friends,
although they be far of? Is it not because our soul, the body being asleep,
leaves its mansion, and flies abroad? Whether God be white or black? for they
themselves being blackish by nature, The Brachmans think God to be black.
out of the esteem they bear to their own color, think that God is black,
and do oftentimes besmeare their Idols with oil in such manner, that they be
not only black, but even ugly also, and horrible to behold; in so much that
you would think you saw the Devils themselves, and not their images.

Xauerius when these questions were asked him, knowing well how to accommodate
his speech to his Auditors, answered not so learnedly, as sutably to their
capacities, so that not one of all the company durst open his month to
contradict him. But when he pressed them to embrace the Christian Religion,
which they saw so manifestly proved unto them, they answered, that indeed they
were afraid of what the people would say, and that they should want means to
live, if they should change their course of life. And so these wretches making
more account of what the people would say, then of their own salvation,
contemned the light which began to shine upon them, and remained obstinate in
their darkness.

Now although, as we said, the Brachmans carry away the bell for wisdom among
the Indians: yet there was only one found among them all, worthy of that name,
a Schoole-man of a famous Academy of India, who out of the familiarity which he
had with Xauerius, declared to him certain mysteries of that Academy, which held:
that there was one God maker of the world, who reigning in heaven ought to be
worshipped of mortal me^: that every eight day (which we call Sunday) ought to be
kept holy: and that a time would come when all should profess one Religion.
Moreover he desired to know the mysteryes of the Christian faith, which at
length Francis declared unto him, and withal spoke these wholesome words of our
Savior, Marc. 16. Math.
Qui crediderit and baptizatus fuerit, saluus erit, He that belieueth and is
baptized shall be saved. The Brachman noted down in a little book these words
with their explication, and entreated Xauerius to baptize him upon certain
conditions. But Xauerius rejecting his conditions being neither just nor
honest, thought it good to differ his request for a time, and so dismissed
him; bidding him to publish that mystery of one God to the people, hoping that
he would indeed become a perfect Christian, and be occasion of no small
advancement to the Christian cause. But yet there was another young Brachman who
gave not only greater hopes, A Brachman baptized teaches children the
Catechism
but also proved better indeed. He being of an excellent wit and behavior, was
instructed, and baptized by Francis, and by his appointement undertook to
teach children their Catechism; Christ thus choosing to himself masters of
his doctrine, out of the Devils school.

At this time now, God would show manifestly how pleasing Xauerius labors were
unto him. An injury done to Francis is revenged by God.
He went upon some occasions to an Ethincke nobleman, who being a barbarous
and uncivil fellow, contemning the virtuous and holy man, shut him out of his
house, in a rude and disgraceful manner; and scoffing at him, said: Serve me
in the same sort, if ever I come to the Christians Church. This injury offered
to Francis being published abroad by those who were present, no body had less
feeling of it, then he to whom it was done. It seemed doubtless, both to the
Portugheses, and the Neophites an unworthy fact, as deserving indeed to be
revenged by God himself. Therefore he who takes vengeance upon injuries done
unto his servants, sent spedily a due punishment upon that contumelious man.

A few days after, the same Noble man being unarmed, chanced to meet with his
armed enemies not far from the Christians Church: wherefore being not able to
resist he thought to defend himself by running away. Now as he fled, they
followed him close with their deadly weapons, and were even come to the
Christians Church, wherein that wretch (not thinking the^ of the contumelious
words which formerly he had vtteed against Xauerius) thought to save himself.
But the Neophites coming forth in have at the clamor and tumult which they
heard, so stopped up the entrance to the Church, and, as it ordinarily happens,
the last came so hard pressing upon the first, that he could not possibly have
way to enter, so to save himself. They seeing this, and knowing the man, cried
out that God the revenger of Xauerius his injury had by divine judgment
debarred him of the refuge he desired. And so he who before had contumeliously
shut Xauerius out of doors, being pursued by his enemies, and endeavoring to
save his life by flying to the Christians Church, was himself shut out: God
permitting him to be served in the like manner, as he served Xauerius.

CHAP. X.
Living in the coast of Piscaria with great joy, and fruit of his labors, he
comfort the Neophites, who were much afflicted.
BUT, it is incredible to think, what abou^dance of divine consolation
Xauerius found in these extreme labors of his. Himself signified it in a
letter which he wrote to the Society at Rome. To which they shall do well to
hearken, who preferring earthly commodities before divine, think that the life
of holy persons is without all comfort and delight, as though there were no
place for pleasure, where riches and delicacies do not abound. In a clause
therefore of his epistle inuiting others of the Society to the same labors, he
writes thus: So great is the abundance of the heavenly joys, Abundance of
heavenly joys.
which God bestows upon them, who labor in this vineyard, for the conversion
of the Indians to Christ, that if there be any joy in this life, I think it
only to be here. Neither did he avouch this without a true ground, and of what
he had not experienced in himself. For being oftentimes in the midst of those
labors, overwhelmed with heavenly consolations, he has bin secretly heard to
break forth into these words: I beseech thee, O Lord, do not euerwhelme me
with such abundance of joys in this life; of if it please thee of thy
infinite bounty, that still I flow with these floods of delights, remove me
hence into heaven among the blessed; for he that has once had an inward taste
of thy sweetness, must needs live a bitter life without thee.

Xauerius therefore lived a whole year in the coast of Piscaria with infinite
labor, The multitude of those that were baptized
and the like comfort; and that which much increased his joy, was the great
augmentation of the Christian faith. For as it appears by his own letters,
he baptized above a 1000. infants, who presently after their Baptism went to
heaven. Whereby we may gather what a multitude there were, either of infants
that lived, or else of elder people whom he made members of Christ's Church.
And it is well known, that in that coast many villages, and some whole Towns,
were by him converted to the Christian faith.

When he had thus carried, and set in order the affairs of Christian Religion
in the coast of Comorinum, about the latter end of the year 1543. he returns
to Goa, to deal in person with the viceroy of India, concerning certain
important business about Christian Religion. Upon this occasion he took with
him some youths of the chief nobility of that Country, both as pledges, and
supplies for the Christian faith to be brought up in learning in the Seminary of
Goa; for that by this time the College there was for the most part built and
furnished. Wherefore Borban, not suffering Xauerius to lodge in the Hospital of
the sick as he was accustomed, brought him home, and of his own accord gave
over to him the whole government thereof, which he, with the consent of the said
Borban, committed to Fa. Paul Camertes, Paul Camerts the first Rectour of the
College of Goa.
who was lately come from Mozambicum.

The fame of the admirable things which Xauerius had wrought in the coast of
Piscaria was come to Goa before himself arrived thither, and had much increased
his esteem, as well with others as with the viceroy of India, who affected him
exceedingly; and therefore without difficulty he obtained of him whatsoever he
desired. Amongst other things, the report being brought to Goa of those who
were raised to life in the coast of Comorinum, made Xauerius name to be spread
far and near. Wherefore James Borban by reason of his ancient familiarity,
takes him aside, and earnestly entreats him, that for the honor of God he
would tell him the particulers of those, who were reported to be raised to life
by his prayers in the Country of Comorinum. His notable shamefastnes at his
own praises.
At which words Xauerius his countenance was all dyed over with a virginal
crimson-blush, bewraying both his modesty and the truth of the matter.
Endeavoring therefore, as much as he could with truth, to cover any matter
which tended to his own glory, he imbraceth Borban in a friendly manner, and
smiling says* Good Jesus, I raise dead men to life! O wicked wretch that I am!
Certain me^ indeed brought to me a youth seeming to be dead, who being by me
commanded in the name of Christ to arise, presently rose up: His concealing of
miracles.
this indeed, and other such like things, they who were present published
abroad for miracles. Yet this his covering of those miracles (though his
countenance sufficiently discovered the truth) diminished nothing at all the
credit of what was reported of him, his humility therein being almost as
admirable, as the miracles themselves.

Xauerius having now dispatched the business for which he came, and taking
Francis Mansilla for his companion, returned again into the coast of Piscaria
upon the 24. of March the next year following, He brings some to help him in
the coast of Piscaria.
and setleth himself to his old exercises of Charity. He had now besides
Mansilla 3. assistants, John Lesian a Spanish Priest, and two other Priests
also of that country, who at Xauerius request went thither for the same cause,
partly from Goa, and partly from Cocinum. Having made these men partners of his
charge, he never ceased going about, baptizing infants, and exhorting others to
do the same. His labor was as much, if not more, then before, and his
difficultyes greater. For being a stranger, and wholly ignorant of the
Malauarian language (in so much besides the Cathechisme he scarce knew one word
thereof) yet lived he, and conuersed amongst the Malauarian Neophytes without an
interpreter; which thing did not withstanding rather stir up, then hinder his
endeauours. To baptize infants he had no need of an interpreter; and the poor
and wretched people did of themselves open unto him their miseries in such
sort, that he might easily understand them* He also by his study, and
endeauours came to be his own interpreter: for albeyt he were unskillful in
the country tongue, yet made he good shift to preach unto the people,
expressing oftentimes by his contenance and gesture, what he could not do in
words.

But to keep an order and decorum in all things, he called them not al
together, but caused the men and the ^omen to come by turns, every other day
to the Ca^echisme. His chief care was to baptize infants and ^^struct
children, He teaches me^ and women their Catecchisme apart.
because he knew certaynely, that ^uch as dyed before they lost their
innocence, being ^aptized, were made partakers of the kingdom of heaven, the
which many that were of riper years lost by returning again to their former
bad life. And he did ^ot only himself employ his chiefest endeauours in
^elping that tender age, What a care he had of baptizing infantes.
but also gave most diligent charge to F. Marsilla his companion to do the
same. Moreover as occasion and place required, he helped the Neophytes, not
only spiritually but corporally also.

Upon the East of the coast of Piscaria there lies bordering a wild and savage
kind of people, The Badages a savage nation.
whom they ^^al Badages. These gathering together a great army, either out of
hatred to Religion, or through desire of ^illage, had invaded the borders of
the Christians of Comorinum, spoiling and wasting all before them. The
Christians being affrighted at this sudden incursion abandoning their
villages, had gotten over a little arm of the sea, The calamity of the
Comorinensians.
and there hid themselue^s amongst the rocks, a fit place for such a purpose:
where abiding in the open air and the sun (the heat whereof, as we said, is
most extreme in those parts) they were miserably burnt up, Francis his succor
to relieve the neophyts in their misery.
and brought to such want of necessary means to live upon, that some dyed for
mere hunger. This fearful news did not only move Xauerius to piety toward
them, but also stirred up his careful endeauours to affoard new succor, in
this new accident. He therefore presently brings unto these poor souls,
twenty small vessels laden with provision. And withal writes to the
Pantagarines, and magistrates of the Coast thereabout, to make a collectio^
among the richer sort, for the relief of their miseries. So as he provided for
them, not only for the present, but also for the time to come. But as soon as
that storm was ouerpast, by retyrement of the enemy, gathering together his
dispersed sheep, he omitted nothing belonging to the duty of a good Pastor. He
raised up those that were cast down, and comforted them that were afflicted,
both by co^passionate words, and all other sweet means. But, behold a new
tempest aryseth, so much the heavier, by how much longer it endured. They who
were officers in the Coast of Piscaria being covetous and intemperate men,
began after a proud and auaricious manner to dominier over the neophytes.
Whereupon Xauerius being no less moved at the unworthiness of the fact then it
deserved, first opposed himself stoutly against their covetousness; and at
last, when he saw he was not able to withstand them himself, he thought to
request the viceroy of India (remaining then at Cocinum) to aid him, and for
that purpose resolved to go unto him. But new occasions occurring, hindered both
his determination, and journey which now he had begun.

CHAP. XI.
He conuerteth the Kingdom of Trauancoris to the Christian Faith, and
defends the Neophytes from the Barbarians.
HAVING now spent in the Coast of Piscaria half a year in the forsaid
labors; and by his endeauours and diligent care so greatly profited therein,
that finding at his coming thither but twenty, both villages and towns in all,
and those very rude; he left now to his companions thirty, all of them well
instructed and ordered. Wherefore composing all things as well as he could, he
leaves the charge of the Neophytes to Fa. Mansilla, taking his journey toward
Cocinum through the coast of Trauancoris which lies next to Piscaria.

Trauancoris is a sea coast, on that side of India where Goa stands, The cost
Trauancoris.
bending toward the West, and lies between the Promo^tory of Comorinum and
the Town Colanum, almost 30. miles from Cocinum, and is said to be in length
about 80. miles. There were in that Coast, of sea villages to the number of 30.
inhabited partly by Ethnicke fishermen whom they call Machoa's, and partly by
Saracens. Francis therefore, what for want of shipping, and to try their
dispositions had a desire to pass through their Country to Cocinum.

He wanted not friends who endeauored to dissuade him from that journey,
showing him that the Machoa's and Sarac^ns hated him extremely, taking it very
ill that the Paraua's their neighbors were become Christians. His notable
courage of mind.
Yet for all this he being driven on more by God, the^ by any other necessity,
as afterward the event plainly demo^strated, made no doubt of passing through
their country. Depending therefore upon the divine Providence, and thinking
also that he should gain by the bargayne if he chanced to dye for Christ, he
begins his journey through the middle of the Country about the midst of the
year of our Lord 1544. As he trauayled he visited the villages which lay in
his way, and (as the goodness of God far exceeds all that pious men can
expect) he experienced his divine bou^ty no less favorable to his enemies,
Gods providence.
then to himself, so peaceable he found all things, and the people greatly
disposed to receive the seed of the holy Gospel.

First therefore having gotten friendship with their King, and working upon the
Barbarians hearts as well with hope as with fear, sometimes propounding to them
the amity of the Portugheses, and the^ again denouncing against them threats
from heaven, he without any great difficulty brought them to embrace the faith
of Christ; especially when, being won by offices of Christian Charity, they
had obtained leave by an Edict from their King, to change their Religions.
Wherefore Xauerius reioicing at this so fortunate success employed himself
incessantly in going about from town to town, to baptize and instruct the
people in the mysteries of the Christian faith. What an infinite number were by
his means made Christians, may be coniectured by this, The number of those he
baptized
that he baptized at one time above ten thousand. His manner of instructing and
baptizing was this. When he came to any village to baptize, calling all the
men, women, and children together into one place, after he had taught them,
that there was one God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, he commanded
them every one to make upon themselves thrice the sign of the Cross in honor
of the most B. Trinity, according as he had before instructed them. Then
putting on a Surplise, with a clear voice he pronounced the mysteries, and
precepts of the Christian Religion, His manner of baptizing.
and explicated the same briefly (as well as he could) in their own language.
And when they seemed to be sufficiently instructed, he bad them ask God pardon
publicly for the sins of their life past, and demanded whether they did
really and truly believe all and every point of the Christian Religion? The^
they, by putting their arms a cross gave a sign that they did believe, and
so he baptized them, putting down every ones name in writing, as his custom
was.

When all were baptized, He over throws the temples and Idols.
Xauerius caused the Temples of the Gods to be presently thrown down, and
their Idols to be broken in pieces. One could not have beheld a more grateful
or pleasant spectacle, then to see them now trample those Idols under their
feet, which a little before they had with so great reverence adored. Which
great injury the Devil certainly would not have left unrevenged, if Francis had
not had as great courage to withstand the danger, as to offer him that affront.
For he stirred up the Badages again (of whom we spoke before) who are no
less cruel enemies to Christian Religion, then brutish and savage by nature,
against the flock of Christ, which as yet was but young and tender. Wherefore a
mighty army of these barbarians made a sudden incursion upon the borders of
Trauancoris, and began to spoil the villages of the Christians. The
inhabitants making a doleful outery, Atumult amongst the Trauancore^sians.
together with the lamentation of women and children, being all in vproue,
betook themselves to flight, yet with little hope to escape, being round beset
by their enemies.

Xauerius (for it happened he was then present) being stirred up by the tumult,
wrought a memorable act. For, wholly forgetting himself, by reason of the
eminent danger he saw before his eyes, he flies in amongst them, like a Lion,
and with an undaunted courage, A memorable deed of his.
both of spirit and countenance, rebukes those barbarous people; who were
wonderfully amazed to behold his courage and boldness, since being slaves to the
Devil and forgetful of their own freedom and salvation, they came so
violently to offend others. Then as a good Pastor he puts himself into the
formest press of the Christians, either to rule his flock by authority, or if
he could not do that, to die together with them. But the Badages, although most
barbarous and cruel, could not endure those fiery flames which seemed to shine
forth of Francis his countenance and face, and so for fear, and reverence to
his person, they spared the rest. Yet all this while he was not free from
danger of death. For the Ethnickes out of hatred to Christian Religion, lay
oftentimes in wait for him, whom notwithstanding he defeated partly by his
prudence, and partly by divine assistance, as then it happened.

Upon a time some of them seeking after him to kill him, By the goodness of God
he escapes death.
he ran into a wood, where climbing up into a tree he sat there all night,
and so escaped their hands, being sheltred more by Gods assistance, then either
by the tree, or night. And his enemies plots against him were so frequent, that
some of the Neophytes who were most pious and faithful unto him, kept always
of their own accord, watch in the night before his lodging, to defend him.
Notwithstanding the continual treacheries of these barbarous people, he
omitted neither his nightly prayer, which scarcely permitted him two hours
rest, nor ceased from his daily iourneys of the day, eue^ in the heat of the
sun; for that going about the Towns, he went barefoote, in a ragged coat,
and with an ordinary Hat on his head. Yet this carelesnes of his corporal
habit did no way obscure the sanctity of his soul, but made it more eminent.
He is called great Father.
He was now commonly called the Great Father, and the King of Trauancoris
commanded by public Edict throughout his whole kingdom, that all should obey
the Great Father, no otherwise then himself.

The Christians had not at that time any Church in that Coast, wherefore he was
constrained to say mass either under some tree, or some sail of a ship. But
now, it is reported, there be built above twenty Churches and Chapels in that
Country. The multitude of those who followed him when he preached.
And when he was to preach, for want of a pulpit, he would from some commodious
tree, speak unto the multitude, which was sometimes infinite. For when he went
out into the fields to preach, there followed him many times five or six
thousand persons. His care also was not less in augmenting the flock of
Christ, then in maintaining what he had gotten. That the Neophytes might also,
after his departure, retain what they had learned, upon his going away, he did
not only leave a copy of the Christian doctrine in every Town, but also taught
them the manner how to exercise it every morning and evening, and for that end
appointed a Moderatout over them. Yet all this time he refrained from too much
dealing with those who dwelt up higher in the heart of the country, knowing very
well that the sea coasts, where the Portugheses commanded, were far more fit
to receive and maintain the Christian faith, then the vpland Country of India,
The vpland country of India not fit to receive the faith of Christ.
where the Brachmans, deadly enemies to our Religion, had the possession. He
therefore travailed all over that country lying by the sea side, going from
village to village; every where baptizing and instructing as many as he could
in the Christian faith: so as now almost all the towns of the Machoa's and
Paraua's had, by Francis his means, put themselves under the sweet yoke of
Christ; when the report thereof coming to the bordering Islands, set on fire the
Manarians a neighboring people, to emulate their piety.

CHAP. XII.
Neophytes slain for Religion, become an ornament to the Christian Faith.
MAnaria is a little Island, lying over against the coast of P^scaria, distant
from the continent an 150. miles. There was therein a village called Patinus,
at that time of little note, but now greatly enobled by the death of many
Martyrs. The inhabitants of this place had a great desire to receive the
Christian Religion, whereof they had heard many notable things reported, as well
of Xauerius, as of the Comorines. Wherefore they earnestly invited Francis to
come thither and baptize them. But he being employed about other most important
affairs concerning Religion, and not able to go himself, sent a certain
Priest in his place to instruct them in the Catechism, and to baptize them.
Whereupon followed a great storm of persecution, which notwithstanding proved
very profitable unto them. For the King of Iafanapatana, under whose dominion
that Island is, out of a Barbarous cruelty, being also incensed with the hatred
he bare unto Christians, was so enraged, that sending thither an army of men,
what by fire and sword destroyed, and wasted the whole Town. There are said to
have been slain at that time for Religion more then 600. persons. Thus, that
vast solitude, brought forth fresh and fragrant flowers of Martyrs, for heavens
ornament. Since which time, that place has retained the name of the Town of
Martyrs.

About the same time, it fell out fortunately, that the said King of
Iafanapatana his own brother, and heir to the same kingdom, fearing his
brothers fury had fled to the Viceroy of India, promising that if he could by
the Portugheses forces be restored to his Fathers kingdom, The town of
Nagapatana.
he with his nobles and greatest part of his subjects would become Christians.
The Viceroy greatly desirous as well to advance Religion, as to revenge the
slaughter of the Innocents, was much incensed against the Tyrant. Whereupon he
presently sends a very strong Navy to Nagapatana (which is a sea Town
situated in the continent, over against the Island of Manaria, about 200. miles
from the Promontory of Comorinum) and withal commands them to make war upon
the King of Iafanapatana, and either to put him to death, or else to handle him
in such manner as Xauerius should judge expedient, and to restore the Kingdom
to his brother.

In the mean time whilst Xauerius remained at Cocinum, The Ila^d of Macazaria.
there was brought thither joyful news, of many Ethnikes in the most remote
Kingdom of Macazaria converted to the Faith of Christ. This Macazaria is a
great Island, about a 1000. miles beyond India and the River Ganges, and distant
from the Moluca's toward the east about 130. In this Kingdom three Noble and
principal men, besides many others of the people, were lately converted to the
Christian faith, and baptized by a Portughese Merchant called Antony Payua: God
in that manner bringing in thither his Ghospel even by the means of good and
virtuous merchants. They had therefore sent certain men to the City of Malaca,
to request of the Portugheses there, some Priests who might better instruct
them in the Christian Religion; for that which the merchant had commanded them,
was only this: that since they had lived like brute beasts, now having by
baptism received the faith of Christ, they should endeavor hereafter to live
like men, and withal to serve one God with purity and sanctity of life. The
Governor of Malaca approving their demands, granted them certain Priests. And
although Francis made no doubt but they would worthily behave themselves for
the advancement of Christian Religion; yet had he also a great desire to be
partaker of that labor, thinking that in so large a Kingdom there would be
great occasion of work, and need of many industrious laborers, to plant and
cultiuate the holy Gospel.

At the very same time almost, there came news also from the Island of
Ceilanus, which at the first seemed heavy and sad, but afterward proved
joyful. The eldest son of the King of that Island being moved by conference
with the Portugheses (for they endeavored to bring in the Gospel, The Kings
son with 600 more are slain for Religion
as well as merchandise into India) had together with many others resolved to
become a Christian. As soon as the barbarous King his Father had notice
thereof, all-mad with rage and fury, commanded his son, with others of his
consayle (to the number of 600. as was reported) to be publicly slaughtered.
But the enemy of Baptism, baptized them in their own blood: and whilst he
endeavored to depresse Christian Religion, he exalted it.

For at the very same time, the Inhabitants saw a great Cross of Fire in the
air; and in the place where the said slaughter was committed, the ground
opening, made a great and plain sign of the Cross, which remains unto this
day, Prodigious signs of the Cross.
although the Ethnikes have endeavored oftentimes to stop it up, by casting
earth into it. So as many of the inhabitants, and amongst the rest the Kings
younger son, together with his Cousin-german, and some of the Kings guard,
moved by these prodigious signs intended to become Christians Xauerius being
glad of this news, albeyt he had already resolved to go unto the Macazarians;
yet he judged it not expedient to prefer this business before the other with
which he was then in hand. In the year therefore 1545. in the month of April,
taking Fa. Mansilla for his companion, he embarked at Cocinum with intention to
go to the Island of Ceilanus, to try the disposition of the Inhabitants, and
from thence with the first occasion to pass over to Nagapatana, where the Navy
was said to be ready prepared for the foresaid expedition.

CHAP. XIII.
Being transported into the Island of Ceilanus, he reclaymeth the master of the
ship from a bad life.
CEilanus is an Island right over against the coast of Piscaria, They Island
Ceilanus.
of great note both for pearls and other merchandise, but especially for the
abundance of Cinnamon which it bears. It is extended in length an 150.
miles, and in breadth 40. or thereabout. Upon the furthest point thereof
butteth the Island of Manaria where the Neophytes, as we said, were slain by
the King of Iafanapatana. Ceilanus is indeed inhabited by the Malauarians,
whom they call Cingales, but by reason of traffic it is much frequented by
the Portughese Merchants. The Portugheses have therein a fair Town, and by the
shore are to be seen certain Chappells built by them in times past for the
exercise of Christian Religion. Xauerius being thither arrived, there happened a
memorable accident.

The Governor of the ship, being moved by the familiarity which he had gotten
with Francis* had upon the way, freely opened his mind unto him, and told him,
how for a long time he had been given to a certain notorious sin, from which
he could not be absolved by the Priest. But Xauerius being a expert Physician
of the soul, laying before his eyes the clemency, and mercy of Almighty God,
that passes all malice (which was an ordinary custom in him, thereby to draw
men to Confession) made the business light and easy; and promised him withal,
that as soon as they were arrived (for then there was neither time nor means)
he would vnty those heavy bands of his. Having thus agreed between themselves
of the business, the master of the ship as soon as he came to Ceilanus, as
though he had been certain of his salvation, cast of all thought of making his
confession; and began to find excuses, and withal to avoid the sight and
company of Francis, that he might not be challenged by him of his promise. Job.
5.
But Xauerius, or rather Gods Providence ( Which, as holy Job says, takes the
wise in their crafty plots) deceived the master, with all his sleights. For on
a sudden, and unawares he finds Francis walking by the shore side, with his
eyes fixed toward heaven, as his custom was; and now because he could not
avoid meeting with him, having been already espied, and that he might not show
himself light or unconstant, he resolved to set a good face upon the matter,
and by some slight to delude the others carfulness.

He therefore first saluted him, and of his own accord, asks him; How long it
would be, before he would he are his Confession? As soon as he had spoken
these words, faltring as it were in his speech, and showing himself much
troubled in mind, Xauerius found presently by his countenance, and trembling of
body that he had a great horror of that which he required: yet did he not let
slip the occasion offered him whatsoever it were. Prudence in taking away
horror in Confession.
Therefore, to free him from that vain fear, merrily and sweetly, as he was
wont, Good Jesus, quoth he, will you go then to confession? I will most
willingly hear you, and if you please, even here as we walk upon this shore.
Whereupon the other being overcome not so much by the irkesomnes of his foul
sins, as by Francis his exceeding mildnes, but indeed by Gods divine impulse,
resolved to make a confession of his whole life. Xauerius seeing him to begin
with fear and bashfulnes, hearkened carefully unto him first, as they walked
upon the shore: But afterward when he perceived him to go on with more courage
and freedom, taking him gently by the hand, he led him into a chapel near
by. The other out of reverence to the holy place, began to kneel down, as the
custom is, thereby to make an end of the Confession which he had begun. But
Francis perceauing he had some difficulty therein, forbad him to kneel for the
present; and to induce him to confess the more willingly he spread a mat upon
a bank, that they might there sit more commodiously. They had not sat long
when God so touched his heart, that rising upon a sudden, he fell down at the
Fathers feet, and with abundance of tears and sighs laid open all the sins
of his whole life. And having thus waded out of the pudle of sin, and
disburdened his soul of all filth, he began with great feeling to frequent the
holy Sacrament of Confession (of the fruit and wholesomnesse whereof he had now
gotten a taste) and seriously to provide for the salvation of his soul.

In the mean time Xauerius having insinuated himself into the Ceilanians
friendship, got access to the Kings son, whom he found perplexed, as well
by his brothers example, as by those prodigious signs whereof we spoke before,
and privately baptized him, together with his Cousin-German; whereupon he
resolved to fly, together with some chief men of the Kindgdome, to the Viceroy
of India, and to crave his aid against the savage cruelty of his Father, who
had already imbrued his hands in the innocent blood of his brother and kinsmen,
and now thirsted after his also. Xauerius was likewise by him informed, that
most of the Ceilanians being moved by those miraculous signs of the Cross in
the air, and upon the ground, did already much incline to the Christian faith,
but that their good desires were hindered, through fear of the Tyrant his
Father.

Francis being very glad of this news, sends presently letters to Fa. Paul,
who remained at Goa, willing him to send two of the Fathers, who were every day
expected from Portugal, to Ceilanus, with those noblemen, who where to be
restored to their Kingdom, to have a care of the Christian cause in that
Island. And sending back Fa. Mansilla immediately into the Promontory of
Comorinum, he himself crosses over to Nagapatana, for the occasion which we
have already mentioned. But all that preparation, and Francis his expectation,
when it seemed now to be upon the point of joining battle and obtaining
victory, upon a sudden falls to nothing. For at the same time a ship of the
K. of Portugal (which being fraught with rich merchandise was bound back
again from the Kingdom of Pegu into India) being by force of tempest driven
into Iafanapatana, was presently set upon by that barbarous King. Wherefore the
Viceroy employing his service for the Kings affairs, surceased from battle,
until the Kings goods were recovered. And so by making this delay, the war,
as many times it happens, was by differring, broken clean off. Yet God
afterward gave to Xauerius what he desired. For not long after that Tyrant
being disconfited by many overthrows which Constantine the Viceroy of India
gave him, the Island of Manaria was taken from him, and all the inhabitants
became Christians. Thus the death of a few for Christ his sake, was the cause
of liberty and salvation to many. Francis therefore not to loose the labor
which he had taken in that journey, and also serving himself of the wynd,
which though contrary for his return, lay yet right for his going forward,
resolved to make use of that occasion.

CHAP. XIV.
He visits the Sepulcher of S. Thomas the Apostle.
THE Church of S. Thomas the Apostle was not distant from this place above 150.
miles which was very famous both in regard of his sacred relics, and of the
great resort of Indians, who came to visit it from remote places. He therefore
determined to go thither in the guize of a poor Pilgrim, that having done his
devotion to the Apostle, he might go on forward to Malaca, and from thence
(unless God should otherwise dispose) to Macazaria, whither he had been called
by most joyful tidings For he had lately understood that the Inhabitants of
those places were greatly disposed to receive the Christian Religion, and that
nothing hindered the conversion, and baptizing of many, but want of Priests.

About the latter end therefore of Lent, he put to sea from Nagapatana, with a
better wind then good speed. He passes 7. days without eating any thing
He had now sailed about 40. miles when a contrary tempest constrained the ship
to remain 7. days in a certain haven which they chanced upon by the way.
There Xauerius minding more the pilgrimage which he had undertaken, then humane
imbecility, left behind him a worthy example of abstinence. For all that time
(as he that had the care of him testified afterward upon his oath) he passed
without taking any sustenance at all, as though, being indeed inflamed with a
desire to visit the holy Apostle, he had been fed with heavenly food. Afterward
when the mariners hoised sail to be gone, He fortelleth the mariners a
tempest near at hand.
he asked of the Master, whether the ship were sound and strong enough? He
replied that it was an old, and weak ship. Then, quoth he, we must needs back
again to Nagapatana, for we shall have a cruel storm. Although little credit
was given to this prophesy, yet it proved most true. But the Master of the
ship being deceived by the weather and the sea, went nevertheless forward: and
behold upon the sudain a terrible tempest rising, drove the ship back again
to Nagapatana (as he had fortould them) and not without great danger. Then the
mariners and passengers took notice of what he had said, and held ^t for a
prophecy. And although Francis being thus beaten back with a contrary wind,
could not arrive where he intended, yet still he perseuered constantly in his
purpose, and came thither at last on foot, with greater labor, and more merit.

There is a town belonging to the Portugheses called Meliapora, Meliapora the
town of S. Thomas
rich, and much frequented, situated in the sea coast of India, almost in
equal distance (if you consider the turnings of the sea) about two hundred
leagues from the Promontory of Comorinum and the river Ganges, built perhaps of
the ruins of the ancient, and famous City of Calamina. In this Town there
is a Church of Saint Thomas the Apostle, where the inhabitants, and other
Indians say, he was buried; whereof even to this day there be extant many
remarkable signs. There is also to be seen the place where the Apostle is
said to have been martyred, and a Chapel wherein he said mass. Which chapel
the Portugheses out of devotion have adorned, and made thereof a sumptuous
Church, giving the Town the name of S. Thomas. The body of S. Thomas the
Apostle.
In this Chapel not long since, as they dug very deep to lay the fondation
of the new Church there was, as they say, the body of the Apostle found, with
the sword wherewith he was martyred, and a little vessel full of bloody earth,
which was again with reverence laid in the same place. Neither is the constant
report hereof vain or doubtful. This ancient opinion which both they of that
Country and strangers have of the Body and Martyrdom of the Apostle S. Thomas,
is by God confirmed by an yearly and perpetual miracle. For they have a stone
sprinkled with the blood of the Apostle, which retains the prints, as it
were, of fresh blood, and three days before the feast day of S. Thomas (on
which day they say he was martyred) whilst Mass is said there, the said stone,
Ananiuersary miracle.
being naturally white, by little and little waxes red, and sweateth as though
drops of blood distilled from it on all sides; and at last when Mass is
ended, it returns again to the former color. For which respect the Apostles
Sepulcher is had in great veneration, as well of the Ethnickes as the
Christians. For that there come unto this place from all parts, a great
co^course of Pilgrims even Ethnickes themselves, who bear great esteem to
the Martyrdom and Sepulcher of the said Apostle.

Hither therefore Xauerius, out of devotion to S. Thomas the Patron of India,
came in the guize and habit of a Pilgrim, thereby both to honor the Apostles
Sepulcher, and to assist the bordering neighbors in matters concerning their
salvation. He found in that town, besides many inhabitants about 100. families
of Portugheses, who had there settled themselves, and their means. Xauerius
therefore, presently upon his arrival to this place, visited no less
religiously then affectionately the Apostle of the Indians; admiring his
singular glory, whose virtue he emulated, as far as a mortal man was able.
And first he earnestly besought God, that since he being a poor wretch was
called from heaven to imitate, though never so weakly, so great an Apostle in
converting of the Indians to the faith of Christ, he would inspire him with
some of his Apostolical virtues. The^ he instantly requested S. Thomas, for
the care and patronage which he had over the Indians, that through his
intercession, he might neither want courage to undergo the dangers, nor forces
to endure the labors in travailing over, and manuring India, and other
barbarous Countries: and that neither his own, nor others sins might be any
hindrance of his following the Mowers steps, as Ruth the Moabitesse did, in
gathering up the gleanings of that our Lords field, and (to his poor ability)
reposing the same in Christ's sacred granary.

When he had satisfied his devotion to the Apostle he lodged with the Bishops
Vicar (which he was accustomed to do, where there was no public Hospital for
the sick, nor place of abode for Religious me^) who was much edified with the
great respect he saw him bear to Ecclesiastical persons, and with his natural
affability of speech and true simplicity. So as making himself wholly known
unto the Prelate, by laying open his heart before him, he easily won his
favor and good will. This manner of courtesy, as I said before, Xauerius used,
A manner how to gain and help friends.
not so much to gain friends, as to help those whom he judged worthy of
friendship. For when he had once found out their dipositions, he would by little
and little draw them to whatsoever was requisite, both for their own salvation,
and the divine service. This good Prelate therefore of Meliapora requited
Xauerius courtesy by returning him the like, and embracing him as a worthy
person, whom he used thence forwards with much affection and respect,
especialy after he perceived in him most evident marks of sanctity. For by the
conference which he had with Xauerius, Xauiers Virginal chastity.
and by hearing his Confessions, he plainly found (as he afterward testified
upon his oath, which testimony we have now in our hands, iuridically signed)
that he had kept unspotted the flower of Virginal Chastity, wherewith he was
borne.

He remained in the Vicars house three or four months, to the great profit
both of the towns men, and himself. For he drew many out of the sinck of
grievous sins: and many dishonest lovers, whom he could not well separate,
he joined together in wedlock. He reconciled also to friendship, such as
before were at deadly hatred one with another. He freed many who had bin long
entangled with heinous offenses and abominations. Yet for all this, whilst he
so much profited others, he neglected not his own, giving himself very much
to contemplation of heavenly things, especially in the night, when he was free
from other employments. And it happened very often, that when he was sought for
by his companions, he was found praying in some corner of the Apostles Church.
For being at that time doubtful what to do, and very uncertain whether he
should go forward to the Macazarians, or return back into India, he consulted
with God in the holy Apostles Church; so as there spending almost whole nights
in continual watching with great fervor of spirit, he craved the
intercession, one while of the most B. Virgin mother of God, and another while
of S. Thomas, and other Saints. And at last being replenished with incredible
joy from heaven, he perceived it to be Gods will that he should go forward to
the Macazarians, not so much to instruct them (as afterward he understood) as
to help some others, By divine instinct he determines to go to the furthest
part of the East.
who were in the way, unknown to him, and standing more in need of his
assistance. Wherefore being very desirous to perform the will of God, he began
to cast about for some opportunity to pass over to Malaca as soon as might
be, intending to make use of a Saracen, or Ethincke ship, if no Portughese
could be gotten; nay, he said morouer that he had such confidence in God, His
confidence in God.
that if no ship of burden cold be had, and there were but any little boat to
go to Malaca, he would make no doubt, by Gods help, to pass well over therein:
such a firm and constant resolution he had, presently to perform what he had
by Gods instinct undertaken.

CHAP. XV.
Being beaten by Devils, he notvvithstanding spends a whole night in Prayer.
WHILST he thus remained, as we have said, in the Vicars house, there happened
one thing very worthy to be noted in that kind This house joined close to the
Apostles Church, into which was made a little door, for the vicar to enter
privately. Now Xauerius had a custom, when he perceived the vicar to be asleep
(for he lay also in his chamber) to steal secretly, and without noise, from of
his bed, and to creep along with great warines into the Apostles church: yet
did he not wholly deceive the vicar, who often awaking on a sudden perceived
him to be absent. Wherefore he first disse^bled the matter, but afterward, out
of the friendly confidence which was between them, advised him not to go into
the Church in the night time, nor to hazard himself by going that way which
was known to be haunted with bad spirits, for he might perhaps meet with them
in their ugly shapes, when he least thought of them. At this Xauerius smiled,
thinking he had said it to make him afraid, and so putting the Prelate off with
a jest, stool notwithstanding the next night privately into the Church when he
perceived him to be fast asleep.

At this devotion of Francis the enemies of mankind, were mad with rage and
hatred, intending to drive him by terror from that custom: and so at midnight
as he was praying before the Altar of our B. Lady, His constancy whilst the
Devils whip him.
they furiously set upon him on a sudden, filling the Church with horrible
roarings, confused cries, and hydeous noyses. But finding him nothing afraid at
these their threats, they fall upon him altogether, and beat him most cruelly
with scourges, exercising their malice upon him, both in railings, and blows.
Amidst all these their violent strokes he having more care how to remain
constant, then how to defend his own back, called upon the mother of God who
beheld this combat; and so with undaunted courage deluded at last the Devils
vain assaults, and continued on his prayer, not only without fear, but also
with greater constancy. So as by this his manly and invincible perseurance (a
most deadly weapon against all devilish incursio^s) he easily drove away these
troublesome and outrageous spirits. And most certain it is that he by this
victory, so brake their forces, that they never afterward durst attempt any
thing in that kind against him.

There lay a certain young man in a chamber joining to the Church, who being
waked out of his sleep with that noise, heard Xauerius crying out (as the
Devils tormented him) and oftentimes calling upon the B. Virgin for help. And
he observed, that he very often repeated these words: Help me, O Lady. Wilt
not thou help me, O Lady? This young man recounted what he had heard unto the
Vicar, and others of the house; whereat, He is sick of the stripes.
as often it happens, they all fell into a laughter; and the tale was iested on
over all the house unknown to Francis; who the next day, finding himself very
sore with those cruel strypes, and desiring to rise was not able to get out of
his bed, and so lay there three days, His patience in suffering scoffs from
those of the house
all wearyed and tired out, feigning himself to be sick, so thereby to hyde
what had happened. The vicar hearing this came to visit him, and asked him
whether he were sick? Xauerius answered that he was. Then demanding what his
sickness was; he answered wholly from the purpose, turning his speech another
way. The Vicar knowing well the matter indeed, began to jest with him, and
repeated the same words, which he had uttered whilst the Devils beat him,
Help me O Lady. Wilt not thou help me, O Lady? Francis when he perceived that
all was known, began to blush indeed; but yet with a smiling countenance, was
no less courageous in enduring the speeches of men, then the blows of the
Devils.

As soon as he was recovered knowing very well that the Devils terror is
greater then his forces, His courage in combating with the Devil.
and that like a cowardly Curre he barketh fiercely at those who give back,
but runs straight away when one resists, he resolves, like a Conqueror,
voluntarily to return again to his old place of combat, with more alacrity
then before. Trusting therefore in Gods assistance, who especially restrains
the Devils forces, he went oftentimes most courageously and alone, even in the
dead night, to pray in the same Church, and place; and did so contemn those
hellish mo^sters and their devises, as well showed that nothing is more
shameful and weak then the Devils, if one have the courage to contemn them.
For being thus stoutly vanquished, and perceiving their open assaults had ill
success, they used other deceiptfull tricks, and endeavored at least to
distract him in his prayer, if they could not break it of.

Whilst therefore he was at his prayer in the Church at midnight, The Devils
make a noise in time of Xauiers prayer.
as his custom was, they in hatred against him, come together in troops, and
make a horrible noise, and in a scoffing manner imitating the Clergy men, sing
as it were Mattins in the Quire, thereby at least to distract him whom they
could not otherwise afright. But how little they profited heerin did evidently
appear. For Xauerius not regarding who they were, nor what they sung, thought
they had been the Church men coming to sing their mattins. The next day
therefore he demanded of the Vicar, who those Clergy men were who last night
sung their Mattins with the doors shut? He at first wondering what Clergy men,
and what mattins he meant, perceived afterward that they were Devils, and
scoffers of Clergymen. Which thing after Francis his death he often declared to
many.

CHAP. XVI.
He delivers a possessed person: and takes John Durus for his companion.
IN the mean time Xauerius, that he might not leave Meliapora without some
monument of his labors taken therein, he employed himself, as his custom was,
to help the people of riper years both by private and public exhortations,
and to instruct children in their Catechism. Neither was there matter wanting
for him to work upon. In which kind this accident happened worthy of memory.
There was a Citizen of great wealth who was possessed, and most miserably
vexed by the Devil. To whom Francis being called for aid, he sent in his
place one of the children that helped him in teaching the Catechism with a
Crucifixe, He delivered a possessed man by a child.
who reading the holy Gospel over the possessed man, as the Father had
instructed him to do, cast out immediately the infernal monster, who was the
more enraged, because he was driven out by a child, and that a Neophyte.

There is also recounted another thing in a different kind, yet perhaps no
less admirable then the former. There was a certain young man, a merchant
called John Durus, who came to Francis to confession, and hearing him discourse
of divine matters, found there were certain other merchandise far richer
then those with which he traffiked, and of which he never heard before.
Wherefore giving over his former trading, and desirous to become a merchant of
more precious wares, He hardly admits John Durus into the Soety.
entreats Francis to receive him for his companion. He at first refused him
absolutely (because perhaps he saw in him a secret inconstancy, and intractable
disposition) yet at last, by much entreaty he obtained his desire; and so
settling his affairs, began to distribute his goods among the poor. But in
executing of this his good purpose, he was more forward, then constant. For
whilst he was busied about selling of his wares, he was vehemently solicited
by the common Enemy of mankind, Luc. 9.
who did so work him upon that having set his hand to the plough, on a
sudden be began to look back, and sought again most greedily after those
things which a little before he had contemned. Being thus wholly changed in
mind, he packed up his merchandyze in the most private manner he could, and
conveyed them into a ship intending to be gone. But although he deceived
others, yet he could not deceive Francis, the which he most of all sought to do.

Now having gotten al things together which he thought requisite, as he was
about to take shipping, Xauerius upon a sudden causes him to be called unto
him. His determination of flying away secretly is opened to Xauerius from
heaven.
He the more to dissemble the matter, made show of ready Obedience, and came
unto him presently. Francis taking him aside, with great sorrow and grief in
his countenance said: Thou have sinned Durus, thou have sinned. At which words
he being stricken to the heart, stood like one distracted and amazed, wondering
with himself how Xauerius came to know that which no mortal creature but
himself could have suspected. Then being filled with shame, and tears, his
conscience also accusing him, he cried, I have sinned Father, I have sinned.
Then Francis again with a joyful countenance replied: Confession therefore
Child, Confession is requisite. Whereupon Durus having his heart softened by
Xauerius words, and by the dew of divine grace, taking again courage, and some
respite to examine himself, makes his confession. Which remedy he found no
less expedient then wholesome. For by the benefit of that holy Sacrament he was
not only pardoned his offense, but also constantly restored to his former good
resolution. Wherefore without delay, faithfully distributing his goods amongst
the poor, he constantly adhered to Xauerius, as before he had promised,
fortifying this his resolution with the remembrance of his former lightness and
inconstancy.

At the same time also came unto Xauerius a new, thought small supply of
Companions. For that F. Antony Criminalis of Parma, and F. John Beira of
Galliaco, of the Society of Jesus, being sent out of Portugal, were very fitly
arrived in India: of whose coming Xauerius being certified by letters, greatly
reioyed (as being the first supply which had come unto him out of Europe)
determining to set them presently a work, by reason of so great want of
Priests. And he himself, that his labors might not be restrained within the
bounds of India, intended with the first occasion of shipping, to visit the
furthest parts of the East.

CHAP. XVII.
He reformeth the bad lives of the people of Malaca.
HE departed from Meliapora the City of S. Thomas, toward Malaca by sea in
the year of our Lord 1545. The cause of this his journey was, that having now
helped the Portugheses, who dwelt in that City, he might pass on to instruct
the Macazaria^s in the precepts of the Christian faith. Malaca is a country
compassed almost round with the sea, beyond India and the river Ganges, called
in times past (as some think) the Golden Chersonesus. For being joined to the
continent by a small part of land stretching out into the sea, runs forth in
length toward the Island of Somatra (formerly named Taprobana) famous for Gold
mines.

In this Country right over against Somatra stands the city of Malaca
belonging to the Portugheses, Malaca.
a place very rich, and of great note, from whom that country has its name,
distant from the city of Goa near 600. leagues. It lies almost under the
Equinoctial Line, yet by reason of the frequent showers of rain which fall
commonly every day, there is as it were almost a perpetual spring, which does
greatly allay the heates. For they have always two summers and as many
haruests, both of corn and fruit. But the Country is more pleasant and fertile
then wholesome, for that the fruitfulnes of the place, and the vnwholsomnes of
the air proceed from the same causes. And besides this, they have another
inconvenience which does more encumber them, to wit, the Saracens, and
Ethnickes who border upon them. None of these difficulties did any ways
affright Xauerius to go on with his resolution. Nay rather the latter set him
forward to help them with more fervor, seeing them in danger by reason of
their bad neighbors.

As soon as he arrived at Malaca, he goes to the Governor of the City, and
certifieth him of his determination of passing to Macazaria. Whereupon he again
told Xauerius, how he had lately sent thither a strong band of Portugheses,
together with a Priest of eminent virtue to assist and guard the Christians,
if any commotion should by chance, be raised there against the^. And therefore
he wishes him if he thought good, to abide a while at Malaca, until the ship
were returned, Conversation of Ethnickes pernicious to Christians.
and should bring news how matters went in Macazaria. Francis followed the
Governors counsel, and in the mean time taking no rest himself, began to
employ his endeauours for the spiritual good of the Portugheses. The
Malacensians were at this time wholly corrupted with the bad customs of their
bordering neighbors, living indeed more like to Saracens and Ethnickes, then
to Christians. For that through their own carelessness rather then want of
Priests, al good order by little and little was fallen to decay; and their
behauiours also growing daily worse, they began to run headlong unto ruin.
For having now lost all memory either of salvation or honesty, they for the
most part thought, that they might do whatsoever seemed pleasing or profitable
to their sensuality: So forcible is the contagion of bad company, to infect
others with the same vice.

Francis therefore perceiving them to (...) extremely corrupted, that now they
had neither any feeling of their sins, nor could endure any remedy to be
applied thereto, A wonderful art to gain lost souls.
sets upon their lost souls, after a strange, and artificial manner.
First, as his custom was, he insinuat^th himself sweetly into their
familiarity, winketh at their sins, and hides his desire of curing them.
Then having won them by custom and friendly usage, he by little and little
prepares the way to cure their inueterate diseases; somtymes laying before
them their heinous sins and offenses, by propou^ding unto them Gods divine
laws; at other times striking into them a terror of Gods fearful
judgments, by urging of the variable casualities of man's life. And at last
having disposed their minds, he sets his hand to work; he cutteth off
avarice, takes away the occasions of lust, mollifyeth and heals their sore
and wounded consciences (whereof then they began to have some feeling) with the
sweet oil of Gods mercies. The fruit which he reaped thereby well showed that
his labors were not employed in vain. For it is certainly known, that by his
means many made restitution of goods unlawfully gotten; many put away their
Concubines, and those that made difficulty to put them away, were persuaded to
marry them: a great number also clea^sed their guilty consciences by
frequenting the holy Sacrament of Confession, and were brought to lead a good
and virtuous life.

Neither did Xauerius profit the people more by the sweetness of his private
discourse, then by the gravity of his public Exhortations. Upon Sundays he
preached in the great Church with no less fruit, then applause of his
Auditors. And to move the^ the more, and better to imprint wholesome fear in
their minds he with great fervor of spirit foretold what heaven threatened
against that City. His Prophecyes.
It was observed by many, that he was wont oftentimes, when in his sermons he
reprehended with greatest vehemence, the loose and wicked lives of the
Malacensians, to beseech God to turn from them the wrath which hung over their
heads from heaven, and the punishments which a little after fell upon them. For
the year following Malaca was greatly afflicted by a strong siege of the
Saracens of Iaua, who also wasted the country round about. And besides the
calamity into which that cruel war had brought them, there followed a
contagious pestilence, which spreading it self throughout the whole City,
caused a great mortality both of the Citizens and strangers, in so much as the
same became half desolate, whilst God revenging the former sins of the people,
raised up, as it were, a new City.

Xauerius therefore foreseing these evils to hang over their heads from heaven,
and to appease, in some sort, the wrath of Gods divine justice, so to dispose
the inahbitants minds to endure those miseryes which were near at hand, after
many threats against them, warned them often to look seriously about them. And
not in vain; for many being stricken with the horror of Gods divine
indignation, and moved to compunctio^, arose out of their deadly sleep, and
came again unto themselves. Amongst many passages of this kind, a certain
wonderful act which Francis there wrought, did not a little move the whole
City.

There was a young man of that Country called Antony Fernandez, who by the
Devils cruel tormenting him had lost the use of his tongue, and was withal
fallen into a most dangerous disease, whereof he had layne now three whole days
in despair, given over by the Physicians. Wherefore his friends and kins-men
being superstitious and wicked people bring unto him certain Sorceres, a kind
of devilish Physicians, for remedy. But when their Witchcrafts did no good,
Xauerius is sent for, A possessed sickman is freed from the Devil and cured of
his diseases.
who was no soever come into the chamber where the sick man lay, but presently
he begins to rage, cry out, and writhe about his face, eyes and mouth, after
a foul and ugly manner: you would have thought the Devil were now rousing
himself for the combat which he saw to be at hand. There you might have seen
Francis, moved both out of compassion toward the young man, and hatred against
the Devil, to fetch many a deep sigh. Then presently falling upon his knees,
he first offers himself by earnest prayer unto God, and then began to
exercise the raging young man, after the accustomed manner; wherein he
continued, until coming to himself he remained somewhat quiet without so
great vexation as before. The next day Xauerius having said Mass for the
yongman, comes again with courage and alacrity to the battle. A wonderful
thing: that obstinate and importune foul Spirit which tormented him, being
suddenly vanquished, and driven out, the sickman presently recovered both his
speech and senses, and remained free from any corporal infirmity. There was
nothing which ever made Xauerius sanctity of life, more remarkable both to the
Christians and Barbarians then this. For heerupon he began to be ordinarily
called the Holy Father, having his old name now renewed at Malaca, which he had
left behind him in India.

His name grew also famous, A Prophesy.
and much renowned by reason of a certain prophecy which he afterward uttered
in this manner. Upon a time demanding of a Portughese Merchant who was to go
into India, in what ship he meant to go. The merchant pointed to a certain
ship that lay there in the road. I would not have you (quoth Francis) go in
that ship. But when the merchant answered, that he had already put his
merchandise therinto, yet if he thought there were any danger, he had rather
have his goods cast away, then himself; Xauerius recollecting himself a
little, as though he had taken advise of God, uttered this Oracle: since, quoth
he, you have put your mercha^dise into this ship, you may also venture your
life therein. But if any tempest, or other accident happen, beware you do not
cast your goods over board, but have a firm confidence that God will send you
help, which will free both you and your goods from danger. The event afterward
showed him to be no false prophet. For the ship in the midest of her course
being driven by a violent tempest was cast upon the sands. Now the mariners
being affrighted at the suddayne danger went about the lighten the ship of her
burden, by casting over board her loading, when as the merchant remembering what
Xauerius had commanded him, forbad them so to do in any case, telling them
what the holy man had fore told, and withal promising them, by that which he
had said, that God would assuredly succor them. Which presently proved true.
For the sea coming upon a suddayne over those sands, the ship was straight
afloate, and so escaping that danger arrived safely at the haven, by Gods and
Xauerius assistance. The news hereof being afterward brought to Malaca, He
comme^deth in the night time to the peoples prayers the souls in Purgatory and
men in deadly sin.
it is wonderful to say, how much it increased his credit, and esteem of
sanctity.

In the mean space Francis did not only omit any thing of his former old
exercises of Christian Charity, but also invented new. For after the sun was
set, he going up and down the City with a little Bell, by some grave sentence
or speech admonished the people to call upon Gods divine clemency, for the
souls which were tormented in Purgatory, and for them that were in deadly
sin. Which new invention being no less profitable for the living then for
the dead, did not a little set on fire the Malacensians hearts. These labors of
his, whereby he restored the Christian discipline wholly decayed in the City of
Malaca, were much increased, by no small employment, which he took in
translating, with the help of an Interpreter, the Christian doctrine into that
language, which the Macazarians did also understand, The preparation of the
Macazarians to receive the Ghospel.
to whom he greatly desired to go, moved thereto by the often good tidings
which came from thence. For that about the same time news was brought, that
the people of that country were greatly inclined to receive the seed of the
Christian Faith, because there were no Temples of Idols amongst them, nor
Idolatrous Priests to draw the^ to the worship of false Gods: They only adored
the Sun when it rose, and besides that, they had no other God at all.

Nothing now seemed longer to Xauerius then that day, when as having turned the
Catechism into their language, and understood the state of the Island, he might
go to instruct them: yet in the mean time he furnished himself with
contemplation of divine things, but specially with heavenly provision, for the
undertaking of so great a charge. For after he had spent whole days in offices
of charity, he would in the night defraud himself of his sleep, and sit up
watching in prayer and meditation, that so he might come unto the Macazarians
wholly inflamed with heavenly fire, and burning love, both to God and men. He
had now spent some months at Malaca, yet there came no news of the ship which
he expected to return. Wherefore with the Governors good leave he resolved to
go to Macazaria, hastening to instruct that nation in the Christian faith.

CHAP. XVIII.
In Amboynum he gives many signs of his prophetical spirit, and charity.
AS soon as he found opportunity of passage whither he intended, he put to sea
at Malaca, having Durus aforesaid for his companion, upon the 10. day of Ianuay
in the year of our Lord 1546. and having had a prosperous navigations he
arrived at last at his desired haven, but not without many incommodities. For
the master of the ship casting about, A Prophesy.
to come to the Island of Amboynum, and now thinking he had gone past the Haven,
was exceedingly troubled, being out of hope to get to his intended place,
because the wind was full against him. But Francis bad him be of good courage,
for the ship was not yet past the place as he imagined, and that the next day
in the morning he should arrive safe at the port which he desired. And so it
fell out, although they had very ill weather. At break of day the next morning
they were in sight of the Haven. But the wind was all that while so boisterous
and great, that it seemed impossible by any means to cast ancker, thereby to
set Xauerius a land, which was the only cause of their coming to that Island.

As soon therefore as they were come to the mouth, or entrance of the Haven,
upon a sudden that blustering wind, The wind obeys Xauerius.
as though it obeyed Xauerius, ceased in such sort, that the ship came very
commodiously into the haven. But now behold, a second danger even in the very
Haven it self. Xauerius with a few others had gotten into a little boat to row
to land, when as on a suddayne they fell upon two Pyratical ships. The
Portugheses who were in the boat with Francis made away with all speed, thereby
to avoid meeting with the Pirates. And so putting suddenly into the main for
fear, they were carried a great way from land. But now, having avoided the
danger, and making toward the land again, they were put into a new fear,
least they might perchance meet with the same Pirates again. Francis therefore
fortelling what would happen, bad them be of good comfort, and row without
fear to shore, Another Prophesy.
for by Gods goodness they should come safe to land. And the event proved true
as he had prophesied. When Xauerius was landed, he was very courteously
received by the inhabitants, being also before sufficiently recommended unto
them by fame of his sanctity.

Amboynum is about some 80. Amboynum.
miles in compass, and is an Island of special note under the Portugheses
dominion, much frequented both by merchants, and the people of that country. It
is distant from Malaca above 900 miles. There were then in this Island, besides
the garrison of Portugheses, seven other towns of Christians, without any one
Priest among them all, for he, who only had bin there, was lately dead. Francis
therefore going about to those desolate towns baptized many infants and
children. His manner of going was this: Having a boy carrying a cross before
him, he himself asked at every door, if they had any sick, any children to
baptize, or any dead to bury? If he found any sick, Of his manner of going
about.
lifting up his eyes, and hands to heaven, he recei^ed over them the Creed, and
the Gospel. And oftentimes with one and the same labor he cured the sick
both body, and soul. He also solemnly buried them that were dead, saying first
the usual funeral prayers, and afterward mass for their souls; so that a
question might be made, whether he more assisted the living, or the dead. But
whilst he sought to deserve well of men, God out of his providence gave him a
very special subject to work upon.

About the same time Ferdinand Soza Captain over certain Spaniards, Ferdina^d
Soza a Captain of the Spaniards.
coming from New Spain, (which is a Country in the other world, not further
distant from Amboynum then from Spain) and going to the Moluca's, arrived with
his whole navy at Amboynum. There were many ships, a very great number of
mariners and soldiers, an incredible multitude of sick, besides a cruel
pestilence that had taken away many Spaniards: whereupon it manifestly appeared
that God out of his singular bounty, had sent Xauerius before to be ready to
assist and help them. He relieueth the calamity of the Spanish nouy.
For presently his inflamed charity began to set upon the violence of that
pestiferous disease, assisting some by serving the^, and reconcyling others by
the Sacrament of Confession. One while he comforted the sick, another while he
assisted, such as lay at the point of death, and buried those that died with
funeral obsequies. Thus he being but one man, performed the office of many.

But his greatest labor of al was, to procure of those that had means, things
necessary for the poor and sick, and to seek about with unspeakable labor
and pains medicines for their diseases, whereof in that place there was great
scarcity. Therefore having oftentimes begged such things of one John Arausius
a Portughese merchant, He foretells that Arausius will shortly dye.
who had great store of such like wares, he at last took it ill, and was very
angry to see that he made no end of begging. So as when upon a time, one asked
him some such drugs in Francis his name, he with much grudging gave at length
what he demanded, but told him therewithal, that he should ask him no more.
Which thing coming to Xauerius hearing, presently by divine instinct, What
quoth he, does Arausius think that he shall long enjoy those things which he
has? He is surely deceived; Go tell him from me, that he need not be so
sparing of his wares which death will shortly take from him, and that he
himself will dye ere it be long, in this very Island, and that his goods will
fall to the share of the poor: therefore if he be wise, let him largely bestow
what he has upon the sick poor people, for Gods sake, and make his benefit
of that which may help him after he is dead. The event was answerable to what
he foretold. For not long after Arausius dyed in the same Island, leaving no
heir behind him, and his goods were distributed amongst the poor, according
as the custom is there, when one dies without heirs: and Arausius being
stricken with the terror of death which was declared to him to be at hand,
became more wary of his own carriage, and more liberal also of his drugs to
the poor.

He spent three months (for so long the Spanish navy remained at Amboynum) in
serving the sick, to their exceeding great good, both of body and soul. Yet
Xauerius his diligent endeauours were no less profitable to the whole, then to
the sick. For he never gave over to draw out the corruption of their minds
both by the medicines of the Sacraments, and by private and public
exhortations. Which labor of his was not in vain. For he reaped indeed
plentiful fruit of peace, from those warlike people: many private grudges
were taken away, many were reduced to see their own errors, and to betake
themselves to a virtuous life. The fruit which the Spanish navy yielded.
Amongst whom Cosmas Turrianus (who came in the Spanish Navy) being moved by
Francis his eminent sanctity, resolved to embrace his course of life, and to
enter into the Society. Then Francis having had good success concerning the
affairs of the Christian faith at Amboynum, after the navy was departed, going
to Macazaria, took the Island of Ternate in his way, lying about 200. miles
from Amboynum.

OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE III. BOOK.
He reformeth the Inhabitants corrupted behavior, in the Moluca's. CHAP. I.
MOLVCA is a Country divided into Moluca. Islands.
many small Islands (which they call the Moluca's) very famous by reason of the
fertility, and traffic of spices especially Cloves dista^t from Malaca 1100.
miles or therabout. It is full of Country towns, inhabited partly by Ethnickes
and partly by Saracens; the fertility of the soil being such, that it does not
only keep at home those that be there borne, from seeking commodities else
where, but inuiteth also strangers unto it. The Moluca's are very many in
number, most of them little in in extent, and the greatest thereof is but
small: for there is none above 18. miles in compass. They lie under the
Equinoctial line, and run out from the north into the south, divided from
one another almost threescore miles. There are amongst them other Islands of
lesser extent: Ternate the chief of the Moluca Islands.
but almost all the Moluca's, be subject to one Saracen King, who is tributary
to the King of Portugal. Ternate, which without comparison is the fay rest of
all these Islands, has in it a City of the same name, subject to the
Portugheses, which City is inhabited chiefly by them, and other Christians of
that country.

When Xauerius therefore was come thither, he lodged in the suburbs, at a Church
of our B. Lady, called the Bars. There, having inuoked that mighty
Protectresse of the place, his most assured Patroness, he begins presently
to employ himself in his accustomed works of Charity. The people of Ternate
had now openly let loose their raynes, so much beyond those of Malaca, to
wickedness, by how much further they were distant from India. For that through
daily commercement, and conversation with the Ethnickes and Saracens, they were
grown so stupide and blind, even in matters of ordinary humanity, that in
making their bargains concerning trafficque, they esteemed nothing unlawful,
or unjust, wheresoever there seemed any hope of gain. This City therefore,
being almost past recovery, Xauerius sets upon for cure, with the same art
which he had formerly done at Malaca. For having gotten the Inhabitants good
will, Prudence in recalling wicked men.
partly by winking at their manners, and partly by the sweetness of his
conversation, he began by little and little to discover their sores, and to apply
remedies thereunto. Wherein his singular prudence manifestly showed it self.
For if he found any one entangled in the snares of dishonest love, if he were a
person of authority and esteem, he used most commonly to deal with him in
this sort.

First, he would discourse after a sweet familiar manner, and if he did not
inuit him to his house, he would gently offer himself to be is guest. Sitting
at table he would discourse pleasantly, thereby to open a way for good and
wholesome counsel. Then as soon as he had gotten to be in ward and familiar
with him, he would begin to speak of the foulenes of sin, and so by little and
little come to the loathsomeness of carnal concupiscence, and the
inconveniences which ensue thereon; to which he would often also add threats
and vengeance from heaven. At last when he perceived him to be moved, he would
take him, in a gentle manner by the hand, and induce him to make his
confession. And so in fine without much difficulty he either made him put away
his Concubine, or else to take her in lawful wedlock. It is well known that
in this kind he brought many to marry their Concubines, that the lawfulnes of
wedlock might extinguish the flames of dishonest lust.

The like course he took to draw from the^ the money which they had gotten by
usury or deceit; the fumme whereof was such, that the Sodality, called of Mercy
there erected, being but meanly founded, became thereby rich and wealthy. This
was not a little furthered by his often exhorting and instructing of the
ignorant people and children. Whereby the behavior of the City was amended,
unjust Contracts dissolved, and the childrens ears and tongues so filled with
the Catechism, that al places round about sounded with the pleasant tunes of
the Christian doctrine.

But the chief thing which moved the Ternatians was a certain Prophecy that
Francis uttered. He being now at Ternate so far off from Amboynum, saw by
divine revelation John Arausius the merchant a dying, as he had foretold it
would shortly happen. Therefore saying mass before a great assembly, when after
the Offertory he turned about, as the custom is, to the people, saying Orate
fratres, Pray for (quoth he) and commend to God the soul of John Arausius who
is now dead at Amboynum; yesterday I said mass for him and so do now again to
day. Whereat they that were present were stricken into an amazement, looking one
upon another, and asking how he could come to know that, seeing Amboynum was
above 200. miles from that place, and it was known that no man had come from
thence at that time. Then their admiration being turned into expectation of
what would be the event thereof, they who had bin present, noted down his
words, and the time; and a few days after there comes a ship from Amboynum,
and brings news of Arausius his death. Whereupon comparing the things and
times together, they found all to be just as Francis had foretold. Then they
made no doubt but Xauerius assuredly knew the same by divine revelation: and
therefore every one did reverence him, as a Prophet.

Now Xauerius began to prepare himself for Macazaria, which was distant from
that place only two days journey. But if seems it was not Gods holy will that
he should help them, who were already sufficiently provided for. At the same
time he was informed by persons of credit, that in Maurica (commonly called the
Country of the Mauri) there were very many Christians, who through want of
Priests were brought into extreme danger of their salvation. Therefore judging
it best to assist those who stood most in need, leaving of his journey to the
Macazarians who wanted not other helps, he setleth himself, and his whole
endeauours thereunto.

CHAP. II.
He resolves to help the Inhabitants of Maurica, even with the hazard of his
life.
THE Country of Maurica lies distant from Ternate well near 200. miles. The
land is rough and craggy, and exceeding barren of all things. As for corn and
wine the inhabitants know not what they mean. They have neither Cattle nor
sheep, only a few swine, which serve them rather to wonder at, then to eat.
There is much want of fresh water, but ryce enough, and a great multitude of
wild Bores. There be trees of an huge biggenesse, from whence they get their
bread and wine, such as it is. Other trees also they have, of whose bark being
finely combed, spun, and wouen after their fashion, they commonly make
themselves garments. The barbarousnes of the Mauri.
The people are altogether barbarous, and without any humanity; for they have
no sign at all of learning among them. But in cruelty they surpass all other
nations; and so far are their Natures made fierce by custom from sparing of
strangers, as they use to murder and poison even one another, after a most
barbarous manner. There was but one Priest among them who had care of their
souls, and him they had also killed: so as they had bin long without a pastor.

The Country for the most part is often shaken with terrible earthquakes, The
incommodities of the country of Maurica.
casting forth fire and ashes beaten upon with huge waves of the raging sea; so
as you would think that God did punish the^ heerby for their abominable
sins. Wherefore, these manifold fears kept all strangers from coming unto
them. But Francis armed with an undaunted courage against all dangers, Zeal
souls.
omitting (as we have said) his journey to Macazaria, which was the cause of his
coming thither, resolved with himself, to free them from eternal perdition,
although it were with evident hazard of his own life. Whereof writing to his
friends in Portugal, he says, that to help these wretches with his own
manifest danger, he was encouraged by those words of our Savior: Qui volu^rit
animan suam saluam facere, Matt. 10.
p^rdet eam; qui autem perdiderit propter me, inueniet eam. He that will save
his life, shall loose it, and he that shall loose it for me, shall find it.
Which sentence, he said, seems very easy and plain, in speculation, but not
in practice, unless God himself interpret in interiourly in our soul.

Never did his singular courage, and confidence in God show it self more then
now. For when news was brought to Amboynum that Xauerius meant to go to
Maurica, the inhabitants were stricken into admiration, as well at his undaunted
courage, They go above to terrify him from his resolution of going to that
barbarous nation.
as also with commiseration, by reason of the great dangers he was to undergo.
And when they understood, that he was upon the point to depart, they presently
flock unto him, and tell him that, that place is rather a receptacle of wild
beasts, then of men: That most of the Inhabitants have their hands imbrued in
the blood of their Wives, Children, Parents, and Priests. Therefore by Gods
manifest wrath they are continually scourged with all kind of plagues, both
from the land, sea, and heaven it self; and for this cause strangers are much
more to be kept far from their fury. They moreover declare unto him, that
every moment almost, he was to be in evident danger of his life amongst those
people, who make but a pastime and jest of murdring, and poisoning one another,
and thirst after nothing more then humane blood. What prudence therefore could
it be, to prefer such dangerous places, before those that were quiet? What
reason had he, being a stranger to trust his life in their hands, who, as all
well knew, took no other delight, but in killing, and murdering one another?

Whilst his friends stood beating these things into his head, the dangers
which they objected touched no man less, then himself who was to undergo them.
But then they began with tears to entreat him, The entreaties of his friends.
not to make so little esteem of his own life; and seeming withal displeased
they add lamentations to their entreaties, saying: what Portughese is there in
the world yea what stanger or Barbarian who knows Xauerius, will endure, that
the instruction of a base Country should be bought with the hazard of his life?
Who can now hope, that the chief stay of the East, which ought to be
perpetual, will continue long, if so willingly he put his life into manifest
danger, forgetting that he draws with him the souls of so many nations into
the same ruin? He should remember how the salvation of all India, and in
numerable other Countries depends on his life. If he, out of incredible
fortitude, and courage of mind, contemned all dangers, yet at lest he should
not draw with him, the souls of so many people, into hazard. The desire of the
common good, should ouersway the particular; especially seeing it is manifest,
that it was not worth the labor to instruct so savage a Nation, which had been
forsaken by their Priests, not so much for fear of danger, as out of despair
to do any good among them. Wherefore they besought him for Christ JESUS sake,
the redeemer of mankind, that he would not, out of an uncertain hope to save a
few, cast both his own life, and the salvation of innumerable nations into
certain danger, but would, as well beseemed his prudence and virtue, preserve
himself for the Eastern Church, or at least reserve himself for dangers
answerable to the greatness of his mind.

This piety of friends was more grateful, then pleasant unto Xauerius.
Embracing therefore each of the^ in a friendly manner, and bedewed with each
others tears, he replied almost to this effect: Quid facitis flentes, and
affligentes cor meum etc. Act. 21.
What do you, weeping and afflicting my heart? I acknowledge your fidelity and
good will, and thank you, because you have omitted no sign of love toward
me. But none of these dangers move me, considering what God commands. Let
God provide for these things, who undoubtedly is the author of this
determination; under the wings of whose protection I fear nothing at all. For
to whom may I better commit my person and life then to him, who has the
disposing of the lives of all moralls? A man that must once dye, ought not to
fear death, which lays hold on every one, though they fear never so much.
But a good death (which is the entrance to immortality) is to be desired. And
if I dye, God certainly will not dye, who has both a far greater desire of
the salvation of Nations, then I have; and can also easily send laborers into
his vineyard. Neither is the fruit little which shall be reaped in Maurica:
for that is not to be esteemed little, where there is occasion of great merit. I
for my part, if there be nothing else to hinder me, refuse no peril or danger
for their salvation; which being in hazard, I am of duty bound to provide for.
Machab. lib. 1.
Vt fuerit voluntas in caelo, sic fiat: what is judged fitting in heaven, let
that be done.

Then they, out of the vehemence of their love, passing from entreaties to
plain force, won the keeper of the Castle, not to permit him to have any
ship to sail thence. The keeper therefore indeauouring although in vain, to
draw Francis from that enterprise as well by alleging the same dangers, as by
the terror also of present death, when at last he saw he could not prevail
with him, He protests that if he cannot get a ship he will swim over.
told him flattly, that he would suffer no ship to carry him thence. To whom
Xauerius replied, that he feared neither dangers, nor death where the honor of
God and salvation of souls was to be sought, and that he esteemed none for his
enemies, but those that hindered Gods divine service. He was certainly
determined and resolved to follow God who called him into Maurica, neither was
it want of shipping which should stay him; for if he could not get a ship, he
would assuredly rely upon God, and swim over.

When therefore his friends perceived him to be secure of Gods assistance, and
to remain immovable in his determination, not inuenting what more to do, they
came all weeping unto him, and brought him all kind of preservatives against
poison. But Francis fearing least by conceauing, through anxiety of mind, some
vain imaginations of dangers, he might cast upon himself too much solicitude
and care, He gives to his fri^ds back again their me dicines against poison.
and out of hope of humane help diminish his confidence in Gods providence,
gave them thanks for their good will, and withal told them, that those
things would be rather a burden then any help unto him. And therefore entreated
them that they would not load him with so much diffidence in God. But if they
desired to have him preserved from all plagues and poisons, they should daily
pray to God for him. For that was the most infallible, and most present remedy
which could be found. And so taking leave of his friends, he prepared himself
for his journey, with all alacrity.

Whilst he was thus upon the point to depart, and venture upon so great
danger, there came good news out of India, which added more flames to his
zealous confidence: which was, that nine more of the Society of JESUS were come
from Portugal to Goa, five of them Priests, to wit Francis Perez, Alphonsus
Cyprian, Henry Henriquez, Francis Henry, and Nonnius Ribera: the others who had
not yet taken holy orders, were Baltazar Nonnius, Adam Francis, Nicolas
Nonnius, and Emanuel Morales. Xauerius therefore having understood of their
arrival before his departure from Amboynum, being very glad that such
assistance was come so happily, appointed to every one of them their
employment, and presently dispatched letters to Goa to those of the Society,
wherein be gave order that Francis Perez should remain in Goa to teach the
scholars there, and that Cyprian and Henry should go to Comorinum for the help
of the Neophites in that place: and the two Fathers who were already in
Comorinum, with the rest of the nine, he ordained to repair unto the Moluca's,
intending with this small supply to visit all those Ila^ds, and assist every one
as far as he was able. Then with Gods special favor he began his journey
toward Maurica, taking ship at Ternate in the Month of May 1546. whither he
soon after safely arrived.

CHAP. III.
He brings the savage people of Maurica to civil behavior, and instructs
them in the Christian Faith.
AAVRICA (as we have bin informed) is divided into two Provinces: Maurica.
the one is situated in the Continent, and is called Maurotia, the other
consists of two Islands which they call Maurotides. Of these two Islands one of
them is horrible to behold, by reason of certain burning rocks, out of which
there oftentimes burst forth mighty stones of fire, as big as trees, and with
such a noyle and violence, Burning rocks.
as no piece of Ordinance, though never so great, sends forth its bullets
with a greater report: and sometimes also where the stone breaks out in that
vehemence aforesaid, there is cast forth from the same place such an huge
quantity of ashes, that both men and women laboring a great way off in the
fields, Ashes are cast out of the rocks.
are so besmered, and even covered with the same, that you would think them
rather Devils then men. Many wild Bores also are stifled and overwhelmed
therewith in the woods: yea and fishes found every where cast up dead, upon the
shore.

The same Island, that no inconvenience may be wanting, is so skaken with almost
perpetual earthquakes, that they who sailing by chance in the sea near unto
it, Horribly earth quakes.
are oftentimes greatly affrighted, thinking they be cast upon some rock that
lies in their way. Moreover the winds being at continual wars with one
another, within the hollow caves of the earth, make such a dismal noise, and
strike such an incredible horror into the ears, that one would think he
heard the roaring of hell itself: upon which occasion Francis was often wont to
put them in mind of the pains of hell fire, wherein Idolaters and bad
Christians are tormented for all eternity. There inhabit these places also, a
kind of people called Iauari, who are without any knowledge of Christianity,
extremely wild and savage, and delight only in murder. And when they have no
strangers to slaughter, they turn their fury upon their own wives and
children, and oftentimes do make no small havoc amongst the Christians.
People wonderfully savage.
There be also some among them who account man's flesh for dainties, especially
when they are killed in battle.

O eternal God! how strongely is he guarded who trusts in his divine
assistance, and is protected by him! How secure is one in the midst of the
greatest dangers where God stands for him! Nothing surely is to be feared,
nothing to be doubted when God as the Guide leads the way. Among these people
then, more truly savage then brute beasts, Psalm. 90.
did Xauerius through help of the Highest, remain for the space of three
months, beyond all men's expectation with more profit to the inhabitants, then
danger to himself. For in this t^me he brought those savage people to milder
dispositions, and reclaimed them to that civil carriage, which becomes
Christians. They were at that time wholly ignorant, all alike, in matters of
Christianity, retayning only the mere Name of Christians.

Francis therefore presently went about to all the Christian villages being
near thirty in number, baptizing infantes, instructing the elder sort,
hindering sacrifices to Idols, He terrifieth the barbarous people with the
representation of hell.
and helping the neophytes in their miseryes both spiritual and corporal. In
his public and private exhortations, he terrified that barbarous people with
threatenings both from heaven and earth, showing them, that they were not far
from Hell, as they might well see by the fire and ashes which were oftentimes
cast up, and vomited forth in such abundance, that manylewd and wicked men
among them were thrown down headlong, and devoured therein. The same also was
signified by those huge earthquakes wherewith the ground being ready to open
threatened to swallow up such as for their detestable wickedness were hateful in
the sight of almighty God. Therefore they should by all means beware, that they
fell not hea^long into those everlasting flames, whereof they had a continual
representation before their eyes.

By these kind of exhortations, and other precepts of Christian doctrine he
wonderfully qualified their savage natures: Christian discipline qualifieth
barbarous nature.
so as within a short space all that Nation, then the which (as we said) there
had bin none worse, or more inhumane until that day, began from that time to
be not only mild and tractable, but willing to be instructed also in the
mysteries of our faith; such force has Christian discipline to draw men to
humanity.

Here in this place the undaunted courage of Francis his mind manifestly showed
it self. It happened that as he was in the Church at Mass, upon the feast of S.
Michael the Archangell, before a great number of the inhabitants, the whole
Island was upon a sudden so shaken with an earthquake, that the Altar it
self seemed ready to be ouerturned. Whereupon most of the people ran away,
each one whither their fear carried them; His courage in the time of an
earthquake.
but Xauerius either as though he perceived nothing, or rather cont^mning the
fear, went on constantly with his Mass, saying the cause thereof to be, that
S. Micha^l the Archangell did then with many torments throw down all the
Devils of that country into Hell who withstood Gods divine honor: so as he had
more ado with men, then with the devils themselves. For there wanted not some
Idolaters both obstinate and potent who went about by threats and fears to
hinder the going forward of the Gospel. But in vain. For Xauerius invincible
virtue and courage vpheld by divine aid, overcame all things.

In a few months therefore he ran over all the Christian Villages, instructed
an innumerable multitude of the inhabitants in the Christian precepts, and
brought many to embrace the faith of Christ. How much fruit he heaped together
may be hereby gathered, in that, it is said, he made in one town called Tolum,
^5000. Christians. And surely his labor was no less then the fruit. The fruit
of souls.
For running to and fro so troublesome a country, he suffered almost all the
discommodities which could be imagined, as penury and want, heat, hungar,
thirst, weary somnesse, and dangers. But as commonly the pleasure is
proportionable to the pain, so according to the multitude of his troubles he
had co^fortes to recreate his soul, which how great they were, may be
coniectured, by the clause of a letter of his, to some of the same Society,
where having spoken of the barrennes of those parts, and of the want of all
things: These things, says he, I have for this end laid open unto you, Psalm.
94.
that you may know what abundance of heavenly joys there be in these places.
For such labors and dangers undertaken wholly and willingly for Gods sake,
Heauely ^o^forts in labors and afflictions.
are treasuries filled with divine, and unspeakable consolations: so that
these Islands may seem most convenient, and apt to make one loose his eyes, by
shedding abundance of most sweet tears. I for my part do not remember, that
ever I was ouerflowed with so many, so great, and so continual comfortes of
mind, in such sort, as they wholly take from me all feeling of labors and
miseries. So Francis. Who out of his endeavoring to bring this savage Nation
to lead a Christian life, reaped no less fruit and comfort, then labor and
merit.

CHAP. IIII.
He labors the second time, amongst the Ternatians.
RETVRNING back from Maurica to the Moluca's he came again to Ternate, Diverse
sermons
where being most joyfully received by the Ternatians, he stirs up the
slothful to the pursuit of virtue, and confirms those that were wavering.
But the ordinary course he kept was this. Upon holy days he preached twice a
day; in the morning to the Portugheses, in the afternoon to the people of
that Couutry: exhorting the one to live a good and virtuous life, and
instructing the other in the mysteries of the Christian faith, and auerting
them from worshipping of Idols. Besides this, every day both before and after
noone, he heard the Confessions as well of men, as of women. Upon every Wensday
and Friday he made an exhortation a part to the wi^es of the Portugheses (who
for the most part were of that country borne) explicating the articles of the
Creed, of the ten Commandments, and of the Sacraments of Confession and
Communion. It was then the time of Lent: wherefore very many of them did piously
and religiously solemnize the Feast of Easter, by receiving the sacred
Eucharist, from which they had until that time absteined.

But now Xauerius having bin long abroad, was by the domestical care of the
Society at Goa, called home again. Therefore he determined with all speed to
pass over to Amboynum, there to expect passage back into India. But the
Governor of the Castle of Ternate, the Sodality of Mercy, and the other
Portugheses by their earnest entreaty, enforced him to stay yet a while at
Ternate, although it were not much against his will, because he did not repent
himself of the pains he took amongst the^. In the mean time Francis had a
great desire to try what good he could do upon the barbarous King of Moluca,
who being tributary to the King of Portugal, was in Religion a Saracen, not so
much by profession as in life. For he was not held from becoming a Christian
through any devotion to Mahomet, The King of Molucas 100. wives.
but through his own exorbitant and licentious lust. For besides whole troops
of Concubines, he had 100. wives dwelling with him in his Court.

This King therefore being moved as well by Xauerius courtesy, as by his sanctity
of life, used him with all honorable respect, notwithstanding that his
Nobility openly repined thereat; and he much desired his friendship, giving
some hope that he would one day become a Christian; as when he said, that the
Saracens and the Christians adore one God, and a time would come when they
should both profess one Religion. But although he seemed to take delight in
Francis his company and discourse, He much honors Xauerius.
yet his immoderate sensuality of life kept him back from being a Christian.
This thing only could at last be got of him, that he promised, one of his
children (whereof he had very many) should be baptized, upon this condition,
that afterward being a Christian, he might be made King of the Island of
Maurica. Xauerius therefore, although the matter was not yet ripe, being glad of
that hope, did so keep friendship with the King, that he labored neuerthe
less in instructing the Country people. For trying the disposition of the
Ethnickes, he found them to be far less auerted from Christ, then from
Mahomet, although they were by the Saracens compelled to the mahometicall
superstitions; and that the Saracens themselves, being also ignorant of their
own profession, were not found obstinate therein. The Ethnickes of Moluca
mislike not Christ so much as Mahomet
Supposing therefore that it would be easy to convert them both, if there were
an house of the Society erected in Moluca, he resolved by all means to do his
best therein, and at last by help of the King of Portugal, who was a very
great adua^cer of the Christian cause, he fully accomplished the same.

In the mean time his chief care was to instruct the Portugheses and the
neophytes: which labor indeed proved not unprofitable. For within the space of
six months all his pains were reco^pensed with a most plentiful harvest of
the Ternatians. A College of the Society in Mo^uca.
And he so applied the towns men with godly Exhortations, frequenting of
Sacraments, and other holy exercises, that in all men's judgment they seemed to
be another people, then they had formerly been: and it is well known, that the
Christian Inhabitants thereof, of an infinite number of Concubines which they
kept, had put the^ all away, except only two. Neither was there any thing which
did the people more good, then the opinion of his sanctity; a very forcible
argument to persuade, especially when it is confirmed by signs from God. For
as he was once in the midst of a Sermon upon a sudden he desired his
Auditors to say deuoutl^ a Pater and Aue, A prophecy.
for James Aegidius Admiral of the Portughese Navy, who was then a dying at
Amboynum, which was afterward found to be true by assured testimonies. This
thing then much increased the peoples esteem of Francis for the present, and
afterward their desire to keep him.

Having remained there now six months, he prepared for his departure with
intention to visit Amboynum again. The Ternatians love to Xauerius.
Wherefore out of the extraordinary love which they bare unto him, the whole
City came flocking with him to the Haven. And when he was ready to depart,
they brake forth into such a weeping, and crying out, calling him, with their
confused voices, Master, Guardian, and Father, that even pity made him, as
though he had forgotten his journey, remain a while in embracing every one of
them, for that his bowels were greatly moved toward this his flock: and so
having at last embraced and conforted them all with most sweet words, he with
much ado took his leave, where at they bitterly wept, and lamented.

CHAP. V.
He fortelleth, and is Author of a notable Victory, which the Portugheses
obtained against the Barbarians.
XAVERIVS being thus glad to see the Ternatians great devotion, The town Tolum
reuolting from religion is revenged from heaven.
was again presently stricken with sad news of the perfidiousnes of the
Tolaneans. Tolum, as we said before, is a Town belonging to one of the Islands
of Maurica, having in it many Christians, newly planted there by Francis; most
of the inahbitants whereof, either through fear of one Geliol, a foreign
Tyrant, or else to curry favor with him, had revolted both from the King of
Portugal, and the Christian faith; and overthrowing the Church, had in
derision brooken the Crosses and images of Saints; seizing also violently upon
the goods of the other faithful and ^ious Christians. At this fact of their
Xauerius being much afflicted, left the same to God, who would judge his own
cause: The la^d of fertile becomes barraine and the waters of wholesome become
unwholesome.
but the injury done against Heaven and Earth, armed them both with revenge
against the Authors thereof. And first God laid his heavy vengeance upon them:
for their soil which in former ty^es had bin most fertile, became wholly
barrain; their corn also in their barnes consumed away by an accursed
putrefaction; their waters of wholesome upon a suddayne became bitter, and
infectious, so as many of the people were taken away by famine and pestilence.

And as they were thus scourged with direful wrath from heaven, the
Portugheses also came upon their backs with a terrible war. For the Governor
of the Moluca's (Francis promising him that the war should have good
success) sent presently a Navy against those perfidious Rebels, together with
a choice band of Portughese souldiars. The chief Commander of the Navy being
encouraged by what Xauerius had foretold, and through confidence in Gods
divine assistance, undertook the war with great alacrity and diligence:
notwithstanding he thought it not amiss before he joined battle, to send
Messengers unto them, and offer them pardon, if they would reclayme from their
rebellion, and so save their lives. But after they had sent back their proud
answer, the Portugheses set on fire with revenge, march on toward the enemy.

There was a Castle situated upon an high place no less fortifyed by art then
nature, whereto also were added other deceip^full stratagems of the enemy. For
they being not ignora^^ of the war which the Portugeses were to make upon them,
had about the walls thereof for a good co^pa^le, stricken into the ground,
certain sharp stakes armed with four pointed nails, o^ which the
Portugheses might be forced to run if they attempted to approach the Castle.
These engine^ of theirs to defend themselves, would not only have defeated the
Portugheses coming thereon but have also brought great annoyance unto the^,
Prodigious woders give the Portugheses the Victory.
if Fr^cis his prayers had not taken away the present danger, and opened the
entrance which was shut up against them. The Portugheses were not yet landed,
when it appeared how marvelous God himself did fight for them. The Sun about
the time of midday being ouercast with a sudden cloud, made the day as dark
as the night, when as in the top of a mountain hard by, there brake forth
with horrible crackes and roaring, a filthy loathsome fire, which continued
three days and three nights. Whereupon an huge great quantity of ashes, and
stones, the like whereof was never seen before, being cast up out of the earth,
did not only cover the forsaid stakes, but also made the ground level with the
top of the Castle.

And behold whilst the Barbarians were astonished at this unexpected accident,
there happened another thing which struck a greater terror into the^. For at
the very same time a wonderful strange earthquake overthrew an infinite number
of houses in the City Now when the Tolanes had endured these miseries, for
some days, the Portugheses came upon the^ with all their forces. But yet it
cannot be properly called a battle: for most of the enemies were either
oppressed with the falling of the houses, or else were fled for fear; and the
heaps of stones which were cast out of the Earth, carried them up easily to
scale the walls of the Castles. And thus the Fort, Town, and whole Country were
subdued without any battle at all; and peace granted them who were conquered
upon certain conditions, whereof the chief were, that they should again build
up the Church which they had overthrown, restore the goods taken from the
Christian people, and finally embrace again the Christian religion, which they
had once before received.

The Barbarians saw certainly, that this memorable victory was obtained more by
divine then humane force. But the Portugheses did absolutely attribute the
miraculous burning of the mountain, and the sudden heaping together of the
ashes and stones to Fra^ncis his mer^^s, who like another M^yses had obtained
divine assistance for them, whilst they fought against the enemies of God; who,
as he had favored the war, so had he also affoarded special aid thereunto.

CHAP. VI.
He again visits Amboynum, and labors still amongst them.
HAVING in this time well increased, and settled Christian religion in Ternate,
he sailed back to Amboynum, with intention to return thence into India, after
his long absence from those parts and to visit the Society, whereof was he
superior, A prophecy.
and which was now much increased by the arrival of new supplies from Europe.
Now whilst the passengers were in the midst of their way discoursing merrily
amongst themselves, Francis on a sudden stepping forth from the company
wherein he was, with great vehemence and grief of mind cried out: Good Jesus,
what is this? they kill the man. Whereupon the rest being amazed at the
suddaynes of the thing, ran to Xauerius, and asked him what the matter was?
Then he, being come again to himself, dissembling the matter answered, that
it was nothing, and so sat down again amongst them in a familiar manner,
behauing himself as though he had neither done, nor said any thing more then
ordinary. But that which he co^cealed, within a little while was after openly
known. For as soon as they arrived at Amboynum, they found a Portughese who
had been slain by certain thieves, at the very instant when they heard
Xauerius cry out in the ship.

There were in the Haven at Amboynum four Portughese ships of burden.
Francis therefore still burning with charity, considered seriously how he might
best help both the inhabitants and strangers, until he could get passage into
India. He builds himself a cottage upon the shore.
And so either out of love of poverty, or else because he would be near the
port, he makes for himself and his companion a little cottage of straw upon
the Sea shore, and heerunto adioyneth a little chapel of the same
workmanship, therein to hear Confessions, and administer the Sacrament of the
holy Eucharist to the mariners and soldiers, giving himself wholly to such
employments. Many also he made friends who were at deadly hatred amongst
themselves, but specially he helped and served the sick, both corporally and
spiritually. Amongst whom he found one who lay very sick of a vehement fever,
His continual attenda^ce upon thesicke.
whom he never left until he gave up the ghost, which he did even in Francis
his arms; who gave great thanks, and praise to God for his coming back at
that time to Amboynum for the saving of that poor soul, although he should
gain nothing else thereby. Then making his circuit with great diligence over
all the Christian villages, he baptized infants, and instructed the rude and
ignorant in the Christian precepts, with fruit answerable to his labor. He
moreover employed himself incessantly in preaching to draw the people from
vices, and incite them to virtue, The Amboynois love to Francis.
and good life. And how much beloved he was of all, his departure well showed.
Upon the 20. day after his arrival thither, to prevent the lamentation of the
people at his departure which he forsaw would happen, he made al things ready
to take shipping privately at midnight. But it was hard to deceive lovers, for
they perceiving what he intended, came running in the night to the haven, where
upon a suddayne was heard great crying out of men, women, children and
servants, bewayling and lamenting their forlone and desolate state, and making
their moan, that such a man should in such a sort be taken from the^. Xauerius
being moved at these their lamentations and mourning in the night time, with
tears in his eyes comforted them with all sweet words, and embraced them one
after another, who could hardly be pulled from him, they sticking as close to
him as his own bowels. At last after much ado, entreating a certain Priest to
employ every day two hours in teaching the^ the Catechism, he took his
leave, commending seriously to their diligence the exercise of the Christian
doctrine.

The time and tide now urged him to depart, and many Portughese ships being
there ready, Xauerius was invited into the Admiral, wherein were many of his
friends and well willers. But he, although he were earnestly and oftentimes
requested, constantly refused the same And when the master of the ship asked
him, why he would refuse so kind an offer; A presage of what would follow.
he knowing, doubtless by divine revelation, what would happen, answered,
that he was afraid lest some mischance might befall unto that ship in the way,
and that God might punish them for some secret sin of theirs. His fear was
not without ground. For the same ship being soon after by a cruel tempest
driven upon a rock, was in eminent danger to have been cast away: but yet was
for that time miraculously delivered (by the prayers perhaps of Xauerius) and
held on her course, until meeting with another cross tempest, and being by
the violence thereof driven upon a vast quick-sand, stuck therein so fast, that
not only the ship, but all the passengers in her, were accounted for lost; when
as notwithstanding Gods Goodness, which changes the course of things, supplied
again with help proportionably to the danger: for by force of the raging sea
she was at last driven through the quick-sand, and so escaped without much
harm. But Xauerius who had presaged the incommodities which would befall
others, having himself a prosperous navigations, came safe without any stay, to
the place he intended, and arrived at Malaca in the year of our Lord 1547.

CHAP. VII.
He instructs the Malacensians with all the care he could: and by divine
revelation he understands a Vision which happened to Durus his Companion.
XAVERIVS therefore after long absence coming again to visit the Malacensians
his ancient friends, He lodges in an Hospital of the sick.
he is by them very lovingly entertained. But according to his old custom,
refusing to remain with his friends, he takes up his lodging in the hospital
of the sick. At the same time there were three others of the Society newly
arrived at Malaca, whereof two were Priests, John Beira, and John Ribera, whom
he imbracinge with incredible joy of mind retained with him for a while. Then,
after some good space of repose, he instructed them of the manners, and
behavior of the people of the Moluca's, and sent them thither to manure and
cultiuate the vineyard which he had there lately planted. He inculcateth to the
Neophites the coming of Christ.
In the mean time he failed not himself to further the Christian cause, by
serving the sick, preaching to the people, composing of quarrels among the
souldiars, hearing Confessions, and catechizing children, servants, and
ignorant people: especially he oftentimes instructed the Neophites in the
Evangelical history of the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that
so the knowledge of so great a mystery might put out of their minds, the vain
and idle fables of their Gods.

Amongst other things, not forgetting his ancient custom no less pious then
profitable, he took order that in the evening the people by their prayers
might remember to assist the souls in purgatory, Evening prayers for the dead
and those that are in mortal sin
and such as were in mortal sin. For the City of Malaca at Xauerius request,
had appointed a certain man, who carrying a lantern in one hand, and a little
bell in the other, should go about the streets when it grew dark in the
evening, and by ringing the bell, and calling upon the people in a doleful
tune made of purpose, stir up their minds to the said devotion. Which thing,
as it stirred up the virtuous to their duty, so it stroke a terror of Gods
indignation and wrath into the wicked. This practice being begun by Francis at
Malaca, was soon spread over all the Cities and towns of India, the
Moluca's, and the utmost East, and is still even unto this day, there in use,
to the great good both of the living and the dead.

About the same time Xauerius gave a notable example both of Evangelical
poverty, and austerity. John Durus his Companion (as we said before) thinking
he was bound to provide for Francis his necessi^ies, had without his knowledge
received of the Por^ugheses some money more freely then discreetly, under the
color of Alms. A sharp punisher of brech of poverty.
Which when Xauerius understood (as he was no less sharp in reprehending then
dilligent in observing holy poverty) he presently banished him for a time into
an Island near by, lying right against the haven of Malaca, which had in former
times been well stored with inhabitants, but was now left desolate. Durus
therefore living there, saw upon a time in a certain Church (whether awake or
asleep is uncertain) the mother of God sitting at the high Altar upon a
cushion, under a Canopy richly adorned: with her he saw the child Jesus, who
endauoured to allure Durus, being much ashamed of his fault, by sweet means to
come unto his mother. She at first, as though she had been angry, turned from
him, and put him away: then, when after he had humbly entreated, and beseeched
her to pardon him, she at last received him; He by revelation knows things
that be secret and far of.
and admonishing him of certain faults, she left him suddaynly, and together
with her child Jesus mounted up to heaven.

This vision was altogether secret, no mortal man knowing thereof but Durus
himself, nor had he spoken thereof to any. Being therefore after a while
called back to Malaca, and making his confession to Xauerius as his custom
was, he said nothing of the vision. But Francis knowing it by divine
revelation, asks him, what that was which happened to him lately in a Church
of the Island where he was? To me (quoth he?) I remember nothing. The Father
gently urged him to tell, but Durus refused, and utterly denied to have seen
any thing: and being in this manner oftentimes asked (so obstinate he was to
have concealed the matter) forgetful both of obedience and Religion, he still
answered from the purpose. Then Francis, when he saw that he had to do with
one of so obdurate a nature, began himself to recount every thing in
particular, as if he had been present. Whereat Durus stood like one amazed, and
being filled with an holy fear, declares all the matter in order as it
happened; and so at last the good Father received him again into his friendship.
But this truth being wrunge out of Durus by divine revelation, made him more
obseruant hereafter unto Xauerius, and easier in yelding to the truth. Who
after Francis, his death declared all this upon his oath, with a notable
testimony of his incomparable sanctity.

CHAP. VIII.
At Malaca he procures a Navy to be set forth against the Acenians, enemies of
Christianity.
AFTER this, there happened another accide^t which made Xauerius name much spoken
of in Malaca. The thing certainly is very remarkable, by reason of diverse
prophesies which happened in the passage thereof, and therefore must be recounted
at large, lest the breuity of the narration, should diminish the truth and
euidency of the matter. From the Island of Somatra, which (as we have said) is
situated right over against Malaca, a strong navy of the King of the Acenians
arrived there in the dead of the night The Barbarians had in charge, some to
invade the Castle, and others to set fire on the Portughese ships which lay
in the haven. Therefore so soon as they were landed, and with all speed, they
set up ladders to the Castle to have surprised the same at unawares: But they
deceived not the Portugheses. For the garrison being instantly raised by the
watch, armed themselves, and with invincible courage beat back the enemy.

But now the business of their ships in the Haven succeeded not so
fortunately. For the Barbarians fell fiercely upon the same at unawares, and in
the dark of the night, set on fire their principal ships, striking there
withal such a terror into the Portughese mariners that they stood wholly
amazed, like men without sense, not knowing what advise, or course to take to
help themselves. In the mean space the Barbarians being out of danger, stood
looking on, and reioicing to see the Christians Navy on a flaming fire. And so
at last with a most clamorous shout, and outcry they departed, insulting over
the Portugheses, and Christians, as though they had gotten a notable victory.

The Barbarians not content with this, An example of barbarous cruelty.
having in their return, met with certain Christian fisher-me^ upon the sea,
they manifested upon them a most insole^t cruelty. For after they had cut of
their noses, ears, and heels, they sent them to the Governor of Malaca, with
a letter written with their blood, wherein most proudely, and insolently they
provoked him to battle. When the fishermen had given this letter to the
Governor, he caused it to be publicly read before the Soldiers, who were no
less moved at the insolent brutishnes of their enemies, then at the miserable
spectacle of their friends, who were thus mangled and disfigured by their
wounds, and every one had his heart full of pity, and indignation.

Whilst they were in this perplexity and trouble of mind, Xauerius by chance
comes newly from saying mass in the Church of the Hospital, in the suburbs
where he lodged, according to his former custom. And every one might see, that
the Barbarous Acenians had done this, out of their natural hatred to Christian
Religion, and in contempt of the Portugheses. The Governor therefore named
Simon Mello, asked Francis his advise, what he judged fit to be done upon such
an affront offered? He, by divine instinct (as afterward appeared) told him,
that he thought it best to send out some ships presently after the enemy, who
was yet in sight, and by setting upon them of their own accord, to quit
themselves of this disgrace, to the end the Barbarians might be taught by their
own harm, to abstain from doing injury to others. And this he thought best
to be done the rather, because he saw that this public disgrace was not
offered so much to the Portugheses, and their King, as to Christ himself, and
to all Christians; and that by no means it was to be endured, that the
Portugheses, Christians so renowned for their fortitude, should be now
accounted cowards, and made a laughing stock to their enemies. For who sees
not, quoth he, that Christianity will be overthrown, if barbarous people be
suffered, not only to hate it, but also to use it contemptibly? Wherefore he
willed them to take courage worthy of Christian souldiars, and with alacrity
pursue the barbarous enemy, with all hope and confidence; for although they
were inferior to them in forces, yet their cause was better, and had also God
to fight for them, whose cause they mantayned. For certainly he would not fail
to assist them, whilst they behaved them selves manfully in that pious
conflict, and that through his favorable conduct they should remain victors.

Xauerius counsel was approved of all that were present, but they wanted
ships to put the same in execution: for there were but only seven left which
had escaped burning, and these also much impaired through tempestuous weather
at sea, and stood in need of reparation before they could be set forth for such
an enterprise. He desires that he may have the charge of providing the Navy.
Besides, they were not only out of order, but wanted tackling and other
furniture necessary. As the Governor therefore was telling him the want of
ships: I esteem it, quoth he, a matter of much importance, to be forward in
the undertaking of this great Business, in which not only the Kings, but God
Almightyes Majesty is interessed. And seeing in this fearful enterprise you
are amazed, not knowing what to resolve upon, I desire with your good leave, I
may have the charge of preparing the Navy. Then turning to the soldiars:
Brethren, quoth he, God certainly stadeth for us, in whose name I warn you all
before hand, Xauerius puts spirit into the Portughese soldiers.
that you suffer neither fear, nor any thing else whatsoever, to divert you
from having a part in this glorious action, to which he undoubtedly calls
you. Behold here I offer my self to go along with you to this noble and
Christian combat, and to be your fellow, and companion in what danger soever
may happen; that we may revenge our selves upon these Barbarians, Enemies of
most our Virtuous King, and Adversaries of the Cross of Christ.

These words so inflamed the souldiars hearts, that al of them, being as it were
suddenly inspired by God strove to give in their names to fight in so
religious a war, nothing doubting but it would have a prosperous issue,
having Xauerius for the author, and furtherer thereof. And the Governor being
glad to see such consent of the Captains and soldiars left al things to Francis
discretion, who with no less prudence then courage managed a business which to
all men's judgment seemed most full of difficulty; as was to prepare a navy so
presently upon the loss of so many ships, for that the Armoury was wholly
empty, and small help could be expected from the public treasury. Xauerius
therefore out of all the masters of the ships makes choice of seven, By
seaue^ rich masters of ships he sets forth a Navy.
excelling the rest both in esteem and wealth. He calls them every one by
their names, and intermingling gentle words with imbracements earnestly
requesteth them, that they would both for the honor of their King, of Christ
our common Lord, and of the Christian Name undertake this business, how
laboursome or chargeable soever it seemed, and that they would with all speed
cause seven of those ships that lay in the haven to be speedily repaired, and
they should infallibly be repayed shortly all their expenses with an 100. fould.

The ship-maisters were by these words so set on fire, that every one striving
who should make most have, the navy within four days stood ready in the Port,
well appointed of all things. One Francis Saa a kinsman of Mello the Governor
was made General thereof, to whom there were also assigned 180. Portughese
souldiars. Xauerius was to go with them, but that the Malacensians, out of
their great affection to him, hindered it. For they came flocking to the
Governor, and what by lamenting their fatherless and desolate state, what by
protesting unto him that they would abandon the City, if Francis their only
comfort and vphoulder should depart, they got at last both the Governor of the
City, and General of the fleet to entreat him (being himself doubtful what
to do in this affair, since the people were of such different affections) to
remain at Malaca.

Xauerius therefore calling together the Captains and souldiars into the
Church, Precepts given to soldiers at their going to war.
and making to them a comfortable exhortation, bad them be of good courage, and
he for his part, because he could not accompany them in person, would be
present with them with his best wishes and prayers: and that they should so
dispose themselves both in mind and affection, to esteem nothing more precious
unto them, then to dye for Christ the son of God, who dyed upon the Cross
for their sakes: That they should have before their eyes that amiable and
devout spectacle of their Savior, and imprinting it in their hearts, should
most courageously take upon them the battle, and enter into combat with the
Barbarians. Moreover, in the midst of the battle, they should call upon God
imploring his divine assistance, and confidently hope that he will be ready to
help those who fight for him.

Having said this, he began to hear their Confessions, and when he had
reconcyled them, and armed them with the holy Eucharist, he animateth the^
again to set forward against the Enemy, under Gods conduct, not doubting of
the victory. They all by divine instinct, of their own accord, in presence of
God, and striving at it were who should do best, make a solemn protestation,
The Portughese soldiers called by Xauerius the Army of Jesus Christ.
that if occasion required it, they would spend their lives for Christ in that
quar^ell. In respect whereof, and for that they had thus co^ secrated themselves
to Christ, they were by Xauerius called, The Army of Jesus Christ, a Title very
honorable. And thus full of good hope and courage, they were by the Citizens
accompanied to the Navy.

CHAP. IX.
Having lost their Admiral, he foretells the coming of two other ships
unto them, and stirs up the slothful who drevv back, to fight
courageously.
BUT now, when they were all ready, and prepared for this war, there fell out
a disastrous accident, to the end that Francis his virtue and sanctity might
the better appear, which did not a little hinder the business. The ships were
now afloat with their sails and banners all displaied, and their Ordinance
playing in a triumphant manner, and the shore thick beset with the people of
Malaca desiring to see them depart; when behold on a sudden the Admiral, in
view of the whole City, in the very haven (by what chance no man knows) is
sunk, and over whelmed in the sea, together with the loss of all that was in
her, except the mariners and souldiars. Which accident was held by all for a
prodigious token of something else to follow. Whereupon the Citizens fell a
murmuring, that it was certainly a manifest presage of Gods wrath ha^ging over
the Portugheses heads, if the fleet should hold on her course against the
enemy. Morouer they cast forth bitter words against the Governor of the City,
and General of the fleet, as though they had bin the authors of that
disastrous war: neither did some spare Xauerius himself, saying; Who could
ever have thought that the flower and strength of the Portughese garrison
should be thus sent away to their certain destruction, seeing that their enemies
far exceed them, not only in number, but also in strength of shipping and
souldiars. Behold how God, having set before our eyes the danger both of the
General, and whole Fleet, there wants nothing but plain words to tell us,
that this expedition is not pleasing to him.

Whereupon Mello being not able to endure this extreme grudging, and exorbitant
complaynts of the people, sends presently a messenger unto Xarius to entreat
him he would please to come unto him with all speed. He finding Francis at
Mass in the Hospital Church, would have instantly delivered his message unto
him. But being stayed by a sign which Xauerius made, He by revelation knows
things absent.
he expected until Mass was ended. Then Francis, before he had spoken one
word, Go, quoth he, and tell the Governor that I will presently come to him,
but bid him be of good courage, because God favorably assisteth his servants,
at the instant when it is required. This he said to show that he knew by
revelation all the business.

Francis then following the messenger, finds them all in fear and tumult.
His conrage when others are afraid
But he showing cherfulnesse and confidence in his countenance: What is the
matter Mello (quoth he?) Does so little a thing discourage thee? He is
Omnipotent, whose fatherly providence protecteth us. Having said this, he
imbraceth the Captains and souldiars each one in particular, and partly by
entreaty, partly by advise, he still exhorts them to go forward in so
glorious a service nor did he omit to put them in mind of the promise which
they had lately made to Christ, so to stir them up to the performance of
their duty: whereat they were all so filled with joy, especially to see so great
alacrity in Xauerius, that they seemed rather to behold hope it self, then
cause thereof. The soldiers being thus incited, he turns himself again to
Mello, showing him their fervor and zeal in the business.

This was very grateful unto the Governor who much favored Francis his
designement. A deliberation held about the war against the Barbarians.
But yet that nothing might be rashly attempted, it was thought good to call
the principal of the City to a counsel and have their opinions and consent
herin. Their voices were soon given (who would believe it) concerning the
events of this war, every one judging that expedition to be temerarious. For
what discretion were it (quoth they) to venture six ships against a navy of 60.
and less then 200. Portughese souldiars against 5000. fighting Barbarians? But
now on the contrary part all the Captains and chief of the soldiars, who were
to undergo the danger, cried out, that by all means, The Portugheses soldiars
renew their oath to dye for Christ.
that pious war was instantly to be followed, and that it were better for
them to dye bravely in the combat, if it should so fall out, then to violate
the promise they had made to the King of Heaven. And herein they were so
resolute, that without more ado they renewed their solemn oath to go unto that
war, and if need were, to spend their lives for the faith of Christ.

Whereupon the others being all stricken into an amazement, Francis ryseth up
joyfully, and having commended the noble courage both of the Captains and the
souldiars, did often inculcate this unto them; that they should be sure to put
all the hope of the victory in God, for whom it was not hard to save by many, or
by few; 1. Reg. 14.
neither were there wanting evident signs of Gods divine assistance, whereby
they might certainly believe he stood with them. And for one ship which they
had lost, there should that very day come unto them, two more for their
comfort. Which prophecy proved true. A prophecy.
For that a little before sunne-set they espied two Portughese ships sailing by
Malaca. These were private vessels belonging to one James Soarius a famous
mercha^t of those parts, who to avoid paying custom at Malaca, kept on his
course directly for the Moluca's. But yet at Xauerius entreaty, he put in at
Malaca, and moreover offered himself to accompany the rest in that war. Then
were they all by this accident, filled with a new joy, and confidence.

CHAP. X.
The Portugheses by Xauerius solicitation obtain a great victory against the
Barbarians.
THE Captains therefore and soldiers of this Navy much rejoicing, upon the 23
of November in the year 1547. hoysed up sail, The promontori Cambilanum.
whilst every one wished them a fortunate voyage. They were only eight great
ships in number, and not above 230. soldiers. Upon the fourth day after their
setting to sea, having had a prosperous wind, they arrived at the Promontory of
Ca^bilanum, where they were commanded by Simon Mello the Governor, to seek
after the enemies fleet. Wherefore Saa the Admiral using all diligence that
might be in searching for them, could not find to what coast they had retired;
so as being wholly frustrate of their hope, A tempest helped toward the victory.
they were constrained to return homewards again. Whilst, full of sadness,
they began to make back for Malaca, behold upon a suddayne there arose a
cruel tempest, which enforced them to lie many days at ancker. And though
this tempest hindered their return, yet was it a means to obtain the victory,
the divine Providence disposing of incommodities themselves, to serve sometimes
for good effects.

Their victuals now growing short, so soon as the violence of the contrary
wind was allayed, they sailed to the next town of the Ethnickes, being their
friends, to furnish themselves with new provision: which when they had done,
and hearing nothing of the Enemy, they held on their course homewards toward
Malaca; yet they were not so much out of care, as out of hope to find the
enemy. But having gone a little thence, they met by chance a fisherman who
told them, that the Acenians fleet, having spoiled the Country round about,
lay not far off in a river, called Perlen, intending to intercept the
Portugh^se Navy, which (as was reported) was shortly expected from Bengala, to
come unto Malaca, hoping to make prey of the same, and to massacre all the
Christians therein.

The Admiral hearing this unexpected news, much reioiceth, The cherfulnes of
the Portugheses when the battle was at hand.
and to show how glad he was put on straight a rich suite of apparel. And
moreover bestows upon the soldiers all things most liberally to feast and
make merry withal, and commands them all to be bountifully treated, and the
Ordinance to be all discharged in token of his excessive joy; so that one would
have thought that there had been rather a victory already gotten, then a
battle at hand: which though peradventure was imprudently done, Gods
providence turns that to good which was ill carried.
yet by the divine providence it was to good effect. In the mean time the
spies which he had sent privately up into the river with three boats, took
some of the Enemies prisoners, by whom they understood, that the Barbaria^s
having heard the artillery of the Portugheses play, had put their ships in
order for battle, and were coming down apace toward the sea, thinking that
the booty of the Portugheses from Bengala which they expected, was now at hand.

The river Perlen being very large within the banks, The River (...).
becomes almost like a sea where it breaks into the main. For though the
channel be deep, yet runs it never the slower by reason of the breadth, but
glideth along violently like a torrent, not yelding any foard to pass over.
Saa the General therefore making use of the Promo^tory, which runs out by
the bank of the river, within the winding thereof, where the stream has least
force, speedily puts his fleet in order to fight. The Po^tughese Admiral
(...)
The^ earnestly exhorting all the Portughese Captains and souldiars, to call
to mind that day, wherein they had freely, before the Altar of our Lord, vowed
to spend their lives for his Religion and honor, and upon which occasion they
were entitled the Army of Jesus Christ, encouraged them, and willed them to
imagine they saw Xauerius, the Author of that pious war, praying for their
safety and victory. He put them also in mind, not to forget what the good
Father had charged them to do; to wit, that behoulding Christ the son of God
crucified for them, they should (neglecting their own lives) courageously
undertake the combat for his glory. That they should remember how they had
twice bound themselves by oath to Christ the King of Kings, and twice of their
own accord vowed their lives for his sake. That certainly they, who were to
fight that religious battle for God, should not want his divine assistance.
And that Xauerius Prophecy, promising them an infallible victory, would prove
true. The souldiars being with these words set on fire, cried out al together,
that they were prepared to render their lives for Christ our Lord, for whose
sake they had more then once vowed the same. And remembering Xauerius charge,
they expected his assistance, and promise in the battle.

In the mean time, The preparation of the Barbarians navy to fight.
the enemies Navy being set in battle array, came down the river with the
stream, and the banks and shores on both sides sounded forth with horrible
showtings, and confused noise of drums. The first squadron was led by the
Admiral of the Barbarians fleet, guarded on each side with four Turkish
galleys. Then followed six other Galleyes, with nine ranks of ships, and all
abundantly appointed not only with great ordinance, but also with plenty of
small shot. A Sea battle.
The admiral therefore of the Portugheses, as soon as the first rank of the
enemy was discovered, makes toward them presently at unawares with three
ships, commanding the rest to follow as they were ordered for the battle.
Whereupon the Barbarians, whether for want of skill, or rather by Gods
ordinance, sailing on headlong with fury, discharged all their great shot
against the Portugheses before they could so much as reach them, The Turkish
galleys are the occasion of the Barbaria^s over throw.
so as the bullets fell all into the water, without doing any harm. But the
Portughese gu^ner shooting a very great bullet out of the greatest Ordinance,
stroke the Admira'l of the A^enians so flat, that presently he sunk and
drowned her. Which was not only a presage of a future victory but rather the
conclusion of the combat it self. For the Turkish Galleys staying their
course, left off the fight, and began to help the Captain, and other
principal men swimming to save themselves; The Barbarians ships entangled one
with another are shattred.
which can-sed both their own, and the fleets whole overthrow. For the Turks
had placed their galleys overthwart the river, and so had taken up a good part
of the same, to receive in those that could swim unto them, not once thinking
of the danger themselves were in, God had so besotted them. The six other
Gallyes which followed the first squadron, coming down with the stream,
ran upon the former that lay athwart, and all the rest of the nine rancks
which came after, fell against those which went before, and became so entangled
one with another, and so dashed together, each one striving to get free from
his fellow by force, that one would have thought there had been a battle among
themselves.

The Portugheses perceiving manifestly that Gods hand was in this business,
The Portugheses set upon the Barbarians fleet without any hurt at all to
themselves.
failed not to follow the victory which was thus offered them from heaven.
Wherefore presently calling out alowd upon the sovereign name of JESUS, they
began to grapple with their enemies, and on every side to play upon them with
their ordinance, lying there so enta^gled and hindered one by another that they
were not able to styr. Th^ice did they send out with all the violence they
could, the shot of all their great ordinance upon their ships, and no one shot
was made in vain nor was the Enemy able to resist, or make any use at al of
their own artillery, being so thrust up together; and this without any loss
to the Portugheses that assaulted the^. Now within a little while they had
sunk nine of the Enemies ships, and battered many more to pieces, with no
small slaughter of the barbarians. Whereupon the rest were put into so great a
fear, A slaughter of the Barbarians.
that most of them, as well rowers as souldiars throwing away their weapons
desperately cast themselves into the swift stream, thinking save their lives by
swimming: but it vain. For being carried away with the violence of the water,
they were all swallowed up by the swift windings of the stream, not so much as
one remaining alive to carry news of so great an overthrow.

The Portugheses having obtained so noble a victory without so much as any drop
of blood sh^d on their side, An unbloody. victory.
after they had given hearty thanke^ to God, whose present assistance they had
found in this battle, began to gather up the spoils of their enemies, where
the prey was not inferior to their glory For they seized upon the whole Navy,
A great prey.
and took all the ships except those ten which were sunk. They also took
about 300. pieces of artillery, besides the great abundance of armor, and all
other pillage. And they understood by some of those whom they had before taken
prisoners, The nu^^^ of (...) Barbarians slain in the fight
that there dyed in that conflict to the number of 4000. barbarians. Among
whom were many nobles of the King of Acenians Army, besides many Turks and
Ianizaries that had joined themselves unto him.

The report of this notable victory was presently bruited all over that
country; whereupon the King of ^er^en, who through fear of the Acenians had
f^ed unto places of more security, being animated by this overthrow of his
Enemies, began to take courage; and on the sudden setting upon a certain
garrison of the Acenians which stood near to the river Perlen, ^lew the guard
thereof, destroyed it, and made pillage of all that he found therein. The
memory of which benefit, The King of Perlen of his own accord makes himself
tributary to the King of Portugal.
although received from those that thought not of it, wrought so much with that
Barbarous King that he presently came unto the General of the Portugheses, and
with great submission, and many humble thanks acknowledged him for the
restorer of his liberty, and in recompense thereof, of his own accord, offers
himself Tributary to the King of Portugal. This was added to the victory,
which was gotten by Francis sollicitatio^. This done, Saa the General of the
Portughese fleet chose out from all the enemies navy only 25. ships to carry
along with him to Malaca, setting all the rest on fire as being either battered
or otherwise not fit for service, and so returns joyfully laden no less
with pillage, then with glory.

CHAP. XI.
Xauerius foretells to the Malacensians the obtaining of the foresaid victory,
whereof he had been the sollicitour.
WHI^ST these things were doing which was the space of six weeks, Francis his
prayers for the victory.
Francis showed invincible constancy in praying to God for the victory. He did
not only by himself in private crave the favorable assistance of the divine
Go^odnes, but did publicly also incite the people to do the same. For twice
every week, to wit, upon Sunday, and Friday, he preached to the people at
Malaca: and his ordinary custom was at the end of his Sermon, to entreat his
audience to say with him one Pater and Aue for the good success of the
Portughese fleet against the Barbarians. The people at first did willingly as
he requested them, for the space of 15. or 20. days, as long as there was hope
of the victory. But when, all that time, there came no news of the fleet,
many of the Citizens suspecting that their men were overthrown, gave over,
and left of that pious practice.

This solicitude of the Malacensians was increased by a rumor which the
Saracens their neighbors, The Malacensians grief upon the false news of the
Portugheses. overthrow.
had diuulged abroad, without any ground, that the Portugheses were overthrown
in battle, and put all to the sword by the Acenians. That which was known to
be true, made this false rumor to seem credible. For it was certain that the
enemies were stout warlike men, and their forces far beyond the Portugheses.
The whole City therefore began to be very heavy and afflicted: The matrones
with abundance of tears, bewailed the death of their husbands their children,
and kinsfolks, and withal their own desolate and forelorne state. The
Governor himself of the City, because he was esteemed to be Author of this
misfortune, durst not come abroad, or appear in sight of the people.

In this mean time Francis, according to his custom preaching to the people,
indeauored to take from them that vain fear and grief. Sometimes he
inueig^ed against certain men who had gone about by witchcraft, and sorcery to
know what was become of the Fleet, earnestly reprehending their superstition.
At other times he sharply rebuked the Cittize^s for their ^orgetfulnes of Gods
providence and the overmuch ^olicitude for themselves: Then again, he raised
the^ ^p to hope. Finally he most earnestly entreated them ^ll, to continue
their prayers unto God for the obtei^ing of the victory, although he knew full
well, that thereby he incurred the ^ll will of many, who muttered, that the
prayers which he required of them, ought rather to be said for the souls of
those that were dead and slain then for the victory of the living. But within
a little after Francis his prophecy came to be of credit.

The day was now at hand, which was to be made famous by that memorable
victory. Fran^is therefore upon the very same day (which then happened to be
Sunday) made a sermon in the Church to the people* and it was at the same hour
when the Portughese fleet was preparing for the fight. He foresees and
foretolles the victory gotten by the Portughese fleet.
Being therefore to conclude his Sermon, upon the sudden he turns both
himself, and his speech unto the Crucifix, and by divine instinct, with great
motion of body, breaking forth into a prophesy, he began by circu^locutions to
describe in words the first encounter of the two Nauies, to the admiration and
astonishment of his auditors. Then with an inflamed look and countenance, and
abundance of tears gushing out at his eyes, he cried out aloud; O Jesus, God
of my heart, I humbly I bese^ch thee by the last torments of thy life, that thou
would not leave them whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood.
Having uttered these, and other such like words which fear and confidence then
suggested unto him, and growing weak and faint with the violent agitation of
his body, he leaned a while with his head upon the Pulpit. Then by and by, as
if he had awaked out of some ecstasy lifting up his head he cries out on a
suddayne with a cheerful and joyful countenance thus: A Prophesy.
O ye Malacensians cast off all sadness and rejoice: for now at last our fleet
has overthrown the enemy in battle without any bloodshed on our part,
having lost but three men only; so little has so noble a victory cost us. And
in a most triumphant manner will they presently return home, laden with
spoils and pillage of the enemy, together with many ships which they have
taken from them; and forthwith (he appointed a certain day) will they be safe
with us. Come on therefore, and in thanksgiving to God the Author of the
victory, let us say together once Pater and Au^ for the same, and repeat it
again for those few of ours that be slain in the battle.

Upon this prediction of Francis whole audience recited the prayers which he
had requested, and in sign of approbation what he said became joyful, seeing
the great cheerfulness of the worthy man's countenance who had thus raised them
out of so heavy a sadness. Having thus cheered up the men with this hope, the
same day in like manner he made a consolatory sermon in another Church to the
women a part and fortould the very day, when certain tidings should be brought
of the victory and safety of their husbands and friends. The event whereof
happened in every thing as he had spoken. The Malacensia^s joy for the victory.
For within two or three days after, there came a messenger with the news of
the victory. And presently after the messenger, followed the Conquerours
themselves with an exceeding great booty, and no small number of ships which
they had taken from the Enemy. Infinite therefore, was the joy which on a
sudden surprised the Malac^nsia^s when so far beyond all expectation they
saw eight ships to bring home 25. captive.

As soon therefore as this victorious Navy was arrived, 8. Portughes ships
drive alo^g with them 25. Barbarians ship^ taken captive.
the whole City (their late great fear being now turned into excessive joy)
went out to see, and co^gratulate the same. And Francis himself to whom a
great part of that noble victory and triumph was due, goes amongst the first;
and as soon as the General was landed he imbraceth him, and the other
principal Captains of the Navy congratulating the^ for their fortunate
success. Then, in the heat of this general joy and congratulation, when they
inquired more exactly after the time of the victory, they found that not only
the very day, but the battle also did iumpe aright with that which Francis
had foretold. Which was so much the more to be admired, because the place
where the battle was fought, was distant from Malaca above 200. miles. From
that time, Francis was highly esteemed throughout all Malaca, no less for the
gift of prophecy, then for sanctity of life. The fame whereof having spread it
self throughout the East, moved some to come from the furthest parts of the
world, to see him.

CHAP. XII.
A Iaponian is by conference with Xauerius, converted to the faith of Christ.
AFTER he had spent four months or thereabout in helping the City of
Mal^ca, having now gotten commodity of shipping, and being ready to return
into India, there came from Iap^nia unto Malaca, a certain Iaponian called
Anger, a man of good account in his own Country, and of a singular wit. The
cause of his coming was, to seek a remedy for cure of the wounds of his
soul, caused by the intemperate heat of his youthful blood. For having
committed a heinous murder in Iaponia, and being narrowly sought for to
punishment, was forced, partly by the remorse of conscience, and partly by his
enemies who pursued his life, to fly for sanctuary unto a Conue^t of the
Bonzies (who amongst the Iaponians are accounted a kind of Religious men) to
seek thereby as well the quiet of his conscience, Bonzies Priests of the
Iaponians.
as a refuge for his safety. But this his hope failed him in both; which was
finally the cause of his salvation. For when he found no comfort nor yet safety
amongst the Bonzies, he began to be auerted from them, and to seek for remedy
elsewhere.

It happened fitly, that certain Portughese mer^hants had arrived in Iaponia
for traffic; amongst ^home Alpho^sus Vasius who was before acquainted with
him, understanding the matter, for old acquain^nce sake offered him freely all
the help he could affoard him, if he would put himself out of danger, (...)
escaping away privately. He again with hearty ^ankes told him, that he would
make use of his li^^erality: whereupon Vasius forecasting with himself, that
his own ship was for the dispatch of his business to make there some longer
stay, commends him very effectually by his letters to F^rdinand Aluarez a
special friend of his, being then ready to depart, out of another haven, for
India. And these letters of commendations he gives to Anger himself, who
going to deliver them in the night, mistook the merchant by reason there were
two of the same Surname, and gives them to one George Aluarez a master of
another ship: which mistake notwithstanding proved well for him. For George
Aluarez thinking that this occasion of gayning a Iaponians friendship, was not
to be neglected, dissembled the mistake, and in very courteous manner
entertained him, and carried him along with him to Malaca, intending to present
him to Xauerius his great friend there.

This Aluarez being a pious man, out of desire he had to win Angers
affection, and also the better to dispose him for the Christian faith,
recounted to him oftentimes by the way many things of Xauerius eminent
sanctity, and worthy deeds, and of the institutes of the Christians. Anger
therefore desiring, much to be acquainted both with Xauerius, and his manner of
life which he heard so highly commended, came to Malaca greatly longing to see,
Anger desires to speak with Xauerius.
and hear him, whom by Aluarez report he admired as a divine man: yet a
certain delay which happened much troubled him at first, as commonly it
falls out, but afterward inflamed his desire the more. Anger arrived at
Malaca some months before Francis his return from Moluca, and understanding
that he was absent, The distance of Malaca from Iaponia.
being disappointed of what he came for, resolved to return back again into
Iaponia, being much grieved that he had taken so long a journey in vain. For
Moluca is distant from Iaponia about 800. leagues, lying in the midway, almost
between India, and Iaponia.

Taking therefore shipping at Malaca, after almost three months sail, he was
cast upon the confines of China, some 500. leagues from Malaca. There he stayed
a while intending to pass thence into Iaponia, distant from that place a most
800. miles. Departing therefore from China within six or seven days he was
come within sight of Iaponia, when upon a sudden, a contrary wind, together
with a cruel tempest hindered his going forward, Gods Providence.
and tossing him up and down for the space of four days, drove him again
into the same heaven in China, where he had taken shipping. Whilst he remains
there uncertain and doubfull what to do, not without the infallible providence
of God, he meets with Alphonsus Vasius, the same man, who had bin the cause
of his departure out of Iaponia. And by his persuasion, in the year 1548. he
r^tourneth again to Malaca, whither Xauerius was ^ow come. At his very first
landing he fortunately ^ighteth upon George Aluarez that brought him first ^ut
of Iaponia, who being exceeding glad for his re^urne, brings him presently to
Xauerius, Xauerius glad for Angers coming.
and told him what he was, and what his business required. Then Francis as it
were presaging, that he would be a mea^es to open a way into Iaponia, embraced
him lovingly, and showed manifestly both by his words and contena^ce, the great
comfort he took for his coming thither.

Anger being not ignorant of the Portughese language, began to confer with
Xauerius about his business without an Interpreter; whom he instructed with
such diligence in the mysteries and precepts of the Christian faith, that he
freed him from all scrupulous anxiety of mind, and planted in his soul the
seed of a virtuous and happy life: whereof Anger gave always good testimony,
that by Xauerius means he had reaped most abundant fruit both of his life,
and travail. And withal he affirmed, that the whole course of his journey, was
certainly disposed of by God that he might at last embrace that with greater
desire which he had so long sought to learn; which manifested it self within
a short space. For being continually present at the explication of the
Catechism, and noting down in a little book the articles of the Creed, he so
much profited in short time, that he recited the whole by heart, in the midst of
the people, although he were a man of grown years: and moreover asked many
questions, and made many objections with no less prudence, then sharpness of
wit.

The Iaponians in their manner of writing differ much from other nations: for
beginning their lines above in the paper, The Iaponians manner of witing
they write directly downward. Which Francis perceyning in Angers book, and
wondering at the strangeness thereof, demanded of him^ why they did not write
according to our manner of Europe? Nay, quoth he, why do not you rather write
as we do, who follow the dictamen of nature which teaches us so to do. For as
in a man the head is highest, and the feet lowest, so he should also in
writing, bring his lines from above directly downward. Xauerius therefore
observing both by Angers words and actions, Good life answerable to doctrine.
that he was of a notable wit, asked him again, whether the Iaponians would
receives Gospel, if it were brought unto them? They will not, quoth he,
believe presently whatsoever is told them, but will examen both the religion
itself and the life of those that preach it. And if by their doctrine they can
satisfy their demands, and ^o confirm also what they say by their own lives,
then no doubt (being a Nation which is lead most by reason) when they see and
approve the same, they that be of years of discretion, will easily become
^hristians.

Xauerius being greatly encouraged by these words of his, and stirred up also
by the relation of some merchants who recounted wonderful things of the good
disposition of that nation, made a resolution to preach the Gospel unto them.
Upon the eight day after Anger came to Malaca, Francis (being himself to visit
the neophytes of Comorinum by the way) sent him before to Goa with the forsaid
George Aluarez, to remain in the College there, and to be better instructed
(...) the mysteryes and precepts of the Christian faith. Before Xauerius
departed he was entreated by the Cit^y of Malaca to send thither two of the
Society, who ^ight perform the same charitable offices in his ab^ence; which
he could not deny them. And in the me^e time he gave order to a certain
virtuous Priest ^f that Country, that he should supply his place, by
^^structing the Neophytes in the forenoone.

CHAP. XIII.
Having escaped a tempest at sea, he prescribes precepts to those of the
Society of Commorium.
BEING to depart thence for Commorinum, he entreated the Master of the ship
that went to Goa, to transport into India certain children (which he had
brought from Moluca) to be brought up, and instructed in the College there.
And as he was delivering them into his charge, upon a sudden, by divine
inspiration, he told them thrice, he was afraid least that ship should meet
with some mischance by the way. A presage.
Neither were his words herein frustrate. For as the ship was passing along by
the Island of Ceilanum, she fall upon the quicksands, and stuck so fast as that
there was now no hope to escape, when as the passengers all together calling
upon the B. Virgin Mary for aid, she is by the divine goodness on a sudd^ine
delivered out of danger, and arriueth safe at Cocinum.

The ship likewise wherein Xauerius sailed, had as hard a journey, but better
fortune. For three days she was tossed with a most terrible tempest, in such
sort that the mariners having thrown all the goods and merchandise over
board, expected every moment to be cast away themselves. But Francis being not
once moved at that which makes others afraid, continued quietly to implore the
help of all the celestial citizens one after another, His courage in
dangerous te^pests.
and most earnestly to call upon the King and Queen of heaven. And being
secured by such potent intercessours, he found (as himself declared) far more
joy in that tempest, then he did afterward when he had escaped the danger.
Comforts in dangers.
For when all were in that extreme fear, and danger of their lives, he
received such abundance of divine consolation, that when others wept for
sorrow, he ouerflowed with tears of joy: and most earnestly besought God,
that, although he should free him from that tempest, yet if it were his divine
will, he was ready most willingly to endure the like or greater, so that he
might thereby add any increase to his glory. You would have thought there had
bin a combat between Xauerius patience, and the divine liberality, he desiring
most bitter sufferances for Gods sake, and God again regaling him with most
abundant comforts.

He was no sooner arrived in India, but presently he began carefully to go
about, to all the villages of the Christians in Co^morinum, who being as it
were the first fruits of his labors, were most dear unto him. He found there
some of the Society, more then at his departure he had left. Wherefore making
have to Goa, he committed all things to their prudence and trust; yet for the
experience which he had of that nation, he left unto them diverse instructions
and documents: whereof these were the chief. Documents given to those of the
Society in Comorinum.
1. That they should go from door to door and enquire for infants newly borne
to baptize them, least in so tender an age either through neglect of their
Parents or want of Priests they might be in danger to loose their salvation. 2.
That they should gather little children together, and instruct them withal
diligence in the mysteries and precepts of the Christian faith; because to
instruct them in their youth and tender years, was a matter of very great
importance for the leading of a good and virtuous life afterward. 3. That they
should upon Sundays and Holidays cause all the people to come together to
the Church, to pray and hear the word of God, whereof they should warn the
magistrates beforehand that they might therein give others example of piety and
devotion. And reprehending of public vices, they should thereby terrify their
auditors from the like, laying before the^ the pains and torments both of
this, and the next life. 4. They should furthermore inquire who were at strife
and debate amongst themselves, and should call them together into the Church
and there make them friends, the men upon Sundaies, and the women on
Saturdayes. And if therein any case of greater difficulty did occur, they
should refer it to the Captain of the Portugheses. 5. That the alms which
should be given for the relief of the poor, should be so distributed amongst
the needy, as that nothing thereof should remain lying by them. 6. They should
often visit the sick, and say the Gospel over them for help and comfort of
their souls, as the custom is. 7. That they should assist those that lay a
dying, and bury the dead. 8. That they should give charge unto the men and
women a part, that every one give up the number of their sick unto them;
declaring also that they whose names were not given up, if they happened to dye
should be excluded from Christian burial. 9. That they should have no
discourse with the Portugheses, but of holy and pious matters, to the end that
vain talk might not, as often times it happens take up the place of their
priestly functions. 10. That they should use the Captain of the Portugheses
with all friendship and courtesy, and keep good correspondence and amity with
him, whatsoever offense should happen. And the same also they should do, as
much as might be possible, with the other Portugeses, and should draw them by
all means to frequent the Sacraments of Confession, and the holy Eucharist.
11. That they should to their utmost, further the Priests of that country in
matters of piety, and induce them to confess often, The good name of Priests
is with all care to be preserved.
and daily say Mass. 12. That they should take great heed of reporting or
writing any thing to any man, which might diminish the esteem of the party,
unless it were to such an one who might (if need required) be a means to
remedy the same. 13. That he only should be acquainted with the vices of the
Priests, who was able to cure them. 14. That they should neither speak ill of
the Neophites to the Portugheses, nor of the Portugheses to the Neophytes, All
are to be praised to on another.
but should commend them both to each other, to the end that one might be
desirous to imitate the virtue of the other. 15. That they should never leave
the place assigned them, although they were sent for by any Prince or Noble man
whatsoever, unless they had first license granted them by the Father who was
Superior of that Province; and in such cases being mindful of holy Obedience
should refer the matter wholly unto him. Men are to be gouerby love
16. Lastly, that they should endeavor by all means possible to gain the
affection of all, because therein nothing is more forcible to win men's minds
every way, then love; and therefore should draw them as it were with the cords
of Adam: and should never punish any one, but with the advice of the Governor
of the Country of Commorinum. These were the documents of Xauerius; by which we
may see not only what he desired of his companions, but what himself did also
practice, seeing that like a most excellent Master, he drew his patterns from
his own actions.

CHAP. XIIII.
Returning unto Goa, he establishes matters in India.
HAVING given these forsaid documents unto the Fathers in Co^morinu^, he
ordains F. Antony (...) of Parma Superior of the ^est in that Coast, (who
was afterward the first of the Society, that suffered Martyrdom in India) and
about the end of February in the year 1548. he sayleth thence to Cocinum;
where having gotten a little leisure, he writes to Portugal and Rome, desiring
to have many more of the Society sent thither, and among others inuiteth Simon
Rodriguez, his ancient colleague who had then the care of the Seminary at
Conimbria, to come and assist in the vineyard of the East.

He advised the King of Portugal also, to be mindful of his charge, and to
provide for the Garrisons of Portugheses in India good preachers, Francis his
letters to the King of Portugal.
out of any Religious Orders; and to give strict command unto his Governors
and Officers in India, to help what possibly they were able, toward the
advancement of Christian Religion; and especially to protect and cherish the
Neophites, since certainly there was no betterway then that to augment the
Christian faith. Moreover he humbly requested his Majesty would be pleased to
take compassion of his own subjects, and in diverse places to assign
habitation, and allowance for the bringing up of orphans, both of the
Portugheses, and of that country people. From Cocinum, Xauerius went by sea to
Cranganora, which is a town belonging to the Portugheses, some 15. miles from
Cocinum, and from thence he came to Goa, in the beginning of March.

There were at that time many of the Society in the College of Goa, F. Nicolas
Lancelot Rectour of the College at Goa.
to wit, Father Paul Camertes who had care of the Scholars; Father Francis
Perez their master; Father Nicolas Lancclot Rectour of the College, which
co^sisted partly of th^^ who came lately out of Portugal, and partly of others
that were received in India: who, for the most part having never known
Xauerius, but only by report, did much desire now to see him. Francis therefore
returning home from these far Countries, was as a common Father, received
with incredible love, and joy of all the Society; he coming likewise in happy
time for the comfort, and spiritual good of Cosmas Turrianus, Cosmas Turianus
freed from perplexity.
who (as we said before) having in the Isle of Amboynum beheld with admiration
Xauerius rare sanctity, had desired to enter into the Society: and going thence
to Goa, had now retired himself into the College there, that by means of the
spiritual Exercise, he might learn of God what course of life was best for
him to undertake. But when at the end of those Exercyses his mind was much
perplexed with cares, and being uncertain what to resolve upon, suddenly at
the sight of Francis, as at the influence of some fortunate Star, his soul
enjoyed great repose, and so without further delay he entered into the Society.

Now did the fruit of that Seminary begin to appear. For besides the Priests
and Interpreters who had bin sent thence with no little profit into the coast of
Comorinum, many scholars who were well grown in learning and discipline were
sent abroad in missions to the villages near about, The fruit of the Seminary
of Goa
from whence they brought many Ethnikes to Goa to be baptized. Whereat Xauerius
much rejoicing, esteemed it a thing of great importance, to be very exact, in
the training up of scholars, from whom so much spiritual profit might arise.
As he was thus busied, he was given to understand that John de Castro the
viceroy of India was somewhat auerted from the Society through the speeches of
some maleuolent persons. He reco^ciles the Viceroy to the Society.
Whereupon he resolved to go unto him upon the first occasion, and to give him
satisfaction. But there happened in the mean time an accident worthy to be
recounted, which manifested his inflamed zeal in meditation.

There was one Andrew an Indian borne, who was a Scholar in the College of
Goa, and for that time companion also unto Xauerius, Afternoones meditation.
whose custom ordinarily was to spend some time after dinner in meditating
upon heavenly things. He gave therefore charge unto Andrew to admonish him as
soon as the clock had stricken two, for that he was to go unto the Viceroy
about a business of importance. Andrew did as he was charged, and at the time
appointed comes to Xauerius chamber, where finding him fitting with his
contenance all inflamed, his eyes open, and rapt in such sort, as he seemed to
be abstracted from his senses, called him oftentimes, but all in vain; and
when he could not awake him either by calling, or making a noise with his
feet, or knocking at the door, In meditation of divine matters he is
abstracted from his senses.
he pulled him at last by the clothes, wherewith he awaked. In the mean time
the clock had stricken four. Wherefore Xauerius being admonished went
presently to the Viceroies lodging: but the same feeling and fervor of spirit
made him that he could not tell whither he went; so as wandering up and down
the City, he spent the rest of the day in meditation. And when the night came
on, being admonished thereof by his companion, he returned to himself again,
and perceiving to have lost his way, turning to his companion he said: Will, we
well deal with the Viceroy another day, for this day God has taken up for
himself. The next day therefore, he went unto the Viceroy, and gave him
satisfaction.

CHAP. XV.
He reclaymeth two Portugheses from a lewd, unto an honest life.
AFTER this, finding that an old friend of his, was vnmeasurably carried away
with dishonest love toward his own maids, he went to him of set purpose
about noone and coming just as he was going to dinner, inuites himself to be
his guest, and to dine with him. He straight perceived Xauerius would prove
ungrateful to his taste; but having not the face to refuse him, courteously bad
him welcome, coloring his troubled mind, with a feigned observance toward
him, and by showing outwardly a cheerful contena^ce. Dinner being ready they
sat down together, and the fair maids his concubines waited at the table.
The man was much ashamed, because none of his other servants were at home, and
such a number of maids might bring him into suspicion of incontiency. Now
therefore when Xauerius, dissembling as though he had observed no such thing,
spoke nothing thereof at the table, his Host, being taken in so open a fact,
was afraid that after dinner he would have reprehe^ded him. But Xauerius
thanking him for his courtesy, To dissemble another sins in time convenient
does more good then to reprehe^d them.
and bidding farewell both to him and the maids, went his way.

This dissembling the matter was of more force, toward the curing of his
friends disease then his reprehension would have been. His Host being freed of
this fear, and having passed over so great and manifest a disgrace, and
dishonor, without any reprehension, began afterward more confidently to go
unto Francis, and to inuit him freely to his house, yea oftentimes to bring
been home to be his guest. Xauerius on the other side using him very
courteously, and always saluting him kindly, asked oftentimes how those
sisters of his did, without any further speech at all, thinking it enough to
have thus left a sting in his conscience by this his interrogation. Neither was
it in vain. For within a few days after, his Host comes to S. Paul's Church,
and calling for Xauerius casts himself prostrate at his feet: Father, quoth
he I am here ready to do what you command, for indeed that silence of yours
has stroke my soul with such clamours, Xauerius silence cries out.
that being tossed up and down day and night it can take no rest. Wherefore I
shall be most glad, if you will dispose of all that is mine, to Gods glory, and
the salvation of my soul. Francis seeing him thus stricken by God, persuadeth
him to make first a good confession of his sins, then to put away his
Concubins by bestowing them in honest marriage, and lastly to betake himself to
a good and virtuous life.

Neither did Xauerius assist these only who were his friends and acquaintance,
but strangers also whose salvation seemed to be even desperate. There was a
certain Portughese Sea-souldiar, who despayring of his salvation, had not bin
at Confession for the space of 18. year, and was now ready to imbarke himself
for the sea to go with the Navy to Meca, when as Francis by chance had notice
of him. His zeal of souls
Wherefore thirsting after his salvation, he presently gets into the same
ship, and accompanyeth him in that navigations. Then by speaking friendly unto
him, by sitting by him when he was at play, and by using all courtesy toward
him, he so won his affection, that of himself he greatly reverenced him, He
by all courteous offices wins a soldiar of very bad life to make his
confession.
and much desired his company. Whereupon Francis thinking it now a very good
time to put that in execution which he had resolved, sets upon him unawares.
And falling with him into familiar speech of the danger of a Soldiars life,
began to ask him in a friendly manner, how he was provided for death, which
this mortality could not escape, and was hastened on also by a souldiars life
and condition; how long it was since he was last at Confession by which Gods
wrath against sin, the revenger of Iniquity, is appeased. At which words he
fetching a deep sigh said, That he had now continued many years in the filth
of sin without going to Confession; but it was rather another man's fault then
his. For before the setting forth of the last fleet, he resolved to disburthen
his conscience of the many and henyous sins which he had committed; and
having confessed them to the Vicar, he refused to give him absolution, so as he
had now no hope of salvation.

Then Francis, a singular Physician for the curing of forlorn souls, tells
him, that he wondered the Vicar was so severe, if he had confessed his sins as
he ought to do. Then he bids him be of good comfort, promising that he would
willingly hear him, and absolve him, aduising him to call to mind all his sins
from his childhood, as far forth as he could remember them, prescribing him
also an easy and commodious method how to do it; which he, being now raised up
again to hope, did willingly, and diligently practice for many days
together. And when he was thus prepared, the opportunity also of a place was
ready at hand; which was, that by the way the whole fleet was invited to make
some stay at a town as they passed. He gives his penitent a small penna^ce
inte^diug himself to satisfy for him.
When therefore many went a land, Francis also with his soldier went with
them. And there in a place remote from any company, he began to hear his
Confession, who showed himself truly penitent by his often sighs and tears,
which many times interrupted his Confession. When he had ended, Francis
absolueth him, inioining him to say for his penna^ce once Pater and Aue, and
for the rest himself promised to satisfy his divine Majesty. Whereupon Xauerius
leaving the soldier, withdrew into the next wood, and there stripping himself
naked, beat and scourged his back extremely, with a whippe full of most
sharp pricks, and whereof he made no end, or measure.

In the mean time the Soldiar having said his penance, and following the
Fathers footesteppes, came into the wood, and by the sound of the lashes, came
right unto the place where Francis was a disciplining himself. As soon as he
saw that horrible whip, and his back all torn, and begored with blood, at the
first he stood still in amazement. Then with tears gushing forth of his eyes,
he leapeth unto him, and casts himself at Xauerius feet, nor would he rise
until he left off tormenting himself for another sins. Neither did this
invention of Xauerius prove unprofitable. For this strange sight did so move
the soldiars heart, already mollified by Confession, to the desire of penance,
that he afterward by voluntary mortification washed away the spots of his
former life, and satisfied for his offenses by good works. And Xauerius having
thus compassed his desire, and finding present commodity of shipping, returns
back again to Goa.

CHAP. XVI.
Having distributed diverse Provinces to others of the Society, himself
determines to go into Iaponia.
HAVING settled all businesses of the College at Goa, He prepares in many
places, houses for the Society.
and that there was at the same time a new supply of the Society come out of
Portugal, he began to divide and distribute them into diverse Missions.
Wherefore he sent Nicolas Lancellot to the town of Coulanum, Alphonsus Cyprian
to Meliapora the town of S. Thomas, Francis Perez to Malaca, Alphonsus a
Castro to Moluca, Melchior Consalues to Bazainum, and lastly Gaspar of Artois
to Ormus a City of special trade and fame, situated in the mouth of the
Persian gulf. Xauerius had indeed resolved to have gone himself to Ormus, to
suppress the heinous vices which he understood the sincke of Superstition had
nourished in that place. But his journey into Iaponia changed this his
determination, by sending thither the forsaid Gaspar, a man of singular virtue
and sanctity of life, and most like to himself.

It was always Xauerius practice, never (almost) to command any of the Society
to go where himself had not bin before. He sent almost none of the Society
where he himself had not bin.
For he ordinarily first made trial of the place, to the end he might give
both documents suitable thereunto, and also faithfully discharge his promise
made to the King of Portugal, of extending the bounds of the Christian faith.
And whithersoeuer he sent any of the Fathers to preach the Gospel, he always
assigned them a companion, and assistant of the Society, giving them (besides
particular instructions) certain general documents, the sum whereof was:
That before all things, they should attend unto themselves, and prefer
nothing before the pure and religious honor of God, Instructions given to the
Society.
and the salvation and perfection of their own souls. For being endued with
these ornaments, they would not only securely and easily help others in matters
of salvation, but would also cheerfully and willingly apply themselves to any
thing how humble or abject soever, without the which the government of
Christian affairs could not well stand.

Now when he had sent some of the Society into almost all the countries of the
East, to manure and cultiuate the tender plants of our Lords vineyard, he ^egan
to think upon greater matters. About this ^ime Anger the Iaponiam (who as we
said before, Anger the Iaponese is baptized
had ^in by Xauerius sent to Goa) being sufficiently instructed in the
mysteries of the Christian faith, was baptized by the Bishop, together with
two of his ser^antes, and would needs be called (by the Name of the College of
Goa) Paul of the Holy Faith; of such force was the memory of that place, and
the benefit which he had received therein. By him Xauerius understood (which
had bin also related unto him by the Portugheses, who had been there) that there
were in Iaponia many Islands, exceeding full of inhabitants of excellent good
wits, and lay from Goa about 1300. leagues: and moreover that the Iaponeses
were addicted to the knowledge of divine, and humane things. Xauerius therefore
having had some trial of the Iaponians dispositions in this man, and his
servants, began to be taken with such a desire of instructing so understanding
a People, that he determined, without delay to make a voyage thither.

First therefore he takes order for the sufficient instructing of those three
Iaponians who were with him, both in the Portughese language, and other
literature, that they might serve him for Interpreters. Then having spent a
summer and winter in domestical affairs at Goa, He by the way visits the
Comorinensian Neophytes.
like a good and diligent Pastor by the way visits the Comorinensian and
Piscarian Coast with all his flock of Christians in those parts. There he is
^nformed, that Henry, one of the Society, lived half discontented in the next
country of Trauancoris, for that he seemed to loose his labor amongst the
Neophytes of that place, who by reason of the persecution raised by their new
King, a deadly Enemy to Christians, fell oftentimes into Idolatry. Xauerius
therefore by consolatory letters, He comfort some of the Society in a
fatherly manner.
full of fatherly affection, bad him be of good courage, telling him withal,
that his profit was far greater, then he imagined. For although he should do
nothing else, yet certainly there was no small number of infants, and children
saved for being by him baptized, who otherways by vntimly death had been
everlastingly lost. For put the case (quoth he) that there were but few of the
elder sort saved, yet there is no doubt to be made of their salvation, who dyed
in that innocence which they received in baptism. And therefore he should
beware least through the suggestion of the Devil he might be drawn to go into
some other Country, where he should not reap so good an harvest of souls. But
now for those who labored seriously in the vineyard of our Lord, Francis did
not only comfort them himself, but sometimes also procured Ignatius to do the
like, by his letters from Rome, fearing least their alacrity being oppressed by
continual troubles and miseries, might be ouercharged by the labors which they
took. And so, having in a certain letter of his much praised Henry Henriquez
a man of singular virtue, and exemplar life, who took great pains in the same
Promontory, he commended him to Ignatius, desyring he would be pleased to write
unto him a letter consolatory.

Having thus settled matters in Comorinum, he returns again to Goa, to
provide for his Iaponian voyage. Whereupon presently he went into the kingdom
^f Cambaya, to treat about certain affairs for the Moluca's, with the
Viceroy, who at that time was ^mployed in the war of Cambaya. By the way he
came ^o Bazain, which is a town belonging to the Portu^heses, situated almost
in the midway between Goa and the river Indus. And going thence without any
^ay into Cambaia he was very courteously entertained ^y the Viceroy, with whom
having ended his busi^esse, he returned presently again to Goa; where having
made Antony Gomez Rectour of the College, and appointed Paul Camertes to
supply his own place, he prepares himself with all speed for his journey
into Iaponia.

It was no sooner bruited abroad, The difficulties of the Iaponian navigations.
that Francis was to go into Iaponia, but presently many of his friends came
unto him in all have, to terrify him from so dangerous a resolution, laying
before his eyes the many and great dangers of so long and unknown a voyage by
sea, for that he was to go unto the furthest end of the world, Iaponia lying
from Goa above 1300. leagues, and the way unto it being but newly found out,
was not as yet sufficiently known, for the avoiding of rocks and quicksands.
Moreover they declare unto him the horrible storms and tempests of that sea,
in respect whereof, the fury and rage of the rest of the Ocean, was but a
sport, especially in the time of Autumn, The wind Typhon
when as those seas are tossed with a most boisterous wind (called by the
Inhabitants Typhon) and with such a fury and violence, as none can imagine but
those who have seen and proved it; by which also the greatest, and strongest
ships being often loosened in their joints, being not able to endure such
violent waves, become so broken and shattered, that either swallowed up in the
billows, or else dashed against, the rocks do miserably perish. And the very
name of the foresaid Wind, or rather Fury, strikes such an horror into the
passengers, that eue^ the most skillfull, and hardyest Pilots, and Mariners
esteem this voyage into Iaponia to be no less dangerous then toylsome, so
far does the violent raging of that sea pass all their art, and skill.

Moreover, they tell him, that there be in diverse places many quicksands in the
way, very hard to be discovered, wherein their ships, either by not being
acquainted with the tract, or else by drift of tempest do stick fast to their
certain destruction. Again, all those seas for the most part are much
pestered with most cruel pirates. A multitude of Pirates.
For besides the Acenians, who being deadly enemies to the Portugheses, make
continual depredations in the gulf of Malaca with great fleetes; there keep
also, about the Coast of China, many nauies of most bloody and desperate
pirates, using no mercy to whomesoeuer they take. They should also in those
places meet with other nauies of the King of China, which being appointed to
pursue the pirates, kept no more quarter with strangers then with the pirates
themselves: in so much that one cannot tell whether it be more dangerous to
meet with the pirates themselves, or with those that pursue the^: so that it
was certaynely esteemed no bad fortune, if but every third ship came safe
into Iaponia.

These, and such like things; though they were ^^deed matters of no light
moment, yet were they by ^is friends greatly exagerated, who for that they
pro^eeded from very grave persons, and skillfull of such ^^ffaires, hoped they
might auert Xauerius mind from that enterprise. But all in vain: nor could
they once move his noble courage, which contemned even death, and vpheld it
self with firm confidence in the ^iuine providence. Whereupon they flying to
their ^^st refuge, began with tears most earnestly to entreat and beseech him,
that he would not with certain danger of his life, think of going to those
countries, which Nature had so locked up from the sight of mortal me^: and
that having already suffered miseryes enough, he would now at length make an
end of converting obscure Nations, and have compassion, if not of his own,
yet, of the common good.

But Francis thanking them for their fidelity, Francis speech to his frieds who
dissuaded him from going in to Iaponia.
and good will, told them, that by Gods holy help and assistance he feared
none of these things; and wondered they should think, that whither themselves
had gone for gain of trade and merchandise, he durst not ve^ture to go for the
glory of God, and salvation of souls. I have assuredly (quoth he) such
certain signs and pledges of the divine providence, that I think it would be
a great sin in me to fear any danger, though never so certain and
manifest. For, by Gods special goodness, I have passed infinite tractes of the
Ocean, and have compassed round the Promontory of Good hope, and have at last
arrived safe hither to this other world. I have escaped the fury of the
Trauancorians, the treacheryes of the Badages, and the encounter of Pirates.
Moreover I have trauayled over all Malaca, and the golden Chersonesus, the
Islands of Moluca, standing almost in the utmost parts of the world. Without
any harm have I gone to Maurica, and instructed and made civil that barbarous
and savage nation, given wholly to spoil, robberies, and murders. And having
now had all these assurances and arguments of the divine providence, do you
think that I can either distrust of Gods fatherly assistance, or give over to
amplify his glory, to which I have wholly dedicated and vowed my self? Ought I
to draw back for fear of any danger whatsoever? I will certaynely for no
occasion be wanting in what I have undertaken. Whersoeuer I shall be, I will
remember that I am exposed to the view of the whole world, and do stand in the
sight of God, and all the Court of heaven. Neither was it my determination,
when I passed over the sea, to preach the Gospel only in India, and other
places adjoining, but also in the furthest parts of the East. I will tell you
truly, I am ashamed that I have not yet brought Christian Religion into those
countries, whither our merchants have long fince brought their vain, and petty
commodityes. I will therefore with Gods grace, lay open at last a way into
those countries for the Gospel, which Nature has so far separated from our
world: and to spend my life (if need require) in these imploiments, I account
it not only an honor, but also a great blessing.

His friends being overcome by this his incredible constancy, and stricken into
an amazement at his undaunted courage, desisted wholly from their suite, and
praying for his happy journey they left him to his intended voyage, not without
great sorrow for his departure, and careful solicitude for his safety, in
regard of the many dangers he was to undergo.

CHAP. XVII.
At Malaca he does many things worthy of memory.
XAVERIVS at his departure from Goa, left behind him in writing certain
profitable precepts unto Father Paul that had been lately Rectour of the
College of Goa, whom now in his absence he ordained to supply his place. The
sum whereof was: That being myndfull rather of Christian humility, then of
the place and authority he had, he should carry a fatherly government toward
the rest of his companions, and should very carefully provide for them in all
their disco^modities, and difficultyes, and once a year to write unto him into
Iaponia of al things belonging to the Society, and of those that were thereof
under his care and government. Fatherly government.
Now when all the other Fathers desired to follow him into Iaponia, he
comforted them with paternall words, by putting them in hope, that having
opened a way into that Country, he might call them all thither: and in the
mean time he would carry them along with him in his heart, and mind.

Having therefore settled all things in order and provided for his journey, His
Companyons in the Japonia^ navigations.
in the year of our Lord 1548. and month of April he imbarketh at Goa,
together with Paul of the holy Faith the Iaponese, Cosmas Turrianus, John
Ferdinand, and a few others of the Society. He was carried in a goodly ship,
pointed and barbed with iron, the Captain whereof was one James Noronia. By
his courteous behavior he began to gain both the Captains and the other
passengers affections hoping thereby to make way for the cure of their souls.
Wherefore he would look on whilst others played at Chesse, persuade those to
play who seemed shamefast, and would many times also intermingle their game
with witty and pleasant speeches. But Noronia the Captain, who was not yet
familiary acquainted with him, although he liked well of his courteous
behavior, yet in words he impeached the fame of his sanctity. For in discourse
with his familiar friends, he would often cast forth certain inconsiderate
speeches; as that Francis seemed to be but as other men are, and that his
sanctity was not answerable to the report thereof. But within a while the
sple^dor of his hidden virtue brake forth, and showed it self. For when they
were enforced to go a land to take in fresh water, Xauerius with certain
others went a land also; and whilst they provided water, or else, as it often
happened, recreated themselves by taking comfort and solace of the land, he
withdrew himself into a desert, and solitary place near by, there to confer
alone in prayer with almighty God.

Now the ship having received in those that went for water, was ready to hoyse
up sail, when as Noronia perceived that Xauerius was wanting: Wherefore he
presently sends out some to call him speedily to the ship. They looking and
calling him a great while by the shore side but all in vain, In his prayers he
is abstracted from his senses.
find him at length in a private place at his prayers, wholly abstracted from
his senses. Then the report thereof being spread through out all the Navy, it
caused such admiration both in Noronia and the rest, that turning their rash
judgment into reverence toward him, they greatly honored his singular
sanctity, and courteous humanity. This occasion much furthered toward the
curing of their souls, and restrayning their vices.

Francis then arriving, He lodges with the Franciscans
by the way, at Cocinum, went presently as his custom was, to lodge with the
Franciscans, who was very friendly entertained by them: Whither the chief of
the City presently came to entreat of him, that some of the Society might be
sent thither, to instruct as well the youth, as the whole City in virtue, and
other discipline; promising him a fit place, and all things necessary for those
that should be sent. Xauerius being loath to reject so just and pious a
request, leaves the disposing of the whole business unto Peter Consaluus the
Bishops Vicar, making have himself toward Iaponia, whither all his thoughts
were now wholly bent. Afterward having had for the space of more then 60. days
a prosperous navigations, upon the last of May he arriueth at Malaca, and
lodges with his own Society, to their incredible joy and consolation. At the
same time Alphonsus a Castro of the same Society (who was afterward slain in
Moluca by the Saracens, for defense Christian Religion) sung there the first
High Mass with all solemnity, to the exceeding comfort of the Neophytes, who
were greatly delighted to behold those new ceremonies. And for the greater
Celebrity thereof, Xauerius made thereat a Sermon.

At the same time also the Vicar of Malaca, The Vicar of Malaca being out of
his senses recouereth them again.
Xauerius ancient friend, lay very sick of a Fever, no less dangerous then
vehement; and his trouble of mind increased his corporal infirmity. As soon
therefore as he understood of Francis his arrival, being much distempered (as
it happens) through the violence of his sickness, he calls for his apparel,
to go and salute his dearest friend. But as he was pulling on his stockings he
fell into a sown, and suncke down in the arms of those that were about him.
Francis therefore being certifyed thereof, comes presently unto him, and
finds him fallen into a frenzy, and in some despair both of mind and body.
Whereupon he voweth to say certain Masses for this his friends safety. And his
vow was very acceptable unto God: for instantly he recouereth his senses
again, confesses his sins, and dies piously, and with great edification.

Now whilst Xauerius expects commodity of shipping into Iaponia, he
imployeth himself with no less labor and profit amongst the citizens of
Malaca, the^ he had done upon the Vicar. For he delivered out of the Devils
jaws many lewd and desperate men, He euaseth a mercha^t to leave his connes.
who were extremely bewitched with harlots allurements. Amongst whom (that by
one, a sca^tling may be made of the rest) there was a cetayne Merchant, who
kept at home with him seven maids to the show, but indeed were all Harlots.
Which thing Xauerius understanding, first dissembled the matter, expecting a
convenient time. Afterward meeting this miserable man upon an Holy day
(imitating therein our Savior Christ who bad himself to supper with Zacchaeus
the Publican) told him in a friendly manner, that he would dine with him that
day, if it were not inconvenient. The merchant, for fear his maids might be
discoured, was at first extremely troubled, and thought on all the means he
could devise how to excuse the matter. But at last, moved through shame least
he might seem unwilling to receive such a guest into his house, he showed
himself to be content. And so framing both his countenance and speech to a
courteous willingness, carries Xauerius home to dinner, and causes good cheer
to be made. They sat down, and his fair mayds waited at the table. The
merchant was indeed half ashamed, that he had no men to wayt, and that the
mayds were constrained to serve; remaining also with an anxious and sollicitous
mind, what the good Father might think thereof. Which when Francis perceived
judging it prudence to free the man both of shame and fear, Prudence in
dissembling matters.
said nothing of what he intended. Whereupon presently, as though he had
interpreted al things in the best sense, he began to commend the meat, and the
maids also who had dressed the same, and made the sauces to it, asking them
their names, and country, and how long they had been Christians.

The Merchant when he saw in him this mildnes and simplicity, who (as he
thought) suspected nothing Religion) sung there the first High Mass with all
solemnity, to the exceeding comfort of the Neophytes, who were greatly
delighted to behold those new ceremonies. And for the greater Celebrity thereof,
Xauerius made thereat a Sermon.

At the same time also the Vicar of Malaca, The Vicar of Malaca being out of
his senses recouereth them again.
Xauerius ancient friend, lay very sick of a Fever, no less dangerous then
vehement; and his trouble of mind increased his corporal infirmity. As soon
therefore as he understood of Francis his arrival, being much distempered (as
it happens) through the violence of his sickness, he calls for his apparel,
to go and salute his dearest friend. But as he was pulling on his stockings he
fell into a sown, and suncke down in the arms of those that were about him.
Francis therefore being certifyed thereof, comes presently unto him, and
finds him fallen into a frenzy, and in some despair both of mind and body.
Whereupon he voweth to say certain Masses for this his friends safety. And his
vow was very acceptable unto God: for instantly he recouereth his senses
again, confesses his sins, and dies piously, and with great edification.

Now whilst Xauerius expects commodity of shipping into Iaponia, he
imployeth himself with no less labor and profit amongst the citizens of
Malaca, the^ he had done upon the Vicar. For he delivered out of the Devils
jaws many lewd and desperate men, He euaseth a mercha^t to leave his connes.
who were extremely bewitched with harlots allurements. Amongst whom (that by
one, a sca^tling may be made of the rest) there was a cetayne Merchant, who
kept at home with him seven maids to the show, but indeed were all Harlots.
Which thing Xauerius understanding, first dissembled the matter, expecting a
convenient time. Afterward meeting this miserable man upon an Holy day
(imitating therein our Savior Christ who bad himself to supper with Zacchaeus
the Publican) told him in a friendly manner, that he would dine with him that
day, if it were not inconvenient. The merchant, for fear his maids might be
discovered, was at first extremely troubled, and thought on all the means he
could devise how to excuse the matter. But at last, moved through shame ^^least
he might seem unwilling to receive such a guest into his house, he showed
himself to be content. And so framing both his countenance and speech to a
courteous willingness, carries Xauerius home to dinner, and causes good cheer
to be made. They sat down, and his fair mayds waited at the table. The
merchant was indeed half ashamed, that he had no men to wayt, and that the
mayds were constrained to serve; remaining also with an anxious and sollicitous
mind, what the good Father might think thereof. Which when Francis perceived
judging it prudence to free the man both of shame and fear, Prudence in
dissembling matters.
said nothing of what he intended. Whereupon presently, as though he had
interpreted al things in the best sense, he began to commend the meat, and the
maids also who had dressed the same, and made the sauces to it, asking them
their names, and country, and how long they had been Christians.

The Merchant when he saw in him this mildnes and simplicity, who (as he
thought) suspected nothing by seeing so many handsome maids without any men,
began to take some courage; but when at last there was not so much as a word
spoken that day about that matter, fearing now no reprehensio^, he of his own
accord inuiteth oftentimes Xauerius to supper. Francis therefore observing this
cunning of his, dissembled all until he came to be thoroughly acquainted with
the man, and having found out his inclination and which of those Concubines he
loved best; when he saw a fit time for the purpose* in a friendly manner as his
custom was: Why, quoth he, have you so many maids, seeing you have no men? If
you will follow my connsayle, you shall do well to put away one or two of them.
And when, condescending to Francis his gentle instance, he had put away one,
Xaueriu^ being by him invited another day to supper, by commending what he had
done, drew him, without any great difficulty, to put away another. In the mean
time he ceased not privately to use all the industrious means he could devise
to rid away his dearest minio^, that so having weakened his love to her, he
might the more easily batter the chief hold, in which his Incontinency
dominiered. Some days after therefore, being again invited to supper, he
withdraws from him the third, and afterward the fourth, and by little and
little all the seven one after another: and finally brings the merchant
himself, being now moved thereto by divine power, to cleanse his soul of his
sins by Confession, and to provide honest places for the foresaid women; using
herein no less discretion in curing a disease of many kinds, then in wholly
taking away the causes, and occasions thereof.

The same course he took also not only in the City, but likewise in the ship
with men, Prudence in reprehending
who had no government over their ^^ngue. For if at any time he heard any one
cast forth base or contumelious words, he dissembled for the present, making no
show of being displeased thereat; neither would he straightwayes reprehend the
same, but expect always a fit time and occasion to admonish the offenders,
least his admonition might thereby, as oftentimes it happens, rather increase
the sores of festred wounds, then cure them. He being therefore a Physician
very skillful in curing of such evils, to the end that his patients might
quietly abide the applying of his remedy, he would first gently insinuate
himself into his friendship who was to be thus cured, then would he take him a
side, and all alone reprehend him in so sweet a manner, as a friend once told,
him that he wondered how such mild words proceeded from his mouth. And by this
means he so brought the matter about, that the offenders not only acknowledged
their fault, but did sincerely amend it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Being carried in a Pirates bark, he arriueth at last in Iaponia, in despite
both of the Pilot, and the Devil.
WHILST he was thus employed at Malaca in the exercises of Christian charity,
the time approached for his departure toward Iaponia. Whereupon, either through
want of a greater Portughese ship, or else to provide for the more security of
his Neophites who were to accompany him, he ventured to go with a Barbarian
Pyrate, so secure he esteemed all things with those who rely wholly upon God:
For he was afraid least the three Iaponian Neophytes, who went along with him
in that journey, might be much scandalized at the Portugheses, if they should
perceive them, being Christians, The divine providence favors Xauerius.
to offend in any thing. Wherefore meeting with an Ethnicke Pirate of China,
who was not without cause, surnamed the Robber, he agreed with him, that
passing by China, he should carry him, and his companions directely into
Iaponia. And taking pledges for security (yet trusting more upon the divine
assistance, then upon the fidelity of that Barbaran) he aduentureth himself and
his company in a little Bark, which they call in their language Iuncus.

He departed from Malaca in the month of June, upon the Nativity of S. John
Baptist, and had a reaso^able prosperous, and commodious navigations, al^ough
his Pilot were neither industrious, nor fayth^^ll toward him. For he (as
Ethnickes make no great ^nscie^ce of their promise) having on a sudden chan^d
his mind, The perfidiousnesse of Ethnickes.
was not willing to go into Iaponia; and ^erfore to trifle away the time, he
stayed at every Ila^d (...) met withal, without any reason or occasion. Xaue^^s
therefore being sollicitous about his journey, when (...) saw him of set purpose,
by making delays, loose (...) time which was most convenient for them, be^^n
to be afraid least the summer once past, he might (...) constrained to stay all
winter in some Haven of ^^ina. Whereupon he earnestly expostulated with the
^^ayster of the ship, put him in mind of his pledges, (...) lastly besought and
entreated him, that he would ^ot break his promise made unto the Portugeses.
But ^hen he could nothing prevail with the Pyrate, al^^ough he was much
grieved in mind, yet he suppres^d the same, casting all upon the divine
Providence, which he had always found to be favorable unto ^im:
notwithstanding, The execrable sacrifices of Ethnicks.
the detestable Superstiti^^n of the Pilot and mariners did move him much
^ore, then their perfidiousnes had done. For they had (...) the ship an Idol to
which they very often offered exe^rable sacrifices. They also oftentimes by
casting ^^otts asked advise of the Devil, and specially whe^^her they should
have a prosperous journey if they ^ayled into Iaponia. Xauerius was indeed much
incen^ed heerat, and could in no case brook that they should think his voyage
into Iaponia which he undertook for gods sake should depend upon the Devils lot
and pleasure; yet relying wholly upon the divine Goodness, he contemned
whatsoever the Devil could act against him and so by Gods all-ruling
disposition they driect their course toward Iaponia. By the way there happened
two things worthy of note.

The first was, One of Francis his companions falling into the pumpe is
delivered from death.
that Emanuel a Chinese one of Xauerius company, being in a tempest cast down
by the extreme tossing of the ship, fell headlong into the pumpe which was by
chance open; and the fall was not without great danger of his life, for that he
fell both very high, and besides stuck fast in the pumpe with his head
downward. Every one therefore thinking him to be dead, he was at last with
much ado drawn out, and a little after by Gods help, and Francis his prayers
came to life again. In the fall he received a wound in his head, but the fear
thereof was more then the danger, for within a few days he was perfectly cured.

Not long after this there happened another chance with the like danger, but
different in the effect. Whilst Emanuel was in dressing his wound by the
surgeo^, the ship being suddaynly tossed, cast the Pylots daughter over board
into the sea, and being driven on with a violent wind, The Pilots daughter is
drowned.
and a cruel tempest that immediately arose, there was found no means possible
to save her crying out for help. And so in sight of her Father, and the rest of
the mariners the unfortunate maid is swallowed up by the raging billows.
Upon this mischance there arises a doleful cry intermingled with a certain
howling out, and lamentation of the Barbarians, which ^ontinued all that day,
and the next night. Now the ^euill who had bin long since spitefully bent
against ^auerius, The devil takes occasion of treachery.
thinking that he could not have a fitter occasion to wreake his malice upon
him, used many de^eiptfull stratagemes against him in this business. For when
they Infidels damaunded of the Idol the reason ^hy the Pilots daughter was
drowned; it was answe^^ed, that if Emanuell the Christian had dyed in the ^umpe
the maid should not have bin cast away in the (...). Francis presently
perceived that by this answer, (...) and his company were aimed at, to make
them odi^^s both to the Pilot and the mariners: and withal ^^und himself to
be oftentimes much tempted inte^^ourly by that horrible beast. But calling upon
the ^^uine assistance, he did not only defeat all the plotts (...) this most
cruel Enemy, but freed himself also from ^he imminent dangers, in which he
was amongst those Ethnickes.

There was nothing which more cooled the mali^^e of the Devil, His magnanimity
against the terrors of the devil
and the mariners against him, then ^is courageous mind. Neither did this
combat ^^asse without some fruit unto Francis. For by his ^wne peril he
experienced what horrible terrors the ^iuell strikes into others, when he is
permitted, and ^ndeth opportunity Concerning which matter there (...) extant a
notable Epistle of Xauer^us to the Society at ^oa, The way how to overcome the
affrights of the Devil.
the contents whereof are: That there is no surer ^ay to defeat the vain
affrights of the Devil, then ^y wholly distrusting in our selves, and putting
our confidence in God, with a courageous and undaunted ^art, to contemn the
feeble assaults, and threats of that Monster; and by depending upon the divine
assistance, to keep our selves, with all the courage we can, from being afraid.
For in such a case, and at such a time nothing ought more to be feared, then
diffidence and distrust in God: seeing it is manifest, that our Enemy cannot,
with all his forces, dovs any hurt, unless God permit him.

Xauerius having thus overcome the Devil, had now a new combat to fight with
men. When they were arrived at Cantonium a haven Town of China, the Pilot and
mariners consulted again with the Idol by lottes, and receiving no
comfortable answer from the Devil concerning their navigations into Iaponia,
cast ancker, and resolved to keep their winter there. Which Xauerius
perceiving, cast about to help himself. And first he humbly besought the
Pylot, to stand to his promises; then when intreatyes could do no good,
falling from requests unto threats, he laid before him the loss of his
pledges, and the displeasure of the Governor of Malaca, and the Portugeses, to
whom he had given his word: so as, at last the Pilot being somewhat moved with
what was objected against him, he weighed ancker, and began to sail forward.
But this co^stancy in him was no more then his fidelity. For a little while
after the perfidious Ethnicke fell again into his former humor of wintering
in those coasts. Which perfidiousnesse of his, would infallibly have hindered
Xauerius journey, had not the divine Providence turned the Pilots course
another way.

The ship now sailed amain with a prosperous gale toward Cinceum a haven
town of China, where the ^ylot intended to harbor all the winter, for that
the ^^mmer was now almost at an end; when as upon the ^ddaine they meet with a
Pinnace which tells the^ ^at the port of Cinceum was much pestred with
Py^tes. The Pylot being greatly affrighted with this ^ewes, called his wits
together, and began to think that was best to be done. To go back again to
Ca^^nium he could not, because the wind was full against (...), and withal lay
very right for Iaponia. Wherefore ^aking his benefit of necessity, he resolved
to follow (...) wind. And so in despite both of the Pilot, Marri^ers, and the
Devil himself the ship was constrained (...) hold on her course into
Iaponia: whither at last (...) arrived upon the very day of the Assumption of
^^ur B. Lady, more by the favor of God, and his Ho^^ Mother, then of the wind
or weather. Now when ^s they could not well reach to other Havens as they
^esired, they arrived with their ship at Cangoxima, a City in the Kingdom of
Saxuma, and the very Coun^ry of Paul of the Holy Faith. There Francis together
with his companions, is very courteously entertained ^oth by Paul's friends,
and the rest of the inhabitants, ^ea even of the Magistrates themselves: whose
arrival ^eing diuulged among the people, every one, as it often happens, ran
with admiration to behold the new Priests that were come from Portugal.

OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE IIII. BOOK.
He inquireth of the Manners, and Religions of the Iaponians. CHAP. I.
IAPONIA is a Country of the utmost East, A description of Iaponia.
and bordereth upon the furthest part of Asia. It consists altogether of
Islands, divided by strait and narrow arms of the sea. Concerning the extent
and bigness thereof (as much as can be observed by a Portughese skillfull in
such matters, who has lately measured the same) we have for certain, that it
is extended in length about 900. miles, and in form not much unlike to Italy,
except that Italy joins to the Con^inent, and is almost equal unto it in
greatness. On the North, it lies toward the furthest part of Scythia, which we
call Tartary; on the west it bends toward China, and on the East, it is
opposite to New Spain, ^eing distant from thence less then 500. miles. From
^oa it is well near 2000. leagues. It conteynes sixty ^ix Kingdoms; and which
is very strange, the whole Nation uses but one language, and that not hard to
be ^earned. But all Iaponia (by reason of three Islands bigger then the rest) is
divided into three parts, which ^aking their names from the greater Islands,
have ma^y of the lesser belonging unto them.

That part which of all the rest is the greatest without comparison, and
furthest distant from India, is properly called Iapon, from whence the rest of
the country takes its name. This Island is in length 750. miles, but the
breadeth is various, yet for the most part it is about 180 miles over. There be
in it 53. Kingdoms; which certainly can be of no great extent: For even to
Lords, and Princes of several Cittyes they give the Title of King, of whom,
many abound in wealth, especially those who have the Dominion over many
Kingdoms. Herein is situated Meaco which was anciently the head City of all
Iaponia, but now of many Kingdoms only.

The next unto Iapon in greatness and wealth is Ximus, The Ila^d Ximus.
which is said to be 150. miles in length, and in breadeth 70. This lying
nearest of all the other unto China, and less distant from India, is divided
into nine Kingdoms, whereof Saxuma is one, and where, as we said before,
Xauerius first arrived.

The third Island lying between both these, is called Xicus, The Island Xicus.
or Xicocus, little more then half as great as Ximus, and conteyneth only
four Kingdoms. This whole country being altogether unknown to former ages,
was discovered by the Portugeses, who being by tempest of weather driven
thither, began by means of traffic, to have correspondence with them, some
ten years before Xauerius came thither. The Country is very cold, unpleasant
to the eye, and in many places mountanous and barrayne, yet for the most part
cha^pion, enterlaced with many fair rivers, and by nature fertile, although
they do not till the ground by reason of their continual wars; so as it is
more fit for vines and olives, if it were there with planted: for want whereof
there be very few vineyards, and no olives at all, and yields rather Rice,
then Corn. Neither do there want mines of gold, but skill to make it: yet
chiefly it excels in silver mines, A silver country.
for which cause it is called Argentaria. Notwithstanding, for that the
Inhabitants are debarred from trafficque with the Chinese, in times past it
wanted many things which now the Portugheses have by their commercement lately
supplied, not without great profit to themselves. And although there be
frequent Havens in the whole Country, yet the Island Ximus, both because it has
more store of Port Towns, and lies most commodious for the ships that come
from India, is most of all frequented by the Portughese merchants.

There was at that time one King who ruled over all Iaponia, called by the
inhabitants Dayrus; whose raygne, because Kingly Majesty was now ^worne out
amongst the Nobles, What kind of people the Iaponeses be.
began to depend upon their pleasures. The people of Iaponia, compared with the
Indians, are white of complexion, by nature most warlike, and in virtue and
uprightness do far exceed all other Nations which have ^byn found out of
late. Xauerius therefore making his ^abode at Cangoxima (which is the
principal City of Saxuma) before he would adventure to set upon the Iaponians
souls, thought best to seek out first all kind of ways and means how to do
it, and chiefly to inquire of their manners and religions. And having
diligently sounded them all out, he found the matter for the most part thus to
stand: to wit, that the whole Nation was of a very tractable disposition, and
for the most part cannot endure any double dealing. They have no great store of
gold, riches, or wealth; and therefore (as most commonly where there is least
money, there also is least seeking after it) their study is least about such
kind of things. Neither do they account any thing more dishonorable, then to
increase their wealth and substance by trafficque, or any other art. So as
their manner of life is vpheld by the direction of poverty, yet in such sort,
that they hyde the same with a neat and handsome adorning of their bodies.

They stand very much upon their dignity and reputation, so that you would
think them therein most perfectly to resemble the ancient Romans. They do all
for the most part, even children, place their greatest delight in martial
affairs, nor do they ordinarily, take content in any thing else.
Notwithstanding (which is incredible to be spoken or heard) although they be of
such courageous spirits, and so much given to bearing of arms, yet they
absteyne from all quarrels among themselves, reserving the use of their weapons
for time of war against their enemies. The Japoneses temper in bridling their
passions.
For the Iaponians have such government over themselves and their passions,
that they seem therein to be of the sect of Stoickes. And to see a Iaponese
brawling, chafing, or wrangling one with another, is amongst them accounted a
monstrous thing. Wherefore the better to avoid all occasion of contentions, they
never deal about any business of importance or co^trouersy by themselves, but
by a third person. And this they observe, not only with strangers, but also
with their friends, and those of the same household with them; whereby they
conserve quiet of mind in themselves, and peace with others.

They take very great delight in hunting, in so much that they eat no flesh
which is not gotten by that means. They can no more endure mutton,
swines-flesh, beef, or veale, then we can dogs, or horseflesh. They abstain
from milk and cheese as we do from raw blood. They keep hens and geese, not
so much to eat, as for their recreation and pleasure. They do therefore
seldom eat flesh, which when they do, The Iaponeses spare diet.
is always Venison. They feed for the most part on fish, fruit, herbs, and
rice: and by the means of their temperate diet they are very sound and
healthful, living ordinarily until they be very old, unless they meet by
chance with some violent or untimely death. At least, we may learn by this
their living so well upon a little, that Nature is content with few things,
although sensuality be never satisfied. Adulteries are with them most severely
punished. They abstain altogether from dyce-playing, and such like games,
deeming that by those means, men become desirous of others goods. They are
also so far from theft and robbery, that they judge nothing more unworthy in a
man: for which cause they condemn felons to the gallows, the most
disgraceful of all punishments amongst them.

They use cleanliness in their diet, The Japonians ciuility.
neatness in their attire, and most courteous ciuility in all their meetings,
salutations, and conversation: wherein the men are not more exact, then the
children; nor the Nobility, then the Country people. You would believe they
were all trained up together to civil and courtly behavior in the same Kings
Court. But these gifts of nature are obscured by pride, a malady deeply rooted
in this Nation. For they so contemn other nations in respect of themselves,
that they are for the most part very arrogant and insolent in their carriage
toward strangers. This one thing only excepted they want nothing, but the
light of the Gospel, being of themselves a nation (if there be any in the
world) borne, and in a manner framed to al ciuility. For even the country
people themselves are very ingenious, and desirous of learning; in so much,
that as every thing seems most conformable to reason, so they do most
willingly embrace it. They are very attentive to discourses, especially of God,
and divine matters. They are moreover commonly very good scholars, and
therefore so much the more apt to receive Christian discipline.

Now when Xauerius had understood these and many other things (which for
breuities sake I omit) of the disposition and manners of the Iaponians making
also iniquity after their Priests, The Iaponians Gods.
and Religions, he found things standing almost in this manner; to wit, that
they account those things most of all their Gods, by whose means they receive
help. Some therefore do worship the Sun, others the Moon, and others other
Gods. There be also among them certain Men held for Gods, which they had from
the Chinese: Amongst whom are Xacas, Bonzies Japonian Priests.
and Amidas. But there is no greater villanny, or impurity, then among their
Priest^ (whom they call Bonzies,) so that you may easily know whose Ministers
they be. For having brought in that heinous sin (which is not here to be
named) of preposterous lust, they have cast such a thick mist before the
Iaponians eyes, that being not able to discern such impurities, they commonly
account that most detestable crime of al other, to be no sin at all.
Whereupon (both their kings, and subjects being alike infected with that
abominable sin, and running on headlong therein, as it were to arms) their
Cittyes ever since, undoubtedly through Gods wrathful indignation, being
continually in tumultes and uproar, they are perpetually engaged in civil
wars amongst themselves; whereby at last they may, by Gods goodness, open their
eyes to fly from such abominations. And in the mean time, that sin may not
want matter to work on, the Nobility for the most part, commit their children,
like sheep to wolves, for their Education to the Bonzies. There be diverse
Conuents of them both men and women, called Bonzies, and Bonziesses, and they
have also distinct habits, as amongst our Religious men of Europe, the Devil
therein playing the ape with the Church of Christ. But al^hough the Bonzies be
not without good ground, esteemed to be given all alike to that beastly
impurity, yet ^hey are so cloaked, either with the respect of their Priesthood,
or else by the great opinion which is had of their abstinence, that they are
for all that, held in very great esteem, both with the Nobility and com^^on
people: because it is bruited abroad with more ^lory then truth, that they
abstain wholly from flesh, ^^sh, and wine, and live only upon herbs, and
ryce, and ^ate but once a day.

CHAP. II.
At Cangoxima he conuerteth many to the Christian faith.
FRANCIS having taken exact notice of these things, and judging it fit (as the
state of such business then required) that he ought first of all to prescribe
unto himself a more strict manner of life, lived indeed more sparingly, and
hardly then the Bonzies were reported to do; which was most certainly true,
seeing that he found in those places not only want of things necessary, but even
a quite different kind of diet from that he was accustomed unto; so as mere
hunger and necessity did constrain him to change, as it were, his usual manner
of diet, and even his very taste also. For he kept himself alive with ryce
instead of bread, and for the most part, Francis extreme sparing diet in
Iaponia.
with fruit and herbs instead of meat, and this dressed after the Iaponian
fashion. Which new kind of frugality he most willingly embraced, for the
vehement desire he had of gayning souls to God, like one, Whose meat and
drink was to do the will of him that sent him. And he was always wont to say,
that he was much behoulding to Iaponia, because that even then, when he was by
the inhabitants invited to a Feast, he found none of those daynties, wherewith
mortal men, being often deceived, sought more to please their Sensuality, then
to satisfy Nature, even to the overthrow rather of their forces, then to the
strengthening thereof: so as that unusual diet, and the manner of dressing it,
held him to greater tempera^ce therein. Yet for all this, he was of no less
ability of body then before. For he had his health no where better then in
Iaponia; by which it is evident, that a spare diet does not diminish, but
increase ones health, and forces.

But now he had much more to do, in acquainting his tongue with their language,
The Iaponian language
then his palate with their diet. For although the Iaponian language be not of
its own nature very hard, yet have the Iaponians by their endeauours brought
it to be exceeding difficile to learn. There is not any language more copious
then theirs. For to express diverse conceits of things in a different manner it
has wonderful store of words, all signifying the same thing; and in using
thereof, it has a certain kind of Elegancy, and as it were, a smacke proper
to that country. They do not without great consideration, use any word which
first occurreth, but, as some are more elegant, some of a lower strain, so do
they keep a proportion with the matter, and persons to whom they are applied.
Nay, which is very strange, they speak far otherwise, then they write. The men
use one kind of language, and the women another: and the letters which they
send one to another, are written with one kind of character, and their Books
with another. By which copiousnes, and variety both of speaking and writing,
much labor and time is required to learn their language. And no man of
ciuility must be ignorant in this kind. For if he do swerve any thing from
their manner of speech, they will laugh at him, as at an ignorant and rusticall
fellow; no otherwise then we are accustomed to do, when in speaking of latin,
any one should make an odious iarring, in choice ears, by harsh and barbarous
words.

Francis therefore thinking that it now stood him upon, to learn their
language howsoever; when he had caused Paul the Iaponian to set down the
chief heads of the Christian doctrine in writing, he met with many rubs. For
Paul being a man without learning, was no whit a better interpreter then a
Master. And although his endeauours were above his forces, yet he effected
less then the matter required. For he interpreted those points so ill, that
there was no connection in his speech. And he also wrote so badly, that the
Iaponians, who were even learned, could hardly read his writing without
laughing. But Xauerius being of an undaunted courage, which always striued
against difficulties, and making small account of men's laughing at him when
their salvation was in hand, went perseuerantly still on in the business.
Wherefore dealing in the best in manner he could with the people, he by the
sanctity of his life, and divine fervor of spirit, wrought so efficaciously
with the^, that he did more good by himself, then either by Paul, or any other
Interpreter. For at the nouelty of the thing, and of the doctrine he taught,
the inhabitants came flocking about him by whole troops, partly out of desire
to see strangers wholly different from them, both in habit and behavior; and
partly also, to know what Religion they had brought out of the other world. But
because for want of perfect language, they could not well explicate their own
meaning, nor yet resolve those who asked them questions, some scoffed at them,
others mocked at their strange habit and behavior, and others pittyed them
being strangers, deeming that such men coming out of another world as far as
Iaponia, to bring thither a new Religion, ought neither to be fools, nor to
bring with them matters of small moment: so as by this variety of judgment
many were moved with a desire to know the new Religion they had brought, and
received much profit thereby.

In the mean time Paul the Iaponian having settled his affairs, began to be
admired by his Countrymen, because having trauayled over India, he recounted to
them many strange things, and never heard of amongst them. Going therefore to
salute the Prince of Saxama who remained 15. miles from Cangoxima, he is by him
courteously entertained. After mutual gratulations, the Prince asked him many
questions concerning matters in India, and of the Portugheses wealth and
manners. Paul having well satisfied him by his relation, of what he asked,
takes forth a curious table which he brought out of India, wherein was painted
the Image of the B. Virgin Mary with the child jesus sitting in his mothers
lap. A King of Iaponia humbly adoreth the Image of our B. Lady.
And after he had ^ould the Prince diverse things of the Christians Religion, he
showed him this picture, who forthwith ben death down his knees in veneration
thereof, and commands all that were present to do the like. But further then
this veneration of the Picture, the Prince went not: yet his mother being in
love therewith, greatly desired to have a pattern of it, but there was no
painter found who could perform what the pious woman requested. She had also
afterward a great desire to know the Christian Religion, and demanded to have
the principal points thereof set down in the Iaponian language. Paul did so
indeed, but soon after she desisted from her good purpose.

Wherefore seeing his endeauours to have no effect he returns again to
Cangoxima, Paul the Iaponian endeauours to propagate the Christian faith.
and imployeth himself with far better success at home, then he had done
abroad. For the devout and laborious man, being as well moved by Xauerius
example, as of his own accord, set himself seriously to work amongst his
own family and kindred, never leaving to teach and exhort them, day nor night,
sometimes by one alone, sometimes altogether, until he had drawn many of
them to the Christian faith: so as within a short space his wife, daughter, and
many of his kinsfolks both men and women, were instructed in the Catechism,
and baptized, the people no ways misliking what they had resolved upon, and
done.

But Xauerius understanding for certain, The Ninxit or chief Priest of the
Bonzies.
that the peoples affections depended wholly upon the authority of the Bonzies,
and that if he could but once weake^ the same he should find all things easy;
thought it expedient first of all, to bend all his forces against their esteem
and credit amongst the people, as against the maine fort of superstition.
Wherefore meeting upon a very fit occasion with the chief man of the Bonzies
(whom they call Ninxit, and who far excels the rest not only in years
and dignity, but also in the opinion of learning) he by his courteous behavior
insinuates himself into his familiarity. Then falling from one discourse to
another, by little and little he began to buckle with him about matters of
Religion. And not in vain. For he found him presently, not to stand constantly
to what he said, as well concerning the immortality of the soul, as in other
points, but to stagger in his opinions, when he was pressed with the truth; so
as he had no great difficulty in ouercomming, and pressing down the poor man.
Yet the Bonzy taking great content either in Xauerius prudence or else in the
sweetness of his conversation, held him in great esteem. Now the rest of the
Bonzies following their Ninxits example, desired also to converse with
Xauerius, rather for ostentations sake, then for any ^^od will they bare unto
him. There was nothing which they more admired in him, then the greatness
(...) his mind, who for Religions sake only, had by a ^^ng and dangerous
navigations come from Portugal ^^rough the vast Ocean, to those utmost parts
of the ^orld. They also with exceeding admiration and de^^ght gave ear to him,
whilst he declared unto them, ^at there was an everlasting Blessedness in
Heaven, ^yd up for those who serve Christ with devotion, and ^^nctity of life.

Now the Bonzies being partly won by Xauerius ^^ourtely, and partly convinced
by his erudition, the ^^usinesse seemed to be in a good forwardness. But
because he could not deal with the people without an ^nterpreter, his
endeavors were indeed much hindered through want of language. Wherefore being
sollici^ous how to procure the salvation of so many perishing souls, he with
all speed learneth the principles of the Iaponian tongue, whereof he had before
gotten a taste. Then, that he might deal the more freely with the people, he
makes means for access unto the King: wherein Paul the Iaponian stood him in
great steed. For he easily drew the King of Saxuma, who much desired to have
friendship and commercement with the Portugheses, to show particular
countenance unto Francis and his companions, who were of great authority with
the Portugheses. Francis therefore being admitted to the King, and finding him
well disposed, brought him without any great difficulty, to give free leave
unto his subjects, to receive the Christian Religion. This liberty was no
sooner granted, but presently two of the Bonzies, and many other Iaponians
united themselves to the faith of Christ; and within a few months space above
an hundred Citizens became Christians with the good liking of their friends
and kins folks: All whom Xauerius instructed with a greater care and
industry, for that he had as yet no skill of the Iaponian characters, which (as
we said before) are more difficile to learn, then the words themselves.
Wherefore having the chief points of the Chrinian faith turned into the
Iaponian language, but yet written in our European characters, he taught the^
to the Neophites, reading them out of the writing it self. He also sent diverse
Neophytes into India, there to be brought up in learning in the College of
Goa, that being afterward furnished both with knowledge, and Christian
behavior, they might be more able to bring both admiration, and assistance to
their Country men.

CHAP. III.
He rayseth a dead Maid to life: and cures another of the Leaprousy.
AFTER this, there happened a strange Event, which augmented both the flock of
Christ at Cangoxima and made Francis his name more famous also. There was in
Cangoxima an honest and substantial Citizen, yet no friend to Christian
religion. He had a little daugh^er whom he loved most dearly, who by untimely
^eath was suddenly taken away. Whereupon falling ^ut of wits with grief, he
said, and did many things ^nbeseeming a man of his rank. Amongst others, there
^^me unto him certain Neophytes of his kindred and ^^iends, to condole with
him, and to celebrate the fune^lls of his daughter; who being greatly moved
with ^^e woeful case of their kinsman, advise him with all ^^eed to go unto
Xauerius, who was a holy man newly ^ome out of another world, and implore his
aid; for ^ertainly he would restore his daughter to life. There was no great
difficulty to persuade the afflicted Father thereto. Wherefore being set on with
the desire of his daughters life, he runs to Xauerius bedewed all with
tears, and declares the matter unto him, humbly beseeching his help, who
having lost his child, was now left all alone. Francis pitying his case,
presently betaketh himself to prayer, together with John Fernandez his
companion. And after a while he rises up cheerfully, and comfort the man,
willing him to be of good courage, and telling him withal, that his daughter
was alive. Upon which words the Barbarian began to be in choler, who had but
even now left her certainly dead. Wherefore either thinking himself to be
accounted a liar, or else that Francis disdayned to come unto his house, he
departed in a chafe. As he was in the way homeward, one of his family meets
him, and brings him tidings that the maid was alive, and in good health.
Whereupon the man, feeling his sorrow in an instant turned into joy, hastes
home with great desire to see his daughter whom he so dearly loved. When he
entered into his house and beheld her alive and in health, he could hardly
believe his own eyes; and with tears trickling down for joy, asked her by
what means she was restored again to life? As soon, quoth she, as I was
dead, there stood ready at hand certain cruel executioners, who snatching me
up, went to cast me headlong into an horrible pit of fire* but upon the sudden
there appeared two other singular men, by whose means I was delivered out of
those executioners hands, and restored to life again. At this relation of the
maid, the father stood a while astonished through admiration. Then perceiving,
manifestly, that it was done by Xauerius help, he leads his daughter to him
to give him thanks. As Soon as she saw Francis and his companion, she stood at
first amazed, then turning to her father, she cries out: Behold, Father,
these be the two men that rescued me from Hell. Then he with the maid falling
down at Xauerius feet, with abundance of tears gave him humble thanks: who
presently taking them up with joy of heart, wills them to give thanks to
Christ the son of God, and Author of man's salvation.

Neither was this great miracle done in vain. For this one mayds restoring to
life, caused the salvation of many others. And the Father, daughter, and all
the rest of that family presently became Christians. Others also were, by this
example, moved to implore Xauerius aid, and desired to receive the faith of
Christ. Amongst whom there was a certain Leaper, borne of good parentage, who
had sent one to Francis, re^uesting him to come and cure him. But he receiving
the ^^essage excuses himself in a courteous manner, by ^^eason of his so many
other employments; yet sends ^ne of his companions to him, with instructions
what ^^o do. When he came thither, he saluteth the sick man ^erylouingly, and
asks him three, times as Xauerius had ^ppointed, whether he would become a
Christian? And ^^uing a sign that he would, the other presently ma^^eth upon
him the sign of the Holy Cross. A won^erfull thing. He had no sooner done,
but the Cross ^^stantly wiped clean away the leaprosy. Whereupon ^^e man was
instructed in the Christian faith, and a lit^^e after baptized. These things
being done in the view ^^f the whole City of Cangoxima, were straight carri^^d
into India, and related to Francis his companions ^^here, not only by Vincent
Pereira a Portughese mer^hant and Xauerius familiar friend, a man worthy of ^ll
credit although in a matter of such importance; ^^ut by many others also.

CHAP. IIII.
He receaueth nevves of the Martyrdom of Fa. Antony Criminalis.
NOW whilst Xauerius was rejoicing at the happy success of Christian affairs
in Iaponia, there came unto him letters out of India that did somewhat afflict
him, by which he understood of the death of Fa. Antony Criminalis. This man, as
we said before, was by Francis made superior in the Promontory of Comorinum,
and having for the space of four years, with great fruit of his labors,
managed the affairs of Christian Religion in that Coast, in the year 1549. a
little before Xauerius entered into Iaponia, obtained the crown of Martyrdom,
a reward due to his pains. For when a great band of the Badages, inflamed with
hatred against Christian Religion, had from the bordring kingdom of Bisnaga,
broken into the coast of Comorinum, spoiling and destroying all before them the
Christians, in such a fearful tumult, presently forsook their villages, and
houses, and began to fly to the Portughese ships, which at that time lay
there at anchor.

Antony therefore being in a great throng of women and children, and troubled
with many cares, encouraged those who were afraid to make have away, and
withal affoarded his help and assistance to others that were weak, and cold
not fly so fast. In the mean time the enemy approached, and he fearing least
some of the Neophytes being intercepted by the Barbarians might through pain
of torments, be drawn from the faith of Christ, resolved like a good Pastor
there to spend his life for his sheep, Joan. 11.
if need required. The Portugheses invited, and entreated him to come into
their ships to avoid the present danger; but he wholly forgetting himself,
provided more for the safety of those that were with him, then his own, by
ridding out of the way those, especially women and children, who by reason of
their weakness, were most in danger. Now whilst he freeth others from the
cruelty of the Barbarians, being himself stopped from recovering the ships,
for that the enemy had gotten between him and the shore, The Martyrdom of Fa.
Antony Criminalis.
he fell into their hands. Then all burning with the love of God, and having his
cogitations fixed rather upon Eternity, then upon this mortal life, kneeling
down upon the ground, and lifting up his hands to heaven, offers himself to
death with incredible courage and constancy. Nor was the Barbarians cruelty,
less then his valor. For being thrust through the body with three lances, he
fell down dead. And it is reported, that when they were stripping him, as he
lay thus grievously wounded, he helped those cruel robbers to draw off his
own clothes, that he might not seem to hold his apparel faster then his
life.

This news, which could not otherwise choose, caused in Xauerius diverse
affections. For as it grieved him, that he was deprived of so notable a
subject; so was he greatly ioyed for the Fathers good fortune, in receiving the
reward of his labors, by so noble a Crown. So as honoring the memorable
death of this holy man both with tears, and praises, he began to hope firmly,
that the sterility of that field, being now watered with the blood of this
Martyr, would daily yield more plenty of fruit. Neither was his hope herein
frustrate. For since that time the Gospel has no where yielded a more
plentiful harvest, then in the coast of Comorinum, so abundant has been the
increase of Neophytes in that coast, no less eminent in piety, that in
sweetness of manners.

CHAP. V.
The course of Christian affairs being hindered at Cangoxima, he goes to
preach the Gospel at Firandum, and Amangucium.
FRANCIS having the like occasion in the city of Cangoxima, met with a far
different condition. For when he, thirsting after Martyrdom, had weakened and
beaten down the authority of the Bonzies, and that the forward spring of
neophites began to make now a glorious show; behold upon the sudden a tempest
was raised by the Bonzies, which brought great calamity to the Christian cause,
and which was more heavy to Xauerius, then even death it self. Many were now
by divine instinct become Christians; and many also by seeing the truth, were
drawn to embrace the faith of Christ, The Bonzies hinder the course the
Gospel.
when as the Bonzies (which thing Francis had long for seen) hindered the
course of the Gospel. For when they perceived, that by bringing in, and
increase of Christian Religion, the respect both to their Gods, and their own
authority came to be set at naught, they began in good earnest to be all on
fire with rage and anger. And so thrust forward as well with madness, as by the
Devil himself, they come in great troops to their king, telling him very
resolutely, and plainly: That he should look very warily what he did, and
should provide both for his own safety and of the common good, whilst it was
in his power. If he did permit his subjects to entertayne strange Religious,
their Country Gods would certainly become a mocking stock every where: and if
they were once incensed, what could he expect else, but that Cangoxima, and his
whole kingdom would within a while be utterly overthrown? Did not he see,
that the Christian Religion was wholly repugnant to that of Iaponia? and how it
lost every day so much, as the Christian Religion gained? Neither could he be
ignorant that where strange ceremonies should be preferred before those of
their own country, there would be caused extreme sorrow to the country Gods?
And certaynely it was a less fault for the people to offend therein, then for
the King to wink at others offenses. The slower that Heaven was in punishing,
the more enraged would the wrath thereof be when it came. For no doubt but the
first founders of the Iaponian Religion, would be revenged of Cangoxima for so
great a disgrace, and that both he and his kingdom would be utterly destroyed
for the impiety of a few. Wherefore if he had any respect, or reverence of his
Country ceremonies, or Gods, it were wisdom to look either for their favor,
or stand in fear of their anger.

The King being stricken with this speech of the Bonzies, and being also out of
hope of commercement with the Portugheses, published presently an Edict or
Proclamation, prohibiting under pain of imprisoment and death, that all men
should keep their Country Religion, and that hereafter none should become
Christians. But Xauerius hoping every day, that times might grow better and
calmer, took great care in looking to his young flock. And all the rest of his
time which he did not employ therein, he was accustomed to bestow upon God, with
whom he conuersed more then with men, esteeming such divine conferences to be,
not only an encouragement to virtue, but a comfort also in the time of
persecution and labor. He therefore being a stranger in a Barbarous City, and
which was wholly bent against him, endured with wonderful quiet of mind, many
and grievous miseries, as well of hungar and cold, as of other extreme
difficulties. The Kingdom of Figua.
But having passed a whole year in these labors and incommodities, when he
perceived there was small, or no hope left for increase of the Gospel at
Cangoxima, he resolved to depart from thence to some other place. Wherefore
bidding farewell to his Neophytes, he left the protection of them to Paul of
the holy Faith: and together with Cosmas Turianus, and John Fernandez, raised
up with new hopes, intended to pass into the kingdom of Figua, whither now
the Portugheses had resorted for traffic.

It is incredible to be spoken what abundance of tears the new Christians
shed upon Francis his departure from them, for all did bear him extraordinary
affection, as well for many other respects, as chiefly for his singular
sanctity of life. Wherefore weeping, and in lamentable manner, calling him
Master, Guide, and Father, they took at last their leaves, with infinite
thanks for the great pains he had taken, in showing them the way to eternal
salvation. There were well-^eere 800. Neophytes, so well instructed, that
though ^ey were within a few months after bereaved of Paul ^eir master, yet
they perseuered every one of them (...) the Christian faith seven whole
years, without ^^y other guide, until some of the Society came thi^er again.

The kingdom of Figua is in that Island of Iaponia which, The town Firandu^
as we said, is called Ximus. In this King^ome there is a town called
Firandum, about ^00. ^iles from Cangoxima, whither he repayed, and was
^ourteously entertained by the Portugheses, and by their means also by the
King himself; with whom ^emayning for some days, he brought well nigh an ^00.
of the Citizens, to the faith of Christ. And although he repented not himself
of the pains which he had taken amongst the Portugheses, and those of Firandum
(for he had in few days made more Christians in Firandum, then he had done in
Cangoxima in many months) yet having greater matters in hand and committing
the charge of the Neophytes to Cosmas Turianus, and taking John Fernandez with
him, he passes over into the Island of Iapon, intending to go to Meaco. But
understanding by those who were experienced in those parts, that Amangucium, a
Town of good note lay in his way, he presently goes thither, to sound out,
and try the disposition and inc^^nation of the King of that Country

Amangucium is a very ample, and famous sea Town, situated in that part of
Iaponia, which (as we said) is properly called Iapon. For there the King of
that Country has his Royal seat; who being very wealthy and potent, strives
for the Empire with the King of Meaco, who is accounted the greatest King of
all the rest. That town of Amangucium according to the fashion of that
country, is built of timber, containing in it to the number of 10000. families,
and is distant from Firandum almost 300. miles. As soon therefore as Xauerius
came thither, he found very many of the Nobility, and more of the vulgar sort,
desirous to know the Christian Religion, whereof they had long since heard many
things by report. He therefore observed this order, that twice every day at the
corners of streets, and in cross ways before a great concourse of people he
explicated the Ghospel of Christ out of a written paper, for he had not yet
gotten the Iaponian language perfectly; yet all did not with the like
prosperous success give ear unto the word of God: many did indeed hearken
very willingly thereto, but more contemned the same; some also laughed thereat
in skornefull manner. In so much, that when Xauerius went along in the steetes,
Xauerius is used like a madma^.
a great company of boys, and baser people followed, and mocked him as though
he had been out of his wits, repeating also in a scoffing manner many words of
the sacred mysteryes, and Christian laws which he had read unto him. All which
things he bare patiently and joyfully, not considering so much the reproach, as
the cause thereof: so as he did much more good by his patient suffering, then
by words. For the wiser sort of his auditors, seeing plainly that he was no
fool, admired at his singular patience, and quietness of mind in the midst of
such disgraceful reproaches and con^^melious words, especially when they heard
that he ^as come out of Europe into Iaponia, through such ^uge and vast seas,
for no other end, but only out of ^^ale to teach them a new Religion.

At last, his strange virtue and sanctity of life began (...) be held in great
admiration and reverence, and to ^anifest it self not only by words, but by
deeds also. ^hereupon many Noblemen desirous to know more ^rticularly, what
Religion that was which he had ^ought out of the other world, sent for him home
to ^eir houses, promising of their own accord, that (...) he could yield good
reasons of those ceremonies, which he had introduced amongst them they would
^referre them before those of their own Country. ^ut this indeed was now a
business, not consisting (...) the will, or any endeavor of ours, but in the
mercy ^f God. There were diverse others also who heard these things, but most of
them attended thereto, more with their corporal ears, then with any interior
desire ^hey had to embrace them. Noblemen sed for him to their houses.
Xauerius, having thus spent ^ome days in the streets, and in private houses
not without fruit, was at last sent for by the King himself: who demanded of
him his Country, and the cause of his coming into Iaponia. He answered, that
^e was a Spaniard borne, and came thither to preach unto them the law of God,
out of the care, and zeal which he had of their salvation. For that none could
be saved who did not acknowledge God the Creator of this universal World, and
Jesus Christ his only Son the Savior of all Nations; and moreover keep his
divine laws, and Precepts. Whereupon, being commanded by the King to declare
what that law was, He preaches the Gospel to the King
he willingly obeyed, and began to recite the same out of the book which he
had written. He was heard with great attention, and admiration, for the space
of an hour or there about. But the barbarous King being better disposed to
hear, then to perform those heavenly things, was careless of what was said.

Xauerius then applying himself again to his former function of preaching (as
custom does by little and little qualify the most unruly dispositions) found
the minds of the people more indifferently disposed, and began to reap more
fruit of his labors. The Ethnickes at the hearing of Christ's torments fall a
weeping.
For that now very many gave willing ear to the admirable passages of our
Saviors life which he recounted. But when he came to relate his bitter
torments, and most unworthy death, they could not contain themselves from
weping, the same seeming, even to the Barbarians hearts, so greatly to deserve
compassion. Thus Mercy it self opened the way unto Religion, and some began
already to be Christians. But Francis thinking it not worth his labor to
remain any longer in that City, determined to go unto Meaco, with intention
to demand of that King (who by reason of the amplitude of his Empire, The great
King of Meaco.
is called the great King) permissio^ to preach the Gospel. For he had
understood that Meaco was the noblest and chiefest City of all Iapon, and very
famous as well for the greatness thereof, as for the fame of the Colleges (being
also a prime Academy) and multitude of Conue^ts therein; in so much that at his
first entrance into Iaponia he was in the mind to have gone directly thither.
But God favoring those of Cangoxima, the ships, as we said before, arrived
thither first, where hopes of good success for the Christian Cause, had longer
deteyned him, then the fruit which he reaped thereby. Being resolved therefore to
go unto Meaco, he took with him for his companions John Fernandez of the
Society, and Bernard a Neophyte of Iaponia, a sincere good man, and the first
that became Christian at Cangoxima.

CHAP. VI.
Of the great pains which he took in his journey to Meaco.
THE City of Meaco stands almost in the midst of the Island, as it were the
Nauil, of Iapon. It is distant from Amungucium, which is situate in the first
entrance of the Island, not above 150. miles, by a direct line. But the way of
passing thither is much longer, by reason of the montaynes, and the many
turnings and windings about those narrow arms of the sea. Thither did Xauerius
direct his journey in the year 1550. and month of October, at what time the
weather is very could and bitter in Iapon. The way was then not only rough and
craggy, but covered also with perpetual snow, which the hard frosty winter had
congealed together. Throughout the woods there hunge down from the trees as
it were certain ysicles, like beams of cogealed Snow, and Ice, threatening
death and destruction to all passengers who trauayled that way. Besides this,
there was no small danger in respect of the continual civil wars,
wherewith the whole Country was then exceedingly pestered; as also of the great
number of thieves wherewith those woods and ways were ordinarily, yea daily
haunted, and infested.

Notwithstanding all these, and many other unspeakable miseries of the way,
Xauerius having his mind wholly fixed upon the Divine Providence, and Salvation
of Souls, undertook with incredible joy, and iubilation of heart, Xauerius
makes himself lacky to one that rides on horseback.
that so long and dangerous a io^ney, entering into the same, even in the most
unseasonable time of the year. And that he might the more freely pass through
so Barbarous a Country, and savage a Nation; and withal to enjoy the company,
and commodity of a Guide in so tedious, and uncouth a journey, he makes
himself a servant, and becomes a Lacky to a certain Iaponian Gentleman of
that Country, who by chance he met withal, trauayling a horseback upon
business to Meaco; accounting it an honorable thing to serve a Barbarian, or
Infidel, even in the basest office, for Christ his sake.

Francis therefore, running a foot by his Masters side, over and above the
burden of his own furniture for saying of Mass, and administering of other
Sacraments, he carried at his back his Masters implements and baggage, who
rode on horseback, and even disdayned to carry his own necessaries himself,
when he found commodity of another to do it for him. Besides, the Iaponian when
he was to pass through any theeuish place, for fear of ^obbing, spurred on
his horse, more like one that were running a race, then an ordinary trauayler
by the way; and this without any compassion at all of his Lacky, whom he saw,
was not able to follow him keeping on that pace, especially through such durty,
and uneven way, and with so heavy a burden on his back.

Therefore, for the most part, he was forced to travail barefoote, The labors
and miseries of his journey to Meaco.
by reason of the many and often slowes and plashes of water he met withal,
and other little brooks that he was to pass over. In so much that having his
feet oftentimes greatly swollen with snow, and cold weather, he trauayled with
exceeding great pain; being also, partly through running after his Master,
and partly through the weight of both his burdens, that he carried at his
back, even wholly spent, and tired out. Besides being not able to take sure
footing, by reason of the slyppinesse of the ice, and roughness of the way, he
received many a sore, and painful fall.

All which intolerable difficulties he not only overcame with great quiet of
mind, but had with withal his cogitations so firmly fixed upon God, that even
at that very time he became wholly abstracted from his senses. For such was the
force of his heavenly contemplation, and so greatly was he overcome with the
sweetness thereof, that scarsely knowing what he did, he many times ran among
the brambles and bushes, and struck his feet against the stones even till the
blood came out, without any feeling or pain at all. Now at night he was
commonly in as bad a plight as in the day. For oftentimes being all wet, and
even wholly spent with cold and hungar, he came at night to his Inn, where
there was no humane comfort to be had, nor any ease for these his miseries.
Whereof this may be a sufficient proof, that during all that journey, he eat
nothing but only ryce (which himself also begged as he travailed) with no
less want of food then pain of body. Moreover the insolency of the Country
people, to these his miseries which he suffered in the way, added sauce of the
same nature. For the Iaponians being of a proud and haughty spirit, and seeing
him a stranger, contemptible, inexpert in their complements and behavior, and
one that contemned himself, used him even like a poor fool, or sotte: so as
in towns and villages where he was to pass in boats, as also upon the way,
and in the Innes, Xauier is used like a fool.
he was the subject for every one to play upon. But all this he bare, not only
patiently, but cheerfully also, rejoicing with the Apostle to be for Christ his
sake reputed a fool, and the outcast of all. And having thus spent two whole
months upon the way, after innumerable miseries passed both by water and land,
at last through the goodness of God he arrived safe and sound at Meaco.

Meaco is the royal City, and the greatest and most famous of all Iaponia.
This City when it flourished (if we will believe what is reported thereof)
contained well near two hundred thousand families; but having bin oftentimes
destroyed by wars, pillage and fire it is now little more then half so
great. The Circuit indeed of the walls, and the vastnes of the City do yet
well show to have been no less in form times ^^hen that which has been said
thereof; but now when ^au^rius came thither, it had only about one hundred
^^ousand houses. There is in this City a very famous Academy, five principal
Colleges of Scholars, and ^nnumerable Conuents of men, and women: so as
^^here seemed to be offered to Xauerius abundant mat^^r to work upon. But so
secret are the judgments ^f God, that his hope wholly vanished away, and came
(...) nothing.

As soon therefore as he came to Meaco, he expe^^ed some days at the Court,
waiting for oppor^^nity to come unto the Kings presence, and to ask ^^is
license to preach the Gospel in his kingdom; Xauerius is derided by the
Kings guard.
^ut in vain. For his ignorance of the Iaponian custo^es and behavior, his
vulgar, and worne-out ap^arell, and his Christian simplicity caused him to be
^erided, and wholly rejected by the Kings Guard. Fin^ing therefore all passages
unto the King to be stopped ^n such sort, that he could not by any means get
^ccesse unto him; and understanding that certain Noblemen, who, by reason that
the King of Meaco's Regal authority began to grow now out of date, had
withdrawn themselves from his obedience, changing ^^is determination, and
leaving off all thought of ob^ayning the King Letters Patent, began to try the
Meacensians themselves how they stood affected toward the Christian Religion.
But finding the whole Cittty in perplexity, and solicitous expectation, and
fear of wars which were then coming upon them, he lost his time and labor
in speaking to them, who had their ears, and mynds wholly bent another way.

Moreover, when he preached in the streets to the people that stood round about
him (which had also happened to him in other towns) the boys, He is thowne at
with stones.
and baser sort of people, threw old shoes, and stones also at his head to
drive him away; so far was obstinate Superstition from opening her ears, or
understanding to admit of wholesome doctrine. But he went away, rejoicing that
he had been held worthy to suffer reproach for the name of JESUS. At last when
he saw the saw the City to be both disquieted in it self, and wholly auerted
from the Ghospel, it much grieved him that after so long and painful a
journey, he was to depart without doing any good, having not so much as reaped
one handful out of so large and spacious a field. But leaving all to Gods
divine providence, he returns again to Amangucium, comforting himself with
this consideration, That it is a great honor, not only to do, but also to
suffer for Christ.

CHAP. VII.
Having by Presents obtained the King of Amangucium his favor, he conuerteth
many to the Christian Faith.
RETVRNING therefore to Amangucium with almost as much travel and misery, as he
had gone from thence to Meaco, he determined presently to go unto the King, and
^o deliver him certain letters, and presents from the ^iceroy of India, and
the Bishop of Goa, which he had ^^eft at Firandum. He intended to have
presented these ^uifts to the King of Meaco, who was said to be the ^^reatest
of all Iaponia: but when he perceived that he ^aigned now at other men's
pleasures, and that his ^uthority was not so great as his Name, and withal,
that the King of Amangucium was very potent and wealthy, changing his
determination, he thought it ^est to present them unto him; deeming it not
amiss ^o gain his favor by gifts, who was by his autho^ity best able to
help the Christian cause. So retur^ing speedily to Firandum, he bethinkes
himself of a ^^ew means to obtain access unto the King, the which necessity
had forced him unto.

He had now learnt by experience, that the Iapo^ians (according to the common
corruption of mortals) esteemed men by the outward show, and ornament of their
body, and that any one in poor clothes was scarce accounted a man amongst
them: as if the worth of man consisted rather in his outward attire, then in
his virtuous disposition. Wherefore laying aside his old worn coat, By
putting on rich apparel he procures to speak with the King.
he resolved to cloth himself in Court-like habit; and by the splendor of
his ornaments, so to feed the eyes of such as were carried away, rather by the
exterior show of things then by that which was truly good indeed, that
afterward he might bring them to conceive the light of Truth. As soon
therefore as he came back again to Amangu^ium, putting himself into rich
apparel, and with two or three servants attending him, he went unto the King.
And the event declared his prudence herein. For being presently brought in to
the King by his officers, he is by him received in a very friendly and
courteous manner. Then making a short speech before hand, He presents his
gifts to the King.
he delivers unto the King, from the Viceroy of India, and Bishop of Goa, as
pledges of their friendship, Letters, and certain outlandish Presents, among
which there was a Musical Instrument, and a Watch, things very grateful, and
much esteemed in those places, not so much for the value, as for the rarity,
and curiosity of the workmanship.

The King therefore being wonderfully glad for these letters and guiftes which
the Portugheses had sent him, presents again Xauerius very bountifully with a
great quantity of silver, He refuses the Kings gifts.
and gold. But he remembering himself to be a Priest of God, and no merchant,
gives back again the things which were offered him, and withal earnestly
requested the King, that he would by his Royal Edict give him leave to publish
the divine Law throughout his dominions, and his subjects to receive the same:
for that nothing could be more grateful to his and the Portugheses desire,
then that. At which words the King being stricken with admi^ation at his
temperance, The Kings Edict for the Christan Religion.
who despised that which others sought after with so great dangers both by sea
and ^and, made no difficulty to favor his Religion whose virtue he admired.
Whereupon without any further delay, he commands a Proclamation to be made
^hroughout all the streets of the City, that it was his Royal pleasure, that
the Christian Religion should ^e propounded to his subjects, and that whosoever
would, might become Christians: And that none should either by deed or word
offer any affront to the Portughese Priests; neither should any of his subjects
suffer any detriment, or disgrace for having forsaken ^is country Religion.
Besides this also, the better to ^nable Xauerius to perform that which was
granted unto him, he gave him for his dwelling place a certai^e Convent of the
Benzies, which then was void.

This gained both credit to Xauerius, and esteem ^o his Religion. For many
desirous to know the new Religion came flocking to hear him; nor was Xaue^ius
wanting to give them satisfaction, having now gotten some pretty skill in their
language. Twice therefore every day did he preach unto the people, before a
great assembly of the Citizens. After he had ^^ended his sermon, he spent some
time in conference with his auditors about that which he had propounded unto
them out of the pulpit, either by answering to their questions, or else by
questioning them. These disputes coming one upon the neck of another, held
out most commonly till it was very late in the night, so that he had scarcely
any leisure to provide for his corporal necessities. And in all this business
nothing hindered him so much, as his imperfectness in the Iaponian language.
For oftentimes when any improper word sounded harsh to their nice and delicate
ears, they laughed at his ignorant pronunciation. And there wanted not some
also, who did load him with questions, for no other end, but to find out
something whereat to laugh.

But such was the spirit which he spoke with all, such the sanctity of his life
and Religion, and so far excelling the life and doctrine of the Bonzies, that
what he could not effect by words, he clearly demonstrated by deeds. Wherefore
the Iaponians being an ingenious nation, and much led by reason, saw now well
enough that the things he spoke, had very good sense and connection, how soever
he uttered them in bad language. Many therefore came unto him out of the
Co^uents both of Bonzies and Bonziesses; many also of the Nobility, but much
greater was the number of the vulgar sort. The house was continually filled
with people of all qualities, and many times it could not contain the
multitude which came thither. The questions which were disputed to and fro,
were so many and diverse, that the foggy mist of error being dispersed, and
the light of truth spreading abroad its glorious beams, many perceived by
Francis his answers, how vain and false their superstitions were, and that
the divine Law was true and solid: and this diligence of theirs to find out by
examination the true Religion was seconded also on their part, with as great
forwardness in receiving the same.

Some days therefore being spent in asking and an^wering Questions, many became
Christians, wherein those who had bin formerly the chief men, in obsti^ately
ouerthwarting and contradicting Xauerius in ^^is sermons and disputations, gave
the first example; God turning their spirit of contradiction into a mild (...)
pliable disposition. Ferna^dez virtue at a certain Iaponians insolency.
And heerin, Patience, and not Learning only, carried away the chief prize.
For as ^ernandez, Xauerius companion, was preaching to the people in the
public street, a certain Iaponian pas^^ng by by chance, came to his sermon;
who being an ^sole^t rude fellow gathering his mouth full of spitle, ^^asteth
it forth, full into the preachers face, in sight of all the people: The force of
patience to convert Ethnickes.
who bare that disgrace with such admirable patience, that he was not moved one
whit ^herat, but only wept his face with a handkercher, and so went on with his
sermon. Whereupon one of ^he Assembly was so moved by that example of Pati^^nce,
that he verily believed men endowed with such ^ertue, could not teach any
Religion but that which was holy. And so repayring to Francis, was instructed,
^^nd the first of all that was baptized.

Others afterward followed his example. Amongst whom, one Laur^ntius Lusko
conceived within his soul, Laurence Lusko a notable preacher
such impressions of divine light, that quite a^andoning all earthly things, he
consecrated himself wholly to Gods service, to the great good of Iaponia. For
being by Xauerius received into the Society, he became afterward a notable
Preacher, and brought very many of his Countrymen to the light of the
Gospel. After this many of good note were received to the sacred fountain of
Baptism, who being thereby bound to Francis in the highest degree, endeavored
so to gratify his love, that they could never satisfy themselves therein. When
he therefore asked them about the Iaponians Sects, and Religions, they
discovered all unto him, and that with more freedom and forwardness, then
they were demanded.

CHAP. VIII.
Having found out the Sects of the Iaponians, he conuerteth many of them.
BY these men therefore, he got a far more exact knowledge, then before he had
done of the Iaponians Religions, The Iaponian sects.
and Ceremonies. There were in all, amongst them, nine principal Sects, as
well of men as women, whereof it was free for every one to follow that Sect
which best pleased him. Whence it came oftentimes to pass that there were in
the same house almost as many different opinions, as there were several
persons, and all at strife amongst themselves, every one endeavoring to
prefer their own sect before others. Among al these Sects, there was not one
which taught any thing concerning the world, or the souls Creation. And no
mermeruayle, since they all together held, that they had no beginning. Yet
they all agreed in this, that after this life there be two places, one for the
damned, the other for the blessed. But what manner of abiding place the blessed
have, or by whose power souls are thrust down into Hell, there was no mention
at all amongst them: only they spread abroad certain old wives tales, Xacas
and Amida^ the Iaponia^ Gods
of the Authors of their Religion, among whom one Xacas and Amidas were
esteemed the principal Gods, who of their own accord underwent most grievous,
and very long pains, to save the rest.

Of these Sects, some of them conteyne 300. precepts, others five hundred; yet
they all hold that there be five points only necessary to salvation, whereby is
forbidden Murder, Eating of any living creature that is killed, Theft, Adultery
and Lying, and the Drinking of Wine. These the Bonzies, and the Bonzi^sses
undertook to satisfy for the people, who being hindered through the cares and
affairs of the City, could not observe these laws; but yet upon this
condition, that they should allow them houses to dwell in, yearly revenues,
and other maintenance; and withal (forsooth) should do them honor and
reverence. The Bouzies wickedness and avarice.
Whereupon the wealthier sort of people, and the Nobility, that they might have
freer leave to sin, accepting of the conditions, gave then readily whatsoever
they demanded, making no doubt but the Bonzies prayers would rescue them, even
out of hell it self. Besides this, the Bonzies beg alms of all men, but give
to none.

Now when Xauerius had found out these, and other such like things, turning the
Iaponians own practices as weapons against themselves, he began in such sort to
deal with the Bonzies before the people, as that by evident arguments and
reasons, he overthrew their counterfaite fictions. But especially he
demonstrated unto them, that none could, by the Bonzies prayers, be freed from
the torments of Hell, seeing that it was certain, they did not observe those
conditions themselves, which they had undertaken to observe for others. For it
was manifestly known, that they being now fallen from their ancient
discipline, used to drink wine, to eat flesh privately, and publicly to Lie,
and commit Adultery. Whereupon the people, when they saw the Bonzies false
dealing laid open before their face, began to be all-enraged, and to complain,
that they had by their treachery been deceived, and robbed of their goods. The
truth whereof the Bonzies themselves were driven at last to confess, saying;
that unless they had by their wits vpheld themselves, they should infallibly
have perished with hunger. And so from this time forward, they not only suffered
many losses, but foul disgraces also.

Then Xauerius understanding by the relation of of some Iaponians his friends,
The Iaponia^s fables of Xacas and Amidas.
and by their ancient written Records, that Xacas and Amidas had lived full out
two thousand years, and that Xacas had been borne eight thousand times, and
much other such like stuff deserving rather to be laughed at, then recounted;
he presently with great instance set himself to canuase out these idle fables,
showing that they were not Gods, but devilish Monsters. Whereto when the
Benzies themselves, the Sorcerers, and other adversaries of God (being utterly
vanquished) had nothing to say; the Christians were indeed very glad, and much
confirmed in the faith, and course which they had undertaken: And the Ethnickes
that were present perceiving their Masters errors, began to stagger in their
own Religion, and by little and little retired themselves to the standard of
Christ.

The Bonzies again, urged Francis with the authority of the Chinese, from
whom the Iaponians had fetched their Religion: and therefore that the Iaponians
would certainly never change their Religion, and ceremonies, unless the
Chinese first changed theirs. Wherefore he should go, and carry the Gospel
thither first, and bring the Chinese under the yoke of Christ; and when he had
so done, then would Iaponia also willingly embrace the faith and Religion that
he taught. But these sayings of the Bonzies, were little or no hindrance at all
to Xauerius endeauours, who went on never the slower with that which he had
resolved upon. The Iaponian^, who had never heard any thing at all of the
Creation of the Sun, Moon, Stars, celestial Globes. Land, Sea, Souls,
and other things, did not, for the most part, acknowledge any author or maker
of the world. The Iaponians ignorant in astrology.
When Francis therefore showed them that God was the Creator of all things, and
especially of souls, they wondered very much that such a beginning of all
things, had bin wholly hidden and unknown, not only to the Iaponians, but also
to the Chinese, from whence they had their Religion. At last their admiration
came to this, that look how much they reverenced Xauerius and the Christian
Religion; so much they detested the Bonzies, and the Iaponian Sects.

By these disputations therefore Xauerius did so vex the whole generation of
the Bonzies, that they who before his coming, were continually iarring amongst
themselves about their own Laws, new leaving off that quarrel, there was no
other speech among them, but of the law of God. The Japonians witty
interrogations.
And every day there came many, who asked of Francis diverse questions: as
whether there were one beginning of good and bad things? And whether that, were
good or bad, it self? When he replied, that there was but one beginning of all,
and that good in the highest degree; they alleged against him, the evil
spirits, enemies of mankind, who were certainly known to be naught: If then
God were good, why did he create such detestable creatures as they were? Then
Xauerius answered, that God had created them all good, who by their own fault
were become bad, and therefore were tormented eternally in Hell. But then they
urged him, why did God permit men, whom he had created to serve him, to be
deceived by the Devils? And why had he not created their affections rather
inclined to virtue, then prove to vice? To which Francis demonstrated, that man
was free by nature, and had divine helps at hand, both to combat and get the
victory, if he would make use thereof: and withal showed, that al mankind was
framed to honest and virtuous carriage, but was by the sin of their Parents,
and their own faults grown dep^aued. Then they fly from man's fault to Gods
severity, and ask him; Why he made that infernal prison of Hell, the greatest
of all evils? And why would ^e never show mercy to them that be condemned to
e^ernall torments? Xauerius contrary wise declared vn^^ them, that such was the
Majesty of God, and so ^reat his benefits bestowed upon all men, and every ^ne
in particular, that there could be no torment found (...) great, which was not
due to man for his abomina^^e wickedness; who being a base worm of the earth,
^urst violate the infinite power of Almighty God: yet ^^ch again was the
divine Mercy and Clemency, that (...) always punished less, then was deserved.

These, and many other such things were heard with ^^ceeding good liking, so as
they were all easily satis^^ed. But that which troubled the^ most, was, that
God ^^emed neither bountiful nor indifferent, who having ^are of all other
Countries besides Iaponia, had never ^eclared himself to the Iaponians, before
Francis his ^omming thither: Who likewise, had damned to the ^aynes of Hell,
all those who had not worshipped the ^od they knew not; and had permitted also
their an^estours, who never enjoyed that heavenly light, to be ^arryed headlong
thither? Concerning this point ^rancis made it clear unto the^, that the
divine Law, which of all others is the most ancient, was imprin^d in the hearts
of men. For the Iaponians even before ^^ey had their laws from the Chinese,
knew by the ^^ght of reason that it was an heinous offense to kill (...) man,
to steal, forswear, and other things which ^ere forbidden by the divine law.
Whereupon if any ^ne had committed any of these crimes, he was tormented with
the worm of conscience, which took ^s it were revenge of that wickedness.
This (quoth he) we may undoubtedly find to be true, in a solitary man, who
although he should be brought up in the wilderness, without any learning or
knowledge of humane law, would not for all that be ignorant of the divine law,
concerning Manslaughter, Theft, Perjury, and other the like things. And if
this were so, even amongst barbarous nations, what should we think of those,
that were civil, and well trained up? Should not they therefore be justly
punished, who did violate the divine law, which was ingrafted in them by
nature? which if they had observed, they should infallibly have bin illuminated
with light from heaven.

After he had satisfied them with this answer, they began by little and little
to put themselves under the wholesome yoke of Christ. 500. Iaponians baptized
Whereupon within the compass of two months, there were well near 500.
citizens baptized, who bewailing the state of their children, parents,
kindred, and Ancestors, demanded often of Xauerius, whether there was yet any
hope, or means to deliver them out of everlasting misery? But he with tears
in his eyes affirming no, exhorted them, that they who had the divine light and
salvation now offered them, should be so much the more thankful to God for it,
and should mitigate the feeling of others ruin, with the hope of their own
salvation: so that Patience might make that lighter, which they could not avoid.

Then turning themselves to other questions, they asked him of what figure the
world was? what cours^ the sun and the stars held? from whence came the^
blazing Comets, the winds, lightning, and thunder? that force that was which
powered forth snow, hail, and showers of rain? Of all which, when Xauerius,
^ho was very skillful in Astrology, and natural Philo^ophy, had fully declared
to the^ the causes, they being ^holy ignorant before of all such things, stood
wholly ^mazed thereat, admiring both his wit, and learning, ^auing never heard of
the like. And when the report ^ereof was spread over all the City, it brought
also ^^ch esteem to the Christian Law, that it was much ^oken of, not only in
public, but also at home in pri^ate houses. This thing also caused no less
damage to ^^e Bonzies families, then it did good to the Christian ^ause, by
auerting the affections of many from their ^ountry Superstitions: so as some
were of opinion, that ^any Bonzies forsaking their manner of discipline, and
^^eir corporal maintenance failing them, many of ^^eir Conuentes would hereby
fall to decay, to the ^reat advancement certainly of the Christian cause. and
how much the Bonzies authority was weake^ed hereby, may even appear by this,
in that there ^as never a one amongst them all, though never so ^ealous, who
was not detained in his former course, ^ather out of necessity, then for any
affection he bare unto it.

There was in Amanguc^um a certain Noble man ^o rich and wealthy, as few in
that kind out went him. He, together with his wife, exceedingly favored ^oth
Xauerius and the Gospel; but their too much ^orwardnesse in former times did
much abridge them ^f their liberty afterward. For they had built many ^ouses
for the Bonzies, and endowed them with great revenues, to the end that Amidas,
to whom they bare special devotion and reverence, might be propitious unto
them for the attayning of eternal bliss. Whereupon they stood earnestly upon
it, that they would never by changing their Religion upon a sudden, loose
Amidas his favor, which they had now purchased with such expenses, for so many
years together; and that if this were not, which lay heavy upon their
consciences, they would be otherwise advised: showing heerin a double folly,
who having once rashly committed an error, had rather still remain plunged
therein, then once to raise themselves out. But that which they, out of a vain
respect of their ancient institute, would not do, to follow the glorious faith
of Christ, was zealously performed by many others, who were illuminated with
the light of truth.

The Bonzies therefore, being not able to endure this ignominy, and disgrace,
began to be enraged against the Christians, and in their Sermons to cast out
many impious words against God; also to belch forth many reproaches against
Xauerius, which suited better with themselves; and withal to denounce unto the
Iaponians in a threatening manner, that as soon as Iaponia had received the
faith of Christ, it should be utterly destroyed. But these their reproachful
speeches caused more hatred to themselves, then contempt unto Xauerius. For the
Iaponians knowing for certain that the Bonzies maledictions proceeded out of
envy and malice, began not only to find fault therewith, but also to favor the
innocent, by turning their backbiting into Xauerius praise, and respect toward
his person.

In the mean time Francis making most diligent ^^quiry whether the Iaponians
had had in times past a^y knowledge of Christ, The Japonians had received no
knowledge of Christ and his Gospel.
and his Gospel, found both ^y their writings, and testimony of the Iaponians
the^^^lues, that they had never so much as heard of the ^ame of Christ before
his coming: which thing (as ^ood reason it should) gave thespurre to Xauerius
fer^ent desire, who was of himself forward enough, in ^reading abroad the
Gospel, being exceeding ioy^ll that he was come thither for the advancement
of ^eligion: and that the sound of the Gospel which had (...) in heard in the
furthest parts of the Land, might also ^ow be preached in the utmost Islands
thereof. Many therefore being thus brought into the fold of Christ,
Christianity began greatly to flourish, when as there ^apned an accident which
caused much furthera^ce and honor thereunto. There is at Bandua in Iaponia, an
Academy of very great note, both for the fame and no^^ility thereof, as being
frequented by more then 4000. ^^ude^ts. One of this Academy, a man of good
esteem, and renowned for his wisdom and learning, upon (...) very memorable
occasion, became a Christian.

There were in that Academy a kind of Bonzies who ^aue themselves much to
speculatio^, The Academy of Bandua.
pondering what would become of the^ after this life, and other such like
things: whereof many through deep consideration, came ^^tlast to be of opinion,
that there was no means in the Iaponians Religion for the saving of their
souls. For thus they discoursed with themselves: That certainly there ought to
be one beginning of all things, whereof ^in their Books and Records there was no
mention at al, nor of the maker of this world. How therefore could they be
saved who knew not their maker? But whilst others stood staggering betwixt
shame and fear, this man, of whom we speak, ouercomming the one and the
other, through desire of his salvation, was made a Christian. He was indeed of
the mind to have united himself to the Bonzies; but as soon as by Francis his
discourse he came to know their errors, thinking that he ought certainly to
worship him that made both him, and the whole world, and whom the Christian
Religion propounded unto them to adore, changing his mind, he put himself
under the triumphant standart of Christ.

This accident grieved the Bonzies no less, The Japonian Neophites zeal.
then it comforted the Neophytes. For when he for his learning, bare away the
bell from the whole City where he dwelt, his authority gave great advantage to
either part. Whereupon inciting others by his example to Baptism, the
Christian Common wealth began to be increased both in dignity and number. And
this caused in the Neophytes such fervor of spirit, that every one of them
fell to dispute with the Ethnickes about matters of Religion: and when they had
convinced them, would lead them, as captives to Baptism, striving in these
their combats, and victories one with another. Whereat Francis took such
content of mind, Within the space of one year he baptizeth 3000.
that it made him to have no feeling of his labors.

Thus therefore was the Christian business wonderfully increased at Amangucium
(for within the compass of one year there were baptized to the number of
3000.) and their piety equalized the increase of the ^ocke. For they who in
former times had so often run ^^er their beads, by imploring the Authors of
their ^^ct; now turning superstition into true Religion, in^^eased wonderfully
that devotion of theirs. For in ^ying the Beads of our Blessed Lady, at the
end of every Aue Maria (which is usually said upon every small ^ead) they
always pronounced the wholesome na^es of Jesus and Maria, Iaponian Beads.
and withal endeavored, as ^uch as they could, to frame themselves according
to ^rancis his fashion, as being the ^nly pattern they had (...) imitate. And
so great was the progress in piety which the Amangucian Neophytes made under
Xaue^us their Master, that although, when he was called (...) way by other
Kings who importuned him, they ^ere left almost wholly destitute both of
masters and ^eachers, for the space of 25. years, in the midst of Ethnickes:
yet they held on most laudably the said Christian course which they had begun,
being therein both guides, and masters to themselves.

CHAP. IX.
Going to the King of Bungo, at his inuitement, he is honorably received by
the Portugheses.
SO great was now Xauerius Name in Iaponia, and so great was the opinion of his
Sanctity, that it almost exceeded all humane power: wherefore the Iaponians
reverenced him as a divine man. This fame of his Holiness spreading it self
far and near, had filled almost all Iaponia with his renown, and worthy
acts. Whilst therefore he was employed, especially at Amanguci^^ about the
occasions whereof we spoke before, Francis is sent for by the King of Bungo.
he receives from the King of Bungo very courteous, and respectful letters to
this tenor: That whereas by relation of a certain Portugese ship that was
lately arrived in his Dominions, he had understood many things of his singular
virtue; and being greatly desirous to impart an important business to his own
person, he would be pleased to repair withal speed to Bungo etc. At the very
same time also, one Edward Gama Governor of the Portughese ships, had by his
letters invited Francis to a port Town of Bungo, dista^t 180. miles from
Amangucium. Xauerius therefore, conceauing in each place new hopes of happy
success in his business, leaving Cosmas Turrianus, and John Fernandez to
look unto the Neophytes at Amangucium, he prepares himself for this new
journey, and forthwith sets forward on his way, with two or three Neophytes
in his company.

He had now gone almost 175. miles on foot, when as Gama understood that he
was coming on his way* all wearied-out with travailing a foot: wherefore he
speedily sends out certain Portugheses with horses to meet him; who having
gone about a mile, met with Francis, and his Neophytes These Neophytes were of
noble Parentage in their own country, and heertofore of great wealth; but
having had all their goods taken from them by the King of A^^angucium, because
they were become Christians, ^hey went with Xauerius with intention to be
brought ^p at Goa. They rode upon excellent horses with good ^^^urniture, for
so Xauerius had commanded them. But ^e followed them on foot, laden with his
pack of Church-stuffe, so ardent was his love to Humility, and ^he Cross.
Xauerius love of humility and the Cross.
This sight moved the Portugheses no less ^o admiration, then compassion, that
so worthy a ^an, should in such sort so debase, and tire out himself.
Presently therefore they offer him a horse, as also ^o take his pack to ease
him: but he by no means ^ould be drawn to mount a horse back. Wherefore ^he
Portugheses, although Xauerius were very vnwil^ing, and forbad them so to do,
went along with him ^n foot. This spectacle was most grateful, and pro^itable
unto the Neophytes, who admired the ciuility and courtesy of the Christians.
Thus they came unto ^he Port of Bungo, which is called of the inhabitants, by
the name of the River, Fingus.

Bungo is a City wherein the King keeps his Court, Bungo the Royal City.
standing in that part and Island of Iaponia, which as we said, is called Ximus.
The King of Bungo was but a young man, Xauerius is with all honor received by
the Portugeses.
yet far surpassing his age in gravity and wisdom. At that time he had only
Bungo under his government, being a King among the Iaponians more famous for
prudence, then wealth. None was more favorable to the Portugheses then he* For
being gre^atly desirous of their friendship, he had long before sent letters
with presents to the King of Portugal, and the Viceroy of India.

As soon as news was brought to the Portughese ships that Xauerius was
arrived, the men came all out presently to meet him with great joy and
gratulation, every one endeavoring to honor so holy a man: wherein they
proceeded so far, as to salute him one after another in a triumphant manner,
with four volley of shot, from out their great Ordinance, being 18. pieces in
number. And the event declared afterward that this was not done so much
through the abundance of humane affection, as by the divine providence. For
that the thundering out of so many great shot, sounded to the Iaponians ears,
as though there had been a battle at sea. Whereupon the King, who remained in
the City not far from the Port, was surprised with no small care, thinking
that the Portugheses had been at fight with Pirates. And therefore with all speed
he sends a principal Gentleman to Gama the Governor, to demand of him what
the matter was, that he might assist the Portugeses, if any occasion served.

Gama, after he had returned humble thanks to the King, told the Gentleman
that all things were quiet and joyful with the Portugheses; and for that
Francis Xauerius an holy man, and much respected by the King of Portugal their
master, was there arrived, they had received him with that applause, and show
of good will, as was fitting his deserts. At this the Gentleman stood amazed,
and would hardly believe that they had affoarded such extraordinary honor to
so poor a beggar, The Bonzies defame Xauerius.
whom he thought of no credit, by reason of his beggary, and baseness of
attire: For the Bonzies being afraid, that if Francis (who was very famous for
his sanctity of life) came once to Bungo, he might there also lessen their
credit, as he had done at Amangucium, had defamed him after an unworthy manner,
both with the King, and the people.

The Gentleman therefore stood still as one greatly astonished, without once
moving, through admiration. But afterward, when he saw Xauerius countenance
shining out with worth, and sanctity in that ^old torn habit, he perceived
presently the Bonzies ^crafty dealing. Whereupon returning with all speed ^e
relates to the King both what the Portugheses had answered him, and what
himself had also seen; and withal told him, they had made as great a
triumph for Xauerius arriual, as if a ship had come into the port ^^oaden with
silver; wherefore there could be no question, but al those things were false
which the Bonzies (who were indeed fretted to the heart at his incomparable
virtue) had broached abroad of him. For that his very contenance was so full of
worth, that he was able to draw the behoulders, to love and reverence him. The
King greatly admiring heerat; Good reason, quoth he, have the Portugheses then,
to reverence and respect him.

CHAP. X.
He is conducted to the Kings Court, in great pomp, by the Portugheses.
PResently upon this relation, the King sends a young Gentleman a kinsman of
his to Xauerius with letters, in a most friendly and respectfull manner,
earnestly requesting him, not to think it much to come unto him the next day,
pretending withal the great desire he had to be acquainted with the Christian
Religion. The Princely youth therefore, comes to the Portugheses, having in
his company 30. Noblemen, besides his Tutour. Who as soon as he beheld
Francis, although in poor attire, yet most venerable both in countenance and
corporal presence, and much honored by the Portugheses, was amazed. Whereupon,
after he had delivered the Kings letters to him, The Japonians admire at the
love of poverty.
looking upon his Tutour; Certainly, quoth he, this Nation cannot but have a
most excellent God, whose secrets are wholly hidden from us, seeing that his
pleasure was, that the Portughese ships should do homage to so poor a man;
giving all to understand by that solemn triumph of theirs, what a grateful
jewel Poverty was in the sight of Heaven, which is commonly so basely
esteemed, and contemned by mortal men. The next day Gama calling to counsel
the merchants, and the other Portugheses, concluded with the general ^onsent
of all the rest, that it would make much for ^he adua^cement of the Christian
cause, if perhaps that first encounter of Francis with the Ethnicke King did
^arry some show of Majesty, by setting the same out with all the preparation
that might be; The Portugheses prevent the Bonzies calu^niations.
as well to pre^ent the Bonzies slanders and culumniations, that ^here might
be no hindrance to the current of the Gos^ell; as also that Xauerius high
esteem might be able to ^ra^ple underfoot that authority, which a most proud
^eneration had usurped through falsehood and lying. ^or certain it was, that
how much he should seem (...) be esteemed by the Portugheses, so much the more
^lso would the Iaponians account of him.

But now, He is against his will conducted with great po^pe to the King of
Bungo.
when all the rest agreed to the Gouer^ours proposition, Francis only, who
could not en^ure to hear of such honor, as holding fast his Eua^gelicall
simplicity, was of a contrary opinion: yet being conui^^ced not so much by
reasons, as by the vna^imous consent of the Portugheses, he was forced at ^ast
to condescend unto them. Whereupon the Por^ugheses putting on every one the
most costly appa^ell they had, set forward with Xauerius toward the Royal
City, with such solemn preparation, as is worthy to be observed. They were
carried in small ^oates, having their sails all of silk, bedecked and set ^ut
with glittering banners. Besides this, there went (...) long with them Trumpets
and Cornets, answering ^ne the other by turns, with notes declaring their
^estiuall joy. At this unusual spectacle the inhabitants ^locked by troops
from all parts there about, in so much as the banks upon the river side where
they were to pass, were all so thronged with people who came to behold this
solemnity, that the Kings Officers were constrained to keep back the
multitude, and to make place for the Portugheses landing. There was also one of
the Nobility sent by the King, ready with a costly Litter wherein to carry
Xauerius; but he very courteously giving the King thanks for his honorable
offer, would not accept thereof; and so sending back the Litter, came on foot
to the Court with very many of the Nobility of Iaponia attending him.

Amongst all those that accompanied him, the Portughese train far surpassed
the rest in bravery. They were 30. in number, all gorgeously attyred, having
chains of gold about their necks, and every one his man following him in a
rich Livery. Francis also (the Portugheses having forced him thereunto) had set
himself forth better in his apparel then ordinary, intending afterward to
resume again his old habit. For he had put on a very fair gown, over which
he wore a fine linen Surplisse, and about his neck there hung a Priests stole
of green silk grogran down to his knees, with a fringe of gold, such as
Priests did ordinarily use to wear. Gama the Governor, as though he had bin
his Steward, went before him with a long wand in his hand: Then five of the
choysest yongmen of the whole company followed Francis, attending as it were
upon his person; whereof one carried his Breuiary in a little bag of silk,
another his Velvet Pantofles, another his staff made of a Bengalian Reed,
which had a typpe of gold at the top, another his Hat, and the last an Image of
the Blessed Vir^in mother of God, under a Canopy of crimson Da^ask. The rest of
the Portugheses marched after, in a ^oure square rank.

This was the Portugheses own invention, not (...) much approved by Xau^rius,
as winked at, becau^^ he could not hinder it. They went in this pom^e to the
Court through nine of the principal streets ^f the City, with such concourse
of the inhabitants ^ho flocked to see them, that the very houses were ^ucke,
and even covered with the people.

CHAP. XI.
The King of Bungo uses Francis with honorable respect, although the Bonzies
were against it.
AFTER this, when Francis was come into the Palace, he finds at the entrance
or utter Court thereof, 600. Souldiars of the Guard, all well appointed; and by
and by ^n a large Gallery he meets with many more of the Kings Attendance.
Here, those five Portughese yongmen, whereof we spoke before, bowing down
their knees, offered to Xauerius with great reverence that which every one
carried; whereat the Iaponi^ns were so stroke with admiration, that presently
they muttered out these, and the like words: Let the Bonzies now be gone with a
mischief, and never hereafter have the face to appear in the sight of men,
idle companions as they were. For certainly this man is not such a one, as they
have described unto us and the King, but rather indeed one, as we may think,
sent hither by God himself, to curb the slanders of malicious tongues.

From this Gallery there opened a fair and spacious Hall full of Noblemen, A
child of seaue^ years of a rare wit.
where a Child of seven years of age (but of a rare wit, as might easily be
perceived) being led by a Venerable old man, meets with Xauerius, and
saluteth him according to the Country fashion, telling him, that his fortunate
arrival at the Court would be as dear, and pleasing to the King, as a
seasonable shower of rain, is to a thirsty field of corn in the summer time.
Wherefore he willed him to enter with joy, and to know that he was as welcome
to the good, as odious to the bad. To whom, when Francis had courteously
saluted, and kindly returned answer: O Father (quoth the Child again) happy
are you, who are come out of another world into forrayne countries, desiring to
carry hence no other merchandise but the ignominy of Poverty! O infinite
goodness of the God, whom you serve! O hidden wisdom of his, who is comforted
with the Want and Poverty of his Priests! Behold our Bonzies do so abhor the
disgrace of Poverty, that conspiring all together, they avouch openly, that the
way to heaven is stopped, and rampierd up against poor people. Here Francis
replied, that he was in good hope, that God, the most merciful Lord of Heaven
and Earth, would at last drive away the cloud of errous, which ^ad blinded the
Bonzies understandings, and bestow upon them the light of truth; and that they
would al^o, when they saw that heavenly splendor once arise, forsake their
perverse and ignorant opinions.

Then the Child discoursing a while upon very weighty matters far beyond his
age, brought Francis and the Portugheses into a further Hall, The Noblemens
children make reverence to Xauerius.
where the Noblemens sons sat all together. Who as soon as ^hey saw
Xauerius enter, rose up presently every one, and bowing their heads thrice
down to the ground, according to the Country fashion, make reverence unto him.
Then two of them, made a speech in the ^ame of all the rest, which I will here
set down in ^riefe, whereby it may appear what kind of eloquence ^he Iaponians
are delighted in. Thus therefore they ^re said to have spoken. Your happy
coming, Sa^red Priest, will be as grateful to the King, What kind of
eloquence the Japonians have.
as the smile of the sweetest infant is to the mother when she gives it the
pappe to suck. And what wonder? seeing that the very walls, which here you
behold, reioy^cing as it were at your presence, command us to celebrate your
coming with great love and affection: and this for the honor and glory of
that God, of whom as the report goes, you have declared certain strange
things at Amangucium.

After this, they passed into another spacious Gallery leading into an inward
Hall, where Ficharondono the Kings Brother remained with the chief of the
Nobility. As soon as he saw Francis, he rec^iued him courteously with the
rest* and after mutu^ll (...) between each other, he told him, that the Court
never saw a more joyful day; and with good reason, since the King accounted
himself more happy, by the arriual of so worthy a man, then if he were Lord of
the 33. Treasuries of China: for so many there are said to be. The King of
Bungo standing up expects Francis his coming.
At last Xauerius being brought by Ficharondono into the inmost Hall, which for
richenesse of furniture surpassed all the rest, he there finds the King
himself, who expected his coming. The fame of his worthy acts had long
before this caused in the King a great admiration, but now upon his meeting he
conceived a much greater esteem of him, so far did Francis his presence
surpass the imagination (how great soever it were) which the King had
conceived of him in his own understanding. For his maiesticall and venerable
aspect which Nature, and Age had now bestowed upon him, was also much graced by
the splendor of his sanctity, which even dazeled the eyes almost of all that
beheld it.

The King therefore seeing Xauerius, came on a little toward him, Xauerius
maiesticall countenance.
and received him, both in a respectfull and courteous manner. And when Francis
according to the custom was kneeling down, he presently forbad him, by lifting
him up by the hand. And forthwith making himself reverence unto Xauerius, by
thrice inclining of his head as the country fashion was, caused him to sit
down, on the same seat by him. After these salutations, and gratulations past
on both sides, the King looking upon Ficharondono his brother, and the other
Noblemen, began with a loud voice that all might hear, to speak in this
manner: O that ^^ere lawful for us to demand of God, The King of Bungo his
testimony of the Christian faith.
the maker ^^d Lord of Heaven and earth, his secret judgments, ^^d to ask what
the cause has been, why he has ey^^er suffered us to lie so long buried in
such darkness, ^else bestowed such light and wisdom upon these ^^en who come
out of another world? For we all ma^festly see, that whatsoever they say,
although it be ^aynst our Religion, is confirmed which such solid ^asons, that
we are not able to contradict it, if we ^ill follow the light of reason, or
unless we be who^^ void of all understanding. Contrariwise we see ^^r Bonzies
to keep a stammering, when they are to ^^plicate any difficultyes of our
Religion, and to be (...) variable and inconstant, as never to stand fast to
that they say; in so much that if they be now of one ^^ynd and opinion,
presently they will be of another. Whereby it sufficiently appears, that their
doctrine and Religion is nothing else but a rabble of confusion and
uncertainties: so that one cannot with any discretion hazard therein the
everlasting salvation of his ^oule.

At this speech of the Kings, a certain Bonzy nobly borne, called Faciandono,
being by chance present and finding himself touched to the quick, rose up and
answered the King very boldly and freely: That the cause of Religion was not of
that nature that it might be determined by him, A Bonzies arrogance.
who was ignorant of the doctrine therein conte^ed; Wherefore if he Majesty had
any doubt in his mind, he had those present there who could easily resolve him.
And even he himself would undertake not only to rid him of his scruple, but
also to make whatsoever he doubted of, more clear unto him then the sun that
shines: whereby all might plainly see, that those things which the Bonzies
taught were both true; and that they also well deserved the stipe^d which was
paid them for their learning. Then the King smiling: Go to (quoth he)
incomparable Doctor, declare at last these secret and hidden mysteryes of your
Religion, we will with silence give ear unto you. Faciandono then, looking
about him with great gravity: First, qu^th he, it is impiety to call the
Bonzies sanctity into question; for all do know well enough that they lead a
life which is holy, gracious, and acceptable in the sight of Heaven it self.
For they are men who do religiously observe chastity, abstain from fresh-fish,
teach and instruct young youth, give Bills of Exchange to those that lie a
dying for the taking up of money in heaven, and rise in the night to pray for
the sins of the people. And besides this, they are great friends to the
sun, stars, and celestial Gods, with whom they have often discouses in
the night time, and whom they do also many times embrace, after a most sweet
and lovely manner.

The Bonzy having stuffed his Preface with these and such like fooleries, The
Bonzies fooleries.
anger so boiled in his proud and passionate heart, that he began, without fear
or shame to inueigh intemperatly against the King himself. Whereupon he gave a
sign, The Kings temper.
twice or thrice to his brother, to cause the Bonzy to hold his peace. Who
being commanded so to do, and the King firmly fixing his eye upon him, told
him, that indeed ^e gathered by his manners a sufficient trial of the Bon^zies
sanctity; and withal auerred, that he was so well edifyed, by the intemperancy
and temerity of his tongue, that he durst swear, Hell had more right to his
person, then ^e to Heaven. Heerupon the Bonzy adding intolerable pride to his
former violent humor, cried out aloud. That the time would come when
Faciandon^ should be exalted so far above all mortals that neither the King
of Bungo, The pride and inte^perate tongue of a Bongy.
nor any other should be able to aspire to his throne. The King at these his
words began to be moved, yet withal laughed at his ^^rrogancy, looking upon
Xauerius, who advised his Majesty not to trouble himself, but to expect until
the Bonzies fury were past* But the King commanded Faciandono to be gone, and
warned him withal, that henceforward when he spoke of God, he should not be so
vain glorious before men: In the mean time, he wished him to keep hand over
his passions, and come again to himself before he returned to the Court. The
Bonzy therefore, being set on fire with this disgrace in respect of the assembly
of Nobles who were present cries out alowd; Fire from heaven consume the King,
who dares do these things against the Prelates of the Gods; and so in a
fretting and chasing manner flingeth upon a sudden out of the Presence,
leaving the King and Nobles greatly moved with indignation at his uncivil
behavior.

The King then ready to sit down to table, The King inuiteth Xauerius to dinner
inuiteth Xauerius to dinner. But he alleging that he was not acquainted with
the Iaponian daynties, courte^ously refuses: and withal making d^e reverence
to the King, beseeches God, for whose sake he did him that honor, to bestow
upon him sufficient divine light and grace, that he might serve him in this
life with sanctity, and purity of heart, and in the next enjoy him for all
eternity. At last the King, at Francis intrea^y, gives him leave to depart,
and withal earnestly requesteth him that he would now and then visit him, and
teach him the mysteries of the Christian faith. Xauerius promised he would. And
then the King presently with a cheerful and friendly countenance offreth him
with his own hands, The King gives to Xauerius from his own table.
a dish of meat which stood before him, desiring him to take it; who, to
comply with the King, accepted of the same. Then the Governor with the rest of
the Portugheses, who stood about Xauerius, fell down upon their knees all
together, giving the King humble thanks for the great honor he had done unto
the Father, and themselves, even against the Bonzies wills.

CHAP. XII.
Xauerius instructs the King and people in the mysteries of the Christian
faith, and curbeth the audacity of the Bonzies.
FRANCIS remained 46. days in this royal City of Bungo, employing himself
with all possible diligence in the instruction of the Inhabitants. Yet his
principal ca^^ ^as to make deep impression of the mysteries, and ob^eruances
of the Christian faith in the Kings mind. ^or which cause he became so inward
with the King, that there was then no coming for any Bonzy to ^is presence.
For that he began to be much asha^ed of the foul enormities, which he had
commit^ed, through the doctrine of the Bonzies. Wherefore by Xauerius persuasion
he first abandoned many vicious ^abits in his own person, The King by Xauerius
persuasion reformeth both his own and his subjects ma^ners.
rid his palace of all vn^^^wfull loves and pleasures, and began liberally to
^elieue, and sustain the necessities of the poor, contrary to the doctrine
which the Bonzies taught. Then ^urning his thoughts to the reformation of his
people, ^y little and little he enacted many and severe laws against the
murdering of infants (an usual practice in those places) and other heinous
crimes, and enormi^ies, which having been brought in by the Bo^zies were ^ow
grown to a custom. He reverenced Xauerius, as one that came from Heaven, and
sent unto him by the favor of celestial powers. Him only he admired, say^ing
many times, that he saw in his face, as in a glass, ^o his great confusion,
all the heinous offenses, wherewith, by the Bonzies inciteme^t, he had defiled
his own soul; so as he was now upon the point to be made a Christian.

Yet Francis, did not so employ himself about the King, as that he neglected
thereby the people. For being wholly unmindful of himself, he spent so much of
the day in preaching to them in the marketplace, that the Portugheses could
scarce get from him one hour after sunset, to ^onfer about pious matters, and
another before day (...) hear their Confessions. Not minding his meat he
attends to the saving of souls.
Wherefore when some of his familiar friends complained, that he came home
late; he earnestly requested them, that they would never at any time expect for
him at dinner, no^ in the day time ever think him alive, for if they did
otherwise, they would cause unto him much trouble. For the dainties whereon he
fed with chiefest delight, were the good of souls: neither did he esteem any
cheer better then the salvation of one only Iaponian, by uniting him to the
flock of Christ. And to this pious a^arice of his, the divine Providence was
not a little indulgent.

There came flocking to him an infinity of people, not of the vulgar sort
only, but also of the Nobility, and many of the Bonzies themselves: whereof one
of a very Noble Family became Christian, with no small good unto the Christian
cause. He was called Saquaygirano, A noble Bonzie being convinced and converted
to Christ professes his faith in in the market place.
the chief of the Bonzies, a man of great note both for his learning, and
Nobility of birth: who entering into disputation with Xauerius, and being
overcome by reasons, and inspired by the divine goodness, yielded himself
captive to the truth. Wherefore, not thinking upon any thing else then the truth
which was offered him from Heaven, he publicly in the midst of the market
place, before an infinite assembly of people falls down upon his knees, and
lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven, with tears falling from his cheeks,
cries out with the lowdest voice he could. Behold, O Jesus Christ, eternal
Son of Almighty God, I yield, and dedicate my self wholly unto thee. And what
I have conceived in my heart, I (...) freely prof^ss^ with my mouth. Do not
thou, I (...), thee who of thine own accord l^ast called me, ^^pe^l me now,
when I come unto thee. Then with ^eeping eyes looking upon the multitude who
stood ^ound about him he added. And ye, O Citizens, I ^^treate and beseech
you, that you will both your selves ^ardon me, and desire also others to do the
like, for my (...) often setting to sale those things unto you for true, which
now I understand to be false.

This Confession of that famous Bonzy wonder^ully moved the affections of that
Country people, 500. Iaponians won to Christ in one day.
and ^as an example to many of embracing the Christian Religion. For it is well
known, that Xauerius himself often affirmed to the Portug ^ese^, with whom
(...) there lived, that if he would, he could have bapti^ed more then 500.
Iaponians one day. But (which ^as very rare in such fervor of spirit) he was
more prudent, Xauerius prudence
then forward in the making up of the mat^er; and also very circumspect, that
nothing might (...) done rashly, or in passion, which might give aduan^age to
the Bonzies fury, being now ready to burst ^orth. For that, being mortal
enemies to the Chri^tian cause, they were long since, incensed against Xauerius
and his friends, and had persuaded the people, that seeing they would needs
cast away themsel^es, they should damaund of Francis a great sum of ^mony in
recompense, for changing their Religion, that they might not perish for
nothing. Poverty a disgrace among the Iaponians.
Which plot of the Bonzies had this drift, that the vulgar sort taking notice
of Xauerius poverty, might have less esteem of his sanctity: so great a
disgrace was poverty amongst the Iaponians. A crafty devise of the Bonzies.
Yet little or nothing did they prevail by this calumniation against the
known and tried truth, but rather like water cast upon hot burning coals, it
made Xauerius zeal flame out with greater force and vehemence. Whereupon the
enraged Bonzies being put to the plunge, not knowing what to do, left nothing
unattempted, which might seem for their purpose. But when they perceived their
endeauours not to correspond to their desirs, they resolved to try their very
uttermost.

They had now oftentimes by entering into disputation with Francis, been so
foiled, and even driven out of the field, that they durst not open their mouth
before him. Therefore they falsely slaundred him behind his back, but in vain.
For that the threats which they had denounced, of the Heavens Wrath, against
the people, were now accounted idle. Wherefore seeing their ancient authority,
to be worn out in the estimation of the Citizens, turning their passion into
fury, they began to wax mad indeed. And first they heaped upon Xauerius all
the reproaches and maledictions they could devise, calling him in scorn, A
foul stinking dog; the most beggarly fellow alive; and a deuo^rer of dead
men's carcasses. Then they cast forth threatening words against him, and his
company, that they would make them repent it, unless they presently desisted
from their enterprise. At last their passion and fury went so far, that they
plotted to make a tumult in the marketplace, and therein upon a sudden, to
kill both Francis and the Portugheses. Yet were not these things kept so
secret, but that Xauerius and the ^ortugheses had notice thereof. But he
accounted it ^he greatest favor which God had bestowed upon ^im, to be
threatened by his enemies: taking heed with^ll that he might not unadvisedly
provoke those who ^ad no stay over their own enraged passions. As for ^e
Portugheses, they having the Kings guard to se^re them, contemned the vain
threats, and plottes ^f such mad-brayne fellows. Whereupon the Bonzies ^eing
violence would not serve the turn, they bent ^eir designs another way.

CHAP. XIII.
^n a disputation before the King, he overcomes the most learned of the
Bonzies.
THERE was a certain Bonzy called Ficarondono, the only esteemed man for
learning among them, and who carried the bell away from all the rest. For he had
for thirty ^eares together, taught their profoundest and deepest ^ciences in
the most famous University of Iaponia. He ^as at that time President of a
Convent of Bonzies ^ome 40. miles distant. The Bonzies therefore of Bungo
^erswaded him, without much difficulty, to dispute with Francis, thinking it
would be a great honor, if (as to him it seemed easy) he could in the presence
of the King confute that strange Priest, who, as al knew, ^ad already beaten
down the rest of the Bonzies. He ^hasteth therefore with all speed to the
Royal City, with six or seven other famous Doctors in his company. It fell
out very opportunely, that at the same time Xauerius, and the Portugheses were
gone to Court to take their leave of the King, being the next day to depart.
And whilst they were rendering his Majesty thanks, and requesting his
passe-port for their journey, news was suddenly brought unto the King, that
Ficarondono was arrived with a company of choice Bonzies. The King (as might be
noted by his countenance) was not very joyful at this news, fearing least
Xauerius, and the truth might be beaten down by his great learning. Xauerius
therefore, seeing the King troubled, and doubtful what to resolve upon,
trusting in the goodness of his Cause, humbly entreated his Majesty to let
Ficar^dono, that pillar of the Bonzi^^ race, be brought in, knowing for
certain, that although learning could do much, yet Truth could do more.
Whereupon, the King being at last content, the Bonzy was admitted.

After he had made due reverence according to the usual custom, when the King
demanded the cause of his coming to Court, he answered: That he came to see a
strange Priest, The pride of a Bonzy.
who was said to be come out of another world, and to know what manner of man
he was, and the news he had brought thence, This he thundered out with such
boldness and arroga^cy, that one might easily descry what a most proud and
devilish master he served. And presently fixing his eyes upon Xauerius (who
courteously saluted him) and making an end of his ceremonious complements
(whereof the Bonzies are very liberal) with a ^ooke^^ ^^n above the Bonzian
strain, he demands of (...), if he knew him? and when Xauerius told him No,
cause he had never seen him before, he turned to (...) companions, and said: I
perceive, we shall have (...) great difficulty with this fellow, who knows not
^arondono by his looks. Fixing then his eye upon ^ancis: Do thou, quoth he,
remember what mer^^andize thou soldest me at Finorama? He told him (...) had
nothing to answer to that, The Bongies Pythagorea^ fooleries concerning the
transmigration. of souls
whereof he was ^holy ignorant, for he had never been either a Mer^ant, or seen
Finorama, or spoken with him before ^at time; how therefore could it hang
together, that (...) had sold him wares at Finorama? The Bonzie af^med for
certain that it was so, and he could not ^oose but remember it, unless he
were very forget^^ll. Xauerius therefore requested him, that because ^s memory
failed him in that point, he would help ^m out therein. Then very confidently,
and setting (...) it such a face as bewrayed his inward pride: Call ^^y^^fe,
quoth he, to remembrance with me: It is ^^w 1500. years ago since thou
soldest to me at Fi^^^oma an 100. balls of raw silks, in the utterance
^hereof I became a great gayner.

Hereupon Xauerius looking upon him both gravely (...) pleasantly: And I pray,
quoth he, how old are you? ^he Bonzy answered that he was one and fifty. Then
^uoth Francis, how can it be, that you have been a ^^erchant 1500. years ago,
who before one and fifty ^ere not borne? unless perchance you played the
^erchant before you were borne. And I understand, ^uoth Xauerius, you all
agree, that this Country of Iaponia began to be inhabited, not above 600.
years since: how therefore does this hold together, that you were a Merchant
1500. years ago at Finor^^^, which at that time was nothing but a mere
wilderness and solitude? See then, quoth the Bonzy, how much better we know
things past, then you do what is present. Thou shall therefore know, (because
hitherto thou have bin ignorant of it) that neither the World, nor Mankind,
has either had any beginning, or shall have any end. And so, men's souls being
immortal, go successively out of one body into another, both of men and women,
according to the conjunction of the Moon, with the Sun, and the stars, who
frame and fashion the Bodies tender limbs. Wherefore souls which have good
memories (such as mine is) do easily remember all whatsoever they did in their
life time, when they were united to other bodies, which is not so with
forgetful soule^, as it seems yours is.

Xauerius having heard this foolery, He conuinceth the Pythagoricall fables.
and being very learned both in Philosophy and Divinity, found n^ difficulty,
by solid arguments, to confute these Pythagoricall and Platonicall dreams.
First therefore he shows, that the World was not from all eternity, but was
made at a certain time, seeing that it neither was of it self, nor could be
equal or coeternal^^ with the maker thereof. And that it was made, and adorned
with men, and other living creatures by God^ the Parent and Author of all
things. When he ha^^ proved this by many arguments, it was easy for him to
show, that the souls of men, had also a beginning and were not before the
bodies, which they do infor^e; but being by God infused into bodies aptly
orga^ized for them, did make use of the corporal senses, ^^r the gaining of
arts and sciences. For who is so blind ^^at sees not, that Souls would
willingly, if they ^ould choose, with loss and damage of so great a good,
(...) creeping into new and mortal bodies? And that ^^ey would not, unless it
were by constraint, yield ^hemselues prisoners to their bodies, to be
parta^^ers of all their miseries? Wherefore has God, as even ^eason it self
teaches us, who is a most just Judge, ^^ppointed for mortal men after this
life* either eter^all rewards, or torments, according to their deserts; ^^nce
we plainly see, this equity is not used amongst them whilst they live in this
world?

When Francis made these things clear and mani^est, by evident arguments, most
fit similitudes and e^amples, the King indeed and Noble men agreed unto ^im,
declaring by their favorable acclamations, that what he said, was very
coherent, and most confor^able to reason. But the Bonzie, although in the
judgment of all he had the foil given him, would not for all this, through
the pride and obstinacy which was ^ooted in his heart, give over, least he
should seem to grant his ^duersary the victory, if he should acknow^edge
himself overthrown. Going therefore from the Controversy concerning the world
and souls, he ^egan to inueigh bitterly against Xauerius, for that he ^euerely
censured preposterous lust to be a most hey^nous offense, notwithstanding it
was clear and eui^dent, that the same was allowed by the laws of Iaponia,
which nevertheless punished murders, adulteries, and thefts most rigorously.
To which Xauerius (after he had evidently demonstrated, that, that abominable
kind of lust, was most repugnant both to nature, reason, propagation of
mankind, and honest behavior) answered, that it was no wonder the makers of
the Iaponian Laws, being themselves blinded with the very same vice, saw not
the fowlenesse thereof; or if they did, yet would they not by any Law restrain
the liberty thereof in others, which they would have to be common to themselves.
But grant it be so (quoth he) that no Law of the Iaponians did forbid it, yet
certain it was, that the law of Nature, engraven in the hearts of men, and
Reason it self (if it were not depraved by evil custom) did wholly forbid
it. For proof whereof, this is a most impregnable argument, that in these kind
of enormities specially, the doers thereof seek out dark holes, and corners,
and use all means that none may see, or know it. Besides this, if any one be
known to be branded therewith, it is the very first thing that is cast in his
teeth, when one intends to do him a disgrace, if he be once known to have
committed the same.

Here now Ficarondono's obstinacy being in the judgment of every one
convinced, The peevish pertinacy of a Bonzie.
gave way to the truth. Yet he, because reasons failed him, held on his combat
with spiteful clamours, and that in a more froward then obstinate manner. In
so much, that the violent course into which this arrogant fellow did at last
run, moved both the King and his Nobles, who began to cry all out upon him, and
that if he came to fight, he should get packing into the kingdom of
Amangucium, which then was up in arms, and there ^e should not want matter of
combat; for that here ^ll peace and quietness was desired; But if he came to
^ispute, he should abstain from passion and obsti^acy, and should imitate the
forreyne Priest with whom he disputed, for that his temper and modesty in
disputing ought to give him example. At this the Bonzy (as he was naturally
much inclined to chollar) ^eing carried on by the intemperance of his tongue
^egan to curse the King and his Nobles, as though he ^ad bin mad, or drunk.
Whereupon the King, incen^ed and styrred up to indignation, commanded him
presently to be thrust out of the Palace, solemnly protesting withal, that
were it not for reverence to his Priesthood, he would have commanded his neck
to be broken.

CHAP. XIV. Francis his constancy whilst the Bonzies be up in tumult.
THIS so public a disgrace (as they termed it) wherewith the Name of the
Bonzies was for ever branded, drove them presently into a tumult, and uproar.
Whereupon the doors of all the Temples in the Royal City were shut, and an
Interdict put upon the people, and Nobility; so as now the business was come
unto a commotion amongst the vulgar, The King of Bungo his prudence.
when as the King by his prudent dissembling the matter, did easily allay both
the tumult of the one, and sedition of the other.

In this mean time, the Portugeses partly fearing the uproar of the common
people, and partly the Bonzies rage, had with-drawne themselves into the Haven,
counsayling Xauerius also to give way unto the time, and quit himself of the
present danger. But he alleging, that the Cathecumens would be thereby left
succourlesse and desolate, utterly refused. Whereupon the Portugheses being in
great care and solicitude least they should leave so worthy a man, in the
hands of Barbarians, thought it very expedient, that Gama himself should go
back into the City, to draw him thence, before any mischance happened unto him;
and in the mean time, they would expect him in the Road, until he returned
back with Xauerius. (...) therefore hastening to the City in a little boat,
finds Francis in a poor Cottage, instructing one of that Country, who was
preparing himself for baptism, and shows him the charge which the
Portugheses had given him to fetch him away; sometimes alleging reasons for
the same, then again intrea^ing him that he would avoid the present storm of
persecution, which was coming upon him from the Bonzie^.

But Xauerius being endowed not only with an undaunted courage against dangers,
Xauerius courageous spirit.
out desirous also to encounter even with death it self for Christ his sake* O
how fortunate (quoth he) would he be if any one of us should chance to suffer
that which you are so much afraid of! I for my part know well enough, that I
(...) not worthy of so great an honor: yet if the divine bounty please to
bestow such a favor upon me, although not deserving it, God forbid I should
refuse it. Wherefore in that you advise me so earnestly, to provide for my
self, by flying away, I thank you, and acknowledge my self much obliged to
you for your great love: but I neither may, nor can in conscience do as you
counsel me. For what greater calamity ca^ befall those, whom we have lately
begotten unto Christ, then being forsaken by their Father to be exposed to the
rage and fury of the Bonzies? And what can be more grateful to the Bonzies,
then for him to give back to their threats, who never shruncke at their
arguments? and by disgracefully flying away, to loose the honor of the victory
already gotten against them, and to leave the spoil behind us? As for my self
I will never, by Gods grace, suffer that my fear may be an encouragement to
the wicked atte^pts of Christ enemies. For we have to deal with those who be
terrified by our confidence, and confirmed in their presumption when they
perceive us once to be afraid. G. e too, therefore, since now you know what my
absolute determination and resolution is, return back to your Companions, who
expect you. I see well how much you are bound to assist them in their
merchandise; but I know withal what obligation I have to so bountiful and
merciful a God, who for my sake and other men's salvation, has suffered death,
yea the death of the Cross.

This he spoke with weeping eyes, and with such forcible words, and so inward a
feeling, that Gama not daring to reply one word to the contrary, like a man
wholly amazed, returned back unto the ships. When therefore he had related to
the Portugheses, By the Governors means the Portugheses undergo the danger
with Xauerius.
how all had passed between him and Francis, he told them plainly, that
since he was bound by the agreement he had made with them to carry their
merchandise to Cantona, an haven town of the Chinese, he would there leave
them his ship, to do with it as they pleased: But for himself he was
absolutely and fully resolved to come back again to Bungo, and either to
defend Xauerius, or else to dye with him. This incomparable fidelity of the
Governor, wrought very affectually in the pious mynds of the Portugheses.
Whereupon, when they had all together commended his resolution, they also
offer themselves to accompany him in so glorious an adventure, striving withal
who should be most forward therein; so as presently they returned back again
with their ships into the haven, intending there expect the event of the
business. This news greatly comforted both Xauerius and the Cathecumens, and
withal tormented, and even brake the Bonzies hearts, being a people very
audacious where they see others fearful; and very cowards, when they perceive
them resolute.

CHAP. XV.
^auerius gets a new victory over the Chief of the Bonzies.
THE Bonzies therefore, falling from open violence to private plottes, came
together in great troops to the King, making earnest suite unto him, that he
would co^^ and the disputation between Ficarondono and Francis ^oncerning
Religion which had been broken of, The Conditions of the disputation.
to be ^gaine renewed. The King at first was no ways incli^ed thereto, but yet
upon certain conditions he at last ^ondescended; To wit, that the business
might be car^^ed without clamours, and falling into chollar; That ^or deciding
of matters which might occur in any ^o^trouersy, there should be appointed
certain arbitra^ours, not any of the Bonzies, but of other indifferent and
moderat men, whose office should be to judge, what was granted and confirmed on
either part, and to see that the arguments were made according to the rule ^f
reason; That the disputation ended, the said arbitra^ours, and the other
Auditors should give their sen^ence of every article of Religion disputed, and
that which was confirmed by the greater part of voices, should be held for
certain and ratified; And lastly that the Bonzies should neither by
themselnes, nor others hinder any from being Christians that desired the same.
There conditions were not so much approved, as acceted off by the Bonzies,
because they could not indeed refuse them. The next day therefore, comes
Ficarondono to the Court with above 3000. other Bonzies in his company: so as
one would have thought he had bin going into the field with an army. But the
King out of his prudence, admitted only four of all that number, alleging the
danger of a tumult, and the disgrace also which might come thereof unto the
Bonzies, for whom it could not be any credit, if it should be spread abroad,
that 3000. Bonzies had disputed with one only foreign Priest. Neither were the
Portugheses failing in their affections toward Francis. For being advertised
of this his new combat with the Bonzies, The Portugheses new affections to
Xauerius.
they came again unto the City in a brauer manner the^ before; in so much
that the pomp they came in, and the singular reverence which they used toward
Xauerius, did greatly amaze the Bonzies.

When the company was assembled, the King first asks of Ficarondono, what
reason he could allege, why a new Religion brought out of another world might
not be diuulged in that Royal City? To whom the Bonzy, being now taught by
the late disgrace he had suffered, to use more temper, answered calmely; that
the reason was easy to be given, because there was nothing more hurtful then
that, to their ancient Religion, to the Commonwealth, and to the whole order
of the Bonzies, who both had, and always did serve the Gods after a holy and
pure manner: whereof there were extant most certain approbations, and
testimonies of the Kings of Iaponia; so that it were impiety in they Iaponeses,
to seek to save their ^oules by other means, then had been used by their
^orefathers, and predecessors for so many ages.

Then Francis being by the King willed to answer unto this, desired that there
might be some order, and ^ethod observed in this disputation. Wherefore he
re^uested the King, that seeing the Bonzies were come ^f their own accord to
oppugn him, he would be ^leased to command Ficarondono to declare in
particular, whatsoever either he, or the other Bonzies mi^^^ked of that which
he taught, that so he might an^were unto them all. And moreover he entreated,
for ^he avoiding of contention, that that might be ratified, and held for good,
which his Majesty, with the greater part of the arbitratours, should agree
upon, touching matters in the present co^trouersy. The King granted Francis his
request, and commanded that all matters should be so carried. To which the
Bonzy also agreed.

Then Ficarondono demaundes of him, why he, being a Priest of a strange
Country, inueighed against the Iaponians most sacred Gods? Because (quoth he) I
judge them unworthy of so glorious, and divine a Title; which the rule of right
reason has made proper only to him, who by nature is Eternal, and Immortal*
and being the Author of all things, made both heaven and earth, whereof he is
sole Lord and governor For such is the infinite power and majesty of God, that
hardly can the wit of man, by imagination or thought comprehend it. Wherefore
these few things which here we see with our eyes, the motions of the
celestial globes, and stars; the certain and fixed courses of times; corn,
fruit, and other things proclaim him to be the only true and proper God, who
governs and rules this world, which himself made. As for Xacas, Amidas,
Giron, and others whom you hold for Gods, look but into your own Chronicles
and Monuments, and you will find them to have bin men, very rich, and potent
indeed, but yet mortal as we are.

This answer which Xauerius gave, caused in the Judges a soft whispering among
themselves, whereby they declared that it pleased them well. Whereupon when the
Bonzy was ready to oppose him, the King bad him go to something else, for that
was already judged for good by the Arbitrators, whose sentence they were to
stand unto. He therefore demands of Francis, The Bonzies bills of Exchange.
Why he disallowed of the Bonzies bills of Exchange, whereby the dead were
provided of money in heaven, specially seeing by that means they who departed
out of this life, became rich in heaven on a sudden, who otherwise would have
remained poor and beggarly?

To this Xauerius replied, that their riches who went to heaven, consisted not
in the Bonzies Bills, but in the Merit of good works. And those works were
good which proceeded from right reason, and true Religion, being without
question grateful, and acceptable to that Eternal God, who gives rewards to
every one according to their merit. As for Religion there was none true and
pure, but that of the Christians, whereby, sincerely and piously the true God
is worshipshed; the which is also called Christian, be^^use Christ the son of
God delivered it unto men. ^or Christ, quoth he, being made Man for man's sake
^^ought down that excellent doctrine from heaven, ^ho being also glorious in
miracles, replenished the ^rts of men with heavenly precepts; and lastly for
^ans salvation suffered death, washing away their sin^es with his own blood.
Whosoever therefore being ^aptized according to the Christian rites, do truly
and ^^ncerely observe the co^mandments of Christ in this ^ortal life, shall at
last be admitted into heaven, to an ^uerlasting life, abounding with all
happiness.

Neither is the Christian Religion so niggard, and ^inching as the Bonzies is,
The Bonzies shut out of heaven poor people and women.
it shutting out neither ^oore people nor women from heaven, so that they ^iue
and dye as Christians ought to do; and yet the Bonzies either out of
niggardnesse, or superstition will not affoard them any entrance into bliss:
whereby it is easily seen, that the Bonzies course of life, aymeth rather at
their own profit and commodity, then at truth of Religion; and that they
respect their own ^gaine more, then the honor of God, or salvation of ^oules.
For seeing God, who is Lord of Heaven and earth, has created women as well as
men, poor as well as rich; he will without partiality, have them also to be
saved and blessed, if they lead a good, and virtuous life.

Here now the King, and the other arbitratours approved the discourse of
Francis for very good; whereat the Bonzies were extremely grieved and ashamed,
it galling them to the heart, to depart the field with the loss of the victory,
by the judgment both of King and his Nobility. For with this, the disputation
ended; notwithstanding that their obstinacy in defending what they had once
said, was not yet overcome.

After this other Bonzies, gallant fellows both for learning and eloquence,
that they might not seem wholly vanquished, New disputation with other Bonzies.
set again a fresh upon Xauerius. As he was therefore speaking to the people,
they began to press him with very many, and different questions. This
business lasted for above five days: all which time the King was never
absent, either to benefit himself by the disputations, or else by his
authority to defend Francis, of whom he had undertaken the protection; having
not the patience to see the Bonzies, with more obstinacy then truth, impugn
his answers, which were very clear, and according to reason: so as when the
Bonzies ran crying out, and rushing together in throngs upon Xauerius, he
caused them to be kept back, telling them aloud, that if any one would try
whether a Religion were according to reason, he should not himself be void of
reason, as they all seemed to be. And with this, rising up, The King leads
Xauerius to his lodging.
he took Francis by the hand, and with his Nobles following him, led him to
his lodging, which was not indeed more graceful and glorious for Xauerius, and
the Christian Religion, then disgraceful and ignominious for the Bo^zies, who
upon this their new ignominy, heaped up also new rage in their spiteful minds.
The Bonzies rage.
Wherefore like men out of their wits with fury they fell openly a roaring out,
and with loud voices to wish, that Thunder from heaven would consume (...) King
to ashes, seeing he made less account of his ^ncestours Religion, confirmed by
authority of so ^any Kings, then of a strange, and infamous ^ect; and ^ad a
more slight esteem of the Bonzies authority, ^en of a stinking, roguish, and
base fellow.

CHAP. XVI.
He procures the Kings of Amangucium and Bungo to favor Christianity.
IN the mean time whilst Francis was glad to see matters fall thus out happily
(God almighty seasoning his sweet meat with sour sauce) he comes to
understand ^ow variously things had bin carried at Amangucium ^^nce his
departure thence. Cosmas Turianus had all that ^hile employed himself there with
no less fortunate ^^ccesse in refuting the Bonzies, then in instructing (...)
Neophytes, when as a civil war breaking forth upon a sudden, disturbed all.
For that a certain ^otent Prince setting upon his King at unawares, ^ith a
great army of souldiars, had driven him out ^f his kingdom; who being not
ignorant that his life ^as sought for, and that he might not fall alive into
the ^ands of his enemy, being his own subject, had ^esperatly killed himself.
Upon this, the City be^ame all in a tumult, and all things were turned up
(...) down, whilst the souldiars without any restraint had practiced their
cruelty upon all that stood in their way, without respect either of quality,
age, or person, wasting also in a furious manner, even the very houses
themselves.

In the midst of these so many slaughters and deuastations by fire, the
malicious Bonzies intended to have oppressed the Christians and their
Instructors, if the divine Providence had not with present aid protected the^.
For presently upon the news of the Kings death, that dismal war soon was
turned into a joyful peace, by means of the chief Nobility of the Kingdom,
who conspiring all together, sent forthwith Ambassadors to Ficarondono the
King of Bung^ his Brother, to demand him for their King. Wherefore Xauerius
hoping for a fit opportunity to obtain the new Kings favor, toward the
Neophytes at Amangucium, went straight unto the King of Bungo, and requested
him to commend unto his brother, the Fathers of the Society, and the Christians
that lived at Amangucium.

The King did very carefully what Francis requested, and the new King of
Amangucium also made unto him a liberal promise of what he desired, which
heafterward faithfully performed. Moreover the King of Bungo, that his deeds
might add force to his words, The King of Bungo gives an house to the Society
of JESUS.
began presently himself to practice that in his own Kingdom which he
persuaded his Brother to do in his, by favoring of the Neophytes, and
appointing a certain house for such of the Society as should come at any time
to Bungo: Yet himself durst not embrace the Christian Faith, which he so much
^^proued and favored, for fearing he might be thrust (...) of his Kingdom by
sedition. Wherefore Francis ^^uing done his endeavor, although in vain, to
draw (...) to the faith of Christ, when he saw that he lost (...) his labor
therein, and that the business was not (...) ripe, turns his thoughts
another way.

Now when Xauerius was to depart, the King with ^ares in his eyes, The King
weeping at Xauerius departure.
looking upon the Portugheses that ^ccompanyed him; I do, quoth he, in all
sincerity, ^^uch envy you, in this your Companion, of whom (...) being
deprived, cannot refrain from tears; and (...) more, because I fear that
this is the last time (...) shall ever see him. Then Xauerius giving the King
^umble thanks for these tokens of his good will toward him, told him that he
would certainly, if God ^pared his life and gave him leave, return unto him
^gayne ere long; by which promise he put the King unto some comfort. Then
entering into speech with his Majesty about the Christian Religion, he put him
^n mind of those things which he thought most profitable for him, Francis his
exhortation to the King.
aduising him seriously to remember that he was a mortal man, and therefore
should deeply consider with himself, how many foul crimes and offenses would
cry vengeance against him after his death, unless he purged himself thereof
whilst he lived: And that he should for certain know, that whosoever dyed out
of the Christian faith, was infallibly to be tormented everlastingly in Hell:
but they who were Christians, and lived as they ought, should by the help and
grace of Christ, enjoy everlasting bliss (...) in heaven. These words of
Francis, so stroke the King unto the heart, that in the presence of them, he
again brake forth into abundance of tears.

Xauerius now humbly bidding his Majesty farewell, departs from him at last
with much a do. Then comforting the Catechumens with hope of his speedy
return, or else to send one in his place, he departed also the City, full of
hope and confidence, for that he left the King, and a good part of the people
well affected to the Christian faith. Besides, he had much confidence, that so
great a Kings favor might be a singular defense to the Christian cause in
those places. Neither was he mistaken therein. For ever since the King of Bungo
entered into amity with the Portugheses, and took upon him to protect the
Christian Religion, he has always proceeded with very much favor and
friendship toward the^; assigning also a commodious place for Francis his
companions, that were after sent thither, and by his letters of Commendations,
opening the way for them, to enter into the familiarity and favor of his
neighbor Kings. Besides this, he furthered also the propagation of the
Gospel, The King of Bungo his desire to protect and propagate the Christian
Religion.
and favored those of the Society, in the greatest mutability of times that
might be, with extraordinary benefit both to himself and all Iaponia. For by
his means although an Ethnicke, Christianity came afterward to be exceedingly
increased. And he by the goodness of Christ, who rewarding in due time al
these favors of his* did not only add four other kingdoms to that which was
left him by his Father, but was also made a Christian about the 30. year after
Francis his death, as having no small reference unto his merits. For that ^he
King when he was baptized, either out of respect which he bare unto Xauerius,
or for that he attributed that benefit unto his merits, would needs be called
Francis.

This most prudent Kings example, When the King of Bungy was baptized he would
be called Francis.
was by many ^f the Nobility, and some Princes also followed: yet ^e went
beyond them all, no less in piety then in dig^ity. For God Almighty has
granted this our age (...) favor, as to see an Ambassador sent from him (...)
Grego^y the XIII. supreme Pastor of his Church; ^hen as certain young Noble
men of the blood Royal ^ere solemnly sent to Rome, from the Christian ^rinces
of Iaponia, to acknowledge the Bishop of ^ome for the chief Prelate of Gods
Church, and Fa^^er to all Nations: Who coming out of another world, and
returning again into their Country, were ^onoured greatly as they deserved,
not only in Rome, ^ut also throughout Italy and Spain. For which way ^euer
they went they became a most pleasant spectacle unto all; the like whereof had
never bin seen or heard (...) the memory of man. So as they were every where
^eceiued not only with great concourse, and admiration ^f the people, but with
applause, congratulations, and ^ther tokens of excessive joy; that even the
memory ^f Xauerius, who first of all brought the Ghospel into ^aponia, might
also seem heerin to triumph.

Yet was there one thing which did not a little ^ouble Xauerius mind, for that
he had wrought so ^^all good amongst the Nobility of Iaponia (whose ^^thority
ever bears great sway among the people) and that never a one of them had
received his wholesome counsayles. That which most hindered this business, was
the great authority of the Chinese, from whom the Iaponians had received
their Religion; which the Bonzies of Bungo, and Amangucium commonly used for
their starting hole, when they were ouerpressed by Xaucrius, saying: If the
Christian Religion were true, why did not the Chinese approve of it? Moreover
the King of Bungo his example was no small block in their way, who being very
famous both for prudence and learning, seemed in his judgment to disallow
thereof all that time, because he did not embrace it. When Francis therefore saw
that the Iaponians could not be won to submit their understanding to the true
Faith, Why he determined to go into China.
unless the superstition of the Chinese were first overthrown, he resolved
to lay his battery to the principal Fort it self, with great hope and
confidence, that if he could once draw the Chinese to the standart of Christ,
the Iaponians would easily follow their example.

OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE V. BOOK.
Intending to pass into China, he determines first to return into India.
CHAP. I.
THE Confines of China, are distant from Iaponia, The descrip^ion and manners
of the Chinese:.
where the sea is narrowest, not above 200. miles. This kingdom in the
continent is far the greatest and peaceablest of all the East. It is a Country
inferior to none for number of goodly, and wealthy Cittyes and Towns,
replenished not only with store and plenty of people and all other things, but
also with excellent wits, and liberal sciences. It is ruled by one sole
Monarch, whose beck all do obey. And certain it is, that there is not any
Prince in the whole world, who has either his subjects, or officers more at
command, then ^e. The King himself attends rather to moderation in his
government, then Power, ruling wholly by the advice of the Senate, and
according to the laws of the Kingdom. You would think it to be rather a
Commonwealth then a Kingdom, so great a sway does counsel and equity bear
therein.

The people of the Country in favor, are like to the Iaponians, white of
complexion, and ingenious: but not so much given to war. As for the Bonzies
the Priests of their Gods, they are of little or no reputation and esteem
amongst the^, for that the opinion of their sanctity is long since worn out of
date. There is almost no Nation more apt then they to receive the Christian
Religion, were it not that Luxury, and the craft of the Devil did hinder the
same. For by Satan's means, who is there, even afraid of himself, the whole
country is so kept, The country of China shut up against Christ's Ghospel
and as it were locked up, that it affoardeth no entrance at all to Preachers
of the Gospel; it being enacted by the most ancient Laws of the Realm, that
all strangers whatsoever be excluded, excepting only the Ambassadors of
Princes. In so much, that it is a death for any one to come thither without
command from the King.

Xauerius understanding this, began to think how he mightworke himself in
amongst them. And it came to his mind, to return again into India, there to
deal with the Viceroy, and Bishop of Goa, concerning the sending of an
Embassage to the King (...) the China, and so he going as companion to the
Em^ssadour, when he had gotten entrance, might bring (...) the Gospel amongst
the Chinese. And because so (...) any People, and Provinces were governed by
the ^^mmand of one King, it seemed as an evident token ^o^ God, that the
propagation of Religion there would (...) the more easy. Wherefore he was not
out of hope ^^t that (as it had in times past happened in the Ro^^an Empire)
Religion beginning with the King him^^^fe, who was head of the whole Country, it
might (...) conveyed to all the rest of the Provinces of China, (...) members
of the same Kingdom.

He had now remained two whole years in Iaponia, His care of the Society.
^^d had not only united many to the flock of Christ (...) the chief
kingdoms thereof, but procured places ^^so of abode for those of the society,
when as he began (...) think of returning into India. Besides the cause
^^herof we now spoke, of procuring an Embassage to ^^e sent into China, the
solicitude and care of his own ^^ociety invited him also home; not that he
was so ^^uch troubled for the great distance of place from ^^em, or for any
longing desire he had to see them, ^^ut that he deemed, he ought not so to
employ him^^lfe in gaining of Ethinckes to Christ, as wholly to ^bandon the
flock and company which was commit^d to his charge, both by Christ, and
Ignatius. For ^^lthough he often understood by letters from India ^hatsoeuer
was done by those of the society there: yet ^^e remembered well the Proverb
that says, The ^^ore part of the head is better then the hinder; and that
^igilant pastors ought to vi^it their flocks, with their own eyes, rather
then with other men's. He therefore determined, having now bin long absent, to
visit the Society in India, whereof he was Superior, and to send some thence
into Iaponia; and after having settled all things there, and procured the
forsaid Embassage, to go presently into China.

CHAP. II.
Going into China, he recouereth, by his prayers, a Cocke-boate which was
carried away by the violence of a tempest.
BEING therefore invited to China by the opportunity of a Portughese ship, which
was going thither, he, together with the King of Bungo his Ambassador, who
went with presents to the Viceroy of India, imbarketh in the month of
November, and year of our Lord 1551. He took with him out of Iaponia, Matthew
and Bernard two of that Country, whom he had there baptized, inte^ding
afterward to send them to Rome, that others might behold them, as a pattern
of the Iaponian Nation; and they likewise benefit themselves, by seeing the
dignity and Majesty of the Church of Christ^ that so, having by^ eye witnesses
of the glory, and ri^^ ches of that Church, especially at Rome, they might
returning home again, cause the Iaponians to co^^ ^^yue a worthy esteem of
the Christian Religion, ^^y relating unto them what themselves had seen.

Departing therefore from Iaponia with a prospe^ous wynd, they found this their
navigations after^ards very various, and remarkable for miracles. The ^^auenth
day, after they had put to sea, there arose v^^on a sudden a cruel tempest,
which by main for^^e and violence carried away their ship into a sea who^^
unknown to the mariners. And as they wandered ^^p and down amongst the
billows, without once ^^nowing where they were, or whither they went, they
were so tossed with cross waves, that they were in ^mminent danger to be cast
away. For the sky was ^^uercast with such thick and mysty clouds, that ^^hey
were wholly deprived of the light of the sun, and ^^o remained in darkness for
the space of five whole ^^ayes. At which time, not only Francis his sanctity,
^^ut also his care and solicitude manifested it self. He ^^ncited the rest to
assist the mariners in their offices, ^^ot more by words, Francis imployeth
himself to help the ship being in danger.
then by his own example. He was behind none in laboring, both night and day.
He comforted the afflicted, and put them that were ^ut of heart, in hope to
escape. One would have said ^^e had been the Captain, or rather Governor of
the ^^hip.

But when the wind was enraged with greater fury, and tossed the waves higher
and higher, the Master ^f the ship fearing (which after happened indeed) that
some soddain puff of wind might violently rend away the Cock-boate from the
ship, caused it to be fast bound thereto with cable ropes. As they were now
laboring about it (being fifteen men in number, besides two Saracens) they
were presently ouercast with a mist as dark as pitch. And not long after,
their cables burst a^under with the violence of the tempest, and the boat,
with the men, was carried away with such swiftness and vehemence, that almost
in an instant it was out of all their sights. Whereupon the Master lamenting
their case, making account they were all but lost men, unless the Cocke-boate
could be recovered, directed his course that way, which he thought the boat was
carried. But the waves growing rougher and rougher, and the ship compassed
round as it were with mountains of water, was upon the suddayne driven under
the waves, ready to sink. Whereupon Xauerius stirred up by the clamours of the
mariners and passengers who called upon our B. Lady, He delivers out of
danger the ship almost cast away.
comes running out of the Masters cabin, where he was at his prayers, and
there finde^n the passengers and mariners cast one upon another on a heap,
expecting nothing but their certain casting away. He therefore not caring so
much for himself, as for his companions, cries out: O Jesus Christ, God of my
heart, I beseech thee by those five wounds which the Love of us gave thee upon
the Cross, help these thy servants, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious
blood. A wonderful thing. The ship on a suddayne mounted up above the waves,
and got out of present danger, every one acknowledging Gods most liberal, and
helping hand therein.

When they had thus escaped their own peril, all their care was for their
neighbors: and every one who had kindred, or friends in the lost boat, began
greatly to lament their misfortune. After they had thus a while bewailed their
friends, they fall to pity themselves. For they were tossed up and down in an
unknown sea, where nevertheless together with the Cock-boate, they had lost
almost all hope of saving themselves. Xauerius therefore, seeing them all
weeping, and half dead through fear, bids them take courage, and tells
them withal, that within three days the daughter would again come to her
mother, signifying thereby that the Boat should return again unto the
ship. They generally gave no great credit to the matter, A prediction of the
boats return to the ship.
yet they were not altogether out of hope. The next day in the morning as
soon as it was light, Francis comes forth amongst them with a cheerful
countenance, and saluting the Master of the ship after a courteous manner,
wills him to command one to clime up the Mast, to espy whether the Cock
boat were in sight or no. Whereupon an ancient and expert mariner, called
Peter, answered in a gibing manner, that they should then recover their
Cock-boate, when they had lost their ship. To whom Francis replied: why,
Peter, think thou any thing hard for God to do? I for my part am not out of
hope, but that by the goodness of God, and our B. Lady of Malaca her help, to
whom I have vowed three Masses, the boat with those poor wretches in her,
will shortly b^ safe with us again.

Then when he who had ascended the Mast said, that it could not yet be seen,
Francis shut himself close up in a Cabine, and there with tears spent a good
part of the day in prayer, and at last comes out telling them good news,
that they should presently see the boat return home again: and forth with
entreats the Master to strike sail, and to stay for the boat, for
certainly all that were in her, especially the two Saracens, should by Gods and
his B. Mothers help be saved. The master of the ship refused his request, and
the others cried out upon it, both because it was in vain then to expect the
boat, and also because they could not do it, without manifest peril of their
ship. For even still they thought they saw before their eyes the danger which
they had so lately escaped. But the Master, being at last wearyed out with
Francis entreaties, causes the small sail which then was only used, to be let
down. Having thus stayed his course for a good space, and the boat not yet
appearing, and the ship also seeming to be in some danger because the sea was
still very rough and the wynd boisterous, he commands the sail to be hoysed
up again. But Xauerius still urged him, and entreated the mariners to expect
yet a while, confidently assuring them that the boat would come presently
without any danger to their ship. But when the mariners, who were out of all
hope, and moved also with the present danger they were in, would
notwithstanding have hoysed up the sail, the Father runs unto them, and
laying his hand fast upon the yard, besought them by the precious death, and
wounds of our Savior, that they would be pleased to expect yet a little
longer. With much ado they obeyed; and he set himself again to pray.

In the mean time Antony Dias was at his request gone up to the top of the
Mast, who looking all about, told them he could yet see nothing; and therefore
entreats Xauerius to give him leave to come down: but he, on the other side,
wished him to stay there still a while. And as he prayed earnestly with his
hands lifted up to heaven* he bids the Master and the rest to be of good
courage. Now all this while the ship (being as it were warranted by Francis
from any present danger) was tossed with mighty waves, and floated up and down
the sea without any harm at all. And having in this manner expected almost
three hours, and the matter held for desperate by some, behold upon a sudden
Dias cries out that the boat was in sight, and coming toward them. Then
they being all exceedingly comforted, began to give thanks to God, and to
Francis Xauier. As soon as the boat came within all their sights, presently
they turn the ship crosse-wise to receive her, and she, God certainly guiding
her, comes directly upon the ship. As she approached nearer unto them, the
mariners, now leaping for joy, went about, as the custom is, to cast out a
rope unto her: but Xauerius told them that there was no need so to do, The
boat of her self comes to the ship side.
for she of her own self would come close to the ship side. And so it came to
pass indeed; all the company being astonished at the miracle. At last she came
so right unto the side, that the poor men might be co^modiously taken up.
Besides this, although she were in the midst of the waves, yet remained she
firm without any to hold her, until she was again fast bound unto the ship.

Besides this so evident a miracle, another strange and almost incredible thing
is recou^ted by Fernand Mendez Pinto, a grave and virtuous Portughese, who was
companion unto Francis in that voyage out of Iaponia into China, and partaker
also of all these dangers; which was, That after the men were taken up safe
into the ship, and the mariners would have thrust of the boat which was now
empty and fast tied thereto, Francis being in the ship was seen at the same
time also in the boat.
they all cried out unto them that they should first help forth Xauerius who
was still in the boat. When the mariners replied that Xauerius was well and
safe in the ship, and had never been in the boat, they affirmed constantly one
after another, that all the while they were tossed by the tempest, and driven
up and down in the sea, Xauerius was seen comforting them, and putting them
in hope to escape even until the boat came back. Then they began to
understand, that Francis whilst he prayed for their delivery appeared also
unto them (as it is recounted of S. Nicolas Bishop of Myra) by whose prayers it
was manifest they had been saved from shipwreck. This thing was much spoken of
by all the passengers, He foretells a calm sea.
and mariners. But Xauerius affirmed, that it was Gods handy-worke and not
his, and wills the Master of the ship, with all speed to make ready all his
sails, for that presently the tempest would cease, and they should have fair
weather. This proved also very true, for the mariners had scarce put in order
their sails, when upon the sudden, the storm wholly ceased, and the ship
sailed on with a prosperous gale.

Now this regayning of the Cock-Boate, made also much for gayning of the two
Saracens souls, who ^ad been in all the danger. For they being moved by ^o
evident a miracle, were by Xauerius without great difficulty converted to the
faith of Christ; and being ^y him instructed and baptized, were, next to God,
^ound unto him for the salvation both of their bodies and souls. The ship then
having afterward a prospe^ous voyage, came safe to Cinceum, an haven Town of
China, whither she was bound.

CHAP. III.
He makes the Port of the Chinese, and his voyage to Malaca, very famous by
his Prophesies.
AS soon as Francis was landed, he met very fitly with James Perera his
ancient and great friend, a man of note both for Nobility of birth and riches,
who was shortly to re^rne into India. When they had saluted each other ^ith
great signs of joy and affection, Francis acquain^ng him with his
determination, of coming to speech ^ith the King of China, asked his advise
therein. Wher^pon he being a prudent man, and experienced in ^ch matters,
thought his best course would be to ^rocure the Embassage which he spoke of,
and also ^resents from the Viceroy of India to the said King ^f China. James
Pererias notable bounty.
And to second his advise with his helping ^and, he offered cordially for that
purpose not only ^is own endeauours, but his ship also, and all he ^ad
besides; so much did the love of Xauerius togeatogether with advancement of
Christian Religion in China move him. And truly his deeds proved greater then
his words: for he sent with Xauerius to Goa, a man of purpose to conduct him,
and furnished him with 30. thousand Crowns for that voyage. Francis giving him
many thanks prayed God to requite him, and promised also, that his King should
do the like.

From thence he passed to Machao a very famous Mart Town of the Chinese,
where finding a young maid, who through poverty and want had exposed her
Chastity to be abused, he presently began to beg money to make her up a dowry.
He therefore going to one Peter Vellius an ancient acquaintance of his, and a
well monied mercha^t, and finding him playing at chesse in another man's house,
opens the matter briefly unto him, and withal entreats to borrow some gold
of him to be paid again an hundred for one in heaven. Vellius being somewhat
troubled at Xauerius unseasonable coming unto him, Peter Vellius his great
liberality.
told him that it was then no time to talk of such things, for that he was
not at his own house where his money was. Francis urged again in a very
friendly manner, saying, that to one who was to dye, no time was amiss to do
good deeds in. At which words Vellius being moved, gave him the key of his
chest where his money was (for Xauerius knew well his house and where to find any
thing) bidding him take as much as he would. Francis went and took out 300.
crowns, and presently brings him back the key, telling him withal how much
he had taken. Then, quoth he, Father, you have committed an error, and your
modesty has done me an ^niury, having taken far less then I intended you
should. For by delivering you my key, I meant you should have taken the half
that was in the chest I which I think are 30000. crowns of gold) and have
equally divided it between us; but alas, what a ^mall sum have you taken
thence, for your self?

Francis admiring hereat, perceived that Vellius spoke ^incerely from his heart,
and that his words were not more complementall then true. Whereupon he replied:
Go ^orward Vellius, quoth he, still in this thy liberality, for ^hy noble and
real Heart testified by these effects, is gra^efull and acceptable to God; A
notable Prophecy.
in whose name therefore (...) promise, that God shall never fail thee, and
that ^hou shall also by revelation from him, foreknow the ^ast day of thy life.
Wherein God neither deceived Francis, nor he the merchant. From that time
forward Vellius became quite another man, and was very much addicted to bounty
and piety. Some years after, being forewarned from heaven of the time of ^is
departure out of this life, he began to cast up his ^ccoumpts, and to setle his
household affairs, distri^uting a great part of his substance among the poor,
and made himself ready for that last combat, now whilst he was strong and
lusty.

When his last day was come, he went unto the Church, and caused the Priest to
sing a solemn mass of Requiem for Peter Vellius, at which himself was
present, reckoning himself even then for dead. Then go^ng to every one of his
friends, he bids them farewell, for he was to take a long journey. When they
asked him, whither he meant to go? To heaven, quoth he, I trust. Whereupon they
thought he had but iested being always a merry and pleasant man. But he
persisted with many asseuerations that indeed he went to heaven. Then they
thought verily he was distracted, or crazed in the brain, wherein they were
absolutely confirmed when they heard it reported, that Peter Vellius having
gotten a Mass said for his soul, had shut himself up in his house, and there
expected deaths coming. They therefore came unto his house by troops, and
endeavored one after another to draw him from that melancholy cogitation. But
he, carrying himself with a cheerful contenance, showed manifestly, that he
had no grief of mind, and withal very joyfully opens to his friends
Xauerius his prediction, and the event thereof. At last, when he had told them
the whole matter, he entreated that they would even that very day, keep the
funerals of Peter Vellius who was presently to dye. It so fell out indeed: for
being well stricken in years, he was presently taken away by suddayn death; and
the very same day his friends accompanied his Corpse to Church, being greatly
astonished and amazed, partly at his departure, and partly at Xauerius
prediction.

In the mean time, as Francis was going to imbarke himself in Perera's ship,
turning upon a suddayne to those that accompanied him, who were many in number:
Let us, A double Prophecy.
quoth he, pray to God for the City of Malaca, which is pressed by the Enemy
that besieges it, and if any one can affoad any help to it in this distress,
let them make have, least they come to late when all is lost. This fearful
saying wrought much in them all, ^ither by reason of the Malacensians danger,
or else for the ^iraculous prophecy it self: for Malaca was distant from thence
900. leagues, or thereabout. Through this ^each of Francis they all fell
together to their prayers. ^or was it in vain. For whilst the mariners were
^reparing for this their journey, James Perera aforeaid, being much moved by
what Xauerius had spoken ^ade provision both of armor and souldiars to assist
^he besieged. Whom when Xauerius perceived to be (...) such care, through
fear of danger wherein the Ma^censians were: Away James, quoth he, with this
fear and preparation for war, and give God thanks to^eather with us; For
now Malaca is by the divine Goodness freed from the siege: whereby all might
per^eaue that the Malacensians were succored by the ^rayers which were lately
made for them unto God.

Now Xauerius imbarking in Perera his ship, ^hey arrived upon the fortith day
after their depar^ure from Iaponia, The Haven Sincapura.
at Sincapura a haven Town 120. mi^es distant from Malaca, and where they
remained ^ome few days. From thence Xauerius least any thing ^ight
peradventure hinder his journey at Malaca, ^rote letters to the Society there,
aduertising them of ^is return, and warning them to provide him with all ^peed
of all things necessary for his voyage into India, ^or that he was in very
great have. The chief season ^or commodious passage into India was now a good
while past, when they departed from Sincapura toward Malaca, intending from
thence to pass into India. Wherefore Perera was very anxious doubting that
there was not at that time of the year any ship to be gotten at Malaca, to
transport Francis unto Goa. Then Xauerius: James, A Prophecy.
quoth he, be not afraid, but cast away this care: For Anthony Perera has now
stayed for us a good while, with a ship ready for our journey. The event
showed presently after, that what he said was true.

As soon therefore as they came to Malaca, they find Anthony, who had now three
days expected the coming of Xauerius with a ship fraught, and ready to set
forth. And withal, they understood that Malaca had been lately straightly
besieged by those of Iaua, a barbarous people that border upon them; and that
it was freed from the siege, and danger, at the very same time that Francis had
foretold. As soon as it was reported abroad that Xauerius was returned out of
Iaponia to Malaca, presently there came unto him great concourse of al sorts to
congratulate with him for his safe return. At Malaca he is received with great
joy and gratulation of all.
For when he departed for Iaponia he had committed himself to so long and
dangerous a nauigatio^ even against their wills, to their great grief, and
sorrow. But as soon as news was brought that he was safely returned again at
Malaca, the whole City presently making a procession to the Church of the
Society, gave there public thanks to Almighty God, demonstrating thereby the
great affection which they bare unto him. Wherefore his safe return, together
with the good news of the conuersions he had made in Iaponia, brought
abundance of joy unto the whole City.

CHAP. IIII.
At Goa he cures one that was ready to dye: and takes account of what the
Society had done, since his departure.
FRANCIS having stayed at Malaca some few days for the comfort of the Society
which there resided, imbarketh himself in the ship, which had now been there
a ^^od while ready, and with a prosperous gale arri^^eth at Cocinum, where he
is received with the gene^^all joy and gratulation of all the City. Now at the
^^ery same time that Francis arrived at Cocinum, there ^^ere ships ready
bound for Goa. Wherefore making ^^se of the benefit which was at hand, he
presently with ^^ll speed makes have thither. As ^oone as he was lan^^ed, he
went as his custom was to the hospital of the ^^cke before he would go to his
own house of the Society. As soon as he came to Goa he visits the sick
After he had in a sweet manner comforted the ^^ck he went unto the College,
being earnestly expe^^ted there by all his Society. Where after he had most
^^ouingly and tenderly saluted and embraced them all one after another, that he
might not seem more courte^^us unto externes, then to those of his own
family, ^^e asks whether there was any sick in the house? To whom it was
answered, that there was only one. Whereupon he goes presently unto him, before
he went to his own chamber.

The Patient at that present lay in great extremity, and was watched day and
night by some of the Society who had care of his soul. All things were now
prepared for his burial, yet the sickeman himself, although he was then even
ready to give up the ghost, was not out of all hope of life, saying oftentimes
with a broken and dying voice, that if Xariuss would come before he were dead
(for he was every day expected) he should certainly by his merits and prayers
recover his health, He recouers one of the Society ready to dye.
although even then despayred of. Francis failed not to answer to the sick
man's hope, and as soon as he entered the chamber, he saluteth him as he lay even
a dying, recites the Gospel over him, and delivers him from death; so as
being instantly eased of his pains, not long after perfectly recovered his
health. One would have thought that God had so disposed the matter, that both
the sick man should expect the coming of Xauerius, and Xauerius make have on
his journey to come to him.

After this, incredible joy was conceived not only by those of the Society, but
also by the principal of the City for Francis his safe return, who greatly
longed to hear how matters went in Iaponia. Xauerius found also in Goa that
Christianity, The Fra^ciscans and Dominicans industry.
and the Society had there much increased in his absence. For the Portugeses
having bin very carefully instructed both by the Franciscans, Dominicans, and
those also of the Society, after their vices were once rooted out, lived very
ciuilly and piously, even amidst the greatest liberty and affluence of al
things. For although they were warlike and martial men ^yet they lead a life
void, and free ^^ot only from quarrelling, wrangling, and injuries, ^^ut even
from those pleasures also, which are law^^lly granted unto men; in so much that
it was held ^^r a monstrous thing for any one to keep a Concu^^ne: so far
did the force of heavenly mysteries re^^raine the liberty of Souldiars. For
many times in the ^eare, and as often also as they were to be sent upon ^^y
service, they armed themselves with the Sacra^ents of Confession and Communion.
One would ^^aue thought they had bin rather religions men, then ^^uldiars.

Fa. Paul Camertes also ( Francis his Vicar) having ^^stituted an Hospital at
Goa for the poor, did ^imselfe beg alms about the City for the mainte^ance
thereof, with no less encouragement to pious people, then comfort to the poor
themselves. Be^des this, Fa. Anthony Gomez by the Viceroyes and ^^shops command
having been sent to Malauaria, The King of Tanoris baptized
had ^^structed in the mysteries and precepts of the Chri^^ian faith, the King
of Tanoris, (who had bin lately ^^onuerted and baptized privately by Vincentius
a Fran^^scan Friar) and brought him at last (being much a^ayd of the speeches
of men) to prefer religion be^^ore fear, professing himself a Christian
publicly ^^uen in the City of Goa. Where being intertayned by ^^he Bishop and
Viceroy with all honor and solem^ity, he became an example to many Kings and
Prin^^es, and to his own subjects also, to make the same ^^ryall of the
Christian Faith.

Those also of the Society, whom Xauerius had sent abroad into diverse other
places, had each of them wrought great fruit by laboring in our Lords vineyard.
For in the Promontory of Comorinu^, which as we said before, had been manured by
Fa. Anthony Criminalis, and watered with his dearest blood, was to be seen a
most plentiful harvest of souls, In the Promo^tory of Comorinu^ there are
numbered 400000 Christians
there being numbered 400. thousand Christians. So that there may be a question
whether his life, or death caused more increase to the Christian cause. But at
O^^s, that most fair and rich City (as we said) seated in the mouth of the
Persian gulf, Gaspar Barzaeus the low Country man had most nobly carried on
the business. For that City, being the very sincke of Ethinckes, Saracens,
and Jews, had now publicly given full scope to all abuses, being grown even
degenerate, and wholly ignorant of their own country customs and ceremonies.
Wherefore Gaspar being sent thither by Xauerius order, had in a short space
greatly corrected and reformed their corrupt and wicked manners, showing
himself a scholar not unworthy of such a master; whose worthy acts being by
others already recou^ted, I will only mention one in this place, whereby a
conjecture may be made of the rest.

There was at Ormus a most ample and famous Temple dedicated to Mahomet, A
memorable fact of Father Gaspar Barzaeus
wherein he was served by the Saracens with the greatest solemnity an^^
devotion that might be. Gaspar could not endure to se^^ the honor due to
Christ, given to that wicked Apostata from the Christian Religion. Wherefore
infla^^ med with divine zeal he performed a noble act, worthy of all memory.
For leading with him a troop o^^ ^^ldren with great crosses in their hands and
singing ^^oud, he sets upon the Temple, in the open day ^^e; and himself
carrying also a Cross, first of al ru^^th into the midst of the chaunting
Saracens, and in ^^e sight of those Barbarians, who stood amazed at ^^e strange
accide^t, planteth at leisure six great Crosses ^^st in the pauement of the
Temple. One would have ^^ought the fury of that frantic people, to have ^^n
withheld by divine power from doing any out^^ge upon him, who was moved by God
to perform ^^at noble act. The force of the Cross.
The which was afterward made more ^^ident by the event of the thing it self.
For that the ^^ght thereof did so discourage and terrify the Sarace^s ^^at they
forsook the Temple ever after, and ran a^^ay like men distracted, as the
Devils are wont to ^^o when the sign of the Cross is made against them.
^aspar at first, by Francis his appointment, remained (...) the hospital. But
afterward when the City of ^rmus had received evident trial both of his, and
his ^ompanions virtue, they built a proper House and Church for the Society.
Both which, the Society for certain reasons, The Dominicans commended.
thinking good afterward to leave, ^yielded them up freely to the Dominicans
(who with much praise and fruit labored in that vineyard of our Savior) for
the respect they bare unto that most holy Family.

With no less labor did Fa. Cyprian live in Meli^pora the Town of S. Thomas,
who after he came thither, so moved the townes-men by his preaching and
exemplar life, that of themselves they freely gave to the Society a place for
their perpetual habitation. Cyprian therefore assisted by the divine goodness,
did therein many and worthy things, but amongst others, this one was very
remarkable. A certain Mariner having taken away a Christian woman by force
from her husband, put her into a ship, not without the Masters knowledge,
Cyprians notable virtue.
to carry her away. Whereof Cyprian being advertised, when he could not by any
means hinder such an abominable fact, pronounced this prophecy out of the
pulpit. Certain persons have carried away another man's wife, but it shall not
be long before they be punished, according to desert, for their sin against
God and man. For the ship whereinto the woman is conveyed shall perish; and
whereas he that has committed this fact, has now but one eye, and stammereth
with his tongue, shall ere long loose his other eye, and speech also. All this
fell out as he foretold. For within few days after the ship was cast away;
whereupon the Master thereof, being enraged against the said mariner, pulled
out his other eye. And he likewise, by his loud crying out in the shipwreck,
became of a stammerer, wholly speachlesse.

Moreover Fa. Nicolas Lancelot at Colanum, Baltazar Gage at Bazain, Francis
Perez at Malaca, John Beira in Moluca and Maurica, and others of the Society,
some in one place, some in another, by the help of our Lord employed their
labors not without great profit, in confirming the Neophytes, and gayning of
Ethnickes to Christ. And all of them carried themselves with such wonderful
sanctity of life, even amidst so great want of humane assistance and hardness of
all ^^hings, that with ease they obtained, or established pla^^es of Residence
for the Society. About the same time also Gaspar Consalues procured a Reside^ce
for the Socie^y at Tanaa a town dista^t from Bazain 17 miles, where ^he Towns
men being instructed by the same Father (...) Christian piety, became good
husbandmen, and of (...) virtuous life. And many of their children were
trai^^ed up according to each ones capacity and propension, ^ome to learning,
and others to diverse handycrafts; so ^^s, they were taught at once, both to
behave themsel^es virtuously, and also to get their living for the main^nance
of their life.

At this place there came unto Fa. Gaspar, from ^^e furthest part of India for
religion sake, a certain ^^ndian who was very aged, and almost withered up
with leanesse of body; yet of such comportment both in habit and countenance,
that he resembled one of the ancient Hermits. He being in a short space
instructed ^n the precepts of the Christian Faith, An India^ like another
Simeon dies after he had embraced Christ.
when one day ^^e beheld, drawn in a Table, the Child Jesus in his mothers
lap, began presently with great veneratio^ to ^ake up the divine babe into his
arms, and forthwith, ^s he was in that sort embracing the picture, being ^ike
another Simeon, admonished that the time of his death was at hand, urged and
instantly besought the Father that he might, without delay, be made a
Christian, for that his last day and death was at hand. He was therefore
forthwith baptized, and the next morning at break of day he departed this life
in peace, after he had embraced the Savior of the world.

Xauerius being certified how matters went in all places, and of the
difficulties also which many of his subjects were in, he sent unto every place
according to the condition and necessity thereof, not only supplies, but rules
and precepts also for their further direction; which not to interrupt the order
of this our History we have thought good here to omit, intending afterward to
set them down in their proper places.

In the mean time whilst every one greatly rejoiced for the good news he had
brought out of Iaponia, with a special feeling; only he, who had bin the
Author thereof, still burning with an insatiable desire of the good of souls
and glory of God, thought the conversion of Iaponia but a matter of small
moment, in comparison of those other things, which he hoped, and intended to
compass. For he had now a good while, fixed his cogitations upon China. That
was the Country, so replenished with towns and inhabitants, yea the Court it
self of the most ample kingdom of the world, which his intentions aimed at,
as the complete and final end of his trauiales, and a thing whereon the
salvation of all the East did specially depend.

CHAP. V.
Having procured the Embassage before spoken of, he goes himself to China.
SCARCE was he come to Goa, when as the care he had of China ran so
continually in his mind, that be began with all diligence to set forward the
business, making account, that how long the matter was differred, so long was
the salvation of the Chinese delayed. He therefore out of hand deals with
Alphonsus Noronia the Viceroy of India, and John Alboquercius Bishop of Goa
about the sending of an Embassage unto China. The piety and liberality of James
Perera.
The person appointed heerto was James Perera a man of singular piety, and by
Xauerius the only desired, and one who was no way failing in that which was
expected from him. For out of the desire he had ^^o advance Religion, he so
took the business to heart, that in setting out his Embassage, and providing
of Presents, he spent the greatest part of all his wealth.

In the dispatch of this business Xauerius carried all things with
exraordinary speed. For within the compass of a month, he had gotten ready
not only the Patents, Letters, and Presents from the Viceroy, and Bishop for
the Embassage, but also all other things that were necessary for so hard a
voyage. Wherein he was much furthered by the prompt liberality of the Viceroy, a
very pious man, and Xauerius special friend, who gave him both an Ambassador
according to his desire, and provided all things necessary for that journey, not
with more care then speed, and besides commended earnestly the whole business
by his letters unto Aluares Thardus Governor of Malaca.

Now though Xauerius were daily employed in this business of China, Gaspar the
low countryman Francis his vicar.
yet was he not unmindful of his charge at home in India; setting in order all
such things as were necessary for the Society, in those and other places round
about. Wherefore he calls Gaspar the low country man from Ormus, and ordayneth
him his Vicar, and Rectour of the College of Goa, leaving with him most
prudent and wholesome precepts for his direction. The Town Diu.
At the same time he sent also a Priest, with a Coadiutor to assist him, unto
Diu (a Fort in the Portugheses dominion standing upon the mouth of the river
Indus) and diverse others unto other places, giving to every one instructions
fit for the place, whereunto they were sent.

In this mean time Matthew one of the two Iaponians chanced to die at Goa.
Wherefore Bernard was his other companion was sent to Rome in company of Andrew
Ferna^des whom Xauerius sent unto the King of Portugal, and to Rome also to
Ignatius Founder of the Society, to bring back with him some store of the
Society, and such as were most fit for the Iaponian harvest, The sum of
Francis his letters to the King of Portugal.
and expedition of China. Xauerius writing at the same time unto the King of
Portugal, declared what his drift was, in going into China, in these words: We
are only three of the Society who go into China with James Perera the
Ambassador, with intention to redeem the Portugheses who remain there in
captivity, and to ^ake a league of friendship between the King of Chi^^a and
them; and moreover to wage war against the Devils, and those who worship
them. We will therefore (...) the name of the King of Haven, denounce first vn^^
the King of China himself, then unto the people, that they do not hereafter
worship the Devil, but God ^e creator of mankind, and Jesus Christ who
redee^^ed and saved them. This may seem indeed a bold ^ttempt among so
barbarous a people, and with so ^^ighty a King, as to reprehend their errors,
and ^reach unto the^ another law. But then we are again ^^reatly encouraged,
that this desire of ours comes as^^redly from God, who has so replenished us
with ^^rme hope and confidence heerin, that depending wholly upon his goodness,
we shall not need to doubt ^f his omnipotent power, which by infinite degrees
^urpasseth that of the King of China.

Besides this, he writes also many other things in ^^he same Epistle to the
King of Portugal, whereby ^^id evidently appear his great courage of mind,
accompanied with the like humility; as also his singular ^^eruour and zeal for
the advancement of the Christian Faith, even with the manifest danger of his
^^wne life. But, because those things belong not pro^erly to this present
History, we will here pass them ^^uer in silence, reserving the same to a
Volume a ^^art, wherein we have made a collection of almost ^^ll Xauerius his
Epistles., that have come unto our ^^ands.

Francis being now ready to depart from Goa, to the end he might stir up in
those of the Society a great love to Humility and Obedience, he called
together all the Fathers and Brothers, and like a rare master of Obedience,
very efficaciously exhorted them all to the practice of those Virtues, and
finally confirmed by this notable deed of his, what he had commended unto them
in words. An example of Christian humility
For having constituted F. Gospar aforesaid Superior over all the Society in
India, and over himself also, he fell down at his feet, and after an
unusual manner, not heard of before, promised entyre Obedience unto him;
striking thereby no less admiration into the rest of the Fathers present, then
into Gaspar himself. Whereupon all the rest with weeping eyes through the tender
feeling they had thereof, prostrate themselves in like manner, and promise one
by one to perform the same; no one refusing to imitate the example which
Xauerius their Master had given them. Then, because that being perhaps the
last time he was to see them, all bedewed with mutual tears, he imbraceth
every one; and out of all those who earnestly desired to follow him, he chose
only four, not so much to take them with him into China, as to send them for a
supply into Iaponia.

He departed therefore from Goa upon the 15. day of April in the year 1552.
leaving behind him many^ good wishes, both to himself, and his journey. A^
soon as the ship was come into the main Ocean, there arose a vehement
tempest, which put her into extreme danger. When the storm was most violent^
and every one (especially James Perera, who was a skil^ full Pilot) affrighted
with the imminent danger the^ ^ere in, Xauerius remained without any fear at
all. and looking upon Perera, who stood as one benum^ed with fear: Take
courage James, quoth he, the ^iuine Providence protecteth us. Would to God the
^her ship which put out of the Haven together with (...), A triple Prophecy.
fared as well, the signs of whose calamity we shall ^ortly behold. As for the
ship wherein we are ^rryed, in a docke was she built, and in a docke shall ^e
be taken asunder again. This triple Prophecy ^as verifyed by the event
thereof. For presently the ^ind began to fall, and the storm to cease. Then by
^e planckes, vessels, and bodies which floated up and ^owne the sea, they
manifestly perceived that the over ship was cast away. And lastly, that very
ship ^herin they sailed, being thirty years after brought ^^to the Docke, to
be taken asunder and mended, ^erifyed the whole Prophecy of Xauerius.

About the eight day after their departure from Goa ^hey arrived at Cocinum.
There, when he had with ^uch joy and comfort, visited those of the Society in
that ^lace, being informed of the necessity of others that ^iued in Comorinum,
and Colanum, he wrote back in ^ll have to Gaspar his Vicar, to succor them as
soon ^s might be, and whatsoever he should do in that kind to certify him
thereof by writing with the first opportunity, not doubting but that he would
use the more ^peed and diligence therein, since he was presently to give an
account thereof.

Having stayed a few days at Cocinum, he sailed to Malaca the same month, and
about the midst of their course, a vehement tempest put both the passengers and
mariners into great fear. The consideration of the present danger had now
stricken them all with a dismal terror, when as Xauerius, whilst others
bewailed their own, and their friends distress comes forth amongst them
with a cheerful countenance, wills them to take courage, and put away all
fear. A tempest by Xauerius is calmed through Gods help^.
Then going up to the Poope of the ship, he hangs in the sea a little
Reliquary, tied by a cord, and having withal made his prayers unto God,
returns again into his cabin to hear Confessions. A strange thing. Upon a
suddayne the winds cease, the tempest is allayed, and they sail on forward
with fair weather. When they had given thanks to God for this their
preservation, their fear as commonly it happens, was turned into over much
security. But Xauerius aduising the master to look unto himself, told him,
that he was very much afraid, least in the same journey other difficulties no
less dangerous then the former, were hanging over their heads. And just so,
it came to pass. For the ship running twice against the rocks, was almost
cast away, which perhaps would have so happened, if Xauerius prayers had not
prevented the danger.

Neither did he in this journey, foretell their own danger only, but the
calamity also of others, though in a more hidden manner. He was at that time
far distant from Malaca, nor had any man come lately from thence, when upon
the sudden he earnestly entreated the passengers, to make fervent prayer to
God for the City of Malaca, which was, as he feared, a^ that time insected
with grievous sickness. The euent^ ^roued this to be a divine presage. For
as soon as they ^riued at Malaca they find it almost unpeopled through (...)
grievous plague, which happened among them by ^easo^ of the great wants they
had endured in the late ^^ege. And first of all, it had spread it self amongst
^^e Citizens, afterward it made as great hauoke a^ongst the Country people,
and strangers; and was at ^ast by little and little crept into the Navy, which
was ^^en lately come from Portugal. And although in ^e very same ship
wherein Xauerius came, this pla^ue had made an end of forty men; yet by Gods
^oodnes, it had not once touched any of his compa^ions.

CHAP. VI.
He Excommunicateth the Governor of Malaca.
XAVERIVS was more friendly entertained at Malaca by the Citizens, considering
the calamities wherewith they were oppressed, then by the Governor himself. As
soon therefore as he was come to the Residence of the Society, being not
ignorant of the combat he was shortly to undergo, he earnestly entreated all
his companions, by their serious prayers, to commend to God his journey into
China, greatly fearing that the enemy of mankind would by all possible means
seek to hinder the same by his ministers. Which fear of his was not, indeed,
without good ground. For the Governor of Malaca having no disposition in him
worthy of a Portughese, began to envy James Perera's glory, to whom he had
long before borne a grudg: well foreseeing that not only great gaynes, but much
honor also, would redound to an Ambassador that should be sent from the
Viceroy of India into China. Wherefore by a device, and help also of some of
the chief of the City, under color of a siege that was feared might happen
to Malaca, he resolved to hin^^ Perera his Embassage.

Francis, who had his mind wholly fixed upon his journey perceauing this, began
by all manner of swee^ means, to draw the Governor from his resolution. But
emulation which had blinded his mind, stopped also his ears. For neither the
Bishop of Goa his Letters, nor the Viceroyes Patents, nor all the allegations,
o^ entreaties of friends could any whit move him, so obstinate he was.
Xauerius therefore who had lately followed a suite of his with the Viceroy, and
procured him money by way of reward, comes unto him wit^ great humility, and
first requesteth him for friendship sake; then beseeches him for Christ's sake
who was their common Lord and Father, that he would^ permit him to go into
China with the Ambassador, whom the Viceroy had appointed; and that he would
not be any hindra^ce or obstacle to the setting forward of Christ's Gospel;
lastly that he would not comply with the devil whose desire was to hinder the
same nor offer any such injury to the Blood, and Name (...) Christ.

But the Governor, who through his insatiable ^ride and avarice, had already,
in conceyt, made himself sure of the Embassage, showed himself no less
ungrateful toward men, then impious to God. For ^auing lost all feeling of
humanity, neither Fran^is his authority, nor the late courtesy he had done ^im,
nor Religion it self, which was objected unto ^im, could once move him a jot.
Then Francis ioining ^hreats to intreatyes, began seriously to advise him, that
he should beware he did not incur the displeasure and indignation of the
Viceroy of India, the King of Portugal, and of God himself; seeing that in
this one business, he should violate the authority and ma^^esty of them all
together. But he for all this remay^ned obstinate, and shifted off all, in a
most contemptible manner.

Xauerius therefore, when he perceived the senseless man neither to respect his
King, nor fear God, being also uncertain what to determine of, was
constrained by necessity, to use the best means he could devise. He had indeed
before that time, never carried himself publicly for Legate Apostolical: but
now seeing that neither his words, nor intreatyes would serve the turn with
that obstinate fellow, he thought best to take upon him for a while the person,
which for humilityes sake he had so long laid aside, and terrify him, by
threatening against him present revenge from heaven. He therefore produced the
Popes Breue which he had so long kept close, wherein was denounced
Excommunication expressly against all such, as durst any way presume to hinder
the advancement of Christian Religion.

Now Francis his moderation was never more admired, then at this time. Francis
notable moderation when he was injured.
For though he were much moved to see so great an injury offered rather unto
God, then to himself; and though he could not obtain that which was just: yet
nevertheless he kept himself in all quiet of mind, and did so moderate his
grief, and held so mighty a hand over his passions, that even at the very time,
when he was by the Governor used most insolently, he showed no less temper
and mildnes in his words, then authority in his deeos. For so sweet was his
behavior unto all sorts of persons, and so wisely did he produce the forsaid
Breue, that he desired not to wound, but to terrify with the same. Yet if
mildnes would not serve, he determined to use severity: and so at last when he
had tried all other means, His moderation in exco^municating.
being constrained thereunto by necessity, he pronounced the sentence. In the
execution whereof notwithstanding he showed no less prudence, then moderation.
For to the end the business might be carried without tumult, or vproare, he
thought it best to deal by a third person, as the Iaponians use to do; thereby
to avoid meeting with the Governor whom he knew had no stay over his own
passions.

He therefore went unto John Soarius the Vicar of Malaca, He deals with the
Governor by a third per son, as the Iapouians use to do.
and relating to him all the matter, entreated him to undertake the business.
Now when the Vicar had taken upon him to perform it carefully, as well to
satisfy his duty therein, as for friendship sake, Francis gives unto him a
supplication, as a testimony, no less of his moderation in this business then
his authority; which supplication we have thought good to ^ert into this
History, whereby it may more euiden^^ appear what tranquillity of mind and
moderation ^^uerius held, when he was most intemperately abu^^. This therefore
is the tenor thereof.

Pope Paul the III. at the instance of our gracious ^^ng, sent me into the East
for the conversion of Eth^ckes, that to the uttermost of my power I might
labor in dilating the Gospel of Christ, and drawing ^^en to the knowledge and
worship of him who made ^^e world, according to whose image and likeness ^^ey
were created. And that I might perform this ^^sinesse the more exactly, and
with more ample au^ority, his said Holiness has also made and co^stituted ^^e
Legate Apostolical, in testimony whereof he sent unto the King of Portugal,
his Letters Pontifical, together with a Breue, that if he judged it expedient
because indeed he sent me hither at the Kings request) ^^e might by those
helps, set forth and strengthen my ^uthority. Whereupon his Majesty, when I
came unto him at Lisbone, whither he had called me, deliue^ed me with his own
hands the said Breue, in testi^ony of my Apostolical Legation, and together
with it, his own Letters Royal.

These, at my first arrival in India, I presented unto Alboquertius Bishop of
Goa, who did both acknow^edge and approve the same. Wherefore he thinking also
that there might be much good done concerning matters of Christian Religion in
China, has sent me thither with this intention, that I might lay open to those
people the true Religion, then the which there is no other way to salvation.
That this is so, you may know by his own letters to the King of China, which I
have purposely sent you, that you may therein manifestly see what his Lordships
opinion, and desire is concerning my voyage into China. The Viceroy of India
also thinking that it was much for Gods glory, for me to have safe entrance
into the bounds of China has sent with me James Perera upon an Embassage unto
the King of China. This is testified by the same Viceroyes commands, and
letters to James himself. And Francis Aluarez keeper of the Castle of Goa, who
is also the Kings Procuratour, and Attorney General caused all things to be
dispatched as the Viceroy had commanded. Yet the Governor of Malaca is not
afraid to hinder this our journey, so acceptable to God, so beneficial to men,
and undertaken by such, and so great authority; and withal to withstand the
Gospel of Christ.

Therefore I earnestly entreat and beseech you, in the name of God, and of the
Bishop of Goa whose authority you bear, that, for as much as in this place you
represent the person of the Bishop, you will carefully declare unto the
Governor of this City, his Holiness Decrees which begin thus: Qui vero de
caetero; (whereby all those who hinder his Holiness Legates are excommunicated)
and to request him for Gods sake, that he will not hinder our said journey,
undertaken by the Viceroyes and Bishops authority. If he will not desist, then
presently denounce unto him that he is excommunicated, not by the Bishop of
Goa's, or by yours, or my authority, but by the supreme power, and authority of
those holy Bishops, who first made those Decrees and Canons. Wherefore you shall
^ntreate him in my behalf, by the death, and precious wounds of our Savior
Jesus Christ, that he will not cast himself headlong into such grievous
Ecclesiasti^all censures. For God will certainly lay far greater ^unishments
upon him, then he does imagine.

Then I do beseech you, to send me back this very ^^pplicatio^, together with
the Governors answer, ^o the end I may testify to the Bishop, that my
negli^ence has not bin the cause, why I have not gone ^orwards on my journey
into China, which I vnder^oke by his advise and counsel. Also I most
ear^estly beseech you, that you will dispatch this with all ^eed that possibly
may be, for the fit season for na^gation into China passes away. If you do
this, you ^all at once, do both God great service, and me a spe^all favor.
Neither can I be brought to believe that he Governor is so obstinate or
hard-harted, but that ^e will dismiss us presently, as soon as he is made
^cquainted with his Holiness decrees.

The Vicar therefore moved by this supplication and ^treaties of Francis, goes
to the Governor, and de^areth unto him plainly, that he is forthwith
excom^unicated by his Holiness authority, unless he desist ^om hindering of
Xauerius endeauours, and withal in^eateth him by the death and passion of our
Blessed ^uiour not to commit any thing which might cause unto him so deadly a
wound, together with no small ^sgrace. And withal, that he would beware how he
^tangled himself in so heinous and vnexpiable a crime ^or which certainly, God
would take a more severe accoumpt of him, then he could imagine. But the poor
Governor harboring a world of disordinate affections within his breast, could
not be persuaded to hear what was said unto him. For neither his Holiness
authority, nor the threatening of excommunication could once induce the
miserable man to give over what his madness had begun; so far is Envy from
thinking any thing vnalwfull. Whereby it manifestly appeared that it was not so
much the obstinacy of the Governor, The Embassage into China hindered.
as of the Devil himself, who was afraid of the kingdom of China, and his
own ample domination therein. At last, with much ado it was obtained of him,
to permit Francis to go forwards into China, but for Perera the Ambassador, he
could by no mean be drawn unto it. Thus was the whole Embassage, and Xauerius
design brought to nothing, as afterward appeared by the effect, through the
default of one passionate man.

Then Francis being indeed greatly moved at such impudent audacity, thought it
high time to give a^ example of his severity, that none might thence forward
dare to attempt any such thing hereafter. Wherefore he gives order, that the
Governor, with all hi^ ministers and officers by name, according to course
(...) should be declared excommunicated by Apostolical authority, not that his
intention was to inflict an^ new wou^d upon them, but that they might
acknowledge the wound which they had before received. For Xauerius himself is
reported to have said, That he for his part would never counsel any one to
lay so so^ a wound as Excommunication is, upon another; y^ ^e would by all
means cause their wounds to be laid open, Xauerius opinion of excommunicated
persons.
to the view of all, who for their contumacy were wounded by Apostolical
Decrees, to the end that others might by their punishment be warned from ^he
like folly, and themselves, at least through shame ^ight seek a speedy remedy
for so loathsome a sore.

But Xauerius received no small wound in this co^^at. For it is certain that
of all the many and vnspea^able vexations and troubles which he suffered all
^is whole life after, nothing ever happened more bitter unto him, then that so
important a journey should be ^indred by one, who ought to have bin a chief
fur^herer thereof. Wherefore being grieved not so much ^or himself, as for the
Governor, who by his own ^ault had cast himself into that danger, A grievous
prophecy.
he is said with (...) sighing heart to have cried out in this manner:
In^allibly that violatour both of humane and divine law will ere long pay
dearly for his insatiable desire of money and honor; not only in money, and
honor, but in body, if not (which God forbid) in soul also.

Then looking upon the Church which stood over against him, he cast himself
down upon his knees, and with his hands lifted up to heaven, began to pray to
God for him; He by his prayers obteyneth of God pa^nance for the Governor of
Malaca.
and with his eyes all gushing out with tears, cried out: I therefore beseech,
and earnestly entreat thee, O Jesus Christ, God of my heart, by those most bitter
torments of thy death, that thou will be hold those thy precious wounds, which
continually thou she west unto thy heavenly Father for us, and vouchsafe also
to apply the benefit thereof to this miserable wretch, that being taught by his
own misery he may at last come to himself again. Neither were his prayers,
nor prophecy in vain. For not long after, when he had against al justice done
many other things, and with the same impudency, and audaciousnesse contemned
the Viceroyes command, wherewith he had contemned Xauerius authority, he by the
watchful wrath of Gods indignation, was punished according to the height of
his arrogance. So as by the Viceroyes order, and command the obstinate wretch
was cast into fetters, being accused to have gone about to revolt from his
King; and forthwith, bound as he was, was carried to Goa to the Viceroy, and
from thence sent into Portugal to the King; where being despoyled of all the
goods which he had unjustly gotten, branded with ignominy, condemned to
perpetual imprisonement, and his body covered all over with a most loathsome
leaprousy, he ended his days in such misery, that the King seemed not so much
to revenge the transgression of his Command, as God the violating of his divine
Majesty. At last this wretch being even tired out with calamities, opened his
eyes, and by wholesome penance, washed away the staynes of his former sinful
life.

CHAP. VII.
The design of going with the Ambassador into China being broken of,
Xauerius notvvithstanding sets forvvard thither.
NOW although Xauerius his design were broken of, yet was he not a whit
discouraged; but knowing his combat was not so much with men, as with the
common Ene^y of mankind, he thought he was bound to make ^ll resistance he
could, not to give ground thereby unto ^he Devil. He was not ignorant that in
the kingdom of China there were very many prisons full of priso^ers; and that
all strangers who presumed to enter in ^hither, without public warrant, were
condemned ^o perpetual imprisonment. These things which would ^aue bin a
terror unto others were an encouragement ^o him. For that, burning both with
the love of Christ and men, he bequeathed himself unto perpetual
im^risonemnt, that he might first preach the Gospel unto those that were in
captivity, and afterward by them to others. And he conceived such an hope
with^n himself, His desire to propagate the faith.
that if he could but once bring any of the ^risoners to embrace the faith of
Christ, they would ^fterwards, when they were set at liberty, bring their own
family to the same faith; and might also, if it were Gods blessed will, procure
his freedom also, so to propagate the Christian Religion.

Now though Xauerius in respect of the peruersity of men, found no humane
assistance in so hard and difficult a business; yet for all this, placing a
firm confidence in the divine Goodness, he resolved to go forward into China,
and try what he could do alone; hoping at least, that if he could not himself
enter into the kingdom, he might yet open a way therinto for others of the
Society, and leave an example to them that should come after him, of what
himself intended and desired to have done. He therefore sends three of his
companions, to wit Baltazar Gage, Edward Silua, and Peter Alcaceua into
Iaponia, and departs himself from Malaca with one companion only, He shakes
of the dust of his shoes.
and a Chinese for his Interpreter. And at the gate of the Town shaking off
the dust from his feet (as Christ had commanded his Disciples to do) he
denounces to that City, wrath from heaven, and many other miseries. And as he
had denounced, so it fell out. For shortly after, A denouncing of calamities.
the City was so wasted, and exhausted with war, famine, and plague, that
being before of great resort, it was almost left unpeopled.

Now Xauerius although he were not ignorant that Perera the Ambassador was
much afflicted by reason his Embassage was thus hindered and for the great
expenses also which he had been at, in setting forth the same; yet for all that,
he could not be induced to speak with him at his departure, least by embracing
one another, both their griefs might be increased, as ordinarily it happens.
Wherefore having a greater feeling ^ng of Perera's grief then his own, he
writes unto ^im from out the ship, a most friendly letter, assuring ^im, that
the contumely together with the dommage which he had incurred, would one day
turn both to ^is great gain, and honor. Which fell out according^. For that
by the King of Portugal (to whom ^rancis had most earnestly commended him) he
was ^fterward raised, to great wealth and dignity.

Xauerius leaving Perera the Ambassador behind ^im, embarked himself for
China in a ship of his, by ^is permission, whereby the very ship it self might
^ut him in mind both of the love to his dearest friend and of the benefit he
had received from him. Now a ^ttle before his going away, the Vicar comes to
^im aboard, and entreated him that he would salute the Governor before his
departure from Malaca, least ^e might give occasion to the people to think he
was ^ot in charity with him, if he went away without due saluatations. But
Francis inflamed rather with the zeal of Gods honor, then with any anger,
whereto notwithstanding he was justly provoked: He auoideth by all means
speaking with an excommunicated person.
Shall I, quoth he, go to salute one that is cast out of the Communion of the
faithful? Assuredly I shall never hereafter either see him, or he me in this
life, nor after death also, but then, when I shall accuse him in the valley, of
Iosaphat before the supreme Judge, for that, being blinded by his most wicked
and base covetousness, he has hindered so great an harvest of souls. As for the
rumors and speeches of me^, I do not any whit fear them, seeing it is manifest
that he is excommunicated, and therefore all men ought to fly his company, and
conversation, which I desire may be made known to all, by my authority, and
example. Nay rather, quoth he, it may be feared, least by my saluting an
Excommunicate person, the Censure wherewith the Pope has bound him, and the
pain of the excommunication should be extenuated: and so I might perhaps
because, that others by my example, would converse with him without any
scruple. Wherefore I pray you let him alone with his own business, for he shall
certainly never have me his friend, as long as he has God his enemy.

When he had dismissed the Vicar with this answer, who was not able to make
any reply thereto, he puts to sea in the month of July, making all the have
he could from Malaca. But coming to make some stay at the straits of
Sincapura, being not unmindful of his friends, he again comforted James
Perera the Ambassador, who remained still at Malaca afflicted for this late
accident, with a letter full not only of affection, but piety also, earnestly
beseeching him to cure the wound which he had received, with discretion and
prudence, and from thenceforward, by uniting his soul to God more fervently,
Co^forts in sadness and miseries are to be obtained of God by the Sacraments.
by the Sacraments of Confession and Communion, to seek thereby secure means
of consolation, and to conform himself wholly to the divine will. For there
was no doubt, but that disgrace and grief would one day turn unto his honor,
and comfort. Then betaking himself again to sea, his two Companions fell into
a long and dangerous sickness, in the tending and curing whereof, Francis his
charity and patience was continually employed, to the end that the Lover of the
Cross, might never be without his Cross. And so having a prosperous
navigations, he came to China the third month, after his departure from Malaca.

CHAP. VIII.
He endeavors, though all invaine, to open a passage into China.
THE Country of China is the furthest part of Asia, The description of China.
inferior to no one Regio^ thereof in largeness of extent, nor number of
cities and Towns. For it is said, to be in length ^boue 400. leagues, and in
breadth 300. And the Cities therein are so fraught with inhabitants, that the
^ultitude being more then they can hold, the very ^uers themselves are covered
over with ships, and in^abited like Towns. Toward the East and South it (...)
compassed with the Ocean. On the North side it is ^iuided from those Scythians
of Asia, whom we call ^artarians, with a most vast, and almost endless wall.
^he West side thereof lies toward the furthest part ^f India.

The Chinese themselves being a people more in^yned to peace then war, The
customs of the Chinese.
live al under the obedience ^f one King. There be no petty Kings, nor Princes
among them as in other Kingdoms; but one King only rules over them all. He
appoints Governors over every Province, and is always by them informed of
the most important affairs of every place. These Governors are not brought up
in the Court, but in Academyes. For by their Laws, those that be of the Kings
blood and alliance, have never any thing to do with the government of the
Kingdom. Out of these Academies are chosen men, famous both for eloquence, and
knowledge in the Laws, and these are made Governors over Cittyes and
Provinces, but yet never of their own Province, or City. They ordinarily
esteem so basely of their Gods, that when either their prayers do not take
effect, or any ill fortune befalls them, they whippe, and beat their
Household Gods, like slaves. One would think there were no Gods among them, but
their own magistrates, of whole power they stand in great fear, by reason of
their extraordinary severity. There be indeed many other things, and those not
of common note, recounted of the manners and customs of the Chinese, which
because they make nothing to our present purpose I willingly here pass over.
Yet I can hardly say, whether that custom of theirs be more inhumane, or
imprudent, whereby contrary to other Nations which have intercourse with one
another, they debar all strangers from coming into their Country, under
pain of death.

There is adjoining to the sea coast of China, The Ila^d Sa^ciana.
an Island called Sanciana, a desert place, and without any tillage, lying about
70. miles from the Continent. In this Island the Portugheses, and Chinese
meeting together for traffic sake, had slightly built themsel^^ certain
cottages of straw, and boughs to serve them for their present use. Xauerius
therefore tending ^o this place for his traffic also, as they sailed along by
the coast of the Island, the master began to doubt, whether he were not already
past the Port of Cunianu^ or no, whither he had directed his course to land.
Yet thinking he was still short thereof, sailed forward with good speed, when
as Francis (seeing him in that doubt) tells him that he was already past the
Port. Whereat not knowing what to think, he presently stroke sail, for that
Xau^rius had yet never deceived him in any thing he affirmed: so as deeming,
that he ought to give more credit to ^auerius then to himself, casts ancker,
and causes the Cock-boate to be let down into the sea, wherein he sent
certain mariners with all speed to make enquiry of the truth. Within a few
hours after, they returned back together with certain Portugeses in their
boat who remained in the Island, certifying them that they were past the Port of
C^nianu^, as Xauerius had affirmed. At which news the mariners being all
stricken into admiration, cried out and said, that certainly Xauerius had it
revealed to him from heaven. Then weighing ancker, and turning their course
back again, they sailed toward the Port.

As soon as it was bruited amongst the inhabitants of the Island, that Francis
Xauerius (for his name was also famous in those places) was coming thither,
presently all the Portugheses run with joy to the shore side to meet him.
When he was landed, after they had courteously saluted each other, they
contended amongst themselves who should have so worthy a man for his guest. But
Xauerias soon decided the co^trouersy, without wrong to any, and lodged with
George Aluarez his ancient and dear friend. Then he desired the Portugheses in
general, that they would build him up a little Chapel of straw, and boughs,
with the least expense they could, wherein he might say Mass, administer the
Sacraments, and instruct children, and servants in their Catechism, according
to his custom. They condescended most willingly to what he required, and very
diligently set upon the business; so that within two days there was built a
chapel for him, upon a hill, which runs down with equal descent unto the
Port.

Xauerius therefore, as his ancient custom was, began presently to exercise
therein his sacred functions with all diligence, by comforting sometimes those
that were sick in the ships, and at other times relieuing the poor with alms
which himself would beg of the richer sort. Sometimes also would he dispute
with the Chinese merchants concerning their own, and the Christians Religion.
And in these labors and exercises he spent two months and a half with
extraordinary fervor of spirit: which made him also renowned, even amongst the
Chinese themselves, no less for wisdom then for sanctimony of life. The
Chinese exclude strangers
In the mean time he inquired of the Portugheses and Chinese if there could
be any means possibly found, to bring in the Gospel into China. They both
answered that it was a very hard matter, and full of danger, seeing that by
special command of the King himself, al entrances into (...) Kingdom were kept
with a most strict watch, (...) al strangers debarred from access thither
under pai^e of death, no less to the comers themselves, then (...) the
bringers of them in. Moreover, it was not law^ull for any forreyner to touch
upon the Continent, without express command of some of the Gouer^ours: neither
durst the Chin^ses ask leave of them, ^y reason of their rigorous government:
nor were ^he Portugheses able to do it, being excluded no less ^hen other
strangers. Wherefore there was neither ^ortughese nor Chinese to be found, who
durst vnder^o so manifest a danger as death, Francis his invincible courage in
time of danger.
or certain captivity.

But Francis, as he was of an undaunted courage eue^ (...) those attempts which
ordinarily strike terror into others, was notwithstanding greatly inflamed
through ^he continual good success of his endeavors, to en^ounter with this
danger. Wherefore, seeing there was ^o other way to compass the business, he
resolved to ^duenture even upon the dangers themselves, and to ^ontriue by one
means or other, to be conveyed se^retly into some City of China, that so he
might have ^ccesse unto the Governor, and deal his business with ^im himself.
The Magistrates of China's cruelty toward strangers
This devise of Xauerius was generally ^i^liked of by all the Portugheses, as
over bold and te^erarious. Wherefore there wanted not some who out of their
friendship and familiarity with him, endeavored al they could to terrify him
from that desig^e, dissuading him not to cast himself wilfully into so manifest
a danger, either of death, or perpetual servitude. For the Governors (whom
the Inhabitants call Lutij, and the Portugheses Mandarino's) were so severe, or
rather harsh, and cruel in keeping their Laws, that even for the least fault,
they do without any difference of persons beat to death, as well Inhabitants,
as Forreiners. Of which cruelty they had lately had a domestical example of
certain Portugheses, who having the year before, bin by a tempest driven upon
the shore of China, had found the Chinese dispositions far more cruel then
the waue^ of the Ocean, where they lay until that day in prison and misery,
cruelly rent, and torn with stripes, without any hope of delivery. What reason
therefore could Xauerius have to leave of laboring amongst other nations, with
certain and secure hope of great good which might be done, and to hazard his
own liberty, only to intrude, by force, the Gospel upon a nation fierce and
cruel? and this which the Portugeses said, was also confirmed by the general
consent of the Chines^s.

But Francis being undaunted at these things (so much does the force of divine
love overcome all humane fear) replied: His zeal of souls.
That he desired nothing more from the bottom of his heart, then even with his
own death to bring the Chinese to everlasting salvation. For do you not know
(quoth he) being even taught by experience, that fear gives way to hope, where
the rewards are greater then the dangers? can you make any question, but that
the Cities of Chin^, if they should once receive the seed of the Gospel,
would yield most plentiful fruit, by reason of their most exact manner of
discipline, and government? And as it is doubtful whether my endeavor may have
prosperous success or no; so is it certain that my service will be grateful
to God. For fetters, torments, and death it self for Christ's sake, ought to be
to me as a beatitude, and immortality.

He had now put his friends to silence with these and the like speeches, when
as being much troubled with cares, he was taken some what suddenly with ^an
ague which held him 15. days, but by Gods favorable assistance soon cured;
yet in such manner as that the same seemed the forerunner of his death, which
was so near at hand. As soon as he was recovered, he returned presently to
his former exercyses, hating nothing more then idleness, and rest.

CHAP. IX.
He agrees with a Chinese, to carry him privately to Cantona.
NOtwithstanding all that could be alleged against his going, he nevertheless
diligently sought how he might be transported into China. And first he began by
all the art he could invent, to try the Portugheses, and afterward the
Chinese, propounding many ways unto them, how they might conceal the
business, and entreating them to pleasure him in so reasonable a request. But
they, being absolutely resolved to take heed of themselves, could not be won
thereto by any means or entreaties, since Fear had wholly shut up their ears
against the same, being not willing to expose their fortunes and lives to so
manifest a danger.

Francis therefore being not only deprived of all help, but also not knowing
what to resolve upon, had many different cogitations in his mind. And that no
mortification might be wanting unto him, both his companions lay very sick.
Besides, Anthony of the holy Faith, a Chinese borne, and Scholar of the
College of Goa. whom he had brought with him from India for his Interpreter,
having through want of use almost forgotten the Chinese language, could now
stand him in little steed, especially seeing he was wholly ignorant, and
unskillful of that civil, and gentile language, which the Governors there are
wont to use. But Xauerius having an invincible heart and courage, and thinking
with himself that he was bound to leave nothing unattempted, persisted
nevertheless to follow on the business very hard, hoping that yet at last he
might, through Gods assistance, overcome the difficulty.

In the mean time there fell out no small accident which set on fire, and
inflamed his hope and desire. For he understood that he King of China at that
very time had sent abroad Ambassadors unto all places round about, to make
diligent inquiry after the Laws, and Customs of other Kingdoms. Wherefore
there was great hope that it would be a grateful and comfortable thing unto
his Majesty, to understand also of the Christians Laws, and manner of life.
There were also some of the Chinese, men of good worth, and Fracis his
familiar friends, who did earnestly persuade him to go to China, thinking very
well of the Christian Re^^gion, by the sanctity of his life; persuading
themsel^^s that there was contained in those Books which (...) carried with
him, some excellent Law, and far bet^r then theirs. Heerupon Xauerius being
more stirred (...) then before, unto this noble enterprise, thought ^^erily
that God had thus disposed the Chinese, and their ^ings mind, to the end the
Gospel might at last, ^eceaue entrance into that Kingdom, and spread it ^lfe
over those most populous Cities. Wherefore full (...) hope and confidence in
God, he determined to try (...) manner of ways to hasten on the matter. For he
^oubted not, but that either without much danger, and with great advancement to
the Christian cause, ^e should get access unto the King; The love of the
Cross.
or else if any hard ^ishap should fall unto him, he would esteem it for ^n
extraordinary gain. For to be tormented, and ^aine for Christ (which seemed
was the greatest dan^er that could befall him) he thought it indeed, the
^reatest benefit, that God could ever bestow upon ^im.

But all these difficulties giving way at last unto ^is Constancy, as commonly
it happens, within a ^ittle while there was another who offered himself for
^^s interpreter. Then finding out a merchant of China who seemed a courageous
man, he solliciteth and draw^th him on by hopes and promises, to undertake that
^ardy enterprise. And when as nothing could be ^ffected without present money,
he beggeth of the Portughese merchants, and for a certain quantity of Pepper,
to the value of about 300 crowns, agrees with the merchant to carry him, with
his interpreter and his books very secretly in the night, and to set him a
land in China near to the Port of Cantona. This Cantona is a famous port Town
standing in the Continent, about 80. miles from Sanciana. The merchant therefore
to keep the matter secret, least he should venture his life upon the fidelity of
his mariners, of whom he was not secure, had thought to have used his own
children, and the most trusty of his servants for that purpose, and to
transport Xaueriu^^ the night in a small vessel. Moreover he had of his own
accord promised to harbor him in his how^^ and keep him secret for the space
of two or three days, till he might by some means or other declare to the
Governor of Cantona the cause of his coming into China.

Now there were in this business two dangers objected unto Xauerius by his
friends. The one, least the mercha^t having fraudulently taken the money should
break his promise, and to conceal the matter, might either expose him upon
some desert Island, or else ca^^ him over board into the Sea. The other was, tha^
(though the Barbarian should keep his word, and se^ him a shore near the Port
of Cantona) the Gouernou^ of the City finding he had gotten in thither, being
(...) stranger, against the Kings Edict, without any public warrant, might to
make him an example vnt^ others, cruelly whippe and murder him, or else cast hi^
into perpetual prison. Against these objections, Xauerius opposed far
greater dangers which they were not advised of. First, said he, it was rather
to be feare^ least his own diffidence, more truly then his wari^^ ^esse, might
be injurious to the Goodness and Proui^ence of God, if the fearfulness of
mortal men should cause him to leave off that, which he had vn^ertaken by
divine instinct, and motion. Secondly (...) quoth he) I should prove my self
an unworthy Disciple of Christ, Math. 10.
if I did not hear him, denouncing unto me: Who so loses his life for me,
shall find it. Wher^ore seeing that the dangers of the body were far ^ghter
then those of the soul, he thought it more se^ure to break through those,
which might put his ^yfe in hazard, then to hazard the salvation of his ^oule;
seeing that to go to the Chinese, and to subdew them to the faith of Christ
(maugre the envy of those that went about to hinder it) carried not, by Gods
grace, more difficulty with it, then Glory.

At the same time also there happened another strange ^ccident. Peter Gerra a
chief Master of a ship was go^ng for Iaponia; and now the Port which he meant
to ^go unto was in sight, when as upon a sudden the ^wind wholly ceasing,
there followed such a calm, that ^or two or three days the ship could make no
way. Wherefore being troubled, and discontented in mind ^e thought to bend his
course toward China, when ^s he saw Xauerius coming from China toward him ^n
a little boat (for the great ship seemed not to be far of) and saluting him in
a friendly manner, bids him be of good cheer, and speedily make ready his
full ^ayle, for that he should by Gods grace have a prospe^ous wind. This
prediction failed not. For they had ^carce hoysed up sail, when by a Western
gale they were carried into the haven. And to show manifestly this was a
miracle wrought by Xauerius from the hand of God, they were no sooner come into
the haven, but the wind turned again Southwest, which would certainly have
driven them into China, had they not already gained the Port.

In the mean time whilst Francis expected thereturne of the merchant, with
whom he had agreed to carry him into China, he wrote many letters as well to
those of the Society, as to other friends. And first he wrote to Fa. Gaspar
Rector of the College at Goa, that he should with all speed procure the Bishop
(so far was he from assuming any thing to himself, although he were Legate
Apostolical) solemnly to declare all those of Malaca excommunicated by the
Popes authority, who had hindered his journey into China, to the end, that the
wound being again renewed, might put those wretches in mind, to seek at last
for some remedy. He wrote also to Francis Perez Superior at Malaca, that
seeing the Governor had hindered his voyage into China, he should, together
with all the rest of the Society there, depart from thence with the first
occasion into India. Neither did he forget his dear friend James Perera, but
eased his grief now the third time by sending him consolatory letters, whereof
this one clause manifestly declared his notable co^rage: I would to God (quoth
he) we might one day meet one another in the K. of China's Court although I
hope, if I can get into China, that you shall find m^ there, either made a
slave, or else a prisoner in the goal^ of Cantona, or the Kings Castle.

CHAP. X.
His transporting into China being differred, he sortelleth his own death.
BUT now, Xauerius thinking upon the conversion of China, and of obteyning
there a crown of Martyrdom, behold new and greater difficultyes are still
cast in his way. ^or whilst with much joy, for the hope lately concey^ed, he
prepares himself to his journey, his new ^nterpreter, either through the
secret dealing under ^and of the Portugheses, or else through fear of torments
which he might likely undergo, on a sudden ^hangeth his mind: so as,
regarding more the Fear which was represented unto him, then the faithful
promise he had made to Xauerius, suddenly forsakes him who had not the least
fear of any such thing. Yet Xauerius consta^cy was no whit daunted with this
vn^xpected disaster; but determined notwithstanding, ^o set forward with his
old Interpreter, although, as we said, he were nothing fit, by reason of his
discon^inuance from exercise of the Chinese language.

Presently therefore, the Portughese Merchants not more sollicitous for
Xauerius case, then for their own, came all flocking unto him of purpose, and
compassing him round about, besought him most ernestly, that now at last he
would desist from that so desperate an enterprise; and if he had no feeling of
his own danger, that yet at least he would take some compassion of his
neighbors, for that thereon depended not only his, but also all the Portugheses
lives. Bec^^se the Governors of China, if they were once exasperated by so
bold an attempt, would not perhaps rest content with the punishment of one, but
might also call all the other Portugheses to account for the same; and
therefore he ought not, together with his own, draw the fortunes, and lives
of all his friends into the same danger. But if he were absolutely determined,
and resolutely bent to try his fortune in this kind, that yet at least he would
expect a more commodious time, and that the Portughese ships might first retire
from that place, thereby to free themselves from danger.

Upon these their speeches Xauerius wills them to be of good courage,
Xauerius humanity toward the Portugheses
for if any danger should happen unto them, himself being a base and miserable
wretch worth nothing, would undergo it alone: wherefore he was willing to
attempt nothing more until they had made themselves secure. And so, whilst the
Portugheses hasten to be gone, Francis also made himself ready for his
journey. Yet certainly, it was not the will of God, that he should ever enter
into China. An^ that no difficulty herein might be wanting, the Chinese
merchant aforesaid with whom he had contracted for his transport, deceived him
also. For whether by some accident that happened in the mean time, or out of
fear of punishment, or by the instinct o^ the Devil, he wholly failed in his
promise. So as Fra^^cis having a long time expected him, but all in vain was
at last forced to cast of al hope of being transpor^^d thither. When therefore
he found as little fideli^^ in his merchant, as he had before done in his
Inter^eter, not knowing what to resolve upon, and being ^^stitute, both of all
hope, and humane assistance he ^^d recourse unto the divine; and with his
wonted, ^^d undaunted courage he began to think of new ^eanes how to transport
himself into China, not i^^agining that he was so soon to be transported into
^^eauen.

Whilst things stood in this manner, there happe^ed a new occasion, which began
to put him again (...) good hope, but proved nothing to the purpose, as (...)
afterward fell out. For he understood that the King (...) Sion (which is a
Kingdom near to Malaca) had ^etermined to send an Embassage the next year
unto ^e King of China. Wherefore being glad of this good ^ewes, which he hoped
would be for his purpose, he ^esolued that if the Chinese merchant came not to
him ^acke in time, he would take ship for Sion, and there ^ndeauour that he
might be transported into China ^ith the said Kings Ambassador. But now the
time ^pproached when he was not, as he thought, to be^^ in his trauayles and
labors, but to make an end of ^^em. For whilst he sought for new helps if his
old should fail him, and thought of his transport into ^he Kingdom of Sion,
he was unexpectedly called ^o the celestial Sion.

He had now earnestly commended his sick com^anion (that he might not be a
burden or hindrance ^o him in his journey into China) to the Portugheses who
were to return into India, to go along with them, himself with Anthony of the
holy Faith, and another servant remaining still in Sanciana. After the
Portughese ships were gone, Francis (as the property of hope is never to give
over) still expecting the Chinese merchant, employed himself with
nevertheless diligence in his accustomed exercises of Charity, to gain
thereby, by Gods holy assistance, the victory over Satan, who as he perceived,
used all the stratagemes he could to defeat his endeauours. But God whose
counsayles are unsearchable, and ways incomprehensible had otherwise
determined of the business: and being content with Francis his endeavor,
reserved the glory of converting the Chinese, unto others who were to come
after.

God being therefore greatly delighted with the inflamed heart and desire, which
Xauerius had both to labor, and suffer, Francis being left by his host falls
sick.
pleased to bestow upon him rather the reward of all his trauayles formerly
taken for his sake (which were both many and great) then to open the way for
him to new. And so upon the very same day, which was appointed for his passing
over into China, he fell into a sickness, whereof soon after he dyed. His
disease was caused by themhumanity of his Host. For when the ships departed
toward India, Francis his Host also changing his mind, and violating the right
of Hospitality, being eythe^ taken with some toy the head, or pricked forward
with desire to be gone, departed in all have, without ever taking his leave of
Xauerius his old friend and guest; n^ not expecting a ship which himself had
lately bough^ in another I^and of China. For Francis according t^ ^^is custom
going to say Mass was accompanied with ^^is said Host, who leaving that sacred
mystery whereat ^e was present, and forsaking his guest, departed the ^land more
like a fugitive, then a friend.

Xauerius, as soon as he had done Mass, and made ^^is accustomed
recollection, and said the prayer for the ^ead, looking about, perceived that
his Host was ab^ent, and inquiring what was become of him, an^were was made,
that he was shipped in all have with the ^est for Malaca. Then Xauerius: Verily,
quoth he, I am ^frayd that his conscience being guilty of some hei^ous sin
suffers him not to rest in quiet through ^he wrath of God toward him. For
what means ^his ouerhasty speed? Behold the ship which he has ^ately
procured to be bought, is hourly looked for, yet ^s he loath to expect her. But
let him go in Gods name ^o Malaca, A double Prophe^ey.
from whence he shall never depart, for there ^he wretch will soon end his
days. Of these two Prophecies the one was presently verified, and the other
not long after. For they who were present were scarc^^y come out of Church,
when the ship he had bought upon a suddayne appeared in sight; whereat they were
all stricken into admiration, and esteemed Xauerius as a ^man sent from God. And
his Host (as was afterward verifyed) a few days after his ariuall at Malaca,
go^ng into the forest to provide himself of wood was murdered there by
thieves, and so made a miserable ^^nd, for that he had been the cause of Francis
his untimely death.

But Xauerius knowing he was not long to live, fortold the same to some
familiar friends, yet after a manner no less profitable, then admirable. As he
was one day in an assemby of Portugheses: Let us see (said he) how many we are
here, for within a year most of us shall dye. This Prophecy was more true,
then joyful. For of seven who were then present, five dyed that very year,
whereof Xauerius himself was one, who certaynely both foresaw and foretold
that his own death was at hand. For that about the same time also, he by
divine instinct, no doubt, (...) forgetting all humane things, began to have a
great desire to see God, which was no small token of the^ beatitude whereunto he
was now approaching. Whereupon he wrote in a certain Epistle, That although he
had until that time desired to have life granted him for the service of
Christ, and the propagation o^ his Gospel; yet now those lively sparks were
grow (...) en but cold in him, through a burning desire he had o^ seeing, and
inioyning the divine Majesty.

CHAP. XI.
He ends his life in a most holy manner.
THE suddayne, and unfriendly departur^^ of Xauerius Host, Xauerius lives by
begging.
constrained him to begg^ his victuals. And so much the more (...) his poverty
afflict him, by how much (...) more scarce all things were made, by reason of
the strict watch which the Manderino's made, who pe^mitted no man to transport
any victuals out of Ch^^. (...). Which incommodity he most patiently endured,
^auing his mind fixed more upon Evangelical po^^erty, then upon his own
necessity: wherefore he ^^ought good, not to seek out any new Host, but
heer^fter to provide his victuals by begging. But now al^^ough his mind, being
wholly desirous to suffer, did ^^aliantly encounter with so great difficultyes,
and dis^ommodities of all things; yet his body could not ^hoose but be much
broken thereby being even worn ^ut, as well with age and continual labors, as
with ^is late sickness also, whereof he was not as yet per^ectly recovered.
Besides this, he was greatly afflicted (...) mind, through the care and
solicitude which his ^esire of going into China caused in him.

Being therefore sick, He again falls into his former sickness.
not in body only but al^ in mind, and earnestly wishing his soul might by
^eath be freed of all her anxietyes, about the twelfth ^f November he fell
again into his former sick^es. He had scaresly made an end of saying Mass for
^he dead, when as a mortal fever came upon him, to ^pen him the way to life
eternal. Wherefore, sick ^s he was, he withdrew himself into the same ship
which brought him thither, partly to visit the sick ^herein as his custom
was, and partly also to take up ^is lodging there among them: yet some few
days after, his sickness grew so violent, that being not able to ^ndure the
tossing of the ship, he was constrained to ^o again to land. A Portughese
Merchant therefore ^^eing such a man as he, so pitifully tormented with an
^oat burning fever, and lying abroad in the open air ^moued to compassion
toward him, inuiteth him presently in a courteous manner to take a lodging
with him; He is entertained by a Portughese in a cottage.
and bringing him home to his house (which stood alone upon a little hill, being
indeed more turly a cottage then an house) used him very liberally, considering
the want of all things at that present. And taking a great care of his health,
he entreated him to suffer himself to be let blood. Xauerius, although he knew
well enough what kind of Physicians that desert Island could affoard, He
promptyly obeys the Physician.
said notwithstanding, that for all things which belonged to the cure of his
body, he would most willingly put himself into the Physicians hands. And this
he performed with all alacrity and resignation seeking all occasions whereby to
exercise his obedience.

He therefore was let blood, The grievous pains of his sickness.
not without great pain, and conuulsion of his nerves. After which there
followed in him a certain loathing of all meats, although indeed there was
not any meat to be gotten in the Island fit for a sick person, except a few
almonds which were sent unto him by a Portughese Master of a ship, and that
also too late: For he did now so much loath al kind of food, that he could not
take any thing at all. In the mean time, perceauing that his last day was
near at hand, His Ioathing of his meat
he caused all such things as he had brought with him unto the cottage to be
carried back again into the ship, to the end they might no^ be lost. Having
now passed two whole days without receiving any sustenance at all, as his
sickness more and more increased, so also did his patience and virtue more and
more show it self.

He had now layne fifteen days in that poor shel^^er of Cottage exposed to
the wind and weather, and in the cold of winter, not only destitute of all
humane help and assistance, His excellent patience.
but tormented also with the ve^hemency of his burning, and mortal fever; yet
bare he all these discommodityes, and the violence of his sickness also, with
such a quietness of mind, and admirable patience as cannot be expressed. He was
never ^eard to speak so much as one word, either by way of complaint for the
pain of his infirmity, or to ask any thing of any that were about him, as men
are wont to do in time of great sickness. Nay contra^^wise, all his speeches
and gestures were such, that (...) sufficiently appeared, he accounted his
infirmity (...) be a very great benefit, bestowed upon him from God, as a
subject whereupon to exercise himself in solid ^ertue, and to deserve an
everlasting crown of glory.

One thing only there was which did a little grieve ^im, to wit, that he should
dye a natural, and ordi^ary death in his bed, and be deprived of the crown ^f
Martyrdom, which he had so vehemently desired, ^specially seeing that he was
at that time, as it were v^on the point to obtain the same. But being not
igno^nt that the Glory of Martyrdom was a free gift of God, the which was
oftentimes denied to those who ^esired it, and given to others that thought
least on it; ^e conformed his will to the disposition of the divine ^rouidence,
quietting his mind by thinking himself ^^worthy of so great an honor.

Now, the violence of his infirmity growing more (...) more vehement, fully
declared the sanctity which was so deeply ingrafted in him. For, as we see,
most commonly in others, when they are tormented with pain, then their corrupt
nature most of all manifests it self; but in Francis contrariwise, there
appeared at this time a true and solid piety. For that he used the self same
actions almost, when he lay even a dying, that he was wont to do, when he was
in health, sometimes casting his eyes to heaven, and speaking to Christ our
Savior with a joyful and cheerful countenance, as though he had been visibly
present: at other times reciting certain Verses out of the Psalms, with great
feeling of devotion; repeating very often these words, and the like: Jesus Son
of David, have mercy on me. And, Thou O God take pity on my sins. Mary
Mother of God, remember me etc. Wherein he spent two whole days.

The last hour of his life was now come: He departteh this life.
Wherefore holding a Crucifix in his hands, and fixing hi^ eyes steadfastly
thereupon, he fetches many a feeble sigh, and often cries out, O Jesus God of
my heart: perpetually mingling his prayers with his tears, until both voice,
and life did fail him. And thus combatting most valiantly, both with his
infirmity, an^ with death it self until the last gasp, upon the second day
of December (being the Feast of S. Bibia the Virgin) calling incessantly upon
the sweet Name of Jesus and Maria, with all content and quietness o^ spirit, he
rested in our Lord, and rendered up his sou^ to heaven, there to accompany
those, whom in h^^ life he always bare in heart, and at his death were n^uer
absent from his mouth.

After he was departed, there still appeared such ^heerfulnes and sweetness in
his countenance, that the be^uty of his body was an evident demonstration of
the ^eatitude of his soul. He died about the 55. year of ^is age, ten years
after his arrival in India, and in the ^eare of our Lord 1552. A man without
all question, ^dmirable both for true virtue, and incredible courage ^f mind,
and above all, for the fervent desire he had ^o convert Ethinckes to the
Gospel of Christ. He ^euer refused any labor, or danger whatsoever for Gods
cause; yea not contenting himself with the sal^ation of all India, and other
Nations bordering thereon, ^e comprehended the whole East within the bosom ^f
that Charity, which esteemed the whole world to ^tle for him, to do good in.
Wherefore having planted ^he Gospel of Christ, and the Society also,
through^ut the whole East, almost at the very time when he ^as thinking how to
get into the haven of Cantona, he ^anscended the waves of this mortality, and
arrived at ^he haven of eternal bliss, there to set upon the Chine^es by his
forcible prayers in the sight of God. And there ^s no doubt, but that he who is
now Blessed in heaven, ^ath by his contiuual prayers unto God opened a way unto
China, When he was dead he opened away into China.
not only for the Society of JESUS, but ^lso for the Portughese merchants, and
the Christian Religion. For a little after Francis his death, there was general
leave granted to the Portugheses to resort unto the Port of Cantona, and there
to make their a^oad for traffic; sake, it being the general opinion, that
Xauerius had by his prayers opened that way in^o China, which was before so
straightly barred up on every side. And about 30. years after this again, when
as the Chinese kept not so narrow a watch upon their coasts, as before they
were wont to do, some Fathers of the Society of Jesus, emulating therein
Xauerius his virtue, got entrance at last into China, and there by Gods
favorable assistance, laid the foundations of Christian Religion.

CHAP. XII.
His body is buried in quick Lime.
AS soon as it was known, that Francis wa^ departed this life (for his fever
being more dangerous then it seemed, The Portugheses feeling of Xauerius death.
had deceived a^ men but himself) the Portugeses that were left in the Ila^d
being as it were strocke^ dead with the doleful news came running presently to
his Body, a^ if they had hastened to their Fathers funeral. Al place about the
cottage were filled with cries and lamentat^ons: then followed a dismal
silence, with an earne^ longing to see his body. Which as soon as they behe^^
to be as it were the picture of his soul, and to represe^ to them the eternal
felicity which he inioyed, they f^ again unto their former weeping, since they
cou^^ neither satisfy their hearts, nor eyes, with so loui^^ and most amiable a
spectacle.

Xauerius was of a well set, and strong body, tall (...) stature, though not
much above the ordinary pitc^ fair of complexion, and of a graceful aspect.
H^ countenance was exceeding cheerful, and liuel^ ^is eyes gray, and quick;
his nose of a moderate size, ^is beard and hair naturally black, but now
turned ^ray with age and cares; his habit poor and ordinary, ^ut yet neat and
decent. His upper garment (accor^ing as the Priests of India use to wear)
reached ^owne unto his ankles, so that it served also for a ^owne. Those
therefore, who thus beheld him, cal^ed to mind his exceeding courtesy, and
singular be^ignity unto all men; his courage and magnanimity of ^art, giving
way to no dangers, or difficultyes what^euer; his perpetual contempt of death,
the very name whereof strikes such terror into others; his infinite ^esire to
advance Gods Glory and Religion; his Hu^ility equal to his magnanimity; but
specially his ^iety, and sanctimony of life, transcending far the ^ighest
strain of other men.

They therefore made doleful complaints, because that sweetness of behavior,
that example of forti^de, that charity toward their sick was taken from them;
because Religion had lost such an excellent ad^ancer thereof; because the world
was deprived of ^ch an vpholder; and finaly because that new Star ^as now
upon a sudden set, which gave light to the ^ndians, who before had lain in
almost perpetual dar^nesse, and which had driven away the foggy mist of the
East, by the radiant beams of Christ's Ghospel. Where was now one to be found,
to carry on the Christian Religion to the furthest part of the world? Who
should hereafter cure the Portugheses both cor^orall and spiritual diseases?
Who should succeed Xa^erius room and place? In the mean time, whilst the
Portugheses compassing his body, feed both their eyes and thoughts with the
most comfortable sight and remembrance of their dearest father, and overwhelmed
with tears, wholly unmindful of themselves bewailed so great a loss, Anthony
the Intepreter who had attended upon Francis all the time of his sickness, and
at his death, ran unto the ship for Francis his Priestly habit, which was
kept therein. When the Portugheses who were aboard understood of Xauerius
departure, they also with streams of tears gushing from their eyes, brake
forth into lamentations and sighs, being stricken, not so much for their own
present grief, as for the sorrow which they knew it would cause in Perera
their master, who remained at Malaca.

The Interpreter therefore returning back with Francis his apparel, He is pur
into the ornaments of a Priest.
and accompanied with the mariners weeping, clothed his body in Priestly
garments as the manner is; and by advise of the Portugheses determined to put
him into a wooden coffin, as the Chinese are accustomed to do: which, as the
event afterward declared, was done certainly more by divine, then humane
providence, to the end that those things which miraculously happened to his
holy body, might be made the more manifest. Being therefore put in a wooden
chest, and his funerals celebrated with the greatest solemnity that could be,
in so great penury of all things, it was carried forth by all the company to be
buried in the very shore of the Haven. Having there prepared a Grave, and
settled the Coffin therein, it came into their mynds, by divine instinct, to put
unto the body quick lyme, to eat away the flesh, that the bones might be
afterward transported into India.

Opening therefore the Coffin again, they covered the whole body with lime,
vnsle^kt Lime is put into the Coffin.
to the end the flesh might the sooner be consumed, and so closing it up, they
carefully buried it in the same place. Then they heap together certain great
stones upon the grave, to serve as a mark to find it out by, if any of the
Society should chance to seek after the same; and so depart with many tears,
full of exceeding grief and sorrow, for the loss of so worthy a man.

CHAP. XIII.
His body being found whole and incorrupt, is carried to Malaca, and there
again interred.
AFTER this, at the beginning of the spring, when the time was come, that the
ship which brought Francis thither was to depart for Malaca; the Chinese
Interpreter, of whom we spoke before, either out of the love he bare unto
Xauerius, or rather by divine instinct goes to the Master of the ship, and
sighing says: What! sall we here leave Xauerius, who came with us as far as
India, in a desert Island of the Chinese, amongst the barbarous people? O what
a man was he! Did we not our selves behold his Heroical sanctity, both in life
and death, with these our eyes, which all posterity shall admire? Why should
not we rather carry his sacred Body into India, to remain there, where it may
be honored, then leave it here, where it will be contemned? I would (quoth the
master) with all my heart carry his body with me into India, if the flesh were
consumed from the bones, that he might easily be transported. Wherefore I will
presently send expressly one to view the same, and if the hope be answerable to
my desire, I will carry it along as you request, not for your sake more, then
for my own. For I am not ignorant, what great favor I shall reap thereby of
my Master James Perera, who will certainly receive no small content, and
comfort also, to have Xauerius with him dead, whom in his life time he so
deerly loved.

Wherefore he dispatched presently a trusty person to open both the grave and
coffin, and if his body were consumed with the lime, to bring it away with him
unto the ship. The messenger hastening to the grave, diggeth up and opens the
Coffin, Francis his body is found entier 4. months after.
and putting the lime aside from of the body, a wonderful thing to be spoken,
he finds it so wholly entiere, and incorrupt as if it had been but newly
buried. No ill sent or savor, rather (...) most sweet and odoriferous smell
did issue from it; no putrefaction was there found at all, no not so much a
(...) of the nose, which uses first to be corrupted. The color as fresh as if
he had been alive; his garments no whit consumed or hurt; his flesh was fair
and soft (...) nor had the very color, which depends of the lyfe^ ^o much as
once forsaken his visage, so that he durst ^carcely touch him with his hands,
for that he seemed ^uen to be yet alive.

Being therefore wholly astonished at the strange^esse of the thing, he
presently acknowledged Gods ^uourable handy-worke therein, and by the integri^y
of his body, he most highly valueth that of soul. ^is admiration also so much
the more increased, be^^use he knew Xauerius to be by nature, not hot and ^ry,
but cold and moist: and that it was now also ^e fourth month that he had
layne thus buried in ^uicke lime. Fearing therefore lest he might be heer^
deceived, he cut a little piece of flesh from off his high, and carries it
unto the master of the ship, re^ting at large what he had seen and found: and
^he piece of flesh which he had brought, gave credit (...) the miracle.
Whereupon presently the master, mar^ners, and passengers being stricken into
admiration, ^egan to withal speed to run unto the grave, and fin^ing every
thing as was related, some of the company ^ho had bin either niggard, in giving
to Xauerius ^ings necessary for his sustenance, when he was li^ng; or else had
spoken some what disgracefully of him after his death, began to powreforth
abundance of ^ares, and to be ^t themselves upon the face with their ^sts, for
shame and sorrow of their fault. Others gave ^rayse to God, who took such
care, even of his ser^nts dead corpse.

This done, the Master of the ship commanded ^he body to be presently carried
aboard, as it lay in ^he Coffin, intending to make more certain try all
thereof himself, that so the miracle might be published to others. And having
thoroughly searched the body, and found it sound and incorrupt, with great
reverence he puts in the lyme again into the Coffin as before, and hoysing
up sail departed from Sanciana in the month of March with a very prosperous
wynd toward Malaca, where he soon arrived; so as one would have thought the
winds themselves had obeyed Francis. They sent their little boat before to
Malaca to carry news, that Xauerias body was found intier and incorrupt, and
was coming toward them. At which tidings the Malacensians being stirred up
with devotion, and desirous to make satisfaction for their former injury done
unto him, resolved to receive his dead corpse with all the honor and reverence
that they could, whom whilst he lived, they had cast out with no small
disgrace.

Then they began to call to mind, The Malacensians zeal in receiving Xauerius
body.
and seemed even to behold with their eyes the fervor, and countenance where
with Xauerius was wont to preach unto the people, and wherewith he sought to
draw men fr^ their evil life, to seek their salvation; to cure their sick and
possessed persons; and lastly to foretell things far absent, and to come.
Wherefore turning their contumacy into reverence toward him, they all setle^
themselves with greatioy to solemnize the funerall^ of so worthy a man. But
James Perera who had al^ that time remained in Malaca, out went all the res^ in
his love to Francis, and which he showed also by hi^ deeds. For he mitigating
the grief which he had conceived for his friends loss, by the coming of his
body, presently provides with extraordinary diligence (...) abou^dance of
torches, and all other things necessary ^r the funeral pomp. In this mean
time the ship ^as come into the haven, and they had put the Coffin (...) to a
Church near by, there expecting until the ^itty came forth to meet them.

Now, as soon as it was known in the City ^at Xauerius Body was landed,
Xauerius funerals at Malaca.
all the people pre^^ntly thronged out of the gates to meet it, partly to ^e,
and partly to touch the same with their beads. ^he Vicar also of the City
with his Clergy came thi^er in Procession, who opening there the coffin be^re
the people finds the body entiere and fresh, without any the least corruption
whatsoever, breathing ^ut a most sweet and pleasant savor. Heerupon the people
that were present with great admiration be^an to extol Gods divine power, to
kiss the sacred ^liques, and touch them with their beads, especi^ly James
Perera, who having heerby his long sorrow ^hanged into a suddayne, A sickman is
healed by touching his body.
and excessive joy, celebrated ^e arrival of his dead friend with the greatest
affe^ion of heart that possibly he could. And that Gods ^probation might add
more credit to humane iud^ments, a certain sick man by touching of the body
^as instantly restored to his health.

The next day therefore in the morning the whole ^lergy of the City together
with all the people come ^gaine in processio^ to meet the body with burning
ta^ers and torches in theirs hands, as also with extraordi^ary feeling of joy
and devotion. There was not at that ^ime any of the Society remaining in
Malaca, for they were all departed lately thence, by Francis his express
order. Yet the City thought good to have his body carried into the Church,
which had formerly belonged to the Society, whereby they might have Xauerius in
the mean time as a pledge of their return. Wherefore with a most solemn
procession, and abundance of lights the coffin was conveyed to the Church
aforsaid. And there after they had with all solemnity sung mass, the body
being separated from the lyme, was put into a new Coffin, and buried in a most
eminent place of the same Church, causing all that were present to burst forth
again into new tears partly through joy of the late miracle, and partly also
through the grief which the want of such a man had caused in them: and
presently there follows one miracle upon another.

The shortness of the new Coffin, had constrained those who put him therinto,
Blood flows out of Xauerius dead body the 5. month after.
so to bend and strayten the Body as that there presently issued fresh blood
from out his shoulders, breathing forth a most sweet and odoriferous savor.
Which the behoulders perceauing, and attentively considering, were driven into
admiration at the strangeness of the miracle, in tha^ a body which had bin now
five months without (...) soul (so rare and perseuerant was the miracle)
should still retain not only the flesh, moisture and color but also even
blood it self, and that so sweet as it seemed to be the odor, not of his
blood, but of his sanctity. Wherefore thinking good to keep it without a Coffin,
it was taken forth again, and by the Malacensians not only honorably
interred, but preserue^ ^lso, as a pledge of the divine Clemency toward them.
Wherein they were not frustrate of their hope.

At the same time, there was through God heavy wrath toward the^, a most
contagious sickness spread ^uer all the City, which having almost unpeopled
(...) great part thereof, had put them all into a wonderful ^eare. Wherefore
being much perplexed, and through ^emorse of conscience, calling to mind the
predictio^ which Xauerius had pronounced against them for the wrong they had
done unto him, they verily thought there was no other cause of Gods indignation
against them but that. But this pestilence wholly ceasing upon the very day that
his funerals were kept, showed sufficiently that God was now pacified again,
by the merits of Xauerius, by whose intercession the sickness was remitted.

CHAP. XIIII.
His Body is translated from Malaca into India.
AFTER this, upon the 13. of August John Beira a Priest of the Society of Jesus
going with some other Companions to Moluca, took Malaca in his way. He for the
reverence and devotion which he bare unto Xauerius, having heard by report that
his body was incorrupted, greatly desired to visit and behold the same.
Wherefore going privately into the Church with his companions in the night,
Francis his body intier the 9 month after his death.
and opening the Sepulcher, he finds Francis like one alive, no less intier
and incorrupt in the ground, then he was before in the lime, it being now nine
months after his death. Wherefore jointly giving praise to God, who is
admirable in his Saints, with great veneration, and many tears, they kiss and
adore his sacred body.

Neither was there wanting, at the same time a new miracle. For they perceived
that the veil wherewith his face was covered, The veil died with fresh blood.
was, by reason of the heaviness of the earth which was thrown upon him,
besprinkled as it were with fresh blood. Wherefore Beira being moved by the
euidency of the miracle, bethinketh with himself of doing greater honor to
Xarius. And conferring the matter with James Perera, they judged it convenient,
that his body should be taken up, and kept in the Sacristy of the Church; and
Perera himself procures a new Coffin to be made and lined within, with rich
Damask, and covered on the outside with cloth of gould. Beira having thus
enclosed Xauerius in his new Coffin, departed to Moluca, and leaves Emanuel
Tabera one of the Society at Malaca, with order to transport that rich and
precious Treasure, with the first opportunity unto Goa.

In the mean John Mendoza, a noble and wealthy Portugese-merchant had a ship
newly arrived at Malaca fraught with Chinese merchandise. His factour having
unladen the wares kept them in the City expecting a fit season to transport
them to Goa. But when the time for navigations came, he could not get a ship,
for that there was but only one in the Haven, and that not fit for sea, as
being old, and half rotten, and her keele specially so very weak, that she
was ready to fall asunder: So as the sea men and mariners gave their opinion
absolutely of her, that she would not be able to brook the seas, but straight
grow loose in her joints and leake, and so be quickly cast away. Wherefore the
factour being sad, knew not what to do. But when he understood, that Xauerius
holy Body was to be transported unto Goa, he ventured in her, not only all his
merchandise, but his person and life also, having assured confidence in God,
that by the merits of Xauerius, of whose admirable virtue he had had sufficient
experience, the ship would arrive safe.

In the mean time Peter Alcaceua of the Society of Jesus being sent by Cosmas
Turrianus, was come unto Malaca, to bring away those sacred Relics unto Goa.
Wherefore he, together with Tabera, convey the holy shrine into the ship, to
the exceeding joy, both of the mariners, and passengers, as thinking
themselves strongly armed thereby against al tempests. There was a chamber in
the ship prepared of purpose for the sacred Body, richly hung with silk,
wherein the shrine was placed, together with store of excellent perfumes and
waxen tapers. All which dutiful services, Xauerius did abundantly requite.
For when they were in the midst of their course, the ship running upon certain
unknown rocks, stuck so fast amongst them that she could be haled neither
forward, nor backward, but remained immovable, as if she had bin fast nailed
thereto.

At length, after the Mariners had labored for many hours to get her loose
but al in vain, they began to despair. Wherefore having no hope in humane they
implored the divine assistance. And presently they came to Father Alcaceua
entreating him earnestly to set forth Xauerius Body. He without any difficulty
yields to their request, that they might all together call upon the Saint
for help. There was no delay made, and so all with burning tapers in their
hands fell down upon their knees, and in most suppliant wise, and with may
tears began to call upon Xauerius, beseeching his aid in this their
distress. And not in vain. For as they were thus seriously imploring his
help, the Rock upon a sudden leaving its fast hold, the ship got loose, and
gave withal a great crack, then by little and little wynding her self from
out the shallowes, held on her course with a prosperous gale. At other times
also, being in manifest danger of casting away, she escaped miraculously, by
the passengers and mariners calling upon Xauerius, whose holy Body was there
present, and so at last arrived ^afe at Cocinum. Where as soon as it was
known that Francis his body was coming thither whole and incorrupt, The zeal
which the Cocinensians showed in going to visit Xauerius body.
the whole City was so stirred up with the strangeness of the thing, that you
might presently see the haven full of people, and many also making have in small
boats to meet the ship, thereby to satisfy their longing eyes. Then climing up
unto the ^ecke, they came into the chamber where the body lay, and there one
after another, touch, and kiss his sacred relics, admiring to behold the
body intiere and sound, and extolling the divine Bounty of Almighty God, who
had showed it self so admirable, even in ^he dead corpse of holy men.

The ship having made some few days stay at Cocinum, departs thence for Goa,
yet stayed a little ^y the way at a town of India called Baticala, some ^o.
miles from Goa, with no small benefit to the inha^itants of that place. For
there, by Francis his merits (...) principal Portughese woman was delivered of
a ^reat sickness, and many other miracles wrought besides which we shall
afterward set down in their proper ^ace. But now, for that the wynd was full
against the^ ^hey were forced to stay their course at Baticala for ^ty me.
Wherefore the governor of that place taking ^small gally makes have to Goa
before, and there de^lareth the whole business unto those of the Society. Their
desire, as often it happens, was by that delay (...) expectation more inflamed;
nor could they satisfy themselves to make any longer stay.

Wherefore Melchior Nu^nius Rectour of the Col^dge went unto the Viceroy, and
easily obtained of ^m, a light bark of fetch away the sacred shrine with (...)
speed. The bark belonged to one Alphonsus No^nta, a virtuous man, and one that
always much e^eemed of Xauerius, who lent the same far more wil^ngly then it
was demanded, and moreover employed ^s own endeavors carefully therein. But
the may^er of the ship, who had brought Xauerius body from ^alaca, opposed
himself, and earnestly requested, ^at, seeing his ship was not now far from
Goa, she ^ight not be despoyled of so sure and safe a guard. Yet the great
desire they had to see their Father Xauerius, ouerswayed his just request.

Melchior therefore leaving many of the College behind who desired to accompany
him, with certain of the principal Fathers, and a company of Orphane Children
takes boat, and with all the speed that might be hastes to the ship. And when
he was arrived, he forth with went aboard, and entering into the chamber where
the shrine was kept, finds Xauerius body wholly sound and vncorrupt, retayning
still the self same countenance which he had yet living; so that (...) seemed
to be but newly dead, or rather still alive Wherefore shedding tears for joy,
after he had (...) while contemplated his holy visage, as an evident to ken of
his heavenly felicity, he sweetly kisseth his sacred hands and feet, with
extraordinary feeling o^ devotion; and the like also did all the rest, every on
striving who should be most forward therein.

In the mean while, the Master had commande^ his ship to be set out with many
flagges, Honor given to Xauerius by the mariners and others.
and tapest^ hangings, and the great Ordinance to be all couere^ with silk. As
soon as the Body was brought abo^ the hatches, the Orphane Children that were
co^fro^ Goa, with garlands made of flowers on their head and boughs in their
hands began very devoutly to si^ the Canticle Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel
etc. wh^ at neither themselves, nor the rest that were prese^ could abstain
from weeping. Whilst they sung^ that manner the Body was let down into the
Bark^ and gently placed in the poope: and presently the gr^ ship taking her
leave of Xauerius, sent forth a mig^ ^eale of Ordinance, which renewed again
the joy and ^ares of all that were present, whilst they called to mind ^ow good
God was, who would even in the midst of ^e sea honor his humble servant with
so great ma^nificence. Then the forsaid ship, having delivered up ^e body, and
being lightened also of all her mercha^dize, perform as it were her last duty to
Xauerius, in the ve^ same place, and at a calm sea, sinketh down of her ^fe
under the water and is drowned; to show thereby ^at hitherto by his holy
assistance she had passed safe, ^rough both waves and rocks.

This done, the Bark arrived in the ^ame evening (...) a Church of our B. Lady
called Rebandaria, about mile and half from Goa, seated in the mouth of ^e
river, which runs along by the Island of Goa. Francis his body is intier 16.
months after his death.
^here Fa. Melchior, greatly desiring once more, to should and co^template
Xauerius Body at leisure, did midnight, all the doors being fast shut, take up
the ^me in his Priestly ornaments, as he lay, from out ^e shrine, it being then
16. months after his death, (...) finds him to have the very same face,
countenan^^ and feature of Body, as he had whilst he lived; to^^her with his
flesh full of moisture, his skin fresh ^d flexible, and his color so lively,
that one would ^ue taken him to have been rather a sleep then dead. Francis his
shirt also nothing the worse after so many months burial.


He had upon his body a garment of fine linen, which he had carried with him
in his journey, inten^ng to cloth himself therewith, according to the ^ountry
fashion, when he came unto the King of ^ina. This, because he had never used it
in his life, ^ey made to serve him for a shirt when he was dead: the which,
notwithstanding that his dead Body was wrapped therein, the space of so many
months, and also that it had been often covered ouerwith lime, and earth,
seemed so neat and clean, that one would have thought it had bin newly put on,
and preserved rather then any way impaired by the Body.

Hereupon Fa. Melchior, after he had rendered due thanks and praises to the
divine majesty, remembering what an incitement to virtue S. Paul the Hermits
coat of Palm Tree was unto S. Anthony, and how Elias his cloak had been
beneficial to Elizeus, felt in himself a vehement desire to be made
possessour of Xauerius shirt. Wherefore taking it of from his body, he kept it
most carefully, either as a memory of Xauerius himself, or as an ornament for
his own use. For that he going afterward into Iaponia, carried the same with
him thither, intending to cloth himself therewith, when he went to speak with
any King, or Nobleman of that Country, to the end that by Francis hi^ merits
and intercession for them, he might not only delight their eyes, but also win
their hearts to God. And the event proved afterward answerable to hi^ desired
devotion.

CHAP. XV.
His Funeral is kept at Goa, with all solemnity.
IN the mean time, the Viceroy (who was then at Goa) being certified over
night of the coming of Xauerius body, for the great veneration which he bare
unto him, was ^ceeding joyful, and presently commanded a solemn ^ompe, and
preparation to me made ready against ^he next day. But the Fathers of the
Society, whom Melchior had left at home against their wills, were so ^uercome
with joy, that having their hearts wholly ^possessed with desire to see their
dearest Father, could ^ot sleep, nor take any rest all that night. Neither ^as
there any one among them either so could in spirit, or weak of body, that did
not watch the whole ^ight, so great possession had the love of Xauerius ^otten
in all their hearts. Wherefore all that night, ^hey busied themselves to adorn
their Church with ^reene boughs, Tapestryes, Carpets, and other or^aments,
intending to receive their most desired Father with the best preparation they
could devise. Now ^t chanced, that this day fell out upon the Friday next
before the Holy week: yet they thought good to ^dorne the Church, and Aultars
in the most sumptu^us manner they could, and with the rich ornaments which they
commonly used upon the greatest Feasts of the year. For they deemed, that this
holy Man, whose funeral God would have celebrated with sollemne pomp, ought
to be received rather in ornaments of joy, then in doleful and mourning black.

This funeral then was kept upon the 15. of March in the year 1554. His
funeral at sea.
Upon which day early in the morning, James Perera who was come from Malaca
thither, embarketh himself with a train of choice friends in a galley, and
all with white torches in their hands, go to meet his dearest Father, and
Friend Xauerius. Presently after him there followed six little boats, wherein
there were to the number of fifty persons, all ardent lovers of Xauerius, and
admirers of his virtues. Every one had a great torch lighted in his hand, and
his page a lesser taper. As soon as they were come to the Church where the
holy body was kept, they all together prostrate themselves upon the ground,
and with tears adore the sacred relics. But yet Perera went beyond them all
in piety, who had always borne so special an affection to Xauerius. Then
there followed other small vessels one after another, to the number of twelve,
of Portughese^, Chinese, and Malacensians, all men of very good account, and
in equipage accordingly, both for apparel and lights: Who when they had, with
all the rest, performed their devotions unto the Body, retired themselves, each
one to his Boat.

Now, when it was well in the day, the shrine adorned with cloth of Gold, was
placed in the Poope of a small Bark al beset with burning tapers of wax; the
Fathers of the Society in their white surplisses, and ^^e Orphane children with
garlands on their heads, ^ompassing the same round about and singing of hym^es
and psalms, and so conveyed it to Goa. There fol^wed this little Bark, in a
long row, to the num^er of about twenty other little boats, all beset with
^urning torches and tapers likewise, the more to grace ^e solemnity of the
funeral pomp. The Sea seemed (...) on a fire with lights, the shores
resounded with ^^ch melodious music, that it caused most that were ^^esent,
through their great feeling of devotion, to ^ed abundance of tears. But when
the Bark thus ^istering with the splendor of so many tapers appe^ed within
sight of the City, whereby they vnder^ood the Body was at hand, the people were
so ^reatly moved thereat, that they seemed to leap, and triumph for joy. For
although the Fathers, not ^nmindfull of their humble modesty, had dealt
alrea^y, and that earnestly, with the Viceroy and Bishop, ^at Xauerius might
not be received as a Saint, but as ^he servant of God, until his Holiness
should other^yse determine thereof: yet by the Viceroyes order and command, the
bells of all the Churches began to ^ing forth peales of joy and melody. At the
hearing whereof the whole City began to run forth, to ^eete the Body, so as
the shores, walls of the town, ^indowes, Garrets, and tops of houses, from
whence ^^ey might discover the coming of the Bark, were ^ll beset, and filled
with people. And the nearer the ^arke drew unto them, the more did the
multitude, and ^^eir desire to see it, increase. Yea many out of feruor and
zeal leapt one after another into the water, striving who should first touch
the holy shrine.

In this mean time the Viceroy, and all the Nobility, with a great number of
chief Citizens, stood expecting the Bark at the Haven, with burning tapers
in their hands, and the Chanons of the High Church, with all the other Priests
in white surplisses came with their Crosses in Procession wise, to meet the
same. Thither also came the Sodality of Mercy with their banners, and ensigns
all glittering with gold and silver. After them followed a very sumptuous
Beer, covered over with cloth of Gold, whereon those of the Sodality had
determined to carry the Shrine aloft, that so it might make the more glorious
show.

As soon therefore as the Shrine was brought aland by those of the Society, A
great concourse to Xauerius body.
the people made such a press out of desire to touch and kiss the same, that
very many were thereby thrown down one upon another. And because those who
came last, would not make way for the first to retire, they were so thronged up
together on a heap, that many were in danger to have bin pressed, and stifled
to death, if great prudence had not been used to avoid the danger. The Viceroy
therefore was forced to send this Guard to put back the throng, and to make way
for the Procession, that was ready to begin.

Now, His land funeral.
when the multitude with much ado was forced back, the Procession set
forward, and was performed with all the pomp that might be. After which there
followed the Shrine placed upon the Beer^ most sumptuously adorned, and carried
by certayn^ Fathers on high upon their shoulders, together with two other
empty Beeres, borne on each side one, and richly furnished like the other.
After the Body followed the Viceroy, and his Court, together with all the
Nobility, and whole City, with such abundance of torches and tapers, that the
streets seemed to be on fire, and this with such applause of extraordinary joy
in all sorts, that one would have thought it had rather been a triumph, then a
funeral. The Shrine or Coffin glittered all with gold; the way was al strowed
with green boughs, and odoriferous flowers; The windows and walls of all the
houses were adorned with costly hangings and tapestry; besides the many sweet
perfumes, set every where about, on both sides. There were moreover hung about
the Beer diverse Censars of silver, in which were cast continually many sweet
and fragrant odours.

Francis therefore in this triumphall manner, returning from his China-voiage,
was at last brought into the Church of the Society at Goa, giving us thereby to
understand with what honor his soul no doubt is now glorified in heaven,
whose Body being dead, through the sanctity of his soul, did notwithstanding
so triumph here on earth.

CHAP. XVI.
The great Concourse of people to behold his Holy Body.
AS soon as they came to the Church of the Society, a solemn Mass was sung.
And to avoid the great press of people, the Beer was placed within the
Cancells of the Altar. It was told the people that when Mass was ended, the
Coffin should be opened, and that all who would, might see the Body. Whereupon
the multitude made so great a throng that they brake down the rayles of the
Cancells. But the Coffin being shut, was kept safe by nothing more, then by the
press of people, hindering one another. Then the Rectour of the College, An
incredible co^course to Xauerius body.
fearing the violence of the pious people, earnestly entreated the Viceroy that
he would be pleased to retire unto his house with the Nobility, for that the
people would then certainly follow his example; and that when afterward the
chapel was voyded and the press of people gone, they might themselves the
more commodiously see the body.

The Viceroy therefore yelding to his request, withdraws himself, and all the
Nobility follows him. But the people remained still immovable, urging, and
requiring to have the Body showed unto them: for unless they had their desire,
they said they would not stir a foot. And by standing out thus stiffly, they
obtained at last their demand. For when as no delay would serve the turn, F.
Melchior was forced at length to give way unto the time, and putting the press
of people a little back, until the Cancels were again set up and fastened,
Xauerius body was showed to them in his Priestly robes, as he was brought
thither. Which when the multitude beheld, they were so desirous to see it
nearer hand, that rushing on with great violence they again brake down the
Cancels. Whereupon the Fathers through a suddayne fear presently shut the
Coffin again, that there might no violence be offered thereunto, and would by
no means open it any more. So as the people being out of hope to see it
again, and weary with expecting, they that stood nearest, and had seen it
though a far of, at length retired, and told the rest what they had seen. They
being set on fire by what they said, never left urging until the Cancels were
again set up, and the Body also showed them.

The same day in the evening Anthony Perera a Portughese, arrived at Goa with
presents, and letters from the King of Bungo to the Viceroy of India. He was
sent thither by the King to procure Xauerius return again into Iaponia,
although it were now too late. The contents of the Kings letters, were these:
That Francis Xauerius had oftentimes discoursed before him of God the Creator
and redeemer of the world, and that his words had taken fast hold within his
heart, and the in most bowels of his soul. Wherefore he was now fully
determined and resouled to be baptized by Francis his own hands, although it
were with the hazard of loosing his kingdom. Xauerius had indeed at his
departure promised him, that he would shortly return unto him, if God spared
his life. But because his return was not so speedy as he had hoped, he thought
good to send one expressly unto Goa, who might certify him of the cause of his
so long delay. Wherefore he entreated the Viceroy, to send Xauerius unto him
with the first opportunity: whose coming would certaynely be both a great
incitement to the Christian Religion, and also a pledge of the Portugheses
friendship unto his person. When the Viceroy had perused the Kings letters, he
easily persuaded Fa. Melchior Nunius (who was one of the chief Fathers of the
Society in India) to go himself with all speed unto the King of Bungo.

In this mean time Xauerius Body was exposed at Goa, not only to the view, but
also to the admiration of all the behoulders. But the great desire of the
people was not satisfied by seeing him, but rather more inflamed: Yea the self
same persons did oftentimes return again to look upon him, and others came
flocking almost every moment to behold him. The Fathers therefore through
necessity, were constrained to change their determination. And so to satisfy
the longing desire of such an infinite multitude, the body was exposed three
days in a Chapel well fenced with strong Cancells to the full view of all,
and every one that would might look upon it at their leisure: So as there came
from all parts an infinity of people to behold, and touch the same with their
beads, which they performed with abundance of tears and much inward feeling
of devotion.

Now whilst some became doubtful of the incorruption of his body, the same was
made thereby not only more certain, but more glorious also. For seeing the
miracle did surpass all humane belief, there were not wanting some, yea
Religious persons, and men of good authority, By order from the Viceroy a
Physician examineth the integrity of his body.
who gave out, that Francis his body being bowelled, was by art, and certain
precious embalmings kept thus lively. The Viceroy therefore, to examine the
truth of the thing, commanded Cos^as Saraina, a Physician of great fame and
experience to try, and look into the Body. But he beginning to lance the
belly with an instrument, when he perceived fresh blood to issue thence, being
astonished ^t the miracle, gave over his design. Then putting his finger into
the hole he had made, he finds his bowels intiere and sound, without any
sign of balm, or other preservative applied; which he confirmed by public
testimony upon his oath. Wherefore the matter being thoroughly examined, and
diuulged abroad, Xauerius Body began to be greatly honored and reverenced, not
more by others, then by those who had been authors of the false rumor
aforesaid, every one kissing his feet and hands, and touching them with their
beads. And so great was the opinion of Xaueuerius sanctity, that every one did
strive to get, yea purloyne some small particle of his body, or garments: in so
much that all the care and vigilance the Fathers could use to look unto it,
did hardly hinder the violence of the devout pepole.

In the mean time Xauerius praises were spread all abroad, and his worthy
acts, prophecyes, and miracles were blazed far and near, not only by those
who had themselves been eyewitnesses thereof, but by others also, who had heard
the same from credible authors; so as all India sounded forth his sanctity, as
it were with one mouth. And likewise for the confirmation of the former
miracles there were many others added anew. For that many who went to behold
that sacred spectacle, affirmed upon their oath, that there came thither many
persons who having either lost the use of some of their lymmes, or otherwise
sick of some disease, were by touching Francis his body healed, and returned
home sound, and in perfect health.

Now, when these three days were past, although the people had not yet their
fill of behoulding and contemplating the sacred Body, the shrine was for a time
placed in a Sepulcher, which they had prepared for the purpose, upon the right
hand of the high Altar, until a fayrer monument were erected and adorned,
fitting the dignity of so worthy a man, according to the Fathers desires, and
devotion of the Citizens of Goa, if the King of Portugal, as they hoped,
would procure his Canonization from the Pope.

About the tenth day after his burial, The Bishops Vicar again examineth the
matter.
Doctor Antony Ribera the Bishops Vicar, and Inquisitour General, determined,
in respect of his charge and office, to examine the matter with his own eyes,
and see whether those things were true which had been diuulged abroad of Francis
his incorruption. Wherefore opening the Sepulcher about Midday himself, with
many lighted torches attending, thoroughly felt, and viewed the whole body all
over. And finding nothing which was not entiere, he gave testimony thereof under
his hand and seal to all posterity. This caused the reverence, and devotion to
Xauerius daily to increase. There were all most none, who came not with
veneration to his sepulcher; many brought thither flowers and garlands, and the
number of white wax tapers to burn continually before it, were exceeding
great. And this devotion of the people toward his servant was by God himself
approved also. For there is evident proof, that a wax Candle of a ^ubit long
only, being lighted before the Sepulcher ^id burn perpetually for the space of
18. whole days, and nights together.

The King of Portugal being moved by these re^tions, The King of Portugal
makes means to have Francis Canonized.
gave order presently to the Viceroy of India, (...) make exact inquiry of
Xauerius worthy facts, and ^iracles, and to set them carefully down in
writing, ^e which he afterward sent to Rome to his Embassa^our, that he might
deal with his Holiness about his Canonization. But this most Excellent Kings
pious ^deauours were hindered by his untimely death. The others therefore having
finished their new Church ^ Goa, and dissolved the old, removed Xauerius Body ^
to a private Chapel within their house, where (...) this day his memory and
name is honored, until (...) Holiness shall grant (if it please God) that
so^mne Honor and Veneration, may be publikly ex^^bited unto him.

OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE VI. BOOK.
By the King of Portugal his command, Francis his deeds, and miracles are
committed to vvriting. CHAP. I.
ALTHOUGH the gifts and favors, which the Goodness of God had already heaped
upon Francis, shined forth at sundry times in all th^^ parts of his life, as we
have demonstrated before* yet will it not be amiss here to propound those
things to be maturely considered, which have been touched by the way, and as it
were in an obscure manner; that so by unfolding the chief heads of matters,
we may at once behold all whatsoever appertains thereunto. And to the end,
we may first of all speak of such passages, which ordinarily cause most
admiration, and are essteemed both by good, and bad-willers; many things, not
only through the whole course of his life, but much more at the very time of
his funerals, have by divine power happened unto Xauerius, which no natural
cause can any way excuse from being miraculous. Wherefore we will here, in a
more exact manner, treat of these signs, and testimonies of his sanctity; and
will cite for every thing such authors and witnesses, whose authority, and
fidelity cannot justly be called into question.

John the third King of Portugal, by whom, as we have said before, Xauerius
was sent into India, when he had understood, and made trial of his sanctity,
honored him no less dead, the^ alive. For as soon as the news of his death
was brought unto him, moved, as indeed he had reason, for the loss of so
worthy a man, he was inwardly grieved at the blow which the whole East had
received thereby, then the which there could not perhaps an heavier have been
given by the wrathful hand of God. When his grief was something ouerpast (as
his own singular piety and prudence admonished him) he sought a remedy for the
same, from that source which had caused it. For having understood, of the many
miraculous things, which had been wrought by Francis, as well alive as dead,
and being inflamed with devotion toward the blessed man, out of his fervor to
Religion, he gives order by Letters Patents unto Francis Barret his Viceroy of
India, to make all diligent inquiry after his illustrious acts and miracles,
and to send them to him with expedition, for that he determined to present the
same to his Holiness, that he might according to the custom of Holy Church,
if he thought it expedient, decree a public honor and reverence to be
exhibited unto him, who was famous both for sanctity, and miracles.

But to the end this Religious Kings opinion of Xauerius virtues may be known,
The King of Portugal letters to the Viceroy of India.
and testified to all the world, we judge it not amiss here to set down a
Copy of his Letters Royal. Friend Viceroy, I the King, send you hearty greeting.
Francis Xauerius life and labors have been so profitable by their exemplar
edification, that we judge it will be most acceptable unto God, to have them
brought to light, to the honor, and glory of his Divine Majesty. Wherefore,
being published abroad, to the end they may receive that full authority and
credit, as it is meet they should; We give you all charge, and commission that
whersoeuer throughout India it shall be thought that good and substantial
witnesses of these matters may be found (I mean of such as have lived and
conuersed with him) you will procure with the greatest diligence you can,
public instruments, and testimonialls to be iuridicially made thereof, and
under the witnesses oaths, both of his life, and behavior, as well of all
things which he has worthily performed for the salvation, and example of
mortal men; as of those things also which he has miraculously wrought, either
alive or dead. These instruments, together (...) all the testimonialls and
authorities, subscribed with your own hand, and signed with your seal, you
shall send over unto us three sundry ways. This if you carefully, and speedily
perform, you shall receive great thanks from us.

From Lisbone this 27. of March 1556.



As soon therefore, The Viceroyes Inquisition after Xauerius acts.
as the Viceroy had received these letters, he by fit persons expressly
ordained for that purpose, presently commanded exact inquiry to be made of such
things accordingly, not only at Goa the Metropolitan City of India, but in
every part of that Country; and also at Malaca, and in all places where it was
known Xauerius had ever bin. Whereupon very many things were found by the
testimony of undoubted witnesses which Francis had both in his life and after
his death, either performed with great profit, or else wrought miraculously by
divine power. Of which the Viceroy having caused public instruments to be
made, subscribed and signed the same with his own hand and seal, and sent
them speedily unto the King his Lord and Master.

The matter now was come thus far, that the King had sent the Instruments
aforesaid to Rome, and dealt by his Ambassador with his Holiness, for the
proceeding therein to his Canonization, when as his untimely death brake of
that his pious determination. An authentical Copy of all which instruments,
iuridically sealed and signed by the Viceroy, we have at this present in our
hands, from whence, for the most part, we have taken those things which we have
hitherto mentioned, and shall hereafter also recount. And for that we have in
these our former Books comprised most of them already; we will therefore in
this last, relate only those which we have of set purpose reserved unto this
place, as not seeming good for diverse reasons, to have put them down before.

CHAP. II.
How Xauerius foretells things future, and absent, and sees men's inward
Thoughts.
XAVERIVS was indeed remarkable for many worthy favors which God Almighty had
bestowed upon him; yet for nothing more, then for his manifold gift of
Prophecy. Whereof many undoubted signs are clerly to be seen, throughout the
whole passage of his life. But these which here ensue are of most particular
note.

One Cosmas Ioannes Procuratour of the King, had bought in India a Diamond of
extraordinary bigness for 8000. crowns, which would be worth four times as
much in Portugal. This Jewel he had delivered unto one Ferdinand Aluarez at
his departure for Portugal, to be carried unto the King his Master. At the
same time Francis comes to Goa, and out of familiarity with Cosmas asked him
how his trafficque went forward? He recounteth all unto him, and in particular
concerning the said diamond, which he had sent unto the King, hoping all things
went very prosperously with him. Then Xauerius asked him again in what ship he
had sent so precious a Jewel? And when he had told him the name of the Ship; I
would to God quoth Francis, you had not sent it in that ship. Why, quoth
Cosmas, is it, because she was almost cast away this last year by a contrary
tempest? No, quoth Francis, for she is to undergo a greater danger. Upon this
speech he began to entreat Xauerius earnestly, that he would not give over
praying to God for that ship, see^ing that he had upon his own hazard sent the
Diamond unto the King. And being thus pensive for his ^ewell, news was brought
unto him, that the ship having one of her chief planckes rent away, by the
violence of a tempest, was even at the point to have been drowned; but that by
the prayers of Xauerius she miraculously escaped, and was safely arrived in
Portugal.

The day also before Francis put to sea from Ma^aca toward China He being at
Malaca foreseeth a danger which the Society underwent in Portugal.
(as they of the Society who were then present, have recounted) lying after an
unusual ^a^ner upon his bed, all along upon his belly, like one between sleep
and awake, he continued a great whi^ in the same posture without ever moving,
wholly ^lienated from his senses. Whereat those of the Soci^ty that were by
chance present, being astonished at ^ strange a posture, durst not, for the
great reverence which they bare him, either awake, or speak unto ^im.
Wherefore turning their admiration into care, ^hey with solicitous and
perplexed mynds expected the event of the thing. At last awaking as it were out
of a deep sleep, and like one that had escaped some great trouble, called
upon a certain person by name who was then in Portugal, and oftentimes cried,
God pardon thee etc. so as for the present (except himself only who knew it)
none could imagine what that his complaint meant. But soon after letters
coming out of Portugal it was known that at the very same time, through the
fault of him, whom Xauerius had so often called upon by name, in that Ecstasy,
the Society had in Portugal suffered a great detriment, which notwithstanding
through Gods goodness and Xauerius prayers, turned to their benefit. Whereby it
plainly appeared that God had showed him what happened at that very time in
Portugal, that by his prayers he might auert the danger which was imminent to
the Society there.

Moreover Xauerius, being at Malaca, did not only tell of things that were
absent and far off, but foretold also things to come, and those as well
doleful, as joyful. I pass over with silence the deuastations of the
Country, the besieging of the City, the grievous contagions amongst the
inhabitants, and other miseries, which either in his public sermons, or
private conferences he foretold so long before unto the Malacensians, even in
the very same manner that afterward they fell out. Let us call again to mind
that memorable victory acheiued against those Barbarous Acenians; that Prophecy
glorious by so many predictions of Xauerius, and enobled by so many tokens of
the divine providence. How many and diverse also were his predictions at
Amboynum, and the Molu^ca's? What notable prophecies were those of the Victory
against the Tolanians; of the returning again of the Cock-boate, which had bin
carried away with ^he tempest? But all these we have related before, excepting
this which follows.

When in his voyage to China, as he was sailing to Malaca, the great
iron-barbed Ship wherein he went being on a sudden tossed with a cruel tempest
among the ^lands of Sumatra by which they passed, was in emine^t ^anger to be
cast away. Now as they were all even in despair, beholding present death
represented before their eyes, A Prophecy of fair weather in the fear of
shipwreck.
Francis comes to James Sosa the master of the ship, and bids him, and
the rest that were present, be of good courage, for that very day in the
evening the tempest should cease, and the ship ariue safe at the Haven. And so
it fell out, just as he had foretold. For before sunne-set, the wind which was
in the South ceased, the sea grew calm, and they arrived at their desired Port.

Moreover he did oftentimes foretell to many, not only their safe arrival, but
their deaths also which were near at hand. He foretells the speedy death of
the^ that were in good health.
For to say nothing of John Arausius ^is death, which he plainly foretold, as
he was one ^ay at Malaca in familiar conference with Antony Sosa, and falling
into speech of the Governor of the City, ^e told him plainly, that although
he were then in very good health, yet he would within a little after ^ye. And
his death following the next month, pro^ed what he had foretold to be true.
Then again when he was going for China, he out of friendship ad- James Pe^^ra
a wealthy merchant, in whose ship he went to substitute another factour over
his wares, because he whom he had appointed should not arrive thither. And the
event was answerable to the Prophecy; for the Factour dyed by the way, before
the came to China.

Being also at another time bound for the ^^uca's, and he setting out in one
ship, and John (...) a merchant in another, Xauerius being carried away by the
violence of a tempest, soon arrived at the port he desired; Where whilst
Galuano the merchant was earnestly expected, Francis upon a sudden, as he was
preaching to the people exhorted them to pray to God for Galuano his soul, who
was then dead. And three days after Galuano's merchandise being found castvp
upon the shore, testified the shipwreck, and death of their master.

This Prophecy of his is also admirable, which the event of late has proved
very true. There was in India a ship so weakened with age and tempests, that
all were of opinion if she went to sea, she would be shaken asunder by the
stormy weather, before she could arrive within sight of the Haven. Whereupon
Xauerius (for he chanced to be then present) moved by (...) A prophecy of a
ship to perish in the haue^.
instinct, Be of good courage, quoth he, for this ship will not be cast away
in this journey, but at last indeed shall perish, yet without loss to any man.
Credi^ was given to this prediction, and the event fell ou^ accordingly. For
presently the Merchants nothing doubting of what Xauerius had by divine
revelation fortould as well concerning that ship, as of many other ^^ings,
strove exceedingly to lade their goods in her, ^ssuring themselves, as indeed
it happened, that they ^ight conueigh their merchandise to and fro therein without
danger of shipwreck, or other loss. Nor ^ere they any whit deceived. For the
same ship, al^^ough very old and rotten, remained always safe (...) many
iorneyes and tempests, until the year 1583. ^ith was almost 30. years after
Xauerius death. And (...) last, as she lay empty in the haven, falling to
pieces ^f her self, was there made an end of, without dom^age unto any man;
giving thereby testimony to Fran^^ his prediction, no less whilst she remained
sound, ^^en when she decayed.

Neither did he only foretell things to come and ^arre absent, but pierced even
into the hearts of men, and ^new their very cogitations and sins. And although
^his be sufficiently demonstrated before in its proper ^^ace by the knowledge
he had by divine revelation of ^e private resolution which John Durus had made
of ^unning away: yet these things, which now we are ^o set down, will make
them much more manifest.

There is in India a town called Bazain, which ly^th with equal distance
almost, between Go^ and the ^^uer Ind^s. Xauerius going thither, about the
time ^e went into Iaponia, to speak with the Viceroy ^ho remained at Cambaya;
behold a certain Mala^nsian, that bare very great affection unto him, offe^ed
to embrace him. Francis having formerly redu^ed this man from a lewd to a civil
life, that he might ^^eereafter look better to the good of his soul, had
commanded him, upon just causes, to return back again into Portugal, and
there to frequent the Sacrament of Confession. But he, although at first had
promised to do them both had indeed performed neither; and moreover had not
only cast off all thought of returning into Portugal, By divine light he sees
his friends sins and how long he had abstained from confession.
but had now also passed over the third year without Confession. As soon
therefore as Xauerius beheld him, and withal by divine revelation saw the
inward wounds of his Conscience, refusing utterly his imbracement: A way (quoth
he) get you hence; is this your standing to the promise you made me? Behold
with shame (to say nothing else) since you took leave of me to sail into
India, you have never been at Confession. I will certainly neither speak unto
you, nor acknowledge you for my friend, until you have by Confession purged
your soul of your filthy sins. Whereupon the man (his conscience accusing
him, both of differing his Confession, and of his heinous offenses) being
stricken with these words, easily perceived that Xauerius knew what he objected
to him, by divine revelation, for speaking humanely he could never have known
it. Wherefore accusing himself and acknowledging his fault, he presently by
Confession washes away the spots of his soul, which he well saw were so
abominable in Francis his sight. He sees that his friend was in his heart
plotting a great sin.


Having also asked another friend of his at Cocinum how he did, and he
answered, well: Well indeed, quoth Xauerius, in body, but not in soul. Upon
these words, the man who was at the same time plotting I know not what villainy,
and wickedness in his heart, pricked in conscience, confessed plainly, that
Francis could better judge, how he did, that he himself, and so confesses his
sins entierely unto him; and leaving off quite his wicked determination,
recouereth again his souls health, which Xauerius had perceived was wanting
in him.

Moreover the day before he departed this life, He being ready to die
foretells destruction of one that accompanied him
casting a stern look upon one of those who atte^ded on him when he lay sick,
cried out thrice with a pittyful voice, Woe be to thee. Which lamentable
denunciatio^ of his, was not in vain. For shortly after the party having bin a
long while in tangled in dishonest loves, was upon the sudden slain, and
dyed miserably. So that Xauerius thrice crying out, might seem to have
denounced unto him a triple misery, to wit the wou^d of his conscience, his
bodily death, and the destruction of his soul.

CHAP. III.
In his life time, he works miracles of all kinds.
MORE OVER Xauerius virtue has showed it self most admirable in almost all
kind of miracles, whereof we will recount in this place some few, contenting our
sel^es to have touched the rest briefly in other places. As concerning Devils,
he did not only overcome them ^ftentimes in single combat, when at Meliapora in
S. Thomas his Church he contemned their frights and threats, although he were
cruelly beaten by them; and again in his navigations into Iaponia, when as with
an invincible fortitude of mind he preuailad against their deceipts, and
subtilities. But oftentimes also both in the coast of C^morinum, Malaca, and in
other places, he cast them out of postest bodies, partly by himself, and partly
by the Neophytes whom he sent unto them.

And this virtue of his was no less seen in curing of diseases, then in
casting out Devils by divine power. For to pass over with silence, many whom
he freed both from fevers and other diseases in the foresaid coast of Comorinum
(as we have before demonstrated) as well by himself, as by the children whose
help he used in teaching there the Catechism; going one day to visit Michael
Fernandez who was excedingly tormented with the Stone in the Island Ceilanum, he
willed him to take courage, and to put great confidence in God, He miraculously
cures the stone
telling him withal, that he would the next day say Mass for him, and did not
doubt but by Gods grace he should recover his strength both of body and mind,
sooner then he could have expected. And even so it fell out, just as he
foretold.

He likewise helped those who were ready to dye, and either through the defect
of nature, or else by some casuality wanted their senses, or members. For it is
sufficiently known, that at Amangucium he restored a lame man to his former
strength; two others that were dumb to their speech; and two likewise deaf
unto their hearing. Many also that were brought unto him being ready to dye, he
presently restored t^^ their corporal health, being out of all hope of
recovery, by making only the sign of the Cross, and casting of Holy water
upon them. At Goa also (as we showed before) in his return from Iaponia,
visiting one of the Society, who was given over by all, and reciting the
Gospel over him, he delivered him even out of the jaws of death.

Neither did he deliver only such as were ready to ^ye, but restored also those
that were all ready dead ^o life again. For it is evidently known, that there
were three dead persons restored to life by him, in the ^oast of Comorinum. But
that is very strange, which (...) recounted of him in another kind. There was a
cer^ayne Portughese merchant (whom we will not name for his credit sake) very
industrious, and practical (...) many things, who at Francis his first coming
into ^aponia, had contracted great familiarity with him; ^ut returning back
some years after into India, lived ^here more warily then honestly. To him
therefore Xa^erius on a time appeared (whether he were then a ^arre off, or
already dead is uncertain) denouncing unto him that God would speedily be
reue^ged of him. and when the other straight confessed, By miraculously
repreheding a very wicked man he makes him become a Francisciscan.
that he had ^^deed well deserved no less* Thou have, quoth he, ^^uly deserved
it, who have committed such a detesta^^e sin; and withal named a certain
heinous of^^nce, which no mortal creature knew, but he himself. Whereupon the
merchant being put in mind of ^^is secret sin of his, was presently stricken
to the ^art, and with admiration cries out: Certainly, Father, this has him
revealed to you by God. Go to therefore, since you have seen the sore,
prescribe also the cure, and show me, who have gone astray, the sure path so
salvation. Thou shall then (quoth he enter into the Order of S. Francis, which
rule if thou diligently observe, thou shall be certainly saved. For I perceive
thou art, as it were borne, and made for that Order above all other. He
presently obeyed his wholesome counsel, as though he had been commanded by a
voice from heaven; and afterward, much rejoicing at the happy event, related
the whole matter to others.

Xauerius moreover wrought very many miracles of other kinds. There is a Town
standing beyond Malaca called Semorra, by which there runs a broad and deep
River. They who dwell upon the Bank thereof, being set on by the instigation of
the Devil, threw many stones, and darts at Francis; who being eagerly pressed,
and pursued by those Barbarians, removed without difficulty a huge beam that
lay ouertwhart the bank, and hindered his way from flying, and thereby escaped
and saved himself; whereupon the Barbarians being astonished, and amazed at so
miraculous a thing, were terrifyed from pursuing him any further; for they
plainly saw, that that beam could not be styrred without the strength of many
men, and therefore that Xauerius had removed the same by diui^ ne, not humane
power.

This which follows was ever scarcely heard o^ At Amangucium in Iaponia he
preached daily to the Bonzies and other Ethnickes, the Christian Religion After
his Sermon the inhabitans (being a Nation n^ less vehement, then insolent
against strangers) a^ ^ed of him very maliciously, He with one answer
satisfyeth many of the Iaponian questions.
one upon another, many questions, concerning that which he had preached.
Xauerius therefore, when he was urged thus by so many at once, with diverse and
sundry questions, often satisfied them all (which is very admirable to be
recounted) with one answer, as though he had answered every one a part. This
was testified by one Bernard a Iaponian, a man of sincere virtue and credit,
who was present himself at those disputations and interrog^tions, and had,
together with many others, more then once observed the same.

No less authentical, and wonderful is that which is recounted to have
happened in a certain Town of India called Coramandela. Xauerius being there
by chance, a poor man, who had newly suffered shipwreck, came unto him,
beseeching him to bestow some alms upon him, to relieve his misery. Francis,
He gives gould which he had miraculously received to one that had suffered
shipwreck.
although he had not where withal to show his Charity, could not for all that,
find in his heart to send the poor wretch away, without something. Therefore, not
thinking of his own poverty, he put his hand into his pocket, but found there
nothing at all. Yet would he not desist from his determination, but began to
have recourse to him, who is Lord of all riches. Wherefore lifting up his eyes
to heaven, he bids the poor man put his confidence in the divine
liberality. And God neither frustrated Xauerius hope, nor he the poor man's.
For putting his hand again into his pocket, he brought it out full of fair
pieces of gold (which the inhabitants call Fano'es) and presently gave them
all, since God had thus affoarded them, unto the poor man, putting his whole
confidence in the endless Treasure of divine hope.

A Portughese Soldier also, playing at dyce had lost 600. Crowns; wherefore
being sad, and not knowing what to do, or course to take, he makes his moan
to Francis. He judging it meet to apply a plaster fit for the poison of the
disease, demands of him a Dye, He uses strange means to make a gamester at
dice detest that play.
and having shaked it in his hand, gives it him back, and bids him go play
again to recover his loss. Neither was he therein deceived. For on a sudden
the fortune of the game began to change, and the soldier having good luck,
soon recovered all again When he had got his own again, he would have
played on still, but Xauerius for bad him, nor did the soldier contradict him,
but remembering the benefit he had received, promptly obeyed his wholesome
commau^ds: and promised furthermore of his own accord, that he would never
after play at Dyce. And he was indeed as good as his word. For from that time
forward, he could never endure to handle Dyce, such an auersion he had to that
game, by Francis his means.

It was an ordinary practice with Xauerius, that in his voyages by sea, The
oil vessel which was emptyed was miraculously filled again.
whatsoever he brought aboard into the ship for his own use, or provision,
he would straight distribute it all amongst the poor passengers, and
mariners, and live himself by begging. Wherefore on a time, giving out his
oil freely to them that asked of him, his vessel was within a little space
wholly empty: Notwithstanding another coming afterward to demand a little
thereof, Xauerius bad that some should be given unto him. His Companion told
him, there was no more oil left, and that the bottle was now spent, for he had
turned ^p the bottom, and shaken it, and could not wring so ^uch as one drop
thereout. Go yet, quoth Francis, ^or all that, and look again. He does as he
was wil^ed, and by and by he brings word, that the bottle was now full
again, notwithstanding he had but a little before left it empty. But Xauerius
taking no notice of the miracle, as his custom was; Give therefore, ^uoth he,
liberally to him that asks.

Moreover, He by his prayers curreth a childfull of ulcers.
lighting by chance upon a child which was sick, and very full of ulcers; and
moved to com^assion toward him, he made at first a little stand, and ^hen
taking him up in his arms, and hugging him in ^is bosom, he began to repeat
these words, God make ^hee whole* which he had scarce pronounced twice or
thrice, when as he restored the child whole and sound to his mother. This was
witnessed by Vincent Perera a master of a ship, and Xauerius familiar friend
(whom we have named in another place) and recounted to those of the Society in
India. But of this kind we have ^n his life set down innumerable examples
although ^e referred these unto this place, because, the times wherein they
were done, were not then sufficiently ^nowne unto us.

This also is very admirable which happened in the land of Sanciana. Xauerius as
he stood baptizing a ^umber of Saracens, who were men of extraordinary great
stature of body, seemed unto the Portugheses, who beheld the thing a far off,
to be much taller then they. Which caused in them such admiration that they
approached nearer to see whether he did not baptize out of some pulpit or high
place. But coming close unto him, they find him standing upon even ground.
Then indeed they perceived that his greatness of mind had added so much to his
body, that he seemed to surpass the ordinary pitch of the tallest men.

Neither is this a small argument of his virtue and sanctity, that whereas the
Sanciana sea, which in former times had bin very dangerous, and subject to
often shippewracks, by reason of a certain furious wind called Typhon, Francis
by celebrating the sacred mysteries of the mass there, has as it were so
sanctified the Island, and made the sea so calm and temperate, that the raging
Typhon does very seldom bring any great inco^brance to the ships that sail
therein. So great was the force either of Xauerius sanctity, or the virtue of
the Holy Mass.

CHAP. IIII.
Miracles wrought by him after his death.
BUT now Xauerius life was not more glorious nor remarkable by such like
signs of sanctity, then his death. For God, who is admirable in his Saints,
adorned Francis his Body after his death with many illustrious miracles, which
whilst he lived had bin a Temple of the Holy Ghost. For (as we said before) his
dead corpse being dug up after it had layne three months in quick^ lime, was
found wholly entiere, breathing forth ^ most pleasant and fragrant odor, which
was no doubt a perpetual, and manifold miracle, seeing it retained the same
integrity, and fragrant odor, after he bad bin interred six months at Malaca
in the ground without a Coffin. This divine virtue which was imparted to his
body, redounded likewise even to his garments, and preserved them wholly
incorrupt, and sound from all putrefaction.

Moreover (which is very admirable) five months after his death, when he was
interred at Malaca, he ^led a fresh, the signs whereof remained lively to be
seen, until his Funeral at Goa, being 16. months after his decease.
Whereupon not only the Cittize^s of Goa, but almost all India being stirred up
no less by the report of the integrity of his body, then by his eminent
sanctity, came flocking thither to his burial; which indeed, as before we have
showed, seemed rather a triumph then a Funeral, the multitude whereof from all
places was so great, as the like was never seen or heard; so that they were
constrained, as before we have said, to leave the Body exposed for three whole
days to the view of the people, to give them ^atisfaction. And besides this,
they were all so taken with devotion to his holy Body, that every one did ^riue
to touch the same with their beads, and to get ^way, even by stealth, some
Relic thereof.

Lastly, this miracle of his Body has (as after we ^all declare) bin honored
by God himself with so ^any, and evident signs, that all men, yea even the
^aleuolous, have bin satisfied thereby concerning the ^^atitude of his soul.
And these things which we ^aue recounted of Francis his body, have bin so
testyfied, that there were as many witnesses thereof, as were people at that
time in the City of Goa, that is to say, almost all India. But least perhaps
such wonderful favors of Almighty God, might seem to some more admirable,
then credible, both humane and divine Providence has so concurred in this
business, that these private testimonies have been confirmed by public Records.
For Ambrose Ribera the Inquisitour, and Vicar General of the Bishop of Goa,
when the fame of that great miracle was spread over India, judging it to be a
matter which belonged to his office, together with certain most skillfull
Physicians went to visit Xauerius body, before it was buried, to try whether
the same were wholly intiere and incorrupt, as was reported, or no. He therefore
having with his own eyes thoroughly beheld the integrity of the same surpassing
all humane faith, and then by making inquiry thereof, as the King of Portugal
had commanded, having found out his incomparable sanctity, confirmed the truth
with a most worthy testimony, The Inquisitors and Vicars testimony of Xauerius
sanctity.
which I have thought good here to insert, in the self same words wherein he
gave it. I D. Ambrose Ribera, Inquisitour, Vicar General, and Assistant of the
Bishop of Goa, and India, do testify, that Francis Xauerius for the space of
nine whole years (for so many haue^ been resident in this place) has gone up
and down to the towns and villages of India, Malaca, the Moluca's, Iaponia,
and other far remote places of the Barbarians, preaching and teaching the
mysteries and precepts of the Christian faith, as well to the Portugheses, as
to other People, and Nations; and has in the same places converted an
exceeding great number of Ethnickes to the Christian Religion, building every
where Churches; and for the effecting thereof has endured very many great
miseries, and labors, even to his dying day. And that his body having bin
brought ^o Goa, and there received with all solemnity, was ^y the whole Clergy
and City conveyed to the Col^edg of S. Paul, His testimony also of them
tegrity of his body
and there buried. But for that there was a certain rumor spread abroad, of
the integri^y of his Body, which seemed to surpass the forces of Nature, and
to be evidently a divine Miracle, since a Body that had been dead so long, and
layne ^uryed an eleven months before, to wit, three in China, and eight at
Malaca (as the Viceroy of India Alphonsus Noronia, and my self have proved by
^ndoubted witnesses) should remain the space of ^6. months free, and entiere
from all corruption; ^ thought it belonged unto my office, to examine and make
trial of the same. Wherefore I went into ^he Church where he lay, caused the
Coffin to be ope^ed, looked upon his body with lighted torches about ^n hour
before midday; and I felt, and handled, for (...) good while, his arms and
legs, his knees and thighs and the greatest part of his body (so that by
those parts which lay open a conjecture might be easily made of that which was
not seen) and found the Body en^ere, and wholly free from all kind of
corruption, with ^he flesh altogether fresh, and solid, even reteyning ^he
natural moisture and color. Moreover I saw in ^is left thigh, a little above
the knee, as it were a wou^d from whence there had been a little piece of flesh
taken about the biggnes of a fingar. And another wound also in the belly,
whereinto I putting my fingars, found all entiere and incorrupt, and without
any kind of ill smell. And moreover, I laid my mouth to his month, and felt,
and looked upon his face all over with the greatest diligence I could.
Whereupon after examination made of all these things, as I found them, I
commanded my Notary to set them down in writing. In testimony whereof I have
heerunto set my own hand and seal, the first of December 1556.

The Viceroyes Physician also, one of excellent skill, having by his Lords
command, thoroughly examined the body, gave no less evident a testimony of the
integrity thereof, which was this: I Cosmas Saraina Physician to Alphonsus
Nor^nia Viceroy of India, An excellent Phisitia^s testimony of the integrity of
his body
do testify, that when Francis Xauerius body was brought to Goa, I looked very
diligently upon it, and felt it all over, especially the belly, which uses to
be most subject to corruption, and I found his entrayles wholly sound, and
solid; notwithstanding it was manifest, that there had neither balm, oil, or
any other thing against putrefaction been applied thereto. Afterward when by my
advise one of the Society of JESUS did put his fingar into a wound, which was
open in his left side, close to his heart, there issued out blood, and water
together, to which I smelling, found no kind of bad savor at all. I also
found his thighs, and the other parts of his body entiere, with the flesh so
solid, and natural, that it could not by art of Physic be in that manner
preserved. For the body had been now dead almost a year and a half, and had
^yne well near a year, in the Sepulcher. These ^^ings according to the charge
which is given me in his business, I do testify upon my oath. Given at Goa the
18. of Nouemb. 1556.

And these humane testimonies were also confir^ed by divine. For about the same
time, there were many miracles wrought, to testify as well Xauerius ^anctity,
as the happiness of his soul in heaven. John Mendoza his ship, A sick woman by
doing reverence to Francis his body is cured.
which brought Xauerius body back unto India miraculously escaped many great
dangers, especially in the Island of Ceilanum. From thence when it came to
Baticala a town in India, Mary Sarra a Portughese woman of good note, and wife
to the Kings Solicitour there, lay very sick of a dangerous infirmity, who
being certifyed of the coming of Xauerius body caused herself presently to be
carried to it, where she ^imploring the holy man's assistance with no less
confidence then devotion, was forthwith by Xauerius intercession, and the
divine goodness cured, and recovered her health. She also having obtained by
earnest entreaty a little piece of the girdle, wherewith he was girt, enclosed it
in a silver reliquary, and wore it about her neck, either as a remembrance of
him, or as a preservative against sickness. And herein her devotion failed
her not. For her little son who had been then grievously afflicted for the
space of six months with an ague, Xa^erius girdle cures many and great
diseases.
was cured by applying the said reliquary unto him the which also recovered him
afterward, of an Apoplexy wherewith he was greatly vexed. It being also hung
about the neck of a woma^-seruant, who was very dangerously in travail,
caused her an easy delivery. Moreover it cured a sick man of a fever. And from
two children, who were grievously sick of the Pox, it took away both the
sickness, and the marks thereof. All this the sollicitous woman of Baticala
related upon her oath.

It is further more evidently known, that many sick were at Goa recovered by
touching Francis his body. Amongst whom one was a woman-seruant, who in the
time of labor, being out of her senses, and in extreme danger of death (for
the child being dead in her womb, and lying overthwart, she could by no means
be delivered) was upon a sudden preserved, and delivered of the dead child, by
applying unto her certain hayres of Xauerius, which were religiously kept in a
reliquary. This, her master Anthony Saa testified up his oath; who also
further more affirmed, that there was in his house a another woman of that
Country, who being also in labor of Childbirth, and brought to such extremity,
that there was no hope of her life, was by the means of the same Reliquary
applied unto her, delivered presently, and quit of the danger.

It is also certainly known, A Gentle man recouereth his sight by applying
Francis his hands to his eyes.
that many others have with diverse relics of his cured sundry diseases. This
following is worthy of note. Antony Rodriguez a man of no small rank, had
through a long rheum so lost the sight of his eyes, that he could not so much
as see those with whom he spoke, although they were close by him. He therefore
being out of hope to find any help by art of Physic, having tried all kind of
medicines, but in vain, caused himself to be carried to Xauerius Sepulcher,
and entreating the Fathes to open the Shrine, put Xauerius hands to his eyes,
and presently began to see, finding that thick dimnesse to be driven away; and
shortly after he fully recovered his sight. This also he himself affirmed upon
his oath.

No less memorable was that which happened to Baltazar Dias a Priest. He being
tormented with the Squinancy in his throat, The key of his shrine drives away
the rheum.
could not swallow down any thing at all: wherefore dispayring of all humane
help, he had recourse to divine; and entreating the Fathers of the Society to
lend him the Key of the Shrin wherein Xauerius Body was kept, touches his
thoate therewith, and the rheum on such a suddayne went so away, that the Key
seemed by Xauerius favorable assistance, to have opened an entrance into his
throat.

But this is far more glorious. A certain woman of good note, named Ioane,
having been tormented with a long sickness, was now brought to the point of death
at the very time that Xauerius body was brought to Goa, A principal woman
desiring to visit Xauerius, is recovered of a great sickness.
being watched day and night for her departure. Whereupon being stirred up by
the solemn ringing of the bells, and also by the fame of his sanctity and
miracles, she earnestly besought Christopher Perera her husband, and others
that were present, to permit her to be carried to Xauerius funeral. They
affirmed plainly it could not possibly be done, without manifest danger of her
life, and would by no means yield thereunto. Yet the woman lost not the fruit
of her devotion. For from that time forward she began to be better, and every
day more and more amending, within a while after perfectly recovered; so
powerful was the desire, not only of touching, but even of seeing his body, in
restoring health to the sick.

It is also recounted, and that by assured testimonies, that a certain whip
made of little cords, wherewith Xauerius was wont to discipline himself, being
kept with great devotion by a certain Neophyte, Francis his discipline
restores many to their health.
restored diverse sick persons to their health, and wrought many other
wonderful things. For which cause Xauerius name both was, and is, not only
glorious, but also greatly reverenced in India, and throughout the whole East;
all the people thereof ordinarily, imploring his protection and patronage. And
as often as any ship passes by the Island of Sanciana, where, as we said,
Xauerius was first buried, the Mariners and passengers have got a custom to
call upon Francis, as a Saint reigning amongst the blessed in heaven.

Neither was India, or the whole East able to comprehend the virtue, and
glorious Name of Xauerius within their own bounds, but passing over the Ocean,
it penetrated into Europe. There is in Portugal a City called Ebora, a place
of special note, wherein there is a College of the Society of JESUS, built by
Henry the Cardinal, who was afterward King; a work well beseeming both the
bounteous liberality of so worthy a Prince, and the magnifice^ce of the City
also. In this College, at the same time that news was brought of the death
and miracles of Xauerius (as we have been informed by one of good credit, whilst
we were writing things of the same nature) two of the principal Fathers, Leo
Henriquez the Rectour of the College, and Andrew Capreda the Ghostly Father,
very worthy and venerable man, were sore oppressed with a burning fever; who
upon the report of the wonderful effects which had bin wrought by Xauerius,
conceived both of them great hope of recovering their health. Leo therefore
caused the Indian letters wherein was written Xauerius happy departure out of
this life, and his funeral made glorious by the miracles which had happened
therein, to be brought, and read unto him. As soon as they were read, he
presently as it were, moved by divine instinct, and stirred up with admiration
of Xauerius virtues, Two Fathers in Europe recover their health by calling upon
Francis.
rayseth himself upon his elbow in his bed, and lifting up his hands and eyes
to heaven, calls upon him with no less devotion then confidence against the
violence of his fever, beseeching that he would be no less favorable to his
own, the^ he had been to strangers. And his confidence and supplication were
neither in vain* For his health followed upon this prayer, and he presently
felt his fever, to be as it were driven away, by Gods divine hand, and his
former strength to be again restored unto him. Whereupon crying out aloud with
joy, and tears in his eyes, he gives humble thanks to God, and extolleth
Francis his miraculous virtue, to the astonishment of all that were present. So
as instantly finding himself to be wholly sound and lusty, he leapeth out of
his bed, and runs with all joy, and alacrity to Capreda his sick Companion.
Capreda knowing how extreme sick Leo was but a little before, began to be
amazed, and to ask him what the matter was? Whereupon Leo declared unto him,
not more in words, then by effect, what sovereign help he had received from
Xauerius in the curing of his sickness, and withal counsayled him to do the
like, and without doubt he should in the same occasion find the like help from
him. Capreda, without more ado follows his advise, stirs up himself to
confidence, and calls upon Xauerius: nor is he frustrated of his hope, but
freed from his fever, sooner then any one could have expected. Thus was the
Societyes joy redoubled, by this double miracle, and Francis his sanctity more
evidently demonstrated. One of these Fathers, whereof we now speak, to wit Leo
Henriquez, is yet living in Portugal, as a glorious witness of Xauerius
approved virtue. The report whereof, afterward as soon as it was spread
abroad, caused many not only of the Society, but even strangers also to admire
his power, and reverence his sanctity.

There was (to say nothing of lesser matters) still living in Paris, even when
we write these things, a certain honest and devout person, venerable no less
in respect of virtue, then age. This man was wont to make this relation; to
wit, that when news was first brought of Francis Xauerius death, whom he had
never known but by report, and hearsay only, he felt himself wonderfully
stirred up with reverence and veneration toward him. Whereupon his wife being
at the same time sick, and in danger of death by reason of her labor in
childbirth, yea and given over by the Physicians, he recounted to her certain
passages of Xauerius sanctity and virtue, and withal persuaded her earnestly
to implore that holy man's assistance, Being called upon at Paris he obteineth
an easy delivery for a woman in childbirth.
and no doubt he would help and cure her. She gave diligent ear unto her
husbands counsel, and forthwith having called upon Xauerius for help, she was
easily and safe delivered of her child. And thus were both the mother, and the
child by Xauerius merits freed from present danger of death.

Nor was Xauerius native soil even at this time without all knowledge of her
Child's great sanctity. For it is evidently known that his death was by
certain prodigious signs foreshewed in the same place where he had received
life. There is in the Castle Xauerium, being the mansion house wherein Xauerius
was borne, a Chapel wherein is to be seen a Crucifix of exceeding great
devotion, and very much esteemed in those parts. There happened at this time a
prodigious accident, miraculous both for sight, and the event thereof. For
certain it is, that this Image, or Crucifix of our Savior, being made of
wood, did manifestly ^weate, as often as Xauerius had any great suffrance in
India, which they of the Castle found out, by the letters which he himself had
sent from thence, by calculation of the times. But upon the very year wherein
Xauerius departed this life, it sweat blood every friday after, for a whole
year together, and made an end of sweating upon a Friday also. Which many so
interpreted, as if it had portended Francis his death, after many long and
painful labors undertaken for Christ his sake, who had continually carried
in his body the mortification of the Cross.

CHAP. V.
Xauerius his fervent love to Prayer.
THESE admirable things, which (as we have before declared) have as well been
wrought by Xauerius divine power, as other ways happened unto him miraculously,
were certain signs and testimonies, of the extraordinary virtues and guiftes,
which the divine Goodness had with a most liberal hand, heaped up together in
his soul. For he was not more glorious in miracles, then in heavenly Virtues,
some whereof we will set forth to public view; which, although he used all art
and diligence to conceal, did notwithstanding discover themselves of their
own accord. And these I shall recount more willingly then the former, in
respect, they are not bare tokens alone, but lively examples also of his rare
sanctity. And whereas those other serve only for admiration, these are brought
within the compass of imitation.

Wherefore to begin with that virtue which is the source and fountain of the
rest, it is to be observed that Xauerius was extraordinarily addicted unto
Prayer, Meditation, and Contemplation of heavenly things. For although he had
his mind perpetually fixed upon God, and divine matters; yet did he assign
unto himself every day, a set and determinate time, which, by withdrawing
himself from al exterior affairs, he employed in meditating upon celestial
things. But the meditation wherein he chiefly exercised himself, was upon the
life and death of our Savior knowing very well, that he might there behold,
and imitate most excellent and exemplar patterns of all kind, lively
represented in that noble maister-piece.

This most wholesome, and fruitful manner of meditation (as being indeed the
principal model of a Christian life, and a singular incitement to divine
Charity) he most diligently observed himself, and commended the same also unto
others, employing all his faculties herein, with no less constancy of mind,
then fervor of spirit. The which did never more discover it self, then whilst
he labored amongst the sick in the Hospitalls. For when his other continual
labors would not affoard him any part of the day free for that purpose, he
having his mind more upon prayer then upon sleep, did always use to take some
^owers from his corporal rest, His night prayer.
that his soul might not be defrauded of her heavenly food, and repast; such
possession had the sweetness of his discoursing with the divine Majesty taken of
his heart. He ordinarily slept but two, or at the most, three hours of the
night, and that in such sort also, as his very sleep was not without prayer.
For oftentimes in his sleep he brake forth into these words: O good Jesus, O my
Crea^our, and other the like; so as one would have thought him to have bin
praying, and not sleeping.

It is moreover certainly known, that he did not so much as break off this
custom of prayer, even in his greatest employments in the Promontory of
Comorinum; for he held his meditation to be the most important affayre which he
had in hand. At Meliapora also, when he lodged near to S. Thomas his Church,
as we have before declared, rising in the night time, he went often into the
Church, and could not either by the speeches of men, or strypes and other
molestations of the Devils be affrighted, or debarred from discoursing with
God; with whom be often spent the whole night almost in prayer.

Likewise at Malaca, when he remained there in a chamber made of Mattes,
certain persons moved with the opinion of his sanctity, did oftentimes by
stealth, as themselves did afterward report, look through the chinckes and
slifters of the Mattes, to espy what Francis was a doing in the night time* and
they found him always (though he had been but immediately before, long kneeling
at a Crucifix) lively perseuerant in prayer, both in spirit and body, until
sleep seizing upon him, constrained him by force to yield a while unto
necessity of nature; and then laying himself down upon the ground, and
resting his head upon a hard stone instead of a pillow, he in that manner
refreshed his body for a while, eue^ worn out with continual toil and labor
day and night; so as one would have thought him to have used sleep as a
medicine; and whilst he took his rest, to love nothing less then rest.

But he, well knowing that God gives more favorable audience to those who
pray in places which be more religiously honored, whenever he could find
opportunity, he always used to make his prayer with much more feeling in the
Church; As often as opportunity served he prayed in the Church.
and therefore he would commonly take up his lodging next to the Church, that
he might go thither secretly in the night, for that purpose. And those of the
Society at Malaca observed, that like another Samuel he was wont often to lie
upon the bare ground in the Vestry until the dead of the night, and then would
steal into the Church, and there fall to his prayers upon his his knees,
before the high Altar, in presence of the Blessed Sacrament: and when his
knees were weary, he would either lay himself along upon the steps of the
Altar, or else lean upon his hands, and still go on with his exercise, until
either sleep constrained him to give over, or else the light of the morning
came upon him. And when he could not have the commodity of a Church, he
notwithstanding held on this exercise of prayer, in some other place.

A certain Priest in whose house Xauerius lodged related, that he used
oftentimes to pray late in the night, and sometimes to sit upon a little stool
(either because such a seat was more commodious, or else because he could
kneel no longer, being wholly tired out with kneeling) and so go on with his
devotions. Moreover many Citizens of Malaca of good account have given
testimony, that Francis when he was in familiar conversation with them, He
goes into solitary places to pray.
would oftentimes withdraw himself privately from their company; and after much
and long inquiry made, they should find him either in some uncouth wood, or
desert and forlorn place, devoutly at his prayers, or else a disciplining
himself there; who not to interrupt his devotions would leave him thereunto,
and dissemble the matter as though they had perceived nothing.

And in this fervor of prayer, Xauerius was no less constant by sea, then by
land, whereof so many demo^strations in his often nauigations are extant, which
we have already set down, that to seek out more examples thereof, would not
only be superfluous, but a troublesome labor also. For though he were
conversant in many and different places, and with sundry persons, yet he
remained always like himself, His prayer in the ship.
and kept as it were, one fashon and method throughout the whole course of his
life. Notwithstanding we will not conceal that which properly belonged to the
sea. For there be certain and evident proofs, that whilst he was a
shipboard, he did usually sit up watching in prayer from midnight, until
break of day; and in the midst of any tempest, or whatsoever danger, he called
on God with a most patient and quiet soul. In so much that the mariners and
passengers acknowledged both themselves, and their ship to have bin very often
saved by Francis his prayers.

Moreover, he was always fervent and inflamed in his prayers, His fervor in
prayer.
and most commonly ouerflowing with heavenly joys: the which was seen and
known by many, and most evident arguments. For to say nothing of those
extraordinary contents which he received from God, amidst his excessive labors
in Comorinu^, and Maurica, whereof we have already spoken in their proper
places; at Goa he was observed by the Fathers there to walk oftentimes in the
dead of the night in the garden, with his eyes fixed upon heaven, and to be
wholly carried away with contemplation, and love of God: so that one would have
thought for certain that his soul, He pu^s his clothes from his breast being
inflamed by the force of prayer.
as being abstracted from his senses, had been departed out of his body. And
afterward when he came again to himself, opening his Cassocke from his
inflamed breast as his custom was, he would oftentimes repeat these words: It
is enough O Lord, it is enough, and this in such a tune, as manifestly
declared, that so abundant was the heavenly joy which overwhelmed him, that
humane Nature was scarce able to bear it.

At Goa also, as he was conuersing familiarly with the other Fathers, there
came upon him oftentimes such excessive joy of spirit, that it constrained him
to withdraw himself from the sight of men, because he could by no means
conceal the abundance of Consolation which he felt. The ardour and sple^dour
of his countenance.
And even in humane affairs, there appeared in him such a divine semblance of
heavenly Joy, that they who conuersed with him, being often stricken with a
reverent respect toward him, could not forbear behoulding and admiring him,
as if he had been a second Moses.

Lastly, in his journey to Meaco, wherein, as we said before, he suffered
extreme miseryes and incombrances, being notwithstanding as it were almost in a
continual rapt through the excessive comfort and consolation, which his soul
received in meditating upon celestial obiectes, and with that sweet
conversation with God; he often stroke his legs, and feet against stubbs and
stones, yea hurt and bruised them sore, without ever feeling thereof; going
forward with such joy and iubily of heart, that he even seemed to participate of
the happiness of the Blessed in heaven, rather then to meditate upon their
life. And verily it is an admirable thing to consider that there could be in
him, A great combination of conte^plation and action together.
such a combination of contemplation, and action together. For it is
incredible (as we have been certaynely informed) that he, being a man
perpetually employed in so weighty affairs, and continual trauayles, and
nauigations most hard and difficile, and being also of so affable and pleasant
a conversation; should notwithstanding, be endowed with so extraordinary a
gift of divine contemplation, and comforted so abundantly by the holy Ghost,
and with continual ouerflowing of divine streams into his soul. For
certainly this divine man, wheresoever he was, or whatsoever he did, kept
always his habitation with himself, and with God. Whereupon it followed, that
even from his very exterior employments, and conversation amidst abundance of
people, he came always to mental prayer and meditation with his soul so
fresh and rectifyed, that presently he could cast, and as it were, even
embosome himself into the most sweet conference with his heavenly Spouse. In
so much, as one would have thought him to have always bin kept in a most
strayte solitude, he had his soul so firmly fixed upon God, even amidst his
greatest employments.

No less was the feeling of devotion which he found, nor the diligence which
he used, in Vocal Prayer, as they call it, and in reciting the Psalms, and
Hymns. For he had gotten a custom, which with great care he always observed,
to recite the divine office and Canonical Hours very diligently and devoutly.
First therefore following the advice of Ecclesiasticus. He recites his divine
office with great preparation and attentio^ of mind.
Before Prayer prepare thy soul, and be not as a man that tempts God, he
prepared himself with a recollected care, the better to stir up attention,
and de^otion in his mind; and before every Hour he used ^o recite the Hymn
Veni Creator, to implore thereby ^he assistance of the holy Ghost. Which Hymn
he ^lwayes pronounced with such fervor of spirit, that ^is heart seemed even to
burst out of his breast, Eccles. 18.
and his ^orces to faint. And very certain it is, that being ^any times
interrupted therein by some that came and ^pake unto him, he again repeated the
same from the ^eginning, with such fervor, as if he had not been in^errupted at
all.

This singular devotion of his, He prefers the longer Breuiary before the
shorter.
in this kind, was ^aused by the liberty of those times. There had been ^ately,
for the more ease and commodity of such men ^s had great imploiments, a new
Breuiary set forth of ^hree Lessons only (called of the Holy Cross) the which
^as also granted unto Francis at the first, by reason ^f his weighty affairs.
Yet he, although he were co^^nually employed, would notwithstanding never ^ake
use of that Grant, but always said the old Bre^iary of nine Lessons, although
it were a great deal ^onger, to the end he might have thereby more time to
^onferre with God, in whose conversation he took ^comparable content.

But above all, Xauerius fervor in saying Mass.
his fervor of devotion showed (...) self in celebrating the divine mystery
of the sacred Mass, especially in the time of Consecration, and Consummation
of the Holy Eucharist. For at those times he used so to weep for joy, that his
face and bosom were all bedewed with tears. There also appeared both in his
pronunciation, countenance, and all the gestures of his body, such a feeling of
heavenly devotion, that it even redounded to the standers by; and struck them
into such a pious admiration, that they oftentimes forgot themselves. Moreover,
there wanted not some, who affirmed, that whilst he was at Mass, they saw him
elevated and lifted up a little from the ground. He had besides this, a custom
in his Mass, before all other things, to beg most earnestly of our Savior
Christ, the Conversion of Ethnickes by that precious death which he had
suffered on the Cross for their sakes; and for this end, he oftentimes also
added a prayer of his own making which was this: Xauerius prayer for the
conversion of Infidels.
Eternal God maker of all things, remember that the souls of Infidels were
created by thee, and man made to thine own image and likeness. Behold O Lord,
how to thy disgrace Hell is filled with them. Call to mind, how Jesus thy
blessed Son dyed a most bitter death for their salvation. Do not, I beseech
thee, O Lord, any more permit thy Son to be contemned by Infidels; but being
pacifyed by the prayers of Holy Men, and of the Church the most sacred spouse
of thy Son, remember thy mercy; and forgetting their Idolatry and Infidelity,
make them also at last to acknowledge Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou have
sent; who is our Salvation, and Resurrection, by whom we are saved and
delivered, and to whom be all honor, and glory for ever. Amen.

Now after Mass, After mass prayer for the dead.
when he had given thanks to God, he was always accustomed to recite a
certain prayer for the Dead, that even then, when he offered Sacrifice for the
living, he might also give some refreshment to the souls departed. His
devotion also ^n administering the most sacred Body of Christ, was ^o less
remarkable then in the consecration thereof. He had this custom peculiar to
himself, He administreth the holy Eucharist upon his knes.
that where ^t could commodiously be done, he would give the ^oly Communion to
the people upon his knees. The event whereof declared how pleasing a thing it
was ^o God. For Cosmus Saraina (the Physician before na^ed) and many other
persons of good account, have ^penly testified, that they oftentimes saw
Xauerius, ^s he was in the Church at Goa communicating the people upon his
knees, He by divine power is elevated from the ground.
raised up miraculously, more then a cubit above the ground; so as one would
have ^hought, that God had then exalted his Humility.

Moreover, he was extraordinarily devout unto the most B. Trinity. For he used
to adore, and to name the ^ame with the greatest and religious respect that
could ^e. He bare likewise a most singular affection to Christ ^he worker of
man's Salvation: His devotion to the most B. Trinity and the B. Virgin.
and was also specially ^euoted to the B. V. Mary, the Mother of God, and the
^ost benign Patroness of mankind: whereupon he ^ad gotten such an habitual
devotion, by continu^ll practice thereof, that when he lay upon his death ^ed,
he oftentimes implored the help of the most B. Trinity, of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and of the B. V. Mary, that so he might at his death call often v^on
them, to whom in his life he had always carried such extraordinary devotion.

Next unto these, His devotion to S. Michaell the Archangel.
he was singularly devoted to S. Michael the Archangell, Prince of the Court of
Heaven, and Patron of the Holy Church. Then hereuerenced the Congregation of
all the Blessed and Faithful, and of the Church the Spouse of Christ, whose
assistance he often implored. Also in all his employments, iourneys, miseries
and dangers he very often implored the help and patronage of his Angel
Guardian, and of the Archangells and Patrones of those places, where he made
his abode, or whither he went.

CHAP. VI.
His purity of Heart, and Chastity.
THIS excellent Devotion which Francis had in Prayer, was, by the like Purity
of his soul, enflamed to behold God. The which is not only manifested by the
purity, and innocence of his life, but approved also by the assured testimonys
of such as co^uersed familiarly with him; who have solemnly auerred, that they
never observed any thing in him, He examineth his conscience oftentimes eue^y
day.
which might be displeasing, or give the least offense to any. This also is a
further argument thereof, for that he did oftentimes every day examine his
Conscience with very great rigor and diligence, and seriously exhorted others
also to do the like, a thing whereon he esteemed the perfection of life
chiefly to depend.

He used also to confess every day, when he could have a ghostly Father. He
used to confess every day.
And this purity of his soul was much graced by the perpetual sanctity of his
body. It is well known that he preserved the flower of Virgiginall Chastity,
even till his dying day. This the Vicar of Meliapora testified publikly, that
he found it to be certain by the often conference he had with him in that
place; and many others also who used to hear his Confession, His virginal
chastity.
have affirmed, that they gathered no less from out of himself. He bare
indeed a most singular affection unto Chastity; and as great was the hatred
which he bare to the contrary vice, in so much that having a detestation to the
least staynes which might be in that kind, he could not without horror hear
it once named, as we may easily conjecture by that which now I am to recount.

Whilst he remained at Lisbone in Portugal, expecting to go into India, he
lodged in the same chamber with Simon Rodriquez. Being once upon a suddayne in
the dead of the night, as he lay in his bed, awaked out of his sleep, he
became so vnsually moved, that there gushed out a great deal of blood from his
nose. Whereof when Simon oftentimes asked him afterward the cause, His horror
of impure thoghts
he kept it close, and would by no means speak of it, as long as he was in
Portugal. Yet at last, when he was upon his departure, and ready to take
shipping for India, he took Rodriquez aside into a private place of the ship,
and said: Now Simon, quoth he, it is time to declare unto you that which you
have so often in vain demanded of me: for this (as I suppose) is the last
time, that I shall ever see you in this life. You shall therefore know, that
there was that night am impure thought presented to me in a dream, the which,
I endeavoring all I could to reject, caused me to shed that blood at my nose.

And these signs, and humane testimonies were no less confirmed by the
integrity of his Body, after his death, then by the sentence, and approbation
of God himself. Which singular benefit of the divine goodness, among many
other, we must acknowledge as granted to his extraordinary Virginal Chastity.
And he, His veins in matter of chasti.
to preserve this so singular and heavenly a treasure, was not more chaste then
wary. For albeit the holy Man being very much given to the contemplation of
heavenly things, and fenced with the shield of more then usual temperance,
could easily extinguish the fiery darts of the most malicious Enemy; yet he was
as fearful, and wary in this kind, as if he had bin much subject to such a
Vice. He never therefore spoke with any woman, upon what necessary occasion
soever, but openly, where they might be both seen, and also with witnesses by;
thinking there was not commonly so much profit, as danger, in women's
conversation.

CHAP. VII.
His Love of the Cross, and Evangelical Poverty.
NO less exact also, was Xauerius in the austerity of his life, as a chief
means for the conseruing of Chastity. For he to tame his want on youth (as we
have said before) did oftentimes (yea and for a long time together) begird his
naked flesh with certain little cords, which ^aused him intolerable pain; and
moreover, throgh^ut his whole life, he greatly afflicted his body, both ^y
frequent fasts, and very sore disciplines. His food was ever very slender, The
slendernes of his food.
and such as might be easily made ^eady to eat, which he also either begged
himself, or else, was brought unto him by way of Alms. But when he took his
repast abroad with others, follow^ng the example of our Savior, he used to
eat indifferently, of whatsoever was set before him; whereby he ^uoided all
troublesomnes to those who entertained ^im; and by hiding his singular
abstinence, recompensed also the dainty fare to which he had bin invited with
the hardness of his own private diet afterward. And the measure in his meat
and drink, was mee^ely the necessity of nature, not any delight he took
^herin.

His custom was to eat only once a day, He eats but once aday.
and that ordinarily, of one only sort of meat, which did not so much please
his taste, as sustain nature. Whatsoever meat he got when he was busily
employed, with that he contented himself. He very rarely tasted either flesh
or wine, unless it were among strangers, and at other men's Tables. He never
eat his fill, even of bread, although he had it lying by him. In his ^orney to
Meaco which was very long, tedious, and troublesome, he lived only upon a
little Rice parched on the fire. And all the time of his abode in Iaponia, he
so accustomed himself to the Iaponians unsavory meats and to extraordinary
spare diet, that when he returned again to Goa, he had lost all taste of his
Country viands, to which he had bin formerly used.

He abstayned wholly from wine for many years, He absteined from wine.
yea even until his old, and sickly age; and then his strength being greatly
decayed through continual labors, he was constrained to use a little wine,
yet well mingled with water. Wherefore when Alphonsus Sosa the Viceroy of India
sent unto him, whilst he remained in the Promontory of Comorinum, two vessels
of excellent wine for a present, he without ever tasting thereof, distributed
it all amongst the poor.

Moreover, he was so far from taking any delight in the softnes of his bed,
that whatsoever place seemed fit to lie down upon, that served him always for
his Couch: yea the bare ground very often (which was usual with him in the
Promontory of Comorinum, the Moluca's, and Iaponia) was the place where he
took his repose. When he was at sea, he lay either upon the hard plankes, or
else upon some Cablerope rolled up together. And if at any time he had ^he
commodity of a bed, yet would he seldom, or never make use thereof, but lend it
freely unto those who were sickly and weak. And in the coast of Comori^um
also, that he might the more freely lie upon the ^are ground, he gave away unto
the sick, a fair Bed and Pillow, which the Viceroy of India had sent unto
him. In his travails by land, although oftenti^es he might have had a horse to
ride, yet he went most commonly on foot; and this even in Iaponia, where for
every step he went, he was exceedingly troubled with stones, snow, ice, and
torrents of water in his way.

But nothing was more observed in him, then his bridling of all disordinate
appetites and affections, He mortifyeth his affections and ouercometh himself.
and wholly ouerco^ming of himself, which is the hardest and most glorious kind
of victory of all others. This appears evidently by that, which happened at
Venice, where whilst he served in the Hospital called Of the Incurable, as we
have before related, he continually overcame himself, in tending one so full
of ulcers, that it caused a great horror unto him. He also oftentimes
admonished those of the Society that they should accustom to conquer and
overcome themselves first in small things, He ouercometh himself in small
matters.
to the end they might afterward obtain the victory in greater combats. And
himself following this rule, which he prescribed to others, had all his
passions and affections evermore so bridled, and restrained within his own
dominion and power, He kept always the same countenance.
that he continually inioyed most full tranquillity and repose of mind, and
withal a most sweet and amiable countenance. And if at any time he were forced
to reprehe^d any one for his fault, he so tempered severity with mildnes, that
having once rebuked him, he presently, as it were unmasked himself, and
returned again to his former sweetness and affability.

Moreover, he esteemed more of this interior moderation, then of exterior
mortification. The mortification of affections.
For well knowing that al passionate and unruly motions of the mind ought ever
to be suppressed, he accounted the affliction of the body to aim principally
at this, that the exterior mortification might help the interior. Wherefore he
most of all commended those kinds of mortificatio^, whereby the interior
motions might be restrained, and virtue and piety quickened, and encouraged. He
so dominiered also over the passion of anger, as if he had never known how to
be angry at al.

But his extraordinary Mildnes was every where very remarkable, and especially
at Malaca, where he had that sore combat with the senseless insolency of the
Governor of the City. The dominion he had over his anger.
For when the Governor (as we have declared before) by his most injurious
intercepting of the Embassage into China, had both obstinately and impudently
hindered his worthy endeauours, and the aduanceme^t of the Ghospel; Xauerius
notwithstanding carried himself so mild therein, that being at last forced to
denounce his Holiness Excommunication against that temerarious and madbraine
fellow, although himself were Legate Apostolical, yet he oftentimes sent the
Bishops Vicar unto him, in most suppliant manner; so as one would have thought,
that he had rather done, then received the injury; or that he entreated, rather
to avoid the blow himself, then to have threatened it to another.

Moreover in the greatest reproaches, sufferances, and vexations that could be
offered, he never complained of any man, but prayed to the divine Majesty for
those who caused him the same, and that he would vouchsafe, rather to receive
them to mercy, He prays for his enemies.
then to exercise his divine justice upon them. Wherefore at the self same
time when he was by the Governor of Malaca's officers, without cause, most
injuriously and disgracefully treated, he notwithstanding said Mass daily for
that outrageous Man, praying to God, that though he had begun to fall, he might
not yet be utterly overthrown.

The love of voluntary Poverty also, which shined in him, His love to
Evangelical poverty.
was not inferior to the moderation of his mind. For through long and serious
meditation upon the poverty of Christ Jesus, who when he was rich, became poor
for us, he bare so special an affection unto Evangelical Poverty, that he
daily found by experience, the Riches of Poverty to be such, that they not only
discharged and freed the mind from all troublesome care, but enriched it also
most abundantly with celestial treasures, and caused him who had nothing, not
to be in want of any thing. Wherefore he always for the most part, lived by
begging, even in the College at Goa it self, where all things were at hand
without seeking for: neither also, when he travailed as well by land, as by
sea, had he any care at all of any Viaticum, or provision of victuals.

Of this his extraordinary Poverty his whole life affoardeth us notable
examples. For to say nothing of such as be of less note, let us call to memory
his departure out of Portugal toward India, how he would carry nothing with
him but a sorry mantle, to use in the Promontory of Good Hope (a place much
pestred with the extreme unseasonable colds of the Antartick Pole) and a few
books for his necessary use, although the Kings Officers by express order
from his Majesty urged him earnestly to the contrary. And in the ship it self
he could not by any entreaty, either of principal persons therein, or of the
Viceroy himself be drawn from begging his victuals, and other necessaries.
For he choose rather for Christ his sake, to ask of the Souldiars in the Navy,
not only victuals, but shoes also, shirts, and other things necessary, the^ to
have them freely given him by the Viceroy, or his followers; such sweetness
found he in Evangelical poverty. His journey also into Comorinu^, was not much
unlike to that into India, contenting himself with only a pair of boots.

Moreover, his apparel and habit was of the vulgar sort. He went in an old
cassocke from Rome into Portugal, and so on forwards into India. In India it
self he refused even a decent, and civil habit which was offered him, and made
choice of a cassock of course linen cloth, He prefers his old gown before a
new one.
without a cloak, fearing least, as oftentimes it happens, some pride of mind
might follow upon such gayness of apparel. His gown being now worn out and
torn, his friends offered him a new one: but he wraping himself up in his
poverty, would never suffer his old one to be taken from him for a new.
Whereupon some, in the dead time of the night when he was a sleep, sent one to
take away his ^ld ragged gown, and to lay a new one in the place. He rising
before day put on the new gown he found, ^steed of his old, and went abroad
therein, never ^reaming how charitably his friends had deceived ^im. Now, this
new gown was of a far different ^ashion from his old one. Whereupon being the
same ^ay at supper with Francis Paiua, and others of his friends who were
acquainted with the matter, they as it were ^ondering, began to ask him in
jest, what kind of ^abit that was? And when he perceived by looking upon it,
and feeling it, that it was a new one, and that ^e was therewith deceived, he
smiling said; Indeed ^his strange habit is more fit for others, then for me.
Wherefore by his earnest entreaty he prevailed at last ^o much with them, that
they restored to him his old ^owne, which they had taken away, and received ^he
new one back again. He therefore with his old ^owne endured the extreme hard
weather of Iaponia, ^lthough oftentimes he even shiuered, and trembled ^or
cold. Afterward also he returned out of Iaponia ^o Goa triumphant, as it were,
over brave and gay apparel, with glorious ensigns of Poverty, to wit, with ^n
old hat, a ragged shirt, a torn gown, and that also ^atched in diverse places.

But if we desire to know, how willingly he im^raced all the incommodities
which poverty brought a long with it, and how he was wont to rejoice in the
extreme want of all things, as in the midst of heaue^^y delights; we may
easily gather it out of a certain letter which he sent from Maurica to those
of the Society at Rome; where describing that Country, after he had said, that
it wanted all commodities both of victuals, and other necessaries for the
maintenance of life, he affirms that he never received from God greater and
truer content. In his letters also which he wrote out of Iaponia to the Society
at Goa he speaks thus: I beseech you, dearest Brethren, to help me to give
God thanks for so great a benefit. We are now by Gods singular goodness arrived
in Iaponia, where there is extreme want of all things; which I indeed esteem
as one of the greatest favors of the divine Providence. For in other places,
plenty of victuals and commodities does most commonly inuit the people to
satiate, and fill their unbridled sensual appetits. And so their souls being
not acquainted with Euangelical poverty, are extremely oppressed through the
want of heavenly graces and delights. And many times also their bodies being
tormented with diseases, and other incommodities, endure no small, nor short
punishment for their intemperance.

CHAP. VIII.
His Obedience, and Humility.
THIS abandoning of the use of other things was not more exact in him, then the
forsaking of his own Free Will, and proper Judgment, wherein the chiefest
praise or Obedience consists. Which virtue being the principal ornament that
the Society of JESUS has, showed ^selfe most of all in Francis, even at the
first, when he ^as by Ignatius sent into India. It was well known, ^at the
Navigations into India was no less dangerous ^en long and tedious. And the
Society at that time, ^hatsoeuer state it had, was not governed by any co^^and
which Ignatius had over it, but only by his au^ority. Notwithstanding Francis
forgetting all things ^esides Obedience, did more promptly obey then he ^as
commanded; and without any delay prepared ^imselfe, even against the next day,
for that long, and ^most endless journey so that God may seem to have ^pened
the utmost parts of the East to his incompara^e alacrity, by this his prompt
Obedience.

In Portugal also, and in India, it is incredible to ^y, how willingly and
exactly he performed whatso^uer Ignatius by letters commanded him; and gave ^m
therein such satisfaction (since he was one who ex^cted to have all things
squared out by the rule of O^edience) that none excelled in that point more
then ^e, showing himself thereby a scholar, How much he esteemed Ignatius.
worthy indeed ^f such a master. For he had such an esteem of Ig^atius his
Sanctity, that he reverenced him as a most ^oly man, sent from God: in so much,
that when^euer he did name Ignatius either in his discourse, or ^tters, he
always gave him the title of Blessed, or ^oly. And in a reliquary Case that he
wore about ^is neck, he kept enclosed Ignatius his Name, written with his own
hand (cutting it from the subscription ^f a letter which he had sent him)
together with other holy relics, and the form of his own profes^on. And
when he commanded any thing, to any of the Society, he was wont to say. This I
command you, for the Reverence, and Obedience you owe unto our Holy Father
Ignatius.

No less was the confidence which Ignatius had in Francis his modesty,
Ignatius his opinion of Xauerius obedience
and obedience. Whereof this may seem an evident argument, in that he was
always very free in commanding him diverse things, how hard soever they were,
never doubting but that he would presently execute whatsoever he should
command. And when Ignatius foresaw the deposition of his Tabernacle was at
hand, and iudginge it expedient that Francis, as the chief vpholder of the
Society, should be called back to Rome, he wrote unto him in such sort, that
when he had set down the reasons which moved him to that determination, by
adding in a Postscript thereof apart, one single Character only, to wit the
letter, I, he seemed to signify thereby that he so confided in Francis his
obedience, that he did not doubt, but he would return back to Rome, even from
the furthest part of the world, and where he was then planting, and setting
forward the Gospel of Christ, with the greatest speed that might be, although
he had given him no one reason for this his return, being invited by one sole
letter, by which he was commanded to go. And certainly Ignatius would neither
have bin deceived in his opinion he had of Francis, nor of his most prompt
obedience. For without doubt, that only letter, I, Go, would have spoken so
forcibly in his heart, that he would without delay, have even seemed to fly from
the furthest part of the East, had he not already bin flowne to hea^e^, there
to ^eceiue the reward of all his labors, before Ignatius ^etters could come
unto him.

And as Francis, throughout the whole course of ^is life was most eminent in
this zeal of Obedience; so desired he also, all those of the Society to have a
special regard unto the same Virtue. Wherefore, he of^entymes inculcated unto
them, in his Admonitions ^oth by words and letters, Comme^dation of obedience
That without true, and generous Obedience, that is, prompt and cheerful, ^o
man could be the true and natural disciple, and ^onne of the Society: and
whosoever wanted that virtue, could not continue long in that, Order with
profit, or joy of mind. Wherefore he always gave this precept to his subjects,
that by hearty, and sincere Obedience, they should wholly conform themselves to
the judgment of the superior of the Society, and of the Church; having their
eyes fixed, not only upon their Command, Interior humility.
but even upon their least sign, or beck. For it was far more secure to be
governed, then to govern, and to obey then command. Wherefore inciting Fa Paul
Camertes Rector of the College of Goa (charging ^him to be ruled by James
Borban a Franciscan, who had care of the same College) to the practice of
Obedien^ce, he wrote unto him, that if he were in his place, nothing would be
more grateful unto him, then to obey him who had command over him. For one
cannot take any more certain and secure course, to come directly and without
erring to the journeys end which ^he intends, then by following his guide who is
skil^full in the way. And contrariwise, nothing is more dangerous, then to live
according to ones own will, and to slight the precepts of Superiors.

Extradinarily also was Xauerius Reverence, and Obedience unto Bishops, and
their Vicars. For that honoring God in them, he desired to exercise his
f^^ctions by their authority, and left himself in all things, wholly to their
disposal and determination; Xauerius Obedience to Bishops and their Vicars.
and the same he commanded others of the Society also to do, saying oftentimes,
that those of the Society ought to give example of true Obedience toward all
Ecclesiastical persons and Prelates. And whosoever took not true content, in
the Societyes kind of government, which consists chiefly in Obedience, him he
judged to be of a quite different spirit from the Society. Neither did he
think it expedient, to expect until that man had committed some thing against
the honor of the Society, whom he forsaw, by that his beginning, would one
day surely do it; but before any ignominy happened, he would dismiss him; and
thereby effect the sooner, what the other intended, and by his example make his
companions more wary in the same kind.

The same Obedience also he required of those of the Society unto
Ecclesiastical Prelates, and that they should not preach unto the people, nor
exercise the functions of the Society, without license first granted by them,
or their Vicars: nor that they should at any time exercise, Obedience toward
Ecclesiastical Prelates.
or do any thing, whereby the said Prelates might be justly offended, or be
auerted from them, though never so just cause or occasion were given them. And
if at any time it fell out otherwise, he always took it very ill. Wherefore
when two certain Vicars did by their letters complain unto Francis, of ^wo
Fathers who abode within their districts, he pre^ntly wrote unto them, that
they should forthwith ^o to the Vicars, and humbly kissing their hands, should
^^ke them pardon, and from thence-forward, in to^^n of the great respect they
ought unto them, they should go every week once to salute them. This, and ^^ch
like Humility and submission, he said, was neces^ry, both to beat down the
Devil, the ringleader ^f Pride, and to gain the Prelates of the Church, by
^^^eciall observance, to be favorable and courteous unto them, that so they
might be the better able to ^^duance the Christian cause.

But above all other things there shined in Xauerius (...) most profounded
humility, Humility.
the mother of Obedience, and the gayner of good will both with God and man,
^herof we find in his life many admirable testimo^ies. For in his journey into
Portugal, as before we ^aue said, he looked very diligently to the companies
^orses, and perpetually both at home and abroad in the Hospitalls of the sick,
with the greatest affection that could be, he took upon him all the basest
offices ^herof. And when he came to Goa, although he were Legate Apostolical,
yet he fell down at the Bishops ^eet, and delivered up to him the Kings
Letters, and the Popes Breue, which he would not use otherwise, then might
seem fitting unto him. Which modesty of his so gained the Bishops good will,
Xauerius Reverence to the Prelates. of the Church.
that he did not more reverence Xauerius authority, then admire his Humility.
But Francis had the Prelates of the Church in such special veneration and
reverence, that he exhibited unto them, even divine honor almost, as
representing the person of God himself; using with very great reverence, both
to kiss their hands, and some^ymes also, to cast himself prostrate at (...)
feet.

Moreover (such was his singular Humility) he not only bare these great
respects and submissions to Prelates and their Vicars, but also to private
Priests and Clergy men, carrying himself rather as a servant to them all, then
as Legate Apostolical. Yet his exterior Humility (which is a token of the
interior) was not the only mark his affections chiefly leuelled at, but
rather the interior it self, which consists in the knowledge, and contempt
of ones self. For when in respect of his singular sanctity, he was held for no
less then an Apostolical Man, yet he esteemed himself to be the most wicked
of all mortal men, as may be gathered out of many of his letters.

Wherefore being a true Contemner of himself, he no less detested praise and
honor (the allu^ements to pride and arrogance) then others do ^^ate disgrace
and dishonor. His hatred of honor.
For he so neglected both honor it self, and those that gave it to him, that
all might plainly see, he ba^e most cordial affection to that ancient
Simplicity, which in former times was never acquainted with flattery or
ambition. Concealing of heavenly gifts.
Wherefore he always used great diligence to keep such things secret which he
had done worthy of praise or commendation; and if at any time he were for the
good of others constrained to make them known, he did it in such sort, as you
would have thought they had ^elonged to some other and not to himself. And so
wri^ing to those of the Society out of the Promontory of ^^omo^^nu^ of things
which he himself had there done, (...) attributes the health which many sick
persons ^^ad recovered, by his means, unto certaynes Neo^^hyte children, whose
help he had used therein, al^hough it were never so little.

Writing also of the heavenly Joys, which God, (...) the same Promontory, had
bestowed upon them who labor for his sake, he recounted what had hap^^ed to
himself, as appertayning to a third person, without any equivocation at all.
Nor was there any thing in him which more declared his singular mode^ty, then a
certain remarkable blush, which straight ^rose in his face when he heard
himself praised, as a manifest demonstration of his interior Humility; which
we may see sufficiently declared by this one example. A remarkable blush in
Xauerius at his own praises.
At his return out of the coast of Comorinum to God, when James Borban asked
him, whether that were true which was reported of him, to wit, that he had
restored a dead man to ly^e; he was so wholly confounded, and out of countenance
through shame-fastnesse, that Borban taking great compassion of him could not
find in his heart to urge him any further in that point.

Moreover, he was so far from affecting titles of Dignity, His flying titles
of honor.
that for the space of ten years (for so long he lived in those Countries)
there was none, but the Bishop of Goa only, who knew that he was Legate
Apostolical, so carefully he concealed the matter. Neither did he ever
discover his authority unto others, until he was driven thereunto by necessity,
to curb the insolent audaciousnesse of the Governor of Malaca; wherein
notwithstanding he so moderated his authority, that it seemed to be rather
Humility, then power. And (for as much, as out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks) in all the Exhortations almost which he made to those of
the Society, he insisted most commonly upon the perfect rooting out of Pride
and self esteem from their minds. And he was wont to say, that look how much
any one was in the judgment, and estimation of God; His exhortations to true
humility.
so much, and no more, ought every one to deem of himself, although the whole
world should otherwise esteem of him. Wherefore he admonished them never to
extol themselves for the good opinion which other men had of them; and that
ballancing themselves in their own knowledge they should humble themselves,
and consider that they were far otherwise in their own conscience, and in the
judgment of God, from that which they seemed unto men. For they who want the
knowledge of themselves, are soon puffed up by the praises of men, thinking
themselves to be such indeed as men esteem them; as though they were able to
deceive both God and men.

This also he was wont oftentimes to say with inward grief of heart: O
arroga^cy, the poison of Christian virtue! How much have thou, do thou, and
will thou hurt the world! How contrary art thou, to the institute and
perfection of the Society of JESUS! What a deadly enemy art thou to the pious,
and wholesome endeauours of those that be of that profession! ^or he affirmed,
that none could be a true Child of the ^he Society of JESUS, or employ himself
faithfully ^or God, who did not contemn himself, and think ^owly and humbly
both of himself, and of all his a^tions. Wherefore, as he could by no means
away with such as too much esteemed themselves, who ey^her under the color of
Humility, or for the Nobili^y of their Ancestors, desired to be honored: so
he ^are an extraordinary affection to such as were truly ^umble, and contemned
both themselves, and whatsoever else was theirs, although they were persons of
never so mean condition.

CHAP. IX.
His Magnanimity of Mind, and Confidence in God.
THIS Humility of Francis did not, for all that, cause in him so abject a mind,
that he durst not aim at high matters, or aspire to any noble enterprise; but
putting his whole confidence in God, and accounting nothing to be either hard,
or difficile to the magnanimity of his mind, be attempted even the greatest
things. For whenever the Honor of God required it, he gave way to no
difficulty, nor danger: so as, he ordinarily attempted nothing, which he did
not effect, or bring to some good pass. This indeed is proper to the servants
of God, to be humble and abject in their own sight, but most courageous and
constant in the affairs of God.

This magnanimity of mind, and slighting of all difficultyes and dangers,
appeared manifestly throughout the whole course of Xauerius life. And indeed it
oftentimes so far surpassed the usual strain of ordinary Fortitude, that it
might have bin accounted ^emerity, if it had not depended rather upon divine,
the^ humane assistance. For in his journey to Trauancoris, when he passed
through the midst of his enemies, he seemed to thrust himself into manifest
danger. But far more evident was that peril, when he attempted to instruct the
inhabitants of Maurica, a Nation extraordinary fierce and cruel, having no
other defense against those barbarous and savage people, but his confidence in
God. He also adventured to pass in a Pirates ship into Iaponia the furthest
part of the East, without any fear of danger, although his dearest friends,
and such as were most expert therein, presented before his eyes how many and
extreme difficulties there were. Concerning which thing he wrote himself unto
the Provincial of Portugal in these words.

All my well-willers and friends are amazed, that I am not afraid to undertake
so long, and dangerous a journey. They lay before me many dangers of te^pests,
quicksands, and Pirates. But I am no less amazed at them, that they have so
little confidence in God, in whose hands and power, all those things are
placed. I for my part, knowing for certain, that al things are governed
according to God Almighties beck and commandment, do fear nothing else, but
God himself, least he should punish me according to the de^erts of my
negligence, and sloth in his service, and ^f the observance of my Religion. But
as for other ^errours, dangers, miseries, and crosses, I do not at ^ll weigh
them. For I fear only God, the maker and ^oderatour of all things, because
other things how ^urtfull soever they be, cannot annoy us, but on ^y so far
forth as God permits them.

It is wonderful also, what Confidence he repo^ed in the divine assistance. So
as having only God for ^is guide, through so many dangers both by sea and (...)
and, through so many Nations different in language and manners, he penetrated
to the furthest parts of the East, and by his often passing over the Ocean ^e
instructed those sauadge, and barbarous Nations in the mysteries of the
Christian faith, and brought them at last to a civil life. And indeed his
Confidence in God did never fail, but always freed him from the dangers, He
is assaulted by the Barbarians.
both of enemies, tempests, and other calamities. For to pretermit with silence
other things whereof we have already spoken in their proper places, in passing
over the Iaponian seas, when as the Barbarians bent all their fury against him,
he by divine Assistance, escaped all their machinations, He suff^rethshipwracke
thrice.
without any hurt or danger at all. He also in the sea of Moluca suffered ship
wrack thrice; and once also he miraculously escaped by lying upon a plancke
after shipwreck tossed up and down the sea, He is delivered from many dangers.
without any hurt at all, for the space of two or three days. Moreover he
avoided the fury of the Saracens who were set in arms against him, by lying
secret for many days together in a wood hard by. Also he did not only defeat
the strategems which his enemies had plotted against him by the force of arms,
but discovered their secret inuentio^s also, when as they sought to poison him.
And besides all this, he very often escaped the incursions of Pirates by sea,
as likewise of thieves by land.

Again, His love of the Cross.
being wholly inflamed with the love of God, he did not only contemn
difficultyes and dangers, but seemed also to embrace them willingly. Wherefore
as desirous to suffer in the very midst of incommodities and dangers, he
earnestly besought God, not to free him from them, unless it were to undergo
greater, for the glory of his divine Majesty. And the divine Goodness,
corresponding sweetly to the magnanimity of his mind, heaped upon him store of
sufferings, and merits, with no less approbation in the sight of Heaven, then
joy and comfort to himself. He likewise in that most hard and difficile
expedition into China showed no less courage. For notwithstanding (as we have
said before) that no stranger could enter the bounds of that Country, without
certain danger of his life or liberty (the same penalty being designed as well
for the stranger that enters in, as for him that brings him;) yet having an
admirable confidence in God, who had moved him to that resolutition, and to the
undertaking of that journey, he determined to commit his life to the trust of a
Chinese merchant, which was no less doubtful and dangerous, then the entrance
itself into China. Concerning which, he wrote himself to Francis Peren at
Malaca to this tenor.

In this business, my friends bring two dangers against me, the one least the
merchant having already received his money, may break his promise, and either
leave me in some desert Island, or else cast me headlong into the sea, that so
his bargayne of passing me over may not come to light. The other is (supposing
he stand to his promise) least the Governor of the City may make me (being a
stranger) an example to others of coming into China against the Kings Edict
without public warrant, and either put me to death by torments, or else cast
me into perpetual prison. Against these dangers, I object others far
greater, which themselves do not perceive. And the first is, least we distrust
the divine Goodness and Providence: For we come hither for Gods only Cause, to
preach to these Countries his sacred Law, and his son Christ Jesus the
Redeemer of mankind, whereof God himself, who gave me this mind, is my
witness. So as now to cast off our hope, and confidence in his Divine
Providence and power, for the dangers we are said to be subject unto in
laboring for his cause, ought certainly to be esteemed a far greater danger,
then whatsoever the enemies of God, and Men, are euerable to bring upon me.
Especially seeing, that neither the Devils themselves, nor their ministers can
hurt us at all, but only by the permission and will of God.

What can we say to this? That if God do approve and further our endeauours, we
shall by his favor not only be delivered from dangers, but also follow the
admonition of our Savior Christ, His undaunted courage against danger.
who says: He that shall loo^se his life in this world for me, shall find it.
Wherefore for as much as we hold these dangers of the soul far greater the^
those of the body, we esteem it far better, and more secure, to break through
those of this life, rather then to hazard the salvation of our soul. I am
fully resolved, God willing, to go into China, in despite of all his enemies.
For, if God be with us, who shall be against us? We do, without all doubt, go
upon great danger, although there were nothing else but perpetual servitude:
But this consideration comfort me, that it is much better, to serve in
captivity for Gods cause, then to enjoy liberty by running away from the Cross
etc.

In which words he does indeed sufficiently show an undaunted courage against
all dangers. And how much Xauerius contemned all the miseries of this world,
appeared also by another letter of his to James Perera, whereof we have
inserted a clause in its proper place.

This greatness of Xauerius mind was not less against the insolency of
Christians, then against the threats and terrors of the Barbarians. The
Governor of the coast of Comorinum being a Portughese, and potent, through his
covetousness, had held the Neophytes in cruel subjection. Which when Francis
understood, he threatened, that unless he carried himself most mildly toward
the Christians there, he would by letters complain unto the King of Portugal
of his insolences and Tyranny. Likewise he caused his companion to declare to
a certain Portughese Captain, who treated the new Christians injuriously,
that unless he ceased from his cruelty, he would be far more savage then
Herod, because Herod slew only the bodies of the Innocents, but he also slew
their souls: and this would certainly be the effect thereof, that if through
his insole^cies the Fathers should leave that Coast, the little infants would
dye without Baptism.

The Governor also of Malaca, who, as we said before, most injuriously, and
obstinately hindered his journey into China, was by Xauerius, who turned at last
his patience into severity, excommunicated, and the sentence published formally
in the Churches; to the end others, through fear to incur the like ignominy,
might carry themselves, as their duty requi^ed.

But nothing more declared the incredible greatness of his mind, then a certain
infinite desire (as we may call it) which he had to preach the Gospel
throughout the whole world. For not contenting himself with the vast Countries
of India, he extended his desires, and endeauours to Malaca, the Islands of the
Moluca's, Maurica, Iaponia, China, and in fine to all the East; intending
certainly, to have extended them afterward to all the parts of the world, if
his life had bin answereable to his fervor of spirit. For he with such speed
travailed over the utmost parts of the East, that the huge vastness of Asia,
seemed too small a circuit for his courageous mind.

CHAP. X.
His Charity, to God, and his Neighbors.
THIS so great Fortitude of mind in Xauerius was matched with the like Charity
both to God and men. For throughout the whole course of his life, there is to
be found no one virtue more eminent, then his desire of increasing the Honor
of God, and saving of souls. And no wonder; for he was so greatly inflamed
with such special love of having clean abandoned the world, that he became
now wholly wrapped in the perpetual contemplation of celestial things. Hence it
was, that his soul being raised to God, the supreme goodness, and to the love
of his most bountiful Creator and Redeemer, held continually most sweet
discourses with his divine Majesty; nay even then, when he was most seriously
employed in conuersing amongst men. Hence proceeded that inflamed love to Jesus
Christ his benign Lord and Savior, repeating so often in most sweet manner,
that most comfortable and wholesome Name. Hence also arose in him that burning
desire of Martyrdom, which finding no entertainme^t among the Turks, went on
to the furthest parts of the Earth thirsting after the glory thereof, by a
thousand means, amongst those savage and barbarous people, and amidst evident
danger of pestilent diseases, shipwrackes, and Pirates; so that Martyrdom it
self fled rather from him, then he from Martyrdom.

This boundless charity of Francis toward God, ^had enkindled in his soul
the like love to men, which never suffered him either to rest, or to be weary.
This ^t was, which made him every where as it were a slave ^o the sick,
imprisoned, and wretched persons, and ^o fear no contagious or infectious
disease, even when ^he bodies lay dead round about him. This it was which
pricked him forward to instruct barbarous and ^auage Nations, even with evident
hazard of his own ^ife, and kept him amongst them as long as was needful
although he were extremely oppressed with want of all things. In fine it was
this, which causing him to ^leight the raging billows of the stormy Ocean, the
^cursions of Pirates, and inconveniences of an end^esse Navigations, drew him to
the furthest part of the world, to make the Iaponians also members of the
Church, who had no knowledge at all of the Gospel: ^o as having passed so many
seas, and instructed almost ^ll the sea coasting Countries of the East in the
faith ^f Christ, he was now come even to the furthest end ^f the world. The
same charity to save men's souls, set (...) on still with no less manifest
danger of his own (...), to acce^pt to get entrance into China, which was so
^^ured up, both with rigorous laws, and strict watch; (...) as the insatiable
zeal which he had of souls, suf^red nothing to seem impossible, nothing
terrible ^^nto Xauerius.

But now, after he had brought so many Nations and people to the faith of
Christ, it grieved him ex^^emely to be withheld from entering into China; and
having determined with himself the conversion of the whole world, be forced
now to make as it were a stand at the beginning almost of his endeauours. And no
doubt, if he had lived until he had dispatched his expedition into China, and
had come back again to Rome, whither he was sent for by Ignatius, he would
have been a most potent means, to have reduced also those forlorn parts of
the Western Church. For in what office soever he should have been placed,
either of the General, or of the Generals Assistant, he would never have
given over sending Religious men, of the Society, to cure the western Nations,
infected with Heresy, until either there had been none left who needed such
cure, or else his own life had left him.

It is incredible to say, He serves his neighbors forgetting his own meat
and drink.
how exceeding zealous he was for the salvation of souls. For at Malaca, and
else where in the East, he employed himself continually in hearing
Confessions, in making reconciliation between those that were at variance and
debate among themselves, and in helping the sick, wherein he so forgot
himself, that oftentimes he passed two or three days without eating or
drinking any thing; in so much that one would have thought he had been fed which
such exercyses, and services done to God. And no marvel, for the zeal and
desire he had to help his neighbors, and to propagate the Christian Religion,
was so engrafted in him, that it seemed almost natural. To this all his forces
were bent; in this he was wholly employed; this was his only desire; in this he
took his greatest joy, to unite as many as possibly he could, to the flock of
Christ. Neither was his care greater in gathering new sheep unto that sacred
fold, then in attending those diligently, whom he had already brought thither.
For he gave them such godly precepts and instructions that they scarce needed
any other Pastor to help them.

Ludouicus Fr^es of the Society of JESUS, a man both of great prudence and
pie^y, gave up this relation: That when himself first of al travailed over the
Island of Iapon, he came by chance to a castle there situate in a corner of the
Island, where he met with three of the habitants of that country, who asked him
what was become of Francis Xauerius? At which sudden question, he at the
first stood a little astonished, then pawsing a while upon the matter, he found
that Xauerius had sometimes bin there amongst them, and had converted many of
the inhabitants to the faith of Christ; had also built them a Church, and so
diligently instructed the Neophytes, that Christian discipline continued still
amongst them, without any other Master. For Xauerius being to depart from
Iaponia, had provided for them for time to come, and given them written in
their own language the life of Christ, and a brief Sum of the
Ecclesiastical history, as also the Roman Calendar, with a table of the
moveable feasts, a form also for the invocation of the Saints, which we call
the Litanies, the Seven Psalms, together with the form and manner of
Baptism, aduising the^ to assemble themselves all together upon holy Days
and there to read something of the life of Christ, and out of the holy
Scripture; to observe the Festival days, to invoke the intercession of the
Saints, and to recite the seven Psalms. Moreover he ordained that the clarke
of their chief Guide should baptize the little infantes, unless some
necessity otherwise dissuaded. And the Neophytes having kept these precep^
which Francis had given them in memory, were so thoroughly instructed in matters
of Christian Religion that they came not far short of those of Europe,
Whereupon Froes concluded, that he had no more to say, but that by Xauerius
example, Religion ought so to be sown, and planted every where, that it might
be able to uphold it self by its own proper forces.

And although Xauerius, as much as in him lay, ceased not at any time, to
advance his Neophytes by those of the Society: yet his Charity was not so
employed in helping of whole Cittyes and Nations, as that he neglected
particular persons, how perverse and obstinate soever they were. At his
departure from the Island of Ternate, of an exceeding great number of Christians
that inhabited therein, he left only two, whom he could not draw to forsake
their co^cubins. Wherefore when he came back to Amboynum (compassion succeeding
in place of indignation) he wrote unto a certain Ternatian, His zeal of souls
a friend of his, entreating him to salute those two persons in his name, in
the most friendly manner he could devise, and signify unto them, that if they
would at last resolve to arise out of the sincke of sin, he would presently
make all have thither, and in the mean time he would not cease to pray to God
our common Father for their salvation.

At Malaca also, He conuerteth a Jew.
as he preached unto the people, there was oftentimes present at his sermons a
certain Jew, a man of sufficient learning, but (as the property of that nation
is) most obstinate; and who scoffed no less at Xauerius, then at the truth it
self. He being entangled both in vices and errors, stiffly opposed the
Gospel, and his authority kept back many other Jews from the faith of
Christ. Francis therefore treating this man sweetly by all kind of
obsequiousness, and using to suppe with him in a friendly manner, so wrought
with him at last, that being quite altered from what he was, became of an
obstinate Jew, a virtuous and devout Christian. And this Charity of his to his
Neighbors, was not more forcible the^ industrious.

There stands between Goa and Cocinum a fortress belonging to the
Portugheses called Canonora, His wonderful industriousnesse in moving such as
were obstinate in sin.
much frequented by reason of a good haven in that place. Xauerius coming
thither endeavored by the way to draw a certain person to make his
Confession, but in vain; whereupon he desisted for a while from his entreaty,
that when the other thought himself secure, he might at unawares more forcibly
set upon him. For being pressed hard thereto, as one most obstinatly bent he had
passionatly sworn never to yield therein to Francis. Therefore as soon as they
came to land Xauerius resolved to try all the remedies he could devise against
so desperate a disease, and so faygning as though his mind were set on other
matters, got this obstinate man into a wood, in a courteous manner under
pretense of recreation, beset (according to the Nature of that Country) with
many Palme-trees. As soon as they came into a privy place where none could see
them, Xauerius suddenly casting of his clothes, and baring his back, falls
down upon his knees, and presently (the other standing amazed, and expecting
to see the issue of so sudden an alteration) pulls out a very sharp
discipline full of iron pricks, and beating his own back extremely, before
the others face, cries out, that he willingly suffered that torment for his
sake thereby to turn away Gods indignation from him. In the mean time the
Wood runge again with the mighty stripes of the discipline, and he that stood
looking on, in that amazement, like one out of himself, was all besprinkled
with Xauerius his blood. Wherefore turning his admiration, into compassion of
heart, he instantly casts himself at Xauerius feet, and beseeches him, to
leave off revenging another fault upon his own back, for now he was ready to
purge himself of his sins by Confession. Xauerius being glad he had thus
won the victory, presently apparelleth himself, and hearing his Confession,
brings that wretched man, back again into the right way, and hope of
salvation.

But now his Prudence and industry was far more seen in curing the diseases
of the City of Malaca, which was almost brought thereby unto a desperate state.
For when he perceived the Malacensians minds to be so inueterate, and drowned
in the corruption of all wickedness, that they would by no means hear of
remedy, he, being an exquisite Physician of souls, found out a new and
sovereign antidote whereby to cure them. Wherefore setting upon them in a secret
and covert manner, he used to insinuate himself into the company of the
souldiars when they were at their wanton sportes, coming oftentimes upon them
as they were at play, seeming as though he took delight in their game and
conversation; He becomes all to gain all to Christ.
and if any one upon his presence, or otherwise through shame-fastnesse,
absteyned from playing, he in a sweet, and friendly manner would exhort him to
be merry for he also loved the like pastime; and that souldiars ought not to
live like Monks: and if it were used without offense to God, it was better to
play, and be merry, then to speak ill of other men, or to commit any other
wickedness. Then having won their affections by this his gentle behavior,
he would by all manner of obsequiousness insinuate himself into the greatest
familiarity with them that was possible, that so he might find out their secret
inclinations, and thereby take some occasion to apply fit remedies to their
diseases.

Now, for others who were entangled with dishonest love and kept Concubines, he
would oftentimes himself appoint certain days to dine or suppe with them,
where sitting at table, and by bringing in some familiar discourse, as
commending of the dishes of meat which were served in, and inquiring of the
mayd-seruant, that had so well seasoned the same, requesting his Host
oftentimes to send for her, and then to commend her for her diligence and skill
in Cookery, and the like; he opened to himself away for his future designs. If
he found one that would not willingly admit him to his table, he at unawares
would earnestly entreat him, that he might see his house, and being brought
in, did often win the man's affection by his sweet, conversation, and then
concealing his determination he left no corner of the house which he did nor
search into, as if he had hunted after some wild game: where if by chance he
light upon his hosts Concubine, he inquired what that woman was, and to whom
she belonged; making as though he liked all well that he saw, yet still
watching for an occasion wherein to effect his business. Finally, he became in
such sort even all to all, that among souldiars he seemed a soldier, and among
merchants a merchant. Wherefore not only the Portugheses, but also their
Concubines themselves by reason of his singular affability, desired greatly to
have him come to their houses and table, never so much as once dreaming of what
he aimed at.

But Xuerius as soon as he had gotten himself inward with them, he would
begin covertly to apply his cure to their festred souls. If he met with any
that had a beautiful and handsome maid with whom he was in love, he would
commend her unto him, and tell him that indeed for her extraordinary beauty,
and good disposition she deserved to be an honest woman, and was worthy to be
married to some man of good account. Then would he ask his Host that if he
loved her, why did he, to both their dishonours, and utter overthrow, rather
keep her as his Concubine, then honestly and religiously to take her to his
wife? Thus turning the cause of the disease to the cure thereof, he took away
sin, and brought honorable wedlock into place thereof. But if the woman were
deformed, he would demand whether he were well in his wits or no, who could set
his affections upon so ill favored a Creature, and for whom all the
Portugheses talked of him, and laughed him to scorn? Or why did he not rather
seek a wife fit for him? For that would certainly be a great honor to him, as
it had bin to others, whom he would then name.

But now, with others that could not so freely marry, by reason that they were
inta^gled with many Concubines at once, he took another course. First he would
ask them, why they kept in their house so many maids, who served almost for
no other use but to overthrow their soul, and consume their substance, besides
the often disquiet of the house by their chiding and brawling. And if they
either could not, or would not put them all away, he advised them seriously to
rid themselves of some one of them. Then coming again unto them after some
days space, he in a friendly manner would importune them, to dismiss the
second, and so one after another al but one, for they should be both less
hateful to God, and the sooner obtain pardon, if they kept but one woman,
then if they kept many. At last, upon some new occasion, he would urge them
again either to put that one away, or else to marry her, whom they still kept
unlawfully, that so at length they might appease the divine wrath incensed
against them. And thus by little and little he reclaimed those lost souls (by
taking away from them all enticements to sin) to a civil and virtuous life.

Xauerius had perpetually this property and custom to seek most of al to be
familiar with those who were most wicked, thinking that where the sickness was
most grievous, there was greatest need of a Physician, and antidote: neither
would he ever give them over until he had restored them to their souls
health. This also was another chief care of his, that all men by his own and
the Societyes examples, might be inflamed to virtue and devotion, and none
offended by them. Neither did he use to inculcate any thing more often and
seriously to those of the Society who were sent in mission to any place, Romans 1.
then, That they should provide for good things before God, and men. And
besides this he oftentimes also put them in mind by letters, of those precepts
which he had given them at their departure.

But if any one had at any time given offense, he was so afflicted in mind
therefore, How greatly he avoided to scandalize others.
that he might well have said with the Apostle, Who is scandalized, and I not
burned? Wherefore he gave strict charge by letters, to Fa. Gaspar the Rectour of
the College at Goa, that whosoever of the Society should give public scandal
he should by all means dismiss him; 2. Cor. 11.
and being once dismissed never to receive him again upon any terms; judging
it a heavier less for the Society to be deprived of its good Name, then of any
member thereof; imitating heerin that sentence of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5. 6
approved by daily experience: A little leaven corrupts the whole past. And
where the offense was given, there he judged it convenient, that satisfaction
should be made, thereby to take away all scandal from such, as had received it.

Neither did he think it fit that satitfaction should be given only to those
who were offended, The care he had to edify his neighbors.
but to those also who were otherwise offensive unto them. At Cocinum
therefore, when as he understood, that a cer^ayne Sodality, who had granted a
Church to the Society, was displeased with the said Fathers, Xauerius ^asting
himself prostrate on the ground, before a great ^ssembly of worthy personages,
laid the keys of the Church at their feet, and by that Humility wholly pacifyed
their offended minds. For he was always wont to say, that he preferred the
good name of the Society before all the riches and wealth of the world; seeing
God did commonly bestow better, and more durable riches upon pious men, who
made not so much account of their own commodities; as of the common estimation
of their Religion; then upon those, who enjoyed their own rights and
commodities, with the loss and dommage of their good Name. Wherefore in his
letters which he wrote to those of the Society, he was always wont to add,
that he had rather have a little fruit without offense, then a great deal with
the offense of any. For that a little seed of souls sown without offense,
would like corn increase, and continue without weeds; whereas never so great a
Crop, once ouer-growne with displeasures, as with weeds, consumes and wastes
away to nothing. And all this he observed in himself with far more care and
diligence, then he commanded it to others, manifesting himself indeed better
by his examples, then by his commands.

CHAP. XI.
His sweetness of Behavior, and Conversation, joined with Gravity.
MOREOVER to procure the salvation of souls his sweetness of Conversation
accompanied with extraordinary Gravity was of special force; which two Virtues
being different in show, were yet so combined together in him, as neither of
them detracting from the others force, he was both very grave, and also
incomparably sweet in his conversation. For as we said before, there plainly
appeared in Xauerius Countenance, Gesture, Speech, and Conversation, a most
incredible sweetness, which being engrafted in him by nature, and augmented by
Grace, could easily draw, and conserve also, the affection of any one.

He was wondrous cheerful in his countenance, tractable in his discourse, and
most sweet in his conversation and behavior. His looks were so gracious and
pleasant, that they gave great comfort to the sick, and joy to all those that
were in health. And oftentimes, many of the Society came to visit him, Xauerius
looks pleasant to the be holders.
for no other cause, then that receiving comfort from his heavenly aspect, they
might by the remembrance of his extraordinary alacrity, and admirable fervor,
be the more enflamed toward the pursuit of a blessed life. For so often as
they could get but an essay of this his alacrity, or even but a breathing only
of so courageous an heart, they never came away sad or heavy from him. Again,
the singular sweetness of his countenance and speech, drew unto him as well the
bad as the good, great and little, and got such firm hold over the affections
of their hearts, that he was able to draw them which way he pleased: so as he
never demanded any thing of any one, how great, or hard soever, which he did
not at last obtain.

His ordinary discourse also, he was wont to season with great dexterity, and
to intermingle with wonderful variety, that it might not cause any
tediousness in the hearer. He was very skillful both in Astrology and
Philosophy, and therefore always when he travailed by the way, to relieve the
wearisomnesse of the journey, he would oftentimes bring in discourse of the
motions of the celestial Globes, and the Planets. Also the Eclipse of the
Sun and Moon, he would foretell long before it happened. Again, he would
declare the causes of those things which we behold to be admirable, both in
the heavens, and the world; what the cause, or origin of Hayle, Frost, Snow,
and Rain was; whence clouds, mystes, winds, and thunder proceeded; what that
was which caused the swelling, and raging of the seas. Many other things also,
he would add of the same kind; which as they were very admirable, so were they
delightful to the hearers; and in the end of all, he would refer them to the
honor, and fear of God.

Of these things therefore, he discoursed so learnedly and pleasantly amongst
the Iaponians, who are wholly ignorant of such matters, that they were wont
usually to say, that in Xauerius company one might travail all Iaponia over
without being once a weary; and this delight of his discourse carried his
companinons along in such sort, that he ordinarily won them both to himself,
and to God. Yea this sweetness of his Conversation was tempered with so weighty
a Gravity, that in the height of his most pleasant discourses what he said, or
did, breathed forth a most sweet odor of sanctity. Whereof al men had now
gotten such an opinion, that although he conuersed often, and very familiarly,
even with the most vicious, yet the same was never any stain to his
reputation; since the constant fame of his sanctity defended him, not only from
evil tongues, but also from the least suspicion of evil it self.

Moreover, Xauerius had this property, that his familiarity did not any whit
diminish, but rather increase a most reverend and religious respect of all
sorts of people toward him: in so much as one would have said, that his
sanctity, like a precious stone, grew daily brighter and brighter, by
continual use and exercise* Consaluus Fernandez a Master of a shipp, and a
man of good account, was very conversant and familiar with Xauerius, in that he
oftentimes went in his ship, and lodged also in his house at Goa; yet he bare
such reverence and respect unto him, that whenever he came unto his house, he
with his whole family, would go out to meet him, and casting themselves
prostrate on the ground, did always receive him in that manner. And although
Consaluus were oftentimes entreated by Francis, not to use that respect unto
him, yet he would never refrain there from, such possession had the Reverence
of his holy person taken of his heart.

James Perera also, who was so great and familiar with Xauerius as no man more,
was wont to say, that he could never stand before him with his head covered
although Xauerius himself entreated the same; protesting, that whenever he
spoke unto him, he used to be taken with such reverend and religious a respect
toward him, that he seemed to behold God in his person. Yet as occasion
required, Francis wanted not Severity also, the sting of Gravity, which we
shall here recount by an example, or two. A certain devout Matron of good
esteem, was wont always to to confess to Francis when he was at hand. This
woman (as herself afterward recounted to a Religious man) Xauerius sharply
reprehended, because she had upon occasion cast her eye upon an handsome,
proper man, and well attyred: Have thou, quoth he, looked upon a man? Thou
deseruest that God should not look on thee. Which words so stroke her chaste
and pious heart, that she could never after throghout her whole life, endure to
look any man in the face.

He was also, above all other things, a most severe revenger of obstinacy. In
the Promontory of Comorinum understanding that a certain Neophyte had blessed
an Idol, he was so greatly moved with the indignity of such an abominatio^,
that he presently caused the house to bet on fire, to the end the severity of
the punishment might make others afraid to commit the like offense. And when
as, many persons of worth requested him to mitigate the penalty, he only
permitted, that the dwellers might carry out their household stuff, but the
house it self which was the receptacle of that sacrilegious Monster, he would
by all means have consumed, even to the ground.

CHAP. XII.
His Prudence, and the Precepts he gave to the Rectour of the College of Goa;
and to Gaspar the Lovv-countryman.
MOREOVER, Prudence, the Moderatresse of other Virtues, shined not a little in
Xauerius, as well in his dexterous gaining and converting of souls (which
evidently appeared throughout his whole life) as in his propagating also of
Religion, and government of those of the Society committed to his charge. For
he knowing well, that nothing so much hindered the Christian faith, as the bad
examples, and vices of evil Christians, he would not set upon Ethnicks to
instruct them in matters of faith, until he had reclaymed the ancient
Christians from their vicious and sinful life. And those Neophites also,
which he had brought unto Christ with infinite labor and patience, he first of
all instructed them himself with the greatest diligence that could be, before
the committed them to others of the Society for their further education in
virtue. And as ^or those of the Society, he never sent them unto any ^lace
where himself had not first been, and labored. Those also whom he sent, he
armed with certain wholesome and proper instructions against inconue^iences
that might happen, until they were well ac^uainted, and experienced in those
things which ^^mselfe had learned by long practice, and divine in^^inct.

Now, concerning Francis his Prudence, being ^o lesse-profitable a Maistresse
unto others, then to ^^ose of the Society, it showed it self most of all in
^^ose Precepts, and Instructions whereof I have before ^poken; although I deem
it worth my labor to set ^owne a good part of the^ again, since they may be
of ^s great force to teach us knowledge and prudence, as ^hey were to make him
admirable. Having therefore ^onstituted Fa. Paul Rectour of the College of Goa,
(...) his departure he left him these admirable ensuing ^^structions.

First of all, I pray and beseech you, for the love you ^^eare to God, and for
the observance you owe unto ^ur holy Father Ignatius, that you will lovingly
and ^^ourteously receive, and treat the whole Society of ^ESVS, and all the
Fathers, and Brothers thereof, coming either out of Portugal, or already
dispersed over ^ndia. I for my part have indeed such an opinion of all those of
the Society, His opinion of the virtue of the Society.
that (for so much as I can guess) (...) do not think they have need of a
Rectour. Notwithstanding that others may neither want a subject of obedience,
and that all things may be kept in right and ^^due order, I have thought good,
that there should be someone, to whom the rest, in my absence, may be
obedient. Wherefore confiding in your Humility, Prudence, and Wisdom, I have
judged it expedient, that you should be made Superior over all those of the
Society in India, so as all of our Order in, and out of Goa shall obey you,
until it be otherwise ordained. Antony Gomez shall be President of the
College of Goa, and shall gather up the rents, and disburse them upon
necessary occasions, as shall be thought fitting. In these things I have given
him full power; wherefore you shall not therein interpose your authority. If you
find him to do otherwise then well, you shall direct^^ him by your counsel,
rather then by command.

Again, I earnestly pray and beseech you, for the obedience which you owe to
Father Ignatius, that there may be nothing done, His care of concord.
which may at any time, sow discord between you and Antony Gomez, or affoard
subject of talk, either to those of the house, or to others abroad. And on the
other side, to endeavor all you can, that you may always carry the business
together between you, with all concord, both in will^ and actions. If at any
time those of the Society in C^morinum, or others that labor in the vineyard
of Christ, shall require of you any thing belonging to the salvation of souls,
you shall with all speed, and liberally provide them thereof. And when you write
to those poor wretches, who are so greatly oppressed (...) take heed you write
not any thing harshly which may offend them.

Moreover, to such as labor courageously for God^ cause, you shall readily,
and liberally administer such things as be necessary, but especially to those
of Comorinum and Malaca, who carrying a most heavy cross, bear the burden and
heat of the day. You shall therefore both carefully and speedily furnish them,
not only with spiritual, but with corporal supplies also requisite for their
souls: and if any of them come unto Goa to retire themselves, you shall
receive, and cherish the^ as beseems both your self and them. And this I
charge and command you, in Gods and Father Ignatius name.

Moreover, I beseech you, dear Brother, that you will daily go on forward in
the way of virtue, and become a pattern and example therein unto all men as
hitherto you have bin. Write to me also often into Iaponia, whereby I may know
how all things go with you, and with those of your Family, and especially how
you and Antony Gomez, and the rest of the Society do love and agree together;
and of the number, quality, and sufficiency of those Fathers, both in natural,
and supernatural talents, who shall hereafter come unto you out of Portugal.
This you shall not fail to do every year twice, to wit, in the months of
April and September.

You shall likewise take care, that some others of the House also (to ease you
of labor) do certify me by writing of such things, concerning the Fathers and
Brothers throughout India, which you think I desire to know. And if any thing
require secrecy, you shall write it with your own hand in a postscript.
Lastly, I earnestly request of you, that you will make much of these precepts,
and read them over every week once, and withal being mindful of me that you
will both by your self continually pray to God for me, and incite others to do
the like.

Other like precepts he also gave to F. Gaspar the Low Country man when he was
to go to Ormus, Precepts given to Gaspar.
and to other Fathers who went to labor in India, as follow: Attend
principally to your self, being very careful both of Gods honor and your
own Salvation. For assuredly if you be vpheld with these two props, you will
both affoard more help to others, and be also your self the better prepared
for humble and religious exercyses. Care of the Catetechisme
You shall therefore instruct the Portughese children, and bondslaues, and other
ignorant persons in the Christian precepts; and this charge you shall not
commit to any other, since it is a thing of so great importance, for the
salvation of souls, and gaining of good will. You shall diligently visit the
poor, and sick in the hospital, and by telling them that sickness is most
commonly a punishment of sin, Works of mercy
you shall gently incite them to examine their conscience, and confess their
sins. Then, when you have leasurely heard their confessions, and refreshed
them with heavenly food, it will be convenient to commend them to the Prefect
of the Hospital, and to help them with such things, as they shall want.

It is likewise fit, that you go oftentimes unto the Prisons, to visit the
prisoners, and to exhort them to make a general Confession of their life. For
amongst those kind of men you shall find many that never made a true
Confession. You shall commend all to the Sodality of Mercy, that no injury may
be done to any one; and for such as be in extreme necessity, you shall also
beg means to assist them, thereby to relieve them in their misery. You shall
likewise provide for the Sodality of Mercy, so far as you shall be able.
Wherefore when any money is to be restored, and is uncertain to whom, I think
absolutely that you had best give it to the said Sodality of Mercy. For
although there want not poor, Alms ought to be distributed to the poor by
externe persons.
for the relieuing of whose necessities those helps may well be employed;
notwithstanding the deceit and cunning of beggars uses oftentimes to cause
some note of infamy in this business; by whose impostures others may sooner be
deceived, then those of the Sodality of Mercy, who by long experience, have
learned prudently to beware of such cosenage. Wherefore it is best to leave that
business wholly to them of the Sodality, who may distribute the Alms,
according to the quantity thereof, amongst such as are known to be truly in
want.

This you ought to do, for many and weighty reasons. First, because if you
distribute the money to the poor your self, many will certainly ask of you
some relief, especially for their bodies, which they would assuredly never do,
if they saw that you used only to help the necessities of the soul. Secondly
to avoid the suspicions, and rumors of those that should give you such money
to be distributed amongst the poor. For (as men are apt to believe the worst)
it is to be feared, least that exacting of money may carry with it some
suspicion of avarice; as though you intended to turn the money, begd under
color of relieuing the poor, to your own use and benefit. Wherefore it is
better to give over that charge to others, of whom there can be no suspicion.
Yet if at any time occasion moves you to the contrary, you may do as may be
most for the glory of God, and the good of souls.

You shall also so carry your self before those with whom you converse, With
friends we must live as if they were to be our enemies.
although they be you friends, and familiar acquaintance, as if they were one
day to be your enemies. This consideration will easily restrain your behavior
from growing dissolute through liberty, and keep you back from giving offense
to any, through too much friendship and familiarity: and such kind of wariness
will also make them ashamed to break friendship with you without cause. This
wariness, I say, keeps not only others from being insolent with us, but also
maintayneth piety in our selves. For if you be present with your self, you
will both enjoy God the more, and have the better knowledge of your self;
whereas certainly the want of knowledge, and forgetfulness of ones self, is
the mother of many Monsters of vices, which make us loose our friends, and
instead thereof procure us enemies; so as they who are not ignorant of our
fashions, do arise with more bitterness and vehemence against us.

Toward the Bishops Vicar you shall always carry your self with extraordinary
reverence and obedience. Reverence toward the Bishops Vicar.
Wherefore so soon as you come to any town where he resideth, you shall
presently go, and cast your self at his feet, and also kiss his hand, as the
custom is. Then you shall ask of him leave to preach, hear confessions, and
to exercise other offices of piety. And no offense whatsoever shall at any time
with^raw you from him, but shall rather inflame you by ^ll kind of complying
with him, to gain him sweet^y unto you, that being at last wrought by pious
considerations he may become better, and more pliable.

You must also seek and maintain friendship with other Priests, that they may
also be the more efficaciously drawn to the same wholesome considerations.
Moreover, to the Governors of Towns you shall be very obseruant, A manner how
to admonish Princes.
and seek to gain their good wills by all serviceable and familiar endeauours,
so far as may be possible. Neither shall you incur their displeasure, or
hatred for any cause although it be just. But if any one of them shall chance
to commit any great offense; first having entered into some fit discourse, you
shall in a friendly and sweet manner show unto him, how much you are grieved
for the infamy, wherewith his dignity and reputation is stained. Then with the
like sweetness and humility, you shall in such sort declare the rumors which be
spread abroad of him, that of himself he may acknowledge, and amend his fault.
And this must be done when there is hope, that your admonition will take good
and prosperous effect. Otherwise it is better to let it all alone, then to
labor in vain, and to gain nothing (as they say) but ill will for your
pains.

Upon Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon, ha^^ng called together the
men and maid servants of the Portugheses, as also their freemen and children
into the Church, with a little bell; besides the heads of the Christian faith,
you shall teach unto them also a method how to pray, anh how to have care of
their souls. And to ignorant persons, the practice of this method shall be for
some time enjoined them for their penance after they have made their
Confession, that being by little and little exercised therein, they may at length
get a wholesome custom thereof. I know by experience that this has bin the
salvation of many. The same method shall be written in a table, and set up in
the Church, that they, who will use it, may write it out.

Some time and labor must be also employed in making peace between enemies, A
manner how to take away suites in law.
and reconciling such as are at variance among themselves. In taking away also
of controversies and suites in law, you shall insist much upon this point, that
ordinarily there is more spent in the suite, then the thing about which they
strive, is worth. And for that this practice will prove ungrateful and odious
to Lawyers and Notaries, they are therefore specially to be gained also, and by
fit considerations brought to conform themselves to justice and equity. For if
we rightly consider the matter, we shall find them to be the chief authors,
and abettors of all Controversies, and suites in law, as turning to their own
gain.

If you meet with any that be so entangled with frauds, Away to convert such
as be very vicious.
unlawful lusts, and hatreds, that they do not only use no means to free
themselves of those vices, but reject all necessary remedies also: there must
be all care taken both by humane and divine means, that their souls, although
they be already as it were past hope, may at last be cured. Wherefore unless
they ^e wholly senseless, you are to propound unto them ^he love and reverence
which they owe to Christ their God and Savior: and to strike into them an
horror of Death and Hell that hangs over their heads. If neither the love of
God, nor fear of Hell will move them ^hey must be terrified with those most
bitter torments, which even in this life the wrath of God inflicteth v^on
wicked men. Wherefore it will be then a fit time, to threaten against them, the
grievous and long sickness of this life, overthrows of temporal states and
goods, the ^riuation and want of children, the reproachful dishonesty of
wives, dangers both by sea and land, suddayne and disastrous chances, and other
such like miseries, wherewith God is wont to take revenge of foul sins and
enormityes, such especially as by long continuance of time have taken deep
root in man. For we daily see that many are moved much more through the fear
of such wordly miseries and incommodityes, From whence obstinacy proceeds in
foul and heinous offenses.
then by the terror of everlasting torments. The cause of which insensibility,
or rather madness, is either the forgetfulness of the divine Majesty, together
with the great neglect of their own conscience; or the slendernes of
supernatural belief in such most lewd and wicked persons, who like sensual
beasts, measure out all things according to what they behold with their eyes,
and tread upon with their feet; wholly unmindful of the joys of heaven, and
of the last combat, whereon their everlasting weal or woe depends; that is,
whether they shall be blessed, or miserable for all eternity.

Some also shall you find, who sticking fast in the sink of sin, will
notwithstanding seek to have friendship and familiarity with you; not that
they may be drawn out thereof, but that they may so escape the reprehension
which they deserve, and gain a good opinion also from others by keeping
company with you. Preachers are to refuse presents.
Wherefore I advise you, to be present with your self: and if at any time such
like persons inuit you either to their houses, or send you Presents, take heed
your liberty be not so restrained by their gifts, that you dare not reprehend
them, even sharply when they offend. Therefore if they inuit you to dinner,
you shall not (indeed) refuse to go; but yet requite them again, by inuiting
them likewise to the holy Sacrament of Confession. When inuitation to dinner is
to be accepted of.
And if you shall perceive that you do no good at all with them, but wholly
loose your labor, then you shall tell them plainly, that unless they leave
such courses, you will from that time disclayme from having any friendship, or
conversation with them.

Notwithstanding what I say of receiving Presents from any one, What presents
are to be received
I do not mean small and seldom gifts, as fruit, and such like, which being
sent back, do oftentimes much offend those that send them: But I mean great
and precions Presents, which may chance to take you, if you take them. If at
any time there be a great quantity of victuals sent unto you, it shall be
distributed amongst the poor in the Hospital of sick, or in the prisons, and
other places; that all men may see the greatest part, even of such things, to
be divided amongst the needy, and that you keep hardly any for your self.
This Charity will give better example of your abstinence, then if you should
refuse to receive such Presents, specially when they who send them, account it
a dishonor to have them sent back again.

Now, The manner how eo correct.
when you intend to correct any one for their ^ad demeanours you shall not do
any thing therein vn^ill you have thoroughly found out his most inward
^isposition. Wherefore I seriously advise you, first to search out and examine
whether he, by reason that he is entangled with some vice, or trouble of mind,
^o neglect the good of his soul. If you find him to ^e of a quiet disposition,
and ready to receive admo^nition, then you may diligently advise him of such
things, as you shall think good. If you perceive him to be moved with anger,
or any other trouble, you must then forbear to admonish him, and endeavor
gently to pacify his distempred mind by certain inward insinuations, and
sweetness of speech. Then you shall bring him to have a consideration and care
of his ^aluation, trying him at the first with lighter admoni^tions, and if
they succeed well, then to set upon him with sharper. And at last when you have
wholly wo^ne him unto you, and that he commit himself intierly to your
direction, you shall prescribe him certain rules ^o observe, A remedy how to
pacify anger and to ease trouble of mind.
and plainly, and openly declare unto him ^ll such things as shall be necessary
for the good of his soul. And the only remedy to ease his trouble of mind or
qualify his anger, is, by speaking prudently unto him, to extenuate and make
less the cause of his grief or anger: As if he be moved with passion, to
impute the injury rather to want of consideration, then to any malice, or ill
will which the other had; or to tell him, that God permits it for the
punishment of his former sins; or that perhaps himself had heretofore
committed something against his Parents, knisfolkes, friends, or other innocent
persons, for which his divine Majesty did now justly, and duly punish him.

These things, or such like, which are of force to extinguish passions of
anger, must be inculcated unto him. And this rule which I have given against
Anger, may be also applied to other unbridled motions of the mind. This
likewise you shall urge unto him, that although he then seems to have some
just cause to be moved, yet if he will recollect himself a little, and by
calling back his thoughts to the truth it self, and more narrowly and
attentively consider of the matter, he shall infallibly find, that, that which
so much troubles him, is nothing at all. And so at last with a cheerful and
joyful look, you shall wipe away al his trouble of mind, and in a friendly and
careful manner advise him, what is needful to do, according to the condition
of the party, and the promptitude of hi^ will. Endeavor must be used that they
who are instructed by one must open to him their re^ptations.


You shall also endeavor what you can, to cause them whom you instruct in the
way of virtue, to open unto you all their temptations, and the thoughts which
assault their mind. For this is an especial help^ for those who are ignorant
in this kind of combat (...) or at leastwise not sufficiently experienced or
practiced therein, to arrive to the perfection of virtue. Bu^ if you carry your
self with more Severity, then Benignity toward them (seeing that Severity
often excludes Confidence) they will easily conceal from you how they are
assaulted by the Devil, Mildnes is necessary in one that instructs others.
thinking it easier to suffer the Devils assaults, then their Instructors
harshnesse: and so, being deprived of all necessary help, and exposed to the
darts of their most cru^ll enemy, will be so long assaulted, and oppressed,
vn^ill at last being overcome with vexations, they yield themselves as
prisoners.

If you shall perceive any to be tempted, A way how to correct vices.
either with pride, carnal concupiscence, or any other vice, your best course
perhaps will be, by giving them some time to deliberate, to wish them to bethink
themselves upon some remedy against those vices. Which that it may succeed
according to their desire, you shall first open them the way to invent some such
remedy; then you shall will them to consider seriously, what course themselves
would take, to persuade sick persons, prisoners, or others to avoid such like
vices; and so the same medicine which they would give to others they may apply
to themselves. For if they be communicated to others, they will both profit
them, and they will also of themselves be incited to those things, which they
perswad^ ^^to others. This rule may also serve for others, who by reason of
some impediment, cannot be absolved. For it is good to demand of the^, that if
they should go about to reclaim another from the same vice whereto themselves
are subject, what course they would in fine take? and so at last persuade them
to make use of that counsel and remedy themselves, which they would give unto
others upon the like occasion.

This also must be looked unto, that in exercising those that be brought up
according to our Institu^e, and in inioyning them employments of virtue, th^^
be a mean observed, so as every man's burden be ^lotted him proportionably to
his forces. For if they be greater then he can commodiously carry, A mean in
the exercise of virtue
they will not stir up virtue, but rather keep it down in him. And so being
discouraged and tired out, he will refuse to take the burden which is to be
imposed upon him, and perhaps shake of that also, which he has already
undertaken.

And for as much as the King of Portugal has out of his free bounty given
order, The King of Portugal his liberality.
that we shall be every where provided of all things necessary, I judge it fit,
that you make use of his liberality, rather then of any other. For assuredly,
he that receives things from another, loses his own freedom, especially
seeing that bounty imposes a necessity of being obsequious for the benefit
received; and that liberty which is sold for a benefit, is so servile, that
although it be bold sometimes to adventure upon something, yet the efficacy
thereof is of far less weight, then it would be, if it had the full disposing
of it self. To which you may also add, that if he, who bestows any thing
upon you, commit a sin, you cannot reprehend him freely. For who will have so
bold a face, as to presume to bark at him that feeds him?

CHAP. XIII.
Precepts given by Xauerius to John Brauius, and others of the Society.
AS soon as you rise out of your bed in the morning, Manner of meditating.
you shall observe this rule: For half an hour at least, to meditate
something of the life of Christ; and this order you shall keep therein, to
begin with his Nativity, and then going on with your meditation, by little and
little to run through all the other noble passages of his life, until you
come to his glorious Ascension into heaven. And for every day, there shall be
particular points assigned, in the very same manner, as is prescribed in the
little Book of Spiritual Exercises: so that you may every month run over the
whole life of our Savior Christ in your Meditations.

Moreover, Vows daily to be renewed.
I would advise you every day when you have ended your meditation, to renew
your vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; then the which, for such
persons as are consecrated to God, there is scarce any more safe defense
against the assaults of our deadly enemy the Devil. Wherefore you shall hold
this in highest esteem, daily to arm your self with those wholesome weapons.
And in the Afternoon, when you have taken your corporal refection, you shall
again employ almost as much more time in the repetition of your morning
meditation, which you shall also in the like manner, conclude with the like
renouation of your vows, as before.

Moreover, A manner how to examine ones conscience.
at night after supper, before you go to bed, you shall betake your self to the
examen of your Conscience; so as taking an account of all that you have
thought, said, or done that day, you shall easily see, if there be any thing
wherein you have offended God, or your Neighbor: and this you shall perform in
as exact a manner, as though you were presently to make your confession. Then
you shall demand of God pardon for all your offense, purposing from your heart to
amend your life. And last of al, having said the accustomed prayers of Pater
Noster, and Aue Maria, you shall for a little while, think what course you may
best take for the speedy amendment of those your defects. Care of amendment.


The next day therefore in the morning whilst you arise, and apparel your
self, you shall call to mind your late offenses of the day before, and having
humbly implored the assistance of the divine Majesty, that you may not offend
in any thing that day (and specially not to fall into those ordinary and usual
faults) you shall begin your meditation, in the manner we spoke of before.
And this you shall do every day. But if through negligence you omit any of these
said things, making a conscience thereof, you shall acknowledge your fault as the
custom is, Victory over ones self.
and that openly before your companions, that you have neglected those things
which were prescribed you.

You shall moreover in all things, whereof you perceive your inordinate desire,
or corrupt nature to have an horror, Humility and obedience necessaris for
those of the Society.
courageously overcome your self, knowing that our chief care ought to be of
Christian humility. For without lowly submission of mind, and true Humility,
you will not be able to profit either your self or others; nor will you be
grateful to God and his Saints, nor yet worthy to be long endured of the
Society of Jesus, as being no way able to brook haughty spirits, who commonly
follow their own wills, and judgments. Wherefore you shall diligently upon all
occasions endeavor to obey your Superior, and that without any excuse, or
unwillingness, no otherwise then if Father Ignatius himself should command
you. Temptations are to be discovered.
To him you shall declare the temptations which the Devil suggesteth unto you,
of what kind soever they be, that being armed by his advise and assistance, you
may the more easily avoid the assaults of that most cruel Tyrant. For humility
in discovering the Adversaries temptations and assaults, obteyneth no less
aid and assistance, then favor at Gods hands. Wherefore it does not only
defeat his most crafty plottes for the present, but also weakeneth his forces
and endeavors for the time to come. For perceauing that his subtilties are
once discovered, by little and little he loses his hope of the victory, and
is discouraged also from setting upon us.

These admonitions he gave to Brauius, remaining at Malaca; and these also
which follow unto others when they went to Cocinum. Above all things (as much
as shall lie in you) you shall gain the love of the City, but especially of
Religious persons, and of those of the Sodality of the B. V. Mary. Let
therefore both your words and deeds manifest that you desire nothing more then
to deserve well of all, and to advance both those of the City, and of the
Sodality also, in pretty. Courteousnesse in going to salute those of the
Sodality, Courteousnes in salutations and visits.
will easily gain them to assist you in your difficultyes. If you shall stand
in need of any thing, for relief of the poor, you shall request it chiefly of
them, but in such sort, that you teach the poor to acknowledge them to be the
authors of that bounty. This course also you shall take with the poor, that
when they lay open unto you their corporal necessities you shall in like sort
lay open to them the necessity of their souls, What course is to be taken with
the poor.
which they themselves do not perhaps perceive: and after you have taken care
of their souls, then you shall also, if you can, assist them in their
corporal necessities.

In your conversation and discourse with others, you must take heed least a
kind of too much gravity in you, yield suspicion of arrogance, which looks to
be reverenced: but rather carry your selves with a cheerful countenance, and
always show affability in your speech. Too much gravity is to be avoided.
Your chief care shall be to behave your selves humbly, and modestly in all
things. You shall therefore bear great respect not only to the Prelates of the
Church, but to Priests also, and all others. It is also very necessary to make
them partakers of such things, as shall be by you laudably performed, together
with the praise thereof, that they may become favorers, and Patrons of those
works whereof they reap the fruit.

In your Sermons also, you shall gently recall your your auditors from the
errors, and vices wherein ^hey live. Diverse ways to deal with diverse persons.
But such as be hard-harted and obstinate, ^re now and then to be terrifyed
with the severity and ^igour of the divine justice; as contrariwise, such as
show themselves tractable are to be comforted and animated by propounding to
them the clemency and mercy of God. Moreover such as are obstinate, and stick
fast in the sincke of heinous sins, must be urged with threathes from heaven,
yet in such sort, as they may not loose all hope in the divine Mercy, but that
their hearts may be sometimes cheered up by remembrance thereof.

By all means procure, that the good name of the Society may be spread abroad
by you, far and near. For the which there is no virtue of more importance,
then true and sincere submission of mind. Remember how those Enlargers of our
Society in the very heat of many, and great vexations, exercised themselves
very carefully in all kind of virtues; and so shall you be partakers of their
merits and glory, if you imitate their industrious labors in aduauncing the
Societies good estimation. You must also remember that to gain authority with
the people in sacred affairs, and such things as belong to the good of souls,
is the gift of God; Authority with the people is a gift of God.
which is bestowed gratis upon pious and virtuous persons (but is ordinarily
denied unto the crafty and subtle, and to such as seek after it by humane
means) to this end without doubt, that perverse men may not think
contemptibly of divine gifts; which they would do, if they were dispensed
equally, as well to the arrogant, as to the humble.

You must therefore earnestly beseech of God, that he would be pleased in every
thing to declare, and lay open unto you the impediments, which, through your
imprudency, you cast in the way before the divine i^deauours, by reason whereof
he does not by you impart his gifts to the people; whereby you do, without
doubt, deserve that he should not give you that authority, and esteem, which
is necessary for such a business. This certainly must be taken heed of, with
the greatest diligence that can be possible. Wherefore in your examen of
conscience, you shall with a very inward care, In examine of our conscience we
must look into our offices and charges.
take an especial account of your selves, whether you have done any thing
amiss, either in preaching, hearing confessions, or in your conversation and
discourse; and shall take joy in ame^ding those faults which you perceive in
your selves, and in purging your souls of all bad affections. For certainly
the further you remove your selves from vices, the nearer you approach unto
celestial gifts.

Do not therefore admire, much less imitate those who invent new ways to
please the people, hunting thereby after popular esteem, Popular applause is by
no means to be sought.
and praise. For such kind of persons attend rather to their own, then to Gods
glory, and are more sollicitous about their own commodities, then of the
salvation of souls. Wherefore their course is very unstable, and subject to
ruin, which being puffed up with a blind desire of glory, sets it self
forth with ostentation to the people, being in the mean while hateful to God.
You must also by all means endeavor, to have both a feeling in your
meditations of those things, which I shall suggest unto you, Things meditated
are to be put in execution.
and also to put them carefully into execution. And if by divine instinct,
there happen to be any such feelings or motions in your souls, you shall for
memory sake, set them down in writing, and express them afterward in your
actions: and thus by practicing those things whereon you have meditated, virtue
(being as it were nourished with good feeding) will arise to a greater grouth.
For it is wonderful to think what difference is between that gust and
feeling those holy men had, who have left us their wrytings concerning this
subject, and that which we now have, who only read, or hear their writings
read. For those things which they meditated upon, and conceived in their mind,
gave them great incitements to virtue; whereas for the most part, they do not
make in us, any great impressions.

Wherefore I do seriously advise and exhort you, Things meditated are to be
looked over
that every one be careful to keep in writing, and diligently to look over
those feelings, and motions of piety which he shall receive from God. The
which, that God may daily more and more increase, you must endeavor to root
your selves every day deeper and deper in humility. Faithful admonitours are
to be sought after.
You shall also seek out some faithful friends and admonitours, who may tell
you in a friendly, and free manner, if you fail in any thing that is appointed
you, that so you may by others come to the knowledge of your own faults, and
amend that which you your selves do not see, because every one is more
quick-sighted ordinarily to behold another imperfections, then their own.

These, and the like admonitions did Xauerius give, partly to Superiors of the
Society, and partly to others. But those are very singular which at his
departure toward China he left unto Gaspar his vicar. Which notwithstanding,
as well as others (to avoid the tec^ousnesse of repeating the same things) we
do here of purpose omit, reserving them for another place. For seeing that the
same precepts are accommodated for the instruction of diverse sorts of persons,
we have thought good to distribute them into certain Chapters, that every one
may benefit himself, by that which he shall perceive to be fittest for him.

CHAP. XIV.
What kind of Governors, and Superiors he required in the Society.
XAVERIVS required, that Superiors in the Society, Care of ones self.
should be such, as himself was. He used therefore so say, that above all
things, they ought first to have a care to look unto themselves, before they
took upon them to help others. For that man could neither have any care of
another, who had none of himself; nor look unto other men's salvation, who was
negligent of his own. It is not for every one to govern.
Wherefore he said, that it was not for every one to be a Superior. For the
person of a Governor could in no wise be undertaken, and endured by the vulgar
sort, and such as were imperfect, without infinite danger to himself.

Moreover he seriously admonished those that were superiors that they should
not suffer themselves to be entangled with other public affairs, Civil
businesses to be a voyded 2. Tim 2.
especially such as belonged to the Commonwealth, deeming them a great
distraction and hindrance to their proper and domestical charges. For no man,
who is a soldier of Christ uses to entangle himself in secular business.
Wherefore their chief care should be, to perform well and daily their own
office, and also to assist, and look to those who were committed to their
charge. Superiors first care must be of their own. Mash. 23.
And when they had performed that with care and diligence, if they had any time
to spare they might employ it upon others: whereto he applied that sentence of
our Savior Christ, These things you ought to do, and not to omit those. This
principal Precept therefore he gave to Gaspar his Vicar.

Your first and chief care must be rather concerning your self, then those
who are under your charge. For he that is bad to himself, to whom will he be
good? Let your own salvation, I say, Eccles. 14
and theirs who are of your household be more dear unto you, then others,
because we must chiefly give an account to God of our selves, and for those
also that be committed to our charge. And they who omit their own domestical
affairs, and busy themselves about others, do err no less, then they who
being unmindful both of God and themselves, seek to please and content men.
Wherefore you shall first take care of your own Househould, and afterward of
others, if you have any leisure. As for your manner of helping them, the more
general it is, the more profitable it will be; such are the exercises of often
preaching, explication of the Catechism, and hearing Confessions.

He would also have Superiors to go before others, no less in humble
submission of mind, Superiors must excel in humility and other virtues.
temperance, charity, and prudence, then in power and authority; and with a
fatherly affection to bear as well with their subjects weakness and
imbecility, as to ease them of vexations, and troubles. This likewise he much
insisted upon, that they should always desire to beloved rather then feared,
and endeavor in all they could, to be as a loving Father unto them all, by
which means it would easily come to pass, that themselves should be sure to
employ their admonitions with profit, for the reformation of bad habits, and
the other could not choose but take all such things in good part also.
Wherefore in their government, they should use rather lenity and gentleness,
then authority and command, lest they should feed their flock as dominiering
over the Clergy, Arroga^t persons are to be kept down.
which S. Peter forbids. And this course they should hold, especially with
the quiet and humble. Now for such as were turbulent, arrogant, and immoderate
praysers of themselves, they ought to be sharply reprehended for their abuses,
and punished also if need were, that the rod of discipline might bring under,
the haughtines of such dispositions. In which kind he gave to Gaspar certain
precepts in these words.

To the Fathers, and Brethren, who be committed to your charge, carry your
self rather gently and with moderation, then severely and with too much
gravity, unless any one chance to abuse your benignity; for then to provide
for his good, you must take upon you some severity; the which, if you perceive
any one to be puffed up with arrogance and pride, will be to good purpose to
beat down, and abate his ^ll-distempered spirits. For as it is expedient to
bear with those who fall, out of some inconsideration or forgetfulness; so
likewise it is necessary to repress and keep those under, who through
arrogance become insolent and contumacious. And by no means must you give any
one cause to think, that you being his Rectour, and overcome by his insolency
and stubbornes, do give thereby way unto his abuses. For there can no greater
mischief ever happen to stubborn natures, then if you wincke at them by
treating them ^imorously and gently in their errors and obstinacies, seeing,
the giving way to such persons, causes them to take more stomach, and puts
them oftentimes in hope to do what they list, without any to correct, or punish
them.

Neither would he have the Rulers and Superiors of the Society to be over
hasty, Choice is to be made of such as are to be admitted into the Society.
or too facile in receiving any into their company without choice, but out of
many to choose few, and those fit members, because there is far greater
strength in a choice band of men then in an infinite multitude of the vulgar
sort. And such indeed, were wished to be admitted into the Society, who seem
to be borne, and framed as it were, for that course of life, and upon whose
virtue one might assuredly rely both at home, and abroad. But for such as
should come unto the Society enforced rather by some difficulty or necessity,
then out of devotion, or desire to serve God; to such the Society should in no
case give way. And this opinion was so grounded in Xauerius mind, that he had
rather have servants, either hired for wages, or procured by some ^ther means,
then to admit such into the Society, as were not fit, for the manage of
domestical affairs. Wherefore he gave Gaspar this charge.

Do not easily, and without choice receive many into the Society, but a few,
and such as may be fit. For both the nature of the Society requires it, and a
few extraordinary spirits are more profitable, then a thousand of the vulgar
sort. Such therefore as are weak, dull, and of no spirit you shall not admit,
as very unfit members for the Society, which requires men that be industrious,
generous, and endowed with extraordinary virtue, and who performing great
matters are contented with a little. And as for such to whom a pious and
virtuous disposition had given a sufficient commendation, How the virtue of
those that were to be admitted was to be tried.
and were judged fit men for the Society, those he would have to be long, and
well exercysed and tried, until their virtue were sufficiently made known, by
many and great proofs. He commanded also, that their Virtue should be tried
rather by ouerco^ming themselves, and suppressing the turbulent motions and
appetits of their mind, then by any show of devotion, by tears, sighs, or
rigorous mortification of the body. Wherefore he gave order so to mortify their
members, A manmer of mortification.
which were upon the earth, that the same might serve to cast off the old man
and put on the new. And therefore he prescribed this method, least by giving way
to new inventions, the ^^wonted nesse of the thing might displease the eyes
(...) minds of the behoulders. Concerning which mat^^ he gives this command to
Gaspar.

Those whom you shall admit into the Society, I ^inke it better to exercise
them in the ouercomming (...) their unbridled passions and affections, then in
cor^^rall mortifications, and such like new inventions. ^^t if any exterior
mortification be applied to re^raine the inward motions of the mind, let it be
al^aies such, as may not cause laughter in the behol^ers, but be approved; As
for example, continual ^ruing of the sick in the Hospitals, begging of money
(...) other alms for the relieuing of poor prisoners, and ^he like. It much
avails some also to Humility, to ^eclare publicly to their companions, the
manner, ^unctions, and employments of their former life before their entrance
into the Society, and other such ^ike things which may help to humility. But in
this kind, there is great respect of persons to be had, and much consideration
also of what every ones condition, and virtue can bear. For unless this heed
be taken, there may arise more harm then good thereof.

Xauerius judged it likewise fit, that Nouices should be accustomed to declare
themselves to their Instructors, and to lay open unto them all their
temptations inclinations, and passions, as likewise their feelings of devotion,
their divine consolations, and voluntary pennances; that so they may infallibly
defeat all the machinations of the enemy, who most of all assaulteth there,
where his deceit is least feared, by manifesting the same to those who are
experienced in such kind of matters: And if by chance they shall have erred in
any thing, All not to be admitted to holy Orders.
they may thereby again b^ brought into the right way. Moreover he required
that Superiors should take great heed, that they did not inconsideratly admit
all to receive holy Orders, but such only of whose fidelity, and virtue they
had had long trial, and whose prudence, and learning was at least ordinary.
For Priests of the Society, to live according to their institute, cannot
without great danger want these helps. Whereupon he gives Gaspa^ this
admonition.

You shall judge none fit for Priesthood, unless he have the commendation of
long, and thoroughly* tried Virtue: because the Society requires Priests of
approved Virtue and learning, for the performance of the functions of their
Institute. This our experience has taught us to be true: for they that have
not been such, we know to have been rather an hindrance, then an help unto the
Society.

And before all others, he would have those that be absent, laboring in our
Lords vineyard far from the company of their Brethren, to be especially
provided for of all commodities, because they (as he was wont to say) were
workmen, who indeed did bear the burden of the day, and the heat. For which
cause he said, that both their corporal and spiritual necessityes ought
carefully to be considered and relieved. And that it was also good, to ask
oftentimes of such men of credit as came thence, how they behaved themselves,
and oftentimes likewise, to give them comfort by letters; but never to write
any ^^ing sharply unto them, or of that nature which ^ight either cause them
trouble, or put the^ out of hope (...) effecting what they have undertaken, for
that they ^ommonly suffer vexations enough where they be; and therefore it was
good to abstain from all severity, and ^ot to heap affliction upon the
afflicted. Moreover ^e forbad they should be often changed (unless neces^ity did
perchance urge unto it) especially by such Su^eriours, as had not yet
sufficient knowledge of the places, Frequent changes to be avoided.
countries, and employments wherein they lived. For there was danger least the
changing of the labourer should bring some disturbance to their fruitful, and
profitable works.

He would also, that the Rectours and Superiors should have great care,
Scandal by all means to be avoided. Prou. 22.
that the Societies good name might be spread abroad, and that all offense
might be every where avoided, although it were with some detriment in their
temporal means, for better indeed is a good name, then store of riches.
Wherefore he seriously exhorted them, that attending more to the edification of
Virtue, then of Colleges, they should cause their Houses to be built in such
sort, The building of howses.
that they might not so much carry a glorious show, as serve them for
necessity, and commodity of habitation. If any thing belonging to their
temporal means, should cause them much trouble, as the exacting of rents or
money due unto them, they should commit that business, being no less odious
then necessary, to some hired Attorney, rather then to one of their own
Company. Likewise, he most earnestly entreated the Superiors of the Society,
to gain the good will of the Superiors of all other Religious Orders and
families, as also of Clergy men and Priests, Other Religious men to be woone.
and to live with the^ in the greatest unity and friendship that could be. To
which end they should sometimes go to visit, and salute them, as well to
gain, as to conserve their good will, or other ways to show their union, and
amity with them.

CHAP. XV.
What kind of men Xauerius wished, should be in the Society.
XAVERIVS required, that those of the Society should be humble obedient
moderate, and conquerers of themselves in all things which are repugnant to our
corrupt nature. For without these virtues none of the Society could either be
grateful and acceptable to God, profitable to himself and others, or ever live
with a quiet and contented mind in the Society. All therefore ought to exercise
themselves very diligently, and for a long space in the knowledge of
themselves, that by plucking up disordinace appetites, as weeds by the roots,
they might lay a deep foundation of true humility and solid virtue. For as he
who in meditating upon the most bitter death and torments of Christ, by feeling
a pious enflamed grief in himself, can easily enkindle in another the same
sorrow of heart; so he that has conquered and beaten down the disor^^nate
motions of his own mind, can without diffi^ulty, restrain, and bridle the
same also in others.

Moreover he said, that none ought to esteem much ^f himself because he had
been long of the Society. For the worth of those that be in the Society, was not
^o be measured by the length of the time, but by the greatness of their
virtue. Seeing that they ought rather to be ashamed, then to boast of
themselves, who having bin so long in the school of Virtue, have made so small
progress therein, 2. Tim. 3.
Always learning, and ^euer arriving to the knowledge of truth. He likewise
forbad them to make any account of the esteem which other men had of the^,
least perhaps a disguized fair gloss of things might breed in them pride and
haughtiness of mind, the most certain and greatest plague, and poison which
can befall the Society. But contrariwise he willed them to turn their
consideration to the knowledge of their own weakness, and especially to
ponder oftentimes the difference between the judgments of men's and the judgment
of God, and there indeed to lay the foundation of their Humility. For he that
attentively considers, what a different judgment God, Who is the searcher of
hearts, frames of men, from that which men themselves do, who behold only
exterior actions; will undoubtedly depresse himself to the lowest rank that
may be in Gods sight, and repute all humane praises (as aiming far amiss from
the truth) for nothing else but crosses, Confidence in God.
and scorns of men. Yet we must not for all this, through consideration of our
own weakness, loose courage in the war-fare and service of Christ: but we
are rather to endeavor, as well by distrusting our own forces, as by reposing
our confidence in the divine assistance, to take heart in all things, since we
must employ our selves in great matters for his sake, who always is ready to
put thereto his helping hand.

The way also to arrive to the perfection of virtue which he showed them, was
this. That every one should in the first place have a care of himself, and
twice every day (if it could be) or at least once, to examine his own
conscience: using the greatest endeavor he could by all means to amend those
defects which he perceived in himself; and that he should moreover make the
greatest esteem that might be of his daily meditation, and never suffer any
day to pass over, without affoarding his soul some such kind of repast. And
this meditation he would have to be always made with serious ponderation upon
the life, passion and death of Christ our Savior, as being a subject of
perfect virtue, and peculiarly proper to the Society of JESUS. He counsayled
them likewise after meditation ended, against the incursions and assaults of
the devil, every day to renew their vows, and to declare all the temptations
of the enemy of what sort soever, together with their bad inclinatio^s, as well
as their desires of virtue, to their Ghostly Fathers, Superiors, and other
spiritual Directours, who were able both to counsel and assist them. For
such is the force of this humble submission, that it does not only obtain more
light and help from God in the time of combat, but frustrateth also the most
importune Adversary, who perceiving his plot to be discovered, his assaults
defeated, and his designs broken off, becomes assuredly more remiss in his
batteries, and at last flies away with loss of the victory, over whom he had
before triumphed.

He also required blind, and simple Obedience in those of the Society, that
leaving their own judgment and opinion, they should in all things (excepting
such as were contrary to the divine Law) obey without any reply, or demurring
upon the matter. That they should not demand of their Superiors such things
as they desired after an odious, and importune manner, or by any invention
wrest their command to their own wills; but that every one should freely direct
his judgment and opinion to that of his Superior, and leave himself wholly
therein to the judgment of those that represent the person of God; houlding this
for certain, that in all things which they command, God will so inspire them,
as may be most for his divine honor, and their profit. For, quoth he, they
that should do otherwise, would oftentimes fall into great troubles, vexations,
and miseries. Which inconveniences, those who are perniciously blinded with
error might think proceeded from the Cross of our Lord, or from the
Obedience; when as indeed they were the fruits which sprung from their own
perverse judgment, and self will. Wherefore they should always make choice
rather to obey their command; especially seeing that it is always secure to be
ruled by another, but often dangerous to govern ones self. For although one
may sometimes rule himself well, yet there be very few, as being deceived with
a certain blind love of themselves, who do not most commonly the contrary.

He further more commanded them, that if at any time they were employed in
humble and abject offices, they should carefully, Humble offices are to be
embraced.
and seriously perform them, and draw out of them the greatest profit of
humility which the could, fully persuading themselves, that they could not at
that time do any thing more grateful, and acceptable to God, in whose name
they were commanded: remembering also themselves, that smaller exercises were
entrances always unto greater; and that he who was not quick in the lowest,
used not to be excellent in the highest: whereas contrariwise he that went with
alacrity about little things, would easily find courage in matters of more
importance. For as our Savior Christ says; Lu^ 16.
He that is faithful in the least, is so also in the greatest.

Moreover he prudently admonished them, not to forsake, or neglect the place or
station which was assigned them by their Superior, although they might be in
hope to do more good somewhere else. For it was infallibly a deceit of the
infernal enemy to suggest vain flourishes of the future and uncertain fruit
that might be reaped in other places, thereby to draw us from the present, and
assured good which we do in the place assigned us; that so, whilst we are
distracted with wavering cares, he may make a mocking stock of us, and send us
away without any fruit at all: Seeing, that as long as you remain in this
uncertainty what to resolve upon, you are not well able either to labor in
another place where you are not, or in that where you are, because you mind is
somewhere else. For confirmation of this wholesome precept he uses that common
sentence of the Apostle: Gal. 10.
While we have time, let us do good. Wherefore he wished such to be confident,
that if what they desired was pleasing to God, he would undoubtedly move their
Superior to send them thither where it should be most for his divine honor.

He was also wont to say, that they were indeed grievously mistaken, who
desired to be honored for the virtue, and notable deeds of their
predecessors, from whom they themselves were become degenerate; imitating
therein those, who adorning themselves with other folks apparel, sought to be
honored and esteemed for great persons. It were indeed better for them by
following their ancestors foote-steps, to emulate their virtue and worth, then
degenerating from them, to boast of others goods, as if they were their own.

Moreover, We must not go to help others before our time.
this advise of his was not more prudent then profitable. He charged those that
were still in trayning up at home in regular discipline, that they should not
be over desirous to go into the field to fight before their time, nor trust too
much upon their own forces, although they should see themselves subject to no
great fault: For certain it is, that young beginners are many times guarded,
not so much by their own virtue, as by the place where they live, which easily
defends them from the assaults of their enemies, and allurements to sin.
Wherefore in the time of their Nouice-ship they should carefully arm
themselves with solid virtue, that afterward they might live safely in the
midst of their enemies darts.

CHAP. XVI.
What manner of Preachers he required in the Society.
HE oftentimes admonished the Preachers of the Society, Preachers ought to
preach not themselves but Christ.
not to preach themselves, but Christ crucified; that is to say, that they
should, not by handling subtle questions and arguments far from the reach,
and understanding of the vulgar sort, make a flourish of their own learning
and wit, thereby to get esteem, and applause of the people: but their Sermons
should for the most part be of moral matters, such as were plain and suitable
to the capacity of their vulgar audience; which being modestly, religiously,
and prudently explicated, would certainly prevail not a little toward the
curing of men's souls. This therefore should be their aim, by laying before
their Auditors, the foulness of sin, and the greatness of the offense
against the divine Majesty, together with the wrath which from heaven is
threatened against such enormities, to draw them to sorrow of heart, and
repentance. But it will not be a miss to hear what instructions he himself
gives unto Gaspar.

The chiefest office of a Preacher, says he, is to cause in his auditour great
feeling of his sins, and to terrify him from future crimes and enormities, by
laying before him the infallible, and never ending torments of the damned. To
discover also the deceiptes and treacheries of Satan; and in fine to treat of
such things, as may be rather understood, then admired, even by the vulgar
sort. Wherefore in his Sermons he was not to cite too many testimonies out of
holy scripture, nor to handle such things as were doubtful, and in controversy
among Doctors; Testimonies out of scripture ought not to be too much used.
but such as were certain, plain, and fit to draw men to the amendment of
their lives, and good deportement in their behavior. He should therefore much
insist upon reprehending of vices, making grievous complaints for the injuries
which are done to our Savior Christ, eagerly threatening revenge from heaven,
and everlasting torments, which are prepared in hell for lewd, and wicked
persons, together with the imminent terrors of death, which often times
seizes upon me^ when they least expect it.

Certain points also were to be propounded by way of colloquy either of a
penitent sinner with God, or of God all-enraged with a sinful man. But all
means must be used, that by the fervor of their speech, the auditors may at
last open the eyes of their hearts, to behold the wounds of their souls, and
cure them by means of the Sacraments. And thus his Sermons will in the end
prove profitable, and fruitful; notwithstanding he is to take great heed, that
he do not let fall any inconsiderate words, which may reprehend, or touch any
one in particular either present or absent, especially if they be Prelates or
Magistrates. For if such persons shall chance to offend, it will be better and
more secure to admonish each of thempriuately, and discreetly at home in his
own house, or in confession. For to reprehend them publicly is no way
convenient. so apt are men, when they are told of their faults, to be rather
exasperated thereat, then to amend the same; especially Governors and
Magistrates, whose authority certainly seems much impeached, when they are
reprehended before their own subjects; because great Honors cause ordinarily
great spirits, which may not easily be reprehended.

If any such person be admonished in private, A manner how admonish great men.
this course shall be taken, to do the same more earnestly, or gently according
as you are acquainted with him; for that which is accounted freedom amongst
familiar friends, may seem oftentimes too much boldness with strangers: and
the rigor also of the reprehension it self, must be tempered with
cheerfullnesse of countenance, and mildness of speech. Wherefore let al stern
looks and harshnesse of words be laid aside, and let there be intermingled
imbracements suitable to that purpose (if the state of the person will allow
it) with frequent signs of humility, that being woone thereby, he may with a
more contented mind receive that sovereign antidote of your admonition. For if
the reprehension, which of it self is always bitter enough, should be
presented unto such men in a harsh or crabbed manner, persons of great spirits
being not able to brook the affront, will certaynely contemn and reject your
wholesome admonishment; and moreover will cast of all respect unto us, and upon
the suddayne become our enemies, who before were friends. And these things are
to be understood of principal persons, and such as are placed in government,
and authority.

Moreover, A preachers prudence to inquire out the vices and behavior of the
people.
he required often and frequent sermons, supposing that out of that common
fountain, there might flow many and particular benefits. Wherefore he would
not have a Sermon omitted without good cause, nor preachers to be busied in
other affairs. Concerning which subject, as also about the diligent endeauours
of a Preacher, he gives to F. Gaspar this divine instruction. You shall, says
he, never prefer a private good, before a common. Wherefore preaching must not
be omitted for the hearing of Confessions, nor the instruction of Children or
ignorant people be put of for private exercises of charity. If you come into a
Town which you do not know, your chief care shall be, to inquire of some
persons of esteem and credit, about the vices unto which the inhabitants are
addicted, and what unjust contracts be among them. Against which your sermons
shall indeed be carried on with a certain seruour, that such vices, and
corruptions may, by reprehending afterward more sharply in Confession, be
wholly taken away. For the chief means to help souls is to know the
disposition and behavior of the people in general, and the diseases (as much
as may be) of every one in particular, to wit, who disagree amongst themselves
who bear emnity to one another, what deceipts, what injustice in matters of
equity, what perfidiousnesse of witnesses, what corruption of Judges and
judgments there be among them. These things therefore must be inquired after,
of prudent and experienced persons, and all careful consideration be used to
find out, what course ought best to be taken for the curing thereof.

You shall moreover by all means possible, draw your penite^ts to lay open
their whole soul unto you, for you will find no other way better, whereby to
help those with whom you converse, in matters concerning their salvation, then
if you can thoroughly sound out their inclinations and conditions, and all such
things as hinder them in the way of virtue. This indeed ought to be their
chief study, who employ themselves for the gaining of souls. This in fine, is
the true reading in living books, which will teach you, what you cannot find
in dead papers. For the things which are delivered in writing use not always
to be so good for practice, as those which are taught in living books, who are
the persons with whom you be conversant in the same affairs. These books
assuredly will easily teach us a prudent method, both how to converse warily
amongst men, and to preach also with profit unto the people. Notwithstanding I
speak not these things in such sort, as that I would not have the worthy
monuments of holy and learned men to be read, but to give you this rule; That
you should gather doctrine from thence to confirm thereby such cures of vices,
which you have drawn out of those living books; for so much as both the
examples and sentences of holy men, as also the testimonies of sacred Writ, are
of great force to give credit to any thing you teach.

Moreover, Cheerfulnes of countenance.
in your conversation and discourse, there must rather appear a cherfulnesse
and sweetness of countenance, then sadness and severity. For if you carry
your self with heaviness, and too much gravity many will be te^ryfied with
your looks, and will assuredly avoid your company: and what then is to be
expected of such, but that they become a prey ready for the wolf to devour,
seeing the Pastor has frighted them away. They be certainly the cords of Adam,
wherewith men must be drawn, whom gentleness allureth, and severity drives
away. Wherefore it is best to endeavor to carry your self mild and affable to
all. Let your reprehensions in any case be gentle, and mollified with the
spirit of lenity: and let there be very great heed taken, least any harshnesse
in your behavior make your conversation troublesome, and odious to others.

Again, he gave this instruction to Preachers, that they should both think
humbly of themselves, and also carry themselves so in the Pulpit, that their
very countenance and speech might easily show their humility of mind.
Whatsoever good they said, or did, they should attribute it to God the Author
of al goodness, and acknowledging only to be their own whatsoever should be
ill, or done amiss. In so much, said he, as they ought sometimes to examine
their own Sermons, and if they found to have committed any error in their
preaching, and hindered either the glory of God, or the profit of the people,
they might humbly ask God pardon for the same. For that a principal profit
which may be drawn out of holy sermons consists in the amendment of such
faults. In which kind there is extant a notable admonition of Xaueri^ to Gaspar
his Vicar, who was an excellent Preacher.

The principal thing, says he, as well in other things, as in the office of
preaching, is to refer to God, whatsoever good arises thereof. For it is
undoubtedly he who both gives to the people a feeling of devotion to hear the
word of God, and to you to preach it. Remember therefore, that you have not
received that very gift, so much through any merit of your own, as by the
prayers of the Society, which often most instantly beseeches the divine
Majesty to bestow his guiftes upon those that be members thereof: bearing also
in memory, that whatsoever you shall utter in your Sermon which is good or
pious, is not your own, but Gods who speaks in you. Exercise therefore that
divine talent with all care and diligence whereof you are one day to render an
account. Attribute nothing to your self but only defects, slothfulness,
pride, and ingratitude both to God, to the people, and to the Society, who have
by their prayers obtained that gift of God for you. Wherefore you shall humbly
again, and again, desire of God, that he will clearly manifest unto you,
wherein you have hindered his divine grace, as that he has not effected those
things which he would, whilst your unworthiness was an obstacle to greater
matters. And lastly you shall from your heart cast your self prostrate before
God, the examiner of hearts and reins, and earnestly beseech him, that you may
not in your sermons or discourses give offense to any one.

This consideration is the nurse of true and perfect humility. The grounds of
humility:
For the knowledge of ones self, that is to say, a perfect understanding of
ones own weakness considered, breeds, nourishes, and increases Christian
humility and virtue. I would have you by all means to remember this, and
deeply to ponder the same, That there be many Preachers now tormented in hell,
who were more copious, and eloquent then you are, and have also converted more
from a lewed and wicked to an honest and veruous life: and who (which is even a
prodigious thing) having been the cause of many others salvation, have
notwithstanding most miserably perished themselves. And why so? Undoubtedly for
this reason principally, because becoming insolent through pride and arroga^cy
they did not refer the divine gifts which God had bestowed upon them unto
him, but attributed them unto themselves. So as hunting greedily after popular
applause, and puffed up with a vain opinion of themselves, they were by an
insatiable desire of pride and glory, elevated to a most dangerous precipice,
from whence they fell down headlong to their everlasting destruction Let every
one therefore call his wits together, and look well to himself. For if we will
atrentiuely diue into the truth of this doctrine, we shall easily see, that we
have nothing at all in our selves wherein to glory, unless we do perchance
desire to be honored for our imbecility, imperfections, for such be the
flowers, or rather weeds indeed, which our garden affoardeth, and are truly and
properly our own. For if in our good works there be any fault or blemish, it
comes from our selves, but all the worth proceeds from God, who sometimes
even from our weakness produces good effects, making use of poor and abject
men for the performance of glorious designs; as well to declare his own
infinite power and goodness, as also to humiliate and repress our arrogance of
spirit. Take heed therefore that you do not contemn your companions and
brethren as though your burden, or labor were more then theirs: But rather
persuade your self, that by their devout prayers, the divine Goodness is moved
to affoard you greater forces, for the due performance of your charge, so as
you owe much more to them, then they to you. This consideration assuredly, will
not only repress all haughtiness of mind in you, so that you shall not
despise any one how humble or abject soever; but will also stir up such
flames of charity in your heart, that you will bear a fatherly affection unto
all.

Moreover, he seriously advised such as were preachers, to procure unto
themselves certain trusty friends, either of the same place where they lived,
or otherwise, that were prudent and virtuous persons, who might freely admonish
them of what was amiss in their sermons, that so they might more easily come
to know the same, and amend it. That they should also give themselves to
prayer, and meditation of such things which they were to propound unto the
people in their sermons; and endeavor by all means if it were possible, to
get a taste themselves first, by some inward feeling, of the force of those
things which they intended to speak of. For there is great difference
between him who with fervor of spirit thundereth out those things which he
has before meditated upon, and him that barely, and coldly produces that
which he has learned by heart. He would moreover have them to confirm their
words by deeds, and always to second their Sermons with the exercises of
charity and mercy. Wherefore they should be careful to serve the sick in the
Hospitals, visit restrained persons in prison, provide for the necessity of
such as were in want, and diligently employ themselves in other offices of
Christian charity and humility. For certainly such offices were much helped by
sermons, and sermons again by such offices. They should also sometimes
condescend to Pastors and Vicars, when they entreated them to preach to the
people in their Churches. Furthermore what kind of people soever they should
undertake to instruct in their Sermons, they should bear a special love unto
them, and very carfully look to the spiritual good, and commodity of their
Auditors.

He charged them likewise, Contentions with other Preachers to be avoided.
by all means to avoid contentions and strife with other Preachers, especially
with the Bishops Vicars, although there might happen many, great, and just
causes of the same. For by such falling out there commonly aryseth not only
offense to God and the people, but also great disturbance to the contenders
themselves, and hindrance to the divine service. For indeed the good name and
reputation of the Society ought not to depend upon co^tending about their
dignity, but upon laboring for the augmentation of the divine glory. Wherefore
our contention with others must not be with detraction and pride, but with
gentleness and humble submission, bending all our forces to beware that our
emulation about dignityes, make us not odious, and hateful to others If
perchance, there should arise any controversy which could find no end, the
matter must rather be handled by private disputation before Ecclesiastical
Prelates, then publicly, with scandal to the people. Concerning which subject
he gave to Gaspar his Vicar, this no less profitable, then prudent instruction.

With all Religious persons, and Priests your strife shall be in courtesy, and
humility. If any offense chance to arise, you shall by your humility appease
their anger, whether it be just or no, yea although you may seem unto your
self to be innocent. And you shall require no greater revenge, Away to revenge
an injury.
then to suppress the injury with silence, where right can have no place. But
if any of them should any time swerve from their duty, you shall be heartily
sorry for him, who unless he amend himself, shall sooner or later pay for it
deerer then one can easily imagine. Wherefore taking compassion of the poor
man's case, you shall continually pray to God for him. Nor shall you make only a
conscience of revenging your self either by deed or word, but also to permit
the least anger or disquiet of mind remain with you. For both anger and
revenge are alike to be avoided, seeing they do both spring from the same
toote. God certainly bestows many, and great favors upon those who do for
Christ his sake patiently suffer the troubles which happen unto the^: and
severely reuengeth also, though sometimes it be long first, the injury which
thereby is done unto him, and brandeth commonly at last the adversaries end
auours, with the mark they deserve. But God will by no means take revenge on
you, if you go about, either by deed, word, or thought to be revenged on your
self.

If there should (which God forbid) any dissensi on arise between you and
other Religious men, Away to compose discords
you shall look carefully that it be suppressed, and take heed that you do not
by any signs of auersion give notice thereof, either to the Governor, or
others of the City. For it is not to be thought how greatly wordly persons are
scandalized, when they see religious men, and such are consecrated to the
divine service to be at discord amongst themselves. Wherefore if any controversy
chance to arise among you, you shall both take the Bishop for arbitratour, who
by his authority may compose the matter without offense to any; and you shall
also request the Bishop in my name that if at any time the enemy shall ^ow
debate between brethren he as a father will make peace amongst you; and as the
author of concord take away whatsoever difference may be between you, that the
matter may not come to the Magistrates, or public Tribunal. Remember
likewise, that if the other part shall at any time speak ill of you, you are
not to defend your selves by speaking ill of them again; but restraining both
your speech and anger, you shall (as I said) have recourse unto the Bishop, who
by comparing the matter with equity, may take away all matter of contention.
And since you know, that the dignity and estimation of the Society consists
not in the opinion of men, but in the grace and protection of the divine
Majesty, you shall have a very special care, not so to defend the Honor of
the Society, as thereby to incur the offense both of God and men.

Lastly, he advised such as were Preachers, that if any, especially men of
note, who were plunged in public enormities, did desire their company and
familiarity, in such sort as notwithstanding they would not arise out of that
sink of sin; they should declare unto them, that such friendship and
familiarity had only this end, to reclaim those that were our friends and
familiar acquaintance, to seek the good and salvation of their own souls;
seeing we use only to converse with them so far forth, as our conversation
may help them toward their salvation. He further more added, that Preachers,
wheresoever they had that which was necessary to maintain life, ought not to
take any thing of others, because guiftes did hinder their freedom: but if any
small things were sent unto them, as signs of good will, rather then as
guiftes, they were not to be refused, least they might seem to reject the
friendship of those who sent them.

CHAP. XVII.
What manner of Confessors Xauerius required in the Society.
MOREOVER he seriously exhorted such ^s were Ghostly Fathers, A Ghostly Father
must have mildnes in hearing Co^fessions.
that in hearing Confessions (having first an inflamed desire of curing souls)
they should midly and gently receive such as came unto them, whereby the lenity
of such spiritual Physicians might draw them without delay to discover all the
soars of their conscience. Wherefore they should not (especially at the
beginning of Confession) make any show of gravity, or severity, but rather of
sweetness and mildness. To which effect he gave to F. Gaspar at this setting
forth toward Ormus, this instruction.

You must take very great heed, least in hearing of Confessio^s, fear may be
an obstacle of freedom to men in disclosing their sins, if you hearken unto
them with a severe ear: but must rather seek with sweetness, to add courage
to the fearful, by extolling the divine clemency, and by compassionating of
them, until they have freely vngorged themselves of all the poison of their
sins. And in this kind there must be great wariness used. For there want not
some, who through shamefastness commit greater offenses by concealing their
sins, then they had before to confess, turning thereby the wholesome remedy
of Confession to their own destruction. Wherefore against such pestilent
bashfulnesse, all means and endeauours possible must be used. And to get out
their sins from such persons, there is no better way, then to show them, that
we have heard far more grievous, and foul sins of others, and withal
somewhat to extenuate by certain fit words, those very sins which they shall
with fear and much ado confess, that so taking heart they may more confidently
lay open all the other offenses of their life. And to get them confess freely,
this may be as the last remedy (although it must be seldom, and warily used)
to open unto them in a general manner, the offenses of your own former life.
For how good a means this is, time and experience will teach you.

This course he prescribed against such as were fearful and bashful; How
great sinners are to be used.
and that other against such as were inthralled in crimes, and abominations of
long continuance. And until the penitent had so declared all his sins,
whilst perhaps he stands wavering betwixt hope and fear, they should
encourage him, by putting him in mind of the divine clemency and mercy, and
namely they should produce some for an example who having been notorious for
their abominable wickedness, were afterward received into Gods favor, of
which company he should also make one, if he would but confess his sins with
the like sincerity and sorrow of heart. At last, when the Confessor had
thoroughly examined all the soars, and wounds of the penitents conscience, then
he should lively present before him the heynouslesse and foulness thereof,
and by terrifying his staggering spirit, with the indignation of God hanging
over his head, and the punishments which miraculously have been inflicted upon
great sinners, draw him to a detestation, and sorrow for his sins; differring
also his absolution, if it were thought convenient, until another time.

But now, How to move obstinate persons.
to such as were obstinate, and hard-harted he would have to be propounded not
only the everlasting torments of the damned in hell, but also the punishments
which have bin inflicted upon the like offe^ders in this life, and especially
upon such, and such as themselves had known, who had received grievous and
bitter torments for their sins and wickedness, to the end they might be a
warning unto others like unto themselves. For he said, that he had learned by
experience, that such kind of persons are sooner moved by the present
detriment which they maysuffer, either in their body or goods, then by the
future torments of their souls, which seem to be absent, and a far off.

If there should at any time come to Confession, rich and wealthy merchants,
Magistrates, or Governors of a loose life, he judged it fitting before all
other things, seriously to admonish them, that making diligent inquiry into
their former life for the space of two or three days, they should (if they
distrusted their memory) note down their sins in writing, and humbly crave of
God with great feeling, sorrow and cont^^tion for the same. Then, at the
beginning of their Confession they were to ask of them an account of such
offices and charges whereof they had the care; of the affairs wherein they
were employed, how diligently they did, or had carried themselves therein. For
by these interrogations they might more easily find, whether there were any
thing to be restored, then if they were demanded in general, whether they
ought to make restitution to any one? because to such interrogations, they use
commonly to give a negative answer, either out of avarice, or else through
ignorance of the thing. Now when they have heard their Confessions, they must
apply certain admonitions, and remedies for the cure of their souls; nor must
they be absolved presently after their confession, but rather when they have
restored those things they ought. Wherefore of such persons he gives F. Gaspar
this instruction.

They shall not presently be absolved as soon as they have made their
Confession, but two or three days shall be given them to prepare their heart by
certain meditations, that in the mean time they may wash away the spots of
their sins by tears and voluntary penance. If they owe any thing to any
one, let the^ make restitution; if they have any grudge against any, let them
put it away, and be made friends with their enemies; let them also be freed
from libidinous customs, and all other vices wherewith they were entangled.
These things ought rather to go before absolution, then to follow it. For such
kind of men when they are at confession, promise that they will do all things;
but after absolution is given them, as careless of their promise, they do
nothing. Wherefore all diligence is to be used, to cause them to perform
before they be absolved what they ought to do after.

Moreover, concerning the means how to confirm such as are staggering in
their faith, these documents he gave to the same Gaspar. You shall find some
also (and I would to God they were not many) who are very weak concerning
their belief of the Sacraments, especially that of the Holy Eucharist, either
because they have now been deprived of the fruit thereof, or by reason of the
great conversation which they have with the Ethnickes, or else because the
impure life of some Priests makes the vulgar and ignorant sort not to esteem
so highly of this Sacrament. With these therefore you shall deal in this
manner: First you shall get out of them their suspicions and doubts, then you
shall confirm them in their faith, by instructing them so, that they may
believe for certain that the true body of Christ is contained in that mystery.
Neither is there any more present remedy for the curing of this malady, then a
pious and diligent frequenting of the sacred Eucharist it self.

But now because for the most part, Familiarity with women is dangerous.
in conuersing with women there is more danger then profit, he seriously
advised such as were Ghostly Fathers, that in hearing their confessions, in
discoursing, and conuersing with them, and in reconciling them to their
husbands, they should be very wary, and attentive to avoid not only all offense
and sin, but also the suspicions and rumors of the people. Concerning which
he left to F. Gaspar his Vicar very notable and wholesome instructions, which I
thought good to insert in this place.

You shall not (says he) speak with women of what condition soever, unless
it be by daylight, and in public; that is, in the Church. And you shall
never go home unto them, unless it be upon some urgent occasion, as to hear
the confession of one that is sick. And then also you shall take great care,
that her husband, or some other kinsman, or at least some honest neighbor be
by. If you have occasion to speak with some Virgin or widow, you shall go to
their house accompanied by men of approved integrity of life, in whose company
there may be, not only no scandal, but also no suspicion. Yet these visits of
women shall be both very seldom, and also not at all but upon necessary
occasions. For it is a ticklish piece of business, where small profit is made
with a great deal of peril. And forasmuch as women (for such is the
inconstancy, and leuity of their disposition) do for the most part, cause to
their ghostly Fathers a great deal of trouble, this wariness is principally
to be held with them. You shall with more diligence labor about the
instruction of Christian men, then of their wives. For seeing that men are more
constant by nature, and the ordering of the house depends upon them, it is
certainly better, and more profitable to employ ones labor upon the^. For as
the wiseman truly says: Such as the Governor of the City is, such also are
they that dwell in it: Eccles. 10.
and withal many scandalls and speeches are avoided, which use to arise upon
familiarity with women.

If there happen any debate betwixt man and wife, to take away al controversy,
and to appease their mind, you shall first of all procure, that each of them,
disposed therun to by fit meditations, do make a good confession of their
former life; and as you shall see it fitting, you may differ to absolve them
for a while, that they may come again better prepared for the amendment of
their lives, and establishing of concord betwixt themselves. If the women tell
you, that if they might abstain from the company of their husbands, they
should be much more diligent in the service of God, do not by any means
believe them. For besides, that such feminine fervor grows easily cold, it
can hardly ever be vndertake^ without grievous offense to their husbands. Take
heed how you lay the fault upon the husband in the presence of his wife, The
busba^ds part must rather be taken the^ the wives
although he be certainly in the fault; but suppressing the matter with silence
for the present, you shall afterward between him and you alone draw him to
purify his whole life by Confession. And when he is at Confession, then you
shall reprehend him in the most modest manner that you can, and advise him to
look carefully to the peace of his house. But by all means you must have a
care of this (being a business very apt to breed suspicions) that you never by
taking the wives part, seem to take against her husband. Wherefore he must
first by little and little, in a friendly manner be admonished, to acknowledge
his own fault, and at last you shall gently and lovingly give him absolution.
For the Indians affections are moved by love, but violence overthrows them.

You shall therefore (as I said a little before) take heed of accusing the
husband in the hearing of his wife. For as the nature of women is to be a
little impudent and malepart, they will easily cast their husbands in the teeth
with their faults, especially if they be judged guilty by Priests themselves.
Wherefore it is better by dissembling the matter, to lay before the wives, the
respect which they owe unto their husbands, and to show them also, that they,
for the contempt which they have oftentimes had of their husbands, have
deserved indeed to be severely chastised. If therefore there happen to them any
trouble from their husbands, they ought to bear it humbly and patiently, and
to be obedient unto them. Do not easily give credit to either of them when they
complain of one another, (for oftentimes they are both deceived themselves,
and deceive others also) but you shall with the greatest indifferency that may
be, hear them both, and not condemn either of them before you have examined
the matter. This I say, that you may the better, and more easily make accord
between them, and avoid suspicion your self. But if at any time you cannot
make any reconciliatio^ between them, you shall refer the whole business to the
Bishop, or the Vicar General, but in such sort, as not to wrong either of the
parties that are at variance, which you cannot but do, if you seem to favor
one more then another. You must undoubtedly use great prudence to give no
offense at all in this bad world. And the events of things, which are carried
here, must be always forecast; for our adversary the Devil does not cease,
but roameth about seeking whom to devour. And it argues great want of
prudence, not to foresee the inconveniences that may arise of actions which be
undertaken with never so good intention.

Moreover he would not have Ghostly Fathers to take money under pretense either
of restitution, or alms, but according to the intention of the giver, procure
it to be laid out in pious uses, or else given to the Sodality of Mercy: for so
that Sodality might the better provide for the necessity of the poor, and they
also for the conservation of the Societies reputation. If any come to
confession not so much to cure their souls, as to seek some relief for their
bodies, such would he have to be admonished of the use of that holy Sacrament,
showing them that the sufferances of the soul, are more intolerable then
those of the body: and at last (if it be judged expedient) to commend them to
the Sodality of Mercy.

In like manner, he advised such as heard co^fessions not to make too much have
with their penitents, but to use all diligence about them, and that they should
rather desire to hear a few co^fessions well made, then many hastily posted
over. For how could they else carefully apply remedies to their soars, unless
they cured them by leisure? for there is no doubt but one confession well made,
is better then many passed slightly over, especially seeing Confession
prepares the way to the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. Lastly he advised
them, that they should take some time to look into the Confessions which they
had heard, and attentively consider whether they had done any thing amiss
therein, and to satisfy for the same in their own Confession, and after to
amend the fault; seeing such diligence is a great help for the well discharging
of a Ghostly Fathers duty.

CHAP. XVIII.
What kind of persons Xauerius required for the instruction of souls.
XAVERIVS required, that those of the Society who were to labor in the
conversion of Ethnickes, and instruction of Neophites, should be not only of
the most choice that could be gotten, but such also as were most addicted
thereunto; so that they should prefer nothing, how specious soever, before so
noble an employment, since there was nothing more grateful to God, or
beneficial to mankind. Neither did he so greatly exhort unto this enterprise
only, but laid himself also for foundation thereof, expressing more in deeds,
then he willed in words. For as we have before declared, he never made more
account of any thing then of the conversion and instruction of Ethnickes.
Insomuch, as those of the Society who came unto him out of India or Portugal,
he so called them to be his compartners in this divine function, that where he
found any of most emineut talents, he would commit this change unto the^ as a
reward of their labors; following therein the example of the Apostles, Who
when they heard, Act. 18.
that Samaria had received the word of God, sent unto them Peter and John, who
were the chief of the Apostles. Wherefore he held it fit, that such as were
chosen to this Apostolical function, should be men extraordinary, and of tried
fidelity, virtue, co^stancy, and sanctity of life. But because such imploiment
required such men, as also for that he had found by experience, that such
charges were exposed to most grievous temptations of the Devil, vexations, and
miseries, therefore in these laborers of our Lords vineyard he required
prudence and sanctity, rather then knowledge and learning; well knowing that
Virtue was absolutely necessary for the ouerco^ming of so many and great
difficulties, and that Sanctity was of more importance then learning, for the
conversion of Ethnicks. But where virtue and learning were beautifully combined
together, such, he said, were indeed singular, and perfect preachers of the
Gospel, and specially fit for Iaponia, and other such places, where the
Barbarians, being a sharpe-witted people, do by their subtle interrogations
make sound trial of the Christian Religion.

He required moreover, in all such as labored amongst Ethnickes, a propension,
and desire to learn their strange language, since without that knowledge there
could be small profit made in gayning the Barbarians to the Christian faith, or
in the instructing of new Christians. For which cause the Apostles, before they
began to teach the Gentiles, were miraculously endowed with the gift of all
tongues. And his chief desire was, that all should be inflamed with ardent
zeal of saving souls, so as never to omit any occasion in that kind, but
presently to lay hold thereof, and follow it close. He likewise charged them to
insist thoroughly upon the salvation and instruction of the Neophytes, to teach
Children their Catechism, and above all things to baptize children and
infants, so as none, if it were possible, might ever dye without Baptism, the
only safeguard of that tender age. He also exhorted them, that by gayning the
affection of the Neophytes, they might be loved and respected by them even as
their parents. For love naturally takes all things in good part; and to one
that loves nothing is hard.

Furthermore in the instructing of new Christians they should show no less
fortitude then perseverance as well by enduring their vices, as bearing with
their weakness; and as good husbandmen expect with our Savior, the harvest
of the seed they had sown, and the fruits of their labors though it were
long first, knowing, Psalm. 125.
that they who sow in tears, shall reap in joy. And if they found the
Christians at first not to be such as they desired, they should carry
themselves toward them as good parents do toward untoward children, putting
their confidence in God, who in due time brings forth such fruit in men, as
is to be hoped for and wished. Wherefore they should attend unto them
diligently, since God our common Parent, although we infinitely offend him,
does not cease to bestow his benefits upon us. Yet would he not have too much
time spent with the ancient Christias, least the new should be defrauded. But
if in ciuility their conversation could not be avoided, they should at least
ways bring in discourses of heavenly matters, and of things pertaining to the
good of their souls, that so they being plied continually with such pious
admonitions, they might either grow better; or else being wearyed out
therewith, might suffer us to busy our selves with helping the Neophytes.

He likewise esteemed more of a little fruit with approbation of the people,
then of a great deal with offense, though never so small of any, because a
little fruit reaped with example of virtue, was both of long continuance, and
always received new increase; whereas oftentimes a great deal, with offense
unto the people, did by little and little dry up, and wither away. Hetherfore
charged them to behave themselves mildly and humbly toward all, having (as the
Apostle says) peace with all men, and by all means to avoid contentions,
especially with Religious men and Priests, and to be mindful always of
Gentleness and Affability, that so they might gain all to Christ. He used
also to say, that what good soever was not gained by virtue, could not any way
be gotten, but by virtue. Wherefore they should take great heed, that they did
not, according to the practice of the world, seek (or seem to seek) after
dignityes and honors; neither by words or deeds endeavor to get the favor
rather of men, then of God, since the high authority, which always
accompanies Virtue was a gift not of men but of God. And it often comes to
pass, that whilst by humane favor (neglecting the divine) men seek to
purchase authority, and even sweat again to get it, they by the great
providence of God, wholly loose it; to this end no doubt, that they may not have
so base an esteem of things divine. For they who in procuring the same have
more regard to humane favor then divine do manifestly show, they do not
respect the divine honor, so much as their own; and that such sacrilegious
ambitions will turn at last unto their own confusion and destruction. Every
one therefore ought first to have a special care of his own soul and then to
help other men's. For he that neglects his own, will hardly have a care of
another salvation: neither can he well be mindful of another, who is
forgetful of himself. Whereas contrariwyse, he that has care of his own
good, will also have a care of his neighbors. Wherefore no day should pass
without meditation of divine matters and perfect examination of their
conscience, observing wherein they had failed in the divine service, or in their
own duty; and withal consider with themselves, how many things God, through
their default, had ceased rather effect, then what he had performed by them:
since the one was an incitement to humility and perfect virtue, the other to
pride and folly, challenging thereby Gods works unto our selves; then the
which a more deadly plague may not be found among religious persons.

Now, for as much as he esteemed the education of children to be a main and
principal mayster-piece, he ordained, that they should deliver the Christian
doctrine to whole troops of children together, never omitting so fruitful an
employment, nor committing it to others. They should never exasperare or
provoke any child to anger, Ephesians. 6.
but forbear threats (as they Apostle advises) to the end that so tender an
age might with the more alacrity embrace their wholesome instructions. Toward
magistrates, and Ecclesiastical Prelates they should carry themselves with all
moderation and humility, and upon no occasion whatsoever maintain iarres or
quarrels against them, allthough they should by never so great injuries be
provoked. For Magistrates are sooner woone by others suffering, then by
withstanding their authority. Wherefore they should communicate unto them, as to
the Patrons of their endeauours and labors, part of their fruit, and gain,
attributing unto them (next after God) all the good they had received: so as by
this means they who labored in the Vineyard of our Lord should have more
helpers and defenders of their labors, or at ^east, fewer adversaries. He
likewise advised them to employ themselves no less frequently, then willingly
in the exercise of charity and humility, by helping the sick of the Hospital,
and prisoners the Goales, both with charitable attendance, as also with alms
which they should gather for them; but so, as their help might profit them both
corporally and spiritually. For by such exercyses of Charity we shall have our
own souls inflamed with divine love, and others also will be stirred up to the
like deeds, and the servants of God get credit, and authority toward the
advancement of the Christian cause. But especially, they should never make
account of ill rumors made against them without cause, which do often
overthrow, and weaken the endeauours of those that be fearful. Concerning
this, there is extant as notable instruction, which he gave to Fa. Gaspar, in
these words.

If, when at any time you go about a good work, ill disposed persons give out
slanderous reports against you, you shall not be moved therewith; but be sure
that none perceive you are by such men's words, hindered from the service of God.
For they who are afraid of false rumors, in such a case, are more truly
Souldiars of the world, then of Christ. Lastly, I would have you greatly to
esteem of this; That remembering yourself to be a member of the Society of
JESUS, you would in all your words and actions, carry your self worthy of such
an Head and Body. By which admonitions it might eas^^^ appear, how diligently
and seriously Xauerius both by examples and precepts trained up those of the
Society to the highest perfection of prudence and sanctity; as also how
conformable Ignatius and he, were in all their judgments and opinions,
notwithstanding that at the very same time they were almost infinitely distant
the one from the other, Ignatius being superior of the Society in Italy, and
he in India. But without doubt, one and the same spirit dictated the same
things unto them both, fashioning the Society in each place, to a certain form
of discipline, and inspiring them both with divine wisdom alike.

Xauerius prudence was not more seen, in giving his instructions, then in his
government. For whersoeuer he resided, he would always be certified by the
local superiors of the Society how all things passed, providing remedies for
all difficulties, no otherwise then if himself had bin present. For at his
departure into Iaponia he gave order, that they should at certain times write
unto him, and acquaint him what number there were of the Society, as also with
their qualities, and tallents both of virtue, learning, and arts, yea with
their inclinatio^s also, and to what they were most addicted, as well by nature
as by disposition; what zeal of souls appeared in each of them, what fruit
every one reaped, with what griefs or afflictions each one was oppressed,
tried, and afflicted. And lastly so great was his care even in the smallest
things, that he would be certified of the meanest household servant, as also
what debts were owing, and the like: and so accordingly he disposed of each
person, and thing in particular by letters, as was requisite. And not
contenting himself with having given order what was to be done, he charged also
the Superiors, to signify unto him with all speed, whether every one had
carefully performed his commands or no, to the end that his command to them
might set an edge upon their cares, for the better discharging of their office.

Moreover, although in his travails throughout the utmost Eastern parts, he
bent all his forces for the conversion of those barbarous Nations,
notwithstanding in his return back, through almost infinite tracts of the
Ocean, he at times visited those of the Society which were committed to his
trust, dividing his care according to his double charge, that he might so
assist strangers, as not to be wanting to his own. Certainly, by his singular
industry and virtue, he so contrived all things, that if you consider, how much
he advanced the Christian Religion, he may seem to have had no time to think
of the Society: and again (...) you turn your consideration to the care which
he had of the Society, you will think, he neither did, nor could possibly have
had time to perform, any thing else.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader,
THE faults which have escaped in printing (by reason of employing strangers
heerin, not skillfull of our Language) I hope are not very many, nor yet such,
as may not easily be corrected, by thy judicious Reading


