THE SPANISH MANDEuile of Miracles. OR The Garden of curious Flowers. VVherin
are handled sundry points of Humanity, Philosophy, Divinity, and Geography
beautified with many strange and pleasant Histories. First written in Spanish,
by Anthonio De Torquemeda, and out of that tongue translated into English.

It was dedicated by the Author, to the Right honorable and reverent Prelate,
Don Diego Sarmento de soto Mayor, Bishop of Astorga. etc.

It is divided into six Treatises, composed in manner of a Dialogue, as in the
next page shall appear.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Edmund Matts, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the hand and Plow in Fleet-streete. 1600.

A Table of the Contents of the six Treatises contained in this Book.
IN the first, are contained many things worthy of admiration, which Nature
has wrought and daily works in men, contrary to her common and ordinary
course of operation, with other curiosities strange and delightful.

The second, contains certain properties and virtues of Springs, Rivers, and
Lakes, with some opinions touching terrestrial Paradise, and the four Rivers
that issue out from thence: Withal, in what parts of the world our Christian
belief is professed.

The third, entreats of Uisions, Fancies, Spirits, Ghosts, Hags, Enchaunters,
Witches, and Familiars: With diverse strange matters which have happened,
delightful, and not less necessary to be known.

The fourth, discourses what Fortune and Chance is, and wherein they differ,
what luck, felicity, happiness, and destenie is, and what the influence of the
heavenly Bodies import, and whether they are the causes or no of diverse
mischances that happen in the world, touching besides many other learned and
curious points.

The fifth, is a description of the Septentrionall Countries, which are near
and under the North Pole, and of the lengthning and shortning of the days, and
nights, till they come to be six months long apeece, and of the different
rising and setting of the Sun, from that it is here with us: with other
things pleasant and worthy to be known.

The sixth, contains sundry wonderful things that are in the Septentrionall
Regions, worthy of admiration.

To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Sackuile, Knight, Baron of Buckhurst, Lord
high Treasurer of England, Lieuetenaunt of her Highness within the County of
Suffex, most worthy Chauncelor of the University of Oxenford, Knight of the
noble order of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel.
LIfting mine eyes up from out the low and humble valley of my obscure
fortunes, up to that bright shining eminent hill of Honor, on which the favor
of her Majesty, the noblenes of your birth, and your many excellent virtues
have seated you, I cannot (Right honorable and my most singular good Lord) but
lay a sharp and rigorous censure upon my own presumption, that being (though
bound to this flourishing Kingdom for my education) yet a stranger borne, and
to your Lordship merely unknown, have thus boldly adventured to press into
your presence, and to crave your honorable patronage to a work, whereof (how
soever it deserve) I cannot to my self challenge any praise. It was the first
labor of a worthy Gentleman of your Lordships Country of Sussex, one that
does much love and honor you, who did it for his exercise in the Spanish
tongue, and keeping it by him many years, as judging it utterly unworthy of
his own name, did lately bestow the same upon me, with express charge
howsoever I should dispose thereof, to conceal all mention of him: wherein I
should have done both him and my self too much wrong in obeying him: him, in
depriving him of his deserved praise for so worthy a work, and my self, in
arrogating unto me the glory of this discourse, to the well handling of which,
in such exquisite manner as he has done it, I know my own forces altogether
weak and insufficient: With all humblenes therefore, I beseech your
Lordshippe to vouchsafe your noble name for a protection of this my bold
endeavor, and with your accustomed gentleness to pardon this rash attempt,
proceeding wholly from an infinite and vehement desire I have, to do you all
possible honor and service, that the poorenes of my capacity or fortune can
stretch unto.

I beseech the Almighty to bless your Lordship, and my honorable good Lady,
with all your noble family, with all happiness, honor and length of life,
that you may long remain a strong and happy pillar of this glorious
Commonwealth, under the blessed government of her most sacred Majesty, whom
God long preserve. London, this 23. of April. 1600.

Your Lordships most humble and devoted: Ferdinando Valker.

To the right Worshipful my worthy and esteemed Friend, Jews Lewkenor,
Esquire; one of the honorable band of her Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners in
ordinary.
THE famous Architect of Greece, weary of his constrained abode in the Court of
the Crotish tyrant, finding all other endeavors vain for his escape, composed
at length with singular excellence of Art, two pair of artificial wings,
made with borrowed feathers of sundry sorts, which when he had cunning lie
joined together with wax, he fastened one pair of them to his own body,
and another to his sons, and so bequeating both himself and his son to the
air, began to take his flight; but the audacious courage of the youth,
presuming to approach near unto the glorious rays of the Sun, the wax
melted, his feathers dissolved, and he by his memorable fall and folly, gave
name to the Seas wherein he perrished. The case is mine, and I cannot (worthy
Master Lewkenor) but with a great fordooming of my self, attend the like, or
a greater downfall. For having long striued beyond my forces, to creep out of
the loathsome Cave of ingratitude, wherein I have so long lain obscured, and
knowing all my own abilities too weak to carry me thence, I have at length
with these feathers, which I have borrowed from you, endeavored to make my
flight. But I fear me much, that my ill composition of them, and my too much
aduenturous presuming to fly with them, being not mine own, shall no sooner
appear before the brightness of such a judgment as yours, but that all my
tackling will fail, and my self be vnrelieuably thrown down into the
incurable gulf of confusion, ignorance, and disgrace. Only my chiefest hope
and comfort is, that your gentle and always best construing disposition, to
which only I appeal, will not entertain the hardest conceit of this my
bold and strange attempt. Receive therefore, gentle Master Lewkenor, this
poor Treatise, having so many long years lien obscured among your wast
papers, and lately by your cruel sentence condemned to the fire, now with a
milder conceit under your protection; For though you think it unworthy of the
worlds view, as being the fruit and exercise of your youngest years, yet I
assure you, it has passed the censure of grave and learned judgments, and
received excellent allowance; thorough whose encouragements I have presumed to
give it life, and no longer to deprive the world of a discourse so worthy to be
known and published; whatsoever therein is faulty, let the same lie upon my
shoulders. As for your self, your own worthiness of desert, your great
learning, your excellent skill in languages, your many times approved valor,
your long experience in martial affairs, and generally the great worth
wherein the world holds you both abroad and at home, will be for you a
strong and sufficient warrant and Bulwark against any whatsoever calumniation.
And so returning unto you this Treatise of your own, with the intrest of a
love that shall never cease to manifest it self, in any occasion wherein it
shall please you to employ me, entreating your favorable censure and best
construction of this (as I must confess) ouerbold endeavor, I cease, wishing
that the success of your fortunes, may be equal to the deserving of your
virtues.

Yours ever faithfully devoted, Ferdinando Walker.

The Authors Epistle Dedicatorie, to the most Honorable and reverent Praelate,
Don Diego Sarmento, de Soto Mayor, Bishop of Astorga. etc.
THE grave and wise Philosopher, Hipocrates, well waying the conditions and
qualities of human life, briefly in few words comprehended the whole that
is contained in the same, when he said: Life is short, knowledge long, time
swift, occasion headlong, and experience dangerous. This is (right honorable
and reverend Praelate) a Sentence so pithy, prosound, and delicate, that it
were not possible for any man in how long writing so ever, better or more
materially to express the misery of those that are passed out of this world,
of us that as yet live in it, and of as many as shall hereafter be while it
endures: And I know not who is so deuoyd of sense, but that sometimes thinks
with himself how wretched and unstable is our estate, how swiftly and
irreuocably time flies away, and how small a space our life endures, which
at such time as we think that we have reaped some knowledge and understanding
of some things in the world, though God wot it be but little in respect of the
much that it is to be known; then presently comes Death and cutteth us off,
who for late that he stays, yet comes he in the childhood of our
understanding. For if we mark it well, we shall find, that how wise and
ingenious so ever we account our selves, yet that in the very Winter and last
of our life, we begin to learn and see new Accidents, at which we wonder as
things that were never heard of before, and though we imagine that there is
nothing in the whole world of which we are ignorant: yet every day almost
presents to our eyes some new matter or other unknown and vnvnderstood,
thereby to abate the vain conceived pride of our own universal knowledge;
and if we should live a 1000. years more, we should in like sort daily find
new things to astonish us. Those that are wisest therefore, are never puffed up
with such an opinion of their own wisdom: but conforming themselves with the
truth, do say as Socrates said? One thing only do I know, which is, that I
know nothing. This proceeds of the shortness of our life, the greatness of the
world, the secrets of Nature, the weakness of our understanding, and the error
with which we abuse our selves in thinking that all things to be known, are
comprehended in that little which we know. Diverse therefore of clear
judgments, seeing the end of their days vnineuitably approach, sustain no
small grief to see that they scarcely begin to know the world, and to
understand some particularities thereof, when forcibly they are constrained to
leave the same, and so to dye with the milk of wisdom in their mouths. The
excellent Philosopher Gorgias Leontinus, having lived a hundred and seauenty
years, when the hour of his death drew near, seemed to be very heavy and
sorrowful; and when his friends and Scholars endeavored to give him
consolation he answered: My sadness is not because I dye, but because having
studied all my life, it fails me now when I begin to know and understand
somewhat. So mighty is Nature and diverse in her works, and the world so great,
that there are every day new novelties brought unto our notice of which though
I know your L. being so wise and well experimented, will make no wonder; yet
you will receive delight to find some of them here briefly collected
together, with other singularities full of pleasure and recreation, which
collection I have taken the hardines to dedicate unto your Lor. calling it the
Garden of curious Flowers, to the end, that under the favor and protection of
your Lor. it may appear abroad, without fearing the censure of such, as are
accustomed to murmr at other men's labors, who now perchance will be
silent, in that it is protected by your L. the quallity and merit of whose
person, with the most honorable antiquity of his Noble stock and lynage, is
so notorious to all men, that the baseness of my barraine style should rather
prejudice the same then otherwise: leaving therefore to speak thereof, I
beseech the Almighty to defend and keep the most Honorable and reuent person
of your L. in all faelicity, with increase of Honor, as we your L well-wishers
and Servants do desire.

The humble Servant of your L. which kisseth his most Honorable hands, A. de
Torquemeda.

A Table wherein are contained the Names of those Authors, whose authorities
are alleged in this Treatise.
A.
AEneas Siluius. Aristotle. Albertus Magnus. Andraeas Mateolus. Aulus Gellius.
Alyfarnes. Algasar. Auicenne. Anthonius Sabellicus. Anthony Gubert. Aelyan.
Alexander de Ales. Aelyanicus. Acatheus. Amatus Lusitanus. Atheneus Naucrates.
Anaximander. August. Eubinus Eustechius. S. Anthony of Florence. Alonso del
Castillo. Albertus Kransius. S. Austine. Apollonius Tyaneus. Auienius.
Anselmus.
B.
Baptista Fulgoso. Beda. S. Basil. Boethius.
C.
Caetanus. Celius Rodiginus. Calepinus. Crates Pergamenus. Cornelius Tacitus.
Casaneus. Calcidius. Cornelius Celsus. Capela. Cornelius Nepos. Chronicle of
Spain.
D.
Diodorus Siculus. David. Democritus. Dionisius Halicarnassius Dyoscorides.
E.
Ezechiell. Egidius Augustus. Ecclesiasticus. Encisus Cosmogr. Esaias.
F.
Erancisco de Victoria.
G.
Gaudencius Merula. Grecus Commendator. Gentil. Gemma Frisius. S. Gregory.
H.
Homer. Herman Lopes de Castaneda. S. Hierome. Henricus Bucenburgn. Herodote.
Hermes Trismegistus. Hippocrates.
I.
Iustine. Iuuenal. Johannes Teutonicus. Iacobus Philippus Bergamus. Johannes
Bocacius. Josephus. Johannes Magnus. Johannes Saxo. John de Uarro. S. John
Damascen. S. John Chrysostom. S. Isidore. John Andrew. John Mandeuile. Job.
Iacobus Ziglerus, Iamblicus. Julius Capitolinus.
L.
Leuinus Lemnius. Lodouicus Viues. Lucian. Lucinus Mucianus. Lucius Marineus
Siculus. Lactantius Firmianus. Lopes D' Obregon. S. Luke. Lodouicus Patricius
Romanus. Lucius Apuleius.
M.
Macrobius. Marcus Damascenus. Marcus Uarro. Marcus Paulus Venetus. Mercurius
Trismegistus. Marsilius Ticianus. Mechouita Polonius. Megasthenes.
N.
Nicolaus Florentinus. Nicolaus Leoncius. Nicolaus de Lyre. Nimphodorus.
O.
Onosecritus. Ordinaria Glosa. Ouidius. Olaus Magnus. Origines.
P.
Plinius. Paulus iuris consultus. Pomponius Mela. Pausanias. Petrus Crinitus.
Plutarchus. Pontanus. Pigafeta. Philip. Bergomensis. Procopius. Plato.
Porphirius. Paulus Iouius. Pythagoras. Proculus. Proctus. Plotinus. Pselius. S.
Paul. Paulus Guillardus. Proclus. Petrus Mexias. Ptolomaeus.
R.
Rufus Festus.
S.
Solinus. Strabo. Scotus. Stephanus. Sinforianus Campegius. Seruius. Sigonius.
Solomon. Suidas Graecus. Socrates. Seneca. Suetonius Tranquillus. Salustius.
Sestus Pompeius. Silenus.
T.
S. Thomas. Trogus Pompeius. Translatio septum Interpretum. Tesias. Theodorus
Gaza. Titus Liuius. Tully.
V.
Virgilius. Vincentius. Ualasco de Taranta.
X.
Xenocrates. Xenophon.
Z.
Zacharias.
THE FIRST TREAtise: In the which are contained many things worthy of
admiration, which Nature has wrought and daily works in men, contrary to her
common and ordinary course of operation. With other curiosities strange and
delightful.
Interlocutores. LVDOVICO. ANTHONIO. BERNARDO. LVD. THis days exceeding heat
has distempered me in such sort, that it causes me to doubt with my self,
whether of the two extremities were easier to be endured, the violent sharpnes
of the cold Winter, or the fiery raging of the hot Summer.


BER. On this question there are so many and sundry opinions and of each side
so many reasons, that I dare not undertake to determine thereof, though in my
slender judgment, the cold (how sharp soever The cold more tolerable then
the heat.
in the deepest fury of the Winter) is far easier to be suffered, then these
fervent and contagious heates of the Doggedayes in the Summer. But to hear
this of both sides debated with reasons and proofs that may be alleged, it is
doubtful to whether to incline. Leaving therefore every man to think herein
what pleases him, let us in the mean time not lose the freshnes of this
pleasant evening, which after the great heat, is now turned into an air most
sweet and comfortable, and seeing we have nothing to do, let us walk a
while by the streams of this running River, and pass our time in some honest
conversation.


LUD. It happens better then we looked, for see where Anthonio comes, whose
wisdom, behavior and discreet discourse is such; that you would never be
weary of his company.


BER. It is true indeed, I know him well to be a man both curtious, learned
and wise, I would we could set him in some good vain, to the end we might
hear him discourse.


LV. I will do my best to make him walk along with us.


AN. God save you Gentlemen.


LV. And you Sir are most welcome, and in the fittest time that may be, unless
you have some business which may hinder us from enjoying your company under this
tuffet of trees, where if it please you now after this excessive heat, we may
awhile refresh our selves with the mildnes of this sweet air, and the
delightful coolenes of this fresh river.


AN. Truly Gentlemen nothing can let me in any thing, wherein I may do you
service, for my will is fully bent to follow yours, and therefore without any
excuse I will obey you in what soever it shall please you to command me.


BER. This courtesy of yours is so great, that I know not by what means we
shall be able to deserve it, to the end therefore that we may the better enjoy
the desired fruit of your conversation, let us if it please you repose our
selves under this shadow, where covered from the sun, what with the pleasing
sound of this clear stream, trickling along the peble stones, and the sweet
murmurings of the green leaves gently moved with a soft and delicate wind,
we shall receive double delight.


LV. It is true, but not if we remain standing, you having taken up the best
place.


BER. Indeed I might have offered you the place, but me thinks you are not
much amiss, especially because here is room in the midst between us both
for Signior Anthonio, who how near soever he be unto me, me thinks is never
near enough.


AN. All this Signior Bernardo, is but to increase the desire I have to do you
service, for in truth such is the reputation of your wisdom, that wheresoever
you are, we ought to seek you out, to the end to be participant of your virtue
and knowledge.


LU. Let us lay apart these friendly ceremonies, and busy our selves in
contemplating the diversity of those things which we see round about this place
where we repose, that we may be thankful to the Creator and Maker of them. In
truth so great is the variety of flowers and Roses which are in this Medowe,
that beholding narrowly every one apart, me thinks I never saw any of them
before, so many manners are there of them, their shapes and forms so sundry
and diverse, their colors so rare and dainty, their branches and flowers
placed in such excellent order, that it seems that Nature has endeavored
with her uttermost industry to frame, paint, and enamell each of them.


BER. You wonder at a little, in respect of the much we have to wonder at, I
would to God it had been your hap to have been where I was yesterday, in the
company of ten or twelve Gentlemen, where discoursing of the strange and
marvelous effects wrought by Nature in the world, they were so amazed at some
(to the common sort unknown) which I told them, as though I had come out of
the other world, and told them stories of such things as I there had seen.


LV. I pray you tell us some of them, that we may know what reason of amazement
they had.


BER. I could tell you many, but that which they least believed and iested at
as a fable, was because I said there was a part of the earth inhabited, where
the day dureth the full space of a whole half year, and the night in like
sort as much.


LU. And marvel you if they wondered heereat? It is true indeed that I have
sometimes my self heard as much, but I give as little credit thereunto as
these gentlemen did.


BE. I perceive well that signior Anthonio understands this matter better then
either of us, because I see him smile, ask him therefore what his opinion is
hereof.


An. I am glad gentlemen, to see that in so few reasons you fall upon a matter
so high, that to declare it well, other things of necessity must first be
touched, so strange, that unless it be amongst men wise and of deep
understanding, it were better to pass them over with silence, according to the
saying of the Marquess of Santillana. Never report wonders, for in so doing,
of the greatest part thou art sure not to be believed, but to be laughed at, as
was signior Bernardo amongst those gentlemen.


BE. In this manner though you may (my ignorance considered) pretend great
reason to hold your peace, yet I beseech you, let nothing withold you from
explaining unto me this doubt and some other, which I have about the sesecret
hidden mysteries of Nature.


AN. This is but a small matter, so that you will not bind me to say more than
I know, which truly is very little.


BER. I know that in the fountain of your breast there is not so little water,
but that it may suffice thoroughly to assuage and satisfy our thirst, least
therefore the time pass away in superfluous reasons, seeing we are to entreat
of the wonders and marvelous works of Nature, I beseech you begin with her
definition, that we may thereafter the better understand her effects.


AN. Aristotle says, that Nature is the beginning of Motion, and rest of the
self same thing in which it is principal, The Philosophers definition of
Nature.
and by it self alone and not by any accident, but I will not spend the time
in alleging the definitions and opinions of ancient Philosophers, seeing they
are so far different from those of later time, and because this our discourse
shall be altogether Christianlike, leaving out all those Authors and
Philosophers which were Gentiles, I will only follow those which were
Christians, of the which he that went nearest to the mark in my judgment was
Leuinus Lemnius, which following Saint Thomas, leaving ancient opinions like a
Christian in the beginning Leuinus Le^nius definition of Nature.
of his Book of the Marvelous secrets of Nature, says, That Nature is
nothing else then a will or reason divine causer of all things that are
engendered, and conseruer of them after they are engendered, according to the
quality of every one of them. This word therefore and Name of Nature, serves
not for other, then to represent unto us the will and mind of God, by which
all things are made and created, and in their times and seasons unmade and
dissolved, and therefore it is said, that the leaf of a tree cannot wagge
without the will and ordinance of God: from whom as the very only foundation
and beginning, proceed and depend all creatures reasonable and unreasonable,
even to the very least. Yet, I know, there want not Philosophers which hearing
these definitions, will say, that there is Natura naturans, which is God
himself, and Natura naturata, which is the effect which by Natura naturans,
Natura naturata.
his divine will he works in creatures. But let us not stay here, but behold
the foundation, whence al proceeds, which is God indeed: which if we well
contemplate this abundant and plentiful spring, we shall find that those
which are so astonished and hold for miracles some new things, above their
capacity, which happen in the world, have small reason of their so great
amazement. For what can be more worthy of admiration to men virtuous and of
clear judgment, then the wonderful machine and composition of this world,
the moving of the heavens in order so just and due, the admirable effects of
the Sun, the Moon, and of the other Planets: the strange influences of the
Stars, the exceeding strength of the Poles, upon whom all these things not
straying one jot out of compass, are moved with a Harmony so marvelous: the
reason, wherewith the four Elements stand and contain them selves, in their
places appointed them, each of them affording unto us that part of himself of
which we have need: the clouds forming and thickning them selves in the
region of the air: the rain, hail, snow, and ice, the vehement force and
terrible violence of the winds, thunders, lightnings, and blazing-starres.
Besides these, the world daily brings forth and yields to our view so many
things new, rare, and full of wonder, that if we would busy our selves to
admire and contemplate the variety and strangenes of each of them, we should
have leisure to do nothing else. For how wonderful is it to see that amongst
so many men as are in the world, and daily are borne of new, though they bear
all one proportion and shape, of eyes, mouth, nose, forehead, lips, cheeks,
ears, etc. Yet it is almost impossible to find one like another, and though
it happen sometimes that one resemble another: yet there never wants some
difference of diversity. Besides this, behold the difference of trees, plants,
herbs, and flowers, which in each Country grows, with such diversity of
color, taste, smell, property, and virtue: and if these things, because we see
them daily with our eyes, and handle them with our hands as things common, do
not amaze us, why should we then so much wonder in seeing some things, which
pass this common agreement and order of nature. Which for all that do not
exceed nature, neither are unnatural: though the conceit thereof, pass the
grosnes of our reach and understanding. To see a dead man raised, a dumb man
made speak, or a man borne blind restored to sight, such a thing we may well
term unnatural and miraculous: But as for things monstrous, of which some we
see, some are out of use, and some utterly unknown, me thinks in a wise man
they should work no alteration, nor breed any astonishment at all. Look amongst
the green plants and herbs, and you shall there sometimes find little creepers
and worms, some of one sort, some of another, painted with sundry colors, some
with many feet, some with great horns in the forehead, some with wings, some
with 2. heads, one before, and another behind, and that they go and move as
well of the one side as the other, and if we should see these great and huge,
how would they the^ wonder and be amazed that are ignorant of their causes. But
perchance, he that created al things above and under the heavens, in the air,
the earth, and the Sea of nothing, with his only will, has lost his force: or
his hand is become unable, to do all the rest, which in respect thereof is
nothing. No no, without dout, now is the self same God which than our
sovereign Lord and maker, which as he easily without any travail, by his only
will of nothing made all things: so can he when it pleases him by the self
same will only, turn to undo them, and make of all things nothing, as they
were before.


LU. It is all as you have said Signior Anthonio, and your definition of
nature is true, and agreing to our Christian belief, according to the which
all things may be termed natural but yet I remain in dout of some part of that
which you have said, and therefore I pray you, before you pass any farther,
declare it better unto me. First, making all things so easy in the hand and
will of God, which you term nature it self, when it comes by the same to work
great and marvelous things, as raising of the dead, you say they are
supernatural and miraculous, in the which, under correction, me thinks you
contrary your self, seeing the one is as natural to God as the other.


AN. This comes and proceeds not from God, but from the things themselves,
which being so full of difficulty, and never before seen of us, for their great
strangenes we call the^ miracles, which is as much to say as marvelous and
supernatural. Because nature, or rather to speak more properly, God is not
wont often to work them, and therefore not finding any other word or manner to
express them, we say they are miracles and supernaturalli and so you must
understand it, and not that it is to God any more difficulty to work the one
then the other.


LV. You have satisfied me in this point, but withal you said, that the shapes
of men being al one, their countenances and gestures are so diverse, that it is
impossible to find one like another in all points. Whereas I have heard and
read of many that were so like in resemblance the one unto the other, that
there was no difference at all to be found between them. Your self I know,
must needs have better knowledge hereof then I, because you have read Pliny and
other authors, which treat thereof: and Pedro Mexia has copied out many
examples of the^ in his forest of collections, besides all the which I will
allege some notable examples. The first, is of two striplings which one
Toranius sold to Mark Anthonio, saying, they were two Many examples of me^ like
one to the other.
brothers, when in truth the one was born in Europe, and the other in Asia,
whose likeness was such, that there was not in any one point, difference between
the^: And when Anthonio finding himself deceived, began to be angry, Toranius
satisfied him in saying, that there was greater cause of wonder in the
diversity of their Nations, then if as he first had said, they had been both
begotten and horn of one father and mother. I am sure you have read what many
authors write of K. Antiochus, who The likeness of Artemon to Antiochus.
being murdered by the means of his wife Laodice, she placed in his steed, and
clothed with his rich habiliaments and regal ornaments one Artemo^ of Siria,
who resembled him in such sort, that he reigned two years, without being known
or discovered of any man. In Rome there was a man called Caius Bibius, so: like
to Pompey, that he could be discerned from him by no Caius Bibius like to
Po^pey.
other means, then by the diversity of his apparel Cassius Seucrus, and
Mirmilus, Lucius Pancus, and Rubus Estrius, Marcus Messala, Diverse Romans one
like to another.
and Menogenes, were by couples one so like another, that they were with much
ado to be known of their familier friends, such as were well acquainted with
them; and haunted daily their company. But leaving the ancient Romans, we
have the like examples enough amongst our selves. Don Rodrigo Don Rodrigo
Girdon and his brother.
Girdon, and his brother the Count of Vruenna were so like, that unless it
were by their attire and habiliments, their very Servants knew them not apart,
in so much that I have heard it affirmed, (which if it be true, is passing
strange) that being children and sleeping both in one bed, in touching their
legs or arms together, the flesh of the one did so cleave to the other, that
they could not without difficulty be sundred: But what should we pass herein
any farther, when every day we see and hear the like.


BER. I can be a witness of two which I have seen my self, no less
marvelous then these which you have rehearsed, The strange likeness of two men.
of the one there are witnesses enough in this house of Beneuenta, for it is
yet not much above twenty years, that the Earl had a Lacky, whom another man
came to seek, saying, that he was his brother, and that he had run away from
his Parents being young, they were so like, that there was not between them
any jot of difference at all, unless it were that he that came was somewhat
more in years, but which is strangest, though the Lacky were sent for to take
possession of some goods left him by his Father: yet did he constantly deny the
other to be his brother, affirming with oaths, that he was not borne in that
Village nor Country by many miles, the other still remaining obstinate in
challenging him for his brother, whereupon the Earl commanded them both to
go to the same Village for to satisfy an old woman there, which said, she was
mother to them both. The Lacky coming thither, could not persuade them but
that he was the self same whom they supposed, in the end, the old woman
looking fixedly upon him, for better assurance, (quoth she) if thou art my
son, thou have in such a place of thy leg a mark, which when thou were a
child was burned. The Lacky with wonderful astonishment confessed that he had
such a mark indeed, though still perseuering with oaths to affirm that he
knew them not, and that he never in his life before had been in that Village,
as the truth indeed was, for afterward it was proved, that he was borne far
from that place, and it was well known who were his Parents. Besides A thing
notable of two daughters and a son, borne all at a burden.
this, it was my hap being but a stripling, to see an other the like, very
strange, in a Village hard by the City of Segouia, where I remained four or
five days, in the house of a very honest and substantial man, which had by
his wife two daughters, so strangely like, that in turning your eyes once of
them, it was impossible to know which was the one and which was the other, they
were about 13. or 14. years old, I asking the mother which was the elder, she
pointed to the one, saying, that she was borne half an hour before the other,
for she had at one burden both them and a son, which she told me was with an
uncle of his in Segouia, so resembling in all points to his sisters, that being
one day apparelled in one of their garments, and brought before her husband and
her, neither he nor she did the whole day till night that he was unclothed,
find, know, or perceive any difference at all between him and his sister.


LVD. Truly this is very strange, and the like has sildom happened in Spain,
especially in our time. Macrobius writes in the second book of his Saturnals,
that there came a young man to Rome so resembling Aug. Caesar, that standing
before him, it seemed that he beheld as in a glass the figure of himself,
whereupon Caesar asked him if ever his mother had been at Rome, meaning
thereby that perchance his The answer of a young man to Augustus Caesar.
father might have had acquaintance with her, which the young man perceiving,
answered him redily, that his mother had never been there, but his father
oftentimes: though this history be common and rehearsed of many, yet I could
not let it pass, because it serves so fitly to the purpose of which we
entreat.


AN. I deny not, but that this may be true, and that there are many the like
things happened in the world, but according to the old proverb, One Swallow
makes no Summer, neither does the whole field leave to be called green for two
or three herbs or leaves that are withered and of a dead color within it:
these are things which happen sildome, and therefore refute not a generality
so great as is the diversity and common difference of the countenaunces and
gestures of all the men and women in the whole world.


LUD. I confess that you have great reason, but let us not so pass over
Signior Bernards tale of the woman with three children borne at one burden, all
living and brought up to that age, which truly seems to me so strange, that
me thinks in my life I never heard the like, especially in this our Country.


AN. I wonder not a little thereat my self: yet Aristotle writes that the
women of Egypt are so fruitful, that they have often 3. or 4. children at a
burden, and though he expresses not so much, The women of Egypt marvelous
fruitful.
yet we must imagine that many of them live and do well, or otherwise he
would never make so often mention of them. In this our Spain, we have often
seen a woman delivered of three children at once, and one in a Village not far
hence of 4. and in Medina del campo, some years passed, it was publicly
reported, that a certain principal woman was brought a bed of 7. at once, and
it is said, that a Bookebinders wife of Salamanca, was delivered of 9. and we
must think that in other A woman delivered of 7. children at once. another of
9.
Countries have happened the like of as great, and greater admiration, though we,
(as they say) being in one end of the world have had no notice nor knowledge
of them.


LV. Pliny says, it is certain that six children may be borne at one birth,
which is most strange, unless it be in Egypt, where the women bring sildome
one alone into the world. In Ostia there was a woman that had at one burden
two sons and two daughters, all living and doing well. Besides, in
Peloponeso, a woman was 4 times delivered each time of 5. sons, A woman
delivered of 4. children all living.
the most part of which lived. Trogus Pompeius writing of the Egiptian women,
says, that they are often delivered of 7. sons at once, of which some are
Hermophrodits. Also Paulus the Lawyer writes, that there was brought from
Alexandria Hermophrodites.
to Adrian the Emperor, a woman to be seen which had five living children, 4.
of the which were borne in one day, and the 5. four days after the delivery
of the first. Julius Capitolinus Two women delivered at once of five sons a
piece.
writes the like of a woman delivered of 5. sons in the time of Anth. Pius, so
that the matter which signior Bernardo rehearsed of the woman with 3. living
children, is not so new nor strange. Besides, it is confirmed with the
public fame of that which happened to a lady one of the greatest of this land,
which being in travail it was told her husband that she was delivered A Lady
of Spain delivered of six sons.
of one son, and within a little space of one more, and within few hours, they
told him that she had brought him forth 4. more, which were 6. in all: who
answered merrily to those that brought him the news, if you can wring her well,
I warrant you, (quoth he) you shall get more out of her. This is no fable, but a
matter known to be true.


AN. Seeing we are fallen into the discourse of prodigious births, I can by no
means pass over with silence, that which Nicholaus de florentia writes,
alleging the authority of Auicenna in Nono de animalibus, that a woman
miscarried at one time of 70. proportioned children, 70. Proportioned children
at one burden.
and the same author alleges Albertus Magnus, which said that a certain
Physician told him for assured truth, that being sent for into Almaigne to
cure a gentlewoman, he saw her delivered of a 150. children wrapped all in a
net, each of them so A gentlewoman of Almaigne delivered of a 150. children.
great as ones little finger, and all borne alive and proporcioned. I know well
that these things are almost incredible to those which have not seen the^,
yet is this one thing so notorious and well known, that it confirms the
possibility of the rest, though it be far more admirable then any of the^ all.
That which happened to the lady Margaret of Holland, which brought forth at The
monstrous and strange child birth of the Lady Margaret of Holland.
one burden 306. children, all living, about the bigness of little mise, which
were christened by the hands of a Bishop in a basin or vessel of silver, which
as yet for memory remains in a Church of the same Province, the which our
most victorious Emperor Charles the fifth has had in his hands, and this is
affirmed to be true by many and grave witnesses. Sundry authors write hereof,
especially Henricus Huceburgensis, Baptista Fulgoso, and Lodo. Viues, which
says, that the cause of this monstrous birth was the curse of a poor woman,
which coming to the gates of this great Lady to demand alms, in steed of
bestowing her charity, she reviled and taunted her reprochfully, calling her
naughty pack, and asking her how many fathers she had for her children, whereat
the poor woman taking grief, beseeched God on her knees, to send unto this
Lady so many children at a burden, that she might be able neither to know the^,
nor to nourish them.


BE. I think there never was the like of this seen or heard of in the world,
and truly herein Nature exceeded much her accustomed limits, the judgment
thereof let us refer to the Almighty, who suffered and permitted her to
conceive so many creatures, which seeing it comes so well to purpose, I will
tell you what I have heard of some men of credit, such as would not report any
untruth, which is, that in the kingdom of Naples, or in diverse places thereof,
the childbirth is passing dangerous to the Mothers, because there The dangerous
chyldebirth of women in the kingdom of Naples.
issues out before the child appear, a little beast of the fashion and
bigness of a little frog, or little toade, and sometimes 2. or 3. at once, if any
of the which through negligence come to touch the ground, they hold it for a
rule infallible, that the woman which is in travail dies presently, which
because so soon as it comes out of the womb it creeps and that swiftly,
they have the bed stopped round about, and besides, the ground and walls so
covered, that it cannot by any means com to tuoch the earth, and besides, they
have always ready a basin of water, wherein they presently put those little
beasts, and covering it so close that they cannot get out, carry the^ therein to
some river, or to the sea, wherein to avoid the danger they cast the^: and
though I have not seen any Author which writ so much, yet all those that have
been in those countries confirm the same, so that there is no doubt to be made
thereof, but that it is as true as strange: and though it may seem that I use
some digression from the matter, yet me thinks that it is not amiss that we
should understand what Aristotle writes in his 3. book de animalibus, of a he
Goat, which as it seemed was even ready to conceive, if nature would have given
him thereto any place, He Goats having milk in their teats.
for he had teates like unto the femals, great and full of milk: so that they
milked him, and it came from him in such quantity that they made cheese thereof.


AN. Marvel not much at this, for if you read the book which Andreas
Mateolus of Siena made, de epistolis medecinalibus, you shall find that he
says, he saw himself in Bohemia 3. of the same sort, of the which he
himself had one for his proper use, whose milk he found by experience to be
the best medicine of all for those which were troubled with the Apoplexy or
falling sickness.


BER. There must be some cause, for which Nature in such a thing as this
exceeded her accustomed order, and perchance it was to bring a remedy for a
disease so vneurable as this is accounted to be.


LU. Seeing we are in this discourse of byrthes, it were not amiss that we
knew in what space a woman may bear child, so that the same may live and be
accounted lawful.


AN. This matter has been handled by many authors which give us light herein.
The Lawiers say that in the 7 month, taking thereof some days away, and in the
tenth month likewise How long a woman may go great with child.
the birth may be called lawful, as one of their digests, beginning septimo
mense, and diverse other declares, and Iustinianus in his Autentick of
restitutions. The Philosophers and Physicians debate thereof more at large.
Pliny says, that the child borne in the eighth month may live, which is
directly against the experience we have, and the opinion we generally hold
thereof, for we see that those children do not live which are borne in the
seventh month, unless they are borne just at the time complet: he holds
besides that the birth of eleven months is lawful, and so he says that the
mother of Suillius Rufus, was delivered of him at the end of eleven months.
Other Philosophers have held opinion, that a woman may go with child till the
thirteenth month: but to rehearse all their opinions, were never to make an
end, he that seeks to be satisfied herein, may read Aristotle, Aulus
Gellius, and many more Authors, and Physicians which entreat copiously
thereof, it is sufficient for us that we have said so much in a matter, which
we have so sildome occasion to know or understand.


BER. This matter, in truth is fitter for Physicians to discourse of, then for
us, but in the mean time I would feign know what these Hermophrodites are,
which I heard Signior Ludouico even now say were so common to the Aegiptian
women.


LV. This matter is so common, that there is scarsely any one ignorant, but
that there are often children borne What Hermophrodites are.
with two natures, the one of a man, the other of a woman, though diverse times
the one of so slender force and weak, that it serves not for other then to
show what Nature can do when she pleases: but some there are, though rare,
which are as fully puissant in the one nature as in the other, of the first
sort I knew a married woman my self, which it was well known, had also the
nature of a man, but without any force or effect, though in her countenance and
iesture there appeared a kind of manlines, of the other sort also there are
diverse, and amongst the rest there was one in Burgos, who being Two
Hermophrodites burned.
commanded to choose whether nature she would exercise, the use of the other
being forbidden her upon pain of death, made choice of that of the feminine
sort, but afterward being accused that she secretly used the other, and under
color thereof committed great abomination, she was found guilty and burned.


AN. I have heard that there was another the like burned in Seuilia, for the
self same cause, but in these parts we hold it for a great wonder, that men
should have the nature of women, or women of men: Yet Pliny alleges, the
Philosopher Califanes, which was with Alexander Magnus in his conquest of the
Indies, who says, that amongst the Nasamans, there is a people called
Androgini, who are al Hermophrodites, and use in their embracements without any
difference, The Androgins are all Hermophrodites.
as well the one nature as the other. But we would scarcely believe this, being
so unlikely, were it not confirmed by Aristotle, which says, that these
Androgins have the right teate like a man, and the left with which they nourish
their babes, like a woman.


BER. This matter seems unto me very new and strange, neither do I remember
that ever I heard the like, but there are so many things in the world above
our capacity, that I hold it not impossible, especially being affirmed for
true, with the authority of so grave authors though me thinks this Country must
needs be very far from those which are now of late discovered in India.


LV. I cannot choose but merualie much hereat and I believe that it is some
influence or constellation, or else the property of the Country it self, which
ingendreth the people in such sort, as we see other Countries bring forth
people of diverse complexions, qualities, and conditions. But now seeing we have
so long discoursed of births, as well common and natural, as unnatural and rare:
it were not amiss if we said somewhat of such as are prodigious and monstrous,
so far beyond that wonted order and rule of Nature, which she is accustomed to
observe.


AN. It is true that there has been seen diverse births admirable and
monstrous, which either proceed from the will and permission of God, in whose
hands all things are, or else through some causes and reasons to us not revealed,
though many of them by conjectures and tokens com afterward to be discovered,
which though they perfectly conclude not the demonstration of the true cause,
yet give they us a great liklihood and appearance to guess thereat. It is a
thing natural to all children, to give a turn in their mothers belly, and to
come into the world with the head forwards, yet this general rule oftentimes
fails, and some come forth thwartlong, and some with their body double,
neither of the which can live, their body is so crushed and broken, the mothers
also of such are in exceeding danger. Others come to be borne with their feet
forward, which is also passing dangerous, as well for the mother as the child:
unless they chance to come forth with their arms hanging down close by
their sides, which if they hold upward or croswise, they crush them or put
them out of joint, so that fevve such live. Of these came the lineage of Agrippas
in Rome, which is as much to say as Aegre parti, brought forth in pain, and
The lineage of Agrippas.
commonly those that are so borne, are held to be unlucky, and of short life.
Some say that Nero was so borne of his mother Agrippina, who though he seemed
in obtaining the Empire to Nero borne with his feet forward.
be fortunate, yet in losing it so soon with a death so infamous, his end
proved him unfortunate and miserable. It happens also sometimes that the
mothers die, and that the children by opening their sides are taken out alive,
and come to live and do well. Of these was Scipio Affrican, which was
therefore the first that was called Caesar, and another Roman Gentleman called
Scipio Affrican called Caesar quiae Caesus ex vtero.
Manlius, as Pliny vvriteth in his seventh book.


BER. It is a matter so true and notorious, that there is no dout to be made
thereof, which we read in the chronicles of Spain, of the birth of Don Sanches
Garcia, king of Navarre, whose mother Donna Ursaca, being at a place called
Baruban, to take her pleasure The strange birth of Don Sanches Garcia king of
Navarre.
in the fields, was by certain Mores which of a sudden came thither to
spoil and make booty, thrust into the body with a spear, in such sort, that
the babe with which she went great, appeared out of the wound, as though he
would feign come forth, she her self living in pitiful extremity, and
painfully gasping for life: which her servants perceauing, opened the wound a
little more, and took the Infant out, causing him to be nourished, the which
prospered so well, that he afterward came to attain the royal Diadem, and
reigned many years. And not much before our time, a Gentleman The like of
Diego Osorio.
called Diego Osorio, of the house of Astorgo, was borne in the self same
manner, but they took so little heed in cutting of his mothers belly, that
they gave him a slash on the leg, of which he remained ever after lame, and
lived many years.


AN. Children to be borne toothed, is a thing so common, that we have seen it
often, amongst the Ancients, as Children borne toothed.
Pliny and Soline writes, were Papinus, Carbo, and Marcus Curious Dentatus. I
can give good testimony hereof my self, as an eye witness of some that have
been borne with teeth, and that with those before, whereby we may the better
believe the antiquity.


LV. Some Greek Authors write that Pirrhus King of the Epirotes, in steed of
teeth was borne with a hard massy bone only, one above, and another beneath.
And Herodotus vvriteth, that in Persia there was a whole lineage that had the
like. Caelius Rodiginus, in the beginning of his fourth book de antiquis
lectionibus, brings Hercules borne with three rows of teeth.
for author Io. Mochius, which affirms that Hercules had three rows of
teeth, which is passing strange: but no doubt there have happened many
miraculous things in the world, which for want of vvriters have not come to
our knowledge: and if we could see those things which happen in other
Countries, we should not so much vvonder at these of which we now speak:
neither need we go far to seek them, for we shall find enough even in
our Europe and Countries here abouts.


BER. I will tell you what I saw in a Town of Italy, called Prato, seven or
eight miles off from The face of a child new borne, covered with long hair.
Florence, a child newborn, whose face was covered with a very thick beard,
about the length of ones hand, white and fine, as the finest threeds of flax
that might be spunne, which when he came to be two months old, began to fall
off, as it had peeld away through some infirmity, after which time I never
savv him more, neither know I what became of him.


LV. And I once savv a little vvench, which was borne with a long thick hair
upon the chine of her back, and so sharp, A vvench having hair upon the
chine of her back, like brisles of a Boar.
as if they had been the brisles of a vvild Boar, so that she must
continually ever after keep it cut short, or otherwise it hurt her when she
clothed her self.


AN. These are things wherein Nature seems not far to exceed her
accustomed order: Let us therefore come to the^ that are more strange, and of
greater admiration. Pliny writes that there was a woman called Alcippa
delivered of an Elephant, and A woman delivered of an Elephant
another of a Serpent: besides, he writes, that he saw himself a Centaure,
brought to the Emperor Claudius in honey to keep him from putrefaction, which
was brought forth by a woman of Thessalia. Besides these, there are many other
such like things reported by wise and grave Authors, that such as never heard
of them before, would be astonished at their strangenes.


LVD. And think you that this age and Sundry strange and monstrous childbirthes
time of ours, yields not as many strange and vvonderfull things as the
antiquity did? Yes undoubtedly does it, were we so careful to registre and
to commit them to memory as they were. I will tell you one, of the which I am a
witness my self, of a woman that having had a very hard travail, in the
which she was often at the point of death, at last was delivered of a child,
and withal of a beast, whose fashion was like unto a Firret, which came forth
with his claws upon the childs breast, and his feet entangled within the
child's legs, both one and the other died in few hours.


BER. We see and hear daily of many things like unto these, and besides, we
have seen women in steed of children bring forth only lumpes of flesh,
which the Physicians call Moles. I have Lumpes of flesh, called by the
Phisitio^s moles.
seen my self one, of the which a woman was delivered, of the fashion of a
great Goose-neck, at one end it had the sign of a head imperfectly fashioned,
and the woman told me, that when it came into the world it moved, and that
therefore they had sprinkled water upon it, using the words of Baptism. In
engendring of these things, Nature seems to show herself weak and faint,
and perchance the defect hereof might be in the Father or mother, the
imperfection of whose seed was not able to engender a creature of more
perfection.


AN. Your opinion herein is not without some reason, but withal understand,
that there may be as well therein supersluitie, which corrupting it self, in
steed of engendring a child, engenders these other creatures which you have
rehearsed, as the Elephant, the Centaure, and the rest: but the likeliest is,
that they are engendered of corrupted humors, that are in the woman's body,
which in time would be the cause of her death, in steed of which, Nature
works that which Aristotle says in his Book De communi animalium gressu,
that Nature forces her always of things possible to do the best, and when
Nature forces her always to do the best.
she can create any thing of these corrupted humors, whereby she may preserve
life, she procures to do it as a thing natural.


LU. The one and the other may well be true, but yet in my judgment, there is
another reason likelier then either of them both, which is, that all these
things, or the most part of them, proceed of the woman's imagination at the
time of her conception. For as Algazar an ancient Philosopher of great
authority affirms: The earnest imagination, has not only force and power to
imprint diverse effects in him which The wonderful force of imagination.
imagines, but also may work effect in the things imagined, for so
intentiuely may a man imagine that it rayneth, that though the wether were
fair, it may become clowdy and rain indeed, and that the stones before him
are bread, so great may be the vehemence of his imagination that they may turn
into bread.


BE. I believe the miracle which Christ made in turning water into wine, but
not these miraculous imaginations of Algazar, which truly in mine opinion are
most ridiculous.


AN. In exterior things I never saw any of these miracles: yet Aristotle
vvriteth in his ninth Book De animalibus, that the Hen fighting with the
Cock and ouercomming him, conceaueth thereof such pride, that she lyfteth up
her crest and tail, imagining that she is a Cock, and seeking to tread the
other Hens, with the very imagination whereof, she comes to have spurs.
But leaving this, let us come to Auicenna, (for in this matter we cannot go
out of Doctors and Philosophers) whose opinion in his second Book is, that
the imagination of the mind, is able to work so mighty a change in natural
things, that it happens oftentimes the Child to resemble that thing which the
Mother at the time of her conception imagines. The self same says S.
Augustine, in his 12. Book of the City of God: that the earnest imagination
of a woman going great, causes often the child to be borne with the qualities
and conditions of the thing imagined: and we read in Plutarch, that a white
woman conceauing child by a white man, was delivered of an Infant A black
child, borne of white Parents.
coale-blacke, because at the time that she conceived, she held her eyes and
imagination fixed upon the picture of a Black-Moore which was painted in a
cloth upon the wall, which the child wholly resembled.


LV. Aristotle, Pliny, and many other Authors write of that famous Poet
Vizantine, that his father The strange opiration of Nature in the Poet
Vizantine.
and mother being white, he was borne black.


AN. But this was of another sort, Nature making as it were a iumpe from the
Grandfather to the Nephewe, for his Mother was begotten by an Ethiopian in
aduoutry, which Nature covering in her birth being white, discovered in the
birth of her son being black. Let us therefore return to imagination, of
whose effects we have seen great experience, and I have heard of a woman
delivered of a child all covered over with rough hair, the reason whereof was,
that she had in her chamber A child covered with hair.
the picture of Saint John Baptist clothed in hairy skinns, on which the woman
using with devotion to contemplate, her child was borne both in roughnes and
figure like unto the same.


BE. Marcus Damascenus writes the self same which you have said, saying, that
it happened in a place of Italy, near The place is called Petroe sancta.
the City of Pysa. It is not long since that there went through Spain a man
gathering money, with the fight of a son of his covered with hair, in such
quantity so long and thick, that in his whole face there was nothing else to be
seen but his mouth and eyes: Withal, the hair was so curled, that it crimpled
round like Ringes, and truly the wild Savages which they paynt, were nothing
so deformed, and over their whole body so hairie as was this boy.


LV. I will neither wonder at this, nor at any such like, seeing that in this
our time it is known and affirmed for a matter most true, that certain Players
showing of a Comedy in Germany, one of them which played the devil, having put
on a kind of attire most grisly and fearful, when the Play was ended went
home to his own house, where A wonderful Monster borne in Germany.
taking a toy in the head, he would needs use the company of his wife without
changing the deformed habit he had on, who having her imagination fearfully
fixed on the ouglie shape of that attire with which her husband was the^
clothed, conceived child, and came to be delivered of a creature representing
A wonderful monster.
the very likeness of the devil, in form so horrible, that no devil of hell
could be figured more loathsome or abominable. The mother died presently, and
for the small time that this monster lived, which was only three days, there
are told of him things strange, hellish and infernal, and to the end this
wonder might be known unto the whole world, the figure thereof was brought
printed into Spain, and carried through Christendom.


AN. I saw it, and can give thereof good testimony, and it was assuredly
reported to be true in such sort as you have said, whereby we may well perceive
how mighty the force of imagination is, being able to engender a monster so
horrible. And seeing we are in the discourse of matters monstrous (though this
which I will tell you be not like to these before rehearsed) yet I am sure you
will think that it is not a little to be wondered at, and perchance it is of a
man whom we all have seen, who being a Friar of the third order of S.
Frauncis, was wont to make his residence in the A most strange stoie of a Friar.
Cloister of our Lady of the Valley, which is hard by this place where we now
are, but at this present is in a Cloister called Soto, fast by the City of
Zamorra. He is so little of stature, that without doing him any wrong, we may
well term him a Dwarf, but to the bigness of his body he has an excellent
feature and proportion of lymmes, and a singular comlines in his gesture: this
man, as the common voice is, and besides as many religious men have assured me
for a truth, was borne in a Village called S. Tiso, with all the teeth and
tussles which he now has, of the which he never changed nor lost any one,
and with much difficulty could he be nourished with milk, so that he sucked
but a very little while: besides, he brought from his mothers womb, the hair
of his secrets, as if he had been 20. years old. At 7. years of age, his chin
was covered with a beard, at 10. years he begat a child, and was in the
chiefest strength of his age as other men at 30. and which is more, is not at
this present above 25. years old.


BER. In truth this is a thing very strange and worthy of admiration, but what
shall we say of other monsters which are so many and of so sundry shapes in the
world, that they make those astonished which see them, or read that which is
written of them.


AN. I know not what to judge, because of one side so many grave men, and of
such authority, that we are bound to believe them, write of these monsters,
and of the other side, we see and hear of so fevv now in the world, and of
those we scarsely find any man, that can say he has seen them him self, and
yet there was never so great a part of the world discovered as is now, for all
the which we see not that there are any of these monsters found either in India
mayor, conquered by the Portugales, neither in west Indies, marry they say
Sundry strange and monstrous forms of men.
that they are all retired to mountains, and inaccessible places. Pliny,
Soline, and Strabo, write perticulerly of them, notwithstanding. I will make
mention of some fevv of them. Some they called Monosceli, which have but one
leg, with the which they are so light in leaping, that they overtake all
other Monosceli.
beasts, only in iumping after them, their foot is so great, that in hot
vveather lying on the ground, they lift it up, and with the shadow thereof
defend them selves from the heat of the Sun. There are others without either
neck or head, having their eyes in their shoulders: others their faces plain
without nosethrils, in steed of which they have two little holes only: others
without mouths, maintaining them selves with the only smell of fruits and
herbs, the force of whose sent is such, that they dry and wither up the
flovvers, in smelling out of them all their substance. The smell of any evil
or noisome thing is so contrary to them, that oft-times it puts them in
danger of their lives. Their speech and understanding is by signs. Besides,
they write that there are men in the mountains of Scithia, or Tartaria, with
so little mouths, that they cannot eat, but maintain their lives with
sucking in only the substance and juice of flesh and fruits. There is another
kind of men with dogs faces and Ox feet, which contain all their speech
under two words, only with the which the one understands the other. There
are others whom they call Phanaces, whose ears are so great, that they cover
therewith Phanaces.
their whole bodies: they are so strong, that with one pull they tear whole
trees up by the roots, using them in their fight with exceeding agillity. There
are others with one eye only, and that in their forehead, their ears like
dogs, and their hair standing stiff up an end. Others they describe with
diverse and monstrous forms, which if I should rehearse all, I should never
make an end, yet by the way, I will tell you what I have read in one of
Ptolomes tables of Tartaria mayor, There is in it, says he, a Country now
called Georgia, fast by the kingdom of Ergonil, in the which there are five
sorts of Sundry diverse shapes of men in the Country of Georgia.
people, some black as Ethiopians, some white like us, some having tails like
Peacocks, some of very little and low stature with two heads, and others whose
face and teeth are in manner of horse jaws. And if this be true, it is a
wonderful thing that there should be in one Land such diversities of men.


BER. Do these Authors set all these monsters together in one part of the
earth, or in diverse parts.


AN. In this point they differ far the one from the other. Pliny and Strabo
agree with the story written by the Philosopher Onosecritus, which was in India
with Alexander the great, and writes all these monsters to be there. Solinus
says, that the Arimaspes, being a people with one eye, are in Scithia, fast
by the Riphaean mountains. Arimaspes.
Others hold, that the most part of these monsters are in the solitary deserts
of Africa, and the rest are in the mountains of Atlas: others said, that the
Cyclops, Giants of exceeding hugenes, with one only eye, and that in the midst
of In what places of the world the monsters are written to be.
their forehead, were to be seen in Sicillia.


LU. Yet it may be that they are as well in one place as in another, yet Strabo
entreating of them, in conclusion accounts them but fables, and fained
matters: and Sinforianus Campegius, a man singulerly learned, in a Chapter
which he writes of monsters, proves by natural reasons that there can be
none such, and if there be any, that they are no men, but brute beasts, like
unto men: Pomponius Mela, is of the same opinion, saying, that the Satyrs have
nothing else of man, then the likeness.


AN. I will neither believe all nor condemn all which is written, but as
touching the Satyrs, me thinks Pomponius Mela has small reason, for we must
rather believe Saint. Hierome, who in the life of Saint Paul the first
Hermit, (which work is allowed by our Church) witnesses that they Satyrs
are men and creatures reasonable. The shape of Satyrs.
are men, and creatures reasonable. Their shape is according to the description
of diverse Authors like unto men, differing only in some points, as in having
horns on their heads, their noses and forepart of their mouths, like to
dogs snowts, and their feet like to those of Goats. Many affirm, that they
have seen them in the deserts of Aegipt. The Gentiles in diverse places adored
them for Gods, and Pan the God of Sheepheards, was always painted in the
likeness of a Satyr. Many have written of these Satyrs, and it is held for a
matter certain and undoubted.


AN. Sabellicus, in his Aeneads says, that there are of them in the mountain
Atlas, which run on four feet, and some on two feet like men, either sort
passing swiftly. Pliny affirms, that there are of them in India, in certain
mountains, called Subsolani, whom not accounting men, he terms to be most
dangerous and harmfull beasts. Ovid in his Metamorphosis, says, that the
Satyr is a beast like unto a man, only that he has horns on his head, and
feet like a Goat. But if it be so, that they are men capable of reason, I
wonder that we have no greater knowledge of them.


AN. Herein is no great cause of wonder, because the deformity of their figure
makes them so vvild, that it takes from them the greatest part of the use of
reason, so that they fly the conversation of men, even as other brute beasts
do: but amongst them selves they converse, and understand one another well
enough: for all those which write of the mountain Atlas, say, that there are
in the tops thereof, many nights, heard great noyses, and soundes, as it were of
Tabers and Flutes, and other wind instruments, which they hold for a certain
to be done by the Satyrs in their meetings: for as soon as the day comes you
hear no more: yet some will Meetings of the Satyrs.
say that the Satyrs are not the cause thereof, but another secret of Nature:
of the which we will hereafter in his more convenient and proper place
discourse.


LU. Before we pass any farther, let us first understand what difference there
is between Satyrs, Faunes, and Egipanes: Satyrs, Faunes, Egipanes.
for Virgill in the beginning of his Georgiques, inuoketh as well the one as
the other, and sundry other Authors using these several names, do seem to
put a difference between them.


AN. I will answer you herein with Calepin, which says, that Faunes were
held amongst the Greeks for the self same, which Satyrs among the Latins, and
that they both are one thing. Probus and Seruius says, that they are called
Fauni a fando, because they prophesied, as Pan did amongst the Sheepheards. And
Seruius vvriteth, that Egipans, Satyrs, and Faunes, are all one. Nicolaus
Leonicus, in his second book de vana historia, vvriteth of another sort of
Satyrs, much differing in shape from these before rehearsed, he alleges an
Author called Pausanias, whose authority he follows in his whole work, who
says, that he heard Eufemius, a man of great estimation and credit affirm,
that sailing toward Spain, the ship in which they went, through a great
tempest and storm, being driven with a violent western wind to run along
the Ocean Seas, brought them at last upon the coast of certain Islands, which
seemed to be uninhabited: where they had no sooner landed to take in fresh
water, but there appeared certain vvild men; of a fierce and cruel
resemblance, all covered with hair somewhat reddish, resembling in each other
part men, but only that they had long tails full of brisled hairs like unto
horses. These monsters discovering the Mariners, joined them selves in a great
troop and squadron Men with tails like horses.
together, making an ill-favored noise, like the barking or rather howling of
dogs, and at last of a sudden set upon them with such a fury and vehemence,
that they drove them back to their ship, forcing them to leave behind them one
of their women which was also landed, upon whom, they savv from their ship
those brutish men, or rather barbarous monsters, use all sort of fleshly
abomination and filthy lust, and that in every such part of her body, as by
any possibility they might; which when they savve themselves unable to succor,
with grief hoising up their sails, they departed from thence, naming the
place the Island of Satyrs. Gaudencius Merula, rehearses the self same saying:
that Eufemius which told this to Pausanias, was a Cardinal.


LU. Ptolome in his second book of the tenth table of Asia, vvriteth that
there are three Islands of Satyrs bearing the self same form, and I verily
believe, Three Islands of Satyrs.
that those are they whom we commonly call wild Savages, painted with great
and knotty staves in their hands, for till now I never heard that there were
any such particulerly in any part of the world.


BER. Pliny vvriteth, alleging the authority of Megasthenes, that there are
toward the East certain people, which have long bushie tails like Foxes: so
that they are in a manner Men with tails like Foxes.
like unto those which you have said. I partly believe this the rather, because
of that which (as I have heard) happened to a lynage of men that brake up a
vessel pertaining to S. Toribius, Bishop of Astorga, in which he held sacred
relics, with whose delectable savor he sustained himself, putting in place
there of things stinking and unsavory, for punishment and perpetual mark of
which wicked offense, both they and their posterity came to have tails, which
race, as it is said, A race of men having all tails.
continues till this day.


AN. You commit no deadly sin though you believe it not. But I will tell you
one no less monstrous then all these above mentioned, the which I did see (as
they say) with mine own eyes in the year 1514. of a stranger that went to S.
James in pilgrimage, who ware a long garment down to his feet open before,
which in giving him some little alms he opened wide, and discovered a child,
whose A strange story of a Pilgrima.
head to our seeming was set in the mouth of his stomach or a very little
higher, his whole neck being out, from whence downward his body was fully
perfected and well fashioned in all his members, which he stirred as other
children do, so that there was in one man two bodies; but whether this child
was governed by the man which bare it, or by it self in his natural
operations, I cannot say, for I was then so young, that I neither had the
discretion to discern it, nor the wit to ask it. I should not have dared to
have told this, but that there are in Spain so many which have seen it and
remember it besides my self, and the thing so public and notorious. Besides,
I have been told by certain persons of great credit, that about 2. or 3.
years since, in Rome they went about gathering money with showing a man that
had two A man with two heads.
heads, the one of the which came out of th'entry of his stomach, the self
same place out of which the others body came; but this head, though it were
most perfectly shaped, yet was it like unto a dead member, which of it self
had no feeling, but that the man felt when it was touched, as well as any
other of his members.


BER. Though these things be passing strange and wonderful, and need many
witnesses to give them credit, yet why should not this happen sometimes to
men, as it does often to other creatures? I have seen my self a Lamb brought
forth with two heads, which died incontinently.


LU. Petrus Crinitus in his 21. Book of honest discipline, says, that in
Emaus (which I take to be that of which the holy Scripture makes mention) a
woman bare two boys from the nauill downward joined in one, having upwards
two several bodies, two heads, two breasts, and all other members
proportionable, Two children from the nauill down ward joined in one.
and that they were two persons, and two distinct souls, it was easy to
perceive, for the one wept, when the other laughed, the one slept, when the
other waked, and each of them did in one moment different operations: in which
sort they lived two years, at term of which the one dying, the other lived
only four days after him. He rehearses this history by the authority of
Singibertus, whom he commends for an Author of great gravity and truth, who
lived in the time of Theodosius the Emperor. Besides, Saint Augustine in his
City of God writes of this monster, though not so particulerly. I have read
of other two that were borne joined together by the shoulders, back to back,
living so Two children joined back to back.
a certain time, till the one coming to die, the stench of his dead body, so
infected and anoyed the other, that he lived not long after him.


AN. When there is no Author of credit, I will never believe that which is
amongst the common sort reported, being for the most part altogether fabulous.


BER. Leaving this, I pray you tell me Signior Anthonio what you think of that
which Pliny writes of the Pigmees, and many other Authors of the Amazons.


AN. As for the Amazons, many Writers affirm that they have been, Pigmees.
Amazons.
and there are so many histories recorded of them, their valorous deeds of
Arms, the battles and wars in which they were, that it should seem great
temerity to say the contrary. Though Plutarch writing the life of great
Alexander, brings xij. Greek Authors that wrote also of his life, some in
his very time, and some little after his death, of which some few make mention
of one Thalestris, Queen of the Amazones, that came so far to see him and
speak with him, but the rest Thalestris Qu. of the Amazons.
and the greater part say nothing at all thereof, whereby he seems to doubt
whether it were true or no, for if it were, he thinks that such and so
esteemed Authors would never have past so notable a matter in silence. Besides,
Strabo was of opinion, that this matter of Amazons was altogether feigned,
whose words are these: Who can believe that there was ever at any time, Army,
City, or Commonwealth only of women, and not only that there were, but
that they made war and invaded conqueringly upon other Countries, subdued their
neighbors in battles, ranged and dared set their Armies in Ionia, and on the
farther side of Pontus, even to Attica? This were as much to say, as that in
those days the women were men, and the men women.


LUD. All this is not sufficient to prove that in times past, there were no
such; for all those that write of the Troyan The Amazons came to the wars of
Troy.
wars, make no doubt of their coming thither, and that which is written of
their original and beginning, is most notorious and known, but of their last
fall, and final end, I have not seen any History that makes mention.


BER. There have been in the World many notable things unknown for want of
Writers, of the which this may be one: but I have chiefly noted one thing,
which is, that the Authors agree not about those Countries wherein they write
that they lived; the rehearsal of whose several opinions, concerning their
Province and Kingdom, I will not encomber my self with repeating.


ANT. Diodorus Siculus vvryteth, that the Amazones reigned in two parts, the
one in Scithia, a Province of Asia, and the other in Lybia, a Province of
Africa, wherein is confirmed that which you say, touching their diversity of
Regions, though their manner of life were all one. And if you desire to know
the sum of their history, and the opinion of diverse authors concerning the^,
read Pedro Mexias in his Forest of Collections, who therein Pedro Mexias.
handles it at large; and truly if they were so mighty as they are written to
be, some great and notable matter must needs have succeeded before their fall,
who in time of their prosperity had achiued such worthy enterprises.


BER. Leaving this, let us resolve our selves in the matter of Pigmees proposed
by Signior Ludouico, the discourse of which will yield as much matter vvhereon
to speak, as this of the Amazones.


ANT. Of these the most part of Cosmographers make mention, describing them to
be men of three spans in length. Pliny holds, that they exceed not in
length three handbredths the thombe being strect out. Iuuenall speaking of The
country, stature, story, and description of the Pigmees
them, says, that their whole stature passes not the height of a foot. Both
the one and the other may be true, for as amongst us there be some men greater
then other, so may there be between them difference of statures, though the
highest cannot exceed three spans or very little more. Their habitation is in
the utter parts of India toward the East, near the rising of the River
Ganges, in certain Mountains, where at such times as it is in other places
Winter, the Cranes come to lay their eggs, and to bring up their young ones
about the River sides, whose coming so soon as the Pigmees perceive, because
they are so little that the Cranes regard them not, but do them much hurt, as
well in their persons, as in eating up their victuals and spoiling their
fruits, they join themselves (as Homer writes) in great number to break
their eggs, and Their fight with the Cranes.
to prepare themselves to this terrible fight, they mount upon Goats and Rams,
and in very goodly equipage go forwards to destroy this multiplication of
Cranes, as to a most dangerous and bloody enterprise.


BER. This is a fierce people and of great courage as it seems; but as I have
heard, they live not long, for their women at 3. years of age bear children,
at 6. years are barren and reputed old, and the greatest age they may reach
unto is ix. or x. years. Ovid in his 6. book of Metamorp. says, that they
are two foot long, double the reckoning of Iuuenall, Ovid.
and that their women bear children at five years, and at eight years are
old, and die soon after.


AN. The common fame that goes of them is so, and the like says Aristotle by
these words. The Cranes come out of the plains of Scithia, Aristotle.
to the lakes above Aegipt, which is where the River Nilus runs, and it is
said, that they fight in this place with the Pigmees, and this is no fable, but
an assured truth, that there are marvelous little men, and very little horses
also, the men are about two feet and a handbreadth high, the women breed
children at five years, at eight are barraine, and live not much longer.
Solinus also entreating of the self same matter, says, Solinus,
that the Pigmees enhabite certain hills of India, and that the longest term
of their life is eight years.


LV. These authors are well wide one from another, seeing the one places them
in Africa, and the other in the uttermost bounds of Asia, being so many
thousand miles difference between them. Pomponius Mela, will have their
habitation to be in the farthest parts of all Africa, some others will have it
to be in Europe. Pomponius Mela.
For Gemafrisius in his Cosmography, says, that there was a ship made of
leather, driven through a vehement tempest, Gemafrisius.
upon the coast of the kingdom of Norway, in the which were no other people
then Pigmees, of whose habitation A ship of Pigmees driven on the shore of
Norway.
there could no knowledge be had, because no man could understand their
language, but according to the course of their voyage it could not be, but in
some part between the West and the North, which we will farther prove, when we
come to discourse thereof. It must be in some other new part of the world, or
else it must be in some Country contained under Europe. Pigafeta, a Knight of
Malta, which accompanied Magellan in his voyage to the Indies, when he
discovered the straight, and returned back in the ship called Victoria, (which
The relation of Pigafeta, in his voyage to the Indies with Magellan.
they say went round about the world) in relation that he made to the Pope,
of his strange adventures by the way, said, that being in the Archpelago, which
is in the Sea of Sur, and on the other side of the Straight, there were found
Pigmees in a certain Island, of different fashion from these, for their ears
were as great as their whole body, they laid themselves down on the one, and
covered themselves with the other, and were in their running exceeding swift,
which though he himself did not see, because he could not apart himself from
the voyage which the ship held, yet it was in the Islands there about, a thing
notoriously known and manifest, and the most part of the Mariners testified
the same.


AN. Pigafeta, had need, for the credit of his report, to bring such
witnesses, as had seen them in person: but the matter is not great, for every
man may believe herein what he list, without committing deadly sin. Anthony
Gubert, seeing these diversities took occasion in a Treatise of his, to say,
that this matter of Pigmees is but a fable, which he endeavors to prove, by
diverse effectual reasons, the one of which is, that the world being never so
much voyaged, neither ever so great a part thereof discovered and known as
now: yet is there not any particular part thereof certainly known or found
out, that is enhabited of Pigmees. But omitting the sundry opinions of others,
which have written of this matter, it should be a great rashness, not to give
credit to so grave Authors, as were Aristotle, Soline, and Pliny, which
affirm them to be: and it may be, that in times past this race of men, were in
those sundry parts which they say, all of one form and likeness, according to
that which we said of the Amazones: but let us leave this to be concluded, by
men of greater curiosity then we are, only by the way, I will tell you this,
that there are diverse of opinion, that these Pigmees are not reasonable men,
but beasts, bearing the figure and likeness of men, with Pigmees are men,
and endued with the use of reason.
some little more use of reason, then the other beasts have.


BER. They are in the wrong, which maintain that opinion: for it is most
certain, that there are Pigmees, and that they are men endued with reason, the
which you may see in Ezechiell, where he reckons up the Pigmees amongst
other Nations, that had affairs and dealings in the City of Ezechiel 27.
Tire, saying: The Pigmees also which stand in thy Towers, hanged up their
shieldes round about thy walls, and in this manner increased thy goodlines and
beauty.


BER. Perchance, those Pigmees of which Ezechiell makes mention, was some
Nation of little men, but not so little as those which we speak of: for
Pigmee in Hebrew, Pigmee in Hebrew signifies a little man.
is as much to say, as a man of little stature: for if these Pigmees were such,
as those Authors write, they must needs enjoy long life, seeing they voyaged
so far, using traffic by Sea, bringing unto us such commodities, as their
Country yields, and carrying back such of ours, as are necessary for them,
so that I account it a matter impossible, that men whose space of lives is so
short, should traffic with such careful industry, in the far Countries of
Siry and Jury.


LU. Your opinion is not without reason, but in the end herein we cannot
steadfastly affirm any thing for truth, so that it is best that we leave it
even so, contenting our selves with that which has been upon this matter
alleged, seeing we have not as yet ended our discourse of monsters. I say
therefore, that Ctesias affirms, that being with Alexander in India, he
saw above 130000. men together, having all Ctesias.
heads like dogs, and using no other speech but barking. 130000. men together
with heads like dogs.



BER. I would rather call these dogs with two feet, or else some other two
footed beasts: such as there is a kind of great Apes, of the which, I have
seen one with a dogs face, but standing upright on his feet, each part of
him had the An Ape with a dogs head.
shape of a man, or so little difference, that at the first, any man might be
deceived, and so perchance might Ctesias, and the rest of those which saw
them, seeing they could not affirm whether they had the use of reason,
whereby they might be held for men, and not brute beasts.


AN. Both the one and the other may be, but leaving this, they write, that
there are certain men dwelling on the hill Milo, having on each foot eight
toes, which turn all Men with eight toes.
backward, and that they are of incredible swiftnes: Others, that are borne
with their hair hoary gray, which as they wax old, becomes black. To be
short, if I should rehearse the infinite number of such like as are reported, I
Men borne with gray hair, which in old age waxes black.
should never make an end: for you can scarcely come to any manne, which
will not tell you one vvoonder or other, which he has seen. One will tell
you of an Evve that brought forth a Lion, which as Elian says, happened in
the Country of the Coosians, in the time of the An Ewe brought forth a Lion,
and a Sow an Elephant.
tyranny of Nicippus: Another will tell you of a Sovve that farowed a Pygge,
resembling an Elephant, which happened not long since in this Town, wherein
we dwell, so that every one will tell you a new thing, and for my part I will
not believe but that they are true: because we see every day new secrets of
nature discovered, and the world is so great, that we cannot know in the one
part what is done in the other. If it were not for this, it were impossible to
write the number of them, neither were any book how great so ever, able to
contain them. But for the proof of the rest, I will tell you of one strange
people, found out in the world. Mine author is Iohanes Bohemus, a Dutch man, in
his book, entitled Iohanes Bohemus.
the manners and customs of all Nations, who though he declares not the time
wherein it happened, nor what the The story of a miraculous Island found out by
Iambolo
person was that found them out, yet he writes it so familierly, that it
seems he was some man marvelous well known in his Country: but because you
shall not think that I enhaunce the matter with words of mine own, I will
repeat those self same which he used, in the which have patience if I be
somewhat long. Iambolo, says he, a man from his childhood well brought up, after
that his Father died, used the trade Iohanes Bohemus. Cap. 26.
of Merchandise, who voyaging toward Arabia, to buy spices and costly
perfumes, the ship wherein he went, was taken by certain Rouers, which made
him with another of the prisoners, Cow-heard, and keeper of their cattle, with
which as he went one morning to the pasture, he and his companion were taken
by certain Aethiopians, and carried into Aethiopia, to a City situate on the
Sea, whose custom was from long and ancient time to cleanse that place, and
others of the Country there abouts, according to the answer of an Oracle of
theirs, in sending at certain seasons two men being strangers, to the Island
which they call Fortunat, whose enhabitants live in great and blessed happiness.
If these two went thither and returned again, it prognosticated to that
Country great felicity: but if they returned through fear of the long way or
tempest of the Sea, many troubles should happen to that Country, and those
which so returned, were slain and torn in pieces. The Aethiopians had a
little boat, fit for two men to rule, into the which, they put victuals enough
for six months, beseeching them with all instance to direct the Provv of
their boat, according to the commandment of the Oracle, toward the South,
to the end they might arrive in that Island where those fortunate men lived,
promising them great rewards, if after their arrival they returned back:
threatening to pull them in pieces, if they should before through fear return
to any coast of that Country: because their fear should be the occasion of
many miseries to that Land; and as in so returning they should show themselves
most wicked and cruel, so should they at their hands, expect all cruelty
possible to be imagined. Iambolo and his companion being put into the boat
with these conditions, the Ethiopians remained on the shore celebrating their
holy ceremonies, and inuoking their Gods to guide prosperously this little
ship, and to grant it after the voyage finished, safe return. Who sailing
continually 4. months, passing many dangerous tempests, at last, wearied with
so discomfortable a voyage, arrived at the Island whereto they were directed,
which was round and in compass about 5000. stadyes, approaching to the shore,
some of the inhabitants came to receive them in a little Skiffe, others stood
on the shore, wondering at the strangenes of their habit and attire: but in
fine, all received them most courteously, communicating with the^ such things
as they had. The men of this Island, are not in body and manners like unto ours,
though in form and figure they resemble us, for they are four cubits higher,
and their boanes are like Men whose bones are like sinews.
sinews, which they double and writhe each way, they are passing nimble, and
withal so strong, that whatsoever they take in their hands, there is no
possible force able to take it from them. They are hairie, but the same is so
polished and delicate, that not so much as any one hair stands out of order.
Their faces most beautiful, their bodies well featured, the entry of their
ears far larger then ours. The chiefest thing wherein they differ from us, is
their tongues, which have a singular particularitie given the^ by Nature, the
which is, that from their birth, they are so parted and divided, that they
seem to be double, so that they use them diversely, and in one Men with divided
tongues, which spe^^ two purposes at once
instant pronounce different reasons; and which is more, they counterfeit also
the voice of the birds and fowls of the air, but which is of other most
admirable, they speak with two men at once, to one with the one part, and to
the other with the other part of the tongue, and demanding of the one, they
answer to the other, as though the two tongues were in two several mouths
of two sundry men. The air is all the year long so temperate in this Island,
that (as the Poet writes) the Pear remains on the Peare-tree, the Aple on
the Apletree, and the Grapes upon the Vine, without withering or drying. The
day and night are always equal, the Sun at noone days makes no shadow of
any thing. They live according to their kindreds, to the number of 500. in
company together. They have no houses not certain habitations, but fields and
Meadows. The earth without tillage yields the^ abundant store of fruits,
for the virtue of the Island, and the temprature of their climate, makes the
earth being of it self fertile, passing fruitful, yea more then enough. There
grow many Canes, yielding great store of white seeds, as big as Pidgions
eggs, which gathering and making wette with hot Bread made of white seed.
water they then let dry, which being done they grind it, and make thereof
bread wonderfully sweet and delectable. They have sundry great Fountains, of
the which some are of hot water, most wholesome to bathe in, and to cure
infirmities, and others to drink, most sweet and comfortable. They are all
much addicted to Sciences, and principally they are curious in Astrology: they
use 28. letters, and besides them other 7. These men use 28. letters.
Characters, every one of the which they interpret 4. ways for the
signification of their meaning. All of them for the most part live very long,
commonly till the age of a 150. years, and for the most part without any
sickness. And if there be any one that is diseased with a long infirmity, he
is by the law constrained to die. In like sort, when they come to a certain At
150. years they kill themselves
age which they account complete, they willingly kill themselves. They write
not like unto us, for their line comes from above, downward. There is in
that Island a kind of herb, upon which all those that lay themselves down,
dye sleeping as it were in a sweet slumber. The women mary not but are common
to all men, and they all bring up the children with equal affection,
oftentimes they take the children from their mothers, and send them into other
parts, because they should not know the^, the which they do to that end that
there should be no particular but equal love and affection amongst them; they
have no ambition of honor or valor more one then another, so that they live
in perpetual agreement and conformity. There are bred certain great beasts,
of a marvelous nature and virtue, in their bodies they are round like a A
most strange kind of beast.
Tortoys, and in the midst divided with 2. lines athwart, in the end of each of
those halfes, they have 2. eyes, and 2. hearings, but one belly only, into the
which the sustenance comes as well from the one part as the other: they have
many legs and feet, with the which they go as well one way as another, the
blood of this beast is of singular virtue for diverse things: what part soever
of a man's body being cut and touched with this blood, heals presently. There
are in this Island many Fowls, and some of such greatness, that by them they
make experience of their children, setting them up on their backs, and making
them fly up into the air with them; and if the laddes sit fast without any
fear, they account them hardy, but if they tremble or seem to be fearful,
they bring them up with an ill will, reputing them simple, of dull courage,
and of short life. Amongst those kindreds which keep always company
together, the eldest is King and governor, to whom all the rest obey, who when
he comes to the age of a hundred and fifty years, depriueth himself of
life, in whose place succeeds without delay the eldest of that Trybe.

The Sea is round about this Island very tempestuous. The North-starre, and
many other stars which we see here, cannot there be discerned. There are
seven other Islands round about this, in a manner as great, with the self
same people and conditions. Though their ground be most fruitful in all
abundance, yet they live most temperately, and eat their victuals simple
without any composition, separating from them those that use any arts in
dressing their meats They abhor artificial dressing of meats.
other then seething or vvasting each thing by it self. They adore one only
God the Creator of all things, using besides a peculiar kind of reverence to
the Sun, and all the other celestial things. They are great Hunters and
fishers.

There is great store of Wine and Oil. The trees grow of themselves, without
being planted. The I Will brings forth Their sobriety. Their apparel* Their
exercise.
great Serpents, but hurtlesse, whose flesh in eating is most sauorie and
sweet. Their garments are made of a certain fine woll, like Bombast, which
they take out of Canes, which being dyed with a kind of Sea Ore they have,
becomes of a most dainty color like Purple. They are never idle, but still
employ themselves in good exercises, spending many hours of the day, singing
hymns unto God and the other celestial things whom they particulerly hold as
mediators for their Island. They bury themselves on the Seashoare, where the
water may bayne their Sepulchers. The Canes out of the which they gather their
fruits, grow and decrease with the moving of the Moon. Iambolo and his
companion remained 7. years in this Island, they were driven out unwillingly
and perforce, as men that lived not according to their innocent customs and
virtuous simplicity, so that putting them a great quantity of victuals in
their boat, made them go aboard and cast off; who hoysing up their sails,
after great tempests and dangers, many times reputing themselves as dead and
lost men, at last came to land in a part of India, where they were by a
certain King gently entertained, from whom afterward they were sent with a
safe conduct into Persia, and thence to Greece. This is the self same which
John Bohemus writes, without adding or diminishing one word.


BER. The things of this Island are so strange, that I can hardly believe them:
for me thinks they are like those fables which Lucian writes in his book De
vera narratione, Alexander de Alexandria, cap. 25. lib. 2. de diebus Genialibus.
yet Alexander of Alexandria confirms that of the Fowls flying up into the
air with the children, whose words are these. There are certain Ethiopians,
which set their children as they wax great upon certain Fowls, which to that
purpose they nourish of diverse sorts, and making them mount up with them into
the air; whereby they know what they may hope of them in time to come, for if
they sit fast without fear, they nourish them with great care and diligence,
as of a noble inclination and deserving to be cherished, but if their courage
fail, or that they show any demonstration of fear, they send them to be
brought up in some barren places, far from them selves.


AN. I do not so affirm these things for true, that I think it deadly sin
not to believe them, mary they are written by a man so grave, and which in the
rest of his works, used such sincerity, that truly me thinks we should do
him great wrong, in not believing him.


LV. I know not what to say, that there should be no more notice in the world,
of a Country so fruitful, and a people so blessed: especially, seeing the
Portugals have sailed and discovered all the Coast of Aethiopia and India, even
to the very Sun rising, where they have found so many and so diverse Islands,
that it should be almost impossible, for any such Country to remain
undiscovered.


AN. Marvel not at this, for the Portugals as you say, have not stirred out
of the Coast of Africa and India, the farthest that they went, being to the
Isles of Molucco, whence such store of spice comes, as for Taprobana, Zamorra,
and Zeilan, they are all adjoining Islands, near to those Coasts, but they
never nauigated into the Ocean four continual months, as these others did.


LV. You are deceived herein, for in only Magellans voyage, they sailed
farther then ever any other Nation did: and if there had been any such
miraculous people in the world, they should then have had knowledge of them, as
well as Pigafeta had of the Pigmees, for they did not only (as you know)
discover 4000. Islands discovered by the Portugales.
the Sea of Sur, passing a Sea where in five or six months they never saw any
land, but also on the other side sailed within few degrees of the Southpole:
And besides this, the 4000. Islands which they discovered in the Archpelago,
toward the Sun rising, the most part of which are peopled, and according to
somes opinion, are thought to be on the other side of the earth, in none of
which any such blessed people have been found, as you speak of.


AN. Though all this be as you say, yet the world is so great, and there is in
it so much to be discovered, that perchance they are in those parts which we
know not: things so strange and monstrous, that if we saw them, would make us
wonder a great deal more, and give us occasion to be less astonished at the
others, in respect of which, peradventure we should account these very
possible, and one day having more time, we may discourse more particulerly of
this matter.


BER. I take this word of yours for a debt, marry I would now ask you which
you hold for the greatest wonder in that people, either their tongue so
strangely divided, that they speak differently, and with diverse persons
several matters at one time; or else in steed of bones, to have only
sinews, doubling their members every way.


AN. The first I never heard of, nor of any the like, and therefore of the two,
I hold it for the stranger, but the likelihoode of the second is authorized for
true, by many vvriters, and chiefly by Varro, who writes, that in Rome there
was a Fencer called Tritamio, of such exceeding strength, that being Tritamio a
Fencer of exceeding strength.
bound hand and foot, he wrestled with very strong men, whom only with pushing
his body from one side to another, he gave such a blow, that if he touched
them, they were in danger of their lives: the like force had a Son of his,
who was a man at Arms under Pompey, the which without Arms went to fight with
his enemy Armed, whom taking by The like strength of his Son, being a man of
Arms under Pompey.
one finger, he made him yield, and brought him prisoner to the Camp. It is
said, that these two had not only their sinews at length like unto other
men, but also thwart and croswise over all their whole body, whence proceeded
this their so miraculous strength. There are many incredible things reported,
of the forces and strength of Milo, which though they were without doubt
supernatural and miraculous, yet were they in the end, the cause of his most
miserable and disastrous death, for putting his hands into the cleft of a great
tree, thinking to rent and split it forcibly thorough, the same of a sudden
turned back, and closed with such violence, catching, entrapping, and crushing
his hands so miserably, The miserable end of Milo, who living, was so renowned
for his strength.
that being not able to pull them forth, and being far from help, and in
a desolate place, he was there forced pitifully to finish his life and
unfortunate strength together; cutting up his body, they found that the pipes
of his arms and legs were doubled.


LU. Though the strength of Milo were so famous and renowned as you say, yet
were there in his time (as diverse Authors make mention) that exceeded him
far. Elian writes, that there was one called Tritormo, held in such
admiration for his strength, that Milo thinking thereby the greatness of his
fame to be diminished and obscured, sought him out, and challenged him; but at
such time as they were to enter into combat, Tritormo taking up a mighty
piece of a Rock, so huge, that it seemed impossible that any human The
miraculous force of Tritormo.
force should move it, cast it from him three or four times, with such
exceeding force, and then lifting it up on his shoulders, carried it so
far, that Milo amazed at the strangeness thereof, cried out. O Jupiter, and
is it possible that thou have brought an other Hercules into the world! But
whether this man's pipe bones were double or single no man knows.


BER. I have heard of some whose bones were whole, sound, and massiue,
without any marrowe in them, as diverse Ligdamus the Siracusan, having his
bones massiue and whole within.
write of Ligdamus the Syracusan, and that the same is the cause of greater
force.


ANTHONIO. I never savve any such, but Pliny vvryteth thereof in these words;
we understand, says he, that there are certain men, whose bones are
massiue and firm within, in whom this one thing is to be marked, that they
neither suffer thyrste, nor may at any time sweat: As for thirste, we see it
voluntarily suppressed of diverse; for there was a Roman Gentleman called A
Gentleman in a certain infirmity forbidden to drink, remained all his life
time ever after without drinking.
Iulio Uiator, who being in his youth sick, of a certain corruption
betvveene the flesh and the skin, was forbidden to drink by the Physicians:
using him self to which abstinance a while, he kept it in his age without
ever drinking any thing at all.


LUDOUICO. This is a matter not to be let slip, but in the mean time,
let us return to that of strength, I say therefore that the forces of
Sampsonne were such, that if the holy Scripture made not mention of them, no man would believe them, so that we may also give credit to that which is
written of Hercules, Theseus, and other strong men, that have been in the
world, whose Histories are so common, that it were to no purpose to rehearse
them here.


AN. These were endued both with strength and courage, and through the use
thereof, the one and the other accomplished great and worthy enterprises,
leaving behind them a fame glorious and everlasting: but there have been, and
as yet are, sundry of rare and excellent strength, which they have employed and
do employ so ill, that there is no memory nor reckoning made of them. There
was one not long since in Galicia, called, the Marshall Pero Pardo de Riba de
Neyra, who bearing great grudge to a certain Pero Pardo de Riba de Neyra,
griped his enemy to death between his arms.
Bishop, and finding no means to accomplish his reuengefull despite, was
contented to yield to the request of certain that went between to make them
friends: and at such time as they should meet together for the consummation of
their atonement, the Marshall went to embrace him, but his embracing was in
such sort, that he wrung his guts out, and crushed all his ribs to pieces,
leaving him dead between his arms.


LU. Hercules did no more, when he fought with Antheus, whom he vanquished in
the same manner, though this act be so villainous, especially having given
security, that it deserves not to be spoken of. There are besides at this day,
many trewants, peasants, and laborers, of such accomplished strength, that if
they employed it in worthy works, they would win thereby great estimation.


BER. It is not sufficient to have courage with this strength, but they must be
also fortunate, for else they are soon dispatched with a blow of a Canon, yea,
and though it be but of a Harquebuz, it is enough to abate the strongest man
living, and therefore they had rather live in assurance dishonorable and
obscure, then with such ieopardy to seek glory and fame. But let us return
Sundry that abstained long from drink.
to those that have no thirst, least we forget it. It is a common thing, that
there are diverse men which bide five or six days without drinking, especially
if the victuals they eat be cold and moist. I knew a woman that made but a
pastime, to abstain from drink eight or ten days: and I heard say, that
there should be a man in Medina del Campo, (I remember not well from whence he
was) that stayed usually thirty or forty days, without drinking a drop, and
longer, if it were in the fruit season, for with eating thereof, he moystned
so his stomach, that he made no reckoning of drink. It was told me for a
truth, that there was in Salamancha a Chanon of the same Church which went to
Toledo, and returned, being out xx. days, in all which time till he returned
to his own house, he never drank any drop of water or wine, or any other
liquor. But that which Pontanus writes in his book of Celaestiall things,
causes me to wonder a A man that never drank in his life.
great deal more, of a man, that in all his life time never drank at all;
which Ladislaus King of Naples hearing, made him perforce drink a little
water, which caused him to feel extreme pain and torment in his stomach. I
have been told also by many persons worthy of credit, that there is in
Marsile, near to the City of Lions at this present, a man living, which is
wont to continue three or four months without drinking, without receiving
thereby any discommoditie in his health or otherwise.


AN. There are many strange things reported about this matter, the cause whereof
we will leave to Physicians, who give sufficient reasons, whereby we may
understand how possible this is, which seems so far to exceed the ordinary
course of Nature.


BER. If we leave this purpose, let us return to our former of strength, for
I was deceived in thinking that the greater part thereof consisted in bigness of
body and members.


AN. If we should follow this rule, we should oftentimes deceive our selves,
for we The greatness of strength consists not in the bigness of body.
find many great men of little and slender force, and many little men of
great and mighty puissance, the cause whereof is, that Nature scatters and
separateth more her virtue in great bodies then in lesser, in which being more
united and compacted, it makes them strong and vigorous, and so says Virgil.
In a little body oftentimes, the greatest virtue reigns.


LVD. But we must not always allow this rule for true, for we have read and
heard of many Giants, whose wonderful forces were equal with the largenes of
their bodies.


BER. For my part, I think that this matter of Giants be for the most part
feigned, and though there have been great men, yet were they never so huge as
they are described, for every one adds that as he thinks good. Solinus
writes that it is by many Authors agreed, that no man can pass the length of
seven foot, of which measure it is said that Hercules was. Yet in the time of
Aug. Caesar, says he, there lived two men Pusion and Secundila, of which,
either of them had x. feet Pusion and Secundila, x. foot long a piece.
or more in length, and their bones are in the Ossary of the Salustians, and
afterward, in the time of the Emperor Claudius, they brought out of Arabia a
man called Gauara, nine foot and nine inches long; but in a thousand years
before Augustus, had not been seen the like shape of men, neither since the
time of Claudius, for in this our time, who is it that is not borne less then
his Father.


AN. If you mark it well, in the same chapter in which Solinus handles this
matter, he says, that the bones of Orestes were found in Tegoea, which being
measured, were 7. cubits long, which are more then 4. Orestes was 7. cubits
long.
yardes according to the common opinion; and yet this is no great disformity in
respect of that which follows: Besides says he, it is written by the
Antiquity, and confirmed by true witnesses, that in the wars of Crete, upon
an irruption of waters, breaking up the earth with the violent impesuositie
thereof, at the retreat thereof, amongst many openings of the earth, they
found in one monument a man's body 33. cubits A body found of 33. cubits.
long. Among the rest that went to see this spectacle so strange, was Lucius
Flacus the Legate, and Metellus who beholding that with their eyes, which
otherwise they vvoulde not have believed, remained as men amazed. Pliny also
says, that a hill of Crete breaking, there was found the body of a man 45.
cubits long, the which some said was of Orion, and others of Ocius And though
the greatness of these 2. bodies be such that it seem incredible yet far
greater is that of Antheus, the which Anthonius Sabellicus in his Aeneads,
says was found in the city of Tegaena, at such time as Sartorius remained The
miraculous length of the carkas of Antheus.
there Captain general of the Roman Army, whose Sepulcher being opened and
his bones measured, the length of his carkas was found to be 70 cubits and to
confirm the possibility of this he adds presently, that a certain host of
his, a man of good credit told him, that being in Crete, and meaning to cut
down a certain tree to make therewith the mast of a ship that self tree by
chance was turned up by the root, under the which was found a man's head, so
incredibly great that it amazed the beholders, but being rotten it fell in
pieces, the teeth still remaining whole, of the which they carried one to
Venice, showing it to those that desired the sight thereof, as a thing
wonderful. Friar Iacobus Philippus de Bergamo, vvryteth in his Supplementum
Chronicoru^, that there was found a Sepulcher, and in the same a body of
admirable greatness, outreaching as it were in length the high walls or
buildings, it seemed that he lay sleeping, he had wounds upon him well 4.
foot wide; at his bolster stood a candle burning, which would not go out,
till they bored a hole underneath, and then the light extinguished. The body so
soon as they touched The Sepulcher of Pallas, son to Euander.
it, turned into powder and ashes, round about him were written in Greek
Letters these words, Pallas son of Euander, slain by Turnus.


LUD. You would wonder more at that which Sinforianus Campegius writes, in his
Book called Ortus Gallicus, alleging the authority of Ioh. Bocacius, who
affirmed to have seen it himself, that in Sicilia, near to the City of
Trapana, certain Laborers diging for chalk under the foot of a hill,
discovered a Cave of great wideness, entering into the which with light, they
found sitting in the midst thereof a man, of so monstrous hugenes, that
astonished therewith they fled to the vilage, reporting what they had seen: and
at last gathering together in great number, with weapons and torches, they
returned back to the Cave, where they found this Giant, whose like was never
heard of before, in his left The strange and admirable stature of a Giant.
hand he held a mighty staff, so great and thick as a great maste of a ship:
seeing that he stirred not, they took a good heart and drew near him, but they
had no sooner laid their hands upon him, but he fell into ashes, the bones
only remaining so monstrous, that the very skull of his head held in it a
bushel of Wheat, and his whole carkas being measured, was found to be a 140.
cubits long.


AN. It is necessary to allege many Authors, to give credit to a thing so far
out of all limits of reason, the like of which has never been seen, or
written of in the world: which if it be true, I would think it should be some
body buried before the floode: For in the first age I take it, that men were
far greater then they are now: but since the Deluge, neither Nemrod, neither
any of those that helped build the Tower of Babylon, neither any other Giant
whatsoever, has approached any thing near this monstrous and excessive hugenes
of stature.


LVD. You have reason; but what shall we say thereto, when we find it written
by such authorized Authors, gyuing us the testimony of antiquity, let us
therefore pass on with them, and return to that which Sinforian said, that
he saw himself by Valencia in a Cloister of Grey-friers, the bones of a
Giant, according to the greatness of which, by good Geometry the length of the
The bone of a Giant, to which his body being proportioned, must be 40. foot
long.
body could be no less then forty foot. He alleges also John Pius of
Bononia, which says, that he saw in a Town on the Seaside near unto Vtica
or Carthage, a tussle of a man's head, which if it had been broken in pieces,
would have made a hundred such tussles as men now living commonly have; and of
the self same tussle makes S. Augustine mention in his book of the City of
God.


BER. Many things like unto these have been found in times past, which for my
part being by such men confirmed, I account worthy of belief.


AN. There want not testimonies to give them credit, if we will look into
Antiquities, we shall find in the holy Scripture that of Nemrod and those
other Giants of which Signior Ludouico now spoke, who after Noes-flood,
builded that high Tower to save them selves in, if such another should happen
to come: or according to the Gentiles opinion, to make war with the Gods: and
all these in respect of men that now live, were said to be of a wonderful and
huge stature, and coming unto other ages nearer unto ours, that which is
written of S. Christopher, and confirmed by authority of the Roman Church is
notorious to all men, where we find that his proportion and stature was little
less then these above named. Besides, I have heard diverse that have been in
the Monastery of Ronces valles Hereof I take it it comes that seeing a great
woman, we say she is a Rounceuall.
affirm, that there are certain bones of those (which as they say) were
slain in the battle wherein Charles the great was overthrown by the King
Don Alonso de Leon, where many of the twelve Peers of France, through the
great valiantnes of Bernardo del Carpio ended their lives; the which bones are
so great, that they seem to be of some Giants: and a Friar that brought the
measure of one of their shin-bones showed it me, it was in my judgment as
great as that of three men now a days: but in this, I refer me to those that
have seen them, who told me also that there were some armours so great and
heavy, that they might well serve for a testimony, of the greatness of those
bodies which ware them.


AN. This which you have said, agrees with that which Josephus writes, in his
fifth book of Antiquities. There was (says he) Josephus lib. quinto de
antiquitatibus.
a lineage of Giants, which for the greatness of their body, and proportion
different from other men, were above measure wonderful: of which, there are
yet some bones to be seen, not to be believed of those which have not viewed
them. And in time of Pope Iulio the third, no longer agone, there was a man in
a Village of Calabria, who perchance is yet alive, of so extraordinary a sise
and stature, that the Pope desirous A man of Calabria of a marvelous tall and
big stature.
to see him, sent for him to Rome, who because neither Horse nor Mule was able
to carry him, was brought to Rome in a Coach, out of the which his legs from
the knees downward hanged forth: he was so high, that the tallest man in Rome
reached not to his half breast, according to which height, the rest of his
members were proportioned: it was a thing of admiration, to see how deuouringly
he eat and drank. A friend of mine asked him whether his parents were great, he
answered, that both his parents and brothers were of the middle sort, only he
had a sister as yet young, which by all conjecture, in time would be as great
or greater then himself.


LV. I am of opinion, that in times past, the men were for the most part
greater then they now are, and that by little and little they decrease daily:
and whereas the Ancients write, that men then exceeded not the measure of
seven feet in height, that their feet were then greater then ours, and their
cubits, inches, spans, and all their other measures also, so that the longer
the world lasts, the less shall the people wax. We may the better
understand this to be so, through that which is written of the Giant Golyas, in
the first book of Kings, that he was six cubits high, which if they were then
no greater Golyas the Giant.
then they now are: the greatness of his stature was not so out of proportion
and wonderful: and if the bodies of Antheus and Oryon had the^ been measured,
they would not have been so many of their cubits as they were, of theirs that
measured them, and I believe that they would now be more; the cause hereof is,
that as the world waxes old, so al things draw The longer the world lasts
the lesser are the people in stature.
to be lesser, for even as earth that has not ben labored, yields greater
fruit at the beginning and in more abundance, then after when it becomes
weary, and tired with continual travail and bringing forth: even so the
world through wearines and long course of generation, cease to breed men of
so large and puissant statures as it wonted.


AN. Although in part of this your argument, you seem to have some reason: yet
you are deceived, if you hold this for a general rule without exception, for
this age of ours is not without Giants, and those very great; truth it is, that
in times past there were of the^ in many parts, and now in very few, and those
for the most part in Lands nere to the North and South pole: for it seems
that Nature enclineth to create this greater men in cold Countries; But seeing
this is a matter which cannot be handled, without falling into discourse of
those Countries toward the Septentrion matter, of no less admiration, let us
leave it till we meet another time, to the end we may have wherewith to
entertain good conversation.


LU. There are also people of great stature, which live in hot Countries
toward the Aequinoctiall: for as Crates Pergamenus writes, there is a people
among the Aethiopians called Sirboti, whose common stature is eight cubits and
more in height: and what think, People among the Ethiopians called Sirboti, of
8. cubits in height.
you? May not these men well be called Giants.


AN. This only Author makes relation thereof, and though we have notice of
all the Nations of Aethiopians, we have never seen nor heard of any such great
people amongst them, but we notoriously know that there are of them in the
cold Regions, and such as are commonly held to be vninhabitable, which at
farther leisure I will cause you thoroughly to understand.


LV. If you think that I will forgette this your promise, you are deceived,
for I hold well in memory all such matters, as we do now leave in suspense;
but now seeing you will have it so, let us pass on, and give me to
understand, whether live longest these great or little men, for it agrees
with reason, that the one greatness should be conformable to the other.


AN. The long life of man, consists neither in littlenes nor greatness, but in
being well complexioned, Wherein the long life of man consists.
and having good humors, not apt to receive corruption: besides, a mild and
reposed life, good victuals, sobriety in eating and drinking, and many other
particular things, which Physicians prescribe, do help much thereunto: but
the chiefest of all, is the good quality and condition of the country, as well
for some particular constellation, as for the temperature and pureness of the
air, breeding the victuals in perfection without raw and flimy humors: and
this I take to be the cause why some Nations live so long. Aelianicus says,
that in the Province of Aetolia, the men live 200. some 300. years; and Pliny
says, that The men of Aetolia live long.
there is a people in India called Cimi, who live ordinarily 140 years.
Onosecritus also writes, that in a certain part of India where at noone days
there is no shadow at all; the men are of height 5. cubits, and two hand
breadths, and that they live 130. years, without waxing old, but die even as it
were in their middle age. There is another Nation of people of a Province
called Pandora, whose life endures v. or 300. years, in their youth People of
the province Pandora.
their hair is hoary and gray, in their elder age turning to be black: Though
these lives be long, yet we may give credit thereunto for the causes which I
have said, and chiefly for the pureness of the air, which co^serueth health,
as well in humane bodies themselves, as in the fruits and victuals, which grow
there, with less coruption, and more perfection and virtue the^ in other
parts. (...) glueth testimony hereof, speaking of the Island Lemnos, and the
City Mirina, the which has in opposite the mountain Atos in Macedonia, which
is so high, that being thence in distance 6000. paces it covers this City
with his shadow on the top whereof moves no air at al but pure, in so much
that the ashes which there remain, moves not from one year to another and on
the height of this hill was builded a City called Acroton, the enhabitants of
which lived twice so long as The City Acroton bu^lded on the top of the
mountain Atos.
those that dwelt beneath.


BE. If this City were so wholesome, and the people of so long life, wherefore
came it to be dispeopled and for saken: by reason me thinks it should be as full
of people as it were able to hold.


AN. One commodity alone suffiseth not to the life of man, for what avails
long life, if men live continually in penury and want of things necessary? For
in so great a height, Spring they could have none, neither could they gather
water into Cesternes, because it was higher then the Region where the clouds
are congealed, which could by no means move themselves wanting wind as they
must needs want there: for how can there be any, where the ashes lie without
moving? so that this and other commodities for their sustenance, were to be
provided, with such pain, difficulty, and unease, that forsaking this place,
they chose rather with more ease though shorter life to commodate themselves
elsewhere: for this self same cause is the mountain of Olympus There blows
no wind at all on the top of the hill Olympus.
uninhabited, in whose top also it is affirmed, the air to be so pure, that
there blows no wind at all. The like also I believe, to be of the mountain
Pariardes, which is in Armenia, where after the flood the Ark of Noah remained.
But all this is to no other end, then that you should understand the reason,
how man's life is to be conserned more in some places then in others: and even
so I think it to be, in the Provinces which we have rehearsed and that also
which the self Solinus says of the Aethiopians, whom they call Macrobians,
who are on the other side of the Island Meroe, and live ordinarily Macrobians.
150. years, and many reach to 200. And Gaudencius Merula writes, that he
has found Authors, which affirm, that in the self same Island Meroe, the
people never die of any sickness, living so long till very age consume them. But
leaving Men never die of sickness in the Island Meroe
this generality of lives, let us come to entreat of some particulers without
alleging the lives of those holy Fathers out of the old Testament, before and
after the flood, of 800. and 900. years a piece, which we firmly believe
through faith, and because the holy Church affirms it, so that we know it to
be true and indubitable: neither is that a small argument to give credit to
some things, which seem for their strangenes fabulous, as that which Pliny
writes, alleging Damates in his chronicle, where he says, that Pictorius
Prince of the Epiorians, lived 300. years. Xenophon affirms, Pictorius lived
300. years.
that a King of the Maritimes, had 600. years of age, and a Son of his 800:
But Pliny iesteth thereat, saying that this computation of years and ages was
made through ignorance of times; for in those days, many reckoned the Summer
for one year, and the Winter for another, others made them shorter, reckoning
the Spring for one, and the Autumn for another, so that one of our years
contains as much as four of theyrs. So counted the Arcadians: and the
Egyptians made a year of every month, from one conjunction of the Moon to
another: so that it is no marvel if they say, that some of them lived a 1000.
years and more. And if that K. of Maritimes lived 600. and his son 800.
years, I vvarrant you it was according to this account, so that in fine it
seems that the longest age of a man cannot extend above a 150. or a 160.
years, and so long, says Mucianus, they live that inhabit the top of the
mountain Timoli.


BER. Alexander in his 24. chapter of his third book De diebus Genialibus,
entreats at large of this computation of years made by the Ancients, in the
which they were so diverse and different, that we had need of a whole day to
repeat their varieties, being Diverse and different co^putation of years by the
Ancient.
many more then those which Pliny rehearses: but he speaks like a good
Philosopher, conforming himself to that which is likeliest, and restrayning
the limits of Nature, as a thing only of it self, and not borne, created, and
conserved in the will and mind of God, as writes Leuinus Lemnius, alleged
by you in the beginning of this our discourse, guyding our selves according to
which, these mysteries are not so hard to be believed: for that of Nestor is
since the first ages, neither is it held for fabulous, whom as the Poet Naso
vvryteth, Nestor lives 300. year.
lived 300. years. But leaving these Ancients, let us come to certain
secrets of Nature of later times: of which, if Pliny had had knowledge, he
would not so much have wondered at those long lives, neither have held them
for fabulous. First therefore I will begin with that which Uelasco de Taranta
writes of an Abbess, which was in the Monastery The Abbess of Mo^uiedro
turned to be young again
of Monuiedro, who having accomplished the age very near of a 100. years,
nature that went in her failing and declining, recovered of a sudden in such
sort virtue, vigor and force, that her flowers, which in long and many years
before she had not felt, began to come down, even as when she was in the prime
of her youth, and withal her teeth and tussles which through age were fallen
out, began to bud and grow out anew, her gray hayres waxed by the roots
black, casting off by little and little their hoarines, her face waxed fair
and full, fresh blood filling out the old riuels and wrinckles, her breasts
rose and increased, and to be short, she became as young and fresh in sight,
as she was at 30. years, in such sort, that diverse with wonderful admiration
coming to see her, she procured to hide herself and not to be seen, being
ashamed of the strange alteration and newnes which she perceived in herself:
and though he remembered not to write those years which she lived afterward,
yet it is to be imagined that they were many.


LV. I will not wonder at this, because I my self have knowledge of two the
like, whereof the one is, that being in Rome the year 1531. the public voice
and fame throughout all Italy was, that there was in Taranto Two men that in
their old age became young again.
an old man of a 100. years that had turned young again, changing all that
ever he had in him, even to his skin and the very nails of his feet and
hands, of which dispoyling himself like a Snake, he grew so new and fresh,
and became so young and frolic, that his very familiars knew him not, and in
the end, for it was well 50. years past that this had happened to him, he turned
to be so old again, that his color properly resembled the root of a
withered tree. The other was, (which is most true and assured) that the
Admiral Don Fadriques passing in his youth through a Village called Rioia,
encountered a man of the age, as it seemed, of fifty years, who told him,
that he had been footeman to his Grandfather, which the Admiral making
difficulty to believe, because his Grandfather was dead long and many years
agone, the other with oaths assured him that it was true, and vvithall, told
him that he was at that present a hundred years old, and that he had turned to
be young again: changing his nature, and renewing in him all things that caused
age. The Admiral astonished at this miracle, made diligent enquiry thereof and
found by infallible proofs, the truth to be in each point according as he had
said: and this is by the vulgar fame, and by infinite witnesses that were
present, notoriously known to be true.


AN. I will not deny but that all this which you have said is possible, seeing
that there is in this present time of ours a matter more strange and
miraculous, public and of undoubted truth, written by Herman Lopes, de
Castaneda, Chronicler to the King of Portugal, of a man brought to Nuns de
Acuna, being Vizroy and Governor in India, the year 1530. a thing truly most
worthy of admiration, for it was by sufficient witnesses and indubitable profes
affirmed to be true, that he had at that time accomplished the full age of
340. A man in India that was 340. years old, and had four times renewed his
age.
years. He remembered when that City was unpeopled, being one of the chiefest
and most important strengths of all India: he had 4 times being old renewed to
youth, each time casting of his hoary hairs and riueled wrinckles, and
sheading his rotten teeth, in place of which fresh and new arised: and at such
time as the Vizroy saw him, the hayres of his head were black, and those of
his beard also, though he had there but few. A Physician being present, was
bid feel his pulses, the which were found to be as lusty, as though he had
been in the flower and prime of his youth. This man in his youth had been a
Gentle, and afterward turned to embrace the erroneous belief of the Moors,
he was natural of the Kingdom of Hungary, he confessed that in his time he
had had seven hundred wives, of which some died, and some he had forsaken. The
King of Portugal had notice of this man, and kept reckoning of him, and the
Armies that came yeerelie from thence, brought him tidings that he lived, and
lives as yet as they that come thence say, so that he must now have 370,
years. The self same chronicler also writes, that at such time as the self
Nuns de Acuna governed, there was in the city of Vengala another Moore,
named Xegueor, native of a Province called Xegue, that was also 300. years old
both by A Moore in the City of Vengala 300. years old.
his lowne saying, and the affirmation of those that knew him well besides
other many great proofs and arguments thereof. This Moore, for the austeritie
of his life and abstinence which he used, was held amongst the rest for a
very holy and religious man, and the Portugals had great familiarity and
friendship with him. For all this, though the Chronicles of Portugal are so
sincere, that there is nothing registered in them but with great fidelity and
approved truth, yet I should stagger in the belief of this, were it not that
there are so many both in Portugal and Spain which are eye witnesses hereof,
and know it fully to be true.


BER. And so truly should I, but that your proof and information is not
refutable: for these ages are so long in respect of the shortness of ours,
that they bring with them incredible admiration, and me thinks it is
impossible that the first of these two should have had so many wives.


AN. It being verified that he The laws both of Gentiles and Moors
permits to take many wives.
lived so long, this is not to be wondered at, for the law both of Gentiles and
Moors, permits men to forsake their wives and to take new as often as they
please, and so perchance this man was so fantastical and peevish, that not
contenting himself long with any, he took it for a custom to put away his
wives, as we do servants that please us not. And as they hold together as many
wives as they will (though they be not all called lawful) what let him, if
he chopped and changed some, turning away and taking new, especially if he were
so rich that he had means to maintain many at once: so that there is no such
cause to wonder at any of these things, for in the year 1147. in the time of
the Emperor Conrad, died a man which had served Charles the great in his
wars, who as it was by inuinsible arguments proved, had lived 340. years,
and it agrees A man that had lived 340. years.
with that which you have said of this Indian, whence Pero Mexia which writes
also the same, took it. Fascicuhis Temporum likewise makes mention thereof.
All this can he do in whose hands Nature is, shoutning and lengthning lives
and ages as it pleased him; but for my part I will never believe, but that
there are in these things some secret mysteries, which we neither conceive nor
understand.


LU. Let us take it as we find it, without searching the profound judgments of
God, who only knows wherefore he does it, and in truth I dared not utter,
as holding in for a thing fabulous, that which I have read in the xv. book of
Strabo, where The long life of those that live on the other side of the
Mountains Hyperbores.
he says, that those which dwell on the other side of the mountains
Hyperbores, toward the North, many of them lived a 1000. years.


AN. I have also read it, but he writes the same as a thing not to be
believed though he denies not but that it may be possible, and that many of
them lived very long, but the likeliest is that in those Countries, they divide
their years according to the reckoning of which Pliny speaks, one into
four, by which computation a thousand years of theirs, makes 250. of ours:
and this differs not much from the ages of other people and Nations which we
have rehearsed: Yet Acatheus the Philosopher, speaking of the mountains
Hyperbores, says, that those which dwell on the farther side, live more
years then all the other Nations of the world. Pomponius Mela, also speaking
of them in the third book, uses these words; when they are weary of living
joyful, to redeem themselves from the travails and miseries of life, they
throw themselves headlong into the Sea, which they account the happiest death,
and fortunatest Sepulcher that may be: how so ever many Authors of credit
verify their Cornelius Tacitus writes that in Illiria a man called Dondomio
lived 500. years.
lives to be long.


BER. It is said also, that those of the Island Thile, according to the opinion
of many, now called Iseland, live so long that wearied with age, they cause
themselves to be conuaied into other parts, to the end that they may dye.


AN. I have not seen any Author that writes this, it is like to be some
invention of the common people, because those of that Island live very long,
every one adds what pleases him: for as the desire to live is a thing
natural to all men, so how old so ever a man be, he will in my opinion rather
procure to defend and conserve his life, then seek occasion to finish or
shorten the same. This people being in the occident, and according to the
ancient vvriters, the last Nation that is known, that way participate with
the Hiperboreans in fame of long life, or perchance those which have heard
speak of Biarmio Superior, (the which as we will one day discourse, is the
last which is known of the other side of the Septentrion, and of which are
written many wonderful matter, chiefly of their long life without infirmity,
ending only through extremity of age: the which many of them not attending,
voluntarily kill themselves) thought that these men were under the self
climate: and hereof was the invention of the Elysian fields, which the Gentiles
held to be in these parts: But this being a matter that requires long time, we
will now leave it, and return to our former discourse. Truly, if conforming
our selves to reason, we would well weigh the travails, miseries, Long life
not to be desired.
and vexations, which in this wretched life we endure, we should esteem a
short life far hapier then a long, which we see beset with infinite troubles
and calamities; and endeavor so in this transitory life to serve God, that we
may come in glory to enjoy that other which shall endure for ever.


BER. Seeing we have hitherto discoursed of so many particularities belonging
unto men: let us not forget one which is of no less mystery, nor less worthy
to be known then the rest, which is of the Centaures or Archers, to the end
we live not deceived in that Centauri vel Sagitarij.
which is reported of the^: for many Histories make mention of them though to
say truth, I never read any grave Author, that affirms to have seen them, or
steadfastly that they now are or at any other time have been in the world, which
if they either be indeed or have been, they are not to be held for small The
History of the Centaures.
wonders, but for as great as ever have been any in the world.


AN. Certainly this of the Centaures, is but a Poetical fiction, for if it
were true, it is not possible, as you said, but that some grave Author or other
would have written thereof.


LV. Let us yet know whence these fables had their beginning.


AN. Ask this of Eginius Augustus Libertus, which in a book of his, entitled
Palephatus de non credendis fabulis, says, that Ixion King of Thessalia,
brought a mighty Heard of Bulls and Cows to the mountain Pelius, which being
affrighted through some accident that happened, scattered themselves, flying
into the Woods, Valleys, and other uninhabited places, out of which they
furiously sallied, doing great hurt and damage in the Country, killing and
wounding the passengers, and destroying the fruits and labored grounds. Ixion
seeing that the people hereby endamaged exclaimed upon him, resolving to take
some order for the destruction of these Bulls, made it be proclaimed, that he
would give rich rewards and great recompenses, to who so ever should kill any of
them. There were at that Those of Nephele first learned to ride horses.
time in a City called Nephele, certain young men of great courage, which
were taught and instructed by those of the same town to break and tame
horses, and to mount upon their backs sometimes assailing and sometimes flying,
as need required. These undertook this enterpise to destroy these Bulls, and
through the advantage of their horses, and the virtue of their own courage,
slew and took daily so many of them, that at last they cleared and delivered
the Country of this anoyance. Ixion accomplished his promise, so that these
young men remained not only rich, but mighty and formidable through the
advantage they had of other me^, with this use and redines of their horses,
never till that time seen or known before. They retained still the name of
Centaures, which signifies wounders of Bulls. They grew at last into such
haughtines and pride, that they neither esteemed the King nor any man else,
doing what they list them selves: so that being one day invited to a certain
marriage, in the town of Larissa, being well tipled, they The cause of the wars
between the Lapiths and the Centaures.
determined to ravish the dames and Ladies there assembled, which they
barbarously accomplished, rising of a sudden, and taking the Gentlewomen
behind them on their horses, and riding away with the^, for which cause the
wars began between them and the Lapiths (for so were the men of that Country
called.) The Centaures gathering themselves to the mountains, by night came
down to rob and spoil, still saving themselves through the swiftnes of their
horses. Those of the Countries there about, which never til that time had seen
any horsman, thought that the man and the horse had been all one; and because
the town whence they issued to make their wars was called Nephele, which is
as much to say as a cloud, the fable was invented saying; that the Centaures
descended out of the clouds. Ovid in his Meramorphosis entreats hereof, say
that it was at the marriage of Perithous with Hypodameya, daughter to Ixion, he
names also many of the Centaures, by who^ this tumult was committed, but the
pure truth is that which Eginius writes.


LV. It is no marvel if the people in those days were so deceived, having
never before seen horses broken and tamed, nor men sitting on their backs, the
strange nouelty whereof they could not otherwise understand; for proof whereof
we know The Indians thought that the man and the horse had been all one creature
that in the Islands of the West Indies, the Indians when they first saw the
Spaniards, mounted upon horses, thought sure that the man and the horse had
been all one creature, the fear conceived, through which amazement was cause
that in many places they rendered themselves with more facillity, then they
would have done, if they had known the truth thereof: But withal you must
understand, that the Ancients called old men also Centaures, that were Tutors
of noble men's Sons, and so was Chiron called the master of Achilles, Chiron
the Tutor of Achilles.
through which name diverse being deceived, painted him forth, half like a man,
half like a horse.


BER. I was much troubled with this matter of Centaures, wherefore I am glad
that you have made me understand so much thereof: but withal, I would that
Signior Anthonio would tell us what his opinion is of Sea men; for diverse
affirm that there are such, and that they want nothing but reason, so like are
they in all proportions, to be accounted perfect men as we are.


AN. It is true indeed, there are many grave and sincere writers, which
affirm that there is in the Sea a kind of fish which they call Tritons,
bearing in each point the shape humane, the Tritons or Sea men. Nereides.
female sort thereof they call Nereydes, of which Pero Mexias in his Forest,
writes a particular Chapter, alleging Pliny, which says, that those of the
City of Lisboa advertised Tiberius Caesar, how that they had found one of
those men in a Cave near to the Sea, making music with the shell of a fish;
but he forgot an other no less strange, which the same Author tells in these
very words. My witnesses are men renowned in the order of Knighthood, that on
the Ocean Sea near to Calays, they saw come into their ship about night time
a Sea man, whose shape without any difference at all was human, he was so
great and wayed so heavy, that the boat began to sink on that side where he
stood; and if he had A strange History of a Sea man.
stayed any thing longer, it had been drowned. Theodore Gaze also alleged by
Alexander of Alexandria, writes, that in his time one of these Sea men, or
rather men fishes, accustomed to hide him self in a Cave, under a Spring by
the Sea side in Epirus, where young maidens used to fetch their water, of which
seeing any one coming alone, rising up, he caught her in his arms, and
carried her into the Sea, so that having in this sort carried away diverse: the
enhabitants being advertised thereof, set such grins for him, that at last they
took him, and kept him some days. They offered him meat, but he refused to
eat, and so at length, being in an element contrary to his nature, died.

The same Alexander speaks of another Sea Monster, which Bonifacius
Neapolitanus, a man of great authority certified him that he saw brought out of
Mauritania into Spain, A Sea man brought out of Mauritania into Spain.
whose face was like a man somewhat aged, his beard and hair curled and
glistring, his complexion and color in a manner blew, and in all his members
proportioned like a man, though his stature were somewhat greater, the only
difference was, that he had certain finnes, with the which as it seemed, he
divided the water as he swamme.


LVD. It seems by this which you have said of these monsters, that there
should be in them a kind of reason, seeing the one entered by night into the
Ship, with intention to do it damage, and the other used such craft in his
embuscades to entrappe those women.


AN. They are some likelihoods, though they conclude not, for as we see that
there are here on earth some beasts with more vigorous instinct of nature
then others, and nearer approaching to the counterfaiting and gestures of men,
as for example, Apes and such like: so is there also in this point difference
among the Fishes of the Sea, as the Dolphins, which are more wary and
cautelous then the others, as well in doing The Dolphins more cautelous then
other Fishes.
damage as in avoiding danger: for Nature has given all things a natural and
general inclination to aid and help themselves withal. Olaus Magnus handles
very copiously this matter of Tritons or Seamen, of which in the Northern
Seas, he says there is great abundance, and that it is true that they use to
come into little Shyps, of which with their weight they ouerturne some, and
that they get up also into great ships, but as it seems, not with meaning
to do hurt, but only through nouelty and curiosity to view them, and that
commonly they keep together in flocks and companies, in manner of an Army: and
it has happened, that some of them entering into shyps, have been so amazed,
that they have been taken by the Mariners: but in finding themselves laid hold
on, they give loud and pitiful shrikes, making a most hydeous and ill-favored
noise: at which very instant there are heard infinite other the like cries and
howlings, in such sort, that they make deaf the ears of them that hear them,
and there appear so many of their heads above water, as though they were a
mighty Army of many people, with the which, and with their terrible noise,
they make the waves rise so vehemently that is resembles a furious tempest.
The which is a token that they go always together, unless it be that some
one stray by chance; and when they perceive that any of their company is taken,
they make this crying and tumult to assault the ship, unless the Mariners do
presently turn him lose and cast him into the Sea again, which being done,
they cease their clamor, and go their ways quietly under the water, without
doing any farther hurt. And therefore that which signior Ludouico said, is not
without reason, for truly though they be not creatures reasonable, yet seem
they to have far greater use thereof then other Fishes have, for as far as
we can conceive and judge, that entry of theirs so boldly into the ships, is
not with any intention to do harm, but only to view what is in them, and to
behold the men whose likeness they bear. And if perchance they ouerturne any
little vessel, such as are Cockboats or Skiffes, it is through their heavy
weight, and not through any will to do mischief. But let us refer this to the
Almighty, who only knows the truth of that which we guess at by conjecture.


BER. I would that you knew, before we pass any farther, a common opinion which
is held in the kingdom of Galicia, of a certain race of men, whom they call
Marini, the which as it is affirmed for matter most A race of men in Galicia
descended of a Triton.
assured, and they themselves deny not, but make their boast thereof, are
descended from one of these Tritons or Seamen, which though being a thing
very ancient, is told in diverse sorts, yet they come all to conclude, that a
certain woman going along the Seashore, was surprised and taken by one of
these Tritons that lay embusht in a tuffet of Trees, and by force constrained
to yield unto his lustlie desire, after the accomplishment of which, he
withdrew himself into the water, returning often to the same place to seek
this woman, but at last, perceauing that his usual repair thither was
descried, and that there was wait laid to take him, he appeared no more. It
pleased God to permit this woman from the time of that acquaintance with the
Triton to conceive child, which though at the time of her delivery proved to be
in each point like unto other children, yet by his strange appetites, and
desires, and infinite other signs and tokens, it was most evident and manifest
that it was begotten by the same Triton or Seaman. This matter is so ancient,
that I marvel not though it be told after diverse sorts, seeing there is no
Author that writes it, neither any other testimony thereof then only the
common and public fame, which has spread and published it.


LU. One point herein me thinks by the way is rather to be held for a fable
then to be credited: for though it were that Nature through any such
copulation, should suffer some thing to be engendered, yet should the same be a
monster, and Reasons refuting the former story of men, called Marini.
not a man capable of reason, as you say this was, for hence would arise two no
small inconveniences; the one, that there should be men in the world, whose
beginning should not descend from our first Parents Adam and Eve: for this
Triton neither is, neither can be accounted a reasonable man, and of the
posterity of Adam, in like sort, neither his son, nor those that shall
descend of him: the other is, to gaine-saie the general rule of all
Philosophers and Physicians, which resolutely affirm it to be impossible, that
there should be engendered of the seed of a man reasonable, and of a creature
unreasonable, any creature like to either of them, perfectly bearing either of
both their shapes. Though put the case that the contrary sometimes happen
between a Mare and an Ass, a dog and a Shee-woolfe, or a Fox and a bitch,
yet the contradiction is not so great, these beasts differing so little one
from another, as the great and unspeakable difference which in so many
points is between men and brute beasts. And though in likeness and
similitude a Seaman resemble a man of reason: yet it suffiseth that he differ
only in reason: then the which, there can in the world be no greater
difference. And therefore Galen the Physician, in his third Book De vsu
partium, in scoffing manner iesteth at a certain Poet called Pindarus, because
he affirmed the fable of Centaures to be true.


BER. All that you have said stands with great reason, but I have always
heard, that the seed only of the man is able to engender, without any
necessity that the vvomans should concur also, and of this opinion is
Aristotle.


LVD. In this sort the contradiction is greater, for if the seed of the woman
concur not in generation, of necessity it must ensue, that the thing
engendered be like the Father, and not the mother, the contrary whereof is
known to be true: and that both the seed of the male and female concur in
generation: which if it were otherwise, the generation could not com to effect,
and this maintains Hipocrates, in his book De An answer to those
refutations.
Genitura, and in that De sterilibus, and Galen in his 14. book De vsu partium.


AN. Very well has this matter been debated on both sides, yet I will not
leave vnaunswered the two inconveniences alleged by Signior Ludouico, as for
the first, it follows not that if a woman conceive a child reasonable by a
creature unreasonable, that therefore the same child should not be accounted the
offspring of Adam, for it suffiseth that he is on the mothers side, without any
necessity that he must be also of the fathers: As for the second, I confess,
that guyding our selves by the ordinary course of Nature, the Philosophers and
Physicians in maintayning the impossibility of perfect generation, between
different creatures have great reason, unless that it be in these before
mentioned, whose fimilitude is such that they seem to be all of one kind. But
we must not so restrain Nature as they do, without having regard to the
superior cause, which is God, by whose will it is directed and governed, and to
whom wholly it obeys. For seeing it is a greater wonder, of nothing to work so
many miraculous things as he does, me thinks we should not so much marvel, or
at least we should not hold it so impossible as these Philosophers do, that a
reasonable woman should conceive a child by a Seaman, and that in the
participation of reason he should take after his mother, whose seed concurred
as well in his generation as his fathers. For there have happened and happen
daily in the world many things no less notable then this, of the which, this
one which I will rehearse you is so strange and admirable, that I should not
dare recite it, unless it were confirmed by the testimony and authority of so
many learned and grave Writers. The first, is John Saxon in his History, the
second, Johannes Magnus Archbishop of Vpsala, in the Kingdom of Sweueland: and
lastly, it is written and affirmed by his Successor, the Archbishop Olaus
Magnus.

There lived, say they, in a Town of the Kingdom of A most strange and
admirable History, of a Virgin deflowred by a Bear.
Sweueland, built near the mountains, a very principal and rich man, who had
a daughter very beautiful and fair, the which going forth one evening in
company of other maidens to walk and take the air, as they were sporting in
the midst of their devises and pastimes, there issued out of a thicket that was
on those mountains a Bear, of exceeding greatness, fierce, and terrible,
making toward them as fast as he could, the which tremblingly and fearfully
began to fly, each one procuring to save her self, only this seely young
maidens hap was to fall into his paws, with whom running away as fast as he
might, without any resistance he recovered the thicknes of the wood, whose
principal intention though it were (as it is to be imagined) to satisfy the
appetite of his ravening hunger: yet was it the pleasure of God, not to permit
this maidens death; for the Bear moved with an instinct of Nature different
far from his cruel kind, refrained not only from devouring her, but
carrying her into a Cave which he had, in the bottom of a deep Valley in the
Forest, converted the rage of his cruelty into a love most vehement, stroking
her softly with his paws, cherinshing, and handling her in such gentle sort,
that she perceauing his intention, relented in some part her fear, and for
terror of death not daring to resist his fiercenes, suffered him to gather the
flower of her virginity. The Bear daily issued out of the Cave, chasing Hearts
and other beasts, presenting always part of his pray unto her, of which hunger
compelled her to eat: her drink was clear water, out of a running Fountain
that passed under the trees near this Cave, and in this sort sustained she her
desolate life, praying continually unto God to have pity on her, and to
deliver her out of this wretched estate and miserable calamity: And though she
determined oftentimes to run away when the Bear was out, yet she never
dared to attempt the same, fearing death if she were found by him, and besides,
not daring to adventure through the mountains, being so full of sundry and
diverse cruel wild beasts. Having certain months endured this unhappy kind of
life; it happened that certain Noble men came with nets, toils, and dogs a
hunting into this Forest, by whom this Bear was entrapped and slain. The
vvench hearing their cries and voices, and that they were near unto her Cave,
ran with all possible speed unto them, who with singular amazement, as well
at the ralation she made, as at the wildnes of her affrighted countenance,
carried her away with them, and delivered her unto her parents, who scarcely
knew her, she was become so ugly and disfigured. Nature which often works
things marvelous out of her natural order and common observed course, joined
in such sort the seed of this brute beast in the body of this maiden, that to
her intolerable grief and dismayment, she perceived her self to go great,
fearing nor attending any thing else, then to be delivered of some horrible
monster. But such was the will of the Almighty, that at the end of nine
months, she came to bear a goodly Boy, resembling in nothing else his
Father, then that he was somewhat more hairy then other children are. They
nourished him up with diligence and care, calling him the Bear: or perchance
that name was given him afterward by the people, wondering at his miraculous
fiercenes and valor; for after he came to man's estate, he became so strong,
valiant, and hardy of his person, that he was redoubted far and near, and
coming to have knowledge of those that slew the Bear, by whom he was
engendered, he deprived them of life, saying; That though by their means he
had received a good turn, yet could he do no less then revenge his Fathers
death. This man begatte Trugillus Sprachaleg afterward, a famous Captain,
whose Son was Ulfon, a man notable and renowned, and of whom the Chronicles
of those Countries make great and often mention, for he was Father to Suenus,
which by his valor came to obtain the royal Diadem of Denmark, and they
say, that of this lynage discende all the Kings of Denmark and Swethland.


LU. In truth this Story should seem fabulous, were it not by so many grave
and learned men affirmed to be true: but we may well give it credit, because
we have knowledge of the like happened in our time no less monstrous, nor
worthy of admiration, then this which you have rehearsed; and there are as yet
many which found themselves present, and can give witness thereof. It was in
this sort, as I have heard it through true relation of many persons, most
worthy to be believed. A woman in Portugale for a heinous offense by her
committed, was condemned, The most wonderful History of a woman begotten with
child by an Ape.
and banished into an uninhabited Island, one of those which they commonly call
the Isles of Lagartes, whether she was transported by a ship that went for
India, and by the way set a shore in a Cock-bote, near a great mountain
covered with trees and wild bushes, like a Desert. The poor woman finding
her self alone forsaken and abandoned, without any hope of life, began to
make pitiful cries and lamentations, in commending her self unto God, him to
succor her in this her lamentable and solitary estate. Whiles she was making
these mournful complaints, there descended from the mountain a great number
of Apes, which to her exceeding terror and astonishment, compassed her round
about, amongst the which, there was one far greater the^ the rest, who standing
upon his hind legs upright, seemed in height nothing inferior to the common
sort of men: he seeing the woman weep so bitterly, as one that assuredly
held her self for dead, came unto her, showing a cheerful semblaunce, and
flatteringly as it were comforted her, offering her certain fruits to eat,
in such sort, that he put her in hope that she should not receive any damage
of those other Apes, taking her by the arm, and gently as it were inuiting
her to follow him to the mountains, to the which she willingly condiscending,
he led her into his Cave, whether all the other Apes resorted, providing her
such victuals as they used, wherewith and with the water of a Spring near
thereunto, she maintained her life a certain time, during the which, not being
able to make resistance, unless she would have presently been slain, she
suffered the Ape to have the use of her body, in such sort that she grew great,
and at two several times was delivered of two Sons, the which as she her
self said, and as it was by those that saw them afterward affirmed, spoke,
and had the use of reason. These little boys, being the one of two and the
other of three years aged, it happened that a ship returning out of India,
passing thereby, and being unfurnished of fresh water, the Mariners having
notice of the Fountain which was in that Island, and determining thereof to
make their provision, set them selves a shore in a Cockbote, which the apes
perceauing, fled into the thickest of the mountain, hiding themselves,
wherewith the woman emboldened and determining to forsake that abominable
life, in the which she had so long time against her will continued, ran
forth, crying as loud as she could unto the Mariners, who perceauing her to
be a woman, attended her, and carried her with them to their ship, which the
Apes discovering gathered presently to the shore, in so great a multitude, that
they seemed to be a whole Army, the greater of which through the brutish love
and affection which he bear, waded so far into the Sea after her, that he
was almost drowned, manifesting by his shrikes and howling how grievously he
took this injury done him: but seeing that it booted not, because the Mariners
began to hoise their sails and to depart, he returned, fetching the lesser
of the two Boys in his arms, the which, entering again into the water as
far as he could, he held a great while aloft above water, and at last, threw
into the Sea, where it was presently drowned: which done, he returned back
fetching the other, and bringing it to the same place, the which in like sort
he held a great while aloft, as it were threatening to drown that as he had
done the other. The Mariners moved with the Mothers compassion, and taking
pity of the seely Boy, which in clear and perfect words cried after her,
returned back to take him, but the Ape daring not attend them, letting the Boy
fall into the water, returned, and fled toward the mountains with the rest.
The Boy was drowned before the Mariners could succor him, though they used
their greatest diligence: At their return to the ship, the woman made
relation unto them of all that happened to her in manner above rehearsed, which
hearing, with great amazement they departed thence, and at their arrival in
Portugal made report of all that they had seen or understood in this matter.
The woman was taken and examined, who in each point confessing this fore-saide
history to be true, was condemned to be burnt alive, as well for breaking the
commandment of her banishment, as also for the committing of a sin so
enorme, loathsome, and detestable. But Hieronimo capo de ferro, who was
afterward made Cardinal, being at that instant the Popes Nuncio in
Portugal, considering that the one of her faults was to save her life, and the
other to deliver her self out of the captivity of these brute beasts, and
from a sin so repugnant to her nature and conscience, humbly beseeched the
King to pardon her, which was granted him on condition, that she should
spend the rest of her life in a Cloister, serving God and repenting her former
offenses.


AN. I have heard this history often, and truly in my A strange history of
the first inhabitation of the Kingdoms of Pegu and Sian.
judgment it is no less strange then any of those before rehearsed, or any
other that ever happened.


BER. That which John de Banos, Chronicler of the King of Portugal writes, is
no less marvelous, but of as great or greater admiration then any of these,
if there were thereof so sufficient witnesses to prove it true. Writing
certain memorable things of the Kingdoms of Pegu and Sian, which are on the
other side of the River Ganges, he says, that the people of those Kingdoms,
hold and affirm for a matter assured and indubitable, that of long time that
Country was uninhabited, and so wild and desert, and possessed of so many
fierce and cruel beasts, that if a whole Army of men had come, they could not
have prevailed against their multitude. It happened on a time, that a ship
coming from the Kingdom of Chinay, was through a violent tempest driven on
that Coast among the Rocks, so that all those that were therein perrished,
saving only one woman, and a mighty great mastiue, the which defended her from
the fury of wild beasts, using daily with her fleshly copulation, in such
sort, that she became great, and in process of time was delivered of a son,
she being at that present very young, the boy in space of time had also
acquaintance with her, and begat upon her other children, of whose
multiplications those two kingdoms became to be inhabited, and as yet at this
day they have dogs in great veneration, as deriuing from them their original
beginning.


LV. If that of the Triton with the woman, and that of the Bear with the
maiden, and that of the Ape be true, there is no impossibility of this: but
let us leave herein every man to think as it pleases him, without
constraining him to believe or not to believe any thing, but that whereto his
judgment shall most incline: and though we have used a large digression, yet
let us not so give over the matter which we handled concerning Tritons or
Seamen: for I have heard that there is a kind of fish also called Mermaids,
resembling in their faces fair and beautiful women, the truth whereof I would
be glad to understand.


AN. It is true, there is indeed much talk of the Mermaids.
Mermaydes, whom they say from the middle upward to have the shape of women,
and of a fish from thence downward. They are painted with a comb in one hand,
and a Lookingglasse in the other; some say that they sing in so sweet,
melodious and delectable a tune, that charming therewith the Shipmen asleep,
they enter into their ship and bereave them of their lives: but to say the
truth, I have never seen any Author worthy of credit, that makes mention
hereof. Only Pedro Mexias says, that in a certain strange and terrible
tempest, there was one of them amongst a number of other Fishes, driven a
shore on the Seacoast, having the visage of A mermayd driven a shore on the
Seacoast.
a woman most beautiful, expressing in lamentable sort such sorrow and
grief, that she moved the beholders to compassion, who gently turned her
back again into the water, whereinto she willingly entered and swamme away,
without being seen any more. And though it may be that there is in the Sea
such a kind of fish, yet I account the sweetness of their singing, with all the
rest that is reported of them to be a mere fable.


BER. It is a thing most true known and approved, that there are in the Sea as
diverse and sundry kinds of Fishes, as there is on the earth of beasts, or in
the air of fowls, so that it is not to be wondered at, if some of them
resemble human form, as these which we have named.


LU. And though we have long deteyned our selves in this conversation, yet
before we part, I beseech you resolve me in one doubt, which remains
concerning men, the which is this, I have heard say, that there have been in
times past certain women which changing their sexes have been converted into
men: which seems so strange and unnatural, that I hold it but for a fable,
like that which is reported of Tyresias the Thebane Prophet.


AN. Never wonder so much at Tyresias the Theban Prophet
this, for possibly this which is reported of him as a tale false and feigned,
was indeed truth, as many other the like, which have with great authority
been written and affirmed. For proof whereof read Pliny in his 4. chapter of
his 7. Book, where he uses these words, It is no matter feyned, says he,
that women sometimes change their sex, for we sinde in the Chronicles, that
Publius Licinius Crassus, and Caius Cassius Longinus being Consuls, a young
maiden, perfect in that sex, The daughter of Casin changed into a man.
daughter to Casinus, was changed and metamorphozed to a perfect man, and
therefore by the commandment of their Soothsayers, was carried away as a
thing prodigious, and cast into a desert Island.

And Licinius Mucianus affirms, that he saw in Argos a man called Aresconte,
who had been first a woman, and called The like of a woman in Argos.
Arescusa, after the changing of her sex she came to have a beard and married
a wife: of the like sort he saw a young strypling in the City of Smyrna, and
a little farther he comes to say, and I my self saw in Africa, Lucius
Coscius, a citizen of Triditania, who the self same day that he was married,
being then a woman, was transformed into a man. Neither is Pliny alone author
of this wonderful nouelty, for Pontanus a man of great gravity, writes that a
woman in the city of Caeta, after The like of a woman in the City of Caeta.
she had bin 14. years married turned her sex, and becam a man, and that
another woman called Emilia, married unto a citizen of Ibula called Anthonio
Spensa, after she had been 12. years his wife, becam a perfect man, and married
another woman and begat children. Another far stranger then either of these is
recited by the same author, of a woman that had been married and brought forth
a son, which afterward being converted into a man, married another woman,
and had children by her, but because these are old matters, and it may be said
that we go far for witnesses, I will tell you what Doctor Amatus writes, a
Physician of no small estimation in Portugal, who in a work of Physic which
he made, says, that in a village called Esgueyra, distant ix. leagues from the
City of Corimbra, there lived a Gentleman, who had a daughter named Marya
Pacheco, the which at such age as by the course of nature her flowers should
have come down, in sted thereof, as though it had before lain hidden in her
belly, there issued A gentleman's daugh ter of Portugal changed her sex.
forth a perfect and able member masculine, so that of a woman she became a
man, and was presently clothed in man's habit and apparel, and her name
changed from Marie to Manuell Pacheco, and not long after, passing into the
East Indies, she wan in the vvarres great reputation through the valor of her
person, from whence returning most opulent and rich, she shortly afterward
married a Gentlewoman of a very Noble house, by whom whether she had any
children or no, he writes not: but only that she never came to have any
beard, retayning always a womanly face and countenance: and this he affirms
of his own sight and knowledge. But those that will neither give credit to
these things which I have said, nor to the Authors of them, let them read
Hyppocrates, by a common consent called the Evangelist of Physicians. There
was, says he, in his 6. book De morbis popularibus, The like of a woman
called Phaetula.
a woman called Phaetula in the City of Abderis, wife to Piteus, which being
of young and tender years, when her husband was banished from thence, remained
many months without having her flowers, which caused her to feel an exceeding
pain in her members, whereupon her body shortly after miraculously changed
sex, her voice became manly and sharp, and her chinne was covered with a
beard. The self fame happened in like sort in Tafus to Anamisia, wife to
Gorgippus.


LUD. Truly these things which you have rehearsed are marvelous, and the only
authority of Hippocrates suffiseth to give them credit, emboldned through
which I will tell you a thing, which till now I always accounted as a fable,
or thing dreamed: which though it be long since it was told me, yet would I
never utter it to any, because I reputed it as a thing altogether incredible.
It was thus. A friend of mine The like of a Husbandmans wife in Spain.
of good authority and credit, told me, that in a Village not far hence,
there was a woman married with a Husbandman, by whom having no children, they
were at continual jar, so that were it through jealousy or other cause, she
led with him a most unquiet life, for remedy whereof, she rising on evening,
clothed her self in the garments of a young fellow that dwelt with them in
the house, and departed secretly, from that time forward faigning her self to
be a man, and put her self into service, gaining wherewith to sustain her
life, in which estate after she had a while remained; whether it were that
Nature wrought in her with so effectual virtue and puissance, or that her own
earnest imagination seeing her self in that habit, had force to work so
strange an effect, she was transformed into a man, and married an other woman,
not daring through simplicity discover this matter, till by chance: a man that
had been before time acquainted with her, looking one day earnestly upon her,
and viewing in her the perfect resemblance of her which he had before time
known, demanded, if she or rather he were her brother, whereupon he being
now changed, and become a man, and withal putting great confidence in the
other, opened unto him the whole secrecy of this success, instantly
beseeching him not to discover it to any man.


BER. Whatsouer Nature has at one time done, it may do an other, and as well
may this which you have told be true, as that which is affirmed by Writers,
and therefore you have done well to reserve it till now, coming so well to
purpose as it does, for the confirmation of the before rehearsed; especially we
being now so well persuaded of the possibility thereof: but if you should tell
the same amongst some kind of men, you would be in Strange things not to be
told, but before such as are learned and wise.
great hazard to be iested at for your labor: as I was for saying, that there
was a part of the world, where the days and nights equally endured six
months a piece.


AN. This is the inconvenience: that those which have seen and read these
strange and wonderful secrets, may not make relation of them, but in presence
of those that are learned, wise, and of clear understanding: so that these
matters which we have here privately discoursed, are not to be rehearsed
before other men, the grosnes of whose ignorance, would account us more gross
and ignorant, and inuenters of fables and novelties: neither should it avail
us to allege witnesses, for they will say they know them not: who, nor
whence they are: yea, though they be such Authors, as never wrote with greater
gravity and credit.

But seeing it is now so late, and that we have spent so great a part of the
night, me thinks it were not amiss if we retired our selves: for this shall
not be the last time (God willing) that we will meet together.


LV. This our communication has been long, though for my part I could have
been contented, that it should have lasted till to morrow morning, and
therefore Signior Anthonio, before we depart, I will take your word that we
shall to morrow meet here again in the evening.


AN. Assure your selves Gentlemen, that I will not fail, for the profit here
of is mine.


LV. The pleasure you have already done us, is not small, neither shall that be
less which we hope to receive to morrow.


The end of the first Discourse.
The second Discourse, containing certain properties and virtues of Springs,
Rivers, and Lakes: with some opinions touching terestriall Paradise; and the
four Rivers that issue out from thence: withal in what parts of the world
our Christian belief is professed.
Interlocutores. LVDOVICO. BERNARDO. ANTHONIO. LU. WHat think you Signior
Bernardo, had I not reason in commending Anthonio, to be a man most
accomplished in letters and ciuility, and of a most sweet and pleasing
conversation?


BER. Truly I little thought him to be so sufficient in discourse, as I
perceived yesterday that he is: of which seeing I now begin to taste the
sweetness, I should be exceedingly glad, that it were our hap according to
promise, to meet together again to day; for our time cannot, in my opinion,
be better employed then in his company, who unless I be deceived, goes far
beyond a great many, which presume themselves to be great and learned Clarks.


LV. Believe me in this one thing which I will tell you, it is sildome or never
seen a fool to be curious, (folly and virtuous curiosity being two things
directly repugnant and contrary) for wise men procure always to extend their
knowledge farther, esteeming that which they already know and understand to be
little or nothing: but fools, whose understanding reaches not to think that
there is any farther knowledge to be had, then that which they understand and
comprehend, within the gross compass of their own barraine capacity, imagine
that all wisdom and knowledge makes there an end; so that bounding there
their definitive conclusion, they argue and dispute, without willing yield to
any thing more, then that whereto the dulnes of their sense reaches: whereas
the wise man for much that he knows, thinks always that there is an other
that knows more, and never wedding him self to his own fancy, nor trusting
his own opinion and judgment, remitteth him self always to those of more
understanding: and this is the cause, wherefore they err so sildome, whereas
the other blockish dull heads never judge a right in any thing: because
trusting opiniatiuely to their own wit, they never persuade them selves that
they are deceived, whereby they remain continually in error.


BER. This which you have said is so true, that I must needs yield thereunto,
unless I would show my self as ignorant and wilful, as those which you
speak of, but Lupus est in fabula: for if I be not deceived, yonder comes
Signior Anthonio. I should be glad that he came vnaccombred with other
matters, to the end we might have his conversation a while, as yesterday we
had.


LU. Though it were with dear price to be bought, we should not permit the
contrary.


AN. A better encounter then this I could not have wished, in meeting you both
together, for being three, I feared that we should not all have met so
conveniently.


LV. Neither are we less glad of our good hap in meeting you in this place,
hoping that it shall please you to favor us in prosecuting that good
conversation, with the which you left us yesterday so engaged.


AN. You shall find me ready, wherein it shall please you to command me.


BER. Let us then if you think good, walk a while amongst these Vines, the
fragrant greenes and spreading of whose pleasant branches, yield an air,
nothing inferior in freshnes to that which yesterday refreshed us by the
Rivers side, and a little beyond is a delicate* Fountain, where being wearied
with walking, we may rest and repose our selves, it is environed round about
with green trees, whose shaddowe will serve to defend us from the scorching of
the sun, which also now begins to decline.


AN. Let us go whether it shall please you; for in truth such is the sweet
and delectable freshnes and verdure of these fields, that it reuiueth a man
that beholds them, and it may serve for a motive, to lift up our minds, and
to be thankful unto God, which has for our use created them.


BER. If our care were as great to consider of this, as his is to bless us
with his benefits, we should without ceasing praise his Name, and be
continually busied in the contemplation of his glorious works; but see here
the Fountain and place most commodious for us to repose in.


LVD. Well let us then sit down together, for this very Fountain will yield us
sufficient matter of admiration, whose water we see spring out so perfectly
pure, and clear, that it runs as it were cheerfully smyling amongst the
peble stones, the which (parting with his course the sands) it leaves bare and
naked, procuring with his christaline freshnes thirst to the beholders, and
inuiting them as it were to drink.


AN. God has given to many things different force and quality, so that few or
none are without their particular virtues, if we were able to attain to the
knowledge of them, but chiefly has he enriched the water, (over and above the
general virtue as being one The cause of the diversity of the taste and
properties of waters.
of the 4. Elements concurring in the generation of all things created) with
sundry proper and particular gifts, virtues, and operations, the diversities of
which, by experience we find in Rivers, Springs, Fountains, Ponds, Lakes, and
Floodes: the cause whereof is, (though the water be all one, and proceed wholly
from one beginning and original) that the Sea passing through the veins and
concauities of the earth, takes and participateth the virtue, nature, and
property of the same earth and minerals through which it passes, whereof it
comes, that some Springs are hot, some cold, some bitter, some sweet, some
salt and brackish, and others of so many different tastes and properties, that
it is impossible to reckon the^. There are many Authors which write of their
different virtues and conditions, some of the which are recited by Pedro
Mexias, in a chapter of his book entitled, The Forest of Collections, which
(seeing you may there find at large, when it shall please you to peruse him) I
will spend no time in rehearsing.


LVD. You say he collected some, whereby I imagine there are other some by him
unremembered, of which you should do us great favor to give us notice and
understanding.


AN. I am persuaded that he left them out, not for want of remembrance or
knowledge of them, but only that he wrote those, which he accounted the
principallest, and of greatest wonder. For what greater or more incredible
strangenes may there be then that of the Fountain of Epirus, into the The
Fountain of Epirus.
which putting a Torch or a candle lighted, it quenches and extinguisheth the
flame thereof, and putting it in dead, it kindeleth and enflameth the same: and
that which he writes of other Rivers and Lakes, which burned the hands of
those that had falsely sworn being put into them, and others that filled them
full ofleprosie; and of the Fountain Elusidis, which in The Fountain Eleusidis.
sounding a Flute or other musical instrument, begins to swel and buble up
in such quantity as though it would flow oouer, the which in ceasing the sound,
appeaseth it self again, and sinketh and setleth it self into a quiet estate
as it was before. There are so many like unto these written and reported, that
to go about to rehearse the^ all would be an endless work. I will only
therefore recite some of the^ recited by Pliny, in his second book cap. 103.
and some other mentioned by other authors of great authority, gravity and
credit, which I imagine you have not heard, neither are they in the collections
of the beforesayd Author remembered. First therefore to begin, how strange and
miraculous is that of Jacobs Well in Sichar, where Sychen the son of Emor died,
by signs and tokens of which, the inhabitants Jacobs Well in Sichar.
know in what sort the River Nilus shall ouerflowe that ensuing year (for it
happens yearly once) at which time they fail not with all diligence to observe
the tokens thereof, especially how high the water rises, whereby they assuredly
know in what sort the Nile shall rise, and how far he shall ouerflowe that
year: by which observation, they know if the year shall be scarce and barrein, or
plentiful and abundant, according to which they make their provisions, fetching
from other parts things necessary for their sustenaunce, if there be any
appearance of dearth. Of the Lake which Pedro Mexias says is in Ethiopia, in
the which those that bathe themselves, come forth as it were anointed and
besmeared with Oil: Pomponius Mela and Solinus make mention, whom he
alleges for authors, saying that the water thereof is so subtle, delicate
and and pure, that a feather falling therein, goes straight without any let
down into the bottom, which is no small cause to wonder at, that being in
show greasy and full of grossness, the effect thereof should be so above
reason contrary. The self same property writes Gaudencius Merula of a Lake
which is in India, called Silias, into the which, casting the lightest The Lake
Silias.
thing that may be, it sinketh presently to the bottom. The which according to
the Philosophers opinion, proceeds of the great purity and thinness, which
is very near to be converted into air. There are also in a valley of Jury (as
writes Josephus in his book of the captivity of the Jews, alleged Sundry
Springs of different natures, in a valley of Jury, near Macherunte.
by Nicholaus Leonicus, near a place called Macherunte, a great number of
Springs, of the which some are sweet and of a most pleasing taste, and others
unsavory and bitter in extremity, being all wreathed, and as it were mingled
one with another. Not far from thence there is a Cave, into the which there
issue out of a Rock two fountains, so near together that they seem to be
both but one, and yet are in their effects most different and contrary, for the
one is extreme cold, and the other hot, so that between the^ both they make
there a lake of most singular temprature, healing those that bathe themselves
therein of diverse infirmities. And seeing it comes to pass to count the
wonderful things of this valley, though we digress a little from the order of
our discourse, concerning the property of waters, I will tell you what the same
Author writes of the property of an herb which there is found, called
Baharas, taking his name of that part of the valley where it grows. It has
the color of a bright and shining flame, by the glistering The most strange
nature and property of the herb Baharas.
discovered far of by night, but the nearer you approach unto it, the more it
loses of his brightness, which when you come to take it, vanishes, leaving
deluded and deceived the hands of those that seek it. Neither can it be
found, unless you first cast upon it the urine of a woman that has her
flowers, being corrupted and poured down all at once upon it, which being
done, it discovers it self presently to the view of those that seek it,
who die at the very instant, unless they have a piece of the root of the same
herb gathered before, bound to their arm, having which, they remain secure,
and may gather it without any perrill or danger.

But they have also another manner of gathering the same, which they hold for
the surer, which is thus. He that goes in search thereof, finding it, pareth
the ground close round about away, and bringing with him a dog, binds him
with a cord fast to the root thereof, at whose departure the dog striving to
follow him, pulls it up by the root, falling presently down dead in the
place, by his death giving security to his Master to take up the root
without any danger at all, and to carry it away, and to apply it to such use as
pleases him. The virtue thereof is so great, that it heals men possessed of
devils: besides, many and diverse other infirmities, for which it is a remedy
most excellent. So that some will say, that the The virtue thereof.
virtue of this herb was not unknown to Solomon, by the excellency and
force whereof, he expelled evil spirits, and cured infinite diseases, which
was an occasion to make his wisdom be held in greater admiration: and that
others learned this of him, after his death working therewith many marvelous
and admirable things, exceeding the rules of Nature, but this is Apocryphus,
and not written by any Author of credit.


LV. God ordained not this herb with such difficulty to be found and
gathered, without enduing it also with some especial and particular virtue,
which, as says Hermes, he has in such sort imparted to herbs, plants, and
stones, that if we had the knowledge and use of them, we should so cure all
infirmities and diseases, that we should seem to be in a manner immortal.


AN. Believe me, the virtues of the water are no less then theyrs: for as the
herbs suck and draw their property and virtue out of the earth, which
nourishes and produces them, yielding moisture and sustenaunce to their
roots: so likewise the water draws to it self, the property of the earth
and minerals through which it passes, participating with the^, of their
virtues; which being so deep in earth, are from us hidden and unknown. But I
know not whether the virtue of a Spring which Aristotle writes to be in
Sycilia in the Country of the Palisciens, proceed of this cause, A Spring in
Sycilia, most admirable.
for the mystery which it contains is far greater, and so says Nicholaus
Leonicus, that it is a thing very hardly credible: for he affirms the
property thereof to be such, that who so takes a solemn oath, and the same
oath be written in Tables, and cast with certain solemnities into the
Fountain: If the oath contained therein be true, the Tables remain floating
aloft upon the water, but if it be false, they sink incontinently down to the
bottom: And he which took the same, is burned presently in the place, and
converted into ashes, not without damage many times of those that were present:
They called this the holy Fountain, and appointed the charge and custody
thereof to Priests, which suffered no man to swear, unless that he first put
in sureties, that he would content him self to pass by this trial.


LV. I rather think that Aristotle and those that wrote hereof were deceived,
then otherwise, because we hear not at this present, that there is any such
Fountain known in Sicilia: and if there had been in times past any of such
force and virtue, the memory thereof would be far more rife and famous then
it is.


BER. Let us never trouble our selves with the trial hereof, for in this sort
we may say the like, of all those others which we have not seen.


AN. The self same Nicolaus Leonicus, writes A Fountain in the Country of
the Elyans.
of another Fountain, in the Country of the Elyans, nere to the River
Citheros, into the which, all the water that ran there out, degorged. There
stood by this Fountain a sacred house, the which they constantly affirmed to
have been the habitation of four Nimphs, Caliphera, Sinalasis, Pegaea, and
Iasis. All manner of diseased persons that bathed them selves in this
Fountain, came there out whole and sound. The like is written of two other
Rivers, the one in Italy called Alteno, and The Fountains Alteno and Alfeno
the other called Alfeno in Arcadia: But of no less wonder then all the before
rehearsed is, that which is written of the Lake in Scithia, in the Country of
the Dyarbes, near to the A Lake (...) in Scithia.
City Teos, the which besides the marvelous plenty of fish in which it
abounds, has a property most admirable: for in calm and warm weather,
there apeareth above the water great abundance of a kind of liquor like unto
oil, which the inhabitants in Baotes made for the same purpose, skimme off
from the water and apply the same to their uses; finding it to be as good and
profitable, as though it were very oil in deed. There is likewise in the
Province of Lycia, nere a City called Pataras, a Fountain, the water that
flows from A Fountain in Licia.
which, looks as though it were mingled with blood: The cause whereof, as the
Country men say, is through one Telephus, who washing therein his wounds, it
has ever since retained the color of blood: But the likeliest is, that it
passes through some vein of red clay or colored earth, with the which
mixing it self, it comes forth stained with that color: the Author hereof
is Nicolaus Leonicus. And Athenaeus Naucratites says, that in an Island of the
Cyclades called Tenaeus, there is a Fountain whose water will agree by no
means Water of the Fountain Tenaeus, that will by no means be mingled with
wine.
to be mingled with wine, always, howsoever it be mingled or poured with
wine into any vessel, it remains by it self a part, so that it is to be
taken up as pure and vnmedled, as when it was poured forth, yea, though all
possible diligence were used to join and mingle them.


LV. There be a great many that would be glad, that all water were of this
condition, by no means brooking the mixture thereof with wine, as a thing that
keeps them sometimes sober against their wills.


AN. You say truth, but leaving them with their fault, which is none of the
least, but one of the greatest and foulest that may be, in any man pretending
to bear honor or reputation, I say there is in the Island of Cuba, according
to the relation of many which A Fountain in the Island of Cuba.
have seen the same, a Fountain which pours forth a thick liquor, like unto
Tar, which is of such force, that they cauke and pitch their ships withal,
in such sort that they remain as firm and dight, against the entry of water,
as though they were trimmed with the best sort of Pitch that we do here use
in these parts.


BER. I have heard say, that there is in the same Island a great Valley, the
stones that are found in which are all Stones in a Valley of the same Island all
round.
so round, as if they had by Art every one been fashioned in the same form.


LV. Perchance Nature has so framed them for some effect, of the which we
are ignorant: seeing that few or none of her works are without some secret
mystery, and as well may these stones serve to some use, as the liquor of that
Fountain: but let us heerewith not trouble Signior Anthonio from prosecuting
his discourse.


AN. Solinus discoursing of the Island of Cerdonia, says, that it contains A
strange Fountain in the Island of Cerdonia.
many wholesome waters and Springs, and amongst the rest, one whose water
heals all infirmity of the eyes, and withal serves for a discovery of
thieves: for whosoever by oath denies the theft which he has committed, in
washing him self with that water, loses incontinent his fight; and if so be
that his oath be true, his eye siight is thereby quickened and made more sharp
and lively: but whosoever obstinately persisteth in denying his fault,
remains blind for ever. But of this Fountain there is now no notice at all,
for I have been long resident in that Island, during which time, I never heard
any such matter. Many the like unto these are written of by diverse Authors, the
which for their uncertainty, I will not weary my self in rehearsing: only I will
tell you of a Lake, which is in the Spanish Island called S. Domingo, in a
mountain very high and uninhabited. The Spaniards having conquered that
Country, found round about this mountain no habitation of people, through A
Lake on the top of a mountain in the I Will of S. Domingo
the cause of a hideous noise, which was therein continually heard, amazing and
making deaf the hearers thereof, the hiden cause and secret mystery whereof, no
man being able to comprehend, three Spaniards resolutly deliberated to go up
into the height thereof, and to discover if it were possible the occasion
whence this continual roaring proceeded: so that providing them selves of all
things necessary, for the difficulty and ragged sharpnes of the way, being full
of craggy rocks and shruby trees and bushes, stopping their ears fast and
close with pelets of wax, and taking some few victuals with the^, put
themselves onward in their enterprise, not without exceeding wearines and
travel, insomuch that the one fainting by the way, was forced to bide behind.
The other two with chereful labor and virtuous alacrity, ouerco^ming all
difficulties, came at last with much ado unto the top of the mountain, where they
found a great Plain without any trees, and in the midst a lake, the water of
which was obscure and black as ink, boiling and bubling up, as though all the
fire in the world had been flaming under it, making a noise so terible and
thundering, that though they had stopped their ears with all possible care and
diligence: yet the intolerable roaring noise thereof, wrought such a humming
and giddines in their heads, that they were constrained with all possible have
to return, without bringing any certain relation then this which you have
heard.


BE. Such a matter as this cannot be without great mystery, for put case that
there were underneath some mine of Sulphur or brimstone, sufficient through the
heat of the fiery matter therein to make the water sees up and boil, yet
could not the same cause a noise so tempestuous and horrible, as you said the
same is; and besides, me thinks this continual boiling should in time consume
the water, and so the Lake by consequence become dry.


LU. Perchance there may be some Spring or Fountain there near, which
feeds the Lake with as much warer as the fire consumes, by which means it
can never be void or empty.


AN. Let us leave these secrets of Nature to him only which has made them,
for though we through some causes represented in our understanding, would seek
to yield reasons thereof: yet when we think to hit the white, we shall find
our selves far wide: returning therefore to our former matter of Springs and
Waters, me thinks it were not reason, that speaking of things so Two Fountains
in Spain of strange effect.
far off, we should ouer-slip these which we have here at home in our own
Country, having in this our Spain two Fountains, whose effects are not a
little to be admired at, the one of which is in a Cave called de la Iudia, by
the Bridge of Talayuelas, near the Castle of Garcimunios, which though I my
self have not seen, yet I have been thereof so certified, that I assuredly
know it to be true: It yields a water which in falling congealeth, and
becomes hard, in manner of a stone; which hardness it always after retains
without dissoluing, in such sort, that they apply it to their buildinges.


BER. It were need of great Philosophy to know the mystery of this, that
water should in such sort harden, that it should never afterward dissolve:
the contrary reason whereof we see in great heaps of Ice, which how hard so
cuer they be, yet change of weather, makes them to dissolve and melt.


LV. This is because the heat undoes that which is done by the cold, as in
snow, hail, and ice; which seeing it works not the like effect in these
stones, we may thereby gather that, not the cold but some other secret to us
hidden and unknown, is the cause of this obduration and hardness. I have heard
with great credit affirmed, that there is also near the town called Uilla
Nueua del obyspo, a Fountain, in which during six months of the year, from
such time as the sun enters into the sign of Lybra, which begins about
the midst of September, called the Equinoctial of the Autumn, till the
midst of March, there is no one drop of water, and all the other half year,
there runs a most clear and abundant stream: and this is every year
ordinary. Of this Fountain makes mention also Lucius Marineus Siculus.
Sinforianus Campegius writes of another in Sauoy, which breeds by miraculous
A Fountain in Sauoy, breeding stones of great virtue.
operation stones of exceeding virtue.


BER. If this be true, then am I deceived, for I never thought that stones
could be bred, but that they were as the bones of the earth, always of one
bigness, neither decreasing nor increasing; for otherwise, if stones should
grow, in time they would come to be of such quantity and greatness, that they
would be in diuer parts very combersome.


AN. And doubt you of this? Assure your self that stones wax and diminish
according to the quality of which they are, the place where they are, and the
property, nature, and condition of the earth where they are found. Though
those which we here call peble stones, remain always in one greatness, or else
grow so little and so slowly, that it can in many years hardly be perceived,
yet all those stones which are any thing sandy, contracting and drawing the
earth about them, convert the same into their own nature, hardening it in such
sort, that in short space a little stone becomes to be exceeding great, yea
and in such sort, that sometimes we see things of different nature and kind,
enclosed and shut up within them, still retaining their own substance and
essence, which if you desire better to understand, behold but the stone in the
Earl Don Alonsos garden, which he has caused to A strange stone in the Earl
of Beneuenta his Garden.
be placed there, as a thing marvelous to be viewed of al men, which though it
be hard and sound, has in the midst thereof a great bone, seeming to be the
shinbone of some beast, which the same stone embraced by all likelihood lying
near it on the ground, and continually growing, came at last to compass it
round about, which being afterward carved by a Mason, was found lying in the
very bosom and midst thereof, and that this should be a very perfect bone,
there is no doubt to be made thereof, for I my self have made most sufficient
proof and try all of the same.


BER. I have also viewed it very narrowly and am of your opinion.


AN. Turning to our discourse of Fountains, I am persuaded that there are many
of rare and great virtues, utterly to us unknown, and sometimes it happens,
that the virtue of the water, works through the aid of some other thing,
jointly together, matters very admirable, as that which Alexander writes in
his book De diebus genialibus, that in those parts of England which bend
toward the West, when any shyps are broken, These Fouls are in English called
Barnakles.
and the ribs or planches of them remain a while in the water, that with the
continual moystnes, they engender and bring forth certain Puscles like
Mushromps, which within fevve days seem to be alive and to have motion: and
by little and little grow and gather feathers. That part wherewith they are
fast to the rotten timber is like unto a water-foules bill, which coming lose
of it self, this miraculous foul begins to heave it self up, and by
little and little in short space of time to fly and mount into the air. Pope
Pius, whose name was Aeneas Siluius, rehearses this in another sort, saying,
that in The Author is heerin deceived, for these are 2. several stories, and
both very true.
Scotland, upon the banks of a River, there grow certain Trees, whose leaves
falling into the water and putrefying, engender in them a certain worm,
which by little and little becomes great and feathered, and at last lifts
up the wings and flies into the air. Cassaneus in his Catalogue of the glory
of the world, in the twelfth part repeateth this otherwise. In times past,
says he, there grew in England upon a Rivers side a strange and wonderful
tree, that brought forth a fruit like unto Ducks, the which being ripe and
falling of, those which fell on the Land side, rotted and perished, but those
which fell into the water received presently life, recovering feathers and
wings, and in short space became able to fly. Others write that there were
many of these Trees, and so by consequence many such fowls in great number.
But whether there be any such now or no, I know not. Besides these Authors. I
remember that I read in an Epitaphe which is written in the Map of the world,
printed by a Venetian called Andreas Valuasor, that one Andrew Rosse, citizen
of the same town, had at that present two of these fowls, about the bigness of
two little Ducks, the which were brought him out of Spain, but I think there
was an error in the writing, and that he should have written England or
Scotland: for a thing so miraculous as this is, cold not in Spain be obscure
and unknown.


BER. Truly, as you say, this may well be termed miraculous, but me thinks this
disagreement of opinions, makes the matter seem doubtful.


LU. There is no mortal sin neither in believing nor unbelieving it: but
Nicolaus Leonicus affirms another thing as strange as this, that in the City
of Ambrosia, situated at the foot of the hill Parnassus, there should be a
tree called Is, and by another name The strange fruit of a tree in the city
of Ambrosia.
Cocus, whose leaves are like those of the Dock, and the fruit about the
bigness of a Pease, the which if it be not gathered in season, engenders a
little fly like unto a maget at the beginning, which afterward comes to have
wings and flies away, leaving the fruit hanging on the tree and withered up:
which some let perrish of purpose, because the blood of those flies is
singulerly excellent to die silk withal.


AN. Of no less admiration are those trees of which Pigafeta in his relation
to A strange tree mentioned in Pigafetas relation to the Pope.
the Pope makes mention, whose leaves falling down, presently move and go, as
it were upon 2. points, which they have on the one side like feet, seeming to
have life: he affirms to have seen this himself. Therefore, whatsoever is
said and affirmed by grave Authors, we ought to believe that it may be, for
though some have a fault in ouerreaching, yet others will not register any
thing but that which is true. Turning therefore to our purpose of waters, let
us not in silence pass over the greatness of such Rivers as have been in our
times discovered: for till now Nylus, Ganges, Danubius, and Boristhenes have
bin accounted great, but at this present, the greatest that is in all Asia,
Affricke, or Europe, is but a little stream in comparison of those, which by
Navigations are newly found out in the West Indies, scarcely to be believed,
were they not sufficiently authorized by the infinite number of so many
Certain rivers of incredible greatness, found out in the West Indyes.
vvitnesses: As for example, the river of Orellana, so called, by the name of
him that first discovered it, is so great, that it bears fifty leagues of
breadth at the mouth where it enters into the Sea, and through the extreme
fury with which it forciblie passes, it pierces in such sort through the
waves of the salt water, that the Sailors call that Coast the Sweet water
Sea. The River Dela plata, now inhabited by our Spaniards, there as the Sea
receaueth it, contains xxv. leagues in breadth, and the Rivers of Maranion
fyfteene. There are also many others, of infinite largeness, whereby we may
conjecture, that there is a greater quantity of Land the^ that which is
already discovered, for it is not possible that such mighty Rivers should rise
out of any Spring, but that many other Rivers should fall into them, and that
out of diverse Regions, but let us leave this till we meet another time, when
we shall have more leisure.


BER. First I pray you tell us, what is your opinion concerning the source and
rising of Rivers, both these and the rest, and whence their spring, issue and
proceed, for I have heard herein diverse contrary opinions, which cause me to be
doubtful, and I would be glad to be resolved.


AN. The opinion of Aristotle and others that imitate him, is, that the Rivers
are engendered in the hollow Aristotle's opinion of the source of Rivers.
and hidden parts of the earth, where the air, through the great moisture and
coldness conuerteth it self into water, the which running along the veins of
the earth, comes at last to the height thereof, where not being fully
perfected, it takes thickness and issues out, discovering it self as well
in great Rivers as in little streams and Fordes such as we see, Anaximander
and many other Philosophers with him affirmed, The opinion of Anaximander and
his followers
that the earth has within it self and in the midst thereof a belly full of
water, out of which break forth all these Fountains, Rivers, and Springs: but
the surer opinion, and the truth indeed is, that all Rivers, streams, and
Fountains, and Lakes that come of flowing waters, issue and proceed out of the
Sea, as says Ecclesiastes in the first Chapter by these The surest opinion
confirmed by Scripture.
words. All Rivers enter into the Sea, and the Sea for all that increases not,
and the Rivers return to the same place out of which they issued, and begin to
run anew.


BER. You have given us very good satisfaction in this matter of which we
doubted, only one thing remains, in which I beseech you to resolve us
concerning the four Rivers that issue out of earthly Paradise, for in all that
I have seen or read, I have only found the names of Tygris and Euphrates, as
for Gion and Fison, I hear them not named in the world. Besides, I should take
it that these Rivers must needs be of great virtue, seeing their source,
Spring, and original comes out of Paradise.


AN. I would not willingly that you should engulfe either your self or me in
a matter so profound and deep, entering once into the which, I know not how we
should get out, for of such difficulty is this point which you have touched,
that he had need of great understanding and learning that should therein well
resolve you, which both are in me wanting, neither being so great a Divine, or
so well seen in the holy Scriptures, that I can satisfy you without bringing
you into many doubts, whereas you have now only one. For to discourse of
these Rivers, of force we must first declare that which may be said of
Paradise, of which when I set my self to consider, my understanding is in it
self confounded, for the disagreeing contrariety of Authors which have written
hereof, is such that I know I should weary you with hearing them.


LU. I know not how we may spend the time better, then in searching and
debating a matter so pleasant and delectable, though it were to no other end,
then to move us to seek and aspire unto that heavenly Paradise, which this
terestriall represents unto us.


AN. Well then, seeing it so pleases you, I will recite the opinions of such
as understand it better than I do, and you may thereof judge, that which
seems most agreeing to our Catholic faith and to reason, and I will with
the greatest breuity I may, make you pertaker of that which I remember.

Many Divines, especially those which have written upon Genesis, have
discoursed upon this matter of earthly Paradise: amongst whose opinions, though
there be some diversity, yet they shoot all at one mark, though in the mean
time it be some confusion to those which curiously procure to sift out the
truth thereof: But seeing their opinions are all Christianlike and of good
zeal, I account it no error in following either of them. But leaving a while
the Christians and Divines, let us first see what was the old Philosophers
opinion, though it were at blindfold, concerning Paradise: and the place on
earth, where they thought it to be. If we take this name of Paradise
generally, it signifies a place of delight, and so says Saint Hierome in his
Translation, that Heden What the word of Paradise generally taken signifies.
in the Hebrew Text signifies delight, according to the 70. Interpreters,
which having said that God planted Paradise in the place of Heden, turn
presently to declare the same, calling it a Garden of delight: and of these
delightful places there are many in the world for their exceeding beauty and
pleasantnes called by this name, and so Casaneus alleging Philippus
Bergamensis, the one very late, the other not very ancient, says, that there
is one in the Oryent toward the side The Philosophers opinions concerning
Paradise.
of Zephyrus, (and this he thinks to be the same of which we now speak,)
another in the Aequinoctiall between the winds Eurus and Euronotus; the third
between the tropic of Cancer, and the circle of the South pole; a fourth in
the Orient on the other side of the Aequinoctiall, where the Sun scorcheth
with so vehement heat: a fifth at the Southern pole, of which he says, that
Solinus also makes mention, and as I take it, it is in his discourse of those
that dwell on the other side of the Hyperbores. The sixth he places in the
Occident, and withal he alleges, that the Senate of Rome had made a decree,
that none should be chosen high Pontif, unless he were in the Garden of
delights in the province of Italy: But me reemeth that Casaneus and Philippus
reckoning up such places as these are, and calling them paradices, and taking
the word so largely, might have found a great many more. For Solomon also
says: he makes Gardens and paradices, and planteth in them fruitful trees.
And Procopius writes of a paradise in a certain part of Africa, whose words
are these: There was, says he, builded a royal palace, by a King of the
Vandales, in the most delightful paradise of all those that ever I have seen,
for there were many delicious Fountains, of which it was bedewed and watered:
and the vvoods round about were continually most fragrant, green, and
flourishing. These paradices are understood, as I have said, to be all the
purest and pleasantest places of the earth, refreshed with sweet gales and
temperate wholesome airs, though perchance also such as have written of them,
have added somewhat to the truth: and as for those of which Phillip of Bergamo
speaks, they are described in places so far distant from us, that it is
almost impossible to know the truth. The Gentiles likewise according Where the
Gentiles supposed the Elisian fields to be.
to their falls, sects, and opinions, fained the Elisian fields to be paradise;
whether they imagined the souls of those that lived well; to be transported
after their death. Which some dreamed to be in the province of Andaluzia, in
this our Spain, because it is a plat most pleasant and delectable. Others held
opinion, that they were not any where else then in an Island called Phrodisia,
consecrated to Venus, near unto Thule, which was the most delicious and
comfortable place that might be Thule is thought to be the same which is now
called Iseland.
found in the whole world, which suddenly sinking into the Sea vanished and was
seen no more. But the commonest opinion was, that the Elisian fields were
those, which we now call the fortunate Islands, the enhabitants of which are
said to live so long, that they are held to be as it were immortal. Plato in
his fourth book called Phedon, writes, that there is a place on the Plato.
earth so high above the clouds, that they cannot rain upon the same; neither
though it be near the region of the fire, feels it any immoderate heat: but
that there is always a temperature of air most pure and perfect, in such
sort, that many are of opinion, that al things grow there, in greater fertility
and abundance, then in any other part of the earth: and that the men are of
purer complexion and longer life then we, whose bodies are such, that many
think them to be formed the greater part of fire and air: as for water and
earth they participate thereof very little, neither feed they of such fruits
and victuals as we do here, but differ far from us in customs, and always
enjoy a perfect freshnes of youth. These words rehearses Caelius Rodiginus,
which were says he, of a man that went serching out the certain knowledge of
our faith, and who was not far of from being a Christian, if there had been any
man to have instructed him, wherein he was found to say so of him, I know not,
for Plato spoke and wrote many other things, wherein he deserved the name of
Divine, and out of which greater argument may be taken, then out of these words
to judge as he does of him. That agrees very well with this of Plato, which
Lactantius Firmianus writes in verse, in a little Treatise of the Phaenix,
discoursing of that Country, whether after she has burned her self in
Arabia, and turned to revive again of a worm engendered in her own ashes)
she takes her flight, to pass The Phaenix renueth of her own ashes.
her life, till such time as of necessity, she must return to renew her self
again: His very words are these. There is (says he) in the farthest part of
the East, a blessed place, where the high gate of the eternal pole is open, it
is neither anoyed with the heat of the Sun, nor the cold of the Winter, but
there whence the Sun sends and discovers to us the day, there are neither
high mountains nor low Valleys: the fields are all flat in a great and
pleasant Plain, which notwithstanding the even level thereof, is ten fadoms
higher then the highest mountain of ours. There is a flourishing vvood adorned
with many beautiful trees, whose branches and leaves enjoy Lactantius
Firmianus discourse of Paradise.
perpetual greenes, and at such time as through the ill guiding of the chariot
and horses of the Sun by Phaeton, the whole world burned, this place was
untouched of the flame, and when Deucalions flood ouerwholmed the whole world,
this remained free, for the waters were not able to overcome the height
thereof. There is neither languishing disease, painful old age, nor consuming
death. No fear, no grief, no coveting of riches, no battailing, no raging
desire of death or vengeance bereaueth their repose. Sorrowful tears, cruel
necessities, and careful thoughts, have there no harbor. No frozen dew
touches their earth, no misty cloud covers their fields: neither do the
heavens pour into them any troubled waters, only in the midst thereof they
have a Fountain, which they call Uiba, clear, pure, and abundant of sweet
waters, which once a month moystneth the whole vvood. The trees therein are
of a marvelous height, and hang always full of fruit: in this delicious
Paradise lives the Phaenix, the only one bird of that kind in the world, etc.


BER. Lactantius praises this Country very largely, neither agrees his
opinion ill with Platos: But he speaks here like a Philosopher, and not like
a Christian, though perchance if he had been asked his opinion like a
Christian, in what part of the world he thought terestriall Paradise to be; he
would have described it in like sort. But leaving these Philosophers Paradices,
seeming rather to be fictions, then worthy of credit; tell us I pray you what
the Doctors and Divines say hereunto, whose diligence, study and care has
been greater in procuring to understand and write the verity thereof.


AN. I will in few words tell you what some of them, and those of the greatest
authority have written on this matter. S. John Damascenes opinion of Paradise.
S. John Damascene, in his second book chap. 2. says these words; God being
to make Man to his own image and likeness, and to appoint him as King and ruler
of the whole earth, and all therein contained, ordained him a sumptuous and
royal being place, in the which he might lead a blessed, happy, and glorious
life, and this is that divine Paradise planted by his own omnipotent hands in
Heden, a place of all pleasure and delight, (for Heden signifies a delightful
place) and he placed him in the Oryent, in the highest and most magnificent
place of all the earth, where there is a perfect temprature, a pure and a
delicate air, and the plants continually green and fragrant; it is always
replenished with sweet and odoriferous savors, a light most clear, and a
beauty above man's understanding: a place truly only fit to be inhabited of
him, that was created to the image and likeness of God himself.


LVD. S. John differs not much in the situation and qualities hereof from the
opinion of the others before alleged, but pass on I pray you with your
discourse.


AN. Well, be then attentife a while. Venerable Bede handling this matter,
says: Earthly Paradise is a place most delightful, beautified with a
Venerable Bedes opinion.
great abundance of fruitful trees, and refreshed with a goodly fountain. The
situation thereof is in the oryentall parts, the ground of which is so high,
that the water of the flood could not ouer-reach the same: and this opinion
holds Strabo Strabo the Theologians opinion.
the Theologian, affirming that the height of the earth where Paradise is,
reaches to the circle of the Moon, through which cause it was not damnified
by the flood, the waters of which could not rise to the height thereof. Those
which follow this opinion, might better conform themselves with Origin, who
judges, that all this which is written of Paradise, Origens opinion.
must be taken allegorically, and that it is not situate on the earth, but in
the third heaven, whether S. Paul was lyfted in Spirit; but leaving him,
because he is alone in his opinion, without having any that follows him, let
us return to our alleged Authors, against who^ S. Thomas and Scotus argue,
saying, that Paradise can by no means reach unto the circle These opinions
refuted by S. Thomas and Scotus.
of the Moon, because the Region of the fire being in the midst, the earth
can by no means pass thorough the same without being burnt and destroyed.
Besides this, there are many other reasons sufficient to refute this opinion,
for so should those Rivers which come from Paradise, pass through the region of
the fire, which, the contrariety of the two Elements being considered, is
absurd: and besides, if this ground were so high, it could not choose but be
seen a far of from many parts of the world as well by sea as by land: and by
this means also, there should be a place in the world, by the which it seems
a man might go up into heaven, so that this opinion is grounded upon small
reason, and easy to be confuted.

Many other Authors there are, which affirm Paradise to be in so high a part
of the earth, that the water of the Deluge could not reach unto the top thereof
to anoy it: and to the objection which may be made against them out of Moises,
which says, that the waters thereof covered and ouerflowed; the height of xv.
cubits, all Mountains under the universal heaven: they answer, that these
Mountains are to be understood such as are under the region of the Air, where
the clouds are thickened and ingendered, for Heaven is meant many times in the
holy Scripture by this region, as the royal Heaven taken for the regio^ of the
air, in many places of Scripture.
Psalmist says: The fowls of heaven and the fishes of the Sea. Where by this
word heaven, is understood the region of the air, thorough which the birds
fly; so that according to their opinion, the mount or place where Paradise is,
exceeds, and is above this region of the air, where there is neither
blustering of winds, nor gathering of clouds, so that it could not be
endomaged by the waters of the flood. This is the self same of which we
discoursed yesterday, as touching the mountains Olympus, Athos and Atlas, and
that of Luna (which in height, according to the opinion of many, exceeds all
the rest on the earth) and many other like mountains in the world, over whose
tops there is neither rain, wind, nor clouds, the ashes lying from one year
to another unmoved, because that the height of their tops exceeds the middle
region of the air, and pierces thither where it is still and pure without any
moving. But S. Thomas also argues this not to be true, saying that it is no
convenient place for Paradise to stand in the midst of the region of the air,
neither could it, being there, have such qualities and conditions as are
necessary, because the winds and waters would distemper it.


LU. This should be so if it were in the midst of the region, but you your self
say that it passes farther, where the winds and waters have no force to work
any distemprature.


AN. If not the winds and waters, the^ the fire would work it, for the farther it
shoots beyond the region of the air, the nearer it approaches the region of
the fire.


BE. You speak against you self, for yesterday you said that the city Acroton
builded on the top of the mountain Athos, being in the superior region of the
air, enjoyed a singular temperature.


AN. You say true, but things are not to be taken in such extremety as you take
them, for though it be said the superior part, yet thereby is not meant the
utmost thereof, neither is that which we call the superior part with out a
difference and distance between the beginning and the end, the which though it
be in the middle temperat, yet the end being near to the fire, and participating
with the heat of the Sun, wants that temprature; and that which S. Thomas
says, is to be understood, that if Paradise be in the region where the clouds
be engendered, it cannot be in a place temperate, neither if it reach unto the
uppermost of the superior part of the pure air, by reason of the great heat
and drines of the fiery element. But these are matters spoken at randon,
without ever being seen or verified: and therefore every one thinks and
judges that which in his own fancy he imagines to agree with reason. For no
man is able to do that which Lucian in his Dialogues writ of Icarus, the which
with artificial wings flewe up into the air. Leaving therefore fables, I say
that the common opinion of all men is, that Paradise is seated in the oryent,
and in a country or region abounding in delights, and so writes Suidas a
greek Author, whose words are these. Paradise, says he, is in the East, the
seat thereof is higher then all the other earth, it enjoys a temprature Suidas
a greek Author.
pure in all perfection, an air most delicate and clear, the trees thereof
flourish in perpetual greenenesse, laden with flowers and fruits, a place
full of all solace and sweetness, and of such beauty and goodlines, that it
passes all human imagination. Conciliador and Scotus are of the same
opinion, and these are the words of S. Thomas him self. Wheresoever we
believe Paradise to be, it must be so, that it be in a place very temperate, be
it under the Aequinoctial or in what other part so ever. To this purpose
Caelius Rodiginus applies that of Arryanus, a Greek Historiographer, to whom
Arrianus a Greek Historiographer.
they attribute so much credit, that they call him the very searcher of
verities, who says, that Hanno a famous and renouned Cartagenian Captain,
parting with an Army from the pillars of Hercules, where the City of Calyz is,
forward into the Ocean, leaving Lybia and Africa on the left hand, sailing
toward the West, and afterward turning his course toward the South, suffered
by the way many and great impediments and discommodities, for besides the great
feruentnes of the hot The strange adventure happening to Hanno a Carthagenian
Captain.
stars, as if it had been in the part of a burnt world, they began to want
water, or if they found any, it was such as they could not drink; they heard
terrible thunders without ceasing, their eyes were blinded with continual
flashes of lightning and it seemed that there fell from heaven great flakes of
flaming fire, so that they were forced to return. Some think that this Navy
went very near the Aequinoctial, but Caelius aleadgeth it, speaking of
Paradise, saying, that all these were tokens of Paradise, being near there
abouts, according to that of Genesis, where he says, that God placed before
the gate thereof a Cherubin with a sword of fire, which turned about on all
sides, to the end that he should suffer no man to enter into that place: But I
rather believe, that Hanno with this Navy came to be under the Torrida Zona, at
such time as the heat thereof caused these effects, making him return so
astonished, whereas if he had stayed, perchance he should have found both
time and place to pass forward, as it happened at the first to Colona, who
going to discover the Indies, found him self under the same Zone, where the
vveather waxing calm, his ships were detained two or three days, without any
hope ever to come forth, or to save their lives: but afterward, a gentle gale
arising, they passed forth without any danger, and now since, diverse pass
thereby daily in their Nauigations: but all these are imaginations of
contemplative men, seeking to sift out the truth.

There are some also that affirm Paradise to be in that part where God when he
framed the world, began the first moving of the heavens, which they call the
right hand of the world, and the best part thereof. This is alleged by
Nicholaus de Lyra, bringing for his Author Johan. de Pechan, in a Nicolaus de
lyra.

Ioha. de Pechan.


treatise which he wrote of the Sphaere, though the more general opinion be,
that the motion of the heavens took not their beginning in any one particular
place, but that they began to move jointly as they now do. There want not
also that affirm the whole world in which we dwell, to be Terrestrial
Paradise, who ground them selves in saying, that the four Rivers which the
holy Scripture says come out of Paradise, issue out of diverse and distant
parts of the earth, which cannot otherwise be verified, unless we will grant
the whole earth to be Paradise: but I would ask of these men, when the Angel
by the commandment of God drove Adam and Eve out of Paradise, whether they
went, for according to this opinion, they should have gone into some other part
out of the world: As for their objection of the four Rivers, you shall
hereafter understand it, when we fall into discourse of them.


BER. If it please you, you may well declare it now, seeing you have satisfied
us with such opinions as are held touching the seat of Paradise.


AN. One only remains contrary to all the rest, maintained by Caetanus, and
Opinions of Caetanus and Eugubinus touching terestriall Paradise.
after him, by Augustinus Stechius Eugubinus, a late Doctor, that wrote
learnedly and highly upon the Genesis, who declaring the words of Moises,
which says, God had planted Paradise in Heden, proves that though this word
Heden being interpreted signifies delights: yet in that passage it is not to
be understood, for other then the proper name of the Province or Country so
called, where Paradise was planted, the which he proves by strong and
sufficient arguments and reasons, the first he gathers out of the fourth
Chapter of Genesis, where it is written: Cain flying forth went and enhabited
the oriental stripe of Heden. And out of the 27. of Ezechiel, where he
reckons up many people, and diverse Nations that handled and trafficked with
the city of Tire, saying, that there came also thither people out of the
Countries of Charam, Chene, and Heden: yet Caeton thinks that Heden in this
authority, is not the place where terestrial Paradise was, but the name only of
a particular City: But following the opinion of Eugubinus, we may gather that
the Country where earthly Paradise was planted, was inhabited, and that near
unto it were peoples and Nations: and therefore God placed the Cherubin there,
with the turning fiery sword, to the end he should not let enter there-into any
person living: for if Paradise had been the^ unknown as now it is to al men,
what need had there been of an Angel to guard it, when no man knew where it
stood, nor which way to come unto it: Besides it may be gathered, that put the
case that Paradise stood toward any part of the East, yet could not the same
be far off from the Cities of Jerusalem and Tire, because he names jointly
together Charam and Heden, being a thing most manifest, that Charam is a
Province in Chaldae or Mesopotamia, which appears by the words of Genesis,
saying: God took the^ out of Vra Province of the Chaldaeans, that they might go
to Canaan, and they came even to Charam: these are evident reasons to prove that
Paradise stood in that Country, and that if as yet it be, it stands there: it
makes the better with this opinion, because the two Rivers Tygris and
Euphrates, bath and water that Province. Besides, we may suppose that the Ark of Noah during the 40. days of the flood, while it floted upon the water, being
so great and huge, and built so monstrous, as appears by the holy scripture,
to no other end then that it should not sink, made no very long voyage, which
staying and settling it self on the mountains of Armenia, is a token that Noes
biding was not far from thence: and of the other side it is certain, that
his habitation was not far off from that part where Paradise was, which by
consequence could not be far off from Armenia, upon which these provinces
before rehearsed do border: and that the Country where Paradise stood was
enhabited, appears by these words of S. Chrysostom. Before the flood, says
he, S. Chrisost.
men knew the place where Paradise stood, and the way to go unto the same: But
after the deluge, they found themselves out of the knowledge thereof, neither
could Noe or any of his Successors remember or find out the place where it had
been. And seeing that Chrisostom says, that it was never afterward known,
neither can we know if it still remained, or if it were dissolved for standing
in part where notice might have been had thereof.


LV. Indeed if Paradise should be in a place so near unto us, how were it
possible that no man should have knowledge thereof, or at the least of the
place where it might stand.


AN. To this answers Eugubinus, that granting his former opinion to be true,
or that Paradise was planted in a flat ground, or at least not so high as other
Doctors affirm: then certainly it was destroyed by the waters of the flood.
God through our offenses not permitting a thing so notable and of so great
perfection, to remain amongst us in the world.


LV. It seems not unto me that Eugubinus has reason to gainsay the opinion
of so many Doctors agreeing all in one. Strabo being both a Historiographer and
a Divine, writes, that the The Seraphin with the fiery sword, placed before
Paradise.
sword with which God placed the Seraphin at the gate of Paradise, was called
Versatilis, which is as much to say as turning, because it could turn back, as
it did when it gave place of entry to Elias and Enoch, though the same be
otherwise understood of Nicolaus de Lyra, who says, that Torrida Zona is the
fiery sword which the Seraphin held, whose exceeding furious heat defended that
passage from all men living: But this is out of date, seeing the industry of
this our age has found the same to be passable.


BE. I dare not determinatly affirm, whether Elias came out of terestrial
Paradise or any other place, when he was speaking with Christ at his
transfiguration; for it is generally held as a thing most certain and
indubitable, that Elias where so ever he be is in body and soul.


AN. Truly there are for the maintenance of each of these opinions, so many
reasons, that it is best not to trouble our wits withal, but to leave the
censure of the^ to wiser men and greater Doctors then we are: only one thing
remains, the which truly if it were in my power, I would not permit, that so
many fables should be set forth and divulged as there are, as that which is
written in the life of S. Amasus, that he stood so many years at the gates
thereof: and also in a treatise of S. Patricks Purgatory, where it is written,
Fables touching Paradise.
that a Gentleman entering in passed through the same into earthly Paradise: for
in such matters no man ought to be so hardy, as to affirm any thing, but that
which is known to be true and approved.


LV. In good sooth you have great reason, but now seeing you have said as much
as may be about the situation of Paradise, go forward with that of the Rivers
which come from thence, a matter, unless I be deceived of no less difficulty,
then the before rehearsed.


AN. I assure you it is such, that I should have been glad if you had
ouerslipped it, doubting least I shall be unable to satisfy your expectation:
for as Eugubinus says, there is so great and so intricate a difficulty
herein, that he is hardly able to unwind him self there out, whom of force
in this matter I must follow: for as for the other Authors which write hereof,
it seems that they stay at the half carere, without reaching to the end of
the course. To begin therefore, it is said in Genesis, that there issued a
River out of Paradise, dividing it self into The four Rivers that issue out
of Paradise.
four parts, the which were Gion, Fison, Tygris, and Euphrates; But seeing the
difficulty of the seat and place of paradise cannot clearly be determined,
much less can this be of the four Rivers which issue thence, especially
knowing at this present that their Springs and risings are in diverse different
parts of the world: yet for all this sifting and bolting out the truth, we will
approach as near it as we may. This River which divided it self into four,
first issued out of the place of delights, which was according to Eugubinus the
Province of Heden, and from thence entered to inundate Paradise, whence coming
forth it made this division. It is manifest, that the first part thereof called
Gion, is the same which we now call Ganges, for this is it which watreth the
land of Heuylath: The second River Fyson, is without all doubt that which we
now call Nilus, seeing there is no other which waters and compasses about
the Land of Aethiopia, as the text it self says: As for Tygris and Euphrates
they retain yet their self same first names, and run along the Country of
the Assirians: and of these two last it may be said, that they rise, or at the
least that the first Land which they water, is the same, which according to
that before alleged, may be called the province of Heden.


BER. These two Rivers are by all Cosmographers described to have their risings
in the Mountain Taurus in Armenia, and it is true that they water the
province of the Assirians, but their rising and beginning is far from thence,
as says Strabo by these words. Euphrates and Tygris rise in the Mountain
Taurus, and compassing about The rising of the rivers Tygris and Euphrates.
Mesapotamia, join themselves together by Babylon, and from thence go to
enter into the Persian Sea: the spring of Euphrates is on the North side of
Taurus, and that of Tygris on the other part of the same Mountain toward
the South: the sources of these two Rivers are distant the one from the other
2500. stadies. This is also affirmed by other Authors, and Beda says: It is a
thing most notorious, that those rivers which are said to come out of Paradise,
spring and rise out of the earth; Gion which is Ganges, out of the hill
Caucasus, which is a part of the mountain Taurus: Fison, which is Nilus, not
far from the mountain Atlas in Africa, toward The sources of Ganges and
Nylus
the West, and Tygris and Euphrates out of a part of Armenia: which two and
Nylus, as the Historiographers say, hide themselves in many places under the
earth. Pomponius, Solinus, Ptolomie, and the rest are of Bedas opinion as
touching the rising of these Rivers: and the words of Procopius are these; Out
of this Mountain, says he, arise two Fountains, the which immediately make
two rivers, of that on the right hand comes Euphrates, and of that on the
left hand Tygris.


AN. I told you, that whence soever these Rivers come, so they enter thorough
the province which they called Heden, according to the opinion of Eugubinus,
they may enter into earthly Paradise and water it, neither for all this
leaves it to agree with the text of Genesis, especially making one whole river
after they come to join by Babylon.


LVD. Leaving these two Rivers, let us speak of the other two, seeing it is
also notorious, that Ganges takes his beginning in the Mountain Caucasus,
though some will The mountain Emodos.
say in the Mountain Emodos, whose height and sharpness is such, that few
have been able to reach unto the place where the source of the River is, whence
some took occasion to say, that Paradise was placed in the midst of those
Rocks, and rough inaccessible crags, and so shall you find it described in the
most part of Mappes, but is certain that this consideration is false, and
leaving it for such, I say that the stream of this River, discendeth from
between the East and the North, and comes running thorough many Countries of
the East Indies, even till it enter into the Ocean Sea, and contrarily, the
River Nilus ryseth as I have said in Africa, near the Mountain Atlas, and
as some think, toward the East, though by the Navigations of the Portugals
which discovered it, it seems that the rising thereof should be in the
Mountain called De Luna, bending toward the South. But how soever it be, his
stream is contrary in opposite to the The mountain of the Moon.
river Ganges, and entered by a different and contrary way into the Red Sea,
so that I see not how it may stand with reason, that these two Rivers should
conform themselves in their rising, or that they should ever come both out of
one part.


ANT. Have patience awhile, and perchance, though now it seem to you
impossible, you will straight be of a contrary opinion: First therefore you
must suppose, that there is either now a Paradise in the world, or else that
the same is through the waters of the General floode destroyed. The will of
him which planted and made it, is not that we should have thereof any notice,
not only concealing from us the place where it stood and stands, but taking
also from us all signs and tokens, whereby we might come to the knowledge and
understanding thereof: So that though Paradise now remain in such sort as
when it was first made and planted by the hands of GOD: yet has he so
diuerted from thence the current of those Rivers, guiding them by vvayes
different and contrary one to another, that by them it is impossible to attain
to the knowledge thereof: For it Paradise be in the East, and under the
Aequinoctiall, according to the common opinion, and that the four Rivers ought
to come from those parts, and to derive their streams from thence, we now see,
that Nilus and Ganges are toward the West, or rather South-west, and Tygris
and Euphrates, though they come from the East-wardes, yet is it by very
contrary ways, the reason is, because those Rivers at their coming forth of
Paradise, or at least before they come to be known of us, The Rivers that come
from Paradise, hide themselves in the hollowes of the earth.
do hide themselves in the depths and veins of the earth, breaking out again
in other parts with new Springs and rysings, the one being distant from the
other so many thousand leagues: and that this may be so, we see daily amongst
our selves the experience thereof, as for example, the River of Alpheus in the
province of Achaia, which entering into a co^cauitie under the earth, turns to
come out again in the The River Alpheus.
Spring of Arethusa near Caragosa in Sicilia, which by this experience is
apparently known, for all such things as are thrown into the same in Achaia,
being such as may swim and flote above water, come forth at the mouth of
Arethusa, passing not only under the earth, but also under the Mediterranean
Sea, as Pliny affirms, saying: There are many Sundry Rivers that hiding
themselves under the earth, come to rise out in new springs.
Rivers that hyding themselves under the earth, come to appear and run anewe
in other parts: as the River Licus in Asia, Erasine in the region of Algorica,
and Tygris in Mesapotamia. The like also do the Rivers of Sil and Gaudiana in
our Spain, although the space of ground under which they run hidden be not
so great, yet suffice they for examples of that which we say. And in this
manner do the rivers which come from Paradise, hide and put themselves in the
concauities and hollow veins of the earth, and turn to break out anew in
other parts, where of force they must alter and change the course and current
of their streams.

S. Augustine entreating of this matter, affirms the rivers of terrestrial
Paradise to hide themselves under the earth. Encisus in his Cosmography,
discoursing of Lands on the Coast of the Oryent, reaching to the Golfe called
the great Sea, which by the same coast goes toward the North, in coming to
speak of the land called Anagora, says, From this The Gulf called Mare magnum.
place forwards, there is knowledge of no more Lands, for no man has sailed
any farther, and by Land it is inaccessible, for the Land is full of Lakes, and
high rockie mountains of Encisus, touching Paradise.
marvelous greatness, where they say is the seat of earthly Paradise, and that
there is the Fountain, where the four Rivers make a cross, and afterward
sinck into the earth, going along by the hollow veins whereof, they come out
again, the one at the Mountain Emodos which is Ganges, and the other in
Ethiopia, at the mountain De Luna, which is Nylus, and the other two at the
rough mountains of Armenia, which are Tygris and Euphrates. All this is so
easy for him which made the whole World of nothing, and of nothing created all
things in the same, that we ought not so to marvel at this, but as a thing
which may be. Leaving this opinion, and returning to that of Eugubinus, that
Paradise should be planted in the province of Heden, and that through the
waters of the General flood, it should be destroyed and overthrown: the self
same consideration may serve for this of the Rivers not without proofs very
evident and agreeable to reason, for if it were destroyed with the Flood, even
as it pleased God to permit the undoing thereof, so would he also ordain,
that all signs and marks of the same should cease, to the end, that the
peoples dwelling in the provinces and borders thereabout, should have no
knowledge at all thereof, and that it should be no longer necessary for the
Cherubin to remain in guard thereof with a fiery Sword, as till that time
he had done. But before we come to handle the principal causes, you shall
understand, that there are some who hold opinion, that all these four
Rivers, rise near the Land of Heden, and come to join in the same. Leaving
therefore a part Tygris and Euphrates, because that of them seems in a manner
verified; as for Ganges, the course thereof is not so contrary, but that it may
well meet where the other rivers do: and that any inconvenience either of
lownes or highness of the earth, might be sufficient to divert or to cause the
same to run where it now does: But this is an argument that neither
concludes, nor carries any reason withal.

As for the River Nilus, they go another way to work, Some hold opinion that
Nilus is not the same with is in the holy Scripture called Fison.
saying, that it is not the same, which in the holy Scripture is called Fison,
for there are two Ethiopias, say they, the one in Africa, which is watered with
Nilus, the other in the West Indies in Asia, beginning from the coast of
Arabia, and following along the coast of the Ocean sea toward the East, the
which may be understood by the holy Scriptures, who call those of the Land of
Madian near to Palestina, Ethiopians: and Sephora also that was wife to
Moises, being native of that region, was called Ethiopesse. And with this
agrees a Gloss written in the margen of Caetano his discourse upon this
matter, by Anthonio de Fonseca, a Friar of Portugal, and a man very learned:
so that Fison may well be some River of these which waters this Country,
first discending by the Land of Heden, coming from the same to enter into the
Ocean, as Tygris and Euphrates, and many other deep rivers do; in the same
manner may it be coniectured that Gion should be some one of these rivers, the
one and the other through antiquity having lost their names, and that it is not
known, because it cannot perfectly be proved whether of these two Ethiopias
is meant by the holy Scripture. Aueneza says, it is a thing notorious, that
the River Gion was not far from the Land of Israel, according to that which is
written in the third book of Kings. Thou shall carry it into Gion, although
there be other Authors that understand not Gion to be a River, but to be the
Lake Siloe, or else a Spring so called. If that Gion were Ganges, it is
manifest that it runs not so near unto Israel, as it is here said. S.
Isidore entreating of this matter, says, that the River called Araxes,
comes out of Paradise, which opinion is also maintained by Albertus Magnus.
Procopius writes of another River, called Narsinus, whose stream issues from
thence near to the River Euphrates: some think that these are Gion and Fison,
though at this time, their waters run not through the same Lands. These are
the opinions of Ecclesiastical Doctors, laboring to discuss and sift out the
truth of this secret: But leaving them all, I will tell you my opinion partly,
agreeing with Eugubinus and his followers; that when it pleased God to drown
the whole world, in time of the Patriarch Noe, with a universal flood,
mounting according to the sacred Text, fifteen cubits in height above all the
mountains of the earth: the same must of necessity make and unmake, change,
alter, and ouerturne many things, raising valleys, abating mountains,
altering the Deserts, discovering many The Authors conclusion concerning the
four Rivers.
parts of the earth unseen before, and covering and drowning many Cities and
Regions, which from thence forth remained under the water overwhelmed in the
Sea, or covered with Ponds and Lakes, as we know that which without the flood,
happened to Sodom and Gomorrha, with the rest, which after they were burnt did
sink with them: And we see oftentimes in the swelling and ouerflowing of great
Rivers, whole Countries drowned and made like unto a Sea, yea, and sometimes
mighty Rivers to lose their wonted passage, and turn and change their course
another way, far different from the first: If I say the violent impetuosity
of one only river suffice to work these effects? What shall we then think
was able to do the incomparable fury, and terrible swinging rage of the
general and universal flood? In the which as the same Text says, all the
Fountains and Springs of the earth were broken up by their bottomes, and all
the Conduits of heaven were opened, that there might want no water either above
or beneath. If then the Springs so brake up, it could not be, but that some of
them were changed, and passed into other places, different from those in which
they were before: their streams scouring along through contrary ways and
veins of the earth. In like manner might it happen to those which entered into
terestriall Paradise, and issued forth to water those Lands named in the holy
Text, which either through the falling down of huge mountains and rocky
hills, or filling up of low valleys, might be constrained to turn their
streams far differently to their former course, or else by the permission
and will of GOD, (which would have us to be ignorant of this secret) they
changed their Springs and issues by hiding and shutting them selves in the
bowels of the earth, and running through the same many thousand miles: and at
last came to rush forth in other parts, far distant from those where they
were before; neither passed they only under a great quantity of Lands
enhabited and uninhabited: but the very Sea also (whom they hold for mother and
Spring whence they proceed) hides them under her, to the end that they might
return to issue forth, where they were not known, or if through some cause
they were, it should be unto our greater admiration and marvel, as now it is.

Neither wonder you at all, if the general flood wrought The opinion of some
who thought the world to be plain and leuel before the time of the universal
flood.
so great a mutation in the world: for there have not wanted grave men, who
affirm, that the whole world before the time of the flood was plain and
level, without any hill or valley at all, and that by the waters thereof were
made the diversities of high and low places, and the separation of Islands from
firm Land. And if these reasons suffice not, let every man think herein what
shall best agree with his own fancy, for in a mystery so doubtful and secret
we may as well miss as hit: and so S. Augustine thinking this to be a secret
which God would not have known, but reserues it to himself, says, that no
man may certainly attain to know where the place of terestriall Paradise is,
unless it be by revelation divine, which self same he might have said of
the four rivers that issue there out. But seeing this is a matter, which the
more we penetrate into, the greater difficulties we shall find: it were
better that we left the same to be discussed and determined, of men whose
learning and capacity is more profound then ours, always submitting our selves
to their judgment and censure.


BER. It pleases me very well which you say: but there is one thing in the
which you must first satisfy me, that is my first demand of the virtue, with
which by all reason the waters of these Rivers should be enriched with, for
this was the beginning of our present discourse.


AN. I confess that by reason, these Rivers should have more virtue then all
the others of the world, and so I think they had at such time as they issued
out of Paradise: and whiles with their waters, they refreshed that blessed
soil: but after, as they changed their Springes and Issues, the cause ending,
the effect also might cease and end without retayning any more the former
virtue: but whether Paradise be as yet, and whether at their beginning they
enter into the same, enriching and ennobling themselves with the virtue thereof,
is to us utterly unknown, and perchance God has herein darkened our
understanding, because through our wickedness we deserve not to enjoy so great a
good, or that a thing so excellent proceeding from so sacred a place, should be
communicated unto us: so that we remain in obscurity and darkness unable to
judge of Paradise, but by signs and conjectures, which lead us to believe the
one and the other without any assured certainty: so that I marvel not if in
so diverse a matter there be diverse opinions.


LU. Will you have my opinion: we are so few and so ill Christians in the
world, that we deserve not to have this matter of Paradise revealed by God unto
us.


AN. Few Christians say you? nay we are many in the world if we were all good,
and would live as we ought to do.


BER. Of all friendship, I pray you make me understand this, for in my opinion
we are so few, that in many parts of the world there is scarcely any knowledge
or notice of us.


AN. You are far deceived, as you shall presently understand. First therefore
the devil is so mighty, that he has been able to blind the understanding of
many wise and provident men, to the end that they might not attain unto the
knowledge of the truth: so that the world is divided into three principal
sorts of Religions, Three principal sects of Erronius Religions in the world.
besides ours which is the universal true Christian and Catholic belief. The
first is of the Jews, which still remain in their law: The second is of the
Moors and Turks, who follow the law of Mahomet. The third is of Pagans and
Gentiles, who adore Idols, and things which are bare creatures, leaving to
adore him who of nothing made and created them all.


BER. This is that whereat I wonder exceedingly, that these false laws and
sects should so maintain them selves in manifest errors and deceites, without
any substance or foundation, especially those of the Pagans and Moors, which
in a manner take up and possess the whole Lands and Countries of the world
that are known and enhabited: for take the three parts into which the world is
by the ancient Philosophers divided, and you shall find that they possess so
much thereof, that there is scarcely any place left for the Christians, so that
we are thrust, and as it were shouldered into the least part thereof which is
Europe, yea, and of that also we possess but a part.


AN. I tell you once again that you are deceived, for Christendom stretches
very wide and far, and there are few places in the world where Christians
inhabit not, as you shall straight understand, though in truth all that bear
the name are not true and Catholic Christians. But leaving this for another
time, I say, that the blindness of the Gentiles consisted, not in that they
followed the simplicity of the Laws of Nature, the which if in those days
they had used well, they might rightly have called themselves, wise: But that
they became to frame and forge new Sects and Religions: Whereas I can not
persuade my self, but that they knew that there was one only God, only
puissant and almighty, who of nothing created the whole word, and all things
therein contained, but such was their malice, that they would needs put up and
exalt into the heavens other men, deifying and making them Gods, by their own
authority. Of the beginning and original of Idolatry, though there be many
and diverse opinions, The original of Idols.
yet for breuities sake I will omit them, only the commonest is, that Ninus
King of the Assirians, after the death of his Father King Belus, made and
erected an Idol of his likeness, ordayning the same to be a surety and defense
to all those that had their refuge thereunto, how capital and heinous soever
were the offenses by them committed: so that the offenders finding there a
security inviolable against those by who^ they were persecuted, began with all
reverence to worship that Idol, and to do sacrifice unto the same, as
though it had been God. From that time forward, the ignorant blindness of the
common people began to adore their Kings and Princes and to call them Gods,
imagining that as they had been mighty on the earth while they lived, so
should they be in heaven after their death. Against the grossenes of this
error, furdered by the devil, which put himself into the Idols they made: and
to deceive them the more, spoke and gave aunsweres, many have written, chiefly
Lactantius Firmianus, in his Book of Divine Institutions, highly and clearly
making them understand, the error and deceit wherein they were abused in
adoring creatures, and leaving to adore the Creator. Neither do you think but
that the wiser sort had in detestation their ignorant errors, laughing at the
foolish multitude, and though in public they did like the rest, because they
would not lose their worldly estimation, yet in their secret breast they were
of a far different opinion, which they showed as clearly as they might,
namely Divine Plato, Aristotle, Porphirius, Socrates and Cicero, who in his
Treatise of the Nature of the Gods, gave to understand, how differently The
old philosophers in their secret conceit, detested the adoration of the feyned
Gods.
he judged of those false Gods, if it had been lawful freely to have uttered
that which in his breast he conceived. To be short, there were fevve
Philosophers, either Latins or Greeks, which understood not this common
blindness, having the same in abomination and horror. If you doubt hereof,
ask Hermes Trismegistus, who confesses that there is no more but one true and
only God. Look in Lucians works, and you shall find them full of scoffs and
iestes in derision of his Gods: whom as there was then no man to lighten and
instruct them in the way of truth, they went greping and feeling at blindfold,
as all the Gentiles do which are now at this day in the world. For being now
generally come to know and confess the truth, that there is one only GOD
which created the world, and is the beginning of all things, they jointly
adore with him, many other imagined Gods, as the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
and all other things of which they think themselves any way to be benefited.
But their insensible madness ends not here, for in many places they worship
with divine honors the devil himself, making him temples and sacrifices, and
honoring him with all possible veneration: as in many provinces of India
Mayor, but cheefely in the West Indies. Being asked if there be one only
GOD, the Creator of all things, they say, yea: and if they know the devil to
be of all other creatures the most wicked and abominable, with open mouth they
confess that he is: if you turn to ask them, wherefore then they adore him,
they answer, that as God is cheefely Good, so is it his custom and Nature to
do always good and never evil, for all evil works proceed of the devil,
who is the only Author The cause why the gentiles adore the devil.
of them: so that they have no need, say they, to serve or honor God, because
they are assured that he will never cease to do them good, and therefore they
serve and honor the devil, because he should not do them all the evil he
may: as though the devil without the permission and sufferaunce of God, could
do or undo any thing; so that with these, and such like toys and frenzies,
they run headlong into hell, refusing to take possession of those goodly
seats which their Deceauers left void in heaven.

The Moors and Turks, presuming to be a people more advised and settled in
reason, deceive themselves through the sweetness and liberty of their Law,
which flattereth them in their delights and fleshly lusts, without binding them
to any precepts, so that they run on a head, defending it with Arms The
Mahometists will neither hear nor answer any man in disputation against their
religion.
and not with reasons, according to the commandment of Mahomet, saying, that
he that has an ill cause, puts it to pleading: but the likeliest is, that
being assured to be vanquished and confounded, if they come to disputation,
they will therefore neither hear nor answer any man. As for their Prophet, as
crafty and as wise as he was, yet like a most barbarous and unlearned man, who
neither knew how to read nor write, (besides infinite fancies and toys that
he said, as well in his Alcoran as in the book called Zuna, compiled of his
words and deeds by the wise men of his law) contrarieth himself in so many
places, that he must be more then blind which sees not his falsenes, deceit,
and beastly ignorance. Concerning this Many learned Authors that unrip and lay
open the beastly absurdities of Mahomets Sect.
point read S. Isidore, and Anthonius Archbishop of Florence, and Vincentius de
speculo historiali, and a book entitled, Fortalicum fidei, and another made
by John Andreas, who was first a Moore and an Alfaqui of great estimation, and
an other composed by Lope de Obregon, Curat of Saint Uincent de Auila,
entitled, Confutatio Sect Mahumetanae, the which besides many other Authors,
entreat particulerly of this matter: So The wise and learned men amongst the^
what show soever they make in public, do in secret detest his abusions.
that I need not use any longer discourse herein, seeing his falsenes,
abusions, contradictions and follies, being neither Philosopher nor Astronomer
are most manifest: only I will say, that I hold it also for certain, that
the wise and learned men amongst them, howsoever in public they observe this
Law, yet they are in their hearts otherwise persuaded: for me thinks, though
there were nothing else yet some points which they themselves confess, were
sufficient to make them find their error, and to lead them into the knowledge
of the truth, which are such as Mahomet himself confesses, and are expressed
in his Alcoran, in the Zuna, and in another Book which they call Mahomets
Ladder of Heaven, full of monstrous absurdities, where he says, that going up
with the Archangell Gabriell, who was his guide to bring him into the Mahomets
confession touching our Savior Jesus Christ, our blessed Lady, the Gospel,
and our Christian Belief.
presence of God, he saw stand in the seventh Firmament two ancient Men of
great authority and venerable majesty, and that asking the Archangell who they
were, he answered that they were two very just men, and great servants of God:
the one S. John whom they called Baptist, and the other, Jesus Christ, who was
not begotten by man, but by the only Spirit of God, and that he was borne of
Mary, who after she was delivered, yet still remained a pure Maiden in perfect
virginity. And in another place he says, Christ the Messiah, the Word of God,
and the holy Spirit of the Highest: Likewise in another chapter of the Alcoran:
Christ shall turn to descend upon the earth, and shall be the righteous Judge
of the people. And of our blessed Lady he says, that the virgin Marie, mother
of Jesus Christ, was conceived without sin, and offered up in the Temple, and
dedicated to the service of God, and that the lotte fell upon Zacharias to have
charge and care over her: that she spoke with the Angels, and communicated
with them: that she was fed with caelestiall food: and that the Angels said
unto her, O Mary, Mary, certainly God has chosen thee, and adorned thee, and
exalted thee above all the women of all generations. But above all, I vvoulde
have you mark one gross absurdity of this naughty man, the which alone
were sufficient to make all Moors, Turks, and Infidels in the world, to
discover and find out his ignorant falsenes, that is, where he affirms our
blessed Lady, to be that Mary which was sister of Aaron: whereas there is so
great distance of years passed between the one and the other, and it being a
thing so manifest, that Christ was in the time of the Emperors Augustus and
Tyberius Caefar. The which is an error so notorious, that it should cause the
whole world to know and detest his blindness, abusion, and ignorance.

Besides, the self same Mahomet speaking in his Alcoran of the Gospel,
terms it the light, health, way, and law of the people, without the which
they cannot be saved: and in many places he confesses the faith of the
Christians to be holy and good, though afterward like a blind, wicked, and
frantic man, he turns to speak against it, condemning the same for naught:
and yet all his Alcoran and the books of Zuna, of no less reputation amongst
the Moors then the Alcoran, are full of the praises of Christ, of his holy
Mother, and of the Gospel: which was an occasion that not long since, there
were some among the Turks in Constantinople, that dared openly maintain and
affirm, that Christ was a greater Prophet and better beloved of God then
Mahomet. But let us leave these kind of men, running wilfully unto their The
slavery and servitude which the Jews have endured since the denial of our
Savior the true Messiah, is an evident argument to confute their obstinate
blindness.
own damnation, and come unto the Jews, a people no less obstinate and
wilful then the other, who by no means will confess that the prophesies of
the Messiah, promised in their law was fulfilled in our Savior Christ, but
remain obstinate in stubbernes and hardness of heart: and therefore God
permits that they live continually in slavery and subjection of Christians,
Moors, and Pagans, reproached, contemned, and persecuted, in which servile and
miserable state they shall continue so long, as they do persevere in resisting,
and not willingly acknowledge the manifest and known truth: But this is so
clear, that it were in vain to spend therein any time.

Turning therefore to that, whereas you said, that in respect of other sects,
there were but few Christians in the world, I would have you otherwise
persuaded: for presupposed that the greater and truer Christianity be in these
our parts of Europe. Yet for all that there are Christians in all parts of the
world, or at least over the greater part thereof. Besides, those with whom we
commonly here converse, there is on the other side of Alemaigne, Hungry, and
Polonia, within our Europe, a great number of Christian Regions: as Russia,
Prusia, Lituania, Moscouia, part of Tartaria, and many other mighty Provinces
which follow the Greek Church, though not wholly, for some of them apart and
sepuester them selves from the same, holding several and different opinions.
Besides these, there are the kingdoms of Scotland, Mirguena, Swethland, and
Westgothland, with infinite others toward the North, of which we will one day
discourse more particulerly, and at length. But leaving Europe, because it is
so known and notorious; let us pass into Libia and Africa, which is the
second part of the world, where we shall find, besides many Countries
conquered by the Crown of Portugale, and reduced to the Christian faith, that
on the Coast toward the South, in the midst thereof is a Christendom, so
great, large, and wide, that it is little less then this of our Europe, which
is wholly under the government and subjection of one King and Governor.


LU. Is not that he whom we call Prester John.


AN. Yes, it is he indeed which is now commonly so called, but those which
gave him this name, and now call him so, know not what they say, nor whether
they name him right or no.


LV. This cannot I understand, unless you declare it plainlier unto me: for
it is contrary to the common opinion of all men.


AN. I confess it to be so, and that it is a great chance if you find any man
affirm the contrary: but if you will hear me a little, you shall understand
wherein the error is; so that you your self will confess that I have reason in
that which I will say: First therefore it were good that you did understand
what Paulus Iouius entreating of this matter affirms, who says, that this
name of Prester John is corrupted, and that his true name is Belulgian, which
was common to all the Kings The name of Prester John is rightly Belulgian.
of that Land: the which interpreted, signifies a rich pearl of great and
incomparable excellence: But turning to our purpose, if you read the life of
S. Thomas the Apostle, and S. Luke, in the Acts of the Apostles, you shall find
that S. Thomas went to preach the faith in India mayor, where he died, leaving
converted to the Christian belief infinite multitudes of people, who electing
and choosing after his death, a priest that was called John, to govern,
instruct, and rule them, from that time forward each of their Governors being
for the most part priests, were called Priest John, bearing the name of the
first elected. Of their election there is written a very strange An egregious
fiction of the Papists.
History: that at the time of the solemnity thereof, a hand of S. Thomas was
brought forth, into which putting a dry withered Vine, when he that was
elected passed by: the same burgened and sprouted out Vine leaves, green
branches, and sundry clusters of ripe Grapes, out of which they pressed the
wine, with which they celebrated the same day service. But though you believe
not this, there is no greater danger: For they had not the body of S. Thomas,
neither knew they where it was; and as we find in the Chronicles of Portugale,
this holy The place where Saint Thomas the Apostle died
Apostle died in a Country called Choromandel, in the kingdom of Bishaga, and
in a city named Melia, sometimes the principal of that kingdom, but now
ruinated, remaining only certain ancient and noble buildings, by which it
appears the City to have been sometimes great and populous: amongst the which
there is a church held by the enhabitants in great veneration, saying, that
there lay buried the body of S. Thomas, and another of a King by him converted
to the faith of Christ. The Portugales digging in search thereof, found 3.
bodies, the one of the king, another of the Apostle, and a third of one of his
Disciples. That of the Apostle they knew by sundry marks, chiefly in that they
found lying by him in his grave a Lance, with the which, the fame went in
those Countries that he was slain, which opinion whole India maintayneth: but
the Church in his life records the same in another sort, saying, The Church
holds that S. Thomas was slain with a knife by an idolatrous Priest.
that he was wounded to death with a knife, by the hands of an Idolatrous
Priest: though herein be small difference. S. Isidore speaking of him, says,
that he died with the stroke of a Lance, and his body, as it is written in his
life, was transported into the Country of Syria, into the City of Aedisa: and
this is that which we chiefly ought to believe. But how so ever it be, S.
Matthew was he who preached in Aethipia, and S. Thomas in India, after whom
succeeded Prester John, whose beginning of rule was great and mighty, which
authority in space The beginning of the name and authority of Prester John
of time they came to loose, and to be yoked under the subjection of the great
Cham. The manner of this, being so far off, has not been well vnderstooode,
though some have endeavored to write and give notice thereof, principally,
though passing obscurely a certain Armenian: but certain it is, that there
are as yet sundry tokens of this Christianity. John Mandeuile vvryteth in the
description of a journey, which he made, that there are many of these
Christian Provinces under the dominion and Empire of great Cham, whom at his
entry into their Towns, they encounter with their Clergy in Procession, and
the holy Cross before them, to which he boweth and makes low reverence: and
that they bless five Apples, presenting them unto him in a dish, of which he
takes and eats of the one: If he refuse so to do, they take it for a great
disfavor. Lodouicus Patritius Romanus, writes, that being in Taprobana, he
found there sundry Merchants of the foresaid Provinces, who professed the
faith of Christ, making him great and large offers, if he would accompany them
home into their Country, and instruct them more amply and thoroughly in the
faith, according to the use of the Romain Church: which request of theirs he
would willingly have accomplished, but that he dared not undertake so far a
voyage: so that hereby we may gather, that Prester John is not he which is
in Aethiopia but he who was in the Oriental Indies, Prester John is not he
which is in Aethiopia, but he who was in the East Indies conquered by the great
Cha^, though the other be now through error so called.
and that he name given unto him of Aethiopia, was but through error, and
because the people would have it to be so. Johannes Teuronicus, in his book of
the rites and customs of Nations, is as well deceived also in this matter as
the rest, following the common opinion, that he of Aethiopia in Afrique should
be Prester John: the other having reigned and been subdued in the end of Asia,
where, as I said, the great Cham or Tartare holds his Empire and signeury,
who as it is thought, is one of the puissantest and mightiest monarchs of the
world, and so he entituleth himself King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This
matter, though otherwise well known and verified, is also confirmed by Marcus
Paulus Venetus, who was along time resident in Towns and Cities of his
Empire, and by an English Knight, likewise called John Mandeuile, who serving
him in his wars, received his wages and pention.


BER. You have great reason in all this which you have said: and now I call to
memory, that the Aethiopians began to receive the faith of S. Phillip the
Deacon, and afterward by the preaching of S. Matthew the Apostle, and therefore
they vaunt them selves to be the first Christians that were in the world in
community. But leaving these, there is a province of Christians in Asia, called
Georgia, the which say they, were so called, because they were converted by S.
George: but I rather take it to A Province of Christians called Georgia.
be the ancient proper name of the Province. These Georgists are also called
Yuori, they have their Ambassadors always in the Court of the Sophie, I know
not whether they pay him tribute or no: their Country is very cold and full of
Mountains. Those also of Colchos are christians, now called by an Sundry
Provinces, kingdoms and Islands of Christians.
other name, Mengrels. There is another kind of people called Albanes, who
maintain the Christian religion. There is another country of Christians who
are called Iacobits: and on the Mountain Sinay there are other christians
named Maromites. And all the coast of India is inhabited of christians, from
the entry of the Red Sea, where the city of Aden stands, to the cities of
Ormur, Dia, and Malaca, and from thence forward to the kingdoms of Iapon and
China, which are very great and mighty: and hereabouts border many other
Kingdoms, cities, and Islands, as Zamora, Taprobana, Zeilan, Borney, and the
Isles of Molucco, whence the spice comes, with many other Regions great and
little, where dwell infinite numbers of Christians, as well Portugals as other,
which (through their good example) have converted themselves to the Christian
faith: the like is hoped that those will do which live under the subjection of
the great Cham, seeing they draw so near unto it, which should be a great
augmentation of christianity: so that by this means Christianity goes as it
were compassing round about the whole world. The christianity Christianity
goes compassing round about the whole world
of the Armenians is notorious to all men, in the greater of which they are in
a manner all christians, and in the lesser, the greatest part. There are
likewise christians in Sury in Egypt, where as yet remain sundry signs of
ancient christianity, and in many other parts, though in respect of their far
distance from hence, we have no plain and particular knowledge of them. I have
read in the chronicles of Portugal, that when the Islands of Catatora were
found out, the enhabitants were all christians in their belief, though, God
wot, passing ignorant in the mysteries of the same: for they only worshipped
the Cross, because they said that God the redeemer of mankind died upon the
same: as for the rest, they held a few precepts, the chiefest of which was, to
observe the law of Nature. They called themselves by the names of the Apostles
and other Saints, whereby it may be thought, that some good christian man had
arrived in that Island, and converted the^ to the faith, through whose death or
departure from thence, they remained so smally endoctrined in that Belief,
through the which they should work their salvation. As for the christianity of
the West Indies and new discovered world, we al know it and hold it for a thing
most assured, that as much as is and shall be discovered, will embrace the
Catholic faith: because that people easily discovers the error of their
Idols and false gods, knowing him whom they served, to be the very devil
himself: for some of them were of the same belief as those of India Mayor, of
whom I spoke before, who held him in solemn reverence with sacrifice and
temples. But since the christians arrival in those parts, now they see the
dreadful state of damnation wherein they stood, and withal, the devils
authority daily decaying: (for he speaks nor appears now no more The devil
speaks nor appears no more to those Gentiles that begin to embrace the
Christian faith.
unto the^ as he was wont to do) there come daily such mighty numbers of them,
and with such sorrowful contrition and repentance to receive the Christian
faith, that it is wonderful: in which after they are once thoroughly
instructed, they persevere with such ardent charity, zeal and perfection, that
truly I am ashamed to say, how far they do excel us of whom they received
it.


LVD. At one thing I do much vvonder, and that is, how the christianity of
these Indies remains so clear without Heresies, considering the foul and
contagious infection that is here amongst us, and no doubt but diverse have The
new converted Countries, clear without heresy.
gone out of these parts thither, that have not been of the soundest in
Religion, but it seems that God has laid his hand upon that Country for the
preservation of the same, to the end he may be there honored and served.


BE. We have understood that Christendom is far greater then we thought it had
been, if we all could agree in one unity of acknowledging and obeying the
Catholic Church: and cover our self under the blessed protection thereof,
and not as many do, who bear only the name of Christians, but are indeed
children of damnation, following other fantastical Churches, and professing
new haereticall doctrines. I pray God that we may live to be all lively
members of one true and Catholic Church, the Spouse of Christ, and that we
may one day see the prophecy fulfilled, Et erit vnum Ouile, and vnus Pastor,
and there shall be one flold and one Shepherd.


LV. That we may see, say you, this were to promise your self a longer life,
then those of who^ we yesterday made mention: considering the diversity of
supersticions, and factious Sects wherewith the world is infected.


AN. Say not so, for when soever it shall please God to touch the hearts of all
those in the world with his merciful hands, he can in one year, yea in one
month, day, hour, or moment, so illuminate and lighten, not only all
haereticall Christians, but also Turks, Moors, Pagans, and Jews, and all
erroneous Sects over the whole world, that they may see and repent their own
error, and reconcile themselves into the bosom of our holy Mother the
Catholic Church, to the end the prophecies you have said, may take effect: but
let us not look for this, till that which is promised of the coming of
Antechrist be fulfilled, which, we know not, when it shall please GOD to
bring to pass. In the mean time, seeing it now begins to grow late, let us
defer this communication of ours, till we meet again to morrow, or any other
time when it shall please you.


BER. I am well content therewith, because the hour of Supper approaches, but
on condition that we fail not to meet here again to morrow at this time, and
walk into this pleasant Garden hereby, where the variety of sweet savors and
odoriferous flowers will exceedingly delight us, and give us occasion to pass
our time in good conversation.


LUD. No man better content with this match then I: in the mean time,
committing you to the protection of the Angels, I take my leave, for I must go
this other way.


AN. God have both you and us in his keeping, and bless us everlastingly.


The end of the second Discourse.
The third Discourse, entreating of Fancies, Visions, Spirits, Enchaunters,
Charmers, Witches, and Hags: Containing besides diverse strange matters which
have happened, delightful and not less necessary to be known.
Interlocutores. LVDOVICO. ANTHONIO. BERNARDO. LU. SO soon as I knew of your
being here, I made as much have as I possibly might to come to you, and had
not it been that some occasions hindered me, I would not have failed to have
been the first.


BER. I likewise had a desire to have come sooner, to the end I might the more
at leisure have enjoyed the pleasant freshnes of this Garden. But because the
way between this and my lodging is long, I stayed for the company of signior
Anthonio, to enjoy by the way his good conversation.


LU. To say the very truth, I am glad that I find you here, for if I had been
here my self alone, I should have been half afraid.


AN. And of what?


LV. Have you not heard that which is bruited abroad these few days past?


AN. I have not heard any thing, neither know I what you mean, unless you
first declare it unto me.


LVD. Why it is openly said over all the Town, that there has of late
appeared in this Garden certain visions and Spirits, which have affrighted
diverse men, so that for my part, though it be somewhat against my good
reputation, I am not ashamed to confess it, I am so fearful, that I had
rather fight with any man, how far soever above me in force and strength, then
to be alone in place, where any such cause of fear and amazement might happen.


AN. There are many which would laugh at this which you say, and attribute your
fear to faintnes and want of courage: but I will not marvel hereat, because
I know how violently such passions and conditions of the mind are, which as it
seems, grow and are borne in men, so that, though they would never so feign,
yet they cannot shake them off and forget them: so that I have seen a man,
who, if you showed him A man that could by no means endure the sight of a Rat.
a Rat, would cry out, and enter into amazement, trembling like a child; though
in all other his actions, he wanted neither valor nor courage. Besides this,
it is a thing public and well known, of a Noble man in this Country of ours,
who, if you shut any door in the whole house where he is, at what hour so
ever it be of the night, enters into such an alteration A Noble man that if
you shut by night any door of the house, would be ready to throw him self out
at the window
and agony, that sometimes he is ready to throw him self out at the window.
And there are others, which if you make any iesture at them with your hands or
fingers, they trouble and vex them selves, as though you did them the greatest
oppression and outrage in the world.


BER. These are natural passions and imperfections, which seeing, as the old
proverb is: no man can take away that which Nature has given, they that are
troubled with them, are not to be blamed, if they cannot leave and cast them
off so lightly, as it seems they might, to those that are not encombred with
them.


AN. They are not so absolutely natural, as you term them, for they are
qualities which work in men, according to the complexion of which they are:
and as the complexion which is the causer of them may change, and is often
changed through space of time and many other accidental causes; so also may be
changed, these which you call passions, defects, or inclinations natural. We
see this verified by good experience, in those who are much troubled with
melancholy, who so long as this humor dureth, are amazed at all things which
they see, having in their minds a kind of impression and imagination, which
makes those things seem to be of an other figure, then in deed they are:
but this humor consuming, and the other humors coming to praedominate above
that of melancholy, this amazement of theirs wears away, and they become in
conditions far different to that they were before: in this sort the chollerick
man is commonly hasty and heedelesse in all occasions; and the phlegmatic more
slow and tardise: But age, time, and chances, change many times one
complexion into an other, and jointly the passions, conditions, and operations
of them, as by example we see every day.


LV. So that you say, though they be not wholly natural, yet there is no great
error in saying that they are, whiles their complexion so continues without
changing.


AN. Understand it how you will, but howsoever they are, the force which they
have is great, so that if it be not with singular reason and discretion, they
are sildome kept under, and subdued.


BER. May they then at any time be subdued?


AN. Yea indeed may they, for I my self have seen good experience thereof, A
strange melancholy humor of a Gentlewoman, which by reason and discretion she
violently suppressed.
in a kindswoman of mine, not dwelling far from hence, which being vexed with
a kind of melancholy, called by the Physicians Mirrachia, which bereaueth the
Patient of all judgment, driving him to a kind of madness and frenzy: in such
sort suppressed and prevented the same with discretion and reason, that she
sildome suffered her self to be vanquished thereof: And truly it was strange,
to see the combat that passed between her and the melancholy, in such sort
that you should see her sometimes forced to fall down groueling to the ground,
flat upon her face: and though the violence of this humor was such, that it
forced her sometimes to tear in pieces such things as she had about her, and
to cast stones at those that passed by, and to bite those that approached her:
yet reason continually so striued against the vehemency of these passions,
governing, detaining, and suppressing them, that by little and little they
utterly forsook her, leaving her senses clear, and her judgment untroubled as
it was before: but leaving this, and returning to your speech of the Spirits,
which are reported to be seen sometimes in this Garden: did you ever procure to
sound out the truth thereof?


LU. Yes marry did I, but I could never learn any certainty thereof, so that
I hold it for a jest, and all other such like tales, of which the common people
speaks.


AN. There are some, certainly, yea, and very many, which I take to be mere
fictions and fables, invented by men for their pastime, or some other cause
that moved them: others there are, which are undoubtedly of most assured truth,
as it appears by sundry examples and successes which cannot be denied.


LU. Truly Signior Anthonio, I should be very glad, thoroughly to understand this
matter of Spirits, whether they be illusions and deceits of the devil, who
represents the^ in imagination and fancy only; or whether they are truly
seen and discerned with our bodily eyes, for according to the diversity of
tales which I have heard, and of such diverse sorts, I know not what I should
judge thereof.


AN. You have entered into a matter very deep, and me thinks you go about to
make me a Divine perforce, as yesterday you did, in that of terestriall
Paradise, wherein because I found you then easy to be contented, I am the
readier now to satisfy you so far as my knowledge extends. Let us therefore
repose our selves on this green bank, where with the shadow of those trees of
one side, and the freshnes of this Fountain on the other, we shall sit to our
ease and contentment.


BER. We are ready to fulfill and obey your commandment in all things,
especially in this tending to so good an end: and surely I have oftentimes
beaten my brains about this matter, of which you will now entreat, but still
in the end, finding the conceit thereof intricate and above my capacity, I
gave it quite over.


AN. Well therefore, I will begin to say what I know, and as there arises any
doubt, ask, and I will do my best to resolve and satisfy you as well as I can,
and with the greatest breuity possible, for otherwise the matter is so great
and so much thereof written, that we should never bring it to an end: and
because these illusions and Illusions and apparitions of Spirits do chiefly
proceed of the devil.
apparitions of Spirits chiefly proceed of the devils, let us first see what
the ancient Philosophers thought of them, not touching our Christian Religion.
The Peripatetikes and chiefly Aristotle, were of opinion, that there were no
devils at all, and so says Aueroes, that he knew no spiritual substances,
but those which move the heavens, which he calls also Angels, separated
substances, intelligences, and moving virtues, so that the devils being
spiritual substances, he seems to deny that there be any. Of the same
opinion was Democrites, and therein so obstinate, that certain young men
clothing themselves one Democrites would by no means believe that there were
any devils.
night in deformed and ugly attire, seeming to be very devils in deed, thinking
to make him afraid, when they came into the place where he was, using horrible
and fearful gestures, he showed himself secure without any alteration at all,
bidding the^ cease to play the fools, because he knew well there were no such
bugs as they represented. And when these Philosophers were asked, what grief
that was which those endured who were possessed of Spirits: they answered it
was a passion proceeding The old philosophers opinon touching those that were
possessed with Spirits.
of a melancholy humor, affirming melancholy to be able to work those
effects: and as yet the most part of Physicians, maintain the same; affirming
that when the devil speaks in diverse tongues, yea, though often very highly
and mistically, yet that all this may well proceed through the operation of a
vehement melancholy. But this is a manifest error, for amongst the Ethnike
Philosophers them selves, there were diverse of a contrary opinion: as
Pythagoras, Plato, Socrates, Trismegistus, Proculus, Pophirius, Iamblicus, and
many others, though S. Austine in his ninth book De ciuitate Dei, says, that
Plato and his followers called the superior Angels Gods, and that they were
the self same, whom Aristotle called Angels; and in this sort is to be
understood the spirit of Socrates, so famous in Platos works, and of which
Apuleius writes a whole book, and whosoever attentively reads the Tymeus of
Plato, and his Cratilus in the tenth Dialogue De legibus, shall find that he
meant the same: and Aristotle him self, says, that Lemures and Lamiae dwell
in a sad Region.


LV. I understand not these names if you declare the^ not plainlier unto me.


AN. The devils are called by sundry and different Lemures et Lamiae.
names, which though for certain respects keep their particular
significations, and Lamiae properly signify a kind of devils, yet under the
same name, are also contained Hags and Witches, as persons who have
confederation and agreement with the devil: and Lemures or Lares are such as
we call Hobgoblins or domestical Spirits: and as these are Spirits, it
seems to make against that which in other places he maintained: But leaving
these men who went so blindly and obscurely to work: Let us come to the truth
it self, which is Christ, and to our Christian Religion, which manifestly
teaches us to understand, what we should believe as touching these malign
Spirits, whose being, is proved by so many examples and testimonies of the holy
Scripture, and by the mysteries and miracles wrought by the same God our
Savior, in casting them forth of human bodies: The which afterward the
Apostles and holy men, did in like sort. The Philosophers which confessed that
there were devils, though they understood, that their office was to torment the
souls of evil livers, as says Plato, and Xenocrates in his book which he
made of death, yet they draw diverse ways, for they make good spirits and evil
spirits, and they call the departed souls of great wise men, Spirits, and
half Gods, feyning the^ through the excellency of their merrits, to be
assumpted into heaven, where, though they never entered into the Consistory
with The fabulus fictio^ of the old Philosophers.
the other Gods, but when they were called and appointed, yet were they
Mediators for men that lived on the earth, carrying and offering up their
messages, requests, demands and supplications to the Gods in heaven. Neither
made they here an end, but they called also the Gods, Demons, as it appears
Daemonia.
by the words of Trismegistus, which are thus. When the separation, says he,
shall be of the soul from the body, the examination thereof shall be tried by
the power and judgment of the chief Demon, who finding it righteous and
godly, will assign it a convenient and happy place: but if he find it spotted
with wickedness, and defiled with sins and offenses, he will throw it into
the deep Abysmes, where there is always horror and confusion, terrible
tempests, violent waters, and unquenchable fires; And so by degrees downewardes
toward the earth, they place other Gods, still declyning, till they come to
the ill Spirits, which they say are those who dwell under the earth in the
deep Abysmes thereof. Feyning besides, a hundred thousand other such like
toys and vanities, which if you desire to see, you may read the Philosophers
before named, and besides them Caelius Rodiginus, Protinus, Pselius and many
others, who have perticulerlie written of this matter. But one thing I will
assure you, that he had need of a very divine judgment, whom they confound
not with their intricate and obscure contrarieties: it is best therefore that
we refer our selves to the Church, following for Pylots in this matter the
holy Doctors, who cleerelie express the pure truth hereof, and so shall we
attain to the understanding of that which we pretend.


BER. You say well, but first declare unto us, whether Lucifer and those other
Angels that offended with him in ambition and pride, fell altogether into hell,
or no?


AN. They fell not altogether into the very Abysme of Hell, though they all
fell into the truest hell, which is Punishment. Those which remained in the
Whether Lucifer and those other Angels that offended with him, fell altogether
into Hell, or no.
places between, was because they had not offended with so determinate an
obstination and vehemence as the others had, and they remained also there,
because it was necessary and convenient for our merit, that we should have
Spirits for our enemies, and in such place where they might vex us with their
temptations. For which cause, God permitted a great part of them to remain in
the air, the earth, and the water, where they shall continue till the day of
judgment, and then they shall be all damned into the very dungeon of Hell: so
that we have with them a continual war: who though they be in the places
which I have said, yet are they not out of Hell in respect of torment, for
their pain is all alike. All this is out of S. Thomas, in the first part.
Quest. 64. Ar. 4. The difference of the degrees of Spirits, is rehearsed by
Gaudencius Merula, taking the same out of Pselius, who makes 6. kinds Six
degees of Spirits.
of Spirits between Heaven and Hell. The first, who are those that remained in
the highest region of the Air, he calls Angels of fire: because they are
near unto that Region, and perchance within it. The second kind, says he,
is from the middle region of the Air downward toward the Earth. The third,
on the earth it self. The fourth, in the waters. The fifth, in the Caves and
hollow vautes of the earth. The sixth in the very dungeon and Abysme of Hell.


LU. In such sort, that they are as it were enter-linked one with another, but
tell me, have all these Spirits one self duty and office.


AN. No, if we will believe Gaudencius Merula, but many, and The devils have
several and sundry offices.
those of diverse sorts. For the cheifest grief and pain of the first, which
were those that had least offended, seeing themselves so near Heaven, is the
contemplation, that through their wickedness they have lost so great a
Beatitude, (though this be general to them all) and these are nothing so
harmfull as the others are. For those which are in the middle of the region of
the Air, and those that are under them nearer the earth, are those which
sometimes, out of the ordinary operation of Nature, do move the winds with
greater fury then they are accustomed, and do out of season congele the
clowes, causing it to thunder, lighten, hail, and to destroy the grass,
Corn, Vines, and fruits of the earth, and these are they, whose help the
Negromancers do often use in their deuilish operations. Amongst other things
which are written in the Book called Mallcus Maleficarum, you shall find,
that the Commissioners having apprehended certain Sorceresses, A strange story
written in the book called, The Hammer of Witches.
willed one of them to show what she could do, assuring her life, on condition
that from thence forward, she should no more offend in the like. Whereupon,
going out into the fields, in presence of the Commissioners and many other
besides, she made a pit in the ground with her hands, making her water into
the same, which being done, she stirred about the urine with one of her
fingers, out of the which, by little and little after she had made certain
Characters, and mumbled a few words, there arose a vapor, which ascending
upward like a smoke, began to thicken of it self in the midst of the region
of the air, gathering and making there a black fearful Cloud, which cast
out so many thunders and lightnings, that it seemed to be a thing hellish and
infernal: the woman remaining all this while still, asked at last the
Commissioners where they would have that cloud to discharge a great quantity
of stones, they poynting her to a certain place, where it could do no hurt at
all, the cloud of a sudden began to move it self, with a great furious
blustering of winds, and in short space coming over the place appointed,
dyscharged a great number of stones, like a violent shower, directly within the
compass thereof. And in this sort may the Witches and Negromancers work many
such like things, through the help of those Spirits, as we will hereafter
declare. But turning to the third kind of Spirits being on the earth, The
office and function of the third degree of Spirits.
whose principal office and function is to persecute men, and to tempt and
allure them to sin, and thereby to work their damnation, envying that those
glorious places which they once enjoyed in heaven, should be possessed and
replenished with men. These vex us, these trouble us, these deceive us, and The
devils malice against us, proceeds only of envy.
entise us to all those wicked offenses, which we commit against the majesty
of him, who made and created us of nothing these lie in weight day and night to
entrap us, sleeping and waking they allure us to evil thoughts and naughty
works, tempting our souls, and persuading us to run the way of perdition: the
which because they are Spirits they may very well do, in vexing and tempting
our Spirit, yea, and many times so that we are not not able to perceive it.
And though Gaudencius and The devils though of different kinds, yet in malice
and desire to do evil, are all alike.
Pselius attribute to sundry kinds of Spirits, sundry functions in particular,
yet in general each of the^ can indifferently use them, though they be of
another kind. For in doing evil, they agree all in one malice, and most
earnest desire to work our damnation by all means possibly they may.


BER. Is that true which they say, that there is no man but has at his right
hand a good Angel, and at his left hand a bad.


AN. Doubt not of this, for as God, for our good and benefit, has ordained to
each one of us a good Angel to accompany us, Every man has a good Angel and
a bad attendant upon him.
whom we call our Angel of guard, who as by the holy church we are taught,
keeps and defends us from many dangerous temptations, by which the devil
procures to work our damnation: so also have we at our left hand an ill
Spirit, which still is soliciting, persuading and alluring us to sin and offend
by all means possibly he may. And the Gentiles, though they were not so
illuminated as we are, yet did they in part acknow ledge this, calling the good
Angel, Genium Hominis: though Genium Hominis.
this of the evil Angel I have not found approved by ame Author, only that
it is an opinion which the common people holds, and is generally allowed: and
besides, the readiness of them at hand to procure us to sin, is confirmed by
the holy Scripture in sundry places.


BER. What power has God given unto these good and bad Angels, which we carry
daily in our company?


AN. That may you understand by the words of Job, who says: There is no power
which may be compared thereunto: and The wonderful puissance of the devil.
so leaving aside that which concerns the good Angels, all whose works are
wholly directed to the service and will of God: as touching the evil spirit, our
enemy, he is so mighty and puissant in forces, that in a moment he can throw
down mountains, and raise up valleis, force rivers to run against their
stream, dry up the Sea, and turn all things in the world topsie turuie, so
that he overthrow not the frame and Machine thereof made and ordained by the
hand of God. But you must consider, that they cannot use and put in effect The
power of the devil restrained by God.
this power and virtue, with the which they were first created, when they list:
For God has so bound and limited them, as S. Austine says in his third book
de Trinitate, that they cannot put in excution the full puissance of their
malicious desire, without the permission of God, by which they are brideled and
restrained.


LV. How comes it then, that they do often vex and torment men, not only
doing them great and grievous damages, but also oppressing them with violent
and sudden death: As for example, I can tell you two things of mine own
knowledge, both most true and strange: whereof this A strange chance that
happened to a Boy in the City of Astorga.
one that follows happened in the Town where I was borne and brought up, in
which there was a man of very good quality, and well learned, who had two
Sons, the one of which being about the age of 12. or 13. years, had through
some fault of his so offended his Mother, that in a rage she began to curse
him with detestable maledictions, betaking him to the devils of hell, and
wishing that they would fetch him out of her presence, with many other horrible
execrations: this was about ten a clok at night, the same being passing dark
and obscure; the foolish woman continuing her wicked curses so long, till at
last the Boy through fear, went out into a little Court behind the house, out
of which he suddenly vanished, in such sort, that though with great diligence
they searched round about the house, they could by no means find him, at
which both his Father and Mother exceedingly wondered, because both the doors of
the same Court, and all others about the house at which he might go out, were
fast bolted and locked; about two hours after, they heard in a chamber over
their heads, a very great noise, and withal the young Boy groaning, with
extreme anguish and grief: whereupon they presently going up, and opening
the chamber door, which they found also fast locked, they perceived the seely
boy lie groueling on the ground, in the most pitiful plight that might be:
for besides his garments which were rent and torn all to pieces, his face,
hands, and in a manner his whole body, was scratcht and grated, as though he
had been drawn through thorns and briers: and he was so disfigured and
dismayed, that he came not that whole night to himself. In the mean time,
his parents caused him to be dressed and cured in the carefullest sort they
might, omitting nothing which they thought to be expedient for the recovery of
his health: The next day, after his senses were somewhat comforted, and that he
began to recover his judgment, they asked him by what means this mischaunce
had happened unto him, to whom he made answer, that as he stood in the court
or trippet, there came unto him certain men of exceeding great stature, grim
in countenance, and in gesture loathsome and horrible, who presently without
speaking any word, hoised him up into the air, and carried him away, with such
swiftnes, that it was not possible to his seeming, for any Bird in the world to
fly so fast; and at last lighting down amongst certain mountains full of
bushes and briers, they trailed him through the thickest of them, from one side
to another, araying him in such sort, as at this present he was to be seen:
and thinking surely none other, but that they would kill him, he had at last
the grace and memory to commend him self unto God, beseeching him to help and
assist him: at which very instant they turned back with him through the air,
and put him in at a little window, which was there in the chamber, where when
they had left him, they vanished away. This Boy I knew familierly, both in his
young and elder years, for he lived many years after: but he remained ever
after that time deaf, and dull conceited, never recovering his former quicknes
and viuacity of spirit: taking continually exceeding grief, when any man
talked with him of this matter, or brought it any way into his memory.


AN. Truly those parents who in their angry moods, offer and betake their
children to the devil do most grievously offend, of which this that you have
said is an excellent example: But now for answer of your objection, I say
that sometimes, for just causes, God permits the devil to use and put in
execution, some part of the much which he may do: as you may understand by
his suffering satan to persecute Job, whom he yet so limited, that he could
have no power to touch his soul, and the like has he done and does, in other
things which we have seen and known, and have happened, and daily happen in
diverse parts: of the which I will tell you one, that happened about 8. or 10.
years since, in a Village called Benauides, where two men being together in A
very strange thing that happened in Benauides.
a field, there arose of a sudden a terrible tempest, with such violence of
vveather and vvinde, and presently there-vpon a vvhirl-wind so strangely
impetuous, that it amazed those that beheld it. The two young men seeing the
fury thereof come amain toward them, to avoid the maine danger, ran away as
fast as they possibly might: but to be short, make what have they could, in
fine it ouertooke them, who fearing least the same should swinge them up into
the air, let them selves fall flatlong down to the earth, where the
vvhirl-wind, whisking round about them a pretty while, and then passing forth,
the one of them arose, so altered, and in such an agony, that he was scarcely
able to stand on his feet, yet as well as he could, sometimes going and
sometimes creeping, he came toward those that stood under a hedge, beholding
this which had passed, who seeing that the other made no semblance at all to
rise, but lay still without stirring or motion, went to see how he did, and
found him to be stark dead, not without marks upon him of wonderful
admiration, for all his bones were so crushed, that the pipes and joints of his
legs and arms, were as easy to be turned the one way as the other, as though
his whole body had been made of moss, and besides, his tongue was pulled out
by the roots, which could not by any means be found, though they sought the
same round about the place most diligently. This matter was diversely judged
of, but the most part took it to be the just judgment of God, whom it
pleased to make this man, an example to the world, in suffering The miserable
end of a swearer.
him to end his days so miserably, and to have his tongue torn out of his head,
and carried away: for he was noted to be a great outrageous swearer, and
blasphemer of Gods holy name, while he lived.


LU. And may it not be that the vvhirle-vvind catching this man in the midst
thereof, might have power to work these effects, as well as whole Rocks to
be vvhirled up, and trees to be turned up by the roots, by the furious buffing
together of vvindes, when they meet.


AN. I confess unto you, that the force of whirle-windes are very great, and
that they work often very dangerous and damageabe effects, as that which
destroyed Algadefres, overthrowing the houses and buildings, and making them
all flat with the earth; in like sort it is passing dangerous at Sea, when two
contrary winds take a ship between them, for sildome or never any ship so
taken escapes: but as for this which happened in Benauides, I cannot judge it
to be other, then the work of the devil, through the permission of God as by
two reasons it appears: the first, that they being two men together, the one
was saved: the other, that the dead man's tongue was wanting, and could not be
found.


LU. You have satisfied us, as concerning the power, which the devil has, and
the limitation thereof therefore pass on I pray you with your former discourse.


AN. The fourth kind of Spirits are those which are in the waters, as well the
Sea, as Floods, Rivers, and The fourth kind of Spirits.
Lakes, these never cease to raise damps, and storms, persecuting those which
sail, putting them in great and fearful dangers, through violent and raging
tempests, procuring to destroy and drown the ships also, through the aid of
monsters, rocks, and shallowes which are in the Sea: the like do those of the
Rivers, guiding in such sort the Boats, that they make them to ouerturne, and
causing those that swim, to entangle them selves in sedge or weeds, or
bringing them into some pits or holes where they cannot get out: and finally,
by all means possible they persecute and molest them, so far as the limitation
of their power extends. The fifth kind of Spirits, are those which are in the
Caves, and vautes of the earth, The fifth kind of Spirits.
where they lie in wait to entrap those that dig in Mines, and Wells, and
other works under the ground, whose death and destruction, they covet and
procure as much as they may. These cause the motions and tremblings of the
earth, through the aid of the winds which are therein enclosed, whereby These
are causers of earthquakes
whole Cities are often in danger to be swallowed up, especially those which
are built near the Sea, whole mountains are hereby thrown down, infinite
peoples destroyed, yea, and sometimes the Sea, hereby breaks into the Land,
wasting and devouring whatsoever it finds before it. The sixth The sixth
kind of Spirits.
and last kind of Spirits, are those who are in the Abysmes and place, whose
name is Hell, whose principal and proper office is, besides the pains which
they endure, to torment the damned souls; This is the place where is no order
at all, as says Job, but continual fear, horror and amazement.


BE. Seeing you have declared unto us how many sorts of Spirits there are, tell
us also I pray you, whether they have bodies or no: because I have often beaten
my brains about this secret, without finding any man that could herein
resolve me.


AN. You may well call it a secret, considering the diverse opinions that are
thereof, for many say that they are pure Spirits, as Apuleius, who made
himself so well acquainted with them, writes that there is a kind of
Spirits, who are always free from the strings and bonds of the body, of which
number is Sleep and Love, whom he terms spirits: whereby he seems to
confess, that there are others which have bodies, and so thinks S. Basile,
who attributes bodies not only to these Spirits, but also to the Angels. The
like is understood by the The opinion of S. Basile touching the bodies of
Spirits.
words of Pselius. They who follow this opinion, allege for the maintenance
thereof the words of the Prophet David, where he says: He which makes his
Angels, spirits, and his ministers of fire, etc. They allege also S. Augustine
to have been of the same opinion, saying: that the Angels before their fall,
had all, their bodies formed of the superior and purest part of the Air, and
such those have as yet, which remained guiltless of Lucifers offense: the
bodies of whose followers were turned into a thicker and grosser air, to the
end they might be therein more tormented. But the Master of Sentences says in
his second book, that this is not Saint Augustines opinion, but falsely
attributed unto him, and so the common opinion of all the holy Doctors is, that
both the Angels and devils are pure Spirits, as S. Thomas, and Saint Both the
Angels and devils are pure Spirits.
John Damascene, and S. Gregory, who answer most sufficiently to such
doubts, as may hereupon be moved, as how they may feel, suffer and receive
punishment: though Gaudencius Merula defend the contrary, saying, that things
incorporat, cannot only suffer or receive feeling, of any bodily pain, but
that also to feel them in understanding is impossible. But as for this
opinion, hold it for a manifest error, for truly Gaudencius in some of his
opinions, goes far vvide of the mark. If I should here rehearse each of
the several The general opinion of the holy Doctors concerning the substance
of Spirits.
Doctors opinions, I should begin an endless work: leaving them therefore,
I will come to the point indeed, and that which the rest confess to be the
general opinion, as I said before, of all or the most part of the holy
Doctors of the Church, which is, that the Angels when it is necessary, do
fashion and make unto themselves visible bodies, for the effects which they
pretend, as we find in many places of the holy The Spirits when it is
necessary, fashion unto themselves bodies of fire, air, or earth. etc.
Scripture: whether it be of air thickened, of fire or of earth, it makes no
matter, but that so it is, see what is written of the three Angels that came to
the house of Abraham in the likeness of three beautiful young men: and the
Angel Gabriell appeared to the glorious virgin in a most goodly form and
figure, when he brought her the salutation. The self same is permitted to
devils in their operations, whose bodies though we call fantastical, because
they vanish presently away, yet they verily are visible bodies, formed of some
such substance as I said before, but the same is so fine and delicate, that it
straight dissolueth and vanishes.

And because this is to the purpose of that which you asked me, and which we
now discourse of, I have so lightly passed over all the rest, for there have
not wanted Doctors which affirm the devils to be in such manner bodily, that
they have need of food wherewith to sustain themselves and that they fear
stout men, and fly from their sharp weapons, and that being stricken, they
feel anguish and pain. And if you be desirous to see many particularities,
and the several opinions of diverse learned Authors, read Caelius Rodiginus, in
his second Book De Antiquis Lectionibus, where he discourses copiously
thereof. But now, for not digressing from the principal, let us come to that
which they call, Phantasma, What Pha^tasma is.
the which has his beginning in the fantasy, which is a virtue in Man,
called by an other name Imaginatiue, and because this virtue being moved,
works in such sort, that it causes in it self the things feigned and
imagined to seem present, though in truth they are not: We say also, that the
things which vanish away so soon as we have seen them, are fantasies,
seeming to us that we deceive our selves, and that we saw them not, but that
they were only represented in our fancy. But this is in such sort, that
sometimes we truly see them indeed, and other times, our imagination and
fancy so present them to our view, that they deceive us, and we understand
not whether they were things seen or imagined, and therefore, as I think,
comes it, that we call the things which we really see, Visions: and others
which are fantasticated and represented in the fantasy, Fancies; whether of
which this was that happened in Fuentes de Ropell, I know not, but sure I am that
it was as true as strange, neither is the place so far distant, being only
two miles hence, but that you may by infinite witnesses, be thoroughly resolved
of the verity thereof. There lived about 30. years since, a Gentleman of good
account, called Anthonio Costilla, who (of the which I A strange vision that
happened to Gentleman in Fuentes de Ropell.
my self can give good witness) was one of the valiantest and hardiest men of
all the Country, for I have been present at some broils and byckerings of
his, in which I have seen him acquit himself with incredible courage and
valor: Insomuch that being somewhat haughty, and suffering no man to
ouercrowe him, he had many enemies thereabouts, which caused him, wheresoever
he went, to go always well provided: so that one day riding from his own
house to a place called Uilla Nueua, having under him a good Ginet, and a
strong Lance in his hand, when he had done his business, the night coming
on, and the same very dark, he lept a horse back, and put himself on his way
homeward: coming to the end of the Village where stood a Chapel, in the
forepart or portall of which there was a lettice window, and within the same a
Lamp burning: thinking that it should not be well done to pass any further
without saying his prayers, he drew near unto the same, saying his devotions
a horseback, where whiles he so remained looking into the Chapel, he savve
three visions like Ghostes issue out of the midst thereof, seeming to come
out from under the ground, and to touch the height of the roufe with their
heads.

As he had beheld them awhile, the hair of his head began to stand an end, so
that being somewhat affrighted, he turned his horse bridle, and rode away: but
he had no sooner lyfted up his eyes, when he saw the three visions going
together a little space before him, seeming as it were to bear him company, so
that commending himself to God, and blessing him self many times, he turned
his horse, spurring him from one side to another, but wheresoever he turned,
they were always before his eyes; vvhereupon, seeing that he could not be rid
of them, putting spurs to his horse, he ran at them as hard as he could
with his Lance, but it seemed that the visions went and moved themselves,
according to the same compass wherein he guided his horse, for if he went,
they went, if he ran, they ran, if he stood still, they stood still,
always keeping one even distance from him, so that he was perforce
constrained to have them in his company, till he came to his own house,
before which there was a great court or yard, opening the gate of which, after
he was lighted of his horse, as he entered he found the same visions before
him, and in this manner came he to the door of a lodging where his wife was,
at which knocking and being let in, the visions vanished away: but he
remained so dismayed and changed in his color, that his wife thinking he had
received some wound or mishap by his enemies, often asked him the cause of
this his deadly countenance and alteration, and seeing that he would not
reveal the same unto her, she sent for a friend of his that dwelt thereby, a
man of good quality, and of singular learning and integrity of life, who
presently coming, and finding him in that perplexity, importuned him with
such instance, that at last he recounted unto him the particularity of each
thing that had happened. He being a very discrete man, making no exterior show
of vvonder or amazement, bad him be of good courage, and shake off that
dismaiment, with many other comfortable persuasions, causing him to go to
supper, and from thence brought him to his bed, in which leaving him laid,
with light burning by him, he went forth, because he would have him take his
rest and sleep, but he was scarcely gone out of his chamber, when Anthonio
Costilla began with a loud skrietch to cry out for help, whereupon he with the
rest entering into the chamber, and demanding the cause of this outcry: he told
them, that he was no sooner left alone, but that the three visions came to him
again, and made him blind with throwing dust upon his eyes, which they had
scraped out of the ground: which in truth thed found it to be so: from that
time forward therefore they never left him unaccompanied: but all profited
nothing, for the seventh day without having had Ague or any other accident, he
departed out of this world.


LV. If there were present here any Physician, he would not leave to affirm
and maintain, that this proceeded of some melancholy humor, ruling in him
with such force, that he seemed really to behold, that which was represented in
his fantasy.


BER. The same also may well be, for many times it seems that we see things,
which in deed we do not, being deceived through the force of our imagination:
and perchance this of those visions may be the like, who being once represented
in the imagination of fancy, had force to work those effects: and the humor
which caused the same, increasing through amazement and fear, might at last
procure death: yet for all this, I will not leave to believe, but that these
visions were some Spirits, who taking those bodies of air, earth, water, or
fire, or mingling for that effect any of those Elements together, came to put
so great amazement in this man, that the same was cause of his death.


AN. In all things which by certain knowledge, cannot be thoroughly approved,
there never want diverse and contrary opinions: so that in this diversity of
judgments, I would rather impute it to the work of Spirits, then to any
melancholy passion or humor: and perchance if these visions had not had
sufficient force, through this amazement, to procure his death, yet would they
have been cause unto him of some other secret infirmity: but howsoever it was,
it was by the secret permission of GOD, the which we comprehend not, and
therefore it were in vain to trouble our selves more about it.


BER. Many the like things happen in the world, full of admiration, as well for
the terror of their effects as for the mystery of their causes which we
conceive not. Of which sort was that which happened in Bolonia to John Vasques
de Ayola, A notable strange thing that happened in Bolonia, to one John Vasques
de Ayola a Spaniard.
the verity of which I have found to be approved by most certain and
indubitable proofs.


LV. I have heard this often, as a thing whose truth is not to be doubted of:
but seeing you undertook to tell it, I pray you go forward with the same.


BER. I will tell it you, as it was told me, and as it is both in Bolonia and
Spain, by infinite testimonies confirmed. This Ayola in his youth, with other
Spaniards his companions, coming to Bolonia, with intention to remain there,
and to study the Laws, as many of his other Countrymen did, and finding at
the first no convenient lodging, wherein they might commodiously remain, so as
for their study was necessary: as they went, enquiring up and down the
streets, they met with three or four Gentlemen of the Town, of whom they
demanded, if they could adresse them to any good place where they might abide
being strangers newly come out of Spain, and unacquainted: the one of the
Gentlemen smiling, made them answer, that if they desired to have a
commodious house, he would furnish them with one, poynting to a goodly great
house in the same street, whose doors and windows were fast closed up, and
that without any rent or hire at all: at which liberal offer of his the
Spanish Studients being somewhat abashed, thought surely that he had iested
with them, till another of the Bolonians told them that the same was in deed
spoken merrily, because the same house had been mured, well twelve years
since, no man in all this space daring live within the same, by reason of the
fearful visions and sights, which are there usually seen and heard by night:
so that the owner, says he, has given over and abandoned it as a thing lost,
because there is not any man found so hardy, that dare adventure to abide there
only one night. If the matter be no greater then this (quoth Ayola) let him
deliver me the keys, and I and my companions will (God willing) go live in
the same, come what will. The Gentleman hearing this their resolute answer,
told them that if they required the keys, they would cause them to be
delivered unto them, with many thanks besides: whereupon finding them still
persist in their determination, they brought them to the owner of the house,
who laying many terrors before their eyes, and seeing them not regard the same,
but rather to laugh thereat, caused the doors to be vnrammed and opened: and
delivering them the keys, put them in possession of the house, assisting the^
besides with some necessary household stuff; the rest that wanted, they
provided for themselves, so that being furnished of all things, they took up
their lodging, in a chamber that opened into a great Hall, hiring a woman that
dwelt there without to dress their victuals, for they could not find any that
dared serve them within the house. All those of Bolonia stood intentive to
behold the success of this matter: the Spaniards only making a mockery
thereof, for having been there above thirty days, they had never seen nor
heard any thing, so that they held all that which was said to be a mere fable:
but within a while after, the two being one night laid down to sleep, and
Ayola remaining at his study, toward midnight he heard of a sudden a great
brute and noise, as if it had been the clattering of many chains together:
upon which, growing into some alteration, he imagined presently with him self
the same to be without doubt the vision, which was wont to be seen in this
house, and therefore determined to go and waken his companions, but being
about to go, it seemed that his heart failed him, so that he was, as it were,
forced to attend the event of this alone: after he had listened intentiuely a
while, he perceived that the same noise came up the great stairs of the hall,
so that pulling up his spirits, and commending himself to God with a good
heart, and blessing himself many times, taking in one hand his sword, and in
the other a candel lighted, he went out of his chamber, and put himself in the
midst of the Hall, for the chains, though the noise they made were great,
seemed to come very leasurely: standing so a while, he might see com toward
him through the door that opened to the stairs, a fearful vision, that
affrighted him extremely, and made all his hair stand an end, for it was the
carkas of a very great man, only knit together by the bones without any flesh
at all, like the form wherein death is painted: he was tied about the legs, and
round about the body with certain cha^^es, which he drew trailing along: and so
stayed himself, the one and the other stood still beholding a while, till at
length Ayola recovering courage, seeing that the vision moved not, began to
conjure him with the greatest and holiest words that his fear suffered him to
imagine, to tell him what the thing was which he sought or desired, and to let
him understand, if he needed any thing, promising him his help and assistance
so far as he possibly could. The vision laid his arms a cross, and making
show that he received gratefully this offer, seemed to recommend himself unto
him. Ayola bad him again, tell him, if he would have him go with him to any
place. The vision bowed down his head, and pointed to the stairs, whence he
came. Ayola bad him go on before in Gods name, promising steadfastly to follow
him, whether so ever he went: upon which, the vision began to return whence
he came, going with great space and leisure, seeming to be so clogged with the
chains, that he could go no faster. Ayola following him, as he came to the
midst of the stairs, whether through the wind, or that he trembled in seeing
himself alone with such company, his candell went out, so that his amazement
and fear was much greater then before, yet gathering together his spirits as
well as he might, he said to the vision: thou see that my candell is out,
therefore stay here a while, and I will go light him, and come presently back
again, whereupon going back, and kindling the same in the fire, he returned,
finding the vision in the self same place where he left him, so that the one
and the other going on a new, they past through the whole house, and came into
a Court, and from thence into a great Garden, into which the vision entered, and
Ayola after him: but because there was in the midst thereof a great deep Well,
Ayola stayed, feating least the vision should turn upon him, and do him some
outrage: which the vision perceauing, made signs that he should not be afraid,
as it were requesting him to go with him to a certain place of the garden,
toward which he pointed, whether they were no sooner come, but the vision
vanished suddenly away.

Ayola being alone, began to call and conjure him, making great protestations,
that if there were any thing, in which he might stand him in sted, he was
there ready to perform the same, and that there should be in him no fault at
all: but staying there awhile, and seeing not hearing any thing more, he
advised to pull up four or five handfuls of grass and herbs, in the self
same place where himself thought that the vision vanished, having done which,
he returned and awaked his companions, whom he found both soundly sleeping.
They looking up upon him, saw him so altered, and his color so changed, that
they verily thought he would there have ended his life, whereupon they rose up,
and forced him to eat of a conserve which they had, and to drink a little
wine, then laying him down on his bed, they asked him what was the cause of
this his deadly alteration of look, whereupon he told them all that had
happened, beseeching them to keep it secret, because in revealing it to
others, they should never be believed. But, as these things are hard to be
kept secret, so one of them told it in a place, whence it was known throughout
the whole City, and came at last to the hearing of the chief Magistrate, who
endeavoring to sound out the truth thereof, commanded Ayola by solemn oath to
declare the particularitie of each thing which he had seen, who did so, making
this former relation. The Governor hearing him tell the same with such
assurance, went with others of the Town to the same place of the Garden,
where, according as he had told them, they found a great heap of withered
grass, in which, commanding certain men to dig with spytters, they found,
and that not very deep, under the ground a grave, and in the same a carkas
with all the marks declared by Ayola, which was the cause that his whole
report was credited to be true, but seeking to enquire and learn what body the
same so buried should be, so encheyned and exceeding in greatness the ordinary
stature of other men, they found no man that could expressly satisfy them
therein, though there were diverse old tales told of the predicessours of the
owner of that house. The Governor caused incontinently the carkas to be taken
up, and buried in a Church, from which time forward, there were never any
fearful visions or noyses seen or heard more in that house. Ayola returned
afterward into Spain, and was provided, through his learning, of many
offices under the Crown, and his son after him, in our time, was a man of
great sway and authority in this Country.


LV. It seems that Ayolas courage was far better then Costillas, seeing the
one dyed through fear, and the other remained living: but I would feign
understand in what sort this Vision might appear, which seems not to be a
matter of so great mystery.


AN. At least the Philosophers and Physicians, cannot attribute it, to the
abundance of melancholy, because it appeared by the carkas which they found
buried, that the same vision was truly and substancially seen by Ayola, and
not represented in his fancy. And if there were here any Divines, I dare
undertake there would not want diversity of opinions, for some would say that
it was the work of the devil, to no other end then to mock the people, in
forming to himself a body of air or earth, of the same figure like the carkas
that lay buried: Others would rather maintain the same to be a good Angel
doing so, to the intent that the same body, whose soul was perchance in
heaven, might enjoy sacred burial, neither would they want reasons for
maintenance of their opinions, every man may therefore believe herein as
pleases him, without offending, but howsoever it were, by a good or evil
Angel, it was by the will and sufferaunce of God, and for my part I take it to
be the surest to judge always the best.


BE. Your reason is good, and truly this matter is not without some great
mystery which we understand not, and therefore let us spend no more time in
altercation about it.


AN. Many things have happened and happen daily in the world, to search the
depth and bottom of whose secrets, were great presumption, at which, though some
times by signs and tokens we may give a guess, yet we must always think,
that there is some thing hidden from us, and of this sort is that which happened
to a Gentleman in this our A notable strange chance that happened to a Gentleman
in Spain in a Monastery of Nuns.
Spain, whose name, for the foulenes of his endeavor, and many respects
beside, I will conceal, and the name also of the town where it happened. This
Gentleman being very rich and noble, dealt in matters of dishonest love with a
Nun, the which to the end she might enjoy his abominable embracements, willed
him to make a key like unto that of the Church door, and she would find time
and means (through her turn which she had about the service of the
Sachristie and other such occasions, to meet him there, where they both might
satiate their filthy lusts and incestuous desires. The Gentleman exceedingly
rejoicing at this match, caused two keys to be made, the one for the door of
the Church Portall, and an other of the Church door it self, which being
done, because it was somewhat far from his house, he took one night his
horse, and for the more secrecy of the matter rode thither alone: being come
thither about midnight, leaping of his horse, and tying him by the reins of
the bridle to a convenient place, he went toward the Monastery, of which
opening the first door of the Portall, he found that of the Church open of
it self, and in the Church a great light and brightness of Torches and Wax
candels, and withal, he heard voices, as it were of men singing, and doing the
funeral service of some one that was deceased: at which being amazed, he drew
nearer, better to behold the manner thereof, where he might see the Church to be
full of Friars and Priests, singing these obsequies, having in the midst of
them a coffin covered with black, about which were many light and tapers
burning, each of the Friars, Priests, and many other men besides that seemed
to assist at these funerals having also a waxcandle burning in their hands, but
his greatest astonishment of all, was that he knew not one of the^: after he
had remained a while beholding the^, he approached near one of the Friars, and
asked him for whom those honorable solemnities were done, who answered him
that such a gentleman, naming his own proper name, was dead, and that they were
now performing the honors of his burial. The gentleman laughing replied,
saying, he who^ you speak of, lives, and you are deceived, nay, quoth the
Friar, you are deceived, for he is assuredly dead, and his body here present
to be buried, and therewith fell to his singing again. The gentleman being
herewith in a great confusion asked an other, of whom he received the self
same answer, so that being stricken with a great amazement, without more
attending he went out of the Church, and getting up on his horse, began to ride
as fast as he could homeward: but he had no sooner turned his horse head, when
he was ware of two great black mastiues that accompanied him, of each side of
his horse one: who do what he could, with rating and striking at the^ with his
sword, would never leave him, till he came to the gate of his house, where
lighting off his horse and entering in, his Pages and servants coming to
receive him; wondered to see the color of his face so pale and deadly; assuring
themselves that some great mischance had happened unto him, beseeching him with
such instance to tell the^ what ayled him, that at last, he recited unto them
all the particularities of this before rehearsed history; having made an end of
which, and entering into his chamber, the two black mastiues of a sudden
rushed in upon him, and woried him, so that his servants not being able to
succor him, he dyed presently, verifying that of his funerals, which he had
seen done while he lived.


LU. This man was paid the hyre of his desert, for what more grievous offense
can a man commit, then to endeavor to violate that, which is to God so
folemnely sacred* and surely for my part I am of opinion that these mastiues
were two devils, set lose by God, receiving of him power and permission thus
cruelly to punish a wickedness so detestable, or else they might be two very
mastiues indeed guided by the devil, through the sufferance of God. And
perchance those visions which he saw in habites of Friars and Priests, were
to warn him of his error and offense, to the end he might have repented and
craved pardon, and the like might be of the mastiues that accompanied him to
his house: but he like an ill christian, neglecting to use permitence and
contrition, paid with the loss of his life, that which his offense deserved,
I will not judge of his soul, which in so dangerous an estate passed from his
body.


BE. I take it for all this that he might be saved, if at such time as he saw
himself assaulted by the dogs he had the grace heartily to repent.


LUD. Happy was he if he had this grace, and most unhappy and miserable if he
wanted it, but leaving this, pass on I pray you Signior Anthonio.


AN. There is another written by Alexander de Alexandro, in his Diebus
genealibus, which because it serves fitly to our purpose, I will not pass it
over: and as the same Alexander says, it was told him by a great friend of
his, whom he so highly commends, and with such earnest words, to be a man of
great virtue and no less credit, that he puts no doubt, but that the
matter passed really and truly as he told it him. This friend of mine, says
he, had a dear companion, Another very strange history written by Alexander de
Alexandro.
a Gentleman of good quality, who through a long infirmity, having endured
exceeding pain and anguish, and being counceled for the recovery of his
health, to go to the Bathes of Cuma, requested him to bear him company, which
he did with many other Gentlemen besides: after they had remained there a
certain space, the sick Gentleman daily so empaired in health, that finding
no amendment, they returned back toward Rome again: but by the way, his
infirmity so increased, and he waxed therewith, and with the wearines of
travail so weak, that he ended his days in an Inn by the way, where he came
to lodge: His companions heavily bewailing his death, caused him to be buried
with the greatest funeral solemnity they might, in the Church of the Village
where they were, remaining there some few days after, about the performance of
his obsequies, which being finished, they departed toward Rome: Growing one
night late they took up their Inn in a Village, where this friend and
companion of the deceased Gentleman laid him self down to sleep, in a bed
that stood alone in a chamber, the door of which being fast locked, and a
candell burning by his bed side, being broad awaked, of a sudden he saw stand
before him his dead companion, whom he had left buried in the other Village,
his eyes hollow, his face deadly, his countenance pitiful, lean, and yellow,
who approaching the bed, and beholding him without speaking a word, began to
put off his clothes, which seemed to be the very same that he ware while he
lived: what so ever he that lay in the bed said unto him, he answered not a
word, but after his clothes were off, lifting up the couerlet and sheet, he
laid him down in the bed by him, who through great fear was so dismayed,
that he had not the power to resist him, so that the dead man came nearer unto
him, and made semblance to take him in his arms, who with exceeding horror,
seeing himself in this distress, and being shrunk to the farther side of the
bed, when he saw there was no remedy, took as good courage as he could, and
thrusting down the clothes between them, because he should not touch him,
began to make resistance, which the dead man perceauing, and beholding him with
a grim and angry countenance, rose out of the bed, putting on his clothes and
shoes again, and so went his ways, without being seen from that time
forward any more. The other remained in the bed, with so great fear and
perplexity, that he fell thereof grievously sick, and was in great hazard of
his life, though he recovered at last: he affirmed, that when he made that
resistance to keep the dead man from him, that by chance the other touched
him with one of his feet, which exceeded all the Ice of the world, in
extremity of coldness.


BER. This thing is surely very strange, and hardly to be judged of, for what
way so ever you will conster it, there cannot want contradiction.


AN. I confess it to be so, yet I should undoubtedly hold it to be an illusion
of the devil, who endeavored, if he could, to have deceived him that lay in the
bed, taking upon him the shape and figure of his dead friend: but God would not
suffer him to do him any hurt, and in manner as the same devil came not
imagined or fantastical, but taking on him a visible body, and such as through
the thicknes thereof might be touched, so vanished he away, and turned into
air again. And that the devils form and thicken in such sort their bodies,
that they seem sometimes verily and visibly to resemble us: you may plainly
understand by another example of the said Alexander, who says, that a
certain Monk called Thomas, with whom he Another most strange history written
by Alexander de Alexandro.
was familiarly acquainted, being a man ever after this accident of a most
holy and approved good life, who being resident in a Monastery near unto the
City of Luka, being situated amongst certain mountains, falling one day out
with some other of the Monks, and moved with an exceeding passion of choler,
went furiously out of the Cloister, with determination to absent himself from
thence for ever, and to go live in some other part: as he was thus traversing
the thickest of the mountain, he met with a great tall man, of a tawnie
Sunne-burnd complexion, with a long black beard, rolling eyes, and his garment
hanging down to the ground. After having saluted him, the Moonke asked him
whether he went that way, seeing the same was no beaten or usual path: The
other answered him, that he followed a horse of his, which was broken loose,
and had strayed over those mountains into certain meddowes on the other side,
so that they went on together talking, till they came to a River at the foot
of the mountain: which because the same was very deep, and full of great
pits, they went along the side thereof seeking a Foord or passage, till at last
coming to a certain place which seemed passable: the Moonke would have pulled
off his hose and shoes, but the other would by no means suffer him so to do,
saying: that he was tall and strong enough, to carry him safely over on his
shoulders, in which persuasion he was so earnest, that make the Monk what
excuse he could, he trussed him, half perforce up upon his sholders: at which
instant looking downward, he chanced to spy his Ferrymans feet, not having
seen them till then, which were of a far different making from those of
other men's, so that entering into some suspicion, he would feign have losed
himself, but he could not, for the other began to wade with him into the
deepest of the stream: vvhere-vpon, fearing it to be as in truth it was, he
began with great inward devotion to commend him self to God, and to call upon
the blessed name of Jesus for help: at which very instant, the other who was
the devil indeed, threw him down on the shore of the River, vanishing
presently away, with so horrible a noise and tempest, that the very sands of
the River, were turned vpsie down: and the Oaks that grew upon the banks were
torn up by the roots, and the poor Moonke left in a trance, half dead,
who so soon as he revived and came to him self returned penitently to his
Cloister, giving thanks unto GOD, for the danger out of which he had
delivered him.


BER. To make recital of all such like things as happen in the world, were
to begin an endless and infinite work: for the devils, though they lost
grace, yet lost they not their natural virtue, as Anthonio de Florencia
vvryteth, so that if the same were not restrained through the will of GOD,
they could work many greater hurtes and damages, then those which they do.


AN. According to the saying of S. Paul, they cannot only take upon them such
forms of bodies as we have said, but they can also transform them selves into
Angels of light to deceive us, which they would each moment put in practice, as
sometimes they do, were not their power suppressed and prevented, which God
does sometimes by his only will, and sometimes by a third person, as that of the
devil, which under the habit of a very beautiful and wise woman dined with a
Bishop, who was delivered from destruction by S. Andrew the Apostle, coming to
demand alms of him like a Pilgrim, by aunswering a The answer of S. Andrew
to a question proposed to him by the devil.
question proposed to him by the devil: which was, how far distant the heaven
was from the earth: Thou should better know then I, answered S. Andrew,
because thou have fallen from thence; wherewith the devil finding him self
discovered, vanished presently. But it is to no purpose to detain our selves
in these examples, because there are whole volumes full of them: and Saint
Gregory in his Morrals, rehearses many notable things, which they may read
that desire to know them.


BER. For all this, I must needs tell you one A strange History of Don Anthonio
de la Cueua.
by the way, which has been told me for a matter undoubted, and most assuredly
true, of one Don Anthonio de la Cueua, a Gentleman passing well known in this
our Country, now lately dead: who by Gods permission, for some cause to us
unknown, was, while he lived, often tempted and vexed with visions and
fantasies, so that in continuance of time, he began not to fear them, though
he accustomed to have all night long continually a candell burning by him in
the chamber where he slept. One night amongst others, lying in his bed, and
reading of a book, he might hear a great rumbling under the bed, and as he
lay imagining what the same might be, he perceived come from under the bed
close by the bed side an arm and hand, seeming to be of a naked Blackamoore:
which taking the candell, turned it downwards in the candlestick and put it
forth, and at that very instant, offered to come into the bed to him, which he
endeavoring to refist, the black Moore, or rather devil, grasped him by the
arms, and he him likewise, beginning to wrestle and strugle together with such
force, and making so great a noise, that the servant of the house awaked, who
coming into the Chamber to know what the matter was, found Don Anthonio de
la Cueua alone, in such a heat and sweating, as though he had newly come out
of a Stew or Hothouse, who declared unto them the particularitie of this
accident, and withal, that so soon as they began to enter into the Chamber,
the vision vntwynged himself from him, so that he knew not what was become
thereof.


LUD. At one thing I do much wonder, which I have often heard to be affirmed
for truth, that the devils also are Incubi and Succubi, taking oftentimes to
that end the shape and Incubi. Succubi.
likeness, sometimes of men, sometimes of women.


ANT. This is affirmed by many Authors: For their malice is so great, that
they will not stick to commit the greatest abomination The devils malice is
such, that he will not stick to commit any abomination, so that he may cause
men to commit it with him.
and wickedness that may be, so that jointly they may procure and cause men to
commit it with them. Caelius Rodiginus says, that there was in Greece a man
called Marcus, natural of Cafronesus, who had great familiarity with devils,
for which cause he lived always solitary, conuersing little with other men.
This man uttered many of the devils secrets, of which this of the Incubi and
Succubi was one, and many other, that for their filthiness and abomination are
not to be spoken of: but according to his confession, all the devils do Marcus
a Greacian, that had great familiarity with devils.
not use this execrable offense, but those only who are near unto us, and do
form their bodies of a gross substance, as of water or earth. Saint Augustine
says, that the Satyrs and Faunes were thought of some to be Incubi, because
they were so luxurious. Hence many took occasion to authorize that for truth,
which is reported of Marlyn, that he was begotten of a devil, but this is
better said then affirmed, for whether it be so or no, God only knows: and
besides this which I have said, he speaks of many other particularities and
secrets, that are amongst the devils, which in truth, it is best not to know
nor understand, for the knowledge of them can be no way profitable, and may
perchance be some way hurtful.


BER. If the devil can do that which this Marcus says, perchance Lactantius
Firmianus took thence occasion, to write that folly of his, saying that the
authority of Genesis, which says, As the sons of GOD saw the daughters of
men, which were beautiful, they took them for wives, and had children by
them, is understood by the Angels, whom An erroneous opinion of Lactantius
Firmianus
God held here in the world, so that he attributes to the^ bodies, with which
they conuersed with women and begot children.


AN. Truly you may rightly term it his folly, for there cannot be a greater,
as both S. Thomas and all the other Docters of Theology affirm, understanding
by the sons of God, men that served him, and walked in the way of righteousness,
and by the sons of men, those that followed their own lusts and pleasures, not
regarding that which they ought to do: for it were absurd to think that the
Angels should pollute themselves with such filthiness as the devils do, who
also do it not because they therein receive delight, but because of the sin and
and offense, which they therein make men to commit jointly with them: for they
cannot in truth, howsoever they fashion their bodies, exercise any vital
operation, though there want not some, who say that the devils come to be
enamoured of women, and pursue them in love with lust and desire: but I esteem
this to be a mere mockery, for it the devil at any time make a show of love,
the same is dissembled, and that which he only seeks, is the destruction of the
soul, without having any other respect, for verification of which, I will tell
you what I saw in the Island of Cerdinia, in the city of Caliar, where at that
instant was handled the inquisition of certain Witches, who they said, had
confederation and did communicate, with those of France and Navarre, of which
many not long before had bin A wonderful history of a maiden that was enamoured
of the devil.
sought out and punished: at that very time there was a beautiful young maiden
of the age of 17. or 18. years old apprehended and accused to have acquaintance
and fleshly conversation with the devil, brought to the same by the
allurements and entisements of one of these Witches. The devil used oftentimes
to resort unto her in the likeness of one of the most beautiful young gentlemen
in the world, using so sweet and comely behavior, that the poor wench,
became so vehemently enamoured, and so deeply inflamed in his love, that of
all worldly felicities, she accounted his company to be the greatest: but he
when he saw his time, and thought her to be sure enough his, took such order
that the matter was discovered and the maiden taken, who persisted so
obstinately against the persuasions of those that willed her to repent and to
crave mercy, that it was wonderful, thinking surely that the devil would
help her, as he had promised, perseuering in such ardant love and affection
toward him, that, with her passionate speeches, she amazed and moved to
pity, those that heard her speak: and for conclusion, willingly suffered
herself to be put alive into the fire and burnt, still in vain reclaiming the
promised assistance of her abominable Lover, loosing thereby both her body and
soul, which so easily she might have saved, in dying Christianlike, and
taking patiently with repentance her bodily death in this world.


LU. Truly, her end was most pitiful and lamentable, yet far better did
another of which I have heard, being likewise a young maiden, rich,
beautiful, and of good parentage, An other strange history of a maiden
deceived by the devil.
who with extreme and vehement affection, became to be inamoured of a young
Gentleman living in the same Town where she remained, but for her
reputations sake, she covered so warily this secret fervent affection of hers,
that it was neither perceived of the Gentleman himself, nor of any man else,
the devil only excepted, who, seeing occasion offered, whereby, as he
thought, to procure her damnation: took upon him the likeness, habit and
gesture of the Gentleman: offering unto her his service and love, with such
artificial persuasions, that after solemn promise of marriage, he came to
have the use of her body, to which otherwise her chaste desire would never have
consented: after which he frequented many nights her company, lying in naked
bed with her, as if he had been indeed the Gentleman whose shape he took
upon him, and with whose love the maiden was so ardently enflamed. In this
manner passed over many months, the devil always persuading her, not to
send him any messages, because it was for some respects convenient to keep
the matter for a while secret, and withal, that she should not conceive any
unkindness, if seeing her in public, he used no outward semblance of love
toward her, aduising her also, to use in all points, the like strangeness
toward him, preventing hereby the inconvenience that might have happened, if
she should have found herself in company with the supposed Gentleman. The
matter continuing thus, it fell out that the Mother of this maiden gave unto
her a book of devout prayers to read, which she often perusing, the devil had
no more power at all to come in place where she was, nor to abuse her any
longer, because she ware the same continually about her neck: Whereupon, at
the end of three Months, she wondering much at his absence, and withal,
hearing that he, I mean the supposed Gentleman, courted another Gentlewoman,
entering into a most impatient jealousy, she sent him one day word, that by
any means he should com speak with her, about a matter most important. The
Gentleman, without understanding the cause, being full of courtesy and good
behavior, awayting a time when her mother was out, came and found her alone,
and after having courteously saluted her, demanded what her pleasure was. The
maiden seeing him speak as one that scarcely knew her, bathing her face with
tears, in words full of grief, complained of his strangeness and
forgetfulness, asking him for what demerite of hers he had left her so long
unvisited. The Gentleman astonished at this manner of speech, answered her as
a man amazed, and utterly ignorant of her meaning: whereupon, kindled with
exceeding choler, she began to threaten him, that seeing he had despoyled her
of that which she held dearest, that he should not now think to cast her of,
and that if he would not of his own accord accomplish the promise of marriage
which he had vowed unto her, she would besides her complaints to God and the
world, do her uttermost diligence to constrain him perforce to that, whereto
by his most solemn protestation he was bound. The Gentleman, strooken
heerewith into greater admiration then before, answered her, that he thought
her not to be in her right senses, for never in his life had he promised
marriage, nor once spoken to her in secret, neither was of meaning to satis-fie
any such demand of hers.

The poor vvench welnigh out of her wits, after infinite exclamations, calling
heaven and earth to witness, began perticulerly to recite unto him all such
things as had passed between her and the devil, asking him how he could be
so impudent to deny the same; she mingled with threatening tears, wishing him
to have the fear of Gods vengeance before his eyes. The Gentleman with great
confusion began to bless himself, protesting unto her by the most solemn sort
of oaths he could, that she was deceived, and that of this matter he knew
nothing at all. Oh God (quoth she) and how is this possible, do you not
remember that on such a very day (to me most unfortunate:) naming a great
feastiuall day, you swear, and vowed to accomplish with me the holy estate of
marriage in the open face of the Church, which you said you were constrained to
defer as yet for some respects. But he having here no longer patience, to
the end (quoth he) that you shall fully and plainly perceive your own error, I
will by sufficient information and vnrefusable witnesses prove unto you, that I
was not in this Town the day you say, neither 20. days before, nor 20. days
after: if any man therefore in my name have deceived you, I am not to be
blamed: and to the end she might be the better resolved, he sent incontinently
for seven or eight persons of credit, as well of his house as others, which
without knowing the cause wherefore, solemnly swore and declared, that this
Gentleman had been the very day and all the time mentioned, absent in another
Town above fifty leagues from thence. The young Maiden remained confused and
ashamed, as well for this, as for other particular things passed between her
and the devil, which seemed to her impossible to have been done by any
human man, so that her judgment waxing clearer, she now began to suspect
this her detestable Lover, to be him who indeed he was, and there-vpon entering
into a wonderful deep repentance, and utterly giving over the world, she
placed her self in a Monastery, where she continued most devoutly the rest of
her life in Gods service.


BER. She took in my judgment the best and surest course, both for her own
salvation, and to revenge her self of the injury received by her enemy. But
seeing you have set us in this matter, I pray you tell us what power and
authority they have over the devil, that use and exercise the Art of
Negromancie: for it is manifest that Negromancers Negromancie.
and Witches, constrain the devils and make them perforce obey and accomplish
their commandments: and many also carry them bound and enclosed in rings,
boxes, little viols, and many other things, applying their helps to such uses
as they themselves will, and such devils they commonly call Familiars.


AN. It cannot be denied, but that there is such an Art called Negromancie,
used in old times by faithful and unfaithful, and now in these our days also
by diverse. But this Art may be exercised in two sorts, the first is natural,
Natural Magique.
which may be wrought through things, whose virtue and property is natural to
do them, as herbs, plants, and stones, and other things, as the planets,
constellations, and heavenly influences: and this Art is lawful, and may
without scruple or offense be used and practiced, of those that can attain
unto the knowledge of their hidden properties; and such is that of which S.
Thomas writes in his Treatise, De ente et essentia, (though some doubt whether
the same be his or no) where he alleges, that Abel the Son of Adam, made a
book of all the virtues and properties of the planets, which, foreknowing Abel
the Son of Adam made a book of the virtues of the Planets.
that the world should perish through the general flood, he enclosed so
cunningly in a stone, that the waters could not come to corrupt the same,
whereby it might be preserved and known to all people. This stone was found by
Hermes Trismegistus, who breaking it, and finding the book therein enclosed,
profited wonderfully by applying the contents thereof to his use; which book
coming afterward to the hand of S Thomas, it is said, that he did therewith
many great experiences: amongst the which one was, that being sick, and
troubled with the noise of Beasts and carriages that passed through the
street, remedied that trouble, by making an Image, such as the book
prescribed him, which being buried in the street, none of all the Beasts had
power to pass thereby: but coming thither staid or went backward, not being
by any man to be constrained to do the contrary: He also tells of a certain
friend of his, who by the self same book made an Image, putting the which
into a Fountain, it caused all such vessels as touched the water thereof,
presently to break, which came by observations of certain hours and points
in working of those Images, of which they took great reckoning and heed, to
the end that the planets might the better use their influences in working those
things, which seemed supernatural. The use of all this is so lawful, that
there is nothing to be said to the contrary. The other kind of Negromancie
The use of natural Magique is lawful.
or Art Magique, is, that which is used and practiced through the help and
favor of the devil, which has been of long time, as we know, exercised in
the world? And of this, the holy Scriptures give us sufficient testimony, as
well in the old Testament, speaking of the Magitians of Pharaoh, who contended
with Moses and Aaron, as in the new Testament, in the Acts of the Apostles,
making mention of Simon Magus, rebuked by S. Peter: and besides, to satisfy
your demand, you must understand, that the devils may also be forced and
constrained by the good Angels; and this is because of the grace which the one
lost, and the other as yet retain.

But leaving apart the examples which we find in the new Testament, of
that which our Savior Christ, as very GOD and manne wrought with them: Let us
come to the Apostles and Saints, who by the virtue of words, and in the only
name of Jesus, made them obey and accomplish all that which they commanded
them: But the Magitians, neither by themselves, neither by their words,
Characters, or signs, have power or force to constrayne the devils to any
thing, how so ever they persuade them selves to the contrary: which because
you shall fully understand to be so, you must know that none can use or
exercise this Art of Negromancie, unless he first make a secret agreement,
or express The Magitians do covenant and agree with the devil.
covenant with the devil, and such deuilles with whom they deal in these
couenauntes, are not of the common sort, but of a higher and superior
condition: For amongst them selves (says Father Franciscus de victoria) in a
Repetition which he made of Magique, they do observe their orders and
degrees of superiority: and this is for the better use of their wickedness:
and so says Saint Thomas: some devils (says he) are preferred as
principals, to command the rest, and the inferior devils are subject unto
Some devils higher in authority then others.
those, which are of mightier force, to execute their wickedness: and
therefore the Jews said unto Christ, that he wrought his miracles in the
name of Beelzebub, Prince of devils, so that the Negromancers and Magitians that
are confederated with the Princes and Captains of the Infernal Army, have
always the lesser and inferior devils in a readiness at commandment to do
their will and pleasure, being thereunto constrained, by those of the higher
dignity and condition. And whereas you say, that the devils are kept by some
bound and enclosed in Ringes, Boxes or Viols, it is a common error and deceit,
which the devils make them believe, with whom they deal, for they are where,
and in what place, and when they list themselves, and how far soever they be
of, yet at such time as they are called, or their presence required, they come
in the very same instant to make answer, to those which holding them for
Familiars, and thinking surely that they carry them always present with them,
demand or ask any thing of them, who are greatly abused and deceived, in
presuming that they are able to hold them forcibly at their commandment:
because it proceeds not through the words of the Negromancer, but through the
might and authority of the higher Spirits and devils, which as Captains
govern and command them: Yea, and sometimes constrayning them to remain
bound indeed, when they have any notable exployt in hand, but else for the
most-part they leave them always at liberty. This is not only the opinion of
S. Thomas, but also of S. Augustine, and almost all the rest of the Doctors
that handle this matter, who write thereof many particularities, leaving which,
let us pass now to other matters, no less worthy to be understood.


BER. Let then the first I pray you be one, which of long time, so often as I
think thereof, has and does exceedingly trouble my understanding, and the
same is, if the souls of the deceased, return at any time to visit or to
speak with those that live in the world: as I have often heard say that they
do.


LUD. There want not sufficient reasons to confirm that which you say: but
leaving the determination thereof to better Divines then we are: let us handle
our former discourse of fancies, and visions, of which undoubtedly many that
are reported to be true, are feigned, and sometimes take their beginning of
occasions that happen, whereby they are thought to be true, when in deed they
are not.


BER. This is an ordinary matter and happens daily, for confirmation of
which, I will tell you of one that chanced not long since in this A pretty
tale of Sprights that were seen in Beneuenta.
Town wherein we now are, and the party yet living, which was a woman, who
rising one night very early before day, to do certain business she had;
having over night willed her May de to leave the fire well covered, to the end
she might light her candle in the morning, and finding the same quite out when
she rose, fell into a great chafe: the may de seeing her Mistress so angry,
stepped out of doors with a candell in her hand, and going from house to house
without finding fire, perceauing at last a Lamp burning within the Church, went
and knocked at the door thereof, desiring the Sexton to light her candell. Her
Mistres being out of patience, and not enduring to stay so long, took another
candle, and going to the house of one of her acquaintance, lighted the same,
returning at that very instant by one side of the Church, as her may de did by
the other, and being in the Summer time both unclothed, saving only that they
had a thin white peticoate over their smockes, they chanced to be seen by a
neighbor thereby, who was risen a little before, whose eyes belike not being
well opened, he took them to be Sprights, and published the next day that he
had seen certain women go about the Church in Procession with candles in their
hands. Some that heard him, added that they were eight, others twelve, others
twenty and thirty; and amongst the rest they affirmed that some yet living,
were seen, who hearing thereof, fell into the greatest fear of the world
that they should not live long, but I procured to search out the truth
thereof, and found it to be in such sort as you have heard.


AN. Let but once such a matter as this come amongst the common people, and it
will grow so from one mouth to another, that at last, of a fly they will make
an Elephant, never willing to acknovvledge themselves to be deceived, as it
happened in a very pleasant tale, which I will tell you, the truth whereof came
after to be discovered. There dyed in a town of this Country, a Gentleman
very rich and of great reputation, who had ordained his body to be buried in a
Cloister of Friars, which Another pretty tale of a Spright.
was performed, and his funerals done sumptuously, with great pomp and
magnificence. The night coming, a certain mad woman that ran up and down
the town half naked, was by chance left in the Church of the Monastery when
the Sexton locked the door, who having seen the dead man's Hearse which stood in
the midst of the Church covered over, and of each side with a black cloth
trayling on the ground, with great compass and widenes as the manneris, and
beginning to be pinched with cold, (for it was in the midst of the Winter)
went to shroud herself under the same, in which sort the fell a sleep, till
at last the Friars came into the Quire to say their matins; with the noise of
whose voices awaking, she thought good to sport with them a little, and to make
them afraid, beginning to give great bounces and rumblings against the Coffin,
and withal, to skritche and howl in the lothsomest manner she could. The
Pryor and his Brethren, somewhat troubled at the suddainenesse thereof, came
down into the body of the Church, bringing with them Holy-vvater, and holding
in their hands hallowed Candles burning, and using such prayers and devotions
as for such a case they thought convenient.

Notwithstanding, the foolish woman resolute to go forward with that which
she had begun, the nearer she heard them approach, the greater bounsing she
made, and withal, rearing up the coffin in height with her head, let both
herself and the same fall as hard as she could, which though she did many
times, yet the largenes of the mourning cloth kept her from being discovered.
The Pryor seeing that this coniurations and exorcismes profited nothing at all,
thought it should be a great rashness to lift up the cloth, and to discover
underneath, least thereby, through fear and amazement, might ensue some harm
or danger to some of the Friars, and so commanded them to return to their
Matines. The fool seeing the danger ouerpast, laid her down to sleep awhile,
and waking about the break of day, conveyed herself secretly from under the
Hearse, hyding herself in a place of the Church, until such time as the Sexton
came to open the door, and people began to press in, at which time she stole
privily out of the Church. The Friars coming to visit this Hearse, and lifting
up the cloth, found nothing but the ground trampled and trodden, so that they
knew not what to judge thereof. This matter could not remain so secret, but
that it was in few days published, not only through the whole City, but
also in many other places, and every man adding what pleased him, it was told
in diverse sorts, and the opinions and judgments thereof likewise were diverse,
no man knowing the truth thereof, till on a certain day, two months after the
foresaid burial, it chanced that this foolish or frantic woman standing in
the Marketplace, and being environed with a number of boys and idle
fellows, that were jesting and sporting with her, spyed by chance two
Religious men of the same Cloister passing by, at which breaking out into a
great laughter, i-fayth, quoth she, Friars, Friars, as lusty as you are, I
made you once tremble and shake for fear: At which turning back, better to
understand that which she said, she told them laughing that it was she
that lay the same night under the Hearse, and which made the^ so afray de when
they came into the Church to say their Matines. The standers by, made her by
sweet speeches and fair promises confess all that had passed, laughing not a
little at the craftiness of the fool, and at the general error in which they
had still remained, if she had not herself disclosed unto them all the
particularities thereof.


LVD. Many such things as these, without doubt, do happen in the world, of
which some never come to be discovered: but seeing we have sufficiently
discoursed of the same, I pray you let me somewhat understand your opinion as
concerning Robingoodfelowes and Hobgoblins, which are said Trasgo^y Duendes de
Casa.
to be so common, that there is scarcely any man but will tell you one tale or
other of them, of which for mine own part, I believe none, but do make
reckoning that every man forgeth herein, what pleases him.


AN. Many of them without doubt are forged, and many Hobgoblins and Robin
Goodfelows
also true, for these kinds of Spirits are more familiar and domestical then
the others, and for some causes to us unknown, abide in one place more then in
another, so that some never almost depart from some particular houses, as
though they were their propper mansions, making in them sundry noyses, rumors,
mockeries, gaudes, and iestes, without doing any harm at all: and though I am
not my self witness thereof, yet I have heard many persons of credit affirm,
that they have heard them play as it were on Gyternes and Jews Harpes, and
ring Belles, and that they answer to those that call them, and speak with
certain signs, laughters and merry gestures, so that those of the house come
at last to be so familiar and well acquainted with them that they fear them
not at all. But in truth, as I said before, if they had free power to put in
execution their malicious desire, we should find these pranks of theirs, not
to be iestes, but earnest indeed, tending to the destruction both of our body
and soul, but as I told you before, this power of theirs is so restrained and
tied, that they can pass no farther then to iestes and gawdes: and if they do
any harm or hurt at all, it is certainly very little, as by experience we
daily see: and therefore leaving vnrehearsed an infinite number of fables and
strange tales told of them by the common people, I will tell you truly what I
savve my self, being a boy of ten years old, and a Scholar in Salamanca.

There was in that City a widow, very principal and rich, somewhat aged in
years, which kept in her house four or five maid Servants, of the which two
were young and very A Hobgoblin in the City of Salamanca.
beautiful. There was a common report bruted abroad in the Town, that there
should be in this widows house a Hobgoblin or spright that played daily
sundry strange pranks, of which the most usual was, that he threw stones from
the roof of the house, not only upon the persons therein, but also upon
others that came to visit the widow, in such quantity, and with such noise,
as though whole showers of them had been rained out of the Element, yet
always harmlesly without hurting any man. This matter grew so public, that
the brute thereof came at last to the ears of the Magistrate, who desiring to
know the truth thereof, went presently to the widows house, with at least
twenty in his company, entering into which, he commanded a Sergeant
accompanied with four other men, to seek round about the house with a burning
Torch, willing him not to leave any corner above or beneath unsearched, wherein
by any possibility a man might be hidden, which he and his fellows executed so
nearly, that unless they would have vntiled the house they could do no more:
so that returning they made relation, that there was no seeking any farther,
for all was safe: vvhere-vpon, the Magistrate told the Gentlewoman of the
house, that she was abused and deceived, and as it was most likely by her young
maidens, who might bring into her house their Lovers, by whom these stones
might be so thrown up and down: and therefore willed her for avoiding of all
inconveniences, to look more narrowly unto them, least emboldened through this
simplicity of hers, they might in time attempt some greater matter. The good
Gentlewoman was the most ashamed of the world, not knowing what to reply, yet
still persisted to affirm that of the throwing of the stones to be most true.
The Magistrate and the rest jesting at her simplicity, took their leave to be
gone, but they were scarcely off the stairs, but there came such a whirling of
stones about their ears, and with such a noise, as though they had been
thrown with three or four slings together, as thick as might be: which
falling on their legs, arms, and feet, did them no hurt at all. The
Magistrate caused the self same man which had searched before, to search
again, with great diligence and have, but it was all in vain, for there was
no body to be found: at which, as they stood wondering, there fell of a sudden
in the portall of the house, such a shower of stones amongst them, that it
far exceeded the former, at which their amazement increasing, one of the
Sergeants took up amongst the rest that lay on the flower, a marked stone, and
throwing it over the top of the house that stood on the other side of the
street in front; If thou be a right devil (quoth he) return me this stone
again, at which very moment, the self same stone fell from the roof of the
house, and hitte him on the brimme of his Hatte over his eyes, and the stone
was evidently known of them all, to be the very same which he had thrown
over the other house, so that the Magistrate with the rest of those that were
there present with him, departed out of the house, with the greatest
astonishment that might be; and not long after there came thither a Priest, of
the little Tower of Salamanca, who through certain coniuration which he
wrought, delivered the house both of this throwing of stones, and all other
such like molestations.


LU. In good sooth, I never heard of a merrier devil: but before you pass any
farther, I will tell you of two things A Story of a Studient and a Hobgobline
in Beneuenta.
which both happened in this same Town where we now are: the one was of a
young man, that being a Studient in Salamanca, came thence hither to see his
mother, being a widow, and was certified by the folks of the house, that
there haunted in the same a Hobgobline, which at sundry times played twenty
knauish pranks with those of the house, which the Studient would by no means
believe, but laughed at the reports thereof, and at last, grew into choler
with them, because they persisted in the earnest affirmation thereof: At night
calling for a candell, he went to a chamber that was made ready for him, and
shutting to the door, laid himself down to rest, but waking within a little
while, he might see under his bed a light, like unto a little flame of fire: at
which lifting up the clothes, and starting out of the bed, he began to look
whence this fire might come, but the same presently vanishing, he turned to
his rest again, thinking surely that his eyes had dazeled, but he had not line
long when he perceived a greater flame then the first, to his seeming under the
bed, at which lifting the couerings of the bed fearfully up, and bowing down
his head very low to look underneath the bed, he was suddenly taken by the
legs, and pitched topsie turuie over, and thrown into the midst of the
chamber, wherewith stricken into a great amazement, he cried out as loud as he
could for a candell, which being brought, and searching under the bed, there
was nothing at all to be found: from which time forward the Studient
acknowledged his error, and was less obstinate in believing that were
Hobgoblins. The other was of two Gentlemen, which are now the Another story of
a Hobgobline in Beneuenta.
chiefest in the Town, and our especial friends, who hearing of a Hobgobline
that haunted a poor woman's house, holding the same for a jest, would needs
go thither one night with a certain Priest, to search out the secret cause
whence this report might arise: coming thither, and giving no credit to the
poor woman's words, of a sudden one of them was stricken a great blow upon one
of his jaws, with a clod of stinking filthy clay, of which he received no
greater hurt, but that it astonished him a little: There fell also of this
earth upon others of their company, and one of them was hitte a great blow on
the shoulder with a tile, so that the Gentlemen and the Priest made as great
have as they could to get thence, not without great wonder and marvel.

Not long after, a Priest exorcising a woman that was possessed, the devil
that was within her, amongst other things, confessed that it was he that
which had handled them the other night, and that the same clay which he threw
at them was out of a Grave, and of a putrified body, not thoroughly yet
converted into earth. But if we will enter into speech of this kind of
spyrites, we shall never make an end: for there is nothing told of them, so
impossible, but I believe the same, seeing it is a thing so manifestly
approved, that they can take upon them, what shape or form they list:
Leaving therefore this, and passing to other points of greater importance, I
pray you make me understand, whether A false and ridiculous opinion that
many hold touching those that are possessed
this opinion which many do hold be true, that when so ever any manne is
possessed, the soul of some one that is dead, should enter into him, and
speak within him.


AN. In truth you have reason to seek to be resolved of so ignorant an
absurdity as this of theirs is, who so ever mainetayne or think the same; for
though sometimes GOD permit the souls departed, for some especial causes to
return unto the vvordle, yet does he not permit them to enter into a body,
where is an other soul: for two reasonable souls can by no means abide in
one body, so that there cannot be a greater falsenes and error then this: for
without doubt they are devils and not souls, as we may see by their casting
forth, which is done by the virtue of holy and sacred words, at which time they
use their uttermost endeavor, not to be constrained to go into places, where
they cannot exercise their malice: of which we have in the Scriptures an
example of him, who being as Saint Luke says in his eight Chapter, possessed
of a legion of devils, was delivered of them by our Savior, by whose
permission they entered into a Heard of Swine, which threw them selves
immediately down the Rocks, tumbling into the Sea.


LV. I would also gladly know, what should be the cause that the devils are so
desirous to enter into men's bodies, and can with such difficulty be cast out of
them, making thereunto all resistance that they possibly may.


AN. To this question Psellius makes answer, and Gaundencius Merula also
saying, that Psellius opinion of the cause why the devils desire to enter into
men's bodies
though the devils are enemies unto men, yet they enter into their bodies not
so much with will to do them hurt, as with desire of a vital heat and
warmenes, for these are such as do enhabite the deepest and coldest places,
where the cold is so pure that it wants moistnes, so that they covet places
hot and moist, searching all oportunities and occasions to enter into them so
often, as for some reasons which we understand not, God suffers and
permits them so to do. And when they cannot enter into the bodies of me^,
they enter into those of other creatures, where willingly they detain
themselves so long as they may, and through the violent strength which the body
by their entry receaueth, happen these tremblings, shakings, and forcible
motions, which we see they use that are possessed. This kind of devils use the
spirit of the patient as their proper instrument, and with his tongue speak
and utter what they list: but if they be of those that fly the light, and
dwell in the profundities of the earth, as the last and utmost sort of those of
the earth: they make the patient deaf and dumb, like a block without
understanding, as though he were deprived of all his senses and forces which
he had before: and this is the worst sort of all, and with greatest difficulty
cast out. But as for me, I take these to be rather imaginations of those
Authors, then opinions indeed to be allowed and held for true: for the devils
not having bodies, nor entryng into the bodies otherwise then as pure Spirits,
they can receive neither good nor ill of the natural heat, contained in the
body of the men into which they enter.


BE. Much might be replied to the opinion of these two Authors, but I had
rather, seeing the beginning of this our discourse was of the Witch, that with
her urine caused a cloud to rise in the air, that you would tell me what
difference is between Witches and Inchaunters, and in what sort the one and
the other use their Science.


AN. Much might be answered to this your demand, but omitting that which is
less material, let us come to that which in our vulgar and mother tongue we
understand. We call by name of Enchaunters, those who publicly Enchaunters
and openly have any agreement or covenant with the devil, by whose help
they work things which are in appearance wonderful, entering into circles they
cause them to appear and to speak, consulting with them, using their favor
and aid in all their works, and many they make the devils alone to do for
the^. Witches are those which though they have familiarity and conversation
with the devil yet the Witches.
same is in such sort, that they themselves scarcely understand the error
wherewith they abuse themselves, using unknown signs, Characters, and other
superstitions, in which they secretly inuoke the names of the devils, using
their aid and counsel. And because the devil may the better bring them to
his byasse, he discloseth unto them some properties and virtues of roots,
herbs, and stones, and other things, which have secret operations, mingling
the one with the other, that is to say, that of natural Magique with that of
the devil, but in conclusion, they may all be called Witches and Enchaunters,
which with natural Magique (which is the knowledge of those things to whom
Nature has imparted these secret virtues) mingle signs, Characters, and
words, using the^ though they understand them not, in their sorceries and
vvitchcraftes.


BER. By the way, before you pass any further, I pray you satisfy me in one
thing which you said, that the devil does sometimes enter into the body of
unreasonable creatures, which to me seems very strange, because I never
heard the the like before.


AN. Is your memory so short, that you remember not that which we said a
little before of the devils cast forth by our Savior, which desired leave of
him to enter The devil sometimes enters into the body of beasts.
into a heard of Swine, the which threw themselves presently headlong down
the rocks? But to the end that you may understand that the devils do also
enter into brute beasts, at request of those with whom they are compacted, I
will here give you a later example.

When I was a Student, it was my chance to be familiarlie acquainted with
another young man that studied Physic, in which he proved so excellent, that
he was preferred for a Physician to the Emperor Charles the fifth. He and I
being one day in company, discoursing of such matters as these of which we now
speak, he affirmed to me with great oaths, that when he studied Grammar in
the Monastery of Guadulupe, as he went forth one evening to solace himself in
the fields, he saw ryding on the highway, a man in a religious A story of a
student that rode between Guadalupe and Granada in one night.
habit, upon a horse so lean, and to the outward show so tired, that he
seemed scarcely able to stand upon his feet, within a while the passenger
coming to the place where he walked, after salutations past of both sides,
desired him of all favor to go unto the town, and to buy him somewhat for
his supper, because for diverse causes he could not go himself, promising him
not to be unthankful for so great a courtesy. The Student gently answered,
that he was most vvilling to do him that or any other measure he could:
whereupon receiving money, he departed presently to the town, and returned
with speed, bringing such things as the other had required him to buy. The
stranger being hungry, spread his cloak, and over that a napkin he carried with
him, upon the grass, and fell to his victuals with an appetite, constrayning
the student to sit down and to eat with him. Where amongst other talk, the
scholar asked him whether he rode that way, who aunswering to Granada, the
scholar told him that if he had been provided of means, he would willingly
have undertaken that voyage with him, to visit an old mother of his that lived
in that City, whom in many years he had not seen. That shall not be your
stay, answered the passenger, for if it shall please you to bear me company,
I will defray your charges thither, and withal, I will promise you to take
such order, that you shall neither be anoyed nor wearied with the length of the
way, but upon condition that we depart presently, for I cannot stay long by
any means. The scholar being poor, and the only thing that let him to
undertake this journey, being the want of money, accepted willingly his
offer, desiring him only to attend so long, till he had taken leave of some
of his friends in the town, and fetched a shirt or two. The passenger being
therewith contented, he went his ways and returned again with great speed,
but make as much have as he could, the night was come on, so that he requested
the other to stay till next morning, which he would in no wise do, saying
that it was rather better to travail by night, and to rest by day, because
being in the midst of June, the heat was most extreme: so that they began to
go onwards on their voyage, the one a foot, and the other on horseback,
telling old stories, and discoursing of sundry matters, till when they had so
gone a little while, the passenger importuned the student to get up behind
him on the croupe of his horse, at which the scholar laughing, told him that
his horse, in respect of his passing leanenesse, seemed to be fitter for dogs
meat, then to carry two men at once on his back. Well, quoth the passenger,
if you knew my horse so well as I do, you would not say so, for I assure you,
how ill-favored soever he look, there is not his fellow in the world, neither
would I sell him for his weight in gold: and if you doubt of his ability to
carry us both, get but up, and you shall ere it be long confess the contrary;
at which persuasions and others which he used, the student got up behind him on
his Palfry, which carried them away with such smoothness and so swiftly, that
he though he never rode pleasantlier in his life, and every foot his
companion asked him what he thought of his lean beast, assuring him that he
would not be tired or alter his pace, though the journey were never so long.
After they had ridden all night, at last the dawning of the day began to
appear, and the student saw before him a goodly country, full of gardens and
pleasant trees, and not far of a very great city, asking of his companion what
country and city the same was, he made him answer, that they were within
the precincts of Granada, and that the same was the City which they saw
before them, instantly desiring him in recompense of his easy voyage, not to
utter this matter of him and his horse to any man living: and so took his
leave of him, bidding him to go where it pleased him, for he was to take
another way. The Student after many thanks dispatching himself out of his
company, went to the town the most amazed man of the world, thinking it
impossible to finish a voyage of so many miles in one night, unless there had
been some devil within the horse, as it is most likely there was.


BER. It is most manifest that this could not be without the work of the
devil, and I will recite unto you another the like, which a most substantial
friend of mine, a man of very good reputation told me was most certain and
true, and it happened on the self same way of Granada to his father, which
Another notable chance that happened to two men on their way to Granada.
in company of another of his friends going homewardes, having parted from
Valladolid and past the Town of Olmedo, met by the way with a stranger, who
told him that he was also to go the same way, and that if it pleased them, he
would be glad to bear them company, with which they being very well
contented, rode on together, entertayning them selves with diverse kinds of
discourses and pastimes, till having ridden eight or nine miles, their new
companion persuaded them to light down in a green Meadow by the high way side,
which was to the eye very green and pleasant, and there spreading a great
cloak which he ware, drew out of his Budget provision to eat, and so did the
others also, and sat themselves all down upon the cloak, and two of their
Lacquaies with them, and the new commer would needs have their horses also
set their feet upon the same great cloak of his, and so breaking their fast
with great leisure, and devising of sundry things, such as best pleased them,
after they had sitten a good space without scarcely thinking of their journey,
they began to make have to get a horsebake, but their nevve companion bid them
take leisure, for they should come in good time to Granada, showing them with
his finger the city not above a quarter of a league from thence, bidding them
thank his cloak: requesting them withal not to utter this to any man, which
they promised him not without singular astonishment, upon which he took his
leave of them, departing by a contrary way.


LU. Truly either of both these things here rehearsed, are passing strange:
but if, as you say, the devils lost not their nature, though they lost grace,
then is the power and force which they have, if they be in liberty and not
restrained, like unto that of the good Angels, and so as the Angel carried by
the hair the Prophet Abacuck out of Jury into the den of Lions, which was in
Babylon where Daniel was; might the devil likewise carry in an hour these
men, so great a way as is betwixt Olmedo and Granada: and in this manner do I
think that they carry those men and women, whom we call Sorcerers and Hags,
whether they will themselves. Sorcerers and Hags.



AN. This is a lynage and kind of people, which are expressly agreed and
accorded with the devil, holding and obeying him as their sovereign Prince
and Master, and suffering themselves to be marked of him as his slaves, which
mark, some say, they bear in one of their eyes, fashioned like a Toades foot,
by which they know and have notice one of another: for they have amongst
themselves great companies and fraternities, making often general meetings
together, at which times, they pollute themselves with all filthiness, in
accomplishing most abominable villainies, brutish lusts, and infernal
ceremonies; and always when so ever they meet so together, they do lowly
homage and reverence to the devil, who most commonly appears to them in the
figure of a great Ram-goate, where the wicked and hellish abominations that
they commit, are such, that they are not to be uttered. I will therefore only
tell you one, which was told me for a matter most assured and approved, by
infinite testimonies and informations that were taken thereof, which was thus.
A certain A notable chance that happened to a learned man in Spain.
man well learned, and very discreet, suspected vehemently a neighbor of his
to be a Sorcerer, and through the great desire he had to be assured thereof,
began to use conversation, and to enter in a great league of familiarity and
friendship with him, covering so finely his dissimulation, that the other
assuring him self of his secrecy, discovered him self unto him, with great
instance, persuading him also to enter into their society, in which doing, he
should enjoy all the pleasures, delights, and contentments of the world, who
faining himself to be very desirous of the same, it was agreed between them,
that at the next assembly of theirs, he should go to make his covenant and
confederation with the devil, putting himself under his baner and protection.
The day assigned, being come and gone, after it was dark night, the Sorcerer
took the learned man out of the Town, and carried him along certain valleys
and thickets, in which to his judgment he had never been before, though he
knew the Country round about very well; and in short space he thought that
they had gone very far: coming at last into a plain field enclosed round
about with mountains, where he saw a great number of people, men and women,
that went up and down in great mirth, who all received him with great feast
and gladness, giving him many thanks, for that it had pleased him to become a
member of their society, assuring him that there was no greater happiness in the
world, then that which he should enjoy. In midst of this field was a throne
built very sumptuously, on which stood a great and filthy Ram-goate, to whom
at a certain hour of the night they all went to do reverence, and going up
certain degrees one after another, they kissed him in the foulest part behind.
The learned man seeing an abomination so great, though he were by his
companion thoroughly instructed, how he should behave himself, could no longer
have patience, but began to call unto God, at which very instant there came
such a terrible thunder and tempest, as though heaven and earth should have
gone together, in such sort, that he became for a time, through great
astonishment, senseless, and without all judgment and understanding, in which
sort, he knew not himself how long he continued, but when he came to
himself, it was broad day, and he found himself amongst certain rough
mountains so bruised and crushed, as though he had scarcely any one sound bone
in his body; and being desirous to know what this place might be wherein he
was, coming down from those mountains to the plain country underneath, he
found people so strangely differing in habit, custom, and speech, from those
of this Country, that he neither understood their language, neither in the
world knew what course he might best take to get home: But making of necessity
virtue, craving relief by signs, and guiding himself by the Sun, he took
his way toward the West, and was three years in his journey homewards,
enduring by the way great travails and misfortunes, of which presently upon
his ariuall, and of all the rest which he had passed and seen, he gave notice
to the Magistrate, accusing by name and surname diverse persons which he had
seen and known in the abominable assembly, who were apprehended, found
guilty and executed, whose process he that told me this, swore solemnly that
he had seen and read.


BER. As for me, I scarcely justify this learned man's action, for God knows
what his meaning was, when he went with the other to their assembly and
congregation; howsoever it was, it fell out well, that he had the grace to
repent himself, and to return home to his native Land, being by the devils
transported so far from thence.


LV. Friar Alonso de Castra, in his 16. Chapter De iusta Panitione
Haereticorum, writes another Friar Alonso de Castra, his opinion touching
Sorcerers and Hags.
History like unto this: but I will first tell you certain things that he
writes in particular of these hags and Sorcerers, making a difference between
them and Enchaunters and Witches: for this kind of people (says he) are agreed
only with the devil, to the end that they might in this life enjoy all manner
of delights and pleasures. The first time that they go to present themselves
before him, and to do him homage, they find him not in the likeness of a
Goat, but like a King of great and royal authority: they are all brought into
his presence by other devils, in figure of Ram-goates, whom they call
Martinets: Moreover, he says, that the reverence and homage which they do
unto him, is not like to that which we use unto Princes, but in turning their
shoulders, and bowing down their heads as low as they can, and that he
which is newly assumpted into this brotherhoode, does first with words
wicked and abominable, blaspheme and renounce all the holy points and
mysteries contained in our Catholic belief, vowing unto the devil his
faithful service for ever, with many other execrable ceremonies, vows, and
oaths, which he there uses; which being accomplished, they mingle themselves
altogether, and many devils with them in likeness of young Gentlemen, and some
of beautiful dames, where without shame or respect they fulfill in all
abomination their filthy lust and beastly appetite: and of this company the
greater part, or in a manner all are women, as being through frailty and
ignorance, readiest to be deceived by the devil, and aptest thereunto through
the lust of the flesh: and these women, says he, are called Lamia and Striges,
for Lamia is a most cruel beast, which has the face of a woman, and the
Lamia, Striges.
feet of a horse: and Striges is a bird that flies by night, making great
shriking and noise, the which when she can get into any place where children
are, does suck out their blood We call these skriech Owls.
and drink it, for which cause, the Sorcerers also are called Striges, because
they work the same effect, sucking out the blood of men, when by any means
they may, especially that of little children.


AN. I would be glad to understand this a little better, because I have heard
both Physicians and Philosophers affirm and maintain this to be vnpossibe,
because the pores and veins are so close, that the blood cannot by any such
sucking be drawn out of them.


BER. This reason seems to be sufficient, but to be short, not only the
common people, but also many Authors of good credit, affirm it to be true;
and it may be that the devil whose knowledge and forces, you confess, to be
far above our understanding, makes them herein cunning and industrious in
exceeding Nature.


LU. Whether this be so or no, the matter is not great, but according to the
opinion of many Authors, the Sorcerers and Sorceresses go unto these
assemblies in two manners; the one through the deceit of certain oils and
Two manner of ways by which the Sorcerers are present in general assemblies
with the devil.
ointments, with which they anoint themselves, which depriueth them of their
right sense, making them imagine that they are transformed into Birds or
Beasts, deceauing not only themselves with this error; but oftentimes also the
eyes of others that behold and view them, for the devil with deceitful
appearance, forms about them that fantastical body, which is also practiced
by sundry Enchaunters, who do dazzle and deceive our sight, as did Cyrce and
Medaea, and others that used the Art of Magique, turning and transforming men
into brute beasts, to the seeming of all those which beheld them, though in
truth it was nothing so. For as the Philosopher says, it is impossible to
change one shape into another, and the Counsel of Aquilon uses these words.
Whosoever does affirm that any creature may be transformed into any other
thing better or worse, or may take any other shape, then that in which it was
of God created, is an Infidel. But the Sorcerers and Sorceresses, though they
find the manner wherewith they are deceived and abused, yet they take it well
and give consent thereunto, thinking themselves in those imaginations to be
transported with great swiftnes, into those parts which they desire, and verily
to see and find themselves in action of those things, which to their fancy
are represented. The other kind of going to these assemblies, and transporting
them to far places with such swiftnes, is really and truly by help of the
devils, upon whom sometimes they ride, in likeness of Goats, sometimes they
anoint themselves with other ointments, whose operation makes them think that
they are fowls and fly in the air, when in deed they are carried by the
devils. And though upon this matter, there be many things to say and allege,
as both by reading and experience I have found to be true, yet for breuities
sake I will omit them, only this I will tell you, that there is no doubt at
all to be made, but that the devil can in very short space, and as it were in
an instant, transport these Sorcerers into marvelous far Regions: For he
which had power (speaking with fear and reverence) to carry our Savior Christ
out of the Desert. and to set him on the top of a pinnacle on the temple, and
from thence to convey him to a high mountain, whence he might view and
discover a great part of the world, can far more easily transport a man or
woman through the air, which to the end you may by example understand: I will
tell you what Friar Alonso de Castra, writes, alleging the authority of
Paulus Grillandus, in his Treatise of Heretics, that a Sorceresse in Italy,
having been by the devil carried into one of these assemblies, after she had
filthily defiled her A strange story of a Sorceresse.
self with their abominations, as she was from thence returning homewards, by
a Chapel where people often assembled to pray, the Bell happened to ring to
service, which the devil no sooner heard, but he cast her off and went his
ways, leaving her in a field full of briars near to a Rivers side, whereby
within a while a young man chanced to pass that was of her acquaintance, whom
so soon as she saw, she called by his name, and desired him to come unto her,
but the young man seeing her naked, and her hair flaring about her shoulders
and breast, thinking her surely to be some Spright, feared to come any nearer,
till at last, telling him that she was Lucrecia (for so was her name) and
importunating him with weeping and pitiful words, he took heart a grace and
drew near unto her, asking her with great wonder what she made there at that
time, and in so strange a sort: she answered him dissemblingly, using such
excuses as she thought might serve to avoid suspicion of the truth indeed, but
in such sort, as the young man clearly perceived them to be fictions, and
thereupon told her, that unless she would tell him the plain truth of the
matter, she should not expect of him any further assistance at all: she seeing
that lying auailed not after having co^iured him with many oaths never to
disclose it during his life, from point to point discovered unto him, this
which you here before have heard: which the young man having wholly understood,
conveyed her so secretly to her house that she was not seen of any man,
receiving of her many and sundry gifts to the end that he should keep this
matter secret, who acquitted not so well his promise unto her, but that he opened
it to a friend of his, in whom he reposed great trust and confidence, who
imparting it to another from hand to hand, within a while it began to be spread
abroad, in such sort that she was taken, examined, found guilty and punished
according to her desert. By this example you may perceive that they are
sometimes verily in person transported by the devils, though sometimes they are
by them abused and deceived, persuading themselves that they bodily go, see,
and find themselves present in those abominable meetings, when there is indeed
but only, as I said before, a representation thereof in their fancy, as for
example. Malleus maleficaru^ tells of a woman, who affirmed so obstinately
Another story of a Sorceresse, written in Malleus Maleficarum, a book
containing nothing but things exceeding well verified, and of undoubted truth.
before the Commissioners, that she could go and come bodily whether she list
in short space, though she were never so fast imprisoned, and the way never so
far of, that for trial, they presently caused her to be shut up in a
chamber, and willed her to go to a certain house, and to learn what was there
done, and to bring them relation thereof, the which she promising to do, after
she had remained awhile alone, the Commissioners caused the door to be
suddenly opened, and entering the chamber, found her lying stretched out on the
ground, in such sort, as though she had been verily dead: one of them curious
to prove whether she had any feeling or no, took a candle, and with the flame
thereof scorched one of her legs, but seeing no sign of motion in her, he left
her and they departed out of the chamber, causing the door to be fast locked
again, presently upon which she came forth, telling the Commissioners that she
had gone and come with great travail, declaring unto them the marks and tokens
of all such things as they asked, obstinatly maintaining that she had been
present and viewed the same with her eyes: whereupon, they asked her if she felt
no grief in one of her legs, she answered that since her coming back it
grieved her very sore: then laid they before her the grossenes of the error
wherewith she was abused, and told her what they had done unto her in manner as
before: which she truly perceiving, fell down on her knees and craved pardon,
which was granted, upon promise of her repentance and amendment of life. Truly
this is one of the greatest abominations in the world, and though there be
certain Witches, that are not Sorcerers, as we may see in the Golden Ass of
Lucius Apuleius, yet all those that are Sorcerers are Witches, seeing that by
their sorceries they are able to change not only their own, but other men's
shapes also, as Cyrce and Medaea did, and this partly through Magique natural,
that is, the knowledge of the virtues of herbs, stones, oils and ointments,
whose properties are by the devil revealed unto them, and partly through the
mere help of the devil, employing therein his whole power, for the better
binding and assuring them to be perpetually his.


LU. This which you say, may very well be confirmed by that history which I
told you was like unto that of the learned man, the which having almost
forgotten, you have brought into my memory again: it is written by the self
same Paulus Gryllandus. There was, says he, in Italy a woman, who through the
temptation of the devil, being Another history of a Sorceresse, recited by
Paulus Grillandus.
desirous to soil herself in those abominations amongst the other sorcerers,
entered into their detestable society, so that she went and came so often from
those assemblies, that her husband, after some manifest tokens thereof
discovered, grew into great suspicion of the matter, and having oftentimes
willed her to tell him the truth thereof, with solemn promise to conceal the
same, she would never by any means confess it, but with great oaths and
protestations affirmed the contrary: He remaining still firm in his
imagination, carefully endeavored by all possible means to com to the
knowledge thereof, watching her always with great heed and continual care,
till at last, she having one night locked herself into a little chamber, he
looked in at a little hole which he had made, and saw her annoynting herself
with a kind of ointment, which she had no sooner done, but he thought that she
was transformed into a Bird, and that she flew out at the lover of the house,
loosing presently the sight of her, though he held his eyes most ententiuely
fixed upon her, whereupon going down to the door of his house, and finding
the same fast shut, he went to bed, exceedingly amazed at that which he had
seen, where falling a sleep, as he awaked toward the morning, he found his
wife lying close by his side; whereupon, with greater wonder then before,
asking her if she had skill in forcerie, and she with terrible oaths denying
the same; he told her, that denial could not serve her turn, because he had
seen plainly her whole proceedings with his eyes, giving her thereof so
manifest tokens, that she was in the greatest confusion that might be, yet she
still perseuered with desperate oaths most obstinatly to deny the same til at
last her husband starting up, and taking a good cudgel, and laying upon her
with heave and ho; through pure fear made her to confess it: but on such
condition that he should forgive her, and never disclose word thereof to any
man living, thereupon revealing unto him all the secret mysteries of her wicked
and damnable science: which her husband hearing, began to enter into a great
desire to see the manner of their meetings, whereupon, being agreed to go
together the self same night, after she had craved leave of satan to admit
her husband, they both anointed them selves, and were carried to the wicked
assembly, and place of their execrable and pestiferous delights. The man after
having gazed about him awhile, and diligently beheld all that passed, sat
himself down at a table with the rest, furnished with sundry and diverse sorts
of dainty meats, to the eye seeming delicate and good, but in proof of a
very sour and unpleasant taste, of which when he had proved diverse, finding
them all to be of a most vnfauorie relish, he began to call for salt, because
there was none at all upon the table, but seeing the bringing of the same
delayed, he began to be more importunat in craving it, at last, one of the
devils to please him set a salt-seller on the table, but he being unmindful
of his vviues admonishment, which was that he should there in no wise speak
any word that were good and holy, seeing the salt come at last after so long
calling for, God bless us, quoth he, I thought it would never have come, which
word he had no sooner spoken, but all that ever was there vanished away, with a
most terrible noise and tempest, leaving him for a great while in a trance,
out of which so soon as he came to himself recovering his spirits and sense,
he found himself naked in a field amongst certain hills, where walking up
and down in great sadness and anguish of spirit, so soon as the day came he
met with certain Sheepheards, o whom demanding what country the same was, he
perceived by their answer that he was above a hundred miles from his own
house, to which with much a do, making the best shift he could, at last he
returned, and made relation of all this which you have heard before the
Inquisitors, whereupon, his wife and diverse others who^ he accused, were
apprehended, arraigned, found guihie and burnt.


AN. I am glad that you were put in mind to recite this history, which truly
is very strange, though I have often read and heard of the like; for that
which concerns this kind of people, is no new matter, but very ancient: Many
very old Authors write much of them, and of Witches, Negromancers, and
Enchaunters, no less pestilent and pernicious to human kind, then these
others: since leaving to be men, they became to be devils in their works, of
which sort there have been very many famous, or rather infamous in the world,
as Zoroastes, Lucius Apuleius, Apolonius Tyaneus, and many The names of
certain old famous Sorcerers and Negromancers.
others, of whom there is now no knowledge or memory, because Historiographers
have not vouchsafed to write of the^, as men not worthy to be commended to the
posterity: as for this our time, the number of them is, the more the pity, too
great, which though they profess the faith of Christ, yet they are not ashamed
to confederate themselves with the devil, and to do their works in the name
of Beelzebub (as the Pharisees said of our Savior) and for a small contentment
in this world, make no account of the perdition of their souls, though for
the greatest part also, they never enjoy here any great prosperity, or ever
come to any good success, for commonly their confederate the devil, brings
them to a shameful end, procuring the discovery of their wickedness, and so The
devil in the end always brings his ministers to shame and confusion.
consequently punishment for the same, which if one amongst twenty here
escapes, yet in the other world he is assured perpetually to fry in the fire
of hell: But leaving these, let us now come to another sort of them, who handle
the matter in such sort that they will scarcely be known what they are: these
are Charmers, the which as it seems, have a particular gift of God to heal
the biting of mad dogs, and to preserve people and cattle from being endomaged
by them. These as they say are known, in that they have the wheel of S.
Katherin in the roof of their mouth, or in some other part of their body, who
though in my judgment it cannot be denied but that they do great help in such
like things: yet to hear their prayers, coniurations, and gross clownish
phrases, would move a man to laughter, though they to who^ they use them seem
to recover thereby their health.


AN. This is a strange people, but truly this gift or virtue of theirs, is much
to be doubted of, seeing for the most part, as Friar Franciscus de Victoria
says, they are base forlorn people, and of ill example in their life, and
sometimes such as boast and make their vaunts of more the^ they can accomplish:
and I have heard that some of them will creep into a red hot Oven, without
danger of burning.


BE. I cannot think that any man has particular grace to do this, but rather
that he does it by the help, and in the name of the devil.


LV. No doubt but many of them do so, though there are also some, to whom God
has imparted particular graces and virtues, as those of whom Pliny writes,
alleging the authority of Crates Pergamenus, that there is in Hellespont, a
kind of men called Ophrogens, who with only touching, heal the wounds made by
serpents, Particular virtue of men called Ophrogens.
upon which imposition of their hands, they presently purge, cast out, and
avoid all the poison and venom with which they are infected: and Varro says,
that in the same Country, there are men, which with their spettle heal the
biting of Serpents, and it may be that these were all one people. Isigonus and
Nimphodorus affirm, that there is in Africa a certain people, whose sight
causes all those things to perrish, upon which it is intentiuely fixed, so
that the very trees wither, and the children die therewith: The self same
Isigonus says, that in the Country of the Tribals and Ilyrians, there is a
certain kind of people, which in beholding any one with frowning eyes, if they
detain their sight any while upon them, do cause them to die: and Solinus
writes the like of certain women among the Scythians. Pirrhus King of
Epyrotes, as Plutarch testifies in his life, had such virtue in the great toe
of his right foot, that who so ever had a sore mouth, if he touched him
therewith, was helped presently: and some Authors write, that he healed
also many other infirmities there-vvith. As for the King of France, it is a
thing notorious to all men, that he has a particular grace and virtue in
healing, the Lamparones or Kings Evil: and it may be, that as GOD has
imparted these graces to many and sundry kinds of people, so also may he
endue some of these men, of which we now speak with power and virtue
to heal a grief so pestilent and raging, as that of the biting of a mad
Dog, of which kind of cure, to the end you may better understand the manner,
I will tell you what happened to my Father when he was a young man. As he
travailed one day by the way, he was set upon by a fierce Mastiue, by whom,
make what defense he could, he was bitten through the boot into the leg, of
which making small account, because it went not deep into the flesh, he carried
the hurt about him three or four days, without complaining of the same; the
fourth day passing by a Chapel, and hearing the bell ring to Service, he
lighted off his horse, and stayed to hear the same which being done, as he was
coming forth of the Chapel he was encountered by a Husbandman, who saluting
him, demanded if he had not been lately bitten by a mad dog. My Father
told him A pretty kind of curing a man that was bitten by a mad dog.
he had been indeed bitten of a dog, demanding of him the cause why he was
so inquisitiue thereof; in good faith sir, quoth the Husbandman laughing, you
may thank God that it has pleased him to guide and conduct you into this
place, for this dog by whom you are bitten, was mad, and if you should
remain nine days without help, there were no other way with you but death;
and for the more assurance, that I tell you the truth, the dog had such, and
such marks: all which my Father acknowledging to be most true, and entering
into some amazement, the other bad him be of good comfort, telling him, that
he had the gift of healing that disease, and if it pleased him to stay a day
or two in the Village, he would help him. My Father accepting courteously his
offer, went home with him to his house, where he presently There is a Sect of
men in Spain called Saludadores, who heal by such like ceremonies those that
are bitten by mad dogs, I have seen of them my self.
blessed him, and all that ever he did eat, with certain words and signs,
and so likewise once again after meat; toward the evening, he told him that
if he would be cured, he must patiently endure three pricks in the nose, to
which my Father being in extreme fear, willingly consented bidding him use
his pleasure, whereupon, in presence of many the principallest men of the
Village, he took a sharp pointed knife and pricked him three times on the
nose, wringing gently out of each prick a drop of blood, which he received in
a little sawcer each drop by it self, and then washed his nose with a little
white wine, which was also charmed, after which, entertayning themselves in
talk about half an hour, they looked on the blood which was in the sawcer,
still remaining in their sight without being removed, and they found in every
drop a live worm bubling therein: which the Charmer showing unto my Father,
said be of good cheer sir, for here is all the hurt that the dog has done
you, but assure your self you should have run mad and dyed, if your good
hap, or rather God had not guided you this way, give God therefore thanks, and
depart when you please. My Father requiting him in the thankfullest manner he
could, took the next morning his leave, and went on his way: As for this man
that helped him, though it might be that God had given him some particular gift
and virtue, yet for my part, I rather mistrust that he went not the right way,
because he could so readily tell the color and tokens of the dog.


LVD. Whatsoever he was, your Father had good hap in meeting with him. But now
seeing it waxes late, and we have so long discoursed of the manners and
ways, whereby the devil seeks to deceive us, and to lead us to perdition,
I pray you resolve me in one doubt which remains, the which is, in what sort
they tempt men in their sleep.


AN. If you will read Anthonio de Florencia, you shall there find so many and
diverse means and ways, by the which he compasses us about with temptations,
that to recite them all, we had need of far longer time, then at this present
we have; but amongst the rest this one is most vehement and of great force,
which he suggesteth to us in our sleep, representing in our fantasy those
things in which we take delight, and such as are pleasing to our humors and
appetites, especially making us dream lascivious Dreams, and tempting us so
far with filthy and carnal lust, that he provoke us oftentimes to
pollutions. To others he represents in their sleep The cause why the devil
suggesteth evil thoughts to us in our sleep.
great treasures and riches, to the end that waking they might be stirred with
desire of them, and have their thoughts and imaginations busied about the^,
leaving matter of better meditation: But his malice is not always herewith
contented, for sometimes it tends farther, provoking us in our sleep to commit
follies, whereby we may lose both body and soul at once, which to the end that
you may the better understand, I will tell you what chanced to a very
principal gentleman of this country, whose surname was Tapia, whom being a
boy, I knew passing well. This gentleman had so strange a condition in his
sleep, that he arose diverse nights sleeping out of his bed, and went up and
down the house from place to place, A strange chance that happened to a
Gentleman in his sleep.
without waking: for which cause, least he might thereby come to receive some
mischief, his servant accustomed to set every night a great shallowe tub of
water by his beds side, for it is a thing approved, that whosoever is troubled
with this passion, awaketh presently in: touching the cold water. It happened
one night among the rest, that his servants having forgotten to set this
vessel as they usually accustomed, that being in the hotest season of the
Summer, this Gentleman arose sleeping out of his bed, with the greatest
agony that might be to go swim in the River, whereupon, casting about him a
cloak over his shirt, he went out of his chamber, and vnbolted the door of
the house, making as fast toward the Rivers side as he could: coming to the
towns end, he met with another companion, to whom, demanding of him whether
he went at that time of night, he made answer, that he felt such an extreme
heat in his body, that he was determined to go refresh and cool himself in
the River: I could never have met with a fitter companion, said the other,
for I am also going thither for the same occasion; of whose company Tapia
being glad, they went on together, till they came to the Rivers side, where,
as Tapia having put of his cloak and his shirt, and was ready to enter into
the water, the other fell a scoffing and jesting at him, as at one that knew
not how to swim, which he taking in ill part, because he was therein very
expert and cunning, answered in choler, that he would fwymme with him for as
much, and for what wager soever he dared adventure against him to the
contrary: that shall be soon seen, quoth the other, whither your cunning be
such, that you dare boldly perform as much as you say, and thereupon,
forthwith went up to the top of a high Bridge, that crossed over the same
River, whence, after he had stripped himself naked, he threw himself down
headlong into the water, the River running in that place very swift and
dangerous, where swimming up and down in the maine stream, he called upon
Tapia, by dding him according to his promise, do as much as he had done: who
disdayning to seem either of less cunning or courage then the other, went
likewise up to the top of the Bridge, and threvve himself down in the very
same place, in which the other had so done before him: till which time still
remaining fast a sleep, his feet were no sooner in the water, but he
avvaked presently, where finding himself plunging in midst of the rough
stream, though he were in a wonderful fear and amazement, yet as well as he
could, and with all the possible speed he might, he skambled forth, earnestly
calling upon the companion that came thither with him, thinking assuredly that
there was a man swimming with him indeed, but having passed with great
difficulty the danger of the stream, after long calling and looking about him,
when he could neither see nor hear any man make answer, he began to
mistrust, that this matter proceeded by the crafty illusion and deceit of the
devil, who (as he truly thought) endeavored by that subtle practice and
enticement, to destroy in his sleep both his body and soul. Whereupon,
recommending him self by hearty prayer unto almighty GOD, and going up again
to that place of the Bridge where he and his compapanion, as he imagined, had
left their clothes, when he found no more then his own, thoroughly confirming
himself in the mistrust before conceived, he returned homewardes to his own
house with very great astonishment, meeting by the way diverse of his servant,
who missing him in his chamber, and finding the door of the house vnbolted,
went seeking him up and down, to vvho^ he recited from point to point all
that happened unto him, from which time forward he was less troubled with
such passions, containing himself always in such heedfull sort, that the
devil could never have power to deceive him again.


BER. Truly this man was in great danger of eternal destruction: but GOD is so
kind and merciful, that he always succoureth and assisteth all those, that in
time of necessity and danger, recommend themselves with a devout heart unto him.
And therefore truly we had need look well and carefully to our selves, seeing
we have so cautelous and crafty and adversary, continually dressing so many
grinnes and trappes to entangle The devil is always lying in wait to deceive
us.
us, and always busy in laying baits and allurements ready to deceive us.
But seeing it is now very late, and the pleasantnes of our discoursing has
made us pass over the time without scarcely thinking of the same, I am of
opinion that we should do well to refer this our conversation and meeting
till another time, for the satisfaction of some doubts which as yet remain, if
it shall please Signior Anthonio to agree thereunto.


AN. No man better contented therewith then my self, appoint therefore what
time you think good and I will not fail to be ready.


LU. Let us then I pray you defer the same no longer then till to morrow
morning.


BER. I give you my hand upon the same.


AN. And I also give mine.


The end of the third Discourse.
The fourth Discourse, in which is contained, what Chance, Fortune, and
Destenie is, and the difference between them, withal, what luck, felicity,
and happiness, does signify with their contraries; and what the influences of
the heavenly bodies import, and whether they are the causes of diverse
mischaunces that happen in the world: touching besides, many other learned and
curious points.
* Interlocutores. ANTHONIO. LVDOVICO. BERNARDO, LV. I Could never have wished
to have come in a better time then now, seeing I find the company together,
which I so much desired, especially in this place and Garden of Signior
Bernardos, which contains so great a variety of pleasant Plants, Flowers,
Herbs, and other things worthy of admiration, that though we go not this day
out into the fields, we may find here sufficient to recreate and delight our
selves.


AN. I was saying the same, even as you entered, and in truth the contemplation
of so rare a diversity of many beautiful things, placed in so due and
excellent order, within so small a plot and compass of ground, may lead us to
the contemplation of him which is the giver of all beauty, and stir in us a
zeal and desire to be thankful for his gifts.


BER. The greatest excellency of my Garden, is this commendation which it has
pleased you to give it, otherwise having in it no particular matter, worthy of
such praise, for I am altogether vncurious, having only endeavored to place in
it herbs necessary and wholesome, and flowers that have some pleasing freshnes
and gayness of color, wherewith to recreate the sight, amongst which, sometimes
when I am solitary, I use to solace my self in entertaining time, which to the
end that at this present, we may the more commodiously pass over: Let us
sit down in this seat, under this Arc of Iassemin, whose shadow will keep
us from being encombred with the Sun, for though the weather be temperate,
yet it is good to avoid inconveniences.


AN. It pleases me well to follow your advise, for though the heat generally
be comfortable unto the body of man, yet the excess thereof causes great
infirmities and diseases, as daily experience teaches us.


LU. Seeing we are now so at leisure, I pray you let us know what the matter
was between you and the Lycentiat Sorya, this morning, in coming out of the
Church, I would gladly have drawn near to have heard your difference, but I
was detained in talk by a Gentleman of my acquaintance, about a matter of some
importance: If it be true which I have heard say, the Licentiat presumes much
and understands little.


AN. He should loose nothing thereby, if he did understand somewhat more, then
he does, yet in his own conceit, he imagines, that he knows more then all
the world besides, though truly he made little show thereof, in the matter of
which we reasoned to day, concerning Fortune and Chance: I believe he had
newly read the Chapter that Pedro Mexias makes thereof, in his Forest of
Collections, for he could say it all by roate, he was so obstinate in
affirming that there was no Fortune, but only God, that he would neither
hear reason, nor speak reason, nor understand any thing that was said unto
him.


BER. This is a matter that I have long desired to understand, for in all
discourses, almost at every word we hear Fortune, Chance, good Luck, ill
Luck, Hap, Mishap, and Desteny named, and when I set my self to think what
the effect of these words means, I conceive it not, but the farther I wade
therein, the farther I find my self in confusion.


AN. The understanding of these words is somewhat difficill, yet not so much
as you make it, for they were not invented without cause, or without containing
under them a signification, which oftentimes is manifested unto us, by the
effect and sequel of such adventures and chances as do happen unto us.


LU. It were not amiss in my opinion, seeing we have happened on a matter so
subtle and disputable, if we endeavored to understand what might be said as
concerning it; for we cannot pass the conversation of this evening in a
matter more pleasant, or more necessary to be known then this: and therefore,
sir, you cannot excuse your self to take the pains to satisfy us in this, of
which we are so ignorant, and contains therein so many doubts.


AN. Though in respect of my small understanding, I might justly excuse my
self, yet I will not refuse to satisfy you in this or any thing else, whereto
my knowledge and capacity extends, on condition that you will not bind me
any farther, or expect more at my hands: If I shall err in any thing, let
it remain only amongst our selves, as in our former conuersations it has
done, for this matter being so far from my profession, I fear me, I shall
not be able to say all that were necessary and behoouefull for the good
understanding thereof.


BER. Greater should be our error, in leaving to reap the fruit of your
learned conversation, and therefore without losing any more time, I pray you
defer it no farther.


AN. Well, to obey you then I will begin, according to the common order, with
the definition of Fortune: which Aristotle writing in his second book De
Phisicis, Cap. 6. says in this sort. It is a thing manifest, Aristotle's
definition of Fortune.
that Fortune is an accidental cause in those things, which for some purpose
are done to some end.

Upon the words of this Definition, all the Philosophers that have vvrytten
Glosses upon Aristotle, do spend much time and many reasons, with great
alterations and arguments, the which differing one from an other, I will
forbear to recite, least with the rehearsal of them, I should confound
your understanding, and begin an endless matter. I will therefore, only
say that, which in my opinion, I judge fittest for the purpose, and most
material to satisfy your desire: for your better understanding, I will
therefore begin with that which in Humanity is held and written, as
concerning Fortune, and then what in Phylosophie is thought thereof: and
lastly, what we that are Christians ought to think and esteem in true
Divinity in deed. Touching the first of the Gentiles, as they erred the
groslyest that might be, without all reason and sense in all things concerning
their Gods, so without The grosnes of the Gentiles about their Gods.
any foundation or ground, feigned they Fortune to be a Goddess, dominating
and having power over all things, as writes Boethius, in his first book of
Consolation, so that as well in Rome as in other places, they builded and
dedicated unto her temples, in which she was worshipped and adored, of the
which, and of the founders of them, many Authors make mention, as Titus Liuius,
Pliny, Dionisius Halycarnaseus, Plutarch, and Seneca. The Praenestins, a people
of Italy, held and adored her for the chiefest Goddess and Protectresse of
their Commonwealth: but omitting this, as not making much to the purpose, I
will tell you the diverse sorts and manners wherewith they figured her forth in
their temples: Some painted her like a frantic woman, standing with both her
feet upon a round ball: others with great Sundry manners and forms in which
the Gentiles figured and painted Fortune.
wings and no feet, giving thereby to understand, that she never stood
firm: others fashioned her with a head touching the clouds, and a Scepter in
her hand, as though she universally governed all things in the world: Others
set in her hand Cornucopia, or the horn of abundance, showing thereby that
from her we receive all, both our good and evil: Some made her of glass,
because it is a metal so easily crazed and broken; but the most usual manner
of painting her, was with a wheel in her hand, continually turning the same up
and down, her eyes being blindfolded and mufled: whereby it might appear, that
he which was in the height of all prosperity, with one turn of the wheel,
might easily come under and be cast down; and likewise those underneath, and
of base estate, might easily be mounted up into higher degree: Others thought
it good to picture her like a man, and therefore made unto him a particular
temple.

Diverse also painted her sailing by Sea upon the back of a great fish,
carrying the one end of a sail puffed with a full wind in her hand, and the
other under her feet, deciphering as it were thereby the fickle and dangerous
estate of Sailors and seafarers; and hence as I take it, proceeds that common
phrase of speech, that when any man has passed great tempest and danger by
sea, we say, Corrio fortuna, as though Fortune had meddled with the matter.
Besides these, they devised The phrase Corrio Fortuna, is not so proper in
English, and therefore I set it in Spanish.
and figured her forth in many other shapes, with a thousand rediculous toys
and imaginations, the cause of which diversity of forms attributed unto her,
was because she was a thing only imagined, and not known in the world, as
was Ceres, Pallas, Venus, Diana, and their other Goddesses, so that they
described her by guess and imagination, according to the conceits and
inventions of their own fancies, some of which were passing gross, ridiculous,
and absurd.


LU. I have not seen any picture of Fortune that pleases me better, then
that in a table of your invention, where you paynt her with the wheel of
which you spoke, in her hand, holding her eyes between open and shut, with a
most strange and uncertain aspect, placing under her feet Justice and Reason,
wearied and oppressed, in poor, ragged, and contemptible habites, lamenting in
sorrowful gesture the injury they receive in being held in such captivity and
slavery: on the one side of Fortune stands Pleasure, and on the other
Freewill, both being pompously attired with rich and beautiful ornaments,
each of them holding in her hand a sharp Arming-sworde, seeming with angry
gesture, to threaten them some great mischief, if they ceased not their
complaints. I leave the other particularities thereof, but it appears well
that her effects are better known unto you, then they were to diverse of those
Ancients.


AN. That liberty which they had in their imagination may I also have to
describe her properties and conditions, seeing she observes neither Reason nor
Justice in her actions, but oppresses and banisheth them in a manner out of
the world, governing herself by her own will and pleasure, without order or
agreement, as Tully writes in his book of Divination. There is nothing says
he, so contrary to Reason and Constancy, as Fortune: and therefore the
Ancients termed her by so sundry Names, calling her blind, frantic, variable,
unconstant, cruel, changeable, traytresse, opiniatre, without judgment,
besides infinite other foul Epithetes and ignominious names, always accusing
and condemning her as wicked, light, inconstant, mutable, and inconsiderate.


BER. This was a gentle Goddess that would suffer her self to be so handled
of mortal men, because she did not whatsoever they desired, conforming
herself wholly to their inclinations, humors, and appetites. They might by
this have perceived, that her power was not so great as that which was
attributed unto her.


AN. When their affairs succeeded prosperously, then they praised and adored
her with great honors and thanksgiuings, and endeavored to please her with
great and sumptuous sacrifices: and so, as I said, they builded unto her
temples with sundry names and titles, according to their good and ill
successes, of which though the greater Temples dedicated to adverse Fortune.
part was for the prosperous event of their doings, yet diverse also were
founded and entitled of evil and adverse fortune, in which she was worshipped
with no less reverence then in the others, especially of those which feared
adversity or tribulation growing toward them, verily persuading themselves,
that the same proceeded from her, and therefore through sacrifice and humble
prayers, they endeavored to appease, her, to the end she might alter and change
her determination.


LV. In this manner they made two several Goddesses of prosperous and adverse
fortune, for otherwise, in allowing her to be but one, how being good could
she be evil, or how being evil could she be good? For that should be
expreslie contrary to the opinion of all the old Philosophers, who held that
the Gods were Gods through their virtue and goodness, as Tully in his nature
of the Gods, divine Plato, and all the rest of the grave and learned sort.


BER. They did in this, as diverse Gentiles do now adays in sundry parts and
provinces of India Mayor, who as you Signior Anthonio in our discourse three
days since told us, thought they know the devil to be the worst and wickedst
thing that ever was framed by the hand of God, yet do they make unto him
temples, adoring him with great devotion and solemn sacrifice: being asked why
they do so, they answer, that thereby they hope to please, win, and content
him, to the end he should not hurt or anoy them.


LU. This is like that of the old woman, which setting candles before all the
Images in the church, set one also before the devil which S. Bartholmewe held
bound, and being asked why she did so, she answered, because the Saints
should help her, and the devil not hurt her.


AN. Her meaning perchance was good and simple, deceived only through
ignorance: but returning to our purpose, the Gentiles held and worshipped good
and evil Fortune, as the only Goddess and giver of all good and evil, of
all adversity and prosperity, of all successes, as well fortunate as
unfortunate, of riches, poverty, glory and misery, and they esteemed of her,
and named her according to the good and evil effects which she wrought, and
finally, every one spoke of her, according to the benefits and domages received
from her hand. Of the one she was loved, and of the other feared. Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, held her picture in their secret chambers and
withdrawing places, recommending themselves and their affairs unto her, hoping
thereby that all things should betide them according to their own will and
desire: and lastly, as Pliny says, to only Fortune gave they thanks for all
such benefits as they received, and only Fortune was she that was blamed and
of whom they complained, if any adverse chance, misery, or vexation happened
unto the^.


LV. I would feign ask of these Gentiles how they knew, or whereby they had
notice, that Fortune was a Goddess and not a God, and wherefore they painted
her in that sex, having never seen her, neither yet understood any assured
certainty of her.


AN. I verily think that none of them could yield hereof any reason, but that
from the beginning of their Paganism, when they assumpted her into the number
of their Gods, they imagined her according to her name, to be of the feminine
sex, and perchance also as Galen says, they painted her in this sort, the
better to signify her inconstancy, neither was the subtilty of the devil
wanting to confirm the foolish people in their conceived opinion, for entering
into the statues and idols of fortune, he gave out of the^ oftentimes his
answers. Yet the greatest part of Philosophers did not account Fortune to be a
Goddess, but wrote very differently of her, as Aristotle did in this
definition which you have heard; wherefore, since we have hitherto entreated of
the vain and erroneous opinion of the old Gentiles, and the grossnes wherewith
the common people suffered themselves to be abused: Let us now see what the
Philosophers thought thereof: first, Aristotle, whom in this matter we will
chiefly follow, terms Fortune to be an accidental cause, differencing her
from natural and essential causes, which works in those things that are
done with some purpose, and to some effect.


BER. This definition is to me so obscure, that I understand now as little
thereof, as I did before you told it.


AN. Have patience and you shall understand it better: First therefore for There
is great difference between Chance and Fortune.
better declaration thereof, you must know that there is great difference
between Fortune and Chance, for Chance is ampler and contains more then
Fortune does, for all that is Fortune may be called Chance, but all that is
Chance may not be called Fortune, as according to the foresaid definition it
follows, that if Fortune must be in those things which are done for some
purpose and to some end, they must needs be done with some understanding,
which being so, then there can be no Fortune in those things which want
understanding: so that whatsoever betideth to Creatures unreasonable and things
senseless, cannot be termed Fortune, but Chance, for Fortune is only to be
understood in things pertaining unto men, whence it comes, that when we see
any man in great prosperity, we say, that Fortune was favorable unto him, the
which we say not of any senseless or unreasonable Creature: but rather that
such a thing chanced, or that by Chance such a thing was done, the which very
fame word, as I said, may be also applied unto men, and the definition of
Chance may be the very same which we said of Fortune, taking only that clause
away, for some purpose or to some end, and therefore we will say thus. Chance
is an accidental cause which works in things: for seeing this words purpose
and The definition of Chance more general then that of Fortune.
end cannot be but in the understanding, it is manifest that the definition of
Chance is more general then that of Fortune, because it comprehends all
things that want understanding, which to the end you may the better conceive,
I will use some examples for the plainer and more evident demonstration
thereof. If a man should go from hence to Rome, with purpose and intention to
provide himself of some honest estate or office whereby to live, and in
coming thither, the Pope gives him a Bishopric or a Deanery, we may say that
he had good Fortune, considering that his meaning only extended to the
attaining of some mean office, sufficient for his maintenance, and contrary to
his expectation, the Pope made him some Cardinal or great Prelate, so that we
may very well term him Fortunate: the like may be said of one, that going with
Horses or Oxen to till a piece of ground, turns up a stone by Chance, under
which he finds hidden some great treasure, and therewith enricheth himself.
This man's intention and purpose, was to till that ground, and not to seek for
any treasure, in finding of which, we may say, that he was favored of Fortune:
But because the examples of such things as have truly indeed passed, may be
better understood, we may say, that the Emperor Claudius was very fortunate,
because Caligula being slain, and he also fearing to be killed, in that fury
and uproar of the people, for that he was his near kindsman; as he peeped out
of a corner of the house, wherein he lay hidden, to see how the world went, was
espied of a Soldier, who knowing him, and running toward him, Claudius cast
himself down at his feet, humbly beseeching him to save his life: in which
his miserable desperation, Claudius despairing to live, of a sudden made
Emperor.
the Soldier bad him be of good courage and void of fear, saluting him by
the name of Emperor, and presently being brought forth before the other
Soldiers, he was established and confirmed in his Predicessours room, so
that herein was Fortune favorable unto him, for his peeping out of the corner
wherein he lurked, quaking for fear, was with purpose to discover if the
coast were clear, and to save his life; and it happened thereby accidentally
unto him, that he was chosen and elected Emperor. The like may be understood
in matters of adversity; as if one go to the Court with purpose to serve the
King, and by his service to obtain such favor at his hands, that he may
thereby come to be rewarded with some rich estate or dignity, and it falls
out so unhappily with him, that he come in a quarrel to kill a man, and
thereby to loose all his substance; we may say that Fortune was adverse and
contrary unto him; or if a man walking wi^h his friend in the street, a tyle
fall from the house and break his head; he may justly say that his Fortune
was ill, for both the one and the other happened by accident, and not according
to the purpose and meaning which they had. And if you would have an example
contrary to this former, see but what happened to Caligula, the Predicessour of
Claudius, who going out of his house to solace himself in the Town, Caligula
murdered as he went to see certain pastimes.
and to see certain youthful tryumphs and pastimes of young Gentlemen of Rome,
was murdered by some that had conspired his death. The purpose he had was to
recreate himself, and to see those pastimes, or rather as Suetonius
Tranquillus says, to digest his last nights supper, having his stomach
somewhat ouercharged, and it happened accidentally unto him, when he thought
least thereof, that he was slain; so that his Fortune may well be termed
adverse and contrary. These matters also we may in general call Chance,
because they chanced without any such purpose, meaning or intention, and
likewise Fortune, because they happened to men, having reason and understanding
to make choice of one thing from another: but if a Grayhound running after a
Hare, or any other Beast coursing up and down the fields, should strike his
foot upon a thorn, and become lame, this cannot be properly called Fortune,
but Chance.


LU. Before you pass any farther, I would feign know why you say, that these
accidents are not to be termed Fortune in unreasonable Creatures, grounding
your self therein, because they have not reason or understanding, to make
election of one thing from another, seeing in many Beasts we see by experience
many times the contrary: as for example, the Grayhound in seeing the Hare, has
understanding to follow her, and meaning to catch her; and I have seen some,
that if their Masters be not present, carry them up and down in their
mouths till they find him: besides, the setting dog, when he sees the
Patriches, stands still; and some make a sign to their Masters with their
foot, to the end that he should shoot at them, which they could never do,
unless they had an understanding and purpose to have those Patriches killed:
Besides, what shall we say of those things which the Elephant does,
understanding, obeying, and executing those things which his Governor
commands him. Mark also well the prankes and doings of Apes, and you shall
find in them so strange an imitation of man, that they seem by signs to
manifest that they want nothing but speech: and therefore me thinks that the
definition of Fortune, of which you spoke, may as well be applied to these
Beasts, as that of Chance, seeing they have such use of understanding.


AN. I confess all that which you have said to be true, marry that which is
in these Beasts, is not, nor may not be called reason or understanding, but an
instinct of Nature, which moves and leads them to do that which they do:
for all Beasts are not created for one effect, but as their effects are diverse,
so are also their conditions and instincts, having Beasts have no
understanding, but are only guided by a distinct of Nature.
causes that carry with them perpetually a certain limited order and
agreement; and this opinion is by all the Philosophers confirmed, particulerly
Aristotle in his third book De Anima, and all those that gloss upon his text,
affirms that the brute Beasts are led and guided by a natural instinction
and appetite, without having any reason or understanding at all in those things
which they do.


LV. Your answer has not so satisfied me, but that I remain as yet in some
part doubtful: for how can it be that the Elephant should so behave himself
in battle, fighting and carrying a Tower of Armed men upon his back, wholly
ruling and directing himself by his commanders voice, unless he were endued
with understanding, for the commandment is no sooner out of his Governors
mouth, but he presently executes the same. Besides, we see that Bears in many
things which they do seem not to be without the use of understanding: they
wrestle with men without hurting them, they leap and dance conformably to the
sound that is made unto them, the experience of this we have all seen: and I
particulerly have seen one play upon a Flute, which though he could not
distinguish the notes by A Bear that played upon a Flute.
measure, yet he made a clear and distinct sound: but all this is nothing in
respect of that which we see done by dogs. They answer to their names when
they are called, and in all dangers they accompany and assist their Masters:
neither want they a kind of pride, presumption, and disdain, as Solinus
writes of those which are bred in the Country of Albania, who are so passing
fierce and cruel, that, as he says, two of them were The fiercenes of the
dogs of Albania.
presented by a King of that country to great Alexander, when he passed thereby
toward the conquest of India; who desiring to make trial of their fiercenes,
caused wild Bores and Bears to be brought forth, and to be thrust into an
enclosed yard, where one of these dogs was turned loose, who never stirred at
sight of them, but laying himself down on the ground, let them pass by
quietly, so that Alexander thinking him to be but a fearful and cowardly
curre, caused him presently to be killed, which being understood of those that
had the charge to present them, they came unto Alexander, telling him, that the
dog disdained so base a conquest, as that of those beasts presented before him,
for proof whereof they desired that some fiercer beast might be brought before
the other which remained, whereupon Alexander commanded that a Lion of
exceeding cruelty should be thrust in to him, which presently without any
difficulty he slew: then bringing him an Elephant, he leapt and skipt, wagging
his tail, and making the greatest joy that might be, and set so fiercely upon
him, that at the first he pulled him over and over, and would have killed him,
but that they took him presently away.

King Lysimachus had also a dog, which seeing the fire wherein his dead
daughter was to be burned according to the The strange affection of a dog of K.
Lysimachus.
custom of that time, after having accompanied the dead corpse to the place
where it was to be burnt, and seeing it thrown thereinto, cast himself also
presently headlong into the midst thereof, refusing, lothing, and despising life
after the death of his Mistress. Neither is that less wonderful which happened
in Rome in the Consulship of Appius Iunius, and Publius Silus, to a gentleman
condemned to death for a grievous crime by him committed, after whose
execution, a dog which he had nourished young, and that had borne him always
company in his imprisonment, seeing his dead body The love of a Roman
gentleman's dog to his dead master
carried along the street, followed after, with so pitiful cries and
howlings, that he moved all those which heard him to compassion: some of the^
giving him to eat, thinking thereby to appease him, he took the bread and
offered the same to his dead Masters mouth, persuading him as it were to eat
thereof, and lastly the body being according to the sentence of condemnation
cast into the River of Tyber, the dog plunged himself into the water, and
putting himself under the body, heaued it up, and brought it to the shore,
not without exceeding wonder and admiration of all the beholders. But leaving
apart these old matters, what shall we think of that dog called the little
Lion, which passed over with a Soldier, Cardanus also makes mention of thy
dog in his book de perfect is animalibus.
when Colona began his discovery of the Occidentall Indies, who in their
battles accustomed to fight with such incredible fiercenes, that the Indians
confessed their fear to be greater of the dog, then of twenty Christians
together: and which is more, if any Indian prisoner were broken loose and run
away, in telling the dog thereof he understood Fernandus Gonzala Ouiedus
says, that this dog was called Bezerillus.
presently their meaning, and followed after him as fast as he could by the
track, never leaving till he had found him out, and which is strangest of all,
he knew him amongst a thousand other Indians, and going directly to him, would
take him by the bosom, and bring him along (if he resisted not) without hurting
him at all, but if he striued to defend himself, do the other Indians what
they could, he never left till he had torn him in pieces, but commonly he
found small resistance, for they were generally so terrified at his sight, that
happy was he that had the best heels.


BER. Truly me thinks these A strange story of the Earl of Beneuenta^ dog.
things are such, that they could never be done without understanding, for
confirmation whereof, we need not go so far to seek examples, having had
in this our town one so notably strange as that of the Earl Don Alonsos dog,
called Melchorico, which did many things almost impossible to be done of any
unreasonable creature, and scarcely credible, but that there are so many
witnesses of them, so that the Earl took such exceeding pleasure in him, that
he would never suffer him to be out of his sight, giving on his deathbed
commandment, that the dog should be well kept and nourished, bequeathing
to that effect a yearly pension: but the dog missing the Earl, after his
death began to droupe in so strange and mourneful a sort, as though nothing had
wanted to express his extreme grief, but only speech, and for the space of
3. days would never receive any sustenaunce at all, till at last those of the
house taking pity of the silly dog, endeavored by deceauing him, if it were
possible to preserve his life. There was in the house a Iester, which
counterfeited the Earl so in his speech and gesture, and resembled him so
near in favor, that being attired in his apparel, he seemed in a manner
to be the Earl indeed: Upon whose back they put on a suit of apparel which
the Earl had been accustomed to wear, causing him therewith to enter into the
Chamber, and to call the dog by his name, and to whisle and cheer him up as
the Earl was wont to do. The dog being at the first sight deceived,
presently sprang up, leaping and fawning on him, making the greatest joy that
he possibly might, and fell incontinent to his meat: but within awhile
perceiving the deceit, he returned to his former drouping, refusing utterly to
eat, and continuing so a few days, at last died.


LU. This is a matter very large, and that yields many arguments to
persuade us that there is also in other beasts some spark of reason and
understanding: for what common wealth of the world, can be better governed then
that of the Bees, having one only King their sovereign and superior, The
government of the Bees.
whom they obey and follow, how strange is it to see the order and agreement
they hold, in gathering their honey and bringing it to their hiues? And as
Pliny writes, there are some amongst them, who serve only for discouerers or
skouts, guiding the rest to those parts that are commodious for the gathering
of their honey. Besides, what artifice can be greater the^ that which they use
in building their combs or little lodgings wherein they lay their honey, which
when the cold winter comes, when the flowers are faded and gone, serves to
them for for sustenance. The self same do the Emets, laying up, while the
somer endures, in their caves and storehouses, provision for The providence of
the Ants.
the winter, which being for the most part corn and seeds, they knip and bite
the grains in sunder, least otherwise through the moistnes of the earth, they
might come to sprout and shoot forth. Neither is their art with which they
stop and dress their Cabbins, less exquisite, defending themselves thereby
from the wind and water: infinite other things are written of them of which we
may take example, yea and be ashamed, that we cannot so well govern and order
our selves, as do those feeble and silly beasts. Let us also mark the
diligent vigilance of the Cranes, which for their security by night, while they
sleep, The vigilance or the Cranes.
leave by turn one always waking, as their Sentinel or watchman, the which to
avoid sleeping, stands upon one foot only, lifting up the other and holding
therein a stone, the fall of which awaketh her if she should chance to sleep, so
that surely in my judgment, this wary and provident carfulness of theirs to
preserve themselves from such dangers as might otherwise at unawares fall upon
them while they sleep, can by no means be without some use of reason or
understanding.


AN. I confess that all these things alleged in your replycation are true,
but not that they do them with understanding and election of good from evil, or
of that which is hurtful, and noisome, from that which is wholesome and
profitable, as for reason, it is more then manifest that they have thereof no
use at al, for only man is a creature reasonable: neither can that of theirs by
any means be called understanding, though they seem in these operations which
you have said, to have use thereof: for understanding is so conjoined and
united with reason, that the one cannot be without the other. Nothing, I say,
can understand but that which has the use of reason, nor any thing Reason and
understanding unseparably conjoined and vaited together.
have reason, but that which understands. This therefore in those beasts
which seems to be reason and understanding, is a lively instinct, with which
nature has created them more the^ others, that are more brutish, and have the
power of fantasy more gross and dark, which is the virtue that works in
them with that imagination, by the which they are guided to put the same in
effect, and this proceeds as says Albertus Magnus in The cause why some
beasts have greater instinct then others.
his eight chapter De animalibus, not that the wilines, sagacity and craft of
brute beasts, is more in one then in another, because they have reason or
understanding in those things which they do, but because their complexion is
purer and better, and their senses of more perfection, and because also the
Caelestiall bodies have better influence into them, through which their
appetite is better guided by instinct and Nature: So that we may hereupon
infer, that all their works are done by only appetite, fancy, and the
virtue imaginatiue, which moves them: so that seeing all this is done
without reason, or understanding, or purpose, or intention directed to any
end, it cannot be said, that this definiton of Fortune is competent or
appliable to brute beasts. Though many other reasons and arguments might be
alleged about this matter, yet this that is already said shall suffice, seeing
we pretend no farther, then to know the difference between Chance and
Fortune, the rest we will leave to be debated of by the Philosophers.


LVD. I thoroughly understand all that which you have said, and the Philosophers
opinion also concerning the same: but I see that that these words are daily
used far wide from their definition and opinion, for in naming Fortune, we
never mark whether the thing be done with any purpose, or to any end, but
rather the contrary, for we use this word so generally, attributing thereunto
all accidents whatsoever, that we make no difference of one from an other, and
therefore Tully in his Offices, Great, says he, is the sway of Fortune in
prosperity, and in adversity who knows not her force? Whiles we enjoy her
favorable and prosperous wind, we attain unto the fruition of our desires,
when otherwise, we are afflicted and full of miseries: so that he makes no
difference what is an accidental cause and what is not, neither binds he
her to things only done contrary to the purpose and pretended end: as for
example, when a Prince with a little Army, presents battle to another, whose
Army and force is far in number more puissant, it is manifest that his
meaning is to do the best he can, and his intention firm to obtain victory,
otherwise, he would never put himself in so apparent a danger, which if he,
according to his hope obtain, nothing happens therein unto him contrary to
the purpose and meaning which he had, but he attayneth the end for which he
hazarded the battle: yet for all this we let not to say, that he had good
fortune to overcome so mighty an Army with so slender forces: if one should go
to Rome with purpose to be made a Bishop, being of so small merrite that
there were no reason at all, why he should hope to obtain so great a dignity;
yet in coming to be one, we may well say that Fortune was favorable unto him
therein: and so when Julius Caesar in his wars against Pompey, being in
Durazo, where he attended a supply of Soldiers, without the which, his party
was not strong enough to encounter with Pompey, seeing that they came not,
without trusting any man else, determined himself in person disguised and
unknown to go fetch them, according to which resolution, putting himself
into a Fisher-mans boat, thrust off from the shore, and began to pass the
straight, but the water being rough, and the tempest violent, his Pilot the
poor Fisherman feared drowning, and would feign have turned back again, and
was therein very obstinate; which Caesar by no means permitting him to do,
after many persuasions and threatenings, seeing him still persevere in his fear:
at last, be of good courage man (quoth he) and pass on without fear, for thou
carriest with thee the good Fortune of Caesar. It is manifest that his chief
purpose and meaning in this civil war, was, as the sequel showed, to obtain
alone the Empire, which he afterward did, and yet in common course of speech,
we let not to say, that his good Fortune advanced him to that estate: What
shall we say of Caesar Augustus, who from that very instant that Julius Caesar
was slain, had presently a meaning to succeed him in the Empire, employing al
his thought, care, and imagination, about the compassing thereof, and at last
obtained it indeed, according to his pretense from the first, without any
contrary accident, unexpected Luck, or sudden Chance; and yet for all that,
neither was he forgetful to give thanks unto Fortune, neither err we in
calling him Fortunate, for they were wont to say in an old Proverb, that there
was never any Emperor more virtuous then Traiane, nor more Fortunate then
Octauian, which was the same Augustus Caesar of whom we speak. And now daily
we see this name of Fortune so commonly used, that in a manner the rule and
signeury of all worldly things, seems to be attributed unto her, as though
it were in her power to guide and direct them at her pleasure; and so says
Salust, that Fortune dominateth over all things; and Ovid, that Fortune gives
and takes away whatsoever pleases her: and Virgil attributes unto her
authority over all human matters, be they wrought by accidental causes, or
fall they out aunswerable to our desire, according to that which we procure and
seek.


AN. That which Aristotle says, is in true Philosophy, which though we
understand, yet we apply not well, for Fortune is not in those things which
succeed unto us, according to our purpose and pretense; but in those that do
exceed our hope, or come unlooked for, and unthought of, and so we commonly
mingle and confound Fortune with Chance, and Chance with Fortune, yea, and
sometimes we attribute that to either of them, which is neither of both. But to
tell you the very truth, this definition of Fortune is so intricate, that I my
self do not thoroughly understand his meaning, where he says, according to
the purpose and to some end, which are two diverse words, and may be understood
in sundry sense; as those do which gloss upon his text, whose diversity of
opinions makes the gloss far more difficill then the text it self. But I
will not marvel hereat, because perchance Aristotle would do therein, as he
did in the self same books de Phisicis, which being finished, and Alexander
telling him that it was great pity, that so high and excellent a matter,
should by the publishing thereof, become vulgar and common; he answered, that
he had written them in such sort, that few or none should understand the^: And
in truth the old Writers in all their works, so delighted in compendious
breuity of words, that they not being clearly understood of those that
followed in the ages after, were the cause of an infinite variety of opinions,
neither is there any one which glosseth upon the^, who affirms not his
interpretation to be the true sense and meaning of the Author, the same being
perchance quite contrary. But leaving this. I say, that though in this mother
speech of ours, we want fit and apt words to signify the propriety of many
things: yet in expressing the effects of Fortune, we have more then either the
Latin or Greek, for besides prosperous and adverse Fortune, we have Dycha,
Desdycha.
Hap and Mishap, good Luck and ill Luck, Ventura, Disuentura.
by the which we signify all successes, both good and evil, accustoming our
selves more usually to these words, then to that of Fortune: for what Chance
soever happen to a man, we commonly say, that he was (...) Desdichade.
Bonauentu^ado, Malauenturado.
Happy or Unhappy, Lucky or Unlucky.


LV. Me thinks that Felicity and Infelicity signifies also the same, and that
we may very well use them in such sense as we do the others.


AN. You are herein deceived, for Hap, Mishap, good and evil Luck, prosperous
and adverse Fortune, are as we have Some words of the Author omitted, which
treat of the Etimologie of Dycha and Desdycha, Ventura, Disuentura, and
Disgracia, deriuing them from the Latin, which do nothing agree with our
English phrase.
said, when they come by accidental causes, not keeping any order or
limitation, and felicity, as says S. Anthony of Florence, is in those things,
which happen to a man for his merrite and virtue, and infelicity, in not
happening to him which has virtue and merrite to deserve them: but these words
we use, not in ordinary matters, but in those that are of weight and moment:
some Authors also affirm the same to be understood of prosperous and adverse
Fortune, and that we ought not to use this manner of speech, but in difficill
matters, and such as are of substance and quality.


BER. According to this rule, we err greatly in our common speech: for there
are many that come to obtain very principal estates and dignities, not by
their virtues and merrites, but rather through their great vices and
demerrites: yet we commonly say, that such men's felicity is great, and that
they are very fortunate.


AN. You have said the truth, for indeed we go following our own opinion
without any foundation of reason, neither leaning to those grave and ancient
Philosophers of times past; neither to those which have written, what in true
and perfect Christianity we ought to think thereof, who affirm Fortune to
be that, which happens in worldly and exterior matters, not thought on
before, nor looked for, neither of it self, but proceeding from a superior
cause, directly contrary to them, which hold that such accidents happen,
without any cause superior or inferior, but that they all come at hap
hazard: So that howsoever Fortune be, it must be accidentally, and not in
things that come praemeditated and hoped for: but seeing that the most sort of
men observes herein no order, attrybuting all successes both good and evil
to Fortune, whether they happen or no in such sort as the Definition thereof
requires, every manne speaking and applying as he lists; I hold it for no
error, if amongst the ignorant, we follow the common use: but amongst the
wise and learned, me thinks it were good for a man to be able to yield a
reason of those things he speaks, and to speak of things rightly, according
to their Nature and property, least otherwise he be derided and held for a
fool.


BER. Greater in my judgment is the error which wittinglie and wilfully we
commit, then that which is through ignorance only: neither can any use or
custom be sufficient to authorize or allow, that which in the judgment of all
wise and learned men is held for false and erroneous. But before you pass any
farther, I pray you tell me what you mean in this your last definition,
whereas you say, that Fortune is only to be understood in exterior things.


AN. It is manifest of it self, that in things spiritual and interior,
there can be no In things spiritual and interior there can be no Fortune.
Fortune, which who so list more at large to see, and more particulerly to
satisfy himself therein, may read S. Thomas, in his second book De
Phisicis, and in his third Contra Gentiles, and S. Anthony of Florence, in the
second part of his Theologiques.


LV. As for the opinion of Philosophers, you have sufficiently made us
understand the same: now I would you would do us the favor, to declare unto
us, what the sacred Doctors of our holy Mother the Catholic Church do teach
and think therein.


AN. Far different are they from the before alleged Philosophical censure,
for what good What we ought in true Religion to think of Fortune.
Christian soever you reason withal concerning Fortune; he will answer you
with the authority of Esaias, who says: Woe be unto you that set a table before
Fortune, and erect Altars unto her as to a Goddess, for with my knife shall
you be cut in pieces.

The Gentiles as they were passing blind in all divine things, pertaining unto
God and his omnipotency, so not being able to comprehend and understand his
divine universal providence in all things, they divided the same from God
himself, and made thereof a Goddess, attributing to her, government,
domination, power, and commandment, all the exterior things of the world,
which error of theirs herein committed, some of themselves do confess and
acknowledge, as Iuuenall where he says: Where Prudence is, thou have no
deity, o Fortune, but we for want of wisdom do make thee a Goddess, and
place thee in heaven. According to which, S. Hierome in an Epistle of his to
Terentia says: Nothing is created of GOD without cause, neither is any thing
done by chance as the Gentiles think, the temeritie of blind Fortune has
no power at all: Whereby we may There is no other Fortune then the will and
providence of God.
see that Fortune is nothing else then a thing fained in the fantasy of men,
and that there is no other fortune then the will and providence of GOD, which
rules and governs all things: but when we will stretch our selves farther,
we may say that Fortune co^senting in Natura naturans, which is God himself,
is part of Natura naturata, being his operations, I say part, because of the
definition of Aristotle and others, who attribute no more to her then
accidental causes, so that Nature working in all other natural things,
Fortune is more straightly limited in her works, and is inferior to Natura
naturata, and the self same is to be understood of that which we call Chance.


BE. In this manner there is none other Chance nor Fortune, but only the will
and providence of God, seeing that thereon depend all successes and chances,
as well prosperous as adverse.


AN. You have said the truth, and so are the words of Lactantius to be
understood in his 3. book De diuinis institutionibus, which are thus. Let not
those envy at us to whom God manifested the truth, for as we well know Fortune
to be nothing, etc. Coming therefore to the conclusion of this matter, I say
that we imitate the Gentiles in using this name of Fortune and Chance, as they
did, adding thereunto Hap, Mishap, Good luck, Bad luck, Felicity and
Infaelicitie, in an inferior degree as it were unto them, when in pure truth,
there is neither Chance nor Fortune in such sort as they understood them, and
as yet many Christians thorough ignorance understand them: but if any such
Christian would set himself with Aristotle, to examine and sifte out the
clear reason of Chance and Fortune, I am assured he would come to confess
the same, as he which knew and understood, that there was a first cause, by
which the world was ruled and governed, that was the beginning and Ruler of
all things, and that Fortune differed not from the will of the same, which is
the very self from which we receive all good and evil according to our
deserts, God willing or permitting the same, as it best pleases his divine
Majesty: so that the good Christian ought not to say in any prosperous
success of his: It was my good fortune, or Fortune did this for me, but that
God did this, or this was done by the will and permission of God. And
therefore, though we speak improperly, as conforming our selves to the common
use, in using the name of Fortune in our discourses and affairs, yet let us
always thereby understand the will of God, and that there is no other fortune.


BER. I know that you could have discoursed more at large of this matter if
it had pleased you, neither should we have wanted arguments and replies and
matter to dispute on: but you have done far better, in leaving out those
superfluous arguments, which would have but troubled our wits, and in going so
roundly to the matter, touching only that which is requisite and fit for the
purpose, with such breuity and compendiousnes, that we both understand it
distinctly, and bear it perfectly in our memory. Now therefore I pray you, if
it be not troublesome unto you, make us understand what thing is Desteny, and
how, when, and for what cause we are to use this word, in which I find no less
obscurity, the^ in those before discoursed of.


AN. I was glad in thinking that I had made an end, and now me thinks you cause
to begin What thing Desteny is.
anew: but I will refuse no pain, so that it please you to take the same in
good part, and to have patience in hearing me. I will use as much brevity as
I possibly may, because otherwise the matter is so ample, and so much thereof
to be said, that I know you would be weary in hearing me, in sum therefore I
will briefly allege that which makes most to the purpose, beginning first
with the opinion of the ancient Philosophers hereof. The Stoyicks said, that
Desteny was an agreement, and The Stoyicks opinion of Desteny.
order of natural causes working their effects with a forcible and inevitable
necessity, in such sort, that they affirmed al prosperity and all misery, the
being of a King, beggar, or hangman, to proceed from the unavoidable necessity
of Desteny. Aulus Gellius says, that a Philosopher called Chrisippus,
maintained Desteny to be a perpetual and inclinable order and The opinion of
Chrisippus.

The opinion of Seneca


chain of things; of the self same opinion was Seneca, when he said, I verily
believe, that Desteny is a strong and forcible necessity of all things and
doings whatsoever, which by no means or force may be altered: so that all those
of this sect attributed to Desteny all successes good and bad that happened, as
though they must of force and necessity so fall out, without any possibility
to be avoided or eschewed, to which opinion the Poet Virgill conforming
himself, says of Pallas. To every man is assigned a fixed time and desteny,
not to be avoided. This vnineuitable order, according to many of their
opinions, proceeds of the force which the stars and Planets have through
their influence and operation in human bodies. Boethius in his 4. book of
Consolation, says, that Destenie is a disposition fastened to the mooueable
things, by which the Providence annexeth each of them with order and agreement:
and according to S. Thomas, in his 3. book Contra Gentiles, by Disposition is
understood ordenance, which being considered with the beginning whence it
proceeds, which is God, may be called Desteny, always referring it self to
the divine Providence; for otherwise we may say the same self of Desteny which
we said of Fortune, that desteny is nothing, but only a thing fained in the
imagination of the Gentiles: for a good Christian ought by no means to
attribute any inclination, success in matters, or estate of his, to desteny,
and truly: it is a wicked and Gentilicall kind of speech which we use, in
saying when any thing happens, our Desteny would have it so, or it was his
desteny, he could not avoid it: for though perchance the wiser sort know
their error in saying so, only following the common use, yet the common people
think as they speak that Desteny is indeed a thing forcible, and not to be
shunned, but must of necessity happen and fall out.


LV. It is passing true that you have said, and for confirmation thereof, I
will tell you a most true story, which happened to A story of one that said it
was his desteny to be a Hangman.
my self, in one of the cheifest Cities of this Kingdom. Riding one day with
certain other gentlemen into the fields for recreations sake, toward the
evening as we returned homewardes, we saw by the Towns side three men setting
up a poast, upon a little knap close by the highway, for one that was
condemned to be strangled there the next day, of which three, the one as a
Gentleman in our company told me, pointing to him, was the Hangman, adding
withal, that it was pity, that he had undertaken so infamous a condition,
being a young man otherwise well qualified, and a very good Scholar, of which
desiring to know the truth, because it seemed unto me strange, I turned my
horse, and riding near to the place where the men were, after I had asked them
for whom that poast was set up, and they with their answer satisfied me, I
narrowly marked and beheld the gesture and countenance of the young man, who
was of a very good complexion, and of an honest face, he seemed to be about
the age of twenty or twenty and one years, his garments were not costly, but
cleanly and hansome, asking him if he were the Hangman, he answered me that
he was, demanding of him in Latin, if ever he had been a student, he
answered me to that demand and many others in the same tongue very
eloquently, but at last asking him of what country and place he was, he
answered me: that having confessed himself to be a Hangman, he could with no
honesty reveal unto me, any thing touching his Country or Parentage, and
therefore prayed me to hold him for excused; I perceauing his shamefastnes
urged him farther, saying: How is it possible, that having such knowledge and
understanding, thou have taken upon thee so base, infamous, and dishonest an
office: Truly thou deseruest the greater blame and punishment, by how much
more carelessly thou use the excellent gifts which God has endued thee
withal, as comlines of favor and proportion, good capacity and understanding,
in using of which well, thou might do God and thy Country service, whereas
now thy talent lies hidden and buried. He having a while attentively listened
to that which I said unto him, answered at length with many tears, that such
was his hard Desteny, by which he was thereto forcibly compelled, against the
sway of which, he was not able to prevail; of whose error and ignorance taking
pity, I began to make unto him a large discourse, causing him to understand,
that there was no Desteny able to force Free Will, but that every man had
liberty to dispose of himself as he pleased, and to take what way he list, so
that he could not blame his Desteny, but himself only, which having election
of so many good ways, had suffered himself to be guided so ill. Using these
and many other such reprehensiue speeches unto him, he fell into such weeping,
and shed so many tears, that I took compassion of him: vvithall, he told me,
that he had fallen into this misery, for want of good counsel, having
heretofore never met with any that had told him so much, whereby to lighten
him out of the error wherein he was: but seeing (quoth he) that which is past
may be repented, but not undone, I will by Gods grace hereafter take a new
course, less dishonorable to my kindred, for you shall know sir, that I am
borne of Parents of a very honest condition: being brought into this miserable
estate in which you now see me through play only, but God be thanked, it is yet
unknown to my friends, that I execute this detestable office, neither does
any man of this Town know whence I am, for the place where I was borne, is
far from this Country: so that I am fully resolved to change my manner of
life, and to follow your counsel; and heere-with bitterly bewailing his
unfortunate course, I brought him home with me to my lodging, in which he
remained that night, seeming to be exceeding sorrowful, and the next morning
departed: whether he went I know not, but from that time forward he was no
more seen in those quarters: and truly by many signs I saw in him, he gave
me good hope that he would do as he said.


AN. This fellow had never seen the authority of S. Gregory, in his Homily of
the Epiphany, where, God defend (says he) the hearts of those that are
faithful, from saying that there is any Destenie: this is understood, when
they think or hold for a certainty, that such things as happen to them,
proceed from the constellations or other superior causes, as not any way to
be avoided or declined: Therefore whenever this word Destenie is mentioned,
we must understand the same that we did of Fortune, that is, the will and
providence of God. But the best is not to use it at all, thereby to avoid the
error, into which the common people do fall, yea, and a much greater, which is
the denial of free will; for if that Destenie were a thing indubitable, and
the sway thereof not to be resisted, then should neither reward, punishment,
grace, nor glory be due unto deserts: and so divine Plato in his Gorgias, To
say (says he) that there is any constrayning or vnineuitable Destenie, is a
fable of women, which understand not what they say: so that all things are
subject to the free will of man, not to do any thing forcibly, but by
contentment of the same will, for being a Free Will there can be no Destenie.
But because in plunging our selves farther into this matter, we should fall
upon that of Prescience and Predestination, engulfing my self in which, I
should not be able to find the way out: it is sufficient only to declare,
though it be but superficially, what belongs to this word Destenie, still
understanding that all proceeds and depends of the Divine will and
providence of God; and so says S. Austine, in his fifth book De ciuitate Dei,
If for this cause human things are attributed to Destenie, let him which
calls the will and power of GOD by the name of Destenie, take heed and
correct his tongue. And so concluding, we may infer, that there is no Desteny
at all, at least in such sense as the common people understands the same: but
that by this word we ought to understand the providence of GOD, and the
fulfilling of his will, which always leaves us in free liberty to choose that
which is good, and to eschew that which is evil. For this word Destenie, is
chiefly understood and mentioned in matters of adversity, which when they
happen unto us, are either for that we seek and procure them, or else that God
permits them, because our sins and wicked life deserves such
chastisement: Let not him say, that is hanged, that his Destenie brought him
thereunto, but the small care he had to live virtuously, to fear GOD and to
fly vice, was the cause thereof: The like of him that murdereth or drowneth
himself, for if such had lived well, and refrayned those vices and enormities,
for punishment of which, they were condemned by the Ministers of Justice, or
by their own guilty desperate conscience to dye, they should never have had
any such cause to complain. But there is so much herein to be said, that in
seeking particulerly to discuss every point thereof, it would be too tedious,
especially to those, who desire no more then well to know the conclusion how
it ought to be understood, which by this praecedent discourse, I hope you
do.


BER. I understand you very well, yet me thinks, under correction, that there
are some things which happen forcibly An argument to prove that there is
Destenie.
to men, and not to be auoy ded: as for example, a man borne of Parents that
are bondslaues, of force must be a bondslaue, and such a one, me thinks may
with reason say, that his Destenie placed him in that servitude and bondage,
because he came not thereunto by his own will, neither could he by any
means auoy de the same, but would by any means seek and procure his
freedom, if there were any possibility thereof.


AN. This objection may many ways be answered, the one is, that it was no
Accident or Chance that happened The objection answered.
to this man, to serve as a bondslaue, because he was begotten and borne in
servitude: and besides, there is no impossibility of recovering his liberty,
for every day we see happen sundry new occasions, whereby a slave may be
manumitted and set free, if then it be possible, it follows, that there is
no forcible Desteny: if you will say that it was an accident in his Ancestors
to fall into bondage, to the end that this man should be borne a slave, I
answer, that it was in their choice and free will, because they might have
gone some whether else, and have refrained that place in which they stood in
danger and hazard to be made Captives: so that he cannot lay the fault upon his
Destenie, but upon those that might have remedied the same and did not.


LU. You leave me not well satisfied herein, for if I loose perforce my
liberty, neither ever was it, neither now is it in my hand to remedy the same:
neither am I he that was any way the occasion thereof, I may well say, it was
my Destenie, and consequently with reason complain of the same, considering
that it was not in my power to auoy de it.


ANT. All that which is not impossible, may be said auoy dable: and if at
any time while one remains in bondage, occasions may happen to All that is
not impossible may be avoided.
recover his freedom, he can by no means say, that his Destenie forcibly
withholds his liberty: for though he want it against his will, yet he
wants it not with impossibility of ever having it: if he use such means and
industry as is requisite for the obtaining thereof. For example, we see daily
many slaves run from their Masters, and set themselves at liberty, not
only here with us, but also such as are in captivity under the Mores and
Turks: and if the enterprise which any such one undertakes for his liberty,
succeed not according to his intent, it is because he procured it not in such
as was requisite, or because it pleased not God to permit his delivery, for
his sins and demerrites, or some other cause to us hidden and unknown.


BER. Think not that you have here made an end: for the principal point as
yet remains. If you remember, you said that many of the Ancients held
opinion, that the causes of Desteny working with such necessity, proceeded from
the second superior caelestiall causes, as the influence of the Planets and
stars. I pray you therefore make us to understand what is the force of the
constellations, and in what sort their influence works as well in us, as in
other things, for the common opinion is, that all things on the earth, are
governed and maintained by the Caelestiall bodies, whence it comes that the
Astronomers by calculating Natiuities, casting figures, and other observations,
come to foreknowe and understand many things, not only concerning men, but
also tempests, earthquakes, plagues, inundations, and other such like future
calamities.


AN. It is a thing notorious, that the stars have their influences, but not
in such sort as the common opinion How the operation and influence of the
stars is to be understood.
maintains: first therefore you must understand, that their influence has no
power or force to work any operation in the souls of men: but only in their
bodies, the reason whereof is, that the souls are far more noble, and of
more excellent perfection then the planets and stars, so that the
constellations being unto them inferior in being and substance, are unable to
work in them any effect at all. That the souls are more noble then the
caelestiall bodies: S. Thomas proves in this sort, in his Book against the
Gentiles: So much more noble, says he, is every effect, as it is nearer in
Our souls far more noble then the caelestiall bodies.
likeness to the cause whence it proceeds, and so our souls being liker unto
God then the caelestiall bodies are, in being Spirits, as is the first cause
which is God, must needs be more excellent then they, so that they can have no
influence unto them, nor domination over the^, the souls remaining always
free: For though Dionisius said, that God has so disposed the whole order of
the Universe, that all inferior things beneath Out bodies less noble the^ the
Planets, and therefore subject to their influence.
should be governed by those that are superior and above, yet he presently
adds, and those that are less noble, by those that are more noble: and
though by this reason the souls remain free, yet the bodies do not so,
because they are less noble then the Sun, the Moon, and the other heavenly
lights, and so are subject to their influences, working in them diverse and
contrary inclinations, some good, and some evil, which they that seek to
excuse their vices and wicked life, call Destenies, as though it were not in
their power to fly and avoid them through the liberty of free will? For if
we say, that Mars does praedominate in men, that are strong and valiant, we see
that many borne under his Planet, are timorous and of small courage. All those
which are borne under Venus, are not luxurious, nor all under Jupiter Kings and
great Princes, nor all under Mercury cautelous and crafty, neither are all
those which are borne under the sign of Piscis, fishermen, and so forth of all
the other Signs and Planets, in manner that their effects are not of force and
necessity, but only causing an inclination to those things, the which by many
ways and means may be disturned, altered, and avoided, chiefly by the
disposition and will of the first cause, which is The influence of the planets,
works not ^^ force and necessity, but their effects may many vvayes be
altered and changed.
God, who adds, alters, and takes away at his pleasure, the force, vigor,
and influence of those Planets and stars: restraining their virtue and force,
or else moving, directing and lightning our minds not to follow those natural
inclinations, if they tend to evil and sinister effects. The Angels and devils
also may do the same, as being creatures more noble then the soul, the one
moving to good, and the other to evil: for oftentimes our good Angel is the
cause that we refrain those vices to which by the constellation of those
heavenly Our good Angel preserves us oftentimes from many mischiefs.
bodies, we are inclined, and that we follow for our souls profit such ways
as are virtuous and good, and that we avoid those dangers which these
influences do threaten unto us. These also may a man of himself beware and
eschew by discretion and reason: for as says Ptolomie: The wise and prudent
man shall govern the stars.


LVD. I confess all this which you have said to be true: but yet besides the
inclinations and appetites of men, the stars and Planets work also in
another manner, as in aduauncing some men, and abating others, making some
prosperous and rich, yea, and sometimes from low and base estate, enthroning
them in kingdoms, as for example, King Gygas, and almost in our very time
Tamberlaine the great: and deiecting others that were great and mighty, yea
Kings and Monarchs into extreme calamity and misery infinite examples
whereof may be seen in the Book called The fall of Princes, and many others,
full of such tragical disastres. And it is manifest that this proceeds from
the constellations under which they are borne, and the operations with which
they work, because many Mathematitians and Astronomers, knowing the day,
Astronomers sometimes foretell future things.
hour, and moment wherein a man is borne, use to give their judgment and
censure, what shall betide unto him so borne, according to the Signs and
Planets, which then dominate in their force and vigure. And many of them do
foretell so truly many wonderful things, that it seems scarcely possible
to any man but God to know them, which seems to proceed through the will of
God, whom it has pleased to place that virtue in those Planets, whereby the
future success might be known of those persons that are borne under the^. And
though I could here allege many examples of Emperors, Kings and Princes,
whose successes to come were foretold them by Astronomers truly, and as indeed
they happened, Pope Marcellus Father said at the hour of his sons birth, that
he was borne to be Pope.
yet omitting them, because they are so commonly known, I will tell you one of
Pope Marcellus, who came to be high Bishop, whose Father living in a place
called Marca de Ancona, where he was also borne, being a great Astronomer and
at the birth of his son casting presently his nativity, said openly, that
he had a son borne that day, which should in time to come be high Bishop, but
yet in such sort, as though he were not: which came afterward to be verified,
for after he was elected in the Consistory by the Cardinals, he dyed within
twenty days, not being able to publish or determine any thing by reason of
his short government. I knew also a man in Italy, called the Astronomer of
Chary, who whatsoever he foretold, the same proved in success commonly to be
true, so that he was held for a Prophet: truth it is that he was also skillful
in Palmestrie and Phisiognomie, and thereby strangely foretold many things that
were to come: and perticulerly The Astronomer of Charie.
he warned a special friend of mine to look well unto himself in the xxviij.
year of his age, in which he should be in danger to receive a wound, whereby
his life should stand in great hazard, which fell out so justly as might be,
for in that year he received a wound of a Lance in his body, whereof he
dyed. A certain Soldier also one day importunating him to tell his fortune,
declaring unto him the day and hour, wherein he was borne, and withal,
showing him the palm of his hand, and because he excused himself, growing
into choler, and urging him with threatenings to satisfy his demand, he told
him that he was loath to bring him so ill news, but seeing you will needs have
it, quoth he, give me but one crown, and I will be bound to find you meat
and drink as long as you live. The Soldier going away laughing and jesting
at him, seeing presently two of his fellows fighting, went between to part
them, and was by one of them thrust quite through the body, so that he fell
down dead in the place.


AN. I cannot choose but confess unto you, that many Astronomers hit often
right in their conjectures, but not so that they can assuredly affirm those
things which they foretell of force and necessity to fall out, there being so
many causes Many causes and reasons to alter that which the signs and Planets
do seem to portend.
and reasons to alter and change that which the signs and Planets do seem to
portend: the first, is the will of God, as being the first cause of all things,
who as he created and made the stars with that virtue and influence, so can
he by his only will change and alter the same when it pleases him: Also all
the stars are not known, nor the virtues which they have, so that it may
well be that the virtue of the one, does hinder, make less, or cause an
alteration in the effect of the other, and so an Astronomer may come to be
deceived in his calculations, as was the self same Astronomer of Chary, which
you speak of, when he foretold that Florence being besieged with an Army
imperial, and with the forces of Pope Clement, should be put to sackage and
spoil of the Soldiers. This Prophecy of his had like to have cost him his
life, if he had not made the better shift with his heels, for the Soldiers,
by composition that the Town made, finding themselves deluded, made frusttate,
and deceived of their prophesied booty, would have slain him, if he had not
with all possible diligence made away. Besides, if this were so, there must of
necessity follow a great inconvenience, and such as is not to be answered: for
if when so ever any one is borne under such a constellation, that of force the
good or evil thereby portended must happen unto him: the self same then by
consequence must needs happen to all those which are borne in that instant,
under the same sign and Planet: for according to the multitude of the people
which is in the world, there is no hour nor moment, in which there are not
many borne together, of which, some come to be Princes, and some to be Rogues:
When Augustus Caesar was borne, it was impossible but that there were others
also borne in the very same point and moment, which for all that came not to be
Emperors, and to govern the whole world in so flourishing a peace as he did,
yea, and perchance some of them, went afterward begging from door to door.
And think you that Alexander the great, had no companions at his birth? Yes
without doubt had he, though they had no part of his good Fortune and
prosperity. This matter is handled very copiously by S. Austine, in his fifth
book De ciuitate Dei, aunswering the Mathematitians and Astronomers, which
say, that the constellations and influences are momentary, whereby it should
ensue that every part and member of the body, should have a particular
constellation, because the whole body together cannot be born in one moment,
nor in many moments: to be short therefore, they are many times deceived that
give such great credit to the abusiue conjectures of Astronomy, spending their
whole time about the speculation and foreknowledge of future things,
pertaining not only to the birth of men, fore-shewing their fortunes and
successes, but also to those of plagues, earthquakes, deluges, tempests,
droughts, and such like things that are to happen.


BER. If I understand you well, your meaning is, that the influence of the
Planets works not in men with any necessity or constraint, but only as it
were planting in them an inclination to follow the virtue of their operations,
which may with great facility be euited in such things as are within the use
of free will and Lybre arbitrament: In the rest, they may sometimes fall out,
according as by the virtue and property of the signs and planets may be
coniectured and judged, yea, and sometimes also otherwise, because it may
please the first cause which imparted unto them that virtue to change or alter
their property, or that there may be diverse other causes in the way, which may
hinder the effect of their influence.


AN. You have in few words briefly knit up the very pith and substance of the
whole.


BER. Well then, let us leave this and come to Palmestrers, which are they that
tell Fortunes by seeing the lines of the inside of the hand, whose diuinations
they say prove oftentimes true: I would feign therefore know, what credit we
may give them.


AN. I have great suspicion of those, who confidently affirm their diuinations
by Palmestry, that they deal also in Negromancy, and The Chyromancers or
Palmestrers do often meddle their Science with Negromancie.
that the devil being far craftier and subtiler then man, and through his
long experience, and by certain conjectures, being able to know certain
things that are to come, does reveal unto them the most part of those things:
for otherwise, by the lines of the hand only, it were not possible to divine
so right, though sometimes also the things simply thereby coniectured may prove
true: neither can the Phisiognomers affirm, that the same must needs be true,
which by their Science appears likely to happen: For Aristotle, which wrote a
book of Phisiognomy, entreating of all the signs and marks by which the
conditions of men may be known, says, that they are but casual and by
Chance. As for those that seeing the Phisiognomy of a man, do judge that he
must come to be rich, or that his end must be the Gallows, or that he must be
drowned, and such like: such must think that they be deceived, and ought
therefore to reserve the successes of all things to the will of God, whereby
they may cover their error, and remain excused, if the sequel fall otherwise
out, then they coniectured it should.


LU. This matter seems sufficiently debated of: only out of the former
discourse resulteth one doubt, which me thinks were against reason, that it
should remain so smothered up, and that is of the speech of Signior Anthonios,
where he said, that of the influence of the signs, planets, and stars, are
engendered pestilences and new diseases, inundations, destroying whole
Countries, long dryness which causes dearths, infirmities, scarsity of corn
and fruit, with diverse other the like.


AN. This is a question in which the Astronomers and Philosophers do disagree,
either holding of them their several opinions. For the Astronomers in
community do hold and affirm that all this which you have said proceeds The
opinion of the Astronomers touching the operation of the Planets.
from the constellations, and that through their causes these domages do happen
unto men, and all the other evils also with the which we are afflicted,
alleging for the proof thereof, the authority of Ptolome in his
Centiloquium. The man, says he, that is skillful in the Science of Astronomy,
may fore see and avoid many evils to happen, according to that which the
stars do show and portend: and also they allege Gallen, in his third book
of Judicial days, whose words are these. Let us (says he) imagine that a
man is borne, the good Planets being in Aries, and the evil in Taurus; there
is no doubt to be made, but all things shall go prosperously with this man,
while the Moon shall be in Aries, Cancer, Libra or Capricornus: but when she
shall possess any sign, in Quadrat aspect or in Diameter, to the sign of
Taurus, he shall be molested with many troubles and vexations: and he goes
farther and says, that this man shall begin to be perplexed with many
infirmities, when so ever the Moon shall be in the signs of Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, or Aquarius; and contrarily shall enjoy perfect good health while the
Moon shall be in the signs of Aries, Libra, Cancer, or Capricornus. They
recite besides another authority of Auicenna in his fourth book, where he
says, the configuration of the caelestiall bodies, to be sometimes the cause
of pestilentiall infirmities, as when Saturn and Mars are in conjunction. And
so does Gentil exemplify it, alleging the self same place: but what should I
trouble my self in reciting their authorities, when finally there is no
Astronomer or Physician, which holds not the same: but the Philosophers, as I
have said, maintain a contrary opinion, affirming that no damage or evil can
proceed Opinion of the Philosophers.
from the Planets, signs, or stars, into the inferior bodies: and so divine
Plato in his Epynomide, I surely think (says he) the stars and all the
caelestiall bodies to be a kind The opinion of Plato.
of divine creatures, of a very beautiful body, and constituted with a soul
most perfect and blessed: and to these creatures, as far as I understand,
must be attributed one of these two things; either that they and their motions
are eternal, and without any domageable prejudice; or if not, yet at the least
that their life is so long, that it is not necessary for them to have any
longer.

These are the words of Plato, by the which is understood, that if the
Caelestiall bodies have no evil in them, as being divine, pure, clean, and
sempiternall, without any prejudicial damage, and free from all corruption and
evil, they can then by no means be causers of those domages and evils which
happen in the world to the inferior bodies. Going on farther in the same book,
This is, says he, the nature of the stars, in sight most beautiful and goodly,
and in their moouings observing a most magnificent order, imparting to
inferior creatures such things as are profitable for them. By these
authorities they infer, that seeing the stars are of such excellency, and
that from them are imparted to creatures things profitable and wholesome, they
can by no means be the occasion of harm or mischief, their nature and office
which they continually use, being contrary thereunto. But farther the same
Author goes on, declaring the same more plainly. Finally, says he, of all
these things we may infer this as a true and conclusiue opinion, that it
were impossible for the heaven, the Planets, the stars, and the caelestiall
bodies which appear therein, unless they had a soul, or unless they did it
through God by some exquisite reason, to be able to reuolue the years, months
and days being the cause of all our good, and so being of our good, they
cannot be of our evil. And this explaneth Calcidius upon the same Plato in his
Tymaeus, by these words, Either, says he, all the stars are divine and good,
without doing any evil, or some of the^ only are evil and domageable: But
how can this agree, or how can it be Calcidius.
said, that in a place so holy and so full of all bounty and goodness, there can
be any evil? And the stars being replenished with caelestiall wisdom,
euilnes and malice proceeding of the contrary which is folly, how can we then
term the stars to be malicious or causers of any evil, unless we should say
that which is not lawful, that they are at one time good, and at another time
evil, and that they cannot mixtly be the cause both of good and evil, the
which is not to be thought or believed, that all the stars have not one self
caelestiall substance, none of them separating themselves from their own
nature: so that all the stars being good, they may be the cause of good, but
not of evil.


BE. These authorities, me thinks, conclude not thoroughly the purpose of their
intention, for there are many things that can cause both good and evil, and
therefore the caelestiall bodies also may do the same.


AN. This is when there An objection.
is in any thing both good and evil, working effects according to the nature
thereof; but there is no evil in the heavens, not in any thing therein
contained, for according to Aristotle in An answer to the objection.
his second Book De Coelo, the motion thereof is life to all things, and in
the ninth of his Metaphisickes also he affirms, that in those things which
are sempiternall, there can be found no evil, error, or corruption. And
Auerroes entreating of this matter, uses these words: It is a thing manifest,
says he, that in those things which are Eternal, and whose essence is without
beginning, there can be no evil, error, or corruption, the which cannot be in
any thing but where evil is, and Auerroes.
hereby may be known the impossibility of proving that which the Astronomers
say, that there are some of them luckie, and others unlucky: this only may be
known of them, that there are some better then others. By these words we may
understand that the stars are all good, but not in equality: neither have
they all equal virtue and goodness, and as in them there is no evil at all, so
can they not be the cause of any harm at all, neither can we say that their
influences cause any contagious or pestilentiall infirmities, and so thinks
Mercurius Trismegistus in his Asclepius, Where, the heaven, says Opinion of
Merc. Trismegistus.
he, is that which engenders, and if the office thereof be to engender, it
cannot be to corrupt. Proclus in his book De Anima, holds the same. The
Heavens, says he, founded with a harmony in reason, contain all worldly
things, putting them in perfection, accomodating them and benefiting them:
which being so, how then can they damnifie, destroy or corrupt them.

Auerroes also alleges another reason by the testimony of Plato, who says,
That evil is found in those things which Auerroes.
have no order nor agreement, and all divine things are framed and constituted
in most excellent order, whereby it follows, that the stars and other
caelestiall bodies have no evil in them: and having none in them, they cannot
work or cause any. This opinion follows Iamblicus in his Book Iamblicus*
Plotinus scoffeth at the Astronomers.
De Misterijs Egiptiorum, and Plotinus in his tenth Book, where he demands
if the stars be the causes of any thing, jesting and scoffing at the
Astronomers, who affirm that the Planets with their motions are not only the
causes of riches and poverty, but also of virtue, vices, health and diseases,
and that in diverse times, they work upon men diverse operations, And finally he
will by no means permit that there are any evil stars, or that they can be
sometimes good and sometimes evil, which opinion is also maintained by Auerroes
in his 3. book of Heaven. Where, whosoever, says he, believes Auerroes.
that Mars, or any other planet or star howsoever set in conjunction or
opposition can hurt or do damage, he believes that which is contrary to all
Philosophy. Marcilius Ficinus Opinion of Marsilius Ficinus.
in his Comentaries upon the sixth Dialogue of Laws, says thus: One thing we
must understand and believe, that all forces, and mouings of the superior
Bodies, which discende into us, are of their own nature always causers of our
good, and guide us thereunto: we must not therefore judge that viciousnes of
ill conditioned men proceeds of Saturn, or rashness and cruelty of Mars, or
craft and deceit of Mercury, or lascivious wantonness of Venus. Let us see what
reason thou have, to attribute unto Saturn that frowardness and vice, which
thy evil custom, conversation, exercise or diet, has engendered in thy body
or mind, or to Mars that fiercenes and cruelty, which seems to resemble
that magnanimity and greatness to which he is inclined, or to Mercury that
subtlety and craft, called by a better name industry, or to Venus thy
lascivious love and wantonness? Happens it not often that men loose their
sight, yea and sometimes their lives under the flaming blasts of the
Sunne-beames, which is ordained only for our comfort, and to give life and
nourishment to things? And do we not see diverse that in open air receive the
warmenesse thereof to their comfort, who in enclosed places are with a small
heat smothered, sluft and choked? And even as these men through the heat of
the Sun, whose nature is to help, cherrish and comfort, do receive damage by
their own fault, in not using the same as they should do: so may the
successes of those which are borne under these planets, which by their nature
are al good, through evil and vicious education prove naught, though the
inclination of their planets be never so good and favorable: So that by these
words of Marsilius, the opinion of Astronomers, Mathematitians and Physicians,
seems not to be well grounded, The Astronomers opinion reprouable by many
arguments.
but that how commonly held or allowed soever it be, he holds it to be
reprouable by many and evident arguments.


LU. The Philosophers are not a little beholding to you for strengthening their
opinion with so many authorities and effectual reasons, and no doubt, but if
this matter were put to your arbytrement, they should find of you a favorable
judge.


AN. I have not so good opinion of my self, as to take upon me the arbitrament
of this matter, though it were of less substance then it is, especially so
many wise and learned men maintaining either side. I have therefore only
rehearsed and touched some of their allegations on both sides, leaving you in
your choice to lean unto that opinion which likes you best, referring always
the judgment thereof to those that are of greater learning, deeper study, and
more grounded wisdom the^ my self, though it seems unto me to be a matter
scarcely determinable, considering the variety of effectual reasons that may
be alleged of either side.


LVD. For all this I account you half partial, and therefore Objection.
I pray you answer me to one objection, which might be of the Astronomers
side opposed, the which is thus: We see that there are diverse venomous and
hurtful herbs, and many other Worms, Vermins and Serpents so contagious,
that they are thorough their poisons and infections noisome unto men, yea, and
often causers of their death: And seeing that all inferior bodies, are ruled,
receiving their forces and virtues from the influence of the heavenly and
superior bodies, it then seems, that they should be cause of the damage which
is wrought by the contagion of these inferior bodies, and therefore the
Philosophers party is not so freely and generally to be maintained, without
exception of some particularities: for if we will look down unto the herbs,
we shall find The juice of Hemlocke given to drink, to those that were
condemned to die.
that the Hemlock, a kind of weed, yielded to our elders a juice, with the
which they executed their sentence of death, constraining those whom they
condemned to die, to drink thereof, as Plato writes in his Phaedon. The juice
also of the Mandragora is known to be mortiferous and deadly to those that
drink thereof.


AN. Pass on no farther in this The juice of Mandragora is mortiferous. The
virtue of Hemlock
matter, for I confess it to be as you say: yet Hemlocke was not created by
God, neither does the influence of the constellations work in it any effect,
but for our profit and commodity: for if you read Dioscorides, you shall there
find that there is nothing of greater efficacy to heal Saint Anthonies fire,
it asswageth the raging of the Milk in women newly delivered: and Pliny
says, that it preserves the teates from swelling. Cornelius Celsus affirms,
that it heals watery eyes, and stauncheth the bleeding at the nose: and Galene
says, that the grain thereof is the natural food of many Birds, namely
Stares.

Neither is the Mandragora less profitable and wholesome: The virtues of
Mandragora.
for the root thereof moystned and tempered with Vinegar, heals the wounds
made by Serpents, dissolueth the Kings evil, and cures the disease called the
Wolf, asswageth the pain of the Gout, causes the flowers of women to come
down, and takes spots out of the face. All this says Auicenne, thereof in
his second Book. Tryacle, Escamonia, Turbit, Agarico, and other Medicines
made of herbs, we notoriously know to contain poison in them, and yet we
see by daily experience how wholesome their operations are to No herb so
venomous* but it is some-way virtuous and profitable.
those that are sick, and the like is in all other herbs which are venomous,
of which there is not any one to be found that wants peculiar virtue, or that
is not one way or other helping and profitable. Neither is there less virtue
to be found in living things which are commonly held to be venomous, as for
example, though the Snake be not without poison, yet her skin which she
casts, as says Dyoscorides, being sod in Wine, and some drops thereof let
fall into the ear diseased, helps the pain thereof, and the same Wine
being taken and held in ones mouth, cures the toothache, and the flesh
thereof being made into a certain preparatife and eaten, heals the Leprosy.
The Viper is most venomous and full of poison, yet are they no small virtues
and commodities which The Viper yields remedy against many diseases.
she yields: for as Pliny says in his 29. book, the ashes of her skin
being burned, is the best remedy that may be, to cause hayres fallen of through
infirmity or disease to grow again, and that she herself being burned and
beaten into powder, tempred with the juice of Fenell and certain other things,
cleereth the eyesight, and drives away Rhumes and Catarres. Dyoscorides also
says, and Pliny affirms the same, that the pain of gowtie feet is taken
away, by anointing them with her grease: and Galen in his sixth book De
virtute medicamentorum, affirms, that if a Viper be choked with a cord or
string made of colored Flax, and hanged about the neck of him which suffers
any passion, stuffing or choking in the throat, it shall be an admirable
remedy: the self same affirms Auicenne in his 3. book, though there be
many that regard not whether the string be of Flax, or of wool, of what
color so ever, and for the most part they use therein white: Besides,
Aristotle says, in his third book De Animalibus, that as the Vipers and
Scorpions are known to be noisome and full of poison, so have they also many
profitable and helping virtues, if we could attain to the knowledge and
experience of them all: And lastly, that the Viper sod in wine, heals those
that are infected with Leaprosie: which Gallen confirms by an example,
alleged in his eleventh book of simple Medicines, where he says, that
certain A Leaper strangely cured.
Mowers brought with them into the field where they labored, a little vessel
of wine, leaving the same under a hedge by forgetfulness uncovered, within a
while, returning to drink thereof, as they poured out the wine, there fell
out of the vessel a dead Viper into their drinking boule, which having crept
into the same, was therein drowned, so that they dared not to taste thereof:
There was thereby by chance at that present in a little Hute or Cabbine, a man
infected with a disease which they call Leaprosie, who through the loathsome
contagiousnes of his disease, was expelled the Town, and forced to remain in
the fields, to the end that the infection of his disease, should scatter it
self no farther. The Mowers moved with compassion, accounting the calamitous
life of this poor man to be more miserable then death, gave unto him this
impoysoned wine to drink, as a work of charity, thereby to deliver him out of
that languishing life so full of horror, loathsomnes, and calamity; which
having done, the success that followed was marvelous, for so soon as the
sick Leaper had greedily swallowed in the wine, his disease and filthiness began
by little and little to fall from him, and in short spacee he becam whole and
sound: so that I say, that all herbs, beasts, and stones, containing in them
any poison or thing noisome, contain also in them many good and profitable
virtues, neither are we to attribute unto the stars the blame of the domages
which they do, but unto our selves, which know not how to use them as we
ought, and should doc for our health and commodity. For the Sun which with
his comfortable heat conserueth and cheereth our life, would perchance be
occasion of death to him, that in midst of a raging hot day, would lay himself
naked upon some high place to be scorched and parched with the beams thereof:
And as a sword or dagger which is made for the defense of man, and to offend
his enemy, may be the causer of his own death, if he will desperately thrust it
into his own body: in like sort those men who use not the before rehearsed
things, and such like as they should do, in receiving thereby the profit they
may, and in avoiding the harm that through the use of them ill employed, may
ensue, can not iusty lay blame on any but themselves: Concluding therefore, I
say that pestilentiall and contagious diseases, are caused by matters of the
earth it self infecting Pestilentiall diseases are caused through the
corruptions and putrifactions of the earth.
the air, as dead carrions, corrupted carcasses, sinks, standing, and stopped
waters that come to putrify and stink, with many such other filthy and
infectious things: As for great inundations, droughts, and famines, with the
rest of such like accidents that offend and anoy us; they come and proceed, for
our chastisement, from the will of God, causing and permitting the^, without the
which, neither can the stars have any force or virtue at all, neither can
they be the causers of any thing that may work us hurt, hinderance, damage, or
prejudice.


BER. Well then, seeing the Astronomers and Physicians are of one opinion, and
the Philosophers of another, and each of them armed with so many arguments and
reasons to maintain their party; let us leave them to beat their brains
about the determination thereof, contenting our self with this satisfaction
which you have given us. And seeing it now waxes time to withdraw our selves,
and you Signior Anthonio being wearied with your long discourse, and our
troublesome demands and interpositions; it is more then reason that we now
give you respite till another time, and that we accompany you to your lodging.


AN. This courtesy is so great, that in accepting it, I should show my self
unworthy thereof, and therefore I will not put you to that pain: but seeing it
is so late, we will go every man his way, and there-vpon I betake you to the
protection of the Almighty.


LV. Seeing you will have it so, we also commit you to God, who guide you in
the accomplishment of your good desires.


The end of the fourth Discourse.
The fifth Discourse, entreating of the Septentrionall Countries, and of the
lengthening and decreasing of the days and nights, till they come to be six
months long a piece: and how the Sun and the Moon rises and sets with
them, in a different sort then here with us, with many other things pleasant
and worthy to be known.
* Interlocutores. ANTHONIO. LVDOVICO. BERNARDO. LV. SEeing our business is nor
great, and this place where we are so fit and commodious, to pass our time
in good conversation: I cannot choose Signior Anthonio, but challenge you of
the accomplishment of your promise, made unto us in these our former
co^uersations, touching the declaration of certain doubts, which we then lest
in suspense, remitting them till some other time, that we should meet
together, which now (seeing our opportunity, the fit and delightful pleasure of
this place, and the sweet temperature of the weather, inuiteth us to
entertain our selves in some recreatiue discourse) I pray you make us
understand, especially those touching Geography and Cosmography, wherein my
ignorance is such, that I should account my self very happy to be instructed
in some knowledge thereof, whereby I might be able to discourse my self, or at
least to understand others when they discourse therein: I say this, because I
heard you say the other day, that you were laughed at by certain Gentlemen,
for saying, that there was a part of the world, where the day endured the
whole space of six months together without night; and the night likewise as
long without day, which to me seems a matter so marvelous and strange, that
how true so ever it be, I cannot choose but greatly wonder thereat; and
therefore you shall do me a great favor to declare it somewhat more
particulerlie in plain and evident reasons, whereby I may the better
comprehend the same.


BER. You have prevented me, for in truth I came with the same purpose and
intention, and I know not how we may spend the time better, for thereby
(seeing with our eyes we cannot view, nor with our bodies travel the whole
world thorough) yet shall we understand the particularities thereof, at the
least those which in this matter we require to know, if it shall please Signior
Anthonio to make us participant of some part of his knowledge therein.


AN. I could have been contented that you had forgotten this matter, into the
deep Sea of which, if I once engulfe my self, I see not how I shall be able
to avoid the danger of drowning: for to debate and declare one particularitie
well, of force there must concur many others weaued and enchained as it were
together, one with another: yet if you will promise me to take in good part
that little which I shall say, and to which my knowledge extends, I will
prove how far I can reach, and when I am at the farthest, I will make an end,
though in truth, were it not for giving you contentment, I should do best in
holding my peace, least I seem to take upon me to be an Astronomer, a
Philosopher, and a Cosmographer, whereas indeed I have knowledge in no part of
any one of them.


BER. We require herein no more of you then you know, which how little so
ever it be, I am sure it is far above ours, and therefore seeing you have
audience so intentiuely bent to hear you, you have no reason to use such
excuses, and finally, if you condescend not willingly to our request, we are
resolutely bent to use force.


AN. Nay, rather then you should do so, I will do the best I can with a free
and good will, and though I entreat not but of that part of the world which is
toward the North, because it so chiefly serves for our purpose: yet can not
I choose but touch diverse others, for the better understanding of our matter,
and this will be with so great a difficulty, that I may with great reason say
as Pomponius Mela did, whose words are these: I begin, says he, to write the
situation of the Universe, a work truly very combersome, and of which my
tongue and eloquence is no way capable, the same consisting of so great a
diversity of people and places. etc. This therefore is likely to be a matter
more tedious then pleasant: provided always before hand, that you account me
not so arrogant, as that I should attribute any thing of that which I will say
herein unto my self, assuring you that I will allege nothing but that which
has been written by Authors of credit, both ancient and modern: and in fine,
nothing can be said which has not been said before, as Solinus confesses,
saying: What thing may we properly term to be our own, seeing there has not
been till this our time, any one thing left vnintreated of.

The opinions of those that write of this part of the earth, are so different
and disagreeing, that there can be no greater confusion in the world: at which
I wonder not, if they sometimes err in many things touching those parts of the
world, distant so infinite a number of miles from us, (and separated from us
by so many Mountains, Valleys, Rocks, Cragges, vnenhabited Deserts, Rivers,
Lakes, Forests, sands and seas, which bar us from giving assured testimony
and witness of them) seeing we being here in Europe, which as every one
knows that has but a little smacke in Geography is the least of the three
old parts of the World, cannot truly tell where she ends her bounds and
limits, and thoroughly prove the same with sufficient reasons, but only that
we follow herein the opinion of the Ancients, who wrote thereof according to
their own fancy, and as they list themselves: for some of them coming to
distinguish the bounds of Europe on the North-side, content themselves in
setting the River Tanais, and the Lake Maeolis for limits thereof: others the
Ryphean mountains, without understanding what they say, or yielding any reason
therefore: but they never talk of that Land which runs on in length by the
sea coast on the left hand toward the West passing by the kingdom of Norway
and many other Provinces and Countries, for they know not what Land it is,
neither whether it goes, nor where it ends, nor where it turns to join
with those parts of which they have notice.


LV. By this means then it may be, that they are deceived which say that
Europe is the least part of the three old divided parts of the world, and yet
some say, that on the other side of the bounds of Asia also, there is much
unknown Land.


AN. You have reason, for this Land of which I speak, stretching out along the
Occident, comes turning to the Septentrion, even till under the Northern
Pole, which is the same that we here see, from which forward on the other side,
what Land there is, or how it extends it self, we know not, though
perchance the same be very great and spacious. But let us leave this matter
till hereafter, where I will declare it more particulerly, and let us return to
entreat of some grounds and principles which are necessary for the facility of
understanding that which we will speak of: for otherwise, in alleging every
particular, we should bring in all the Astrology and cosmography of the
world: and therefore ommitting to declare what thing the Sphaere is, and in what
sort it is understood that the earth is the Center of the world, and then how
the Center of the Earth is to be understood, with infinite other the like, I
will only allege that which is necessary for our discourse.

First therefore, all Astronomers and Cosmographers divide The heaven is
divided into five Zones, and the earth into as many.
the heaven into five Zones, which are five parts or five gyrdings about,
according to which also the Earth is divided into other five parts. The one
has in the midst thereof the Pole Artick, or North Pole, which is the same
that we see: the other has the South or Pole Antartick, directly contrary on
the other side of the Heaven. These 2. Poles are as two Axeltrees, upon which
the whole Heaven turns about, they still standing firm in one self place,
in the midst between them both is the same which we call Torrida Zona, and of
the other two Colaterall Zones, the one is between Torrida Zona and the
North Pole, being the same in which we inhabit, co^taining Asia, Afric, and
Europe, and it has not bin known or understood til these our times, that any
other of the Zones or parts of the earth, has been enhabited; and so says
Ovid The opinion of Ovid.
in his Metamorphosis, that as the heaven is divided into five Zones, two one
the right hand, and two on the left, and that in the midst more fiery then any
of the rest: so has the divine Providence divided the Earth into other five
parts, of which that in the midst is through the great heat vninhabitable, and
the two utmost in respect of their exceeding cold. The self same opinion
holds Macrobius in his second Macrobius, Virgil, and the rest of the
ancients erred touching the enhabited parts of the earth.
book of the Dream of Scipio, and Virgill in his Georgiques, and the most
part of all the ancient Authors, whose authorities it serves to no purpose to
rehearse, because in these our times we have seen and understood by experience
the contrary as touching Torrida Zona, seeing it is as well to be enhabited as
any of the others, and every day it is past under from one part to another, as
we the other day discoursed. And truly the ignorance of the Ancients must
be very great, A great ignorance of the ancient.
seeing they know not that Arabia faelix, Aethiopia, the coast of Guyne,
Calecut, Malaca, Taprobana, Elgatigara, and many other Countries then in
notice, were under Torrida zona, being a thing so notorious and manifest, that
I marvel how they could so deceive themselves, and not only they, but
diverse modern Writers also, which though one way they confess it, yet another
way they seem to stand in doubt, as may be seen by the Cosmography of Petrus
Appianus augmented by Gemmafrigius, a man in that Science very famous, whose
words are these: The five zones of the Heaven, constitute so many parts in the
Earth, of which the two utmost in respect of their extreme cold, are
vnenhabitable, the middlemost, through the continual course of the Sun, and
perpendiculer beams thereof, is so singed, that by reason it seems not at
all, or very hardly to be habitable.

The Greek Commendador likewise, a man of great fame and estimation in Spain,
deceived himself in his gloss Commendador is a Knight, of some cross, as
that of Malta or S. James.
which he vvrote upon John De Meno, wherein he maintayneth this ancient
opinion by these words: The Mathematitians, (says he) divide the Earth into
five Zones, of which the two utmost next the Poles, through their great
extreamitie of cold, are not enhabitable, neither that in the midst through
extreme heat, the other two of each side participating of the heat of the
middle, and the cold of the utter Zones are temperate and inhabitable. Of
these two, the one is enhabited by those Nations of which we have notice, and
is divided into three parts, Africa, Asia, and Europa: the other is enhabited
by those whom we call Antypodes, of whom we never had, nor never shall have any
knowledge at Antypodes.
all, by reason of the Torrida or burned Zone, which is vninhabitable, the
fiery heat of which stops the passage between them and us, so that
neither they can come at us nor we at them. etc. Though here the Comendador
confess that there are Antypodes, with whom we cannot converse nor traffic,
yet the Ancients accounting the Torrida Zona as vninhabitable, doubted whether
there could be of the other side thereof any people; seeming unto them
impossible, for any man since the creation of Adam, which was created in this
second Zone of the Pole Articke, to pass over the burning Zone and there to
generate and spread mankind. Of this opinion seems to be S. Austine, when he
says, Those which fabulously affirm that there are Antypodes, which is S.
Austins opinion touching Antypodes.
to say, men of the contrary part, where the Sun rises when it sets with
us, and which go on the ground with their feet right against ours, are by no
means to be believed: and Lactantius Firmianus in his third book of Divine
Institutions, laugheth and iesteth at those, which make the earth and
Lactantius Firmianus opinion.
the water to be a body sphaericall and round, at which error of his, being a
man so wise and prudent, I cannot choose but much marvel in denying a
principle so notoriously known, as though the world being round, those people
which are opposite to us underneath, should fall down backwards. The grosnes
of which ignorance being now so manifestly discovered, I will spend no more
time in rehearsing his words: so that they deny that there are Antypodes, and
that the world is enhabitable at all the Zones, the contrary whereof is
manifest. Pliny handles this matter in the sixty five Chapter of his second
book: but in the end, he resolves not whether Pliny touching the same.
there are Antypodes or no, neither can it out of his words be gathered, what
he thinks thereof.


LU. What is the meaning of this word Antipodes?


AN. I will briefly declare it unto you, though me thinks you should have
understood the same, by that which I have said before: Antypodes are they which
are on the other part of the world, contrary in opposite unto us, going with
their feet against ours, so that they which understand it not, think that
they go with their heads downward, whereas they go in the self same sort
with their heads as we do; for the world being round, in what part thereof
soever a man stands either under or above, or on the sides, his head stands
upright toward heaven, and his feet directly toward the Center of the earth,
so that it cannot be said, that the one stands upward and an other downward,
for so the same which we should say of them, they might say of us, meruailing
how we could stay our selves without falling, because it should seem to them
that they stand upward and we downward: and the right Antypodes are as I said,
those which are in contrary and Who are the right Antypodes.
opposite Zones, as they of the North Pole, to those of the South-pole; and we
being in this second Zone, have for our Antypodes those of the other second
Zone, which is on the other side of Torrida Zona: but those in Torrida Zona it
self, cannot hold any for their right Antypodes, but those which are of one
side thereof, directly to those that are on the other under them or above them,
or how you list to understand it.


BER. I understand you well, but we being in this Zone which is round winding,
as you say about the earth; how shall we term those that are directly under
us, who by all likelihoods must be only upon one side of the world, for if
there were a line drawn between them and us through the earth, the same line
should not come to pass through the Center and middle of the earth.


AN. These the Cosmographers call in a manner Antypodes, which in such sort as
they have different places one from an other, so do they term them by
different names, as Perioscaei, Etheroscaei, and Amphioscaei, being Greek
words, by which their manner of standing is declared and signified. Perioscaei
are those whose shadows Perioscaei.
go round about; and these as you shall hereafter understand, cannot be but
those which are under the Poles. Amphioscaei, are those which have their shadow
of both sides Amphioscaei,
toward Aquilo and Auster, according as the Sun is with them. Etheroscaei,
are those which have their shadow always Ethoroscaei,
on one side: but what distinction soever these words seem to make, yet
Antypodes is common to them all, for it is sufficient that they are contrary,
though not so directly that they writhe not of one side nor other: for facility
of understanding this, take an Orange or any other round fruit, and thrust it
of all sides full of needles, and there you shall see how the points of the
needles are one against another by diverse ways, of which those that pass
through the sides, are as well opposite as those which pass through the very
Center and middle of the Orange: But this being a matter so notorious, and all
men now knowing that the whole world is enhabitable, and The whole world is
enhabitable.
that the same being round, one part must needs be opposite to another: it
were to no purpose to discourse any farther therein.


LU. This is no small matter which you say, that the whole world is
enhabitable, for (leaving aside that you should say, this generality is to be
understood, that there is in all parts of the world habitation;
notwithstanding, that there are many Deserts, Rocks, and Mountains, which for
some particular causes are not enhabited) me thinks you can by no means say,
that the two utmost Zones in which the North and Southpole is contained, are
enhabited, seeing the common opinion of all men to the contrary.


AN. I confess that all the old Astrologians, Cosmographers, and Geographers,
speaking of these two Zones, do term them vninhabitable, the same proceeding,
as they say, through the intolerable rigor and sharpnes of the cold; of which
they affirm the cause to be, because they are farther off from the Sun then
any other part of the earth: and so says Pliny in the 70. Chapter of his
second book by these words: Heaven is the cause of depriving us the use of
three parts of the earth, which are the three vninhabitable Zones, for as that
in the midst, is through extreme heat not any way habitable, so of the two
utmost is the cold intolerable, being perpetually frosen with ice, whose
whitenes is the only light they have, so that there is in them a continual
obscurity: as for that part which is on the other side of Torrida Zona, though
it be temperate as ours is, yet is it not habitable, because there is no way to
get into it, etc. And here-vpon he infers, that there is no part of the
world enhabited, nor where people is, but only this Zone or part of the earth
in which we are; an opinion truly for so grave an Author, far from reason
and understanding: That therefore which I intend evidently to make manifest unto
you, is, that they were not only deceived in those Zones, wherein either Pole
is contained, but in Torrida Zona also: for as this is found not to be so
intemperate, nor the heat and Ardor so raging as they supposed; so also is the
cold of the Polar Zones nothing so rigorous and sharp, as they described The
Polar Zones enhabited.
it, but sufferable and very well to be endured and enhabited, as by proof we
find, that all those cold Regions are peopled. But the Ancients are to be
excused, who though they were great Cosmographers and Geographers, yet they
never knew nor discovered so much of the earth, as the Modernes have done,
which by painful and industrious Navigations have discovered many Regions,
Countries, and Provinces before unknown: not only in the Occidentall Indies
(the which we will leave apart) but in the Oriental also, and in the far
parts of the Septentrion: for proof whereof, read Ptolome, which is the most
esteemed Geographer, and to whom is given in those things which he wrote, the
greatest credit, and you shall find that he confesses himself to be
ignorant of many Countries now discovered, which he terms unknown and
unfound Lands, saying: That the first part of Europe begins in the Island of
Ireland.
Hybernia, whereas there are many other farther North, that enter also into
Europe: and also a great quantity of firm Land, which is on the Ptolome
ignorant in many countries now known.
same part toward the North Pole, where he might have taken his beginning: and
in his eight Table of Europe, speaking of Sarmacia Europaea, he says, that
there lies of the one side thereof a Country unknown: and in his second Table
of Asia, entreating of Sarmacia Asiatica, he says the same, not acknowledging
for discovered all that which is forthward between these two Provinces and
the Sea Northward: Of Scithia he says the same, in his seventh Table of
Asia, that on the North-side it has unknown Land: and in his third Table,
that all that part of the Mountains toward the North is undiscovered; and in
coming to India to the kingdom of Chyna, he has no knowledge at all of that
which is thence forward to the East, where is so great a multitude and
diversity of Countries, Provinces and Kingdoms, as in a manner remains
behind on this side: yet truly there was never any man equal unto Ptolomie in
that which he knew, and all both Ancients and Moderns do follow him, as the
truest Geographer, though he were many times deceived, as in saying that the
Indian Sea is wholly closed and separated from the Ocean, it being afterward
found, that from the Cape of Bona Speranza to Calycut, there is more then a
thousand leagues of water, the which, according to his opinion, should be
environed with firm land.

Strabo also in his seventh book says, that the same Region which turns
toward the Aquylon, pertayneth to the Ocean sea, for they are sufficiently
known who take their beginning from the rising of the river of Rheyne, forth to
the river of Albis, of which the most famous are the Sugambij and the Cymbri,
but the stripe that reaches out on the other side of the river Albis, to us is
wholly undiscovered and unknown, and a little farther, Those (says he) which
will go to the rising of the River Boristhenes, and to those parts from whence
the wind Boreas comes, all those Regions are manifest by the Clymes and
Paraleils, but what Countries and people those are which are on the other side
of Almania, and in what sort they are placed which are now called Bastarni, as
many do suppose, or Intermedij, or Lasigae, or Raxaili, or others that use the
couerings of Wagons for the roofes of their houses, I cannot easily say,
neither whetheir their country extends it self to the Ocean, or whether
through the extreme cold it be vnenhabitable, or whether there be any other
lineage of men between the sea and those Almaines which are toward the part of
the Ponyent.

By these authorities you may understand, that Strabo (though he were so
great a Cosmographer) had no knowledge of all those Countries which are on the
other side of Almaine toward the Septentryon or North Pole. But you must
understand, that they made Almaine extend it self much farther, then we now
adays do, bringing within the limits thereof, all those Countries even unto
Scithia, in which seeing Strabo was ignorant, it is not much if the other
Cosmographers were ignorant of that which is under the utmost Zone it self. As
for Strabo, he confesses not only his ignorance in those parts, but also in
speaking of the Getes, There are, says he, certain mountains which reach
Northward, even to the Tyrregetes, to the knowledge of whose bounds and ends we
cannot attain, the ignorance of which has made us admit many fables that are
reported of the Hiperbores and Ryphaean mountains: But let us leave these men,
yea, and Pytheas Marsiliensis also with his lies, which he wrote of the Ocean
Sea: and if Sophocles said any thing in his tragical verses of Oricia, that
she was carried of the wind Boreas over the whole Sea, and transported to the
utmost bounds of the whole world, to the fountains of the Night, and to the
height of the Heaven, and to the old Garden of Apollo: let us leave him also,
and come to the truth of that, which is in deed known in this our age.


BER. Strabo has clearly given to understand in these speeches, the small
knowledge he had of those Countries, which are toward the North; and of the
other side of the Hiperborean and Ryphaean mountains, which being included in
the utmost Zone, where as you say, unknown to all the Ancients: but I wonder
at nothing more, then that the world having dured so many years before them,
there was never any that could attain to the light and clear certainty
thereof.


AN. There has not wanted some, which in some sort though doubtingly have roued
thereat, as Pliny, who though he denied, as I said a little before the utmost
Zones to be enhabited; yet coming to speak of the mountains of Rypheus, he
discovers the contrary of that which he had said before, turning to use
these words. The Arimasps being past, there are straight at hand the Ryphaean
Plin lib. 4 Cap. 12.
mountains, and a Country through the continual falling of snow like
feathers, called Pterophoros, the which is a part of the world condemned of
Nature, being seated in a place of obscurity and darkness: we cannot place
these mountains any where, then in the very rigor of Nature it self, and in
the very seat and bowels of the Aquilon: on the other side of the Aquilon,
lives (if we will believe it) a very happy people, whom they call
Hyperboreans, whose life they say, lasts many years, and of whom are reported
many fabulous miracles: it is thought that there are the utmost bars of the
world, and the farthest compass of the stars, it is 6. months light with
them, and one only day of the Sun contrary: not as some ignorantly say, from the
Winter Equinoctial to the Autumn, only once a year does the sun rise unto
them in the Solstitio, and only once a year set in the Winter. Their region is
warm, of a wholesome temprature without any noisome The happy soil of the
Hyperborians.
airs: the mountains and woods serve them for houses, they worship their gods
in troops, jointly flocking together, there is never amongst them any discord,
debate, sickness or infirmity. Death never ouertaketh them til being through
old age weary of living they throw themselves from the top of some high Rock
down headlong into the sea: this they account the happiest sepulcher that may
be. Some writers have placed the^ in the first part of Asia and not of Europe,
because there are some in situation and likeness resembling them, called
Attacori, others have placed them in the midst between either Sun, which is
Sunsetting of the Antypodes, and the rising thereof with us, which can by no
way be so, being so great and huge a sea between. Those who place them there,
where they have but one day in the year continuing six months, say that they
sow their corn in the morning, and reap it at midday, and that when the Sun
forsakes them, they gather the fruit of their trees, and during the space of
their night they hide themselves in Caves. This people is not to be doubted of,
seeing so many Authors have written that they were wont to send their first
fruits to the Temple of Apollo in Delos, whom they cheefely adored. All this
is out of Pliny, who as you see discourses confessing and denying, for one
while he says, if we will believe it, making it ambiguous, and then presently
he turns to say that it is not to be doubted of.


LVD. I always understood that the Hiperborians should be those who dwell on
those Mountains which are on the end of Asia, toward the North, and me
thinks that Pliny and those Ancients, being ignorant in the rest concerning
them, call those also Hyperboreans which dwell on the other side, though there
be a great quantity of Land between, seeing he calls also by that name
those which are under the Pole Artick, or on the other side thereof.


AN. It is so, for if they were there abouts, we could not have so little
knowledge of them as we have, and in truth as I understand, there must needs
be a great quantity of Land between those mountains and the people whom he
terms by that name. Solinus also entreats of this matter in the very self
same manner, Solinus touching the Hyperboreans.
which though it be somewhat prolixe, I will let you understand what he says,
First, talking of the Land which is on the other side of the Rephaean
mountains and of the Arymasps, he uses these words: Upon these mountains and
the height of Ryphaeus, there is a Region covered with continual clouds and
Ise, and in some places of exceeding height, it is a part of the world
condemned of Nature, and seated in a perpetual obscure mist, in the very
entrance of the Aquylon, whereby it is most rigorously cold. This only
amongst all other Lands, knows not all the courses of time, and of the
heavens, neither tastes it any other thing then cruel Winter, and
sempiternall cold. And farther, speaking in another chapter of the Hyperborean
mountains, he says, that there was a fable of the Hyperboreans and a rumor,
of which to believe any thing was accounted temerity, but seeing, says he, so
many approved Authors and men of great sufficiency confirm them, let no man
doubt of the^, or hold the^ for fabulous, being approved with such authorities:
coming therefore to speak of them, they are on the other side of Pterophoros,
which we have heard say is on the other side of Aquilo, it is a blessed nation.
Some will situat the same rather in Asia the^ Europe, and others in the midst
betwixt the one and the other sun, there as it sets with Antipodes and rises
with us, the which is contrary to reason, there being so great a sea, which
runs between the 2. rotundities. They are therefore in Europe, and near them
as it is thought, are the bars of the world, and the last compassing or circuit
of the stars, they have one only day in the year. There want not some who say
that the sun is not there as we have him here, but that he rises in the
Equinoctial of the winter, and sets in the Autumn, so that the day
continues six months together, and the night as much. The heavens are
favorable, the air sweet, the winds breathe gently and comfortably, there is
amongst them nothing noisome or hurtful. The woods are their houses, in the day
the trees yield them victuals, they know not what discord is, they are not
troubled with infirmities, they live innocently, their will is equal, and
opinions agreeing, in old age death is welcome unto them, which if it be
tardife in coming, they prevent it in bereauing themselves of life: for being
weary of living, after having banqueted with their friends, they let
themselves fall from the top of a high Rock into the depth of the Sea, and
this is among them the most esteemed Sepulcher. It is said that they were wont
to send by unspotted virgins their first fruits to Apollo in Delos, who
being once by the wickedness of their hosts that harbored them defiled, they
since that time have ever used to offer them up within the bounds of their
own Country, etc. And Pomponius Mela ending to entreat of Sarmanica, and
beginning with Scithia, from thence, says he, Pom. Mela touching the
Hyperboreans.
follow the confines of Asia, and unless it be where the Winter is perpetual,
and the cold not to be suffered, do enhabite the peoples of Scithia, who in a
manner all do call themselves Sagae, and on the edge of Asia, the first are the
Hyperboreans upon the Aquylon and the Ryphaean mountains, under the utmost
cyrcling of the stars, where the Sun not every day, as he does with us, but
rising in the Equynoctiall of the Winter, sets in Autumn, so that their day
and night successively continues six months long apeece.


LU. Me thinks these three Authors say in a manner one thing, and in like
words, differing only a little about the habitation of this people, the one
placing them by the Ryphaean mountains, and the other by the Hyperboreans,
between the which, as I take it, there is a great distance: but before you
pass any farther, I pray you declare unto us the meaning of these two words
lately by you mentioned, Pterophoras and Hyperbore. The signification of
Pterophoras and Hyperbore.



AN. Pterophoras in Greek is as much to say as a Region of feathers, because
the fury of the winds is there so violent, that they seem to fly with
wings, and the snow which continually falls, resembles great feathers.
Hiperboreans is as much to say, as those that dwell under the wind Boreas,
which is the same that we here call (...)
Circius, the which as it seems, engendereth it self, and rises of the cold
of those mountains; and this is the opinion of Diodorus Siculus, though Festus
Pompeius say that they are so called, because they pass the common manner of
men in their living and years: and Macrobius in his comment De somno
Sciptonis, interprets it saying, that they are people which entering within
the Land, passed on the other side of the wind Boreas: but whether it be as the
one or the other says, the matter makes not much.


BER. Let us pass forward, and seeing these Authors seem herein to confess,
that there are Lands and Provinces under the Zones of the Poles which are
enhabited: I pray you tell us what the Modernes do think thereof, who have
seen and discovered more then those of times past.


AN. The Modernes entreat very differently hereof, though they be few: for
Countries so sharp and so far out of the way, have been viewed or passed
into by few, whereby their particularities might be discovered; though we may
say that herein is fulfilled the saying of our Savior Christ that there is
nothing so secret but comes to be revealed and so there have not wanted
curious and industrious persons which have verified the same, discovering this
secret: but before we come to entreat of the particularities of this Country,
hear what Iacobus Ziglerus an Almaigne Author says. The Ancients, says he,
persuaded by a naked imagination, spoke of Iacobus Ziglerus of the Northern
parts.
those places by estimation of the heavens, deeming the^ not to be sufferable
or enhabitable without great difficulty, for those men which were borne or
conversant in Aegipt or Greece, took an argument thereby to speak of the
whole enhabitable world, and to affirm those parts under the North Pole not to
be enhabited: But to declare that the Lands how cold so ever they be, are not
therefore vninhabitable, he brings for example the abundance of metals and
minerals of silver, which grow in Swethland and Norway, being Countries
exceedingly cold, whence he makes an argument, that the heavens are not so
intemperate in those parts or any others how cold so ever, but that they may be
enhabited, yea, and in such sort that men live there very long, and in great
health and strength, as by experience of those Countries we find it to be
true, which could not be, unless the heaven were temperate and favorable in
correcting that damage which by the cold might be caused: Afterward handling
this matter a little more at large, he turns to say; I write not this to the
end you should think that those who go thither out of Aethiopia or Aegipt,
should agree so well with that climate, as those which are natural of the
same; for undoubtedly they would hardly endure the cold, and be in great danger
of their lives: which may be considered by those of the Land of Babylon, for
those of them which went toward the North, did not by and by penetrate into
the utmost bounds of the earth in those parts, but seated them selves in the
middle thereof, and as they enured themselves to suffer the colds, so by little
and little they pierced farther in, coming in time to be so accustomed to the
cold, that they endured the Snow and Ice, as well as the hot Countries do the
continual heat and parching of the Sun: and if there be perchance in those
parts any thing ouersharp and rigorous, Nature has amended the same with other
helps; Nature has provided a remedy to every mischief.
for on the Sea shore she has ordained Caves that run under the mountains,
where the fiercer that the cold is, the greater is the heat and warmenes that
gathers it self therein, and Landward she has made Valleys contrary to
the North, wherein they might harbor and shroud themselves against the cold; as
for their Cattle and wild Beasts, she has clothed them with such thick
skins, that the nipping of the cold can no whit at al anoy them, and therefore
those furs of those parts are more precious, then those of warmer Countries.


BER. We have well understood all these authorities and opinions, but we
understand not what you will infer by them.


AN. It is easily understood, if you look unto that which we at the beginning
discoursed, as touching the opinion of all ancient Authors and Geographers,
who thought that the two utmost Zones of the Poles were not enhabitable through
their extreme cold, whereas by that which I have said, and will hereafter say,
the contrary appears: And so we will go on verifying that our Europe is not
so little or the least part of the earth, as many will have it to be, seeing we
know not the ends thereof, of one side extending it self, and following the
whole Coast of the Sea, seeming to guide it toward the Occident, then giving a
turn to the Septentrion, and by another way passing and traversing the
Riphaean mountains, following the same Land which reaches even to the
Septentrion it self, or under the North Pole.


LV. That Coast which you say goes toward the Occident, as I have heard say,
is not nauigable, because of the frozen Sea, which hinders the passage of the
ships.


AN. There is a great Coast of the Sea, which for the same reason you give,
according to many of the Cosmographers is not nauigable; and of this, the
Ancients yield not so good reason, neither have they so good experience
thereof as the Moderns have, though Gemma Frigius a very grave Author, be very
short in handling this matter, for coming to speak of the Provinces of
Curlandia and Liuonia, he says, that they are the last of Sarmatia, and that
Liuonia stretches toward the Septentrion, and comes to join it self with
the Hiperboreans, whose peoples are Parigitae and Carcotae, which go following
that part of the Septentrion that passes on the other side of Circulus
Articus, and that they are great and wide Regions, and most extremely cold, and
that the men which enhabit them, are of a strong constitution of body, and very
fair of complexion, but somewhat gross of understanding; and that there are
places of ice so hard frosen, that great troops of horsemen may thereupon make
their fights and encounters, whereto they use the winter more then the somer,
and that like unto these Countries are those of Escarmia and Dacia; and a
little farther speaking of the Province of Swethland, which he calls Gotia
Occidentalis, (because there is another called Meridionalis) and of Norway
which stretches it self by the Coast of the Occident toward the Island of
Thule, and joins it self with Thule is the same which we now call Iseland.
Groneland, he says, that without the circle Artick, are the provinces of
Pilapia and Vilapiae, the coldest countries of the world, because they reach
unto the very North Pole, in which their day continues the space of a whole
month, and that those parts The provinces of Pilapia and Vilapia.
are not till this day thoroughly discovered because the enhabitants of them are
most wicked and cruel, and persecute Christians within their limits, and that
evil Spirits do there present themselves many times before the eyes of men,
in bodies formed of air, with a fearful and terrible aspect: and afterward
he says, that in those Countries toward the Occident, it is said, though
their place and seat be uncertain, that the Pigmees do enhabite men of a
cubite high, the truth whereof is uncertain, but only that a ship of leather
through the violence of the winds, being driven on the shore, was taken with
many of these Pigmees in it: All this you must understand he says, in speaking
of that Coast, which as I said Pigmees.
goes out Westward, for from thence all that which turns compassing about
the Land toward the East, passing the utmost Zone, even till it come to meet
with ours, is unknown, neither has any ship made that voyage, neither is there
any Nation that can give us notice thereof, the reason is, because of the
frozen Sea of which you spoke, through which, that Coast is by no means
nauigable, whereof Gemma Frigius makes no mention in this place, neither
afterward also, when he comes to speak of the Scithians, where he says,
that in the farthest Scithia, which extends it self far beyond the
Hiperboreans: there are many Nations whom he names by their names, without
coming in one part or other to the Seacoast, in sort that hereby may be
inferred, that he left much Land in those parts for undiscovered and unknown:
and in his Map (which cannot be denied to be one of the best and surest, that
has been hitherto made by any man) coming to the Country of Swethland, he
sets the same simply with an Epitaph, saying, That of those Septentrial
Lands he will there-after more particulerly entreat: and so says John
Andraeas Valuasor in his.


LU. It seems unto me, that in this matter they cannot so agree one with
another, but that they must differ and discord in many points because the most
of them, or in a manner all, speak by hearsay and conjecture, who though
they bring apparent reasons, yet are they not so sufficient, that we are bound
absolutely to believe them, without thinking that in many of them we may be
deceived.


AN. It is true in part, though they have also many reasons which cannot be
reproved, as those which the same Gemma Frigius gives, to make us understand
that beyond these Lands farther Northwardes, the days and nights increase
successively, as I said before, till they come to be six months long apeece,
which seeing the Batchiler Encisus rehearses also in his Cosmography,
discoursing more plainly The Bachiler Encisus, concerning the length of the
days and nights toward the Poles.
and clearly of them, I will let you understand what he writes. Entreating
how that the days and nights are alvvayes equal, and of one length, to those
that dwell under the Equinoctial, he passes forward, telling how they go
increasing and decreasing in length, according to the degrees that they apart
themselves from the Sun: so coming to say, that those which dwell in 67.
degrees, have their longest day of 24. hours, so that one day is 24. hours,
and one night as much more, which is day without night, and night without day.
Those which dwell in 69. degrees, have a whole month together day without
night, and another whole month night without day. Those which dwell in 71.
degrees, have two months of day without any night, and two months of night
without any day. Those which dwell in 73. degrees, have three months of day,
and other three of night. Those which dwell in 75. degrees, have four months of
continual day, and other four of continual night. And those which dwell in
79. and 80. degrees, have six months of day without night, and other six
months of night without day: so that in the whole year they have no more then
one day, and one night.


BER. By this computation it seems, that they which are in 80. degrees, and
enjoy the day and night six months long apeece, should be under the very Pole.


AN. Nay rather they reach not so far as to be under it, as the same Encisus
says a little after by these words, From thence forward to the Pole, the
difference is little, whether it be day or night: for the greatness of the Sun
exceeding the roundnes of the world, yields to those parts of the Poles a
continual brightness, because the compass of the earth being inferior to
that of the Sun, is not able to make shaddowe, or to hinder that the
cleerenesse thereof shine not over those parts.


LU. This is maruailous strange, that there should be any Land where it is
never night.


AN. You must not understand but that it waxes night (which is when the Sun
sets) but yet the same in such sort, that there never wants sufficient
light and brightness, to see any work whatsoever is to be done, and if you
will be attentife, I will make you understand it more plainly. With those that
are under the Poles and have there their habitation, the Sun neither rises,
neither sets as it does here with us, but very differently: for The
diversity of the rising and setting of the sun between us and those that live
near or under the Poles.
with us the Sun rises in the East, and passing over our heads (or missing
little thereof) goes to hide it self and set in the West, and giving a
compass about under the earth, turns the next day to appear in the same
place, making in this course very little difference in a year: and our
shaddowe when the Sun rises, falls to the West, and when it sets,
toward the East: but to those who are at the Poles, which according to the
rising of the Sun, are the sides of the world, it is not so: and therefore
consider, that when the Sun is in the midst between them both, and from
thence goes declining to one side, the more he declineth, the more he
lightneth that side, and hides himself from the other, and because in going
and turning to the same place, he deteyneth himself half a year, he causes
that those which are under the Pole of that side, have the day half a year
long, and contrary, when returning to the mydst of his journey, he goes
declyning to the other side, he works the same effect with those of the
other Pole, and so they repart the year one with another, the one having
mid-daie when the other has midnight, and so by contrary.

And if you desire to understand this well, and to see it by experience, take
any round thing that is somewhat great, and causing it to be hanged up in the
air, light a Candle when it is dark, and lifting it up a little, bring it
round about by the midst, and begin thence to go declining with it to An
example whereby it is proved, that it can never be very dark under the Poles.
one side, and you shall see that the more you decline, the more you shall
lighten the point which is on that side, and the more obscure will that be on
the other side, and then coming to turn again, giving a compass by the
midst, and thence discending on the other part toward the other side, the same
will presenlie begin to go lightning, and the other obscuring, and if as I
say it is a Candle, it were a Torch, the brightness would be greater, and
though declining to one side, it obscure the other, yet should it never be so
much, but that there would remain some light of that which does reuerberate
from the flame and greatest brightness of the Torch: and so fares it with
those inhabitants which are at the Poles, or in the Land under them: which as
the Sun is so much greater then the whole Earth, so cannot he choose but cast
from one side some light unto the other, which though it be not with his
proper beams, yet is it of the flashing and excellent brightness which does
reuerberate from them, as we have here with us an example of the like when the
Sun is going down. Besides, the cleerenesse of the Moon and Stars shyning
there, helps very much that the obscurity of the Night can never be there
so great, but that men may see one another do their business, and as Nature
has provided a remedy for all things, so has she hereby taken away that
tediousness, which otherwise the length of so long a night should have caused.


BER. I have very well understood all that which you have said, according to
which, the Sun rises and sets with them, far differently from that he
does with all the world besides.


AN. I will tell you: with us, as I said before, the Sun passes above over
us, and makes our shadows on one side at his rising, and on another at his
setting, but if you will understand me well, you must use attention: and first
you must know that this word Orizon signified the Heaven which we see,
wheresoever we are in turning our eyes round about the What this Word Orizon
signifies.
earth, so that every Province and Country has an Orizon, which is that part
of Heaven which they discover in circling or compassing it about with their
sight: And as in our Orizon we discover the Sun by little and little when he
rises, to take his course through the heaven over us, and so at last to set
himself in the contrary place: so with those which are under the Poles in his
rising, and afterward his setting, in a far different sort: For the first day
that he rises, there appears but a point of him, which can scarcely be
discovered, and goes so round about their Orizon, in which going about he
shows himself always in one sort, without increasing, unless it be a very
little, casting all alike brightness forth: At the second turn he goes
discovering himself a little more, and so at the third and fourth, and all the
rest, increasing from degree in degree, and giving turns round about the
heaven upwards, in which he continues three months, and the shadow of all
that upon which his beams do strike, goes round about, and is when he
begins to rise very great, and the higher he mounteth, the shorter it
waxes: and afterward when he turns to come downward, in which he dureth
other three months, it is contrary, even till he come to hide himself under
the earth, at which time, as he goes hiding himself to those of the one
pole, so goes he showing and discovering himself to those of the other.


LV. The understanding of this mystery is not without some difficulty,
especially to us, which till this time have not had thereof any notice: yet I
now begin by little and little to comprehend the same, only one doubt
remains which somewhat troubles me, which is, if the whole Land from that
place where the days are of 24. hours length (which according as I
understand, is from the I Will of Thule, and the other Provinces that are on firm
Land, till you come to that which you say is under the Pole) be enhabited of
men, or Desert without habitation.


AN. I make no doubt but that all this Land is enhabited in parts, though not
so populously in all places as this of Whether all those parts be enhabited or
no.
ours: and in this the Authors do not so plainly declare themselves, that we
may thereby receive clear and particular understanding thereof, though some of
them go on setting us in the right way to know the same. For Encisus
following the discovery of the Coast, which goes toward the Sunnesetting,
giving a turn to the North, he goes discovering by the same many Provinces,
amongst which, I remember he speaks of two, the one called Pyla Pylanter,
and the other Pyla Pylanter Euge Velanter.
which is somewhat farther Euge Velanter, in which he says the days increase
to two months and a half, and the night as much, which though it be a Land
enhabited, yet through the extreme and terrible cold thereof, the Rivers and
Waters are in such sort frozen, that the enhabitants have much ado to get any
water: for their Ices are so thick, strong, and hard, that they cannot be
broken without infinite pain and travail. They wait many times til the Ice
be opened by certain wild Beasts, which they have amongst them, white of
color, and Wild Beasts like unto white Bears which dig up the Ice with
their nails.
proportioned much like unto Bears, whose nature is as well to live by water
as by land: whose feet are armed with such terrible sharp, great, and strong
nails, that they break therewith the Ice how thick so ever it be, under the
which plunging themselves, they swim along the water, and pray upon such fishes
as they find, leaving the holes whereat they entered open, at which the
enhabitants come incontinently to draw water, endeavoring with all diligence
to keep them open, least otherwise they freeze and close together again as
fast as they were before. They hang in at them their baits and Angling hooks,
with the which also they take fish for their sustenance: As for me I assuredly
think that these Provinces are those which Gemma Frigius calls Pilapia and
Vilapia, though he say that the days in them increase no farther then to a
month, and the nights as much. But let us not wonder if in such things as
these so far distant and separated from us, we find no witnesses of such
conformity, but that they differ in somewhat. Olaus Magnus, gives us, though in
brief words, some nearer notice of this matter: for before he come to
discourse more particulerly of the Provinces under the same Pole, he uses
these words. Those of Laponia, says he, of Bothnya, Byarmya, and the
Ifladians, have their days and nights half a year long a piece: Those of
Elsingia, Angermania, and part of Swethland have them five months long, and
those of Gothland, Muscouia, Russia, and Liuonia, have them three months long:
Which Author being natural of Gothland and Bishop of Vpsala, it is to be
thought that he knew the truth thereof: But these Countries being so near
unto ours, I marvel that there is no greater notice of them, and that there
are not many more Authors that do write of them: Truth it is as I understand,
that this increasing of days and nights should not be general throughout the
whole Country, but only in part thereof, which may be gathered out of that
which he says, of the Kingdom of Norway, that in the entry and first parts of
the same, the days are as they are here with us: But going on forth to the
black Castle, and from thence forward, there is so great a change as you
have heard before, and the like may also be in other Countries. By these before
rehearsed authorities, we may understand the resolution of the doubt by you
proposed, that all the Land between us and the North is enhabited, at least
in parts thereof here and there, so that it may be travailed through over all.


BER. My head is greatly troubled, about this increasing and decreasing of the
days and nights so much, because the farther we go from the Aequinoctial, the
longer we find them: yet the common opinion of all Cosmographers, is, that in
one degree are reckoned sixteen leagues and a half or somewhat more, which
being so, it seems marvelous, that in two degrees A league is three miles.
which are but 23. leagues or very little more, the day and successively the
night should increase so much time as is a month, according to your former
computation; and that when it were day in the one part, it should be night in
the other, they being so near together.


AN. You have some reason to doubt, but as these Lands go always downehill or
slopewise in respect of the course of the Sun, so in little space the same both
hides and discovers it self unto them in great quantity; this you may
partly understand by that which happens to trauailers, who having the Sun
in their eye, a little before the setting thereof, in passing over a Plain and
champaine place, lose presently the sight thereof in coming to the foot of a
hill, as though he were suddenly set, yet if they make have, when they get up
to the top of the hill, they find him not fully down, recovering again day
though but a little yet somewhat longer: But for all this, I blame you not in
wondering at a thing so strange, which for the true proof and understanding
whereof, were necessary to be seen with our eyes: for confirmation whereof,
though there be many most sufficient reasons and proofs, yet I have not read
herein any Author which avouches his own knowledge and sight, whereas me
thinks if these Regions were so short, as by this computation of degrees the
Authors seem to make them, there should not have wanted curious men to
discover the particularities of them, how great so ever the difficulty or
danger had been in doing the same, which if they had done, they should
perchance have found many things far otherwise then they deemed, at least
touching some particularities, of which some later Writers vaunt to have in
part experience: of which seeing we our selves are able to give no assured
testimony of sight; I think it best that we leave them to those whose curious
industry will omit no pain to attain unto the perfect searching out of things
so worthy to be known: and seeing the Ancients which went sifting out these
matters, confess that from the same Land came Virgins to bring their first
fruits to the temple of Apollo in Delos, belike there was then some known way,
and the passage between nothing so difficill as it now seems unto us, which
being to us unknown, and the manner how to travail and pass through those
cold Regions beset with deep Snow, thick Ice, wide Rivers, painful high
Hills, fearful low Valleys, inaccessible Deserts, and all kinds of cruel
wild Beasts: we leave them vnuoyaged, not seeking any way whereby we may
penetrate into them, and attain the cognition of their particulers in a manner
concealed and hidden from us, of which though some few of the hither parts
thereof were known by relation of some painful and industrious men, who
affirmed that they had seen them: yet the greatest part was by conjectures,
considerations, and probable arguments, though the curiosity of our times has
passed a little farther, because as I have said, they are eyewitnesses of
part of that which we have discovered of, as I will tell you straight, but all
shall be little to give us such perfect and particular knowledge of this part
of the world, that we may discourse thereof as of the others which we know.
Some Authors will have this Land to be in Asia, others in Europe, but in
whether it be, the matter is not great: always if it be in Europe then is
Europe not so little a part of the earth as they make it, of which if they
will set the limits there as the Ancients say it finished, then must these
Regions before time undiscovered, be another nevve part of the world, and so
they should make four parts thereof or five, with that which is newly
discovered thereof in the West Indies.


BER. I vvonder not much if men have not so good notice of those parts of
which we have discoursed near the one and near the other Pole, and of that
which runs out by the Coast of the North toward the West, because besides
the great sharpnes and rigor of the cold, we have no conversation at all with
the enhabitants of those parts, nor they with us, neither is there any cause to
move either them or us thereunto, unless it be the curiosity of some that
thirst after the universal knowledge of all things in the world, as did Marcus
Paulus Venetus, who for this cause only travailed so great a part of the
world, as any man that ever I heard of till this day. Truth it is that some
Kings and Princes through covetous desire of enlarging their dominions, as you
shall hereafter understand, have entered so far as they could, conquering into
these parts, which they found neither over all enhabited, neither yet so
desert, but that it was in many places and the greater part thereof peopled,
and not so far one from another, but that they had knowledge, conversation, and
traffic together. And as in these Countries and Provinces of ours, we find
one soil, plain, temperate and pleasant, and another quite contrary, sharp,
barren and unfruitful, subject to boystrous winds, harsh airs, and continual
snow, wherewith some mountains are all the year long covered, so that no man
will frame in them his habitation: So likewise in these extreme Regions of the
North, no doubt but there are some parts of them uninhabited, as those which
Pliny, Soline, and the before remembered Authors term condemned of Nature: yet
there want not ways and compasses in cyrcling about them, to discover that
which is enhabited on the other side, and though with difficulty, yet in fine,
Nature would not leave to provide an open way, to the end that this Land should
not remain perpetually hidden and unknown.


LV. I remember I have seen in Paulus Iouius in a chapter which he made of
Cosmography abbreuiated in the beginning of his History these words, speaking
of the Kingdoms of Denmark and Norway, and the Lands beyond them: Of the
Nature, says he, of these Lands, and of the peoples that live beyond them
called Pigmaei, and Ictiophagi, which are those that live by fishes, now newly
discovered, in whose Country Pigmaei. Ictiophagi.
by a certain order of the Heaven of that constellation, the days and nights
are equal, which I will make mention in their place.


AN. Me thinks there are many that touch this matter, promising to write
largely thereof without doing it, and if they do it, it is even as they list
themselves, because there is no man to control them: and as for Paulus Iouius
himself, all that he wrote of this Country, was by the relation of a Muscouian
Ambassador in Rome. In one place he says, that the Muscouites border upon
the Tartaryans, and that toward the North they are accounted the utmost
dwellers of the world, and that toward the West, they confine with the
Danske Sea. And in another place, the Muscouites, says he, who are seated
between Polonia and Tartaria, confine with the Ryphaean mountains, and
enhabite toward the Septentryon in the utmost bounds of Europe and Asia,
extending themselves over the Lakes of the River Tanays, eue^ to the
Hyperborean mountains, and that part of the Ocean which they call the Frozen
Sea. These are his words, in which truly he has little reason, for the utmost
Land that the Muscouites possess, is where the day and night continue 3.
months long a piece, so that they cannot be called the last enhabitants of the
earth, for those whose day and night is of six months, are farther North, and
nearer the Pole then they, so that in fine, as I said before, touching these
matters which cannot be seen without such difficulty, those that entreat of
them, go by guess, coniecturing thereat by the probability of reasons and
considerations.


LU. As I imagine, this country must be very great, where the days are so
long in increasing, and decreasing: and more, if there be on the other side of
the North before you come at the Sea, so much other land, of force it must have
the same increase and decrease, for the self same cause and reason, as is of
the other side, and if the same go lengthning on inwards, it must be greater,
then it has seemed unto us.


AN. Whether this land extend it self on the other side of the North forward,
or whether the Sea be straight at hand, I cannot resolve you: for there is not
any Author that writes it, neither do I think is there any that knows it,
the cause whereof as I said is, that in passing by the coast of the West, beyond
the Isles of Island.
Thule, the coldes are so bitterly sharp, that no ship dares to adventure
farther, by reason of the huge floting Rocks and flakes of Ise, which encomber
that Sea, threatening eminent danger and unavoidable destruction to those that
attempt to sail thereinto. Of the other side of the East, giving a turn about
to the very same North, is discovered so far as the Province of Aganagora,
which is the last of all the known Countries on that The Province of Agonagora.
side, the Gulf being past which is called Mare magnum, for by land they say
it is not to be travailed, by reason of the great Deserts, and the earth in
many places full of Quagmyres, with many other inconveniences which Nature
seems to have there ordained. Some say that earthly Paradise stands there,
and that therefore no earthly man in the world has knowledge thereof: but of
this we have before sufficiently entreated, with the opinions of those, that
have written thereupon. Some there are also who write, that in this Land are
certain great mountains, amongst the which are enclosed many peoples of India,
from which they have no issue, nor means at all to come out, but I rather
believe this to be a fiction, because I find the same confirmed by no grave and
allowed Author. But howsoever it be, beyond this Country called Aganagora, is
much unknown and undiscovered Land, neither by sea thence Northward has there
been any navigations or discovery, of which also the extreme cold and the sea
continually frozen and choked up with heaps of Ise, may be the cause, the
fear of which has hindered men from attempting the discovery thereof only that
which we may hereby understand, is that there is a most great quantity of Land
from the coast which goes by the west and turns toward the North, and that
which compasses about the East, and turns likewise to the North, of which
till this time there is not any man Land yet unknown.
that can give direct notice, in midst of all which, is that which we entreated
of, which is under the North, whose day and night is reparted into a year.


BER. I know not in what sort the modern Geographers do measure or compass
the world, but I know that they say, that the whole Rotundity of all the Land
and water in the world, contains not above six thousand leagues, of which
are discovered 4350. reckoning from the Haven of Hygueras in the Occident or
West 1650. leagues of the world yet undiscovered.
Indies, to Gatigara, where the Province of Aganagora is contained, which is in
the Orient, so that there are yet to discover 1650. leagues, in discovering of
which, the end and utmost bounds of the Indies should be known, as well as
that of this part of the earth which we inhabit.


AN. To those that will measure the world in this manner, may be answered, as a
Boy in Seuilla to those that would divide the conquest thereof between the King
of Castile and The answer of a boy of Seuilla.
the King of Portugale, who in mockage of their folly, pulled down his breeches,
and showing them his buttocks, badde them draw the line there along if they
would needs divide the world in the midst by measure: and as for those which
mesure in such sort the world, they take but the length of the earth, fetching
their way by the midst of the Equinoctial, and so the Astronomers and
Cosmographers may go near the mark, reckoning by degrees, and giving to every
degree 16. leagues and a half, and a minute of way as they do: but though they
discover this, yet they can hardly come to discover the many parts and nookes
that are of one side and another of the world, being so wide, that in one
corner thereof may lie hydden many thousands of miles and Countries, which
being seen and known, would perchance seem to be some new world, and so lies
this part of which I speak on the coast of the Sea, quite without notice or
knowledge.


BER. Some will say, that the ship called Victoria (which is yet as a thing
of admiration The ship called Victoria compassed the world round about.
in the Bay of Seuilia) went round about the world, in the voyage which she
made of fourteen thousand leagues.


AN. Though she did compass the world round about in one part, yet it is not
said that she compast the same about in all parts, which are so many, that to
think only of them, is sufficient to amaze a man's understanding.

Amongst the rest, we never heard that the Coast from the West to the East, by
the way of the North, or at least the greater part thereof, has been
compassed about, as yet by any ship, neither have we knowledge of any thing at
all, neither by Sea nor Land, nauigating from thence forward.


LV. If you read Pomponius Mela in his Chapter of Scithia, where he
discourses of this matter, you shall find that he brings the authority of
Cornelius Nepos, alleging for witness Quintus Metellus, whom he had heard
say, that when he was Proconsull of the Gauls, the King of Swethland gave him
Indians driven by storm into the Norths Sea.
certain Indians, of whom, demanding which way they came into those Countries,
they answered, that through the terrible force of a great tempest, they were
so furiously driven from the stream of the Indian Sea, that after long
attending nothing else, the^ to be swallowed up of the waves; they came at last
violently to be stricken into a River on the Coast of Germany: which being
true, then they made that navigations, by those parts which you say are
undiscovered from the West to the East, by the way of the North, whereby it is
to be thought, that the Sea is not so frozen as they say, but that it is
nauigable.


AN. Truth it is that Mela says so, though it be doubted whether the Indians
came this way or no, and Mela himself in the end of the Chapter turns to
say, that all the same Septentrionall side is hardened with Ice, and therefore
vninhabitable and desert: but as I have said, all this is not directly proved
and confirmed by sound experience and exact knowledge, seeing we know not how
far the Land extends it self on the other side of the North without
coming to the Sea, and if we would seek to sift this secret out, and aspire
to the knowledge of that which might be found in nauigating that Sea, fetching
a compass about the world from North to North, God knows what Lands would be
found and discovered?


BER. The likeliest to believe in this matter, in my judgment is, that the
same Sea of the North though being frozen the greatest part of the year, yet
that the same, at such time as the Sun mounteth high, and their day of such
length, should through the heat of the Sun thaw and become nauigable, and so
in that season the Indians might be driven through the same with a tempest; all
which though it be so, yet the people assuredly knowing that the same Sea
freezeth in such sort every year, will not dare or adventure to sail therein,
or to make any voyage on that side, so that we come not to the knowledge of
such things as are in that Sea and Land, unless we will believe the fictions
that Sylenus told to King Mydas.


LV. Of all friendship, tell us them I pray you, for in so diffuse a matter any
man may lie by authority without controlement.


BER. That which I will tell you is out of Theopompus, alleged by Aelianus in
his book Fictions of Sylenus to King Mydas out of Aelianus.
De varia Historia. This Sylenus, says he, was the Son of a Nymph, and
accounted as inferior to the Gods, but as superior unto men, who in one
communication, among many others that he had with King Mydas, discoursed unto
him, that out of this Land or world in which we live, called commonly, Asia,
Affrique, and Europe, whom he terms Islands, environed round about with the
Ocean: there is another Land so great, that it is infinite and without measure,
in the same are bred Beasts and Fowls of admirable hugenes, and the men which
dwell therein are twice so great as we are, and their life twice as long: They
have many and goodly Cities, in which they live by reason, having laws quite
contrary unto ours: among their Cities there are two that exceed the rest in
greatness, in customs no whit at all resembling, for the The City of Machino
The City of Euaesus.
one is called Machino, which signifies warlike, and the other Euaesus, which
signifies pitiful, the enhabitants of which are always in continual peace,
and plentifully abounding in great quantity of riches, in whose Province the
fruits of the earth are gathered without being sowed or planted. They are
always free from infirmities, spending their whole time in mirth, pleasure,
and solace, they maintain justice so inuiolably, that many times the immortal
Gods disdain not to use their friendship and company: but on the contrary, the
enhabitants of Machino are altogether warlike, continually in Arms and War,
seeking to subdue the bordering Nations: This people does dominate and command
over many other proud Cities and mighty Provinces. The Citizens of this Town
are at least 200000. in number, they sildome die of infirmity, but in the
Wars, wounded with stones and great staves: Iron nor steel hurtes them not,
for they have none: Silver and gold they possess in such quantity, that they
esteem less thereof, then we do of Copper; Once, as he said, they determined
to come conquer these Islands of ours, and having past the Ocean with many
thousands of men; and coming to the Hiperborean mountains, hearing there,
and understanding that our people were so ill obseruers of Religion, and of so
wicked manners, they disdained to pass any farther, accounting it an unworthy
thing to meddle with so corrupt a people, and so they returned back again. He
added hereunto many other marvelous things, as that there were in other
Provinces thereof certain people called Meropes, who enhabited many and great
Cities, within the Meropes.
bounds of whose Country there was a place called Anostum, which word
signifies, a place whence there is no return: Anostum.
this Country, says he, is not clear and light, neither yet altogether dark,
but between both, through the same run two Rivers, the one of delight, the
other of grief, upon the shore both of the one and the other, are planted
trees about the bigness of Poplar-trees; those that are on the banks of the
River of grief, bring forth a fruit of the same nature and quality, The River
of delight. The River of grief.
causing him that eats thereof, to spend the whole time of his life in sad
and melancholy dumps, bitter tears, and perpetual weeping. The fruit of
those that grow on the banks of the other River, have a contrary effect and
virtue, yielding to the eater thereof a blessed course of life, abounding in
all joy recreation and pleasure, without any one moment of sadness: When they
are in years, by little and little they wax young again, recovering their
former vigor and force, and thence they turn still backward even to their
first infancy, becoming little babes again, and then they die.


LV. These things were very strange if they were true, but be how they will,
they carry some smell of that of which we entreated, concerning the Land which
is on the other side of the Riphaean and Hiperborean mountains; seeing he
says that determining to conquer this our world which he calls Islands, they
returned back after they came to those mountains: and so it is to be
understood, that they came from the other part of the North Pole; as for that
Land which he says to be so tenebrous and obscure, it may be the same which as
we said has continual obscurity, and is a condemned part of the world, and I
do not wonder at all, if amongst the other works of Nature, she made this part
of the earth with so strange properties, (I mean not that which Silenus spoke,
but the other by us entreated of before) the air of which by reason of some
constellation or other thing we comprehend not, is so troubled that it is not
only vninhabitable, but also not to be passed through whereby the secreets
therein contained, remain concealed, though perchance on the other side
thereof, the time and temperature may be such and so contrary, that it may
excel these very Countries wherein we now live.


AN. You have reason, for without doubt the Land which is in those parts
undiscovered, must be very great, and contain in it many things of admiration
utterly unknown to us: But coming now to particularize somewhat more of that
which is now in these our times known and discovered, I will tell you what some
very new and modern Authors do say thereof, and principally John Zygler,
whom I alleged before, who in person visited and viewed some part of these
Septentrionall Countries, Johan, Zyglerus.
though he passed neither the Hiperborean, neither the Riphaean mountains, who
meruaileth greatly at that which sundry Authors have left written of these
parts, for he found many things so different and contrary, that theirs
conformed in no one point with the truth, as well touching the situation of
mountains and heads of Rivers, as the sundry properties and qualities of the
Regions and Provinces, for he says, that he was in that part where they all
affirm the mountains Ryphaeus to be; and he found there no mountains at
all, neither in a great space of Land round about it, but all a plain and
level Country: the self same is affirmed by Sigismund Herberstain, in his
voyage; so that if they err in the seat of a thing so common and notorious,
as are these Sigismund Herberstain.
mountains, being situated in a Country of Christians, or at least confining
there-vpon (for the Country where the Ancients desribing them, is now called
Muscouia) hardly can they write truly of other things which are farther off,
and in Countries of which we have not so great knowledge as we have of this.

But turning to that which we entreated of, I say that those things can hardly
be verified which are written by the Ancients concerning these Northern Lands,
not so much for the small notice we have of them, as for that the names are
altered of Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, mountains and Rivers, in such sort,
that it is hard to know which is the one, and which is the other, for you shall
scarcely find any one that retains his old name, and though by signs and
conjectures we hit right upon some of the^, yet it is impossible but that we
should The names of the most part of Provinces and Regions are changed.
err in many, in taking one for another, the experience whereof we may see here
in our own Country of Spain, the principal towns of which, are by Ptolomie
and Pliny, which write particulerly of them, called by names to us now
utterly unknown, neither do we understand which is which, they are so altered
and changed. So fares it with the ancient Geography, which though there be
many that do practice and understand according to the antique, yet if you ask
them many things according to that now in ure with the moderns (so are things
in these our times altered and innouated) they cannot yield you a reason
thereof, and if they do, it shall be such, that thereout will result greater
doubts.

But leaving this, I will, as touching the Lands of which we entreat, conclude
with that which some Historiographers of our time, have made mention, namely,
Johan. Magnus Gothus, Albertus Cranzius, Johan. Saxo, Polonius Muscouita, and
chiefly Olaus Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsala, of who^ we have made here before
often mention, who in a Chronicle of those lands of the North, and the
particularities of them, (though being borne and brought up in those Regions,
should seem to have great knowledge of such things as are in the same) yet is
he marvelous brief concerning that which is under the same Pole. He says
that there is a Province called Byarmia, whose Orizon is the Equinoctial
circle it self, and as this circle deuideth the heaven in the midst, so when
the Sun declineth to this part of the Pole, the day is half a year long,
and when he turns to decline on the side of the other Pole, he causes the
contrary effect: the night enduring as much. This Province of Byarmya deuideth
it self The Province of Byarmya divided into two parts.
into two parts, the one high, and the other low, in the lower are many hills
perpetually covered with Snow, never feeling any warmth: yet in the valleys
below there are many Woods and Fields, full of herbs and pastures, and in
them great abundance of wild Beasts, and high swelling Rivers, as well through
the Springs whence they rise, as through the Snow that tumbleth down from the
hills. In the higher Byarmya, he says, there are strange and admirable
novelties, to enter into which, there is not any known way, for the passages
are all closed up, to attempt through which, he terms it a danger and
difficulty insuperable, so that no man can come to have knowledge thereof,
without the greatest ieopardy that may possibly be devised or imagined. For the
greater part of the way is continually covered with deep Snow by no means
Wild Beasts like unto Stags called Rangeferi.
passable, unless it be upon Beasts like unto Stags, called Rangifery, so
abounding in those Regions that many do nourish and tame them. Their lightness
(though it seem incredible) is such, that they run upon the frozen Snow unto
the top of high hills, and down again into the deep Valleys. John Saxon
says, that there was a King of Swethland called Hatherus, Hatherus King of
Swethland.
who being advertised that there dwelt in a Valley between those mountains a
Satire called Memingus, that possessed infinite riches, with many other
resolute men in his company, all mounted upon Rangifers and domestical
Onagres, made a Road into his Valley, and returned laden with Wild Asses.
rich and inestimable spoils.


BER. Was he a right Satire indeed, or else a man so called?


AN. The Author explaneth it not, but by that which he says a little after,
that in that Country are many Satires and Faunes; we may gather that he was a
right Satire, and that the Satires are men of reason, and not unreasonable
creatures, according to our disputation the other day: and in a Country full of
such novelties, such a thing as this, is not to be wondered at. But returning to
our commenced purpose, I say that this superior Byarmya of which Olaus Magnus
speaks, to us so unknown, by all likelyhoode should be that blessed soil
mentioned by Pliny, Soline, and Pomponius Mela, whose Clymate is so temperate,
whose air so wholesome, and whose enhabitants do live so long, that they
willingly receive death by casting themselves into the Sea; of which Land being
so marvelous, and being as it seems seated on the farther side of the Pole,
the properties are not so particulerly known, and so he says, that there are
many strange people, novelties, and wonders: But leaving this, and coming to
the lower, Olaus says, that the Valleys The lower Byarmya.
thereof, if they were sowed, are very apt and ready to bring forth fruit,
but the enhabitants do not give themselves to tillage, because the fields and
Forests are replenished with Beasts, and the Rivers with Fishes, so that with
hunting and fishing they maintain their lives, having no use of bread, neither
scarcely knowledge thereof. When they are at war or difference with any of
their neighbors, they sildom use Arms, for they are so great Negromancers and
Enchaunters, that with words only when they list they will make it In steed
of Arms, they use Enchantments.
rain, thunder, and lighten, so impetuously, as though heaven and earth should
go together; and with their Witchcraftes and Charms they bind and entangle
men in such sort, that they bereave them of all power to do them any harm,
yea, and many times of their senses also and lives making them to dye mad. John
Saxon writes, that there was once a King of Denmark called Rogumer, who
purposing to subdue the Rogumer King of Denmark.
Byarmyans, went against them with a mighty and puissant Army, which they
understanding, had recourse to no other defense then to their Enchantments,
raising such terrible tempests, winds, and waters, that through the violent
fury thereof, the Rivers ouerflowed and became impassable; upon which of a
sudden they caused such an unkindly heat, that the King and all his Army were
fried almost to death, so that the same was far more grievous to suffer then
the cold, and through the distemperature and corruption thereof, there ensued
such a mortality, that the King was forced to return: but he knowing that this
happened, not through the nature of the Land, but through coniuration and
sorcerie, came upon them another time so suddenly, that he was amongst them
before they heard any news of his coming: yet uniting themselves so well as
time permitted them, with the aid of their neighbors, arming themselves with
bows and arrows, and flying, fighting, and retiring with incredible swiftnes
through the Snowes, they disconfited the King and chased him away, who in his
days was accounted a puissant Prince, and had triumphed of many warlike
Nations. Coming out of these Provinces of Byarmya, there is presently another
which he calls Fynlande, of which a great part was according to the Author
before named in times past, subject to the King of Finmarchia or Finlande.
Norway. This Land, though very cold, yet is in some parts labored, and
yields fruits of all sorts unto the enhabitants, who are in proportion of
body mighty and strong, and in fight against their Enemies of great valor and
courage. Though the air be cold, yet it is pure and well tempered, in so much
that their fishes cut up only, and laid in the air, do endure many days
without corrupting: In Summer it rayneth with them very sildome or never; their
day is so long, that it continues from the Kalendes of April, till the sixth
of the Ides of September, which is more then five months, and the night again
as much: the darkness of which is never so great, but that you may well see to
read a Letter in the same: it is distant from the Aequinoctiall in threescore
degrees: There are no stars seen from the beginning of May, till the
beginning of August, but only the Moon which goes wheeling round about a
little above the earth, resembling a great Oak, burning and casting out beams
of fire, with a brightness somewhat dim and troubled, in such sort, that it
causes great admiration and astonishment to those that never saw it before:
and which is more, he says, that she gives them so light the most part of
their night, though it continue so long: and as for that little time in which
she hides herself, the brightness of the stars is so radyant, that they
have little miss of the Moon, which starre-light, at such time as the Moon
shyneth, forsakes them, whose brightness is the cause that they appear not,
though I cannot but believe that they appear always somewhat, though not so
clearly at one time as at an other, seeing in these our Countries we see them
shine near the Moon, though she be at full, yea, and sometimes at midday we
see stars very near the Sun.


LV. It is likely that it should be as you say in Byarmya and those other
unknown Countries which are under the Pole or near there abouts: and it may be
inferred also that the days go increasing and decreasing, till they come to
the full length of a half year; for being in this part of five months, they
are in some places more and some less, and seeing it is enhabitable as you
say, where it endures five months, it cannot but be better where it is of
four, and better then that, of three, and so consequently of two and one,
whereby there is no doubt to be made, but that the whole Land is enhabitable.


AN. I told you before, that generally the whole Land is enhabited, unless it
be in some places, through some particular cause and secret ordinance of
Nature. As touching the Moon, and the manner in which she lightneth those
Regions, I have not seen any Author that handles the same but only Olaus
Magnus, though by good reason it seems, that where the Sun turns about
the heavens in course and compass so different from that which he does with
us, the Moon should do the like in such sort as we have said.


BER. By all likelihoode there are many secret and wonderful things of the
nature of this Land hidden from us, as the Eclipse of the Sun and the Moon
which must needs be otherwise then it is here with us, and therefore the
Astronomers should do well to sift out the verity thereof, and to make us
understand the same and withal the reckoning of the months and years, the
computation of which, it is likely also that they use in another sort.


AN. As for their years, the difficulty is small, seeing one day and one night
do make a full year: and as for the division of their seasons, their day is
Summer, and the night is their Winter, the months perchance they divide
according to their own fashion, and the effects of their heaven: but herein
the Authors give us no notice, neither makes it much matter whether we know it
or no.


LU. That which I wonder most at, is, how this people can tolerate and endure
the bitter and extreme cold of that Clymat, the effect of which here with us,
though it be not so vehement as that of theirs, we see daily before our eyes,
brings many men to their end, and therefore we take heed of taking cold,
as of the most dangerous thing that may be. Nature has ordained a remedy
against all inconveniences.



AN. You say true, it happens so here indeed oftentimes, but you must
consider that the force of nature is great, which where she creates those
things that are most full of difficulty, there also creates and ordains she
remedies and defenses against the^, as you may before have understood by the
words of John Zyglere: but I will give you another reason, then the which in my
judgment nothing can be more evident and plain, which is, that to all things
the same is proper and natural in which they are bred and brought up: As for
example, a man who from his childhood is accustomed to eat some things that
are venomous afterward though he eat them in great quantity, they hurt him
not at all; and of this I have seen the experience my self: in the like sort
a man brought up in the cold, the greater he waxes, the less he feels the
inconvenience thereof, so that it comes in time to be natural unto him, even
as to the fish to live in water, the Salamander to nourish himself in the
fire, and the Camelion to maintain himself only by air. And even as a Moore
of Guyney, should hardly fashion his body to endure the cold Things to which
men are accustomed become natural unto the^ in time.
of these Northeren Lands, so likewise one of these men brought into a hot
Country, would find as great difficulty in enduring the heat. Besides this,
Nature has framed the me^ of these Regions more sturdie and strong, and
against the rigor of the weather ordained them warm Caves under the earth, to
harbor themselves in. They have wild beasts in great quantity whom they
kill, of whose skins they make them garments, turning the hairie side inward.
Their woods and Forests are many and great, so that in every place they have
store of fuel to make great fires, in fine, they want no defensiuenes against
the cold, which is so far from annoying them, that they live in better health,
and many more years then we do, for their airs are delicate and pure, and
preserve them from diseases, making their complexions more robust and strong,
and less apt to griefs, aches, and infirmities then ours.


LV. You have sufficiently answered me, and therefore go on I pray you with
that you were about to say of those Provinces, when I interrupted you.


AN. There remains little to be said, but that betvveene Byarmia and Fynland,
in declyning toward the South, there is another province which they call
Escrifinia, of which the Authors give no ample and particular notice, only
they say that the people of this Land is more nimble and expert in going over
the Snow and Ise then any other Nation, in which they use certain artificial
staves, with which they swing to and fro, without any danger, so that there is
no valley, how deep so ever filled with Snow, nor mountain so high and
difficill, but they run over the same, even at such time as the snow is
deepest and highest: and this they do in the pursuit of wild beasts, whom
they chase over the mountains, and sometimes for victories sake, in striving
among themselves and laying wagers who can do best, and run with greatest
nymblenes and celeritie. It is of no great moment to know the manner of these
staves which they use, both because it is difficile to understand, and the
knowledge thereof would stand us in small steed, having here no use of them.


BER. If any man be able to discover those peoples of the superior Byarmia, me
thinks these should be they, seeing they are so nimble and expert in passing
the snowes, whereby they might overcome the difficulty of the mountains, and
so enter into that Country, which is generally esteemed so happy, and where
the people live so long without any necessity to travail for their living,
having all things so abundantly provided them by Nature. In truth I should
receive great pleasure to understand assuredly the particularities of this
Land, and also how far it is distant from the Sea, and if it be on all
sides environed with those high mountains and cold Countries, it being in the
midst of them, containing so many provinces and Regions of excellent
temprature, under a climat and constellation making so great a difference
between them and the others, and as touching this world to make the^ so
blessed and happy as the ancients affirm and the moderns deny not.


AN. This land has many more provinces then these, whose names I now remember
not, of which there are some though seated in the region of the cold, yet
enjoying through some particular influences an especial purity of air and
temperature of wether. But seeing till this day we have not attained to the
knowledge of any more, content your selves with that which is already said.


LU. I stand considering with my self the great and loathsome tediousness,
that me thinks those Countrymen should sustain through the wearisom length of
their nights, which in my opinion were alone sufficient to make them weary of
their lives.


AN. Did you never hear the old Proverb, that Custom is another nature:
even so the length of the nights is a thing so usual unto Custom is another
nature.
those of this Country, that they pass them over without any grief or
tediousnes at all. While their day endures, they sow and gather in their
fruits, of which the most part, the earth plentifully affords them without
labor. A great part of that season they spend in chasing of wild Beasts,
whose flesh they powder with salt, and preserve as we do, and their fish in
like sort: or else they dry the same in the air as I said before: neither are
their nights such or so dark, but that they may hunt and fish in them. Against
cold they have as I said deep Caves, great store of wood, and warm furs in
great plenty, when light fails them, they have Oil of Fishes, and fat of
Beasts, of which they make Lamps and Candles, and withal, they have a kind
of wood containing in it a sort of Rozen, which being cleft in splinters, they
do use in steed of Candles, and besides this as I have said before, the nights
are during the time of their continuance so light, that they may see to do
their business and affairs in them, for the Moon and particular stars shine
in those Regions, and the Sun leaves always behind him a glimmering or kind
of light, in so much, that Encisus speaking of these Lands in his
Cosmographie, says, that there is in them a Mountain or Clyffe so high, that
how low soever the Sun discende when he goes from them to the Pole
Antartick, the top thereof always retayneth a light and brightness with
which through the exceeding height thereof it participateth.


LVD. This hill must be higher then either that of Atlas, Athos, or Olympus,
and so they say also that in the I Will of Zeylan there is another called Adams
hill, whose height communicates with heaven, and the opinion of the
inhabitants is, that Adams hill.
Adam lived there after he was cast out of Paradise.


AN. All may be possible, but let us return thither whence we came, I say
therefore that seeing Nature has endued this people with the use of reason,
assure your self that they want not manner and means to seek out such
things. as are necessary for the sustentation and maintenance of their lives,
yea perchance with greater subtlety and industry then we think for, neither
want they discretion to divide their times to eat, drink, and sleep at an
hour, to minister justice, and to maintain their Laws, and to make their
alliances and confederations, for seeing they have wars and dissentions one
with another, it is to be thought, that either party will seek to found
their cause upon reason, and procure to have Chiefes and Leaders to who^ they
obey: and if that which the Ancients say be false, that they should be
Gentiles, and that their cheifest God whom they adore should be Apollo, then it
is likely that they live There is now no known part of the world out of which
the worshipping of auncien feyned Gods is not banished.
by the Law of Nature: for in this time of ours there is not any known part in
the world, out of which this adoration of ancient Gods is not banished, at
least that manner of adoring them which the old Gentiles observed. I am sorry
that Olaus Magnus declared not this matter more particulerlie, seeing he could
not choose but have knowledge thereof, confessing in one Chapter which he made
of the cold of those Regions, that he himself had entered so far within
the^, that he found himself within 86. degrees of the very Northpole.


LVD. I know not how this may be, seeing you say that he speaks not of the
Provinces of Byarmia of his own knowledge of sight, which according to the
reckoning you said the Cosmographers make of the degrees, in reaching within
80. degrees of the Pole, are there where the whole year contains but one
only day, and one only night.


AN. You have reason to doubt, for I cannot thoroughly conceive it my self,
but that which seems unto me, is that either he reckons the degrees after
another sort, or else that there is error in the Letter. But howsoever it be,
it could not be chosen but that he being natural of Gothland, had seen a
great part of these Septentrionall Countries, seeing he is able to give so
good and perfect notice of them: Only this one thing now remains to tell
you, which is, that you must understand, that the very same which we have here
discoursed of, of Lands and Provinces under the North Pole, is and in the very
self same manner, in those which are under the South-pole, and that in as much
as pertains to the Heaven they differ nothing at all, and very little in
that of the earth, neither can they choose but have there some other wind like
unto * Circius, seeing the Snow, Ise, and cold is there in such extremity, as
by experience they found which went the voyage A North North Western wind.
with Magellane, who according to those that write of him and his voyage, was
within 75. degrees of the Pole before he came to find and discover the
straight to pass into the Sea of Sur, but he entreats nothing of the
increase and decrease of the days and nights, the cause why, I understand
not, it being a thing of so great admiration, that I vvonder why the
Chronaclers make no mention thereof, seeing they could not choose but have
notice thereof, both by the relation of those that then accompanied him in his
voyage, and of others that have since attempted to discover those parts, being
prohibited to pass any farther through the extreamitie of the cold, who found
in those parts men of monstrous greatness, such as I said were found near to
the Pole Artick: But The Snow on the mountains near the South-pole, is
bluish of color like unto the Sky.
this by the way I will not omit to tell you, that the snow which was found
on the tops of Mountains there, was not white as it is in the
Septentrionall Lands, but bluish and of a color like the sky, of which
secret there is no other reason to be given, then only that it pleases
Nature to have it so: There are also many other strange things, as birds,
beasts, herbs, and plants, so far different from these which we have, that
they move great admiration to the beholders of them. And if those parts were
well discovered, perchance also after the passing over of these cold Regions so
difficile to be enhabited through the rigor of the Snow and Ise, there might be
found other Countries as temperate as that of the superior Byarmia, of which
we spoke before. But let this happen when it shall please God, in the mean
time, let us content our selves with the knowledge of that which in our age is
discovered and known.


BER. We should be greatly beholding to you, if it should please you to
prosecute your begun discourse, for no doubt where the course of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars is so diverse, there cannot choose but be many other things
also rare, strange, and worthy to be known.


AN. It pleases me well to give you this contentment, so that you will refer
it till to morrow, for it is now late, and draws near supper time.


LVD. Let it be as you please, for to say the truth, it is now time to retire
our selves.


The end of the fifth Discourse.
The sixth Discourse, entreating of sundry things that are in the
Septentrionall Lands worthy of admiration.
Interlocutores. ANTHONIO. LUDOVICO. BERNARDO. AN. YOU may see that there
wants in me no desire to do you service, seeing I came first hither to
renew our yesterdayes conversation, and to accomplish my word and promise.


LVD. Your courtesies toward us are many, and this not the least of all,
seeing we hope at this present to understand the particularities of that
delightful discourse which yesterday you began, with promise to end the same to
day.


BER. It were good that we sat down under the shadovve of these sweet
Eglantines and Iassemynes, whereby we shall not only receive the pleasant
savor which they yield, but shall have our ears also filled with delight in
hearing the Nightingales record their sweet and delectable notes, to which in
my judgment, the curious forced melody of many Musicians is nothing to be
compared.


LU. No doubt but of all Birds their singing is most delightful, if it
continued the whole year, but as their amorous The song of the Nightingale
exceeds that of all other birds in sweetness.
desire cease, so cease also their harmony, whereas the song of other
Birds endures the whole year thorough.


BER. They perchance account it needelesse to rechaunt their melodious tunes
and sweet harmony, but at such time as the the pride and gaietie of the
season entertaineth them in love and jealousy, cheerfully with mutual
sweetness rejoicing one another, and each mate understanding others call.


LUD. According to this, you will have the Birds to understand one another.


BER. There is no doubt but they do, for even as the Beasts know the voice
one of another, assembling themselves together by their bellowing and braying,
even so do Birds understand the call one of another.
they understand the chyrping and peeping one of another, calling themselves
thereby together into showles and flocks.


ANT. Nay, which is more strange, they do not only understand one another
among themselves, but sometimes also, they are understood (as it is written)
of men, of which number Apolonius Tyaneus was one.


LUD. That certainly seems unto me a thing impossible.


ANT. Well, yet I It is written of Apollonius Tyaneus that he understood the
singing of Birds.
will not stick to let you understand what I have read concerning this
matter, and you shall find the same written in his life. Apollonius disporting
himself one day in the fields under the shadow of certain trees, as we do
at this present, there settled over his head a Sparrow, chirping and chyttering
to other Sparrowes that were upon the same trees, the which altogether began
to make a great chyrping and a noise, and A pretty jest.
to take their flight speedily toward the City, whereupon, Apollonius
bursting into a great laughter, and being by his companions earnestly
entreated to declare the cause thereof unto them, he said, that the same
Sparrow that came alone, had brought news to the rest, that a Myller coming
on the high way toward the Town with a burden of Corn charged upon his
Asses back, had by chance let one of his sackes fall, the stringes whereof
breaking, the Corn fell out, which the Myller could not so clean scrape up
and gather together again, but that a great deal thereof remained tumbled in
the dust, which was the cause of the great mirth that the other birds
demeaned, who in thanking him for his good news, flewe away with him to eat
their part of the same Corn. His companions hearing this, smyled thereat,
thinking it to be but a jest, till in returning to the Town, they found the
place where the sack had been broken, and the Sparrowes scraping very busily
about the same.


LV. Apolonius was a man of great wisdom and knowledge, but I rather think,
that he deuined this matter by some other means, for it seems hard to
believe that birds should have any language wherewith they should so
particulerly express their meaning, unless it be certain general notes, by
which each kind knows and calls their semblable, for in thinking otherwise,
we should attribute unto them some use of reason, which can be Birds or Beasts
have no use of reason at all.
neither in them, nor in Beasts, what show so ever they make thereof.


BER. Let us leave this, least otherwise we interrupt Signior Anthonio, in the
prosecution of his promised discourse, touching the Septentrionall Countries,
which is a matter not to be let slip.


AN. I would that I were therein so instructed, that I could entreat so
particulerly and plainly thereof, as it were requisite I should: but though the
fault be mine, in that I understand little, yet I want not an excuse
wherewith to wipe away some part of the blame: For the great confusion of the
Authors both Ancient and Modern that write thereof, as yesterday you
understood is such, that it makes me also confuse and wavering, in whether of
their opinions I should follow. Trust me it is a world to see their
disagreements, and he had need of a very Divine judgment, The disagreement of
writers touching the description and situation of Countries
that should conform himself to the understanding of Ptolomaeus, Solinus,
Stephanus, Dyonisius, Rufus, Festus, Auienius, Herodotus, Plinius, Anselmus,
Strabo, Mela, and diverse other of the Ancients, some of the which in reckoning
up of Nations and Provinces, name only one, saying forth others above this and
others above that beyond, of the one side and of the other: some declare the
names particulerly of each one, but in such sort, that comparing them with
these by which we now know the^, they are not to be discerned which are which,
for with great difficulty can we know who are the right Getes, Massagetes,
Numades, Scythians, and Sarmates, but only that we go gessing according to
the names which they now have; for there are Authors that give to the Land of
the Scithians only 75. leagues of widenes, and others will Diversity of
writers touching the Scithians.
needs have the most part of all those great Countries Northward to be
contained under them, so that Pliny not without cause, speaking of these
Septentrionall parts, terms them to be so vast and of so far a reach, that
they may be accounted an other new part of the world, yet he then knew nothing
of the interior part thereof toward the Pole which is now discovered. But
leaving this, there is no less difficulty and difference in the description of
those parts which we now know and understand, yea, even those which are near
us, and with whom we have traffic, as Norway, Denmark, Gothland, Sweueland,
and the Provinces which we call Russia and Prussia, of which they write so
intricatly, especially in some points, that they hardly give resolution to
those that read them, notwithstanding which difficulties, seeing there is no
part of the world in which there are not some things, though to them common,
yet rare and strange to those that have not seen them, but newly hear them
spoken of; I will tell you some particularities recorded by the Authors, that
make mention of these Regions, with which we may pass in good conversation
this evening, as we have done the rest. And first to begin with their men, they
say that they are of great stature, their lims and members well proportioned,
and their faces beautiful: Amongst which, there are many Giants of incredible
greatness, which as you enter farther into the Land, so shall you Sundry Giants
of wonderful force and puissance.
find them greater. Of these make mention Saxo Grammaticus, and Olaus Magnus,
chiefly of one called Hartenus, another Starchater, and two others, Angrame,
and Aruedor, who were endued with so extraordinary a force and puissance, that
to carry an Ox or a Horse upon their shoulders, though the way were very long,
they accounted nothing. There are also women nothing inferior to them in
strength, some of which have been seen, with one hand take a Horse with a man
Armed upon his back, and to lift him up, and throw him down to the ground: and
of these and others sundry Authors write many notable things worthy of memory,
which serving nothing to our purpose, it were in vain here to rehearse.
Leaving them therefore, I say that the continuance of the Snow in all these
Septentrionall Lands is such, that the high eminent places and tops of
mountains, are covered therewith all the year long, and many times the
valleys and low places also, notwithstanding all which extremity of cold they
have very good pastures, both for Beasts wild and tame; for their fodder and
grass is of such quality, that the very cold nourishes and augmenteth the
force and verdure thereof: The greatest disco^modity they have, is through the
wind Circius, which the greater part of the year blustreth in those Provinces,
North, North-westerne wind.
and that with such raging fury and violence, that it renteth up the trees by
the roots, and whirleth whole heaps of stones from up the earth into the
air, whereby those that travail, are often in great danger of their lives; the
remedy they have, is to hide and shroud themselves in caves and hollow vauts
under the mountains; for sometimes the tempests are so incredibly raging and
terrible, that there have been ships in the Bothnyk The strange violence of the
tempests in the Northern countries.
Sea, (which though it be near the frozen Sea, yet notwithstanding is
nauigable) hoised up into the air, and thrown down violently against the maine
Land; a matter scarsly credible, but that it is verified by so many and so
grave Authors; at other times you shall see waves of the Sea resembling mighty
mountains raised in height, and then with their fall, drown and ouerwhelme such
ships as are near; sometimes the tiles, yea, and the whole roofs of the house
taken away and blown far off; and which is more, the roofs of their churches
covered with Lead and other metals, have been torn up and carried away, as
smoothly as though they had been but feathers: neither have men Armed and a
Horseback more force to resist the violence of this wind, then has a light
reed, for either it overthrows them, or else perforce drives the^ against
some hillock or Rock; so that in diverse places of Norway which lie subiest to
this wind, there grow and increase no trees at all, for they are straight
turned up by the roots. For want of wood they make fire of the bones of
certain fishes, which they take in great quantity: the bleetenes of this wind
(for sildome in those parts blows any other) is cause that the most part of
the year, the Rivers, ponds, and Lakes are all frozen, yea, and the very waters
of the Springs do no sooner com out of them, but they are presently congeled
into Ice, and when the heat of the Sun thaweth or melts any Snow, the same
presently turns into so hard an Ice over that which is underneath, that they
can scarcely pearce it with Pickaxes; so that every year their young men in
plain fields make thick walls of snow, like unto those of a Fortress, in some
such place that they may receive the heat of the Sun, melting through which,
they convert into a hard Christaline Rock of Certain warlike pastimes that
their young men use.
Ice; and sometimes of purpose after they have framed this edifice of snow,
they cast water upon the same to make it freeze and become more hard and
clear: using the same in certain warlike pastimes they have, in steed of a
Castle of lyme or stone, one troop enters there-into to defend the same,
and another bideth without to besiege, assault, or surprise it, and this in
most solemn sort with all engines, stratagems, and manners of warfare, great
prices being ordained for those that shall obtain the conquest: besides, the
triumph wherein the conquerours do glory over the vanquished. Who so amongst
them is found to be fearful, or not forward in executing that which he is
commanded, is by his companions stuffed full of Snow under his garments, and
sometimes tumbled stark naked in great heaps of the same, enuring them thereby
better to abide hardness another time. These Septentrionall Lands have many
Lakes and standing waters of great largenes, some of the which are a hundred
miles long. These are at sometimes so frozen, that they travail over them both
a foot and horseback: In the Countries of East and Westgothland, there are
Lakes upon which great troops of horsemen meet and run for wagers, their
horses are in such Troops of horsemen skirmishing and fighting upon frozen
Lakes.
sort shod, that they sildome slide or fall in time of war, they skirmish
often upon these frozen Lakes, yea, and sometimes fight maine battles upon
them. At sundry seasons they hold upon them also certain Faires, to which
there resorteth a great concourse of strange Nations, the beginning of which
custom was ordained, as says John Archbishop of Vpsala, Predicessour to
Olaus, by a Queen of Swethland, called Disa, who being a woman of great
wisdom, commanded her Disa queen of Swethland.
Subjects on a certain year in which her dominions were afflicted with
extreme dearth and scarsity of grains, to go unto the bordering Regions,
carrying with them such merchandise as their Country yielded, and to bring with
them in exchange thereof Corn and grain, and withal to publish franchize to
all such as should bring thither any victual to be sold, whereupon many
strangers repairing thither at such time and season as the Lake was frozen, she
appointed them that place, for holding of their Fair, from which time till
this day that custom has continued. Northward of these Regions there are many
great and marvelous Lakes, such as scarcely the like are to be found in any
other part of the world that is peopled: of which leaving apart one that is
near the Pole, and is called the white Lake, which is in manner an other
Caspian The white Lake.
Sea, yielding great commodities of foul and fish to the adjoining Provinces,
part of the same reaching out even to the Muscouites. There are in the Regions
of Bothnia, Lakes of 300. and 400. miles long, where there is such quantity of
fish taken, that if they could conveniently be carried about, they would serve
for provision to half the world: Thereby also are many other notable Lakes, of
which the three most famous, are as the Authors write, Vener, Meler, and Veher.
Vener contains in length 130. miles, which are about 44. The Lake Vener.
leagues, and as much in breadth within it, it has sundry Islands well peopled
with Cities, Towns, and Fortresses, Churches, and Monasteries: for all those
three Lakes are in Country of Christians, though we have here little notice of
them: Into this Lake enter 24. deep Rivers, all which have but one only issue,
which makes so terrible a noise amongst certain Rocks, falling from one to
another, that it is heard by night six or seven leagues of, making deaf those
that dwell near there abouts, so that it is said there are certain little
Villages and Cottages thereby, the enhabitants of which are all deaf. They
call the issue of these Rivers in their Country language Frolletta, which is as
much to say, as the devils head. The second Lake called Meler, is between
Gothland and Swethland The Lake Meler.
has in the shore thereof many mynerals of metals both of silver and others,
the treasures gathered out of which, enricheth greatly the Kings of those
Countries. The third also called Veher, abounds in mines on the North side
Zhe Lake Veher.
thereof: The waters thereof are so pure and clear, that casting there-into an
egg or a white stone, you may see it lie in the bottom, though it be very
deep, as well as though there were no water between. Within this Lake are many
peopled Islands, in one of which wherein are two great Parish Churches, Olaus
writes, that there happened a thing very marvelous and strange. There lived
in this Island, says he, a man called Catyllus, so famous in the Art of
Negromancie, that in the A strange History of a Negromancer.
whole world his like was scarcely to be found: He had a Scholar called
Gilbertus, whom he had in that wicked Science so deeply instructed, that he
dared so far presume as to contend with him being his Master, yea, and in
some things seem to surpass him, at which shameless ingratitude of his,
Catyllus taking great indignation, (as always Masters use to reserve unto
themselves certain secret points) with only words and charms, without
other band, fetter, or prison, he bound him in an instant, both body, hands,
and feet, in such sort, that he could not wag himself, in which plight he
conuayed him into a deep Cave under one of the Churches of the same Island,
where he remains till this day, and according to the common opinion, is
always living. Thither used darly to resort many, not only of that Country
people, but strangers also to see him, and to demand questions of him. They
entered with many Torches and Lanternes, and with a clew of thread, of which
they fasten one end to the door whereat they enter, vnwiding the same still as
they go, for the better assurance of finding their way out, the Cave being
full of many deep pits, crooked turnings and corners. But at length because
the moisture and dampish cold thereof, with a loathsome stench besides, anoyed
so much those that entered, that some of them came out half dead; they made a
law, that on grievous pain, none of the Countrymen should from that time
forward resort nor enter into that Cave, neither give counsel, aid, or
assistance to strangers, which for curiosities sake should atempt the same.


LV. This is without doubt the work of the devil, who, the same Gilbertus
dying, perchance presently entered into his putrified stinking carcass, and
abusing the people, answered The force of enchantments cannot any longer
prolong life then the time by God fixed and appointed.

The devils have greater liberty in the Northern Lands the^ in other parts.


to their demands: For though the force of enchauntments be great, yet can they
not preserve life any longer, then the time fixed and appointed by God.


AN. You have reason, and in truth it seems that the devil is there more
lose and at greater liberty then in other parts, so that some will say, the
principal habitation of devils to be in the North, according to the authority
of holy Scripture. All evil shall come and discover it self from the Aquilon,
and Zachary Chap. 2. cries, ho ho, fly from the land of the Aquilon: howbeit
that these authorties are understood commonly in that Antichrist shall come
from those parts, whose like was never in persecuting the people of God.


LV. Remember you not what Esaias says in his 14. Cha. speaking to Lucifer, It
was thou, says he, that said in thy heart, I will mount up into heaven, and
put my chair upon the stars, and seat my self on the hill of the testament,
in the sides and corners of the wind Circius or Aquilon.


BE. These authorities have many interpretations, but howsoever it be, sure it
is that there is in these Northern parts, an infinite number of Sorcerers,
Witches, Enchaunters, and Negromancers.


AN. Those of the Provinces of Biarmia, Scrifinia, and Finland, with many other
bordering Regions, do, as the common fame goes, for the most part all
exercise Negromancie, chiefly those of Filandia and Laponia, which they vaunt
to have learned of Zorastes. To such as sailed to their country for traffiques
sake, and had the wind contrary at their departure, they used to sell for money
or merchandise such and so commodious wind as they themselves desired. They
used to knit in a cord three knots, of which undoing the one, there followed
presently a moderate wind, out of what Coast so ever they desired, undoing the
second, the wind began to bluster somewhat more furiously; but upon the losing
of the third, there arose such raging storms and tempests, that the ships
miscarried oftentimes and were drowned: And therefore such strangers as
traffiqued thither, procured to entertain friendship with them, imagining
their happy and unhappy success, the raging and calmenes of the Sea, to be at
their pleasure and disposition: for in this the devils were to them in great
subjection and obedience. Besides, when any man desired to know news from
foreign parts, there were amongst the^ diverse that would undertake to give
them true aduertisements, of such things as they required to know, being well
paid for their pains. They enclosed themselves into a chamber, taking with
them their wives, or some other person who^ they especially trusted, and then
smiting upon a figure of metal which they kept, made in fashion of a Toade or
Serpent, after whispering some words, and making certain signs, they fell
down groueling on the ground in a trance, most straightly charging and
enioyning him or her that stood by, to take great heed, that no fly, vermin,
or beast, should touch them while they so continued: Returning to themselves,
they answered to such things as they were enquired of so truly, that they
were never found to be false in any one point: And this they publicly used,
till they received the faith of our Savior Christ; since which, if they use the
same it is with great secrecy, and most severely punished if it be known.
There are as yet in certain Provinces that confine upon them, and are somewhat
nearer unto us, many notable Negromancers, famous by the writing of many
Authors. Amongst the rest, there was even almost in our time Henry king of
Swethland, Henry King of Swethland, a famous Negromancer.
who had the devils so ready and obedient at his commandment, that he caused
presently the wind to turn and change into what part so ever he pointed with
his cap, in so much, that of the common people, he was called by no other name
then Windy Bonet. He had a Son in law called Reyner, Reyner King of Denmark.
King of Denmark, who conquered on the Sea coast many Countries by force of
Arms, never at any time having contrary wind, when he went to Seaward, being
therein by his Father in law always assisted, to whom he succeeded afterward
also in the Kingdom of Swethland. Many write of a woman called Agaberta,
daughter of a Giant in those Septentrionall Agaberta a notable Sorceresse.
Lands, whose name was Vagonostus, that she was so skillful in Negromancie,
that she sildome suffered her self to be seen in her proper figure; sometimes
she would resemble an old withered wrinkled Crone, sometimes a most beautiful
and goodly Maiden, sometimes she would seem so feeble and faint, and yellow of
color, as though she had been consumed with a long and languishing Ague:
another time she would be so high, that her head should seem to reach unto the
clouds, changing when she listed with such facility her shape, as did Vrgand
the unknown, of which old fables make such mention, the strange force of her
enchauntments was such, that she could darken the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
level high Mountains, and make plain champaine of savage Deserts, pull trees
up by the roots, and dry up running Rivers, with many the like, as though she
had had all the devils of hell ready at a beck to fulfill her commandments.
The like is written of an other called Grace of Norway. Yffrotus the Grace of
Norway.
mighty King of Gothland and Swethland, walking for recreation along the
Seashore, was run at by a Cow, and hurt Ifrotus K. of Gothland, slain by a
Witch.
with her horns in such sort, that he died presently upon the same: afterward
it came to be known and proved, that the same Cow was a Witch disguised in
that form, which for some grief conceived against the King, had used that
revenge Hollerus a Negromancer.
upon him. There was one called Hollerus, so incredibly surpassing the rest in
this detestable Science, that the common people supposed him to be more then a
mortal man, and honored him as a God, though at length they found their
error, for notwithstanding his fained immortality, his head was cut off, and
his body torn in pieces by his enemies: for commonly the devil though he
help them for a while, yet ever in the end he leaves them in the mire.
Othinus, which Othinus by his Enchantments restored the K of Denmark to the
Crown,
was held for one of the greatest Negromancers that ever was, brought Hadignus
king of Denmark to his kingdom out of far Countries into which he was
banished, on horseback, or rather on the devils back behind him, through
thick and thin, yea, and over the Sea it self, bringing it by his
Enchauntments so to pass, that the King was received and established in his
government: afterward, in a battle against Haruinus King of Norway, he
caused such a clowdie shower of hayle to strike on the face of his enemies,
that not enduring the violence thereof, and being on the other side furiously
charged by the Danes, they turned their backs and were discomfited. But it were
time lost to entreat any farther of this people, being the devils disciples,
dwelling and daily dealing so familiarly with them. There are amongst them
often seen visions and Spirits, deluding those that travail, appearing to
them in likeness of some of their known friends, and suddenly vanishing away,
so that the devil seems to have in those Septentrionall Countries, greater
dominion and more liberty then in other parts.


LV. I remember that I have read a certain Author, which A mountain that
seems to be inhabited of devils.
among many strange and wonderful things, writes that there is in a certain
part of these Lands a mountain environed round about with the Sea, unless it
be of one side, where it has only a very narrow and little entry, so that it
seems in manner to be an Island: the top thereof is covered with trees, so
thick and high, that a far of they seem to touch the Clouds. There is
within the same continually heard so great and hideous a noise, that no man
dares to approach near it by three or four leagues. The ships keep always
a loofe of, fearing and flying that Coast as death it self. There is seen
amongst those trees such an abundance of great black fowls, that they seem in
a manner to cover them, who rising up into the air do make so great a cloud,
that they obscure in a manner the cleerenesse of the Sun, their crying or
rather roaring, is so horrible and fearful, that such as hear them, though
very far of, are constrained to stop their ears. They never fly out of
the precincts of this Island, the same being always shadowed with a kind of
obscurity in manner like a Cloud, diuersifying it from the Land near unto
it: Some (says he) do affirm this Mountain to be a part of Hell, where the
condemned souls are tormented: which opinion though it be ridiculous, yet
the property of this Mountain is strange, and in the cause thereof, some
hidden mystery which we comprehend not.


BER. These are matters, the secrecy of whose causes are not to be sifted out,
like unto that of the Mountains of Angernamia, one of the farthest of those
Northern Provinces, A strange noise heard in certain mountains of Angernamia.
which are so high, that they are seen a far of by those that sail on the
Bothnycke Sea, and by them with great care and diligence avoided, through a
wonderful secret in them contained, which causes a noise so hideous, violent,
fearful, and full of astonishment, that it is heard many leagues of, and if
that by force of tempest driven, or otherwise through ignorance unwitting, any
ship passes near thereunto, the horror thereof is so great, that many die
presently: through the penetrating sharpnes, and intolerable violence of the
same, many remain ever after deaf, or diseased, and out of their wits.
Neither are they that travail by Land, less careful in avoiding these
Mountains. Once certain young men of great courage, being curious to
discover the cause hereof, stopping their ears as artificially as they could
devise, attempted in little Boats to row near these mountains, and to view
the particularities of them, but they all perrished in that attempt, by their
desastre leaving an example and warning to others, not to hazard themselves in
like danger. That which we may hereafter imagine is, that there are some clefts
or Caves within the Rocks of these Mountains, and that the flowing and ebbing
of the water, striving with the wind, and having no aspyration out, causes
that fearful rumbling and hideous noise; and this is understood, because the
greater the tempest is at Sea, the greater is the noise in those Mountains, the
same being in calm and mild weather nothing so loud and violent. Of these
mountains Vincentius makes mention Vincentius in his Speculo historiali.
in his glass of Histories, though he write not so particulerlie of them as
some modern Authors do, which affirm that they have seen them.


LV. Me thinks this place is as perrillous as that of Charibdis, and rather
more, considering the sharpnes and terror of Charibdis.
the noise which penetrateth so far: and in my judgment the flowing and
ebbing of the water, should draw unto it the ships, and make them perrish,
though you made thereof no mention.


AN. It seems unto me that you also have read these Authors which treat of
the Septentrional Countries, and seeing it comes now to purpose, I will tell
you one no less admirable then the rest, which is, that in a city called
Viurgo, near the province of Muscouia, there is a Cave called Esmelen, The
strange property of a Cave in the City of Viurgo.
of so secret a virtue, that no man has hitherto been able to comprehend the
mystery and cause thereof, which is, that casting any quick beast into the
same, there issues out presently a sound so terrible, as though 3000. great
Canons were discharged and shot off together, the effect of which is such, that
the hearers thereof, if they have not their ears very well stopped and closed,
do fall presently down deprived of all feeling and sense, like dead men, out of
which mortal trance some never revive, some do, but from that time forward so
long as they live they detain some defect or other. The greater the beast is
that is thrown thereinto, the greater is the noise and roaring that resoundeth
out. This Cave is compast about with a very strong wall, and the mouth thereof
shut up with a mighty strong door, having many Locks, of which the
Governor has one Key in his keeping, and the rest of the Magistrates each of
them a several, least otherwise some desastre might fall out, by which the
City might come to be dispeopled, which though it be very strong both of
walls and Ramparts, yet the greatest strength thereof consists in the Cave,
neither is there any enemy so mighty, or puissant, that dares to besiege it,
having before his eyes the ruin of great Armies that have attempted the same
before, by which after the City was brought into some extreamitie, the
Citizens bethinking themselves of the property of the Cave, commanded by
public proclamation all those of the town to stop their ears, and one night
unawares to the enemy, they cast into the Cave a great number of living
beasts, upon which there presently issued forth such a hideous and infernal
noise, and the violence thereof struck such amazement into the enemies, that
some fell down in a trance, and others throwing away their Arms, fled out
of their Cabbines and trenches, the most confusedly that might be, and
withal, to increase their misery, the Citizens issuing out, massacred the
greater part of them, by that means delivering their City from servitude.
And though they could not but receive some inconvenience through the horror of
that hellish noise, though their ears were never so well closed, yet through
the joy of their victory and recovered liberty, they made small account of the
same, since which time, all the borderers there abouts, fearing the effect of
their Cave, do live in league and amity with them.


BER. In truth this is a matter of great admiration, and such, (that though
diverse very great secrets both of heaven and earth are comprehended) yet the
curiosity of no wit, how perfect soever, can reach to give hereof any reason.


LVD. Let us leave these secrets to him that made them, whose will perchance is
to conceal their causes from us.


AN. You say well, and in truth the more we should beat our wits about them,
the less we should be able to understand them, it suffiseth therefore for us
to know, that these are the secret and wonderful works of God shown by
Nature, the understanding whereof is above our reach and capacity. But to
follow on our discourse of the wonders of this Country, you shall understand,
that in those standing waters and frozen Lakes of which we spoke before, the
air remains oftentimes The air sometime enclosed within the frozen lakes, in
seeking vent, makes a terrible thu^dring and noise.
shut in and enclosed, the which moving it self, and running up and down
under the Ise seeking vent, causes such roaring and noise that it were able to
amaze him that knows not the cause thereof, the same being no less terrible
then the thunder from heaven; yea and sometime because it is nearer, it seems
to be more violent: the force thereof is such, that the Ise sundereth and
splitteth in clefts, making it way and room to pass and espire out thereat,
at which time those that travail thereupon, being near the place where the
noise is, make as much have thence as they can, fetching a compass about, till
they think themselves in security, and then they follow their way on forward.
And though all these Lakes and waters, thaw by degrees, more and more as the
Summer comes on, yet is the Lake Vether in thawing far different from The
strange property of the lake Vether in thawing
the rest: for it seems to have in the bottom thereof some secret and
hidden property hard to be understood, because the water beginning to boil and
bubble beneath, in making like noise as does a Cauldron of skalding water
seething over a hot Furnace, in very little space mounteth upward and breaks
the Ise, how strong, thick, or hard soever it be, and that into such little
pieces, that many times those whose hap it is to be in that instant travailing
upon the same, do save themselves upon one of them as upon a plank, where they
perrish if they be not presently succored with Boats, which usually
accustom to be in readiness, to help and assist those that are in danger, at
such time as the breaking of the Ise is suspected to be at hand: And once it
happened that a Gentleman of very principal calling and reputation, with five
or six of A notable chance that happened to a Gentleman upon this Lake, by which
he saved his life.
his Servant all on horseback, travailed upon this Lake toward a town in
the Island, and at the very same time, somewhat far from them upon the same Lake
was going a laboring man, driving before him certain beasts, who being
borne there-abouts, and knowing by long experience the property and manner of
the Lake, at that instant hearing it begin to murmr and bubble beneath,
leaving his beasts, betook him to his heels, and ran with all his might
toward the shore, which was about half a league of. The Gentleman and his
servant being a good space farther inwards upon the Lake, imagined the poor
man to be some thief that had stolen this Cattle, and the cause of his
running away, to be the fear he had of being discovered by him and his
company: and therefore putting spurs to their horses, galopt after him, as
fast as they could to take him. But the Laborers extreme fear made him so
swift, that they could not overtake him, till he was of from the Lake, and
upon the firm Land, where laying hands upon him, and demanding him, why he
ran in such sort away, leaving his Cattle behind him. The poor Labourer
being tired with running, was scarce able to make them answer, but after he
had paused awhile and recovered his breath, he prayed them to have a little
patience, and though he told them not, they should themselves see the cause
why. Whereupon, presently of a sudden the water bubled up, the Ise speeted in
small pieces, and the beasts in sight of them all fell into the water and were
drowned, at which the husbandman laughing, I had rather (quoth. he) that they
were drowned then I, and this was the cause of my running, because foreseeing
by assured signs the breaking of the Ise, and having no space to save them, I
did the best I could to save my self. The Gentleman being a stranger in those
parts, hearing this tale with amazement, thinking this preservation of him and
his to proceed of Gods divine goodness, gave thanks and praise unto his holy
Name, and withal, knowing the Labourer to be an instrument and mean of saving
his life, took him along with him, not only paying him for the Cattle which
he had lost, but also recompencing him with many other large rewards, to his
great contentment and bettering of his estate.


LV. By diverse means does God preserve his servant and I warrant you this
Gentleman was one that feared GOD, seeing it pleased him by fo strange a mean
to deliver him from that danger in which he had otherwise perrished.


BER. The nature of this Lake is wonderful strange, and above man's capacity,
which being but a moment before able to bear and sustain a whole Army, should
so in an instant be dissolved and broken. But leaving this, the cold must of
necessity, in my judgment, be there most extremely sharp, vehement and
rigorous, seeing it causes an Ise of such incredible strength and thicknes.


AN. Let us leave that of the sea which is on the other part or under the
North, commonly called the Frozen-sea, remaining so, as some do write, the
whole year thorough, though as I said before, my opinion is, that it thaweth at
such time of the year as the sun lies beating upon it with his beams, and let
us come unto those Lands and Seas, which though we call Septentrionals, yet are
nearer unto us, which are all as you have heard, in a manner, enhabited of
Christians, and are according to the description of the old Cosmographers,
contained under our Europe, the cold of which is so sharp and pearcing, that a
man would judge no human flesh able to endure the same. But according to the
old Proverb, Custom is another nature, and so those that are accustomed
thereunto, receive thereby no damage Custom is another nature.
at all.

Albertus Kransius in his history of those Countries, writes in particular of
some years, in which the cold was so excessive, that not only the Rivers and
Lakes were frozen, but the Sea also, so that no ship could sail thorough the
same, and that they travailed on horseback upon the Ise from one country to
another, carrying with them provision of things necessary, and fuel also to
make fire. Neither was this extreme cold and freezing upon the Seacoast
only, but also many thousands of miles inward to the Landwarde, and the earth
was so hardened and bound, that it yielded them no fruits, vvhereupon there
ensued a great dearth and mortality, principally among their Cattle, for want
of fodder. The daily increase of this cold and Ise continued so long, that
they built Tauerns and victualing houses built upon the sea.
upon the Sea, on such places as men usually trauayled by, Innes and Tauerns,
with all necessary provisions both to eat by day, and to rest by night, as
well for man as horse, a matter scarcely credible.


LVD. I know not why any man should be so fond, as to travail upon the Sea in
such danger and penury of commodities as of necessity they must endure,
especially having means to go by Land, with greater security, and more
provision of necessaries.


AN. This may be easily answered, for the way by Sea cannot choose but be far
nearer, in cutting straight over, and less painful, as being without Hills,
Valleys, Quagmires, or compasses about: Neither is it to be imagined, that they
want by the way commodity of things necessary, which for gain are brought
thither most abundantly from all sides, at such times as this passage is used:
Besides, both Horsemen and foote-men travail with greater facility, but
especially the footmen, which when they list go as it were in post, even as
fast as a horse can gallop.


LV. Shall we not understand the manner how this may be.


AN. Yes marry shall you, if you please, and in truth it is an invention worth
the knowing. When they are to make a voyage upon the Ise, if they list to A
strange invention to slide upon the Ise.
use speed, they set both their feet upon a piece of wood, made as smoothe
and slippery underneath as is possible, binding only their left foot to the
same, their right foot being loose, upon which they wear a strong shoe, with
an iron in the point thereof, so cunningly made, that how great a blow so ever
you give the rouling planke with the same, yet the foot receaueth thereby no
hurt at all, because the force of the stroke falls hollow: They carry in
their hands great staves like demi Lances, with three sharp pikes at one end
of them: And so having made their provision of all things necessary for their
journey, going on alone, or many in company, every man upon his engine, they
draw the right foot backward, and give a spurn as hard as they can against
the planke upon which the left foot is bound, which presently gyrdeth out,
slyding along the Ise with incredible swiftness, welnie so far as the reach
of a Caliuer shot without stay, and then seeing the force of their course
beginning to relent, they chop down their staff upon the Ise, fastening
therein the three pykes of the same, for otherwise they should fall down, and
then turning anewe into their first posture, they give an other gyrde with
their right foot, so that they travail in one hour three or four leagues.
When there are many of them together, they contend and lay wagers one with
another who should give the greatest stroke with his foot, and they make such
a shouting and crying, that the tediousnes of the way is nothing noisome to
them at all. Besides, they have certain I have seen in Brabant and (...) the
Noble me^ use these kind of slids very cunously made and gilded they call them
Trin^aus.
slide Wagons finely made, in which two or three persons may sit, in which with
great ease and pleasure, they are drawn along the Ice with Horses, being much
like unto those slids which are here used of Gentlemen for their recreation.
They are carried in them with incredible swiftnes, because the Ice is
altogether plain, smooth, and slippery, without any rub, hillock, or other
impediment to stumble at.


BER. Necessity inuenteth many things, which to those that never saw them,
seem new and strange, though ordinary, and of no account to those that daily
use them: but as for this invention, it is very easy and without any
difficulty at all. For in Frizeland, Denmark, and other cold Countries also,
both men and women do use much to travail on the Ice, though after a
different sort: for they wear in the soles of their shoes certain plain
Irons, with a point turning up forward, they call them Schouerdins, and with
these in short space slyding upon the Ice, they transport themselves very
far: but it behooves them to be skillful in their Art, or otherwise they
fall very often. Their women are herein so practiced, that they will slide in
such sort five or six leagues, carrying a basket on their heads, and that
without once stumbling. Also when the Snow is deep, they have certain little
Wagons, made in such These are in manner like those above said which they call
(...).
sort of planks, laid athwart one another, that they cannot sink into the Snow,
in which, they are drawn along by Horses with exceeding swiftnes.


LU. I think the Snow be never so deep in these Lands of which we speak,
but that they have some devise or other to pass over them: for you said that
in the lower Byarmya, Fimnarchia, Escrifinia, Fylandia, yea, and in part of
Norway, and in some places under the Emperor of Russia, the enhabitants do
travail over such places, as a man would judge to be utterly impossible: Where
though the Snowes lie so deep, that they make low valleys equal with high
mountains; yet you say that the peoples industry finds means to pass over
them from one part to an other.


AN. It is most true, and as I said before, chiefly those of Fylandia, have
fame to excel in agility and lightness. When they are to pass over the Snow,
they bind under their feet certain bordes, about the breadth of a spanne, or
little The manner of their travailing upon the Snow.
more, from the points of which comes a crooked staff bowing upward, which
they take in their hands, the same being furrd and wrapped about with the skins
of certain Beasts called Rangifery, and in this fashion they travail upon
the Snowes without sinking into them, the manner of which is difficill to be
conceived unto those which have not seen the same.

They have also an easier kind of artifice to travail over the Snow, much
like unto those slide-Wagons of which Rangifer is a Beast in manner like unto a
Stagge.
we spoke before, to drawing of which, in steed of Horses they use Rangifers:
then the which there is no one thing among them of greater vtility and profit.
They are about the bigness of a Horse, or little less, in fashion, making, and
proportion, they are like unto Stagges; they have on their heads three horns,
two like unto those of a Stag, with many points, branches, and brow-antlers,
and between them two, one somewhat less, having also many branches, some of
the which are round and cloven, their back is somewhat hollow, so that the
saddle is very sure and fast upon them, for they are in steed of Horses to
those peoples. When they put them in Coaches, Carts, or Wagons, besides the
ordinary gyrths and peutrals, coming over their breast and belly, they tie one
fast to the little horn in the midst, which causes them to draw with greater
force. They are wonderfully light and swift, insomuch that when need
requires, they travail twenty leagues in a day. They tread so light, that you
can scarcely see any tracke of their feet, so that when the Snow is any thing
frozen, the enhabitants fear not to pass upon their backs over any place,
how deep so ever it be. They know by experience at what time they may
adventure this dangerous kind of ryding with security, by the stiffness of the
Snow. Commonly they are drawn by these Rangifers in such slide-Wagons, as I
spoke of before; and if they see themselves in any danger, presently they
vnspanne them, and leaping on their backs, do save themselves with great
facility.

They have great abundance of these Beasts, both wild and tame, which in
respect of the great commodity they receive by them, they nourish with great
industry, having whole Droues of them, as we have here of Oxen and Kine: in
so much, that some one man has four or five hundredth of them to his private
use: The milk and cheese of the females is passing wholesome, and a principal
nouriture unto them.

Their flesh svveete and sauourie, but especially that of the young-ones, is
passing delicate; the same powdered endures The great commodities that those
Country people receive of the Rangifers.
very long. They apply their skins to such uses, as we do here the hides
of Oxen. They make also of them Couerlettes for their beds, retayning always
in them as it were a kind of natural warmth: Of their horns and bones they
make very strong Bows, neither is that of their hoofes without great virtue,
having as it is wrttten, in them a notable remedy against the falling sickness.


BER. I never heard of a more profitable Beast, and therefore I much marvel,
why other Countries procure not to nourish them?


ANT. All possible diligence has been used, not only to convey them into
other Provinces and Regions, but also to send with them Keepers acquainted
with their custom and nature: But all sufficed not; For it seems that
Nature will have them to be only in those Countries toward the North, the
farther from which you carry them, the greater difficulty is in keeping them;
for in coming where they feel not the sharpness of the cold, they die,
even like fishes taken out of their natural Element, which is water.

There is another Beast also in those parts, called Onager, in manner like
unto the Rangyferes, but that he has Beasts called Onagri.
only two horns like a Stagge, whose lightness they say is such, that he
runs also over the Snow, without scarcely leaving any sign or trace of
his feet. They were wont to use this Beast in dravving their Coaches and
artificial Tables, with which they trauayled over the Ice and frozen Snow.
But they were forbidden by the public edict of their Kings and Princes, not
to nourish them any more tame and domestical: I omit the causes wherefore,
because the Authors write insufficiently thereof. This Beast endures so well
hunger and thirst, that he will travail 50. or 60. leagues without eating or
drinking. The woods and mountains contain infinite numbers of the^, they are
at continual war with the Wolfes, of which also there is great plenty,
whenever any one of them happens to light upon a Wolf with his nails,
how little so ever the wound be, he dies thereof presently. If the Wolf
pursue him, his refuge is straight to the Ice, where in respect of his sharp
paws, he has a great advantage, standing stiff and firm upon them, which
the Wolf cannot do upon his.


LU. Solinus writes also, that there are of these in Africa, whose words are
thus. There are The strange jealousy of the Onagres in Africa.
(says he) in this Province Beasts called Onagri, of which each male
governs a Heard of females, of the same kind, they are exceeding jealous,
and cannot endure to have companions in their lasciuiousnes; whence it
proceeds, that they look very watchfully unto the females going great, to
the end that if they bring forth males, by giving them a bite upon the
genitories, they may thereby take from them all possibility ever after of
engendring; which the females fearing, endeavor always as secretly as they can
to hide their young ones.


BER. Perchance these and those of the Septentrionall Lands, are not all of
one sort, seeing the one lives not but in places extremely cold, and to the
other, nothing is more natural then heat.


AN. This is no argument to prove that they are not all one sort of Beasts,
for as there are men in the Regions of extremest cold, and likewise in those
of most scorching heat, even so may these Beasts, though of one sort, yet live
under contrary Climates, each of them conforming them to the nature of the
soil: Yet I will not say, but that it may well be, that they are two sundry
kinds, encountering both in one name: For in truth we do not find, that any
of these properties of which Solinus speaks, are in the Northern Onagres.
But seeing the matter is not great, whether they be one or diverse, let us turn
to our Wolfes again, of which there is so great a number in those Northern
Regions, that the people have much ado to defend themselves, and their Cattle
from them: insomuch that they dare not adventure to travail in diverse places,
unless they go many together, and well armed.

There are of them three sorts, the one like these which we have here, others
all white, nothing so fierce and harmeful as 3. Sorts of Wolves in the
Northeren Regions
the rest, the third sort they call Troys, having great bodies, but short
legs, which though they be more cruel, and withal more swift then either of
the other sorts, yet are they not of the enhabitants so much feared, because
they live and pray upon wild Beasts, seldom doing any violence to men. But
if at any time they undertake to pursue a man, they never leave till they have
woried him. As touching the ancient opinion, that there should be in these
parts a province of men called Neuri, which at one time of the year are
transformed The Neurians do at sometimes of the year transform themselves
into wolves.
into Wolves, if there be therein at all any foundation of truth, it is as all
late Writers affirm, that as there are in those parts many Witches and
Enchaunters, so have they their limited and determined times of meetings, and
making their assemblies, which they do in the shape of Wolves, the cause
whereof though they declare not: yet is it to be thought, that they are by their
master the devil so enjoined, at appointed times to do him obedience in this
form and figure: as the Sorcerers and Hags do, at which time he instructs
them in such things as appertain to their art and science. During the time
of their transformation, they commit such infinite outrages and cruelties, that
the very Wolves in deed are tame and gentle in respect of them: For proof that
they can and do so transfigurat themselves, besides many other examples which I
could allege, I will content my self in telling you only one, which is
most true and certain. It is not long since that the Duke of Muscouia caused
one to be taken that was notoriously How the Duke of Muscouia dealt with an
Enchanter.
known to transform himself in such sort as we have said, of whom being
brought bound with a chain into his presence, he demanded if it were true,
that he could so transform and change himself into a Wolf, as it was
bruted, which he confessing, the Duke commanded him to do it presently:
whereupon, craving to be left alone awhile in a chamber, he came of a sudden
out, in the shape of a very Wolf indeed, being still fast bound in his
chain as he was before. In the mean time, the Duke had of purpose made come
two fierce mastiues, which taking him to be as he seemed, flew presently upon
him, and tare him in pieces, the poor wretch having no force or ability to
defend himself at all.


BER. He was justly punished according to his desert. But it is not only of
late days, that the devil exercises this Art among those Nations, for
Solinus, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and many other learned Authors, in their
wrytings make mention thereof. But leaving this, seeing it comes so well to
our purpose of VVoules, I will tell you what a man of very good credit told
me not long since, affirming the same to have happened in a Town on the
utmost bounds of Germany, which we may also term to be a land
Septentrionall.

This Town, said he, was so near a great wild Mountain ouer-growen with
Trees and bushes, that of one side the Trees shadowed the Houses. This
Mountain was so pestred with Wolves, that raging through hunger, they used
to come in mighty troops even to the very Town it self, though it were
great and well peopled. Their cruelty and fierceness was such, that no man
dared stir out of the Town alone, no nor three or four together, if they
went not very well provided both of courage and weapons, unless they would
be torn in pieces, and devoured of the Wolves. Neither did the Women and
Maidens dare go How three young men destroyed a number of wolves that
greatly annoyed the town where they lived.
unto the River that ran thereby for water without a strong Conuoy of Armed
men. Finally, the damage they daily received was so great, that for their
last and only remedy, they determined to abandon the Town, and to seek
some other habitation: which their deliberation being known, three young men
amongst the rest of great force and courage, determined to put their lives in
ieopardie, rather then to leave the place of their nativity defert, to become
the habitation of vvilde Beasts. Whereupon, making each of them a light
Armor, complete at all pieces, full of short sharp gaddes or Bodkins, they
Armed themselves therewithal, pulling over the same a black garment, least
otherwise the Wolves might discover their Armor, and so set forward to the
Forest, having in each hand a strong sharp poynted poniard: and least they
should break or leese them, four others in a readiness under their gyrdles.
They went not far a sunder, that they might succor one another when need
required.

They had not so soon endred into the VVood, but they were presently espied by
the Wolves, who very raueningly with open mouth assayling them, they made no
semblance of defense, but suffered them freely to come on: Who with open mouth
thinking presently to devour them, what with the sharp Bodkins on the
Armor, upon which they smote their jaws, and the stabbes bestowed upon them
with the ponyards, had quicklic their bellies full. In this order they they
dispatched very many that day, helping still one another when they were in
danger: And continuing the same many days together, penetrating daily farther
into the mountain, they made such a slaughter and havoc of Wolves, that in
short space they cleared the whole Coast of them, and delivered their town
from desolation.


AN. Truly these youngmen were worthy of great commendation, for their
courage and discretion, in clensing their Country of so great an inconvenience
and mischief, but by the way, I will tell you a strange thing that happened of
late in Galicia. There was a man taken that accustomed to hide himself in the
Mountains and Caves, clothed in a Of a man that disfigused himself like unto
a Wolf, and did many cruelties in the kingdo^^ of Galicia in Spain.
Wolves skin: lurking always in some secret place, near unto the Highway,
where if he saw any child come alone, he ran out upon him, and strangling
him, satisfied therewith his hunger. The hurt he did was so great, that those of
the Country, with a general consent, laying daily wait to catch him,
surprised him one day so by chance at unawares, that they took him alive, and
finding him to be a man, they imprisoned him, and afterward laid him on the
torture, but they could wring no matter at all out of him, for all that he
spoke was fantastically, like unto a mad man. He would eat nothing but
raw flesh, and in the end dyed before his time of execution.

But leaving this of their Wolves, they have besides many other beasts both
wild and tame, amongst the which their Hares have a property far different
from these of ours, for as the Winter comes on, and the snow begins to
fall, A strange property of their Hares.
they shead all their old hair, in place of which comes new as white as
any Lilly, which as the Summer approaches, they change again, returning to
their old color, being the same which ours have here, whereby it may be
inferred, that in those Countries which are farther North, and where the snow is
in a manner continual, the Hares should be always white, though it is
doubtful whether the Snow or the natural property of the Land, causes this
alteration in the color of their hair. Whenever they are taken in the
Winter their skins are excellent, and accounted to be one of the best Furs
that may be.

There is another mystery also very strange, written by the Historiographers
concerning these Hares, which is, that what woman soever eats their flesh,
during the time of her going great, the upper lip of the child of which she
comes to be delivered, is in the midst cloven in two with a slitte, even up
to the very nostrels, for which they use this remedy. The Midwife or
Physician takes the brawne of the breast of a Chicken newly kilde, and lays
it upon the slitte, and over that the warm blood of the same Chicken, with
which it closes and joins together, though never so well but that the mark
and token thereof remains. There are also in those Countries certain other
Beasts called Gulones, about the greatness of a Mastiue Curre, proportioned
like a Cat, with Beasts called Gulones.
long and sharp claws, having a bushie tail like a Fox, whose nature is,
having kilde any Beast, to eat so much as his belly can hold, which being
swollen so great as though it would even presently burst, he goes to the
Wood, and seeking out two Trees that grow very near together, he strayneth
himself between them in such sort, that he comes to vomit and cast up all
that which he had eaten before, thence he returns to eat anewe, and thence
to vomit again, and so still, till he have devoured the whole Beast. The
skin of this Beast is accounted very precious: In taking him the Hunters use
this policy: They lay near The manner of taking the Gulones.
the place where he uses, the carcass of some dead Beast, hiding themselves
in the mean time, til his belly be as full as a tun, within the thickest of
some bush, and then they shoot at him with their Crosbowe, otherwise their
fiercenes and cruelty, and withal, their swiftnes is such, that they would put
the Hunters to great ieopardy, if they should chance to descry them while
their bellies are empty. They have also great abundance of Tigers, whose skins
they apply to many uses chiefly Tigers.
in respect of their exceeding warmth to garments and couerlets of beds. Their
most esteemed furre is that of Martres, which we here call Zibellinas, to
which also there is an other Furre of Martres.
Beast very like, and little differing; the flesh whereof they eat not, because
it is very dry and unpleasant: their skins only is that which they seek and
hold in estimation. There are also Lynces, whose sight is so sharp and
piercing, that it penetrateth Lynces.
through a wall, seeing that which is on the other side. In Gothland commonly
the Rams have 4. horns, and some 8 and withal, they are of such courage in
defending themselves The Rams of Gothland
against the Wolfes, that they are sildome by them assailed: for their horns
are so sharp and strong, and withal do grow in such order, as though Nature
had of purpose planted them there for their defense.


LU. I have seen often some with 4. horns, but never any with 8.


BER. Nay more then Weathers whose tail weyed, weyed more the^ one of their
quarters.
this, they say there are also Weathers of 5. quarters, for the tail waieth
more then any of the other 4. and therefore may well be taken for one. Of these I
my self saw certain in Rome, which whether they were brought thence or no, I
know not, but surely they seemed unto me wonderfully strange.


AN. But let us now come to say somewhat of the fishes that are fouud in those
parts, seeing of their Beasts we have sufficiently discoursed. Notwithstanding
that we all know that the Sea is the Mother of Monsters, and that therein are
contained so many kinds and sorts of fishes, as there are Beasts on the earth
or Fowls in the air: Yet seeing there are some very strange, and of which the
Authors and Historiographers make particular relation, I cannot but say
somewhat of them: Amongst the rest there is one to whom for the horrible and
hideous form thereof, they give no other name then Monster. A kind of fish
called Monster.
His length is commonly fifty cubits, which is but little in comparison of the
greatness and deformity of his proportion and members, his head is as great as
half his body, and round about full of horns, as great and long or rather
more, then those of an Ox: The greatness and manner of his eyes is marvelous,
for the only apple is a cubite in length, and as much in breadth, which by
night glistereth in such sort, that a far off it resembles a flame of fire:
His teeth are great and sharp, his tail forked, containing from one point to
the other fifteen cubits, his body full of hairs, resembling the
wing-feathers of a Goose being stripped, and his color is as black as any Iet
in the world may be: The violence and force of this Monster is such, that with
great facility in a trice, he will ouer-turne the greatest ship that usually
crosses those Seas, neither can the resistance of the Mariners, though they
be many in number, avail. The Archbishop of Nydrosia, Henry Falchendor
Archbishop of Nydrosia.
and Primate of the Kingdom of Norway, called Henry Falchendor, writing a
Letter to Pope Leo the tenth, sent him withal the head of one of these
Monsters, which was a long time kept for a wonder in Rome. There are other
Sea Monsters called Fisiters, no less dangerous to those that sail then
Another kind of fishes called Fisiters.
the other: their length is commonly 200. cubits, the head and mouth
proportionable to the same: The tail is also forked in the midst, and
contains from one point to another a hundredth feet, their belly is exceeding
great and wide: nosthrils they have none, but in steed thereof, two deep open
holes above the forehead, out of which, they spout out such a quantity of
water, that ships have been many times through the violent fall thereof, in
danger of drowning, which, if that suffice not, they throw half their body
upon the sides of the ship, ouerwhelming it with the weight thereof: neither
is their tail less dangerous with which they give so mighty a blow, that it
is able to smite any ship in pieces. The damage were infinite, that these
deformed Monsters would do, but that it has pleased God, that a remedy should
be found out to prevent their mischief: for they fly the sound of Trumpets
and the thundering of Artillery, as death it self; and this is the only
mean which the Mariners do use in driving them away. There was one of these
Fisiters found on the way toward India, with which happened a notable chance,
in this sort. A Galley in which Ruynas Pereyra went for Captain, A strange
miracle.
sailing near the Cape of Bona Speransa, with a reasonable good wind, and all
her sails out, stood of a sudden still, so that the Mariners thought she
had stricken a ground, and were in great fear of their lives: But doing their
diligence to redress the danger in which they were, they perceived the Galley
to have water enough, only that she was deteyned by one of these Fisiters,
which had clasped himself about her keele, thrusting up of a sudden certain
finnes that reached above water, even to the mizzen sail, upon which many of
them laid their hands, and some would have stricken him with their Iauelins,
others would have shot at him with Muskets, or discharged a piece of Artillery;
to neither of which counsels the Captain would by any means consent, least
through the struggling and tossing of the Monster being wounded, the Galley
should be in hazard of drowning. The only remedy therefore that he had refuge
unto, was to desire the Chaplain of the company to reuest himself in his
Priestly habit, and with humble Prayers to beseech the Majesty Divine, to
deliver them from that imminent danger: In the midst of whose devotions, it
pleased God that the fish by little and little vnwound himself, and diued
downward into the water, the last that was seen of him was his head, being of
an incredible greatness, out of the holes of which, he launced out so much water
and so high, that the same in falling resembled a mighty cloud dissolved into
rain; and therewith he went his ways, those of the ship infinitely praising
God for this their miraculous delivery. There is also in the West part of this
Northern Sea, a great number of Whales, which though they be hurtful and of
great terror, yet are they nothing so much feared as the others before named.
There are of the^ two kinds, of which the skin of the one is covered with great
Two sorts of Whales.
and thick hairs: these are far greater then the other, in so much that there
have been of them taken 900. or 1000. foot long: the other whose skins are
smooth and plain, are nothing so great. But seeing there are many of them in
this Sea of ours, and their shape and proportion is so well known unto us, it
were time lost to describe particulerly the manner of them. Only I will tell
you what Olaus Magnus writes, of one taken in those Countries, which seems a
thing if not A Whale of admirable greatness.
incredible yet passing admirable, the which is, that his eyes were so great,
that twenty men sitting within the circle of one of them, did scarcely fill it
up: according to which, the other parts of his body carried full prorortion and
conformity. The greatest enemy they have, and of greatest courage in daring to
assail them, and by whom they are many times conquered and slain, is a fish
called Orca, though not great and huge, The fish called Orca, is enemy to the
Whale.
yet passing fierce and cruel, and extremely swift and nimble; his teeth are
long and sharp as Sizers, with which coming under the Whale, being heavy and
sluggish, he rippeth up his belly. Of all others, this fish the Whale dares
not abide, and oftentimes in flying him, lights amongst shallows and sands,
where being not able to swim for want of water, he is slain of the fishers: of
whom great numbers coming in small boats, strike him with hooks, giving him
always the line at will, till they perceive that he is dead, and then they
pull him a Land, and make great commodity of the oil and other things which
they take out of his body. Many do affirm a thing, which in my opinion
seems hard to believe, which is, that the great Whales when the weather is
any thing tempestucus, plunge themselves with such violence from out the bottom
of the Sea, that their back appears above water like an Island of sand or
gravel: insomuch that some sailing by Sea, imagining the same many times to be
an Island in deed, have A strange thing written of the Whale.
gone out of their ships, and made fire upon it, through the heat of which, the
Whale plunging himself into the water, leaves the men deceived, and in
extreme great perril of death, unless they could save themselves by swimming
to their ships. This is written by many Authors of great estimation, though to
me it seems a thing incredible, and against all reason.


LV. It may be that such a wonder as this, has been seen at some one time,
and as the manner of men, especially trauailers is to ouer-reach, they say it
happens usually and often.


BER. For my part I will wonder at nothing, neither leave to believe any thing
that is possible, which is written of these great fishes, and Sea Monsters,
seeing it is most approouedly known and verified, and now lately also written
and published by sundry me^ of credit, that in the year 1537. there was taken
in a River of Germany, a Fish of a huge and monstrous greatness, the fashion of
whose head was like unto that A monstrous fish taken in a River of Germany.
of a wild Boar, with two great tuscles shooting above four spans out of his
mouth, he had four great feet, like to those with which you see Dragons
usually painted, and besides the two eyes in his head, he had two others in
his sides, and one near his nauill, and on the ridge of his neck certain
long brisles, as strong and hard as though they had been of iron or steel.
This Sea Monster was carried for a wonder to Anwerp, and there live as yet many
which will witness to have seen the same. But in such like things as these, no
man gives us more ample notice of things that are strange, rare, and
merueilous, then Olaus Magnus.


AN. There are also in these Seas many other strange and hurtful fishes, of
which there is one called Monoceros, of extreme greatness, having in his
forehead a mighty stiff and sharp horn, with which he A fish called
Monoceros.
gives the ships so forcible and violent a stroke, that he breaks them,
and drives them under water, as though it were with a Canon shot: but this is
when the ships are becalmed, which sildome happens upon those Seas, for it
there blow but the least gale of wind that may be, he is so lumpish and slow,
that they avoid him easily. There is another fish A fish called Serra. which
is as much to say as saw in English.
called Serra, because of a rank of pricks which he has on his head, so
sharp and hard as the points of Dyamants, with which lurking under the ships
he saweth in sunder their keele, which if it be not foreseen and remedied in
time, they perrish presently. There is another fish called Xifia, which is
Another called Xifia.
in a manner like unto the Whale, whose mouth being open, is so wide and
deep, that it astonisheth the beholders, his eyes likewise of a most terrible
aspect, his back sharp as a sword, with which lying underneath the ships,
he practices to cut or to ouerturne them, to the end he may eat and devour
the men that are within them. There are also in this Sea fishes called Rayas,
of exceeding greatness, whose love toward Rayas.
men is passing strange and admirable: for if any man chance to fall into the
sea, near where any of them is, he vnderproppeth him presently, bearing him
above the water, and if any other fishes com to anoy or hurt him, he defends
him as much as he may, even to the death. There is also another called
Rosmarus, whose property is very rare and strange, he is about the bigness of
an Elephant, he is headed in manner like Rosmarus.
an Ox, his skin is of dark and obscure color full of stubbie hairs, as
great as wheaten strawes, he comes often a shore, where chauncing to see a
man any thing near, he runs at him with open mouth, and if he catch him,
he dismembreth him presently. He is marvelous swift, and delights much to
eat grass and sedge that grows in fresh water, for which cause he
haunteth often to little rivers and plashes that are on maine land, wherewith
when he is well satisfied and filled, he climeth up the Rocks by the help of
his teeth, which are passing sharp and strong, where he lays him down to
sleep so deeply and profoundly, that it is not possible with any rumor how
great soever it be, to awake him: at which time the mariners The manner of
taking him.
and peasants thereabouts, boldly without fear bind great ropes to each part
of his body, the other ends of which they fasten unto trees, if there be any
near, if not, as well as they can to some place of the Rock, and when as they
think they have entangled him sure enough, they shoot at him a far of with
bows Crosbowes and Harguebuzes, chiefly at his head. His strength is so great
that awaking sometimes and perceauing himself to be wounded, he starteth up
with such violence, that he breaks all the cords with which he is fastened,
but commonly he has first his deaths wound, so that after a little struggling,
he turns of the Cliffe down into the Sea, and dies incontinent, out of
which they draw him with hooks and yrons, dispoyling him cheefely of his bones
and teeth, which the Muscouites, Tartarians, and Russians esteem to be so good
and true Iuorie, as the Indians do that of their Elephants.

Of all this Paulus Iouius makes relation in an Epistle which he wrote to Pope
Clement the seventh, being amply thereof, informed by one Demetrius a noble
man and Lieuetenant general under the Emperor or Duke of Russia. But to our
first purpose, there are also found in this Seas sundry kinds of fishes, or
rather beasts, which live both by water and land, coming often a shore to
feed in the pastures thereby, bearing the likeness of Horses, Oxen, Hares,
Wolves, Sundry fishes like to Horses, Oxen, and etc.
Rats, and of sundry other sorts: which after they have well fed on the Land,
turn back unto the Sea again, the one being in a manner as natural unto them
as the other. But leaving to speak any farther thereof, we now will come to
the Dolphins, whose love to music and children, is a thing manifest and
notorious to all men: and seeing it serves to the Dolphins.
purpose, I will tell you a strange and true tale of one of them, that being
taken by fishermen when he was very young and little, was by them brought and
put into a pond or standing water, in the Island of S. Domingo, a little after
the conquest thereof by the Spaniards. Being in which fresh water, in short A
strangt tale of a Dolphin in S. Domingo
space he increased to such greatness, that he became bigger then any horse,
and withal so familiar, that calling him by a name which they had given him,
he would come ashore, and receive at their hands such things as they brought
him to eat, as though he had been some tame and domestical beast. The boys,
among other sportes and pastimes they used with him, would sometimes get up
upon his bace, and he swim all over the Lake with them, without ever doing
harm, or once dyuing under the water with any one of the^. One day certain
Spaniards coming to see him, one of them smote him with a pyke staff which he
had in his hand, from which time forward, he knew the Spaniards so well by
their garments, that if any one had been thereby when the other people called
him, he would not come ashore, otherwise still continuing with those of the
Country his wonted familiarity. Having thus remained in this Lake a long
space, the water upon a time through an extreamitie of rain, rose so high,
that the one side of the Lake ouerflowed and brake into the Sea, from which
time forward he was seen no more. This is written by the Governor of the
fortress of that Island, in a Chronicle which he made.

Leaving them therefore, now I will briefly speak of certain notable Fish
coasts from the West of Ireland forwards, winding about toward the North: For
it is a thing notorious, that many Kingdoms, Regions and Provinces, have their
provisions of Fish from thence, of which our Spain can give good testimony,
the great commodity considered that it receaueth yearly thereby. To begin
therefore, the farther forth this way that you go, the greater plenty you
shall find of fish, many of those Provinces using no other trade, foreign
Merchants bringing into them other necessary things in exchange thereof. The
chiefest store whereof is found on the Coast of Bothnia, which deuideth it
self into three Provinces, Bothnia divided into 3. provinces.
East, West, and North-Bothnia. The last whereof is different far from the
other two, for it is a plain Champaine Land, seated as it were in a Valley
between great and high Mountains. The air thereof is so wholesome, and the
Climat so favorable, that it may be well termed one of the The excellency of
the Climat of North Bothnia.
most pleasant and delightful places of the world, for it is neither hot nor
cold, but of so just a temperature, that it seems a thing incredible: the
Countries lying about it being so rigorously cold, covered with Snow, and
congealed with a continual Ise. The fields of themselves produce all pleasant
variety of herbs and fruits. The woods and trees are replenished with
Birds whose sweet charms and melodious tunes, breeds incredible delectation
to the hearers: but wherein the greatest excellency and blessing of this Land
consists, is that amongst so great a quantity of Beasts and Fowls, of which
the Hills, Woods, Fields, and Valleys are full, it breeds not, nourishes,
or maintains, not any one that is It nourishes no venomous or hurtful beast
harmefull or venomous, neither do such kinds of Fishes as are in the Sea
hurtful, approach their shoares, which otherwise abound with Fishes of all
sorts, so that it is in the fishers hands to take as many and as few as they
list: The cause of which plenty is, as they say, that diverse forts of Fishes
flying the cold, come flocking in multitudes into these temperate waters.
Neither bapneth this only on their Sea-shoare, but in their Lakes and Rivers
within the Land also, which swarm as thick with fishes great and little of
diverse kinds as they can hold. The enhabitants live very long, never or
sildome feeling any infirmity, which surely may serve for an argument (seeing
it is so approouedly known to be true) to confirm that which is written
concerning the upper Byarmya, which Byarmya superior.
though it be seated in the midst of intemperate and cold countries, covered
and frozen with continual Snow and Ice: yet is it self so temperate and under
so favorable a Climate and constellation, that truly the Authors may well call
it as they do, a happy and blessed soil, whose people having within
themselves all things necessary for the sustentation of human life, are so
hidden and sequestered from other parts of the world, having of themselves every
thing so abundantly, that they have no need to traffic or converse with
foreign Regions. And this I take to be the cause that we have no better
knowledge of some people that live upon the Hyperbores, who though they live
not with such policy as we do, it is because the plenty of all things gives
them no occasion to sharp their wits or to be careful for any thing, so that
they lead a simple and rustique life without curiosity, deuoyd of all kind of
trouble, care, or travail: whereas those who live in Countries, where for
their substentation and maintenance, it behooves them to seek needful
provisions in foreign Lands, what with care of avoiding dangers, and well
dispatching their affairs, and daily practicing with diverse dispositions of
men, they cannot but become industrious, pollitique, and cautelous. And hence
came it, that in the Kingdom of China there was a Law and statute, prohibiting
and defending those that went A strange Law in the Kingdom of Chinay.
to seek other Countries, evermore to return into the same, accounting them
unworthy to live in so pleasant and fertile a soil, that willingly forsook
the same in searching an other. But returning to our purpose, in this North
Bothnya, which is beyond Norway, is taken incredible store of fish, which they
carry some fresh, some salted, to a City called Torna, situated in manner of
an Island between two great Rivers that discende out of the Septentrionall
mountains, where they hold their Fair and Staple, many and diverse Nations
resorting thither, who in exchange of their fish, accommodate them with such
other provisions as their Country wants; so that they care not to labor or
till their grounds, which if at any time they do, the fertillity thereof is
such, that there is no Country in the world able to exceed the same. The
people is so just, that they know not how to offend or offer injury to any
man: they observe with such integrity the Christian faith, that they have him
in horror and destentation that commits a mortal sin. They are enemies
of vice, and lovers and embracers of virtue and truth. They correct and chasten
with all severity and rigor those that are offenders, insomuch, that though a
thing be lost in the street or field, no man dares take it up, till the
owner come himself.

There are also other Provinces maintained in a manner wholely by fishing, as
that of Laponia, in the which, are many Lakes, both great and little,
infinitely replenished with all sorts of excellent fishes; and that of
Fylandia, which is very near, or to say, better under the Pole. The greatest
Filandia.
part of this Province obeys the King of Swethen, who has in the frontyers
thereof, one of the best and strongest Newcastle belonging to the King of
Swethen.
Castles in the world, called Newcastle, which is situated upon a high Rock,
accessible only of one side, and that with great difficulty. At the foot of
this Rock runs a great and deep River, in such sort, that in some places
it is hard to sound any bottom, the waters of which, and all the fishes
therein are so black, that it is therefore called the black River: it
discendeth from the Aquilonar mountains, and comes along through such desert
and craggie Lands, that no man knows where the head thereof rises, only
it is thought, that it comes out of Lacus Albus, waxing black, by reason of
the soil through which it comes. There is in this River great abundance of
Salmons and of other fishes, of such excellent relish and pleasing taste, that
there can in no part of the world be found any better: They serve not only for
provision to the Country it self, but are carried thence into many far
places. Amongst the rest, there is found a A strange property of the fish
Treuius.
fish called Treuius, which in the Winter is black, and in the Summer white,
whose marvelous property is such, that binding him fast with a cord, and
letting him down into the bottom of a River, if there be any gold in the
sands thereof, the same cleaves fast to his skin; which how great soever the
pieces be, fall not off from him, till they be taken off, so that some use no
other occupation to win their living with, then this. It is said for an
assured certainty, that sometimes there is openly seen a man go in the middle
of the stream, playing most sweetly upon an Instrument like a trebble Vial,
which at such time as men behold him with greatest delight, of a sudden
sinketh down into the water: There are also often heard upon the shore,
Trumpets, Drums, and other loud Instruments, without seeing those that sound
them: which when it happens, they hold the same for a sign or presage of
some harm or disastre, that is to ensue to some principal person of the guard
of this Fortress, which they have often found true by experience. But leaving
to speak of the great plenty of fish which is in these Countries; Now I will
come to say somewhat of the Birds and Fowls which are in these parts, of
which there are many kinds far differing from those which we have here, and
among the rest, some as great or rather greater then Patridges, whose feathers
are diuersified with beautiful colors, chiefly white, black, and yellow,
called Raynbirds, because toward rain they Rainebirds.
cry, otherwise holding continually their peace. It is held for a certainty
that they live by the air, for being very fat, they are never seen eat at
any time, neither when they kill them do they find any sustenance at all in
their belly or mawe. Their flesh is of a very sauourie taste, and much
esteemed. There are other Birds found on the high and rough mountains, such
as are for the most part continually covered with Snow, somewhat bigger then
Thrushes, which are in the Summer white, and all the Winter long black: Their
feet Snowbirds.
never change culour, which is a most perfect yellow. They sleep and shroude
themselves for the most part always in trees: But when they see any Hawke or
Foul that lives by pray, they choppe down into the Snow, fluttering the
same over them with their wings, in such sort, that they leave no part of
them undiscovered, preserving thereby their life. Of all other Fowls they are
hardlyest taken, they hide themselves so artificially in the Snow, and
therefore they call them Snow-birds. Of Falcons there is passing great Faulcons
of diverse sorts.
store over all these Northern Countries, and of many sorts. At such time as
the day lasts, the whole Summer long in those Regions near the Pole, few or
none remain in the bordering Lands, but fly all thither, returning thence
again when the night comes about. Amongst these, there are certain white,
which pray both on fowls and fishes, which I take this to be that which we
call here an Ospray, of which I have seen diverse.
Rivers for their pleasure do reclaim, taking with them both fish and foul.
Their two feet are of sundry and several fashions, the one with long sharp
talents with which they seize their pray, the other like unto a Goose, the
talents whereof are nothing so long. The Ravens in these Lands are so great and
harmfull, that they kill not only Hares and Fawnes, but also Lambs and Pigs;
of which they make so great spoil and destruction, that there are Laws made,
by the which there is a reward appointed to such as shall kill them, so much
for the head of every one. About the Sea shore and Lakes, there are many which
they call Sea-Crowes, and of diverse kinds; some are great, and have sawes in
their beakes in manner of Sea-Crowes
teeth, with which they sheare the fishes asunder. Their principal food is
Eeles, which if they be not very great, they swallow in whole, and many times
slice them out again behind, before they be fully dead. There is an other sort
of them somvvhat less, otherwise of small difference, which in seven days
make their nests, and lay their eggs, and in other seven days hatch their
young-ones. There are other Birds called Plateae, which are always houering
also over Lakes and Ponds; they have mortal wars with the Crows, and with
all other Plateae.
fowls that live by fish, of which, if they see any have in his beak or
talent any pray, they make him let it go, or otherwise they kill him; for they
have of them a great advantage through the sharpnes of their beak and talents.

Of Ducks wild and tame there is such infinite abundance in these provinces,
that they cover the Lakes and waters, no Duckes.
other foul being any thing near in so great quantity, especially where there
are any veins of warm water, which keep the Lakes longer without freezing,
and where when they do freeze, yet the Ise is so thin that it may easily be
broken. They are of diverse colors and sizes, otherwise all of one making.
Certain Authors which write of these Countries, affirm, that one kind of
these Duckes, is of those which are bred of the leaves of certain trees in
Scotland, which falling into the Ducks bred of the leaves of a tree in Scotland.
water take life, as in manner above said, becoming first a worm, then
getting wings and feathers, and at last flying up into the air. Olaus says,
that he has seen Scottish authors which affirm, that these trees are
principally in the Islands called Orcades. They affirm also that there are
Geese bredde and engendered in the same manner, between whom and the Geese.
other there is great difference, both in color and many other
particularities. And seeing this wonder is by the testimony of so many Authors
confirmed, I see no reason but that we may well believe it without offending:
and that also which they write of a town in the utmost parts Northward of
that Kingdom, the commodity rising to which through the abundance of Duckes
is so great, that I cannot ouerslip the same. There is near this Town a
mighty great and craggy A Town in Scotland that receaueth great commodity
through Duckes.
Rock, to which at breeding time, these Fowls come flocking in such
quantities and troops, that in the air they resemble mighty dark clouds
rather then any thing else. The first two or three days, they do nothing else
then houer aloof, and fly up and down about the Rock, during which time,
the people is so still and quiet, that they scarcely stir out of their
houses, for fear of fraying them: so that seeing all things silent and still,
they settle themselves boldly, and fill the whole Rock with nests. Their sight
is so sharp and pearcing, that flittering over the sea which beats upon the
same Rock, they see the fish through the water, which incontinently plunging
themselves into the same, they snappe up with such facility, that it is
scarcely to be believed but of him that has seen it. Those that dwell near
thereabouts, and know the passages and ways to get up into this Rock, do not
only sustain themselves, by the fish which they find in the nestes of
their young ones, but carry the^ also to other towns to sell. When they
perceive that the young ones are ready to fly, to enjoy this commodity of the
fish the longer, they pluck their wings and entertain them so many days (as
men use to do young ones of Eagles) and then when the ordinary time
approaches, in which they use to take their flight away, they take and eat
them, their flesh being very tender, and of good smack. These Ducks differ much
from all the other sorts, and are never seen in that Region, but at such time
as they breed, (even as the Storkes are in Spain) and though they kill many of
them, yet the next year they never fail to come, as many as the rock can hold.
Their fat and grease is much esteemed and applied to many medecines, in which
it is found to be of marvelous operation and virtue. There are over al these
Northern Regions many other fowls, far different from these which we have
here, the variety of whose kinds, seeing they have no notable and particular
property or virtue, it were in vain to recite: And though as I said, the
Climat be cold, yet there are found many kinds of Serpents of such as are
wont commonly to breed in hot Lands. There are Aspes Serpents. Aspes.
three or four cubits long, whose poison is so strong and vehement, that
whosoever is bitten by one of them, dies within the space of four or five
hours, if he have not presently such remedy as is requisite, which is Treakle
of Venice if they have it, if not, they stamp a head of Garlic, and mingle
the juice thereof with old Beer, giving it the patient to drink, and withal
stamping another head of Garlic, they apply it to the place bitten. These
Aspes are so cruel and fierce, that in assayling any man, they stretch out
their head with great fierceness, a cubite above the earth, and in finding
resistance, they dart out of their throats an infinite quantity of poison and
venom, whose pestilent contagion is such, that whosoever is touched therewith,
swells and dies as I said, if he be not presently remedied. There are
other Serpents called Hyssers.
Hyssers, whose chief abiding is among herbs that are hoar and dry. They
run exceedingly swiftly, but they are easy to be avoided, because the noise
and hyssing they make is so great, that they are heard and descried a far of,
and thereby easily shunned and avoided. They use to give a leap ten or
twelve foot high when they cast out their venom, the nature of which is such,
that if it fall upon any men's garments it burns them like fire, having done
which they run presently away. Their poison represents to our sight sundry
and strange colors.

There is another kind of Serpent whom they call Amphisbosna, Amphisbosna.
having two heads, one in the due place, annother in the tail, they go and
turn as well one way as another, and do appear and are seen as well in cold
weather as in warm. Gaudencius Merula vvryteth, that there are many of these
in Italy and other parts. In the Springtime, there are found at the feet of
Oaks and other trees, many little Serpents, Serpents that have a King.
which have a chief Ruler or King amongst them, as the Bees have by whom they
are governed. He is known amongst all the rest, because he has a white
crest, which if it happen that he be killed, the whole Army of them presently
breaks and scatters.

All these and many other Serpents, which are there, are so as it were enameled
with sundry bright and glistring colors, that they arrest often the eyes of
the beholders, as upon a most beautiful work of Nature: neither do they
only live on dry Land, but there are also of them about the Sea, living both
within and without the same, feeding upon fish, nothing less hurtful then the
rest: of this kind there is at this present one most notable and of wonderful
greatness in the province of Borgia, which is within the limits of the Kingdom
of A huge and terrible Serpent in the province of Borgia.
Norway, whose terrible shape, cruelty, and horror is such, that there were
doubt to be made thereof, unless it were by the testimony of many witnesses
which have seen him, confirmed. In the place where he lives, are certain
Rockie Mountains, rough and very high both Seaward and Landward, covered in
many places with desert thickets and wild bushes and trees. Here was bred
this horrible, dreadful, and deformed monster, whose length, according to the
guess of those which have seen his manner, making and proportion, is above two
hundred cubits: his breadth from the back to the belly, at least 25. from
the neck downward to the fourth part of his body, he is full of great hairs,
at least a cubit long apeece, from thence downward he is bare and plain,
except his loins, which are covered with certain great sharp scales, or
rather shelles: His eyes are so bright and shining, that by night they seem to
be flames of fire, so that by them he is easy to be discovered a far off, at
such time as he rangeth abroad to seek his pray, which is commonly of Oxen,
sheep, Hogs, Stagges, and other Beasts both wild and tame, such as he can
find: but if in the woods and fields he cannot light of enough to satisfy his
hunger, he gets him to the Seashore, and there fills himself with such
fish as he can catch. If any ships chance to approach near that shore, either
by tempest or ignorance, he puts himself presently into the water, and
makes amain at them: he has been seen at times to rear himself of an
exceeding height above the deck, and to take men out of the ship with his
teeth, and to swallow the^ in a live: a thing truly to be spoken or heard,
full of amazement and terror; what is it then to them that find themselves
present at a spectacle so fearful, horrible and cruel? And if this Monster
were not in such a desert place, far of from those parts which are by the
people enhabited, he were able to dispeople and bring to desolation the whole
Country, for yet as it is, those that are nearest, live in great fear and
dread of him.


LVD. Truly I remember not that ever I heard of a more terrible and cruel
Serpent, and therefore I much wonder, why the people of that Country do not
seek some remedy to deliver themselves of so miserable a fear and scourge as
he is unto the^.


AN. Never think but that they have done their best, though perchance it has
little auailed them.


BE. Their only remedy must come from God, which is, that time shall end his
life, to do which the force of man suffiseth not. As for my part, I wonder not
at all, that there should be a serpent so great and fierce as this is: for both
Pliny and Strabo alleging Megasthenes, write of Serpents in Sundry cruel
Serpents in India.
India which are so great, that they devour a Stag or an Ox whole in at once.
Pliny also, by authority of Metrodorus, says, that there are some so huge,
that they reach the birds which fly in the air: and in time of the Emperor
Regulus there was one found about the shores of the River Bragada 120. foot
long, to destroy which, there was a whole Army of men set in order, as though
they had gone to assault a mighty City.


AN. But now turning to our former discourse, I say it is a thing strange and
marvelous, that in so great an extremity of cold as that of the North, there
should breed so many venomous Serpents, the number of which is so great, that
the people is with them miserably afflicted, especially the Sheepheards, whose
trade of life being most in the open field, meet with them oftenest; and
therefore they never go unprovided of necessary remedies, to apply presently
when need requires. But being wearied with matter so full of contagion and
poison, I will pass forward and come unto their trees, whose kinds and
qualities are diverse: rowing in that extremity of cold, Snow and Ice, to such
an exceeding height and greatness, that there are no better found in the world
to make ships and maine masts of, then they are: But seeing they are smally
different from ours, I will spend no time in describing their particularities:
only I will tell you of one called Betulnye, which is in growth very great and
tall, and all the year long A kind of Trees that in the extremity of the
cold Regions, retain all the year long their greenenesse.
continually green, without casting his leaf; for which cause, of the common
people, he is called the holy Tree, not understanding his virtue and property,
which is so hot, that in despite of the cold, he retains always his
greenenes and verdure, so that many Serpents make their nests and dens under
his roots, through the warmenesse and heat of the which, they defend
themselves against the rigorous sharpnes of the cold, which all the other
trees not enduring, as they shoot forth their leaves and fruits in the
Summer, so shed they them again in the Winter, returning to their naked
barenes. The like also do all their herbs and plants, of which many are
such, as we have commonly here, and many far different, of us neither known
nor used.


BER. I am of opinion that in these Lands there are generally all such kinds of
things, as are in others, excepting always the difference of the soyles, the
quality of which, makes some better and some worse, and of greater and lesser
virtue in their kinds and operations: But let us detain our selves no longer
about things of so small importance. I pray you therefore tell us if that be
true, of which we reasoned the other day, that is, if all these Provinces and
Lands are enhabited of Christians: for if it be so, I wonder we should have
here no more particular knowledge and notice of a matter so important.


AN. Make no doubt at all of that which I have told you, for all those of the
Kingdom of Norway, (which is very Many Christian Regions.
great, and contains many mighty Provinces) and those of Dacia, Bothnia,
Elfinguia, Laponia, Lituania, Escamia, Filandia, Escandia, Gronland, Island,
Gothland, Westgothland, Swethland, Sueue, and Denmark, with many other
Septentrionall Regions and Provinces, even to the Hiperbores; amongst which
also are sundry of those, that the great Duke of Muscouia, and Emperor of the
Russians possesses; all these I say are under the banner and faith of our
Savior Jesus Christ, though differently: For some follow the Church of Rome,
others observe the ceremonies of the Greek church, cleaving wholly thereunto;
others of them follow the Catholic Church, but jointly there-withall
certain errors that are there spread abroad.


LV. But leaving this, till an other time, and returning to our former purpose,
I pray you tell me if the Emperor of Russia be so great a Monarch, as here it
is said he is.


AN. No doubt but he is so great and mighty, that there are few or no Princes
of Christendom besides equal unto him, in government and signeury of many
Kingdoms, Provinces, Lands, and Countries, as partly The magnificent tytles of
the Emperor of Russia.
may be understood by his tytles in a Letter, which he wrote to Pope Clement
the seventh, the beginning of which was as follows. The great Lord Basilius,
by the grace of God Emperor and Lord of all Russia, great Duke of Blodemaria,
of Muscouia, of Nouogradia, of Plescouia, of Finolenia, of Yfferia, of Iugoria,
of Perminea, of Verchia, of Valgaria, Lord and great Prince of the nether
Nonogradia, of Cernigonia, of Razania, of Volothecia, of Rozeuia, of Belchia,
of Boschouia, of Iraslauia, of Beloceria, of Vdoria, of Obdoria, of Condinia,
etc. This Letter was written in the City of Muscouia, which is his principal
seat, and from which, the whole Country takes his name, in the year of our
Lord, 1537.


LU. Are all these Kingdoms, Lands, and Provinces which you have named
enhabited with Christians.


AN. It is to be supposed that they are, though I cannot affirm the same for a
certainty, for perchance he has gotten some of them by conquest: the people
of which may yet remain in their idolatry, as for the law of Mahomet, it is
there of small force. Yet for all this, this Duke or Emperor, or what you list
to call him, being so mighty a Prince as he is, there is notwithstanding A
Nation called Finns, that are in war with the Muscouites.
a Province and Nation of people called Finnes, which live in a manner under
the Pole, so valiant and stout in Arms, that they hold him at a bay, yea, and
sometimes enter into his Country with fire and sword, making great conquests
upon him.


BER. So that the nearest Nation to them that live under the North Pole, is
that of the Russians and Muscouites.


AN. You say true, it is so indeed of one side, marry on the other side is
Bothnia, Fynland, and some others which are under the very Pole; but on that
side of Russia and Muscouia, the old Cosmographers, for far that they went,
reached not beyond the same: and in all their Maps and Cards, if you mark them
well, they set them utmost and next the North, or if they do set any other, it
is without name: But the Modernes as I have said, go farther describing
Countries both of one side and the other: yet for all that, as I understand,
there is a great part of the world there-abouts, as yet undiscovered, A great
part of the world undiscovered.
as well in the higher Biarmia which is on the other side of the Pole, as in
the Land which extends it self toward the west, wheeling and fetching a
compass about to the Septentrion, and from thence again pointing up toward
the East, which way these Muscouites travail with their merchandise, passing
out of their own bounds, among the Tartarians. The principal wares they carry
are Furs of sundry sorts, of which some are very precious. These Muscouits
are a crafty people, cautelous, deceitful, and of small honor in maintaining
their word and promise, but above all other most cruel Albertus Krantzius
writes, A most tyrannous act of the Duke of Muscouia
that an Ambassador being sent out of Italy to the duke of Muscouia was by him
commanded to be put to death, because at the time of doing his Embassage, he
kept his head covered: but the pore Ambassador aleaging the custom of his
country, and the pre-eminence of Ambassadors were sent from mighty Princes: the
tirant answered him, that as for him he meant not to abollish so goodly an
usage, to confirm the which, he caused presently his hatte to be nailed fast
to his head, with mighty long iron nails, so that he fell down dead in the
place.


LU. Seeing you give so good notice of these Northern Lands, I pray you tell
me what Countries or Provinces those are which are of late discovered, and with
which our Merchants do traffic and converse, as that which they call Tierra
del Labrador, the Land of Bacallaos, and another Country Tierra del Labrador.
The Land of Bacallaos.
thereby latelier found out, whence comes such abundance of fish.


AN. To tell you truth, I know not my self, but that which I imagine and hold
for certain, is, that they are some parts or corners in the Sea, of those
Septentrionall Provinces, of which we have spoken, which those that go hence
through ignorance, do term by new names: As for Tierra del Labrador, it is
not yet thoroughly discovered whither it be firm Land; marry the most part and
to which I give greatest credit, affirm that is an Island: The same being so
far Westward, that by all likelihood the Septentrional people had little
knowledge thereof. Those which have been there, say, that the enhabitants do
live after a barbarous and savage manner. But in fine, you must understand that
it is in a manner impossible thoroughly and exactly to know the distinct
particularity of the Regions that are in those parts, not so much for the
impossibility of discovering them, as for the diversity of the names of the
Provinces, Countries, Kingdoms, Islands, Hills, and Rivers, which are every day
changed and diversely in different names termed by such several Nations as
find them; whose languages differing each of them, speaks and writes of
them, by such names as they themselves have imposed unto them: insomuch that
sometimes when we speak all of one Country, yet through the diversity of
names, we imagine the one to be distant from the other many miles: And hence
comes so great a confusion, that though we know these Countries to be amongst
those North and West Regions, of which we have spoken, yet we understand not
which of them they are; and in like manner of those of the East: For as some
Cosmographers give them one name and some another; those that come after them
interpret thereof, every one as he pleases, yea, and many times differ in the
very principal points, and of this is the variety of the world cause: for
even as every year the trees, plants, and herbs, sprout forth in one season
their leaves and fruits, in another do fade, wither, and decay, and then the
next year renew again: and even as of men, one dies and another is borne,
and the like of all other worldly creatures, beasts, fowls, and fishes; so
does it happen and fall out in the very names of things, which with time also
do change, alter and loose their selves, leaving one, and taking another. Take
for example the old Cosmographers, which do most particularly entreat of
Spain, the Provinces, Cities, and particularities thereof, as Ptolome and
Pliny, and you shall not find six names conforming and agreeing to those
which we now use, and perchance within a thousand years, if the world last so
long, they will have lost these which they now have, and taken others: For
without doubt, as the world has such an unstable varying, so it will not
leese the same until it come to be ended and dissolved: Neither only in this,
but in the Languages also I warrant you there will be in tract of time such
alteration and change. For though at this present it seems that we speak in
Castile, the most pure and polished speech that may be, yet those that shall
come some space of years after us, will speak the same so differently, that
such things as are written in this our time, will seem unto them as barbarous,
as does unto us the old prose which we find in stories of ancient time: For
there is no thirty or forty years, but there are diverse and sundry words,
worn out of use and forsaken, and others new invented and had in price, which
though they be not good, yet use makes them to seem so, as in all other
things it usually happens, that only custom is sufficient to make that
which is evil, seem good, and that which is good, seem evil.


BER. There is nothing more true and manifest then this which you say: But
returning to our former discourse, I pray you make me understand, if those
which do border next upon the frontires of these Septentrionall Lands that do
profess the faith of Christ, are Idolaters or no: for if they be so, in my
judgment it were an easy matter (the grossenes of their belief considered)
to persuade and convert them to the Christian faith.


AN. You have great reason, for in truth they are with far greater facility
converted, then the other Countries that are infected and poisoned with the
false and damnable sect of Mahomet: and so Henry King of Swetheland, and Henry
Bishop of Vpsala, being moved with a godly, charitable, and virtuous zeal, to
extend and amplify the Christian religion in those parts, Fynland converted to
the Christian Faith.
used such diligence, that they converted thereunto the Province of Finland,
which is the fardest that is known Northward, and where the days and nights
do each of them endure full six months apeece: the enhabitants of which are
proved so good Christians, and people of so great charity and hospitality,
that the chiefest exercise wherein they busy and employ themselves, is in
doing good works: the like also as I said, do those of Bothnia, who have in
every parrish a Priest, as we have here, that has care and charge of their
souls. And in all the other bordering Provinces round about these, they are
most ready and willing to convert themselves: but the greatest pity of all is,
that they are lost for lack of Preachers and learned Pastors to preach unto
them, and to persuade and instruct them in the right way: many good men have
not wanted will to do the same, but their bodies have not been able to suffer
and endure the extreme cold of that Climat: but I trust in God, that of his
mercy he will one day put this in some good men's hearts to go through withal,
and endue and strengthen them with forces sufficient to the accomplishing
thereof: especially seeing he has already so inclined the peoples hearts to
embrace his word: for it is a thing most assuredly known, that on the
Frontires of Norway, Bothnia, and Fynland, at such time as the vveather
breaks, and that the snow and Ise gives the^ passage, there come men and
women thirty and forty leagues from within The devotion of the North people.
the Land, bringing their young children, those that have means, upon horses
and beasts backs, those which have not, in little Baskets made for the nonce
upon their own shoulders, to be baptized, some of which are four months,
some six, and some a year old: and there coming to the Priests and
Pastors, they desire to be instructed with rules and precepts how to lead a
Christian life, and as opportunity serves, they bring duly unto them their
Tithes. When they are ignorant of any point, how they should deal therein
like Christians, then conforming themselves with the Law of Nature, they do
that which seems good and virtuous, and leave that undone which seems
wicked and vicious: and it is to be supposed, that those of the Provinces
adjoining to the dominion of the great Muscouite do the like.


LU. No doubt but they do so: and truly the Christianity of these Countries,
is greater then I thought it had been, and according to your speeches, there
is appearance of increasing it daily more and more, seeing that there are so
many mighty Septentrionall Princes that are Christians, God of his great
goodness give them will and power thoroughly to convert those poor people, and
to bring them under the obedience of the holy Catholic Church, that they may
save their souls.


AN. It seems unto me now high time to retire our selves, seeing the night
has surprised us, otherwise we might have lengthned this our discourse with
many pretty points not yet talked of, which we must now defer till it
shall please God to give us time and opportunity to meet together again: In
the mean time, let us not be unthankful to those learned Authors, which by
their painful writings have given us notice and knowledge of such things as
we have to day discoursed of, chiefly Olaus Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsala,
Primate of Swethland and Gothland, for the most of the things here to day
alleged are his, as being a man very learned and industrious, and such a one
as desired that we should understand as well the qualities and particular
properties of his own natural Country, as also of the other Septentrionall
Regions, which have been till this present so unknown, that they were in a
manner accounted vnenhabitable: and seeing these are enhabited, at the leastwise
the greater part of them, we may well suppose that so also are the others that
remain yet undiscovered, as well about the circute of this pole, as of the
other, which to be so, they have found by manifest tokens, that have gone
discovering about the West Indies.


BER. You have briefly gone about the whole world, searching and displaying
the wonders and meruailes thereof, but as for me, I account this which we
have said, to be but a Cipher in respect of that which might be said, yet let
us content our selves, and give God thanks that we have been able to go so
far.


AN. Well, let us now be going, and withal, if it shall please you to favor
me with your company at my Lodging, you shall be most heartily welcome to such a
poor pittance as is provided for my Supper.


LU. Neither of us needs much bidding, and threfore go on Sir whenit
pleases you, and we will follow.


The end of the sixth and last Discourse.
Benedicta sit Sancta Trinitas.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A.
ABstinence, 20. Abel, 75. Admiration, 3. Adverse Fortune, 93. Adams hill, 132.
Agrippae, why so called, 8. Alcippa, 9. Amazons, 13, 14. Aethiopians,
Macrobians, 24. Alcoran, 54. Amphioscaei, 115. Andaluzia, 44. Androgyni, 7.
Angels, 65, 105. Angels good and bad, 62, 105. Anostum, 127. Antiodius, 4.
Ants, 97. Antheus, 21. Antipodes, 114, 115. Articke Pole, 113. Antartick pole,
ibidem. Astronomers, 109, 105. Arimaspes, 11. Augustus Caesar, 5.
B.
Baharas, 38. Barnacles, 41. Belus, 53. Beturgia, the true name of Prester
John, fol. 55. Beasts, 135. Biarmia, 129, 151. Birds, 134. Blasphemy, 64.
Bothnia, 150.
C.
Caucasus, 49. Caligula, 95. Centaurs, 27, 28. Childbirth in Naples, 6.
Christianity, 57. Chiromancers, 107. Caelestiall bodies, 105, 108. Claudius,
95. Cold, 1. Corrio Fortuna, 93. Commendador, what. 114. Curses. 6. Custom,
131, 132, 142.
D.
Destenie, 101. Demones, 61. Degrees of Spirits, 61. Their offices, ibid.
Devil, 53, 57, 107, 62, 87, 80, his puissance, 62, his malice, 73, 90. Diego
Osorco, 8. Difference between Chance and Fortune, 94. Disa, 136.
E.
Egipanes, 12. Elizian fields, 44. Elias, 48. Enchaunters, 81, 137.
Ethoroscaei, 115. Euphrates, 48. Europe, 116.
F.
Faunes, 12, 73 S s. 3. Fools, 36. Fortune, 92, 98, 99. Fountains, 37, 39.
Finmarchia, or Finland, 130.
G.
Ganges, 49. Georgia, Georgists, 57. Gihon, 48. God, 2, 3, 51, 53, 63, 90, his
providence, 101. Good and bad Angels, 62. Government of the Bees, 97. Golyas,
23.
H.
Heaven, 45, 109, 108. Hanno of Carthage, 46. Hagge, 81. Hemlock, 110. Heden,
43. 45, 47. Heat, 1. Hercules, 8. Hermophrodites, 5, 7. Holy Fountain, 59.
Hobgoblins, 78, 80. Horizon, 122. Hyperboreans, 26. 27. 119. Hypocrates, 34.
I.
Jacobs Well, 37. Iambolo, 16. Icarus, 46, Idolatry, 53. Ictiophagi, 125. Island
of Satires, 12, Island Meroe, 24. Imagination, 9, 10, 65. Incubi, Succubi, 73.
Instinct of Bears, 96, 98, Influence of the Stars, 104. John Mandeuile, 56.
Ireland, 116, Iseland, 44, 120, 124. Iulio Viator, 20.
K.
Knowledge, 36.
L.
Lamiae, 60. Lares, ibid. Lactantius Firmianus, 73, 84. Lamparones, or the
Kings evil, 88. Lemures, 60. Life of man, 24. Lucifers fall, 61.
M.
Magitians, 76. Mahomet, 54. Mandragora, 110. Mare magnum, 50. Margaret of
Holland, 6. Melancholy, 59, 60, Mermaides, 33. Miracles, 3. Milo, 19, 20.
Monosceli, 11. Monstrous childbirths, 9. Monstrous forms, 11. Mountain of the
Moon, 49, 50.
N.
Nature, 2, 9, 29, 119, 132, 131. Natura naturans, 2. Natura naturata, 2, 201.
Nero, 8. Natural Magique, 75. Nereides, 28. Nestor, 25. Negromancie, 75, 107.
Nilus, 49. Ninus, 53. Noah's Arc, 47, 51.
O.
Olympus, 24, 45. Opinions of Paradise, 47, 44, 45. Opinions of devils, 60.
Opinions of Spirits, 65. Opinions of Sorcerers and Hags, 84 Opinions of
Destenie, 101, 104. Opinions of the Hiperboreans, fo. 119. Ophrogeus, 88.
P.
Palmesters, 107. Paradise, 43, 46. Pallas Euanders Son, 22. Pariardes, 24.
Pirrhus, 8. Pigmies, 13, 14, 120, 125. Pigmie, what it signifies, 15.
Phanaces, 11. Phantasma, 65. Phaenix, 44. Physon, 48. Pictorius, 24. Planets,
105. Pope Marcellus, 105. Port Vizantine, 10. Prester John, 55. Prosperous
Fortune, 93.
R.
Rangiferi, 129, 144. Rivers, 42. Rivers of paradise, 48. River of grief, 127.
River of delight, ibid. Robin-good-fellowes, 78. Rosmarus. 149. Rounceualls.
22.
S.
Satires. 12. 73. Sanches Garcia, 8. S. Christopher, 22. Saludadores, 88.
Scipio Affricanus, first called Caesar. 8. Sirboti. 23. S. Thomas. 55. 56. S.
Andrew. 72. Soul. 105. Spirits, 61, 62, 63. 64. 77. Stryges, 84. Strength. 21.
Suillus Rufus. Stones. 41.
T.
Terrestrial Paradise. 47. 52. Thalestris. 14. Three principal erroneous acts.
52 The beginning of Prester John. 56 The love of dogs. 96, 97. The white Lake.
137. The Lake Meler. ibid. Tigris, 48. Tongues divided. 17. Thule. 44. 120.
125. Tritormo. 20. Tritons. 28. 30. Tyresias. 34.
V.
Versatilis, the Seraphins sword. 48. Vipers. 110. Vener, a Lake. 141. Vether,
a Lake. 137. Understanding. 98. Use of natural Magique lawful. fol. 76.
W.
Water. 37. Women of Aegipt. 5. Women changed to men. 34. 35. Wise men. 36.
Wild Asses. 129. Witches. 75. 80. World. 23. 52. 115. Whales. 148. Weathers.
147. Wolfes. 145.
Y.
Yuorie. 57.
Z.
Zona Torrida. 46. 48. 115. Zones five. 113. Zuna. 54.
FINIS.

