A DEFENSE OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL Discipline ordained of God to be used in his
Church. Against a Reply of Master Bridges, to a brief and plain Declaration
of it, which was printed An. 1584. Which reply he terms, A Defense of the
government established in the Church of England, for Ecclesiastical matters.

JOB. 31.35.36.37. The book that mine adversary shall write against me, I
will bear it upon my shoulder, yea I will wear it as a crown upon me. I will
tell him the number of my steps, and as one of authority I will go unto him.

1. TIM. 6.13.14.15.16. I charge thee in the sight of God, who quickens all
things, and before Jesus Christ, which under Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, that thou keep these commandments without spot, and
unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which in due time
he shall show, that is, blessed, and Prince only, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light that none can
attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see, unto whom be honor and
power everlasting, Amen.

1588.

Unto the Christian Reader.
THERE was written (gentle Reader) many years ago, a short declaration of
the right and only lawful Discipline, which our Savior Christ has ordained
for the guiding of his Church. Which declaration being not published at the
time it was prepared for, has come since into the hands of some, who
considering the Treatise to be modestly and learnedlie written, and discerning
a fit time and occasion for the purpose, caused it in the year 84. to be
printed. Since which time it has bin read and considered of by many, but,
either because the truth of it seemed clear, or because the doctrine
contained in it was general, without particular application to the state of
our Church, or for some other like respect (as I suppose) it has had quiet and
free passage hitherto, without any replication made unto it.

Now comes out one after so many years, belike having thoroughlie in all
the time studied the matter: who replieth to this declaration, and undertakes
to show that there is no such Discipline appointed by our Savior Christ, as is
there declared to be ordained by his authority. This Treatise the Author
calls, A defense of the government established in the Church of England for
ecclesiastical matters. Which title, whether he were moved to give his book
as most plausible, or as most profitable: hoping peradventure for no small
recompense of such a service as he takes upon him to perform, or what other
reason soever it were, because I could not discern any sufficient reason for
it, (the book he would confute, declaring only a general doctrine for all
Churches, and dealing little more with this Church, then any other, much less
impugning it, that it should need his defense) I have thought good, rather to
call his book, A reply to the Declaration, as it is in deed, and as the
nature of the writing requires, he should have called it, then to keep the
name which he has given it. The declaration he has divided into many small
pieces and sections, and so sets it down all before him: wherein he seems
to undertake to prove, that there is not a word in that godly learned
Treatise, which he will not show to be reproueable: which how he performs,
and what honor he is to carry out of this field, wherein he is entered with
great triumph, I leave to the Christian Reader by this answer to consider.

His first section (because nothing should escape him) is upon these words
set after the preface and before the first sentence of the book, and upon the
top of every leaf, A learned discourse of ecclesiastical government. This
Title both here and thoroughout the Reply is much iested at and played
withal. For answer whereunto, the Reader is to understand, the right title
of the book set down in the first page thereof, is, A brief and plain
declaration, etc. The other is of like the Printers, or some others to whose
hand the copy might come, a thing usually done, and without any just note
of ostentation in the Author, who is seldom or never privy to such additions.
But let us leave the Title, and pass on to the Book.

A defense of the ecclesiastical Discipline ordained of God to be used in his
Church.
Against a Reply of Master Bridges, to a brief and plain Declaration of it,
which was printed, An^. 1584. etc.
THE Writer of the Declaration, purposing to show by the holy Scriptures, what
Discipline and order for administration of the Church, Almighty GOD, who is
only wise, has appointed, thought meet to lay first such a foundation of
all his Work, as being sure and immovable, might be able to bear that he
should build upon it.

This foundation consists of these three sentences, the first, That the
Church is the house of God: The second risinge of the former, that therefore
it ought to be directed in all things according to the order which God the
householder has prescribed: The third, That the order prescribed by God for
the guyding of the same, is not to be learned elsewhere but in Gods most holy
word. For proof of all these, it is immediately adjoined, that the first is
contained in the first Epistle to Tim. cap. 3. The second necessarily
follows of the first. 1. Tim. 3.
The third is proved by the 2. Epist. Tim. 3.16.17. 2. Tim. 3.17


This is the foundation which the Writer thought good to lay of all his
Treatise, to the end, that what soever he should after show out of the word
of God, to be appointed by him for the good direction and guydance of his
Church, might be received of the Church of God, as the ordinance of the
householder, whereunto all the household ought to be obedient.

The Replyer in like manner, knowing that if he could shake the foundation, the
rest of the buylding must needs fall down: begins to prove his strength in
shakinge of this grounde-worke, which standing upon three sentences (as has
bin showed) he begins with viewing of the first of these, which being
strong and immovable, he passes by it, and leaves it as sure as he found
it, confessing it to be true in deed, that the Church is the house of the
living God, and saying for him self, and such as he deals for, we most
gladly admit this, as the very word of the holy Ghost. This being granted,
the next point were now to be considered, but that I think it needful the
Reader be admonished of a point or two set down by the Replier in his answer
to this first sentence upon occasion of the Text alleged to prove that the
Church is the house of God, he adds these words following in the same place,
that the Church is the pillar and ground of truth, which is so (says he) in
this matter of Ecclesiastical government, and in all other, so far as is
necessary to salvation. Whereupon he gathers, that either the Discipline
declared in the book which he labors to confute, is not necessary, or
else, that the Church, at least in some ages and places, as a pillar of truth,
has vpholden and mainteyned it, or striuen for it: which he alleges
impertinentlie altogether to the especial matter he was to entreat of, yet
agreeing with his general purpose to lay in all places some stone of offense,
which may hinder the Reader to receive the right and only lawful Discipline
of the Church, in such sort as by the word of God appertains. In the former
point whereof, it is to be observed, that the Replyer grants, the matter of
Ecclesiastical government, in some part thereof, as well as other matters of
doctrine, to be necessary to salvation, which is worthy to be observed here,
because some other impugners of the holy Discipline and order appointed of God
for the guydance of his Church, make it no matter of such importance: whereupon
it must needs follow by his own rule, that the Church at least in such
points of it has kept and ought to mainteyne the true and right Discipline of
the Church. Furthermore, for clearing of another point which he implies by his
words, that is, that there is some truth of God in matters of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and in other points of doctrine, which are not necessary to
salvation, and therefore not mainteyned by the Church: it is to be understood,
that in some sense of necessary, and in their place and degree, all truth
both in the matter of Ecclesiastical government, and also in all other
Articles of Christian Religion, is necessary to salvation. True it is that
some points are so necessary, as that in the ordinary dispensation of God,
no man can be saved without such means: of which sort also there are some,
even in the Discipline of the Church, as is the ministry of the Gospel, by
such as are sent of GOD thereunto, and such like. There are othet which are
not so simply, absolutely, and immediately necessary, but yet necessary as
means ordained of God for the better furtherance of our salvation, both in
their own use, and in the help they yield to make the other degree of means
more fit to do us good, and more serviceable and effectual, when they are
duly prepared thereunto. For example hereof, to believe the promises of the
Gospel, in the ordinary dispensation of God, is simply, and absolutely
necessary to salvation: and because there can be no faith of it, except it be
declared to men, by such as are sent of God for that purpose, this means is
also alike necessary. Now for the better furthera^ce of men's salvation hereby,
God has appointed, that there should be Pastors of it and Doctors in the Church
for the ordinary work of the ministry of the Gospel. He has also declared
how such Preachers ought to be qualified, and in what manner they are to
preach. He has appointed also his holy Sacraments to be administered,
censures and corrections of offenses to be used, with many other such like
ordinances. Which notwithstanding they be not all necessary in the same degree
that the former means are: yet are they necessary to prepare the same that
they may be the fitter to do us good. So the preachinge of the Gospel is the
fitter to profit us, when it is preached, as by the orders appointed of God it
ought to be, that is, soundly and sincerily, without mixture of fables and
phansies of men, when it is preached by men of pity, and learning in the
Scriptures, that are able to teach, to convince, to exhort, and apply it in
every sort as it ought to be applied. And because God gives not such men to
his Church extraordinarily, the means whereby God has provided for the
furnishing of the Church with such, as their due ordination, election,
examination, and such like, are in their degree also necessary. Whereof, it
were to be wished, that we had not so evident and certain proof as we have,
in the danger of so many amongst us, as are hazarded, for want of sufficient
Ministers of the Gospel, and the necessary means, by the ordinance of GOD,
to have such as may be worthy to bear the name of Christ before his people.
The same may be said of the due execution of the censures of the Church:
Which, how necessary it is in his place and degree, for the bringing of the
obstinate sinner to the knowledge of his fault, and to repentance, and seeking
by faith for pardon in Christ Jesus to salvation: I think, by former examples,
and daily experience of such as have bin recovered by that means, and of other
that have died in their sins, for want of the same, may easily be discerned.
Besides these respects, they are also necessary, in regard of Gods holy
ordinance and appointement, the contemptuous breach of whose commandments,
be they great or little in our account, is damnable to all those that do
despise them. Thus much may suffice to clear these words of the Replyer, so
far as is necessary to salvation. Upon this gloss he gathers, that the
Discipline declared in the book he would confute, either is not necessary, or
else, at least in some ages and places, has bin mainteyned and kept, or
striuen for to be established. I answer, that in such sense of necessary as
I have mentioned it so to be, the Discipline, set down in the declaration, is
necessary to salvation: and further, that it has bin mainteyned in sundry
times and places, and is at this day exercised and labored for in the midst
of the Church.

In the Apostles times, and those which followed next after them, it was
exercised and mainteyned in all the places where the Apostles settled and
established any Churches, as appears by their own exercises and the story
of their Acts, as it is alleged in the Declaration, and sundry other books
of like argument. After that time it began in deed to decline in some parts,
as did other points of the Gospel. But notable evidences are to be showed, of
sundry parts thereof, in the writings of the ancient Fathers, exercising
some parts of it, and lamenting the decay of some other. In this age it is not
unknown to be received, mainteyned and exercised in all the Churches of
France, of the low Countries, and of Scotland, for many years together. In
this Church it has bin labored for, now many years, of the Ministry, by
writing, and preaching, and by petitions offered to the Convocation house, of
some of the commons in Parliament: now three sundry times, by such means, as
to that high Court appertains, and by many of all degrees and callings, by
most humble supplications to almighty God, and all authority which he has
set over us, and by sundry other christian duties, and is not to be given
over, till God may hear us, and the righteousness of Syon may come forth as the
light of the day, and her salvation shine like a burning lamp: and till the
lawful authority set over us, may attend our pleas in Gods behalue, and give
sentence with us. Now follows the second proposition or principle set down
in the Declaration, and affirmed by the same to rise from the former: the
Replyer agrees that it does so, and that this rule is also true: but in such
sense as he makes of it, and not in the sense of the Declaration. The sense he
makes of these words, is, that in all things that God has prescribed, the
Church is to be directed by his order, but denies all things belonging to the
external regiment of the Church, to be appointed by him, which the declaration
takes necessarily to follow of the former sentence. This is the effect of
his reply to this point. But because he had either read it in some book
written of the Discipline of the church, or thought of him self, the place
might be alleged for such purpose, though it be not mentioned here, he
labors to show that the verse of the 9. Chapter to the Hebrew. proves not,
that our Savior Christ has appointed, a certain and necessary order for the
outward direction of the Church, in all Ecclesiastical matters, which he
shows in this manner.

The Apostle (says he) refers not this of the Tabernacle to the Church,
applying it after in the 9. chap. much less to the external regiment in all
Ecclesiastical matters, no not before in the 3. where yet he speaks of
Christ and of his Church, but teaches us, that in the inward and spiritual
regiment of the Church, we are to acknowledge Christ the Lord, the Apostle
and high Priest of our profession, and to confirm our faith in him, if we
hold fast (not this or that external order of ecclesiastical government)
but the confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the end. Thus passes he over
this second point: wherein it is to be observed, that he confirms not his own
opinion, which is, that our Savior Christ has not set down any certain rule
for the direction of the Church in all Ecclesiastical matters: neither
answers the reasons that are by diverse alleged to this purpose: but only
labors to show that the 8. of the Hebr. 5. verse, does not prove it. Which
how he has performed may be considered by this which follows. In exodus
chap. 25. ver. 40. whence the words alleged out of the Epist. to the Hebr.
are taken after a particular rehearsal of the charge given to Moses concerning
the making of the Tabernacle, and the furniture thereof, the Arc of covenant,
the Table, the Candlestickes, with the Instruments necessary for it, and with
special direction both for the matter, form and measure of the same: in the
end of all, the charge given him, is generally rehearsed in these words, See
that thou make them according to the fashion and pattern of the things which
was showed thee to see in the mountain. In like manner in the next Chapter,
after a particular rehearsal of the things that belonged to the Tabernacle.
Toward the end of the Chapter, it is said, So set thou up the Tabernacle,
according to the likeness of that which was showed thee to be seen in the
mountain. Whereby it is manifest, that the charge given to Moses, was of
making the things of the external and outward Tabernacle, which were in
deed figures (as the Apostle says) of better, even of heavenly things:
(noted by the showing of the same in the mountain,) but the charge given to
Moses, was concerning the outward Tabernacle, and external order for making
the same. Which appears also by the 39. chap. of the same book, where it is
written, That all these things were made, according to all the charge, that
God had given to Moses. In which respect the faithfulness of Moses is commended
by the Apostle in the 3. chapter to the Hebr. because he had performed all
things according to the charge he had received. Now the Apostle setting out
the dignity and honor of our Savior Christ, by preferring him before Moses,
in the administration and gouuernement of the Church: declares, Moses in deed
to have bin faithful in all the house of God, but yet as a servant in the
house: whereas our Savior Christ, was not as a servant in the house, but as
the Son and heir, governing and rulinge over his own house. Forasmuch then
as every one is more faithful, diligent, and careful of that which is his
own, then any that deals with that which is another: it must needs be,
that our Savior Christ has showed him self more faithful then Moses, who
was but a servant in his house, he being the son and heir, governing over
his own house. But if the faithfulness of Moses appeared in all the house of
GOD, that is, in all that belonged to the administration of it in every
respect for that time, to a sufficient direction, even in outward and
external regiment, in all Ecclesiastical matters, as well small as great: it
must needs follow, that he who has performed incomparably greater
faithfulness to the Church, has as far, as was necessary for it, left
certain and sufficient direction, even for the outward administration of it
in all like matters. But the Replyer seems to affirm, that no certain
external form of ecclesiastical government is necessary, in that he notes
upon the 3. to the Hebr. thus: We are his house or Church, if we hold fast
(not this or that external form of government) but the confidence and
rejoicing of hope unto the end. Wherein, he considers not, that a certain
outward order is necessary, for the keeping and holding fast of that
confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the end. For the administration both of
the Word and of the Sacraments is outward, as well as is the order. For the
calling of such as are to bear any charge in the Church, or the order for
execution of the same, this being a part of the Pastors duty, no less, nay
more public, open, and outward, then sundry other duties are which-belo^g
to his Ministry. But, a certain order for the administration of the word,
and of the Sacraments, was necessary to be left to the Church by our Savior
Christ. For, Apostles and Prophets, Pastors and Doctors, are set in the
Church, for the work of the Ministry, till all the faithful attain to the
unity of the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God. Which being necessary
to salvation, the means in that the ordinary dispensation of God, are
absolutely necessary thereunto, must needs be in like manner by him appointed.
Zuencfeldius in deed, and some of the Anabaptists, make small account of the
preaching of the word, or of the Ministry of the Sacraments, as being
outward matters, fitter for children in their opinions then for men of
understanding, imagining such a perfection in themselves, by immediate
revelations from God, as needs not any such helps of outward means. But
they which discern of this ungodly presumption and vanity, must needs
confess, the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, to be necessary for
them: Mat. 7.6. Mat. 16. Acts 1.8.
and that therefore, it was needful, the Lord should leave a certain order
for the directing of his Church in that administration and ministry. Which
also, because it was so needful, the holy Scriptures declare him to have
done. Mat. 28.19.
For, touching the word, what should be preached, and by whom, and unto whom,
with all other necessary circumstances, even in outward things, he gave
certain order unto his Disciples. Likewise for Baptism, both before his
death, Matt. 18.2^.
and at his ascension into heaven, he instructed them in what outward manner,
they were to administer it, and unto what persons. Of the Lords supper, the
Apostle says, That which I received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you,
plainly declaring, that the Lord had delivered unto him a certain order, for
the outward administration of his Supper. These things and the like which
might be said of the other points of the outward Discipline of the Church,
the Replyer against it, did not well consider, in making no external form of
government necessary, but perseverance in faith and hope. Nay it may seem,
he did not well remember, that in other places the necessity of continuing
the present government of BB. and Archbishops, Priests and Deacons, such as
we have amongst us, is affirmed to have ground and continuance from the very
Apostles: who also are said to have made Timothy and Titus such. For which
cause also, at the ordination of every of them, certain places of the
Scripture are appointed to be read, as co^teyning their Institution and
ordinance in the Church. But how truly and faithfully such places are
alleged for that purpose, there are but few, but upon the reading of those
textes of Scripture, may discern. Yet howsoever they fail in their proof
that seek the confirmation of the Hierarchy, so commonly called: this
appears by their own allegations, that sometimes, and in part, they would
persuade men that there is an external form of administration of the Church
appointed by our Savior Christ. Which, would to God they did, not only
sometimes, and in part, but always and altogether, persuade them selves and
others, as the truth is in deed, that God has set down in his holy word, a
certain form of governing the Church of Christ, necessary and perpetual, by
particular directions in all the chief and principal points, and by general
rules for time, place, and such like circumstances: and that they would rather
labor with us to show what the same is by the word of God, then to strive
for the contrary, that there is no certain form at all. The proof of this
point that there is a certain and perpetual order set down in the word of
God for the guyding of the Church in ecclesiastical matters, has bin often
made, by diverse who have trauayled in this cause, as appears in their books.
But because the Replyer denies it to have been proved, yet it shall not be
amiss to lay down briefly such reasons in this place, as may serve for that
purpose.

From the beginning of the world, there has bin ordained of God a certain
external form for directing the Church. such, as seemed good to his heavenly
wisdom, and agreed best with that time for which it served, both before, and
under the Law, even from Adam to Christ. Which, for such time was not to be
altered by any living creature. Therefore there is also some certain form of
administering the church of God, from the time of our Savior Christ, to the
end of the world, which is not alterable nor to be changed by any power of
man. For, God being as able and as willing to do this good unto his Church in
these last days, as in any time before, and there being no sufficient reason
to be rendered of such difference, why those times should be so regarded, and
this not: it must needs be, that there is a certain form set down in the
word of God, for the outward administration of the Church. Again, the
external administration of the church under the Law was such as had proceeded
from God, and was not altered nor to be altered by any King or Priest
whatsoever. For the first plat was given in the mount, what alteration after
was made by David or others, was not of them selves, 2. Chro. 8. and 25.26. 2.
Chr. 29.25
but by special and particular direction of God by the Prophets. Therefore if
no just reason of difference be to be showed to the contrary, (as there is
not) it must be confessed, that God has ordained a certain external form of
gouuernement for the Church in this time, and not left it to the arbitrarie,
direction and laws of any men whatsoever. Further, where there is a Ministry
and dispensation of holy things ordained, there must needs be an order set
down for the delivering and disposinge of them. Otherwise they must of
necessity be exposed to certain profanation: therefore such ordinances
accompany such administrations, and have both their beginning and ending with
them. So in the Law, the Priesthood being appointed for the ministry of
things that were holy: there was withal a law of ordinances given for
certain direction of their office, which law also ceased, and was abolished
when the Priesthood was translated and taken away from the house of Leui, as
we are taught in the example of the Hebrews. In like manner, Hebr. 7.12.
seeing that in the Church of Christ, since the abrogatinge of the Priesthood
of the Law, there is instituted a ministry of holy things, and officers for
the purpose, it must needs be, that there is also a certain order set down
for the guiding of them in the execution of their Ministry. Which is the
whole Discipline, consisting only in the execution of such duties, as they
are to perform, which are called to bear any charge in the Church of God: as
the regiment of every common wealth stands in the offices and duties of the
Magistrates, and those that have authority in it. Moreover, the Names of
Christ and his Church, the peace, order, edification, and perpetuity of the
church do prove that there is a certain external form of administering it.
For if Christ be a King, a High Priest, an Householder, and the Church his
Kingdom, his Temple and his House: then must it needs be, that he has given,
though spiritual in regard of the end they have, as his kingdom is
spiritual: yet some certain external means, constitutions and orders, for
the good governing and guyding of the same. For this is incident to every wise
man of authority, especially when he him self shall not personally remain
amongst those that belong unto him. And so our Savior notes his purpose to
do, Mat. 25. Luke 19.12. Lu. 12.42.43
in the parable of the Talentes, delivered to diverse servants, and of the
Steward left with charge of the house till his coming. The same is to be said
of the church, which is the Lords kingdom, temple, and house: this being a
matter agreeing to every society, especially having a wise governor, and the
society being such as may have nothing done confusedly, disorderly, and
offensiuelie in it, but all, with peace, order, and to edification, and which
is to abide and continue for ever. But such a society the Church is. For some
short time, it maybe some small society may continue in tolerable manner,
without certain prescripte laws to govern it, yet hardly can it long so
continue, without sundry such disorders, as in the end must needs
overthrow it. But a common wealth and a kingdom, and that such a one as is
spread over all the world, and to continue to the end of the same, to be
like an Inn of Court, without written laws, and orders for the government of
it for ever, can not stand with the wisdom of God, with the offices of our
Savior Christ, with the nature of the Church, nor with the edificatio^, peace,
order, and perpetuity of the same. Further, the whole external form of
th'administration of the Church consists in the kinds and charges of
offices, upon whose care and direction the church in such matters is to
depend, and in the things which concern their lawful vocation to such
places, and due execution of that belongs unto them: but all these points
are particularly set down in the word of God in the several charges of
Ministers of the word, of Elders, of Deacons, and of the joint care of
Eldershippes and Synodes, as is to appear in the proof of every several part
hereafter: therefore it is to be acknowledged, that such an external form of
Discipline and direction of the Church, is appointed of God. Besides all this,
the things which concern the kingdom of Christ, whereof such an external form
is not the least, the Evangelist Luke writes, that full forty days, the
Disciples were instructed by our Savior after his resurrection, 1. Cor. 11.23
1. Cor. 14.37 Mat. 28.20. Acts 1.2. 1. Tim. 6.14 Matt. 18.15.16.17. Acts
11.30.
even as Moses had been taught of God in the mountain concerning the like.
For which respect in diverse places of the new Testament, sundry principal
parts of the Discipline and external order of the Church, are said to have
bin delivered of the Lord, and are called precepts and commandments, yea
and sometimes commandments of the Lord. Finally, the same external order
of the Church in offices for doctrine, conversation, and for the poor, was
settled by the Apostle in all churches where he came, and in some before he had
conferred with any of the other Apostles, and had the Gospel only by
revelation of the Son of God. It is delivered also by him for a general
doctrine to all Churches, in the 12. chapter to the Romans, and the 1. to Tim.
with most earnest charge to have it kept without fault, till the glorious
coming of Christ.

It was likewise established by the rest of the Apostles, in all places where
they came, as appears by the special and express mention of Ministers of
the word, Elders and Deacons: for these offices (in the due execution whereof
the whole Discipline consists) were established in the Churches of
15.4.16.4.6.6.
Jerusalem, of Act. 13.1.14.23.
Antioche, of Phil. 1.1.
Licaonia, and (d) Philippi, Act. 20.17 1. Tim. 3.
Ephesus, Romans 12.6 7.8.
Rome, 1. Cor. 5.16.1.2.
Corinth, Col. 1.7.2.5.
Colossi, These. 1.5.12.10. chapter 2.3.14.
Thessalonica, 1. Tim. 1.5
Candie, and all the Churches of the dispersed strangers in 1. Tit. 5.1.2.3.
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia, and generally in all the
churches of the He. 13.17 Iac. 1.1.5.14. 1 Co. 16.1.2
Hebrews. Which consent of the Apostles in ordering the churches which they
gathered together, by one uniform external order of Administration, in
Ministers of the Word, Elders, and Deacons, declares that they received the
same from the Lord, and by his appointement delivered it to the Churches. Thus
at the first the churches were settled, Colos. 2 5 Mat. 16.19.18.17.18.19.20.
a goodly thing to behold, all after one and the same order, by the Apostles,
according to that our Savior had taught them concerning this matter, and the
commission they were charged with at his going up from them into heaven, which
was, to make disciples, and to teach them to keep all things that he had
commanded them. In the time next succeding the Apostles, the same order in a
great part continued, as may appear by many notable testimonies in Jgnatius,
not only mentioning and saluting in all his Epistles often times the Ministers
of the word by the name of Bishops, Elders, and Deacons: but also earnestly
exhorting to the continuance and respect of them as a most necessary order
appointed for the preservation of Gods Church. Be subject (says he) to the
Bishop, meaning the Pastor, (as appears by the particular respect he is said
to have to that church) as to the Lord, for he watches for your souls as one
that is to give his account thereof to God, etc. Be subject also (says he) to
th'Eldership, as the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and please the Deacons. A little
after he says, The Bishop resembles God unto the^, and the Elders the
assistance of God, and college or band of the Apostles of Christ (a
comparison in sundry other places used by him) without these an elect Church,
a holy assembly, a Sinagogue of Saints is not, etc. In the same Epi. He that
is within the Church is clean, therefore obeys he the Bishop and the Elders:
but he that is without, does any thing without Bishop, without Elders and
Deacons, such an one is unclean: for what is the Bishop, but the follower of
Christ: what is the Presbiterie or Eldership but a holy assembly, Councillors
and assistantes of the Bishops: what are the Deacons, but followers of the
Aungelles, etc. He therefore that disobeyeth these, is surely an Atheist, and
ungodly, despising Christ and setting at naught his ordinance.

In his Epistle to the saints at Tharsus, using the same exhortation, I love
them, says he, as mine own soul, that observe this good order, and the Lord
be with them for ever.

To the Ephesians he says, The Presbytery is to the Bishop as the string is
to the Harp, as no doubt their holy concord is acceptable to God like the
song of the golden harpes, mentioned in the Revelation. Apoc. 5.
Justinus makes mention of such an order of lethargy used by the Christians
in their holy ecclesiastical assemblies as may seem to have bin (as there was
good cause it should) the pattern of the best reformed Churches of this age for
the order of public prayer used amongst them. Tertullianus testimony in his
excellent Apology of Christians is worthy to be written with a pen of gold in
precious marble, which is that certain approved Elders were set over their
Churches and ecclesiastical assemblies, who had obtained that honor not by
money but by good testimony. For no matter of God is obtained with us by money.
Many and notable witnesses are in Cyprian, of the ministry and their equal
power and dignity, and of so great necessity of executing the censures and
discipline of the Church, as that fear of death ought not to hinder it. The
presumption of man in deed began betimes by degrees to degenerate from this
order of Discipline, so as the Elders, who were men chosen out from the rest of
the people to assiste the Ministers of the word in the execution of the
Discipline of the Church began to fail, whereof Ambrose complained in his
time. Ambros. in 2. Tim. 5.
So it came to pass that some of the Ministers of the word, not by the
ordinance of God, whereby they were all equal, but as Jerome notes, by
custom and humane disposition began to be greater then other Ministers, Iero.
in epi. ad Tit.
so as they only were called Bishops (which name is given to all the Elders of
the church of Ephesus) and took upon them, first all the care of the Church,
then of other Ministers also, and that, by degrees, Act. 20.28.
of so large circuites, as for their help and to serve for steps to raise
them selves by, other officers were appointed underneath them, till at last, it
grew to this perfect image of the beast, spoken of in the Revelation, that is,
of the Roman Empire, that of long time has tyrannised the Church of God,
Reave. 13.14.
ever to this age. But in this age of the regeneration of the gospel, the
Churches have openly and plainly discovered these abuses, and declared both
their judgments what they judge and believe touching the kinds of the
ministeries and offices ordained of God to be in the Church: and their endeavor
and desire to return to the same former order appointed by our Savior Christ,
and first delivered to the Churches by his holy Apostles. In the latter
confession of the churches of Heluetia, whereunto besides the Heluetia^s, that
is the churches of Zurich, Bearne, Shaphonse, Sangall, Rhetia, Millynse, and
Bienna: there subscribed also the Churches of Geneua, and of Sauoye, Polelande,
Hungary, and Scotland, after a declaration of the names of the Ministry
that are mentioned in the holy scriptures it is thus written. But moreover in
the times which followed, many more names of Ministers of the Church were
brought in, for some were ordained Patriarchs, other Archbishops, others
Suffragans, Metropolitanes also and Archepriestes, or Arch-presbyters, also
Subdeacons, Acolythes, Exorcistes, Singers, porters, and I know not who else,
as Cardinals, Prouostes, Priors, Fathers, and orders greater and less. But
of all these we are nothing careful what they were in times past, or now
are, the doctrine of the Apostles concerning Ministers suffiseth us. And a
little after in the same confession, one and equal power or office was given
to all the Ministers of the Church.

Surely at the beginning the Bishops governed the Church by their common
labor, none preferred him self before other, or usurped to him self larger
power or dominion over Bishops, for they were mindful of the Lords words:
He that will be first amongst you, let him be your servant, and so forth with
confirmation of this equality amongst the Ministers of the Church, showing
this to have been so amongst the Apostles, by Cyprian and Jeromes testimony,
affirminge, that the Bishops are greater then other Ministers, more by
custom then by the ordinance of God, and that they ought to rule the Church
together, they add these words, this writes Jerome. Therefore say they, no
man can lawfully forbid us to return back again to the ancient ordinance
of the Church of God, Artic. 29.
and to receive that rather then a humane custom. The Churches of France write
yet more directly to this purpose, in their confession, saying: We believe the
true Church ought to be governed by that policy and discipline which our
Lord Jesus Christ has ordained, namely so, that there be in that, Pastors,
Elders and Deacons, that the pureness of doctrine may be retained, vices may be
suppressed, the poor and other in misery may be provided for, and that holy
assemblies may be held, for the edification both of small and great. In like
manner write the Churches of the low Countries: Artic. 30.
We believe (say they) that this true Church ought to be ruled and governed by
that spiritual policy which god him self has taught us by his word: so as
there be in it Pastors and Ministers, who may purely preach and administer
the Sacraments. Also, that there be Elders and Deacons, who may make the
Seniorie of that Church, that by these, as means, true Religion may be
preserved, and true doctrine may be retained euery-where, and spead abroad,
etc. as follows in the same place of the use of this order. Wherein it is
very worthy the observation that these Churches wherein there are an infinite
number of godly learned men, and many for their just deserts, famous,
reverend, and honorable in all the Church of Christ, and the same being in
persecution, and therefore seeking more carefully to please God, in such a
confession as they declare their faith in, have thought it a necessary Article
to set down this point of the policy or discipline of the Church: and that,
in declaring of it, they say not, what they suppose: but what they believe,
using the same word which they do use in the articles of faith and doctrine.
Further also it is to be marked, that they profess, they believe, the Church
ought to be governed, by that policy and Discipline which our Lord Jesus
Christ has ordained, and God him self has taught us by his word: plainly
affirming that there is a certain form of policy to govern the church by,
and that the same is ordained of our Savior Christ, and further, that it is
declared in the word of God. And last of all, that they declare that policy
or discipline which GOD has taught us in his word, to be this in effect, That
there be Ministers of the word, Elders and Deacons, by whom, as by the means
which God has ordained, holy doctrine, and honest life, may be preserved in
the Church, and the poor relieved. The same is likewise affirmed by the Church
of Scotland, as appears in their treatise of the Discipline of the Church.
Upon all which proofs and testimonies, I conclude with the declaration: That
God has given to the church, which is the house of the living God, a certain
order for the direction of it, in all outward matters that belong to the good
gouuernement of the same. Whereof if they shall yet doubt, whom it most
imports the Chureh to be persuaded of it, it is to be sued for by continual
supplications and prayers to God and them, that they would hear what we have
to say further on Gods behalf in these causes, and to receive our information
herein, so far as we shall be able to make good proof by the holy word of God
concerning his ordinance in these matters. I doubt not then but the certain
truth of the points set down in the declaration, would appear unto them to
the great honor of God, and unspeakable joy and comfort of all the Church
amongst us.

Now follows the third and last sentence of those which are set down for
the foundation of all the Discipline. This sentence is, that the order which
God has prescribed for the directing of his church is not to be learned
els-where then in the holy word of God. For proof whereof is alleged 2.
Tim. 3. verse. 16.17. This truth, the Replyer, if he agree with him self, in
like manner yields unto, with this condition, if it be understood, that all
general or particular orders in the external government of the church, are
either expreslie specified in Gods holy word, or inclusiuelie comprehended in
it. This is the substance of his Reply to this point, wherein he is to know
that it is not otherwise meant, but that either by plain evidence, or
necessary consequence, they are to be showed to have their ground in the
word of God, for the substance therefore of this point we are agreed. In this
place without all manner of occasion offered him, he falls into the mention of
a book which he terms our communion book, and says to be entitled, The
form of common prayers, administration of the Sacraments, etc. agreeable to
Gods word and the use of the reformed Churches. Such a book in deed bearing
that title, there has bin much speech of, and it is said, as it had bin twice
before, so this last Parliament, now the third time, to have bin presented to
that high and Honorable Court. Whereof because the speeches were diverse, many
have bin in doubt what they should judge of it. Therefore I doubt not, but that
one no better affected to it then he is, and shows him self to be, both in
calling it our communion book (meaning as it seems that it was reuisited and
considered by sundry faithful Ministers of the Gospel, and by their means
procured to be presented in Parliament) and in his readiness to find fault
with it without cause: but he has observed some notable matter in it, that may
stay the uncertain and doubtful opinions of many concerning it, and may
certify them upon good and sufficient ground of just cause to disallowe it.
The matter which he notes in it, is, that in the title of it, it is said to be
agreeable to the word of God, and the use of the reformed churches. And this
is all that he notes in it: whereby it may seem to be a holy book, and
worthy to be written in letters of gold, if it be such a one as so ill an
eye lookinge into it, could find nothing reproueable in it, but this, that it
is agreeable to Gods word and the use of the best reformed Churches. He might
easily find as great a stayne as this is, in the most orient pearl that ever
came from the Indies. Such a pearl was in deed worthy to be set in the
Diadem of a Prince, and meet to be presented to so noble a State, as is the
State of that honorable assembly. If there were a Gentleman in all the land,
fearing God in truth, with singlenes and sincerity of heart, wise, without
cunning and deceytfull practices, zealous of the honor and service of God,
loving his Country with most tender affection and constant in the truth, with
a christian magnanimity: such a man surely were a personage qualified for
such a purpose, as to make tender to the States of a land, of such a book, as
is agreeable to Gods word, and the use of the best reformed Churches. If
amongst all the Gentlemen of a Country, there were two, graced of God with
rare and excellent gifts, of true pity and zeal, of knowledge and
understanding in other good learning, and especially in the heavenly
knowledge of divinity, and in it particularly of the Discipline and spiritual
policy of the church, and of so gracious speech and utterance, that the
hearers might after truly report and say of them: We saw them as men that
looked into the glory of God, and had bin changed into the similitude and
likeness of the Lords own glory: we heard them, as they that seemed to us to
speak not with the tongues of men, but of Aungelles: for how did our hearts
burn within us, when we heard them so zealouslie and mightily plead on the
behalf of God, and persuade the receiving of a book that had all things in it
agreeable to Gods word, and the use of the best reformed churches: surely
such men were fit advocates to speak in a cause so holy, and so importing the
honor of God, and the comfort of his people. If there were in the Ministry,
true and faithful servants of God, such as seek not them selves, but the
things that belong to Christ Jesus: And if there were of every Country men
endued with pity, knowledge, wisdom, care of the Church, the flower of a
land, assembled together: these were in deed for such a purpose, to lay
their heads together, and to confer, how they might with most grace, set
out such a jewel, to win favor, and to draw love wheresoever it should be
seen, and especially of those who should most of all take pleasure in
iewelles of price. For, wherein could any man's gifts be better employed, then
in reco^mending for public prayers and administration of the Sacraments,
such a book, as is agreeable with the word of God, and the use of the best
reformed Churches. Belike such a book mainteyned not an unlearned ministry,
nor a pontifical Hierarchy, which willingly go together, and uphold one
another, nor reading of Apocripha rather then Canonical scriptures in the
public assembly of the Church, nor private administration of the Sacra. nor
cases of necessity of them, implying the erroneous doctrine of conference of
grace by them for the deed done, nor the baptism of women, nor confirmation,
as an ordinance to give increase of grace, nor Bishops of a several ordination
and power from other Pastors, nor Deacons without any charge of the poor,
nor power to minister baptism without like power to administer the Lords
supper, nor to minister both without power to preach, except further license be
granted: these and such like matters, no doubt, such a book could not
mainteyne it being apparent, what the word of God is herein, and the use of
the reformed churches. Contrariwise, it must needs be that such a book
appoints that all Ministers of Sacra. should be preachers, that preaching be
joined always with the ministry of the Sacraments, and that they be always
ministered in the public assembly, that they be not divided from preaching,
nor one from another in the pastors calling, that the Deacons relieve the
poor, and the Eldership direct the causes of the church: these and other
points like unto them, being declared in the word of God, to be the
ordinances of the almighty for the guydance of his Church, and this being the
use of the reformed Churches, no doubt, but they were mainteyned by a book
agreeing with them both. Which being so, what should I say of them, that would
endeavor to the uttermost of their power, by all good and duetifull means, the
receiving of a book so fit for the advancement of the honor of God, and
promising so great good unto his people: but as it is in the Psalm: Peace and
prosperity be in thee (o Jerusalem) thou city of God, and the Lord prosper
those that love thee. Psalm. 122.6.
The Almighty suffer them not to fear the fear of the wicked, but shield
them from all evil, as the natural and noble sons of Abraham: Gene 15.3.
and whosoever they be dealt with here, the Lord recompense them with an
exceeding great reward. He remember them for good, according to the prayer of
that worthy restorer of the City, and service of God Nehemia, Nem.
5.19.13.12.29.
and what soever they have done for this people, their endeavor to take away
the pollutions of the ministry, to set the Lords watch at his gates again,
and every Leuite to his work, according to his place: the Lord spare them
according to the greatness of his mercy, and remember them and their service
for good, so as their childrens children may receive at their hands an
inheritance of blessing from the Lord. And if any should be otherwise minded,
the Lord forgive it them, and grant that they also in his good time, may have
this truth opened to them, and be noble and elect instruments chosen and
appointed of God to the furtherance of the same.

Thus far, have I bin bold, to follow the occasion offered me, in mention of
a book of common prayer and administration of Sacraments, agreeable to Gods
word, and the use of the best reformed Churches. The which I am, for their
sakes, who seek all advantages, to stir up the higher powers against us,
truly and vnfeynedlie to protest, that I write not with purpose to offend
any, God being witness, and least of all, any that are in authority. For I
bow my face down to the ground before them all, of whom it is said, Ye are
Gods, and in all reverent duty, acknowledging the most humble and faithful
duty which I owe to the great power, that God has given them, to the
punishing only of the evil doer: but to the protection, maintenance and
comfort of all that do well in the land: yea further, as conscience and
duty binds me in that respect, I do not cease to lift up my heart and my
hands to Almighty GOD, day and night for them all, that it may please him
daily more and more to increase in them, all the princely gifts that their
high places and authority do require: and namely, that their hearts may be
more enlarged toward this so necessary a cause of Gods service, and the
comfort of his people, which I do also as my most straight bound and
obligation requires: especially, for our sovereign Lady the Queen, that as
God in his mercy has honored her right excellent Majesty, with these
honors: th'extinguishing of the fires wherewith the Church consumed, the
overthrow of idolatry, and false worship of God, the establishing of the free
professing and preaching of the Gospel of Christ, the harboring of exiles
for the gospels sake, the delivering of the Churches of Scotland from
captivity, patronizing of the Churches of the low Countries, ayding and
assisting of the Churches of France, and the comforting (in a manner) of all
the Churches which profess the gospel, that I say to these so many and so
high and chief points of true honor, this also may be added, that her
Majesty by Gods special favor, and assistance of his holy Spirit, may
establishe in this her happy reign, the same order for directing of the
Church, and publishing the gospel of salvation to all the people within her
Dominion, which almighty GOD has appointed for this purpose: to the great
advancement of the honor of GOD, the exceeding joy of all the good people in
the land, and her own unspeakable comfort and glory with God and men. Thus,
praying not to be misconstrued in that I have bin bold, upon occasion, to
speak a little to the encouragement of Christian and noble minds, in godly
and duetifull manner, to solicit almighty God, and the authority he has set
over us, in Syons suit, being so necessary, and so importinge the good, both
of the Church and common wealth amongst us, (the happy estate whereof
depends upon the favor of God:) I return to the Replier. To whom for his
reply of agreeable, I answer, that agreeable is not that which is contrary,
but which has a correspondence and harmonicall concord with that wherewith
it agrees. And so is it to be understood in the place whereof he makes
question: but such a sense would he feign make of agreeable, to save all
upright in an other place, which yet will not serve, for sundry repugnances
and co^trarieties which are there with the word, and with the use of the best
reformed Churches. And thus far to his reply, to the matter set down in the
third part of the foundation.

Now to his reply to the reason wherewith it is confirmed: The proof
alleged for this third point he admits not so easily, as the matter it
self. Which being granted to be true, it imports the less, whether it be
fitly proved by it or no, yet peradventure he would better have discerned of
the consequence from that place, if he had considered, the man of God there, to
note, not the civil Magistrate, nor every one of the faithful, but only the
Minister of the word, as both the term it self, and the duties of his
calling there mentioned do testify. Whereby it is plain that the words of
the Apostle do more particularly concern matters of the Church, then they
do civil policy or moral life, as he obiecteth. Now, it being said, that
the minister of the word (whose calling is the greatest in the Church) is
fully and thoroughly instructed by the holy scriptures, for every duty
belonging to his office. Surely the Elders and Deacons, whose charges are
less, may be taught by the same what belongs unto them, and if they furnishe
and direct him, that requires most furniture and direction: surely then, they
can not want, that need less. And if all that are of public charge in the
Church, be fully instructed and enabled of God for every part and point of
their duties by the holy scriptures, what one, concerning the discipline of
the Church, can be said, not to be taught in the word of God: seeing the whole
Discipline is administered by those that bear public charge in the church. If
this proof content him not, he is to be satisfied further in the proofs of
the several points which are showed after, to be fully grounded upon the
word of God. In the mean time this I add for his further satisfaction. It
being necessary to be directed in these matters from God, it must needs be,
that God has left us this direction in his word: otherwise, he must confess,
there are necessary truths, not written in the word: but this popish
opinion of unwritten verities, is worthily rejected of all professors of the
gospel long ago. For we can not now say to any as David said to Abiathar,
take the Ephod, 1. Sam. 23.9
and ask of the Lord: we have no other Ephod, nor other Vrim and Thummim left
us from the Lord, whereby we may be certified of his good pleasure in any
thing, but only the bright glistering, and pure light of his H. Scriptures:
wherein, as in the breast of our hye priest Jesus Christ, we may see and read
the will of God for our direction. Now, that we need in these matters to be
directed by God, appears by this, that of our selves we can not by any
natural understanding attain to this knowledge: For, the natural man,
comprehends not, Act. 7.20.21
the spiritual things of God. For which cause Moses, a man otherwise of great
gifts of nature and of study, as one in whose face the grace of God appeared,
and who had bin brought up in all the learning and knowledge of the Egiptians,
and that by such excellent masters and means, as were meet for him, that was
respected in his education, as grau^d-childe to the King of Egypt: yet stood
he in need, to be instructed of God, in as small matters, concerning the
outward guydance of his church, as are any mentioned in the declaration, and
much smaller. Further also, the Apostle affirms, that the things he wrote to
Timothy, he wrote them, that he might know, 1 Ti. 3.14.15
how to behave him self in the Church, which is the house of the living God. 2.
Tim. 4.5.
And if Timothy an Evangelist, one of whose ministry the Prophets had spoken
before, 1. Tim. 1.18
one that had received the faith from his ancestors, 2. Tim. 1.5.
who^ the Apostle for the likeness he had of his Apostolical spirit, calls his
natural son, stood notwithstanding in need to be informed by writing from
the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.2.
how he should behave him self in the church, and that in so many particulars,
as he instructs him in: sure it must needs be confessed to be necessary for
all other to be taught also by writing, (which is the most certain way of
instruction) how they ought to behave themselves in the same. If it were not
needful to be taught by the Apostles, how a man should behave him self in
guyding the house of God, why did the Apostle write to Timothy to this end,
to direct him in that he had to do in the Church. And, if it were needful
for Timothy, why is it not as necessary for all others? This reason moving
the Apostle to write of this matter to Timothy, no doubt, did cause him
likewise for the same end, to write to Titus, of the like matters. And if so
excellent personages understood not what to do, nor how to behave them
selves in the Church, for that which appertayned to them, in the administration
of it, without certain direction in writing concerning it, from the Apostles:
I can not think, but the like direction should be needful for all those, who
have any charge in the church. When Nadab and Abihu sons of Aaron the high
Priest, Leui. 10.2.
had bin consumed with fire from before the Lord, for misgouerning them selves
in an outward thing, concerning their Ministry (in a matter as it might
seem to flesh and blood, of small importance) Moses told Aaron his brother,
that this was so come to pass, according to that the Lord had said, Leui.
10.3.
I will be sanctified in those that come near unto me, and glorified in the
sight of all the people: meaning thereby, that God had forewarned the Priests,
that if they misbehaued the^ selves in their ministry, he would glorify him
self in their examplarie and grievous punishment. Which being so, surely the
fault and punishment can not be small, nor to be despised, if any of those
who come near to the Lord to stand and minister before him, in the time of
the gospel, shall misgouerne them selves in their charge. Therefore,
necessary it is, and that most necessary, that there be direction for them
in the word of GOD. And thus much also to this point.

In the next section, which the replier makes of the declaration, it is
gathered of the former sentences, that we are to search the Scriptures, that
we may find that order which is left in them for the guydance of the Church.
The first thing the Replyer reproves in this section, is, that it is said,
The gates of hell shall not prevail against the foundation before mentioned.
Who may easily satisfy him self for this objection, because the meaning of
the Declaration was not to allege those words, as spoken of that it
intreates of, it being apparent to be meant of the Church, builded upon the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the foundation-stone thereof:
(somewhat otherwise then he has taken it, who expounds it of Christ him
self) but by these words, although used in that place to another end, it
declares the sure stedfastnes of that doctrine which was a little before
mentioned, which being as the declaration intends, and as it is in deed, a
part of the heavenly truth of the word of God, which can not fail in any
part of the same: it was truly spoken also of the matter it is applied unto.

Of the word foundation he takes occasion to set down the 1. Corinthians. 3. ver.
10.11.12.13.14.15. where mention is made of the foundation Christ Jesus, and of
buylding upon it straw or stubble, which he says they do, that urge any
outward order of ecclesiastical government, as matter of salvation. After,
where it is said in the declaration upon former proofs, that we ought
therefore diligently and reverently to search the holy Scriptures, to find
what the order is which GOD has appointed for his Church: he answers with
scoffing and reprochefull speeches, without any just matter of rebuke. And in
the end of his replye to this section, because it is said in the declaration,
we are to search in Gods word, that order, by which God would have his Church
directed in all things appertayning to the salvation thereof. He replyeth,
that this were to condemn all the Churches, where this order has not bin
observed: which either if it be necessary to salvation, could not be the
Churches of God without it, or if it be not necessary, it is (says he)
unnecessary to salvation, and then our Church may remain, gouuerned as it is,
without either being deformed, maimed, or no church, as some affirm, who^ he
names as in reproach. For answer to these things, and to begin where he
leaves, that is, with the persons he names, the former of them we
acknowledge, M. Cartwright.
and reverence, as his rare gifts of knowledge and zeal, and his learned
works and constant suffering in this cause, and at this time his continual
travel in preaching the gospel, do worthily deserve: for which causes he
was worthy other respect then the Replier here does give him. If he would
needs set down his name considering the example of the Apostle, who
(notwithstanding he far excelled in office and in gifts) yet seldom or
never mencioneth any Minister of the gospel by name, yea scarce any
professor, without some good mark of the grace of god in them: but this and a
great deal more, both he and whosoever shall serve God as they ought in this
cause of the further reformation of our Church must account to endure of them
that oppose them selves to this most necessary service. As for the other, that
he obiecteth to him, concerns not any of those, in whose name the Declaration
was published.

But for the matter of necessity, this word being taken as has bin above
declared a little before in this defense, it may stand well enough together,
to say as the declaration says, that God has set down in his word, an
order to direct his Church in all things partayning to the salvation of it, and
yet that some Churches may be worthily acknowledged the true Churches of God,
although they have not in all points kept that order. For all the things in
that order, do not in like degree partayne to salvation: which if they did,
his reason were good, but it being otherwise, fails. He him self, a little
before, acknowledges outward orders in their degrees, as necessary to
edification: though (says he) not directly partayning to the necessity of
salvation, which we agree to be true in some, but that he adds there, nor to
the necessity of obedience, is not true in such orders as have their
particular ground in the word of God: which point because he returns unto
again in this place, and often hereafter, he is to understand his answer
herein once for all: which is, as has bin partly touched before, that
certain points of the Discipline, are of necessity to salvation, in such
absolute degree of necessity, as is of any ordinary outward means. Of which
sort is the ministry of the word, and of the Sacraments, and of the
censures of the Church, which are appointed for the winning of th'offendour,
and for the saving of his spirit in the day of the Lord, as we are expreslie
taught by our Savior Christ in the gospel: and by the Apostle Paul in the 5.
Mat. 18.
of his former Epistle to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 5.
Whereupon it consequently follows, that the sufficiency of the ministry
to teach, and to exhort according to sound doctrine, and to convince the
gayn-sayer: likewise their ordinary residence, and diligent attendance upon
the Church, whose servants they are in the Lord, is partayning to the
salvation of souls. For it is said, That where vision or prophecy, that is
interpretation of scriptures fails, there the people perishes or is made
naked, Pro 1.29.18.
that is, exposed to all danger, Mat. 9.36.
and our Savior Christ yearned in his bowelles upon the people, seeing them as
sheep without shepheardes, that is, in danger to be made a pray to Satan
that roaring Lion, who goes about co^tinuallie to seek whom he may devour.
In like manner, because this is the use of the censures to serve immediately to
the recovery of the sinner to repentance, that he may be saved, the office of
Elders, who are by the ordinance of God, to keep the Lords watch over the
Church, and to procure the repentance of the sinner, is in his place
necessary: which thing being necessary, it follows also that other inferior
means which serve hereunto, and without which these holy offices can not be
thus established, nor discharged, are in their degree also necessary. The
Deacons office is not so directly tending to the salvation of the soul, as
these are, but rather regards the relief of the outward necessities of the
poor and afflicted of the Church, yet not without respect to comfort and
confirm their faith in him, by whose holy ordinance they are so provided for.
But being as it is, the ordinance of God, that there should be Deacons in the
Church for such uses, this office is also of the necessity of obedience. And
generally, so are all the offices and orders set down in the Declaration,
because they are all ordained of God, to be kept for great and necessary use
in the church, to the end of the world: as it is to be justified in their
several places, when we come unto them. So as this is briefly that we affirm
herein, that sundry points of the matters of the ecclesiastical policy set
down in the Declaration, are directly partayning to salvation, and in that
respect necessary: and both they and all the rest, are by the appointment and
ordinance of God, to be continued in the Church, and in the necessity of
obedience, they are all likewise necessary. Yet where this order appointed of
God is not kept, by reason of ignorance, and want of due information of the
will of God, or means to perform it, or of humane infirmity, such as flesh
and blood is subject unto: it follows not, that they are therefore no church
of God. The holy ordinances of God, were horribly profaned by the sons of
Elie: 1. Sam. 2.17
so as, for their abominations the people of God began to abhor the service
of God, yet was the Church of God still amongst them. The Prophets in their
time charged the Priests with breach of the covenant that God had made with
Leui their Father, Mal. 2.5.8.
with their ignorance, Esai. 29.
in being a number of them not able to teach the people, with their
flatteries, and bolstring up of the sins of all estates and degrees, Esa.
56.10.
and saying all was well, when there were a number of things that needed
reformation amongst them, Iere. 6.13.14
they charged them with ambition, with covetousness, Iere 8.8 9.11.12.
with prophanenes, and many other great enormities: yet did the Prophets
continue their teaching of the people, and acknowledged the people
notwithstanding to be the people of God. Yea, even what the people offered
upon the high places and the Lords altar was removed and put to the wall,
and the altar of Damascus set in the place thereof: all which were notable
breaches of that external order which God had commanded to be observed by
them: yet were they not therefore straightway no people of God as were the
Gentiles. God did in deed grieuouslie punish them by war, by famine, by
pestilence, and sundry other ways, declaring him self to be highly offended
at these their transgressions, as the Prophets forewarned them he would do:
but this correction was yet with the Fathers rod, and not with the bar of
Iron, till such time, as by the just judgment of God, the state of that people
became worse and worse, falling from one degree of sin to another, till at
last they denied the Prince of life, and crucified the Lord of glory: Then
the Lord in part rejected them for their unbelief, and brought in the Gentiles
that believed. But till that time, the Lord acknowledged them for his, even as
a Father does his child, notwithstanding he be maimed or deformed. Which
comparison the Replier without cause is offended at, Heb. 12.13.
this being an usual thing in the scriptures, to resemble sins and offenses
to imperfections and deformities of the body. For which cause the Evangelist
Matthewe, mentioning the healing of bodily infirmities by our Savior Christ,
notes that therein (as being a visible evidence of the other) was fulfilled
that, which was written by the Prophet Esaie saying: He took our infirmities
and bare our diseases upon him: Matt. 8.17.
Likewise also the Apostle exhorting to holy example of life, says: Make
straight steps unto your feet, that that which is halting be not turned out
of the way, but may be healed rather. And how long (says Elias to Israel)
do you halte between two: Jf God be God, follow him, 1. Kin. 18.21
and if Baal be god, follow him. I add further, which touches the matter yet
more near.

The Apostle compares the Church unto a body, 1. Cor. 12.27.28.
and the particular persons of it to the parts and members of a body and the
guydes of the Church and such as have public charge in it, to the more noble
and principal parts of it, whereof Christ our Savior is the only head. As
therefore the body is blind that wants eyes to see withal, and lame, maimed,
or deformed, whereof the shoulders, arms, hands, or other principal parts
are wanting or displaced and disordered: so that body of a Church can not be
said to be perfect and entier, wherein there are not Ministers of the word,
who by the light thereof may direct the people in the ways of God, or Elders
that may discover and descrie every matter that may threaten any danger to
the body: or Deacons who may distribute liberally according to that is in
their hands, for the relief of the poor. Nay I doubt not to say (the
necessary use of these offices being considered) that no body natural, has
so much want of any of these, as the body politic of the church has of the
other. Therefore I see no just cause, why this comparison should greatly
offend him. A man may live in deed many years with such wantes and
imperfections, none of those parts being necessary for life, but shall live a
heavy and uncomfortable life, because he wants parts, that are necessary
for many great uses, whereby a Man may live the better and more comfortably, as
being preserved in health, in strength, and in beauty: which thing they well
discern of, who wanting by any occasion such parts, use a hand or a leg of
wood, or help the imperfections of other parts as well as they can. So
likewise a church may live, and be the Church of God, whilst the faith of
Christ, as the breath and spirit of life is in it, but wanting these offices,
or in place of these which God has made, and are the natural parts of the
body, having a supply and help such as Man has devised, shall so live, as
one neither having beauty in the sight of god and his holy Angels, nor force
and health to perform in good order the actions belonging to it, but pineth
and wastes away with discomfort, one part decaying after another, till in the
end the spirit of life, the doctrine of the Gospel, in the just judgment of
God forsaking it, leave a dead corpse upon the ground, to warn and admonish
other Churches by such example, to be careful in time, of the means, whereby
thorough the blessing of God upon his own holy ordinances, according to the
promise he has made in the use of them, and not of any humane devise to like
purpose, (be it never so pollitique and reasonable to flesh and blood) they
may be in health, strength, beauty, and honor, preserved and mainteyned for
ever.

There remains yet to answer his misapplying of the words of the Apostle
in the 3. of the former epist. to the Corinthians, concerning the laying of
stubble and straw upon the foundation, which he says is done by those, who
holding Christ, and the doctrine of the Gospel, will urge a necessity of the
outward regiment of the Church in all Ecclesiastical matters. Wherein how
justly he charge such as seek a further reformation of our charge, may
appear by that which has bin said already, and is further to be made
plain by the rest of this treatise: Wherein every part of the doctrine set
down in the declaration being sufficienlie proved by the word of God, the day
will witness for us, that we have laid upon the most rich and precious
foundation, nothing but fine gold of Ophir, and silver refined seven times in
the furnace. On the other part, the same light will make manifest their work,
that upon Christ the corner stone, laid in Syon, elect, and precious, lay
things altogether vnsuteable to it, matter of no value, and whose end is to
be consumed with fire. Of this sort is the administration of holy things, as
Baptism, and the censures of the Church, by Women, and lay men, such as are
Chauncelours, Commissaries, Officialls, and such like, the confusion of both
powers ecclesiastical and civil, in persons called to the ministry and
preaching of the word of God. In Ecclesiastical matters so immoderate a
power, as that one man at his pleasure should make Ministers, should give out,
and call in again, licenses to preach, should suspende, excommunicate, and
do what he list in the church which is the house of the living God. Of like
sort are confirmation, with laying on of hands, in sign of grace increased:
the cross in baptism, in sign of serving like a good soldiour of Christ: the
wearing and bearing in public administration, of Albe, Surplesse, Coape,
pastoral staff, commonly called the Crosier staff. These, and a number of
such like, and worse then some of these, which some lay upon the foundation if
they be their gold and silver, it may be well said now as was sometime: The
gold of Syon is turned into dross, and her fine silver is like the base cure,
which a man being abused shall lay up for a time under many locks, and
esteem it as some great treasure, but after discovering the abuse, he will cast
away in displeasure and indignation with the dross of the furnace. The Lord
burn out the dross till it be pure, and take away all the base metal, but
with the fire of his gracious word, if it please him: and not with that the
Prophet speaks of, that the Judges of Syon may be restored as at the first,
and their Councillors as in the beginning, and it renowned for a faithful
City, Esai. 1.25.26.

Thus much may suffice to have said to this Section of his Replye. For I leave
his iestes and scoffs to him self to consider of, with remembrance that the
Apostle says, These are things not seemly, and reckons this pleasant
humor amongst a number of other things, whereof all professors of the
Gospel, and much more the Preachers of it, should be ashamed.

Ephe. 5.4.
The Declaration, groundinge it self upon the former sentences, as pillars of
rock that can not be shaken, the first, that the Church is the house of the
living GOD: the second, That therefore GOD has appointed a certain order
for the gouuernement of it: and last of all, that both these being so, it must
needs be, that this order is taught in the holy Scriptures: begins out of
the same to show and declare, what that order is. Wherein, the first point,
which is made the next Section, is, that our Savior JESUS Christ has
ordained an holy Ministry of men to the building up of the Church, which
is his body, in unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of GOD. Which is
confirmed by two places of Scripture, The fourth to the Ephesians, and the 12.
chapter of the former Epistle unto the Corinthians.

The Replyer to the first of these places takes this exception, that it is
impertinentlie alleged, and that it touches not the question in hand:
whereof he renders his reason, for that the thing spoken of in that place,
is diverse altogether from the matter to be proved: because the proof (as he
supposes) is to be made of orders, prescribed and set forth, concerning
ecclesiastical gouuernement, for the Church to be directed by in all
things, and the matter which the Apostle speaks of, is of gifts and
functions, the end whereof is referred to unity in doctrine of faith, and to
holy and honest conversation of life, not to the external orders of the
Churches Ecclesiastical government. This is the effect of his Reply to this
point. Wherein he has failed, in making diverse those things, that are of
great agreement together. For, the purpose pretended, is to show, what that
order is, that the holy Scriptures declare, our Savior Christ to have
appointed for the guydance of his Church. Now, to perform this, there is
proof made, of all the Church offices of public charge, that are appointed
of our Savior Christ, for the directing of his people. Which proof if it be
sufficient, as it is, to show that the Ministry of those that are appointed
for the preachinge of the word, both Pastors, and Teachers, and also of other
seruinge for other necessary uses, that is, both of Elders, ordained and
appointed for the care of honest and godly life and manners, and of Deacons,
instituted for the necessity and relief of the poor and needy, is appointed
to be in the Church: then is all the policy and the Discipline of the Church
sufficiently proved. For this being the ordinance of our Savior Christ, as it
is proved by these places, that there should be Pastors, Teachers, Elders, or
Governors and Deacons in the Church, the whole Discipline of the Church
standing in nothing else, but the due calling of them to such charge, and the
execution of such duties, after they be called, as belong thereunto: it is
evident, that the whole order which concerns the external and outward
guyding of the Church, is hereby plainly showed what it is, and that it is
ordained by the Lord. Where the question were of a king gone to a far
country, whether he had left any certain form of policy for the regiment
of his kingdom in his absence, what playner proof could be made, that he had
left certain order for their government in his absence then if it could be
showed by authentike and sufficient records, under his hand and great seal,
that he had appointed Magistrates for the mannaging of state causes, and
other, for due execution of justice amongst his people. But this does the
Declaration in the proofs alleged. For, the question being, whether our
Savior Christ have set any certain order for the guyding and directing of
his Church till his coming again: the Declaration answers, that he has:
because he has ordained Ministers of the word, Pastors, and Teachers, for
procuring the advancement of the faith of the Church: Elders for the censure of
their conversation and life, and Deacons for the comfort of the poor and
afflicted. Therefore I take it, this allegation is most pertinent, and fitteth
so near the matter, as the Replier can not by this pretense, nor by any other
remove it. But the cause of this error of his, to take that to be from the
matter, that is so near unto it, seems to be, the abusing of him self in
th'ambiguitie of the word orders. So as where the Declaration undertakes to
show a certain order to be left by our Savior Christ for th'administring of
all ecclesiastical matters, the Replyer belike looks, here should be showed,
some orders for things indifferent. For this place (says he) refers all to
unity in doctrine of faith, and to holy conversation of life, and not to
th'externall orders of the Churches ecclesiastical government. Whereby he
shows, that he looked not to hear proof of any matters that are referred
to faith or life, but to other external orders: and what can they be, but of
things indifferent. Which yet, that they may remain indifferent, could have
no order appointed by our Savior Christ, for then should they be no more
indifferent: the commandment of our Savior binding to a necessary obedience
to do that which he should command, so as this exception can not serve. For
what orders may more clearly prove, our Savior Christ to have taken order
for the governing of his Church in all ecclesiastical matters, then they,
which are referred to doctrine and manners. Is there any matter
ecclesiastical, that is not referred to one of these? And if this place show
the order he has set, for all things referred either to faith of doctrine or
conversation of life: surely it proves a certain order for all ecclesiastical
matters. Which if the Replyer will deny to follow, yet is it to be remembered,
that he plainly confesses here, that the place alleged, is referred to
matters of unity in doctrine of faith, and to holy conversation of life.
Whereof, whosoever he deny it, I doubt not but every indifferent and advised
Reader will easily discern, that hereby he has granted the whole cause,
except he show some ecclesiastical matter, that is not referred to one of
these. Another shift he has, but it is such, as he dares not trust unto him
self, and yet seems to point other to use it, if they lift. Which is, that
he says, The Apostle there speaks of gifts and functions, meaning, as I
think, co^struing his meaning out of other places, and to his best advantage,
that this place concerns not any kinds of offices or charges, but of gifts
and fu^ctions in the Church. For, in his speech, he takes these two words for
one thing, as after shall apeare, grou^ding him self herein as it seems upon
that which is said in the same place, that Christ, being ascended, gave gifts
unto men, some Apostles, and so forth. But if this misleade him, he is to
understand, that these may well stand together, that they may be offices, and
yet gifts. When a King grants a Charter to a people, to be a corporation
and a City, and sets officers amongst them for their good government, are
not such offices the Princes gifts, and yet offices too? We read of Paul's
knowledge, wisdom, diligence in preaching, sufferings for the Gospel, of his
tongues, of his power to work miracles, and many such like excellent graces,
worthy an Apostle of Christ Jesus. When the Lord, gave us Gentiles, such a
Teacher, and appointed his name to be brought unto us in that vessel of gold,
enriched with so many goodly graces of god, more precious then any jewel,
bestowed he no gift upon us? It is manifest that greater gifts have not bin
given to men, then were these offices whereof the Apostle speaks. Therefore,
how soever he point another to it, he did well not to trust to much to this
shift him self. Therefore, notwithstanding there appear not any such order
given for ceremonies, as, what stuff, what fashion, what color, this or that
garment should be on, on which side of the church the Minister should stand in
his ministration, North or South, nor such like: yet, this is manifest, even by
the Replyers own confession, that orders necessary for the church, to unity
in like precious faith of the same holy doctrine and good conversation, by, and
in obedience to that doctrine, by the ministry temporary of Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, and perpetual, of Pastors and Teachers, are
established by our Savior Christ. To the other place, alleged by the
declaration, which is the 12. of the former epist. to the Corinthes, he takes
the same exceptions. Wherein, confessing, as he must needs, express mention
of governors, yet, he would not have this neither to be to the purpose,
because (says he) here is mention of Governors, but what kind of
governors: and whether any more gouuernours then the rest, here mentioned, or
by what kind of government they are to direct the Church, it is not said.
True it is, for all things are not spoken in every place: but here appears,
that there are Governors appointed for the Church. Which being so, it
necessarily follows, that there is a government left unto the Church.

For his second question, the name of governors peculiarly given to these,
shows that they are rather appointed for government, then the rest: which
being from God, it is plain, the government must be, according to his word:
which is answer to another of his questions. For his other question, which
governors are here meant, Master Beza says, By governors, are meant the
Elders, who had the charge to see this ecclesiastical Discipline kept and
observed. But, to satisfy him, not with authority but with proof and reason,
he is to consider, that, as governors are here only named, without further
mention of their office, or manner of government, so are also Apostles,
Prophets, Doctors, and other like gifts and offices. For the purpose of the
Apostle is here, to exhort, to such a use of all the gifts and ministeries and
powers bestowed upon the Church (for all these are generally named in the
beginning of the chapter) as might most further love, edification, and good
order in the church: which being the purpose of the Apostle in this place, he
was not to stand upon every several gift, ministry, and faculty to show
what they were, and to declare whatsoever might be said of them. This had bin
wholly from the matter he intended, So as, it suffiseth him to name only the
things, to the right use whereof he exhorts. For, the things them selves
were sufficiently known by their names, to those to whom he wrote, and needed
no further discourse to make them understand him. If a letter were directed to
a City in the behalf of their Prince, which declaring to them, that the
offices and powers they have, the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and such like,
they are granted and given them, by free donation and by charter from the
Prince, and that therefore they are not to abuse their places, to the
oppressing or envying one of another, but to the furtherance of the service of
their Lord, and the mutual benefit and aid one of another, which were the
ends, for which those privileges and honors have bin bestowed upon them: no
Man of the city could doubt at that time, who were meant by the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and other Officers named in the letter, notwithstanding the office
of the Mayor and the rest were not laid out wherein they stood, and what
duties belonged unto them, with such like matters, but by their names would
easily understand what offices were meant. But if many years after, the
government of the city being altered, and the state of it oppressed and
tyrannised by ambitious men, who by still and soft motions had cunningly
turned all the course of it, ere they were espied: the Citizens, in the time of
a gracious Prince, should sue to have their Charter renewed again, and
allege, that they had of ancient time such Officers, A Mayor, Sheriffs, and
such like, in their Corporation, proving it, amongst other Records, by such a
letter, in the Reign of such a King sent unto them: then in deed might grow
question, what offices were noted by those names, and what their government
and office had bin in times past. Which, being so doubted of, could no way more
readily be answered, then by ancient Rolls, Charters and Records of that
age, showing, in such a time, a Mayor lawfully, by virtue of his office, to
have done such and such things. Whereby it might appear what manner of office
that had bin. This case is as like ours here in question of Pastors, Teachers,
Elders and Deacons, as any man's countenance may be like another. For the
Church, as the City of GOD, had offices sometimes bestowed upon it, which
Christ JESUS the King thereof, had given it, soon after his ascension into
heaven, at the time of his Coronation, and entringe into the possession of his
kingdom: which offices it enjoyed for a season, but afterward was subtely
oppressed and tyrannised by those, who should most of all and chiefly have
preserved the liberty thereof.

But now, the Citizens of Sion with us, discerninge of the gracious Prince,
and time, that GOD has given, make their suit, for renewinge their Charter
again: and that the offices which by our Savior Christ, were of ancient
time granted to the Church, may be restored. In which suit, to show that
such offices were sometimes in the church, we show this Record of the
Apostle: who, exhorting all to use their gifts and offices, which they have
received of one GOD, one Lord, and one Spirit, to the honor of the same one
Lord that gave them, and their own mutual help and comfort, namely, the
gifts and offices which had been bestowed upon them. Wherein, we finding
Gouuernours named, show it for good evidence, that this was an office and
gift amongst the rest, which was granted to the Church, and therefore
pray that we may have it restored again.

Now, to Replye to this, that here is not declared, what these Governors are
in this place mentioned, is no sufficient replye to us, the evidence being
full, and strong, for this, that sometimes the Church by the gift of our
Savior Christ, had governors.

But whereas it is demanded, what governors these were, and what office is
noted by this name, we answer, that the office of Elders is noted by it. For
proof whereof, we show the monumentes and writings of that time. Whereby it
appears, that this name was peculiarly given to those, who are in other
places called Elders, to whom, belonged, the power of gouuernement: whereby,
in this place, they are noted. This appears in the 12. Chapter to the
Romans, where they are called [proistamenoi,] that is, such as were set over
the Church, for the guydinge and directing of it: and in the fifte of the
former Epistle unto Timothy, they are likewise named [Presbyteroi,] that is,
Elders. To the which Elders, together with the Ministers of the word,
(making the whole assembly of the Eldershippe) is given, that power, that is
chiefest, and most principal in the Church is committed to them, as of
imposing and laying on of hands, upon such as are ordained for the ministry
of the word, to bind and to loose the sinner, to lock him up in the Lords
prison, or to let him out, and restore him into the liberty of the sons of
God, as he may be repentaunt or unrepentant. Thus, this place serves to prove
that, fitly, which he denies, that is, the office of Elders, or governors in
the Church, and besides, (which the Replier has taken no heed to) the office
of Deacons also, who are noted by the name of helpers, as Master Beza plainly
expounds it, saying by helpers he notes the office of Deacons, and as may be
showed, by like proof, as has bin made of the office of Elders. Thus have we
the whole Discipline, proved by these places, the first, showing the offices of
the Ministry of the word Pastors and Teachers: the other, the rest of the
public charges, that is, Elders and Deacons: In the due vocation to which
offices, and execution of the same, the whole policy, order and government
of the Church consists. Which, if any man can not, or will not see, we are
to leave him, to him, that opens the eyes of the blind, and shuts up
theirs, who seeinge will not see, and so proceed to that which follows.

After the first point of the Discipline or policy of the Church, which is,
that there are appointed of our Savior Christ, some to have care of others,
and to bear public office and charge in the Church, the Declaration adds
this, agreeing alike to all the guydes and servants of the church, that, they
are to be ordained, to th'attendance and service of some particular Church,
wherein they are to exercise and execute that office, which they are to be
appointed unto: as countries, cities, or Towns may be best divided for the
purpose: Which is proved by these two places of Scripture, Act. 14.23. and
Titus 1.5. which the Replyer makes the next section. A part of his Reply to
it, is spent in seeking out the meaning of the Declaration. Whereof yet, in the
end, by the suit of the matter, and coherence of the words, as he says, he
resolves, as he might have done, if it had pleased him, at the first, what the
Declaration intends, and judges rightly of the meaning of it in part: but
in some other goes as far from it, as if he were disposed to go out of his
way, when he might see it lie straight before him. For he gathers, that
some of those, who are to have charge in the Church, should be set over whole
Countries, some other over Cities, and some over Towns. Wherein it is not
hard to guess what led him, in this place, as it does in many other, out
of the way: but, hardly is he like to find such a Bishoprike, or
Archbishoprike, as he would have, let him seek it as long as he will in the
Declaration: The words whereof are very plain to the contrary. For, it is
said, that they all that have any charge or Ministry in the Church, should be
distributed and limited, for execution thereof, to certain places or particular
churches. It is added there in deed, that they should be so distributed,
according to the division of Regions, Cities, and Towns, but meaning nothing
les, then as the Replyer would gather, that some should be set over whole
countries, as Diocesses, and Provinces. Which appears in that it affirms
directly the contrary, that is, that they are to serve particular Churches or
Parishes. As for that there is added, according to the division of Regions,
Cities, and Towns, it has this sense, that the particular Churches or
Parishes are to be divided, according to the divisions of Countries, Cities,
and Towns, that is, that according as there may be more or fewer particular
Churches in one town, city or country by a convenient distribution of them,
so fit men should be ordained to those callings or Ministeries, more or
fewer, as the use and service of the particular Churches in them should
require, til all might be sufficiently furnished. And, this is it, that the
Declaration says, order and necessity requires. So as the Replier has wholly
mistaken his mark, and the matter, in this place yet labors he to persuade
him self, that he has found the right sense by the places quoted for proof of
this doctrine. Wherein it appears, how hardly a man shall find way again,
that has once lost it. For the 14. of the Acts, he says confirms
directly his sense, but shows no reason how any man but him self can so
gather of it, whereas it most plainly teaches the contrary, it being there
said, that the Elders were ordained in every particular Church, church by
Church. Therefore not finding any reason to prove his sense, he turns him
self to another matter, of election and ordination in whose power they should
be. Which, because it belongs to an other place, where he promises to
allege this proof again, I refer the answer to the same. The other
example, he says, does most apparantlie confirm the same his construction,
taking hold of that it is said, Paul left Titus in Creta to ordain Elders:
for which belike he thought it to be alleged, which is not so, but for the
other words following, of Elders to be appointed in every City, city by
city. As for the Bishoprike of Creta, or rather Archbishopricke, as he likes
better to term it after, that he would gather out of this place, and the
subscription of that Epistle, because it is impertinent to this place, and that
he promises not to let this hold of a Bishopric or Archbishopricke go
thus, but to take better hold of it in another place: I think good to let him
alone, till he have taken his sure hold, that he do not complain that he was
taken at an advantage. Thus we have nothing in this Section, but impertinences
and ouersightes, which are too many and to gross, though no man but him self
had looked to this business, and none other, had regarded a defense that
concerns the whole Hierarchy and their Jurisdiction.

The next point, set down in the Declaration, is, of the sundry kinds of
Ministry, that are in the Church. This, the replyer divides into three
Sections: whereof the first propounds the number of all such ministeries, as
have at any time bin in the Church of Christ, the second proves some of them
to have bin temporary and ordained to continue but for a season, and the
third concludes, which are perpetual, and appointed to abide for ever.

To the first part, the only reply that is made, is, that more offices and
gifts then are named in the Declaration, have bin in the Church. Whereupon he
concludes nothing to the present matter, but rests contented with this,
that he have any thing, wherein to reprove the declaration. But, what just
cause of reproof he has, may be considered by his reason. His reason is, that
the number of gifts and offices, reckoned up in the Declaration, agrees not
with the text, wherein there are more named. If this were true, it imports
smallie the matter in question, except they be of other sort and kind then
these are of, which are mentioned. But how proves he more? In the 12. to the
Romans, says he, there are reckoned seven by the Apostle, whereof he
renders no reason in this place, where it had bin fittest: but in his Replye
to the next section, shows how he would raise up six out of that, wherein
he seems to have forgotten he had before reckoned seven. Of the six he
takes four, which the Declaration notes, that is, Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, and Deacons: the other two he makes office, and shewer of mercy. But
for office, he is to understand, it is there no name of any special charge,
but a general name, comprehendinge under it two special kinds of Ministeries
which are not Prophets, that is, Governors, and Deacons. For, as Prophecy
is in that place the general name to contain the two offices of the
Ministry of the word: so is the name of office, or, as the Apostle there
calls it Deaconshippe, a general, to the other special charges, which deal
not with the Ministry of the word. So as he might as well have reckoned
prophecy as office or Deaconshippe, and have had his whole number of seven.
But, there is no cause, for the reason I have showed, why he should allege
either of them both. The other which he brings in, to make up his account of
six, is of those that show mercy, who did bear no several office, but were
such of the Deacons, as regarded especially those poor ones, that beside
their poverty, were also in some affliction, by sickness or other like misery.
Thus can there not be found in this place, any more special and several
kinds of offices, then only the Pastor, noted by the name of Exhorter, the
Teacher, the Elder, called Governor or Ouerseer, and Deacon termed
Distributor. The next place, alleged for the proof of these offices set
down in the Declaration, is, 1. Corint. 12. verse. 28. Wherein, because he
finds not, besides the other, named in the other places, quoted in the
Declaration, but only three, which are there also mentioned, that is, the
gifts of healing, of powers or miracles, and of tongues, he says, that
beginning at the 8. verse of that chapter, he finds nine more which were not
before named in the 12. to the Roman. and in the 1. Cor. 12.28. two or three,
not before mentioned, and in the 4. to the Ephesians, 4. or 5. more, and so
says he there are more, then as many more again as are reckoned in the
Declaration to be found, even in these places: besides those that are
mentioned in the other. In which Replye he did warily not to name them, as he
did in the 12. to the Romans, which he takes to be mentioned by the Apostle,
and pretermitted in the Declaration. For them he might soon have bin
answered, as he has bin of the other: that either he mistaketh generals for
specials, or makes a difference of sundry kinds of offices where none is.
Now therefore, till he show what they are, this may suffice him for answer.

In the next Section the Declaration having already said, that the gifts and
offices given to the church were these, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
gifts of healing, of miracles, of tongues, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and
Deacons, proceeds to show which of these were temporary, and given but for
to continue a certain time: and which were perpetual, to remain for ever.
Of the former sort are showed to have bin the six here first named, which is
proved by the ceasinge of the gifts, and the use of those offices: both which
ceasing manifestly declare, that such offices were but to continue by the
ordinance of God for a ceason. These are the general reasons, which in the
handling of the particulars are enforced by sundry other proofs, agreeing to
the special offices of the Apostles, Evangelists, and the rest. The first
matter he excepteth against here, is, that such offices and gifts as have bin
said to be but temporary, and to have ceased since the time of the primitive
Church, were not such, neither have ceased, but have bin since that time, and
some (says he, returninge to this point again, after he had left it) are yet
remaining. For instance of that he speaks of here in this place, he names
power to work miracles, which diverse (says he) of the papists had: he
names also the gift of speaking strange tongues, without study, which one
Anthony (he says) was endued with, etc. Of prophecy which diverse had
amongst the Fathers, the Papists and us, which is much more true, of the gift
of healing. For answer to this (I say) he needed to have showed good
authority for these matters, our credulity being not so great, as upon his
bare word, to believe matters so strange, and almost incredible. But I
suppose he thought he should bring small credit and honor to his proof, by
alleging his Authors. For, what other Author could he name us, for popish
miracles, but the lying Legende, as it is commonly and truly named, A book
(as one worthily said of it) whose author was of an iron face, and a leaden
heart, that is, a foolish and an impudent man. And for the rest, what other
author but either the same, or some at least, in some points, as fabulous,
and of as little truth as that, except per adventure of the gift of prophecy,
he may show some extraordinary example or two, which touches not the point
handled in the Declaration, which is, that these gifts were neither ordinary
nor perpetual. His second objection to this part is, that there were more
gifts in the primitive Church, then are named in the Declaration: a matter
which he has bin about to prove before, and now returns unto again, which
yet if he could prove, might peradventure show, that there are more gifts
ceased, then are mentioned in the Declaration, but that there are any more
perpetual, then are mentioned by it, or that any of those are ceased, which
are there said to remain for ever, it proves not. But let us see, how he
proves this: In the 12. to the Romans (says he) there are two more named,
that is, office and showing of mercy, this has bin answered already before.
Further in the 1. Corin. the 12. Chap. he moves many questions to little
purpose. For answer to all which he is to understand, that The Apostle
mentions not any gifts here, that are peculiar gifts, whereof the question
is, but such as either are named again in the 28. verse, or are contained
under some of them, or of the same sort and kind that they are of. So the
gift of knowledge and wisdom, though now given by ordinary means of
study, is that, which belongs to the Pastors and Teachers, whose office
being perpetual, the gift also continues. Faith is not any peculiar gift,
but common to all the Church, and therefore not to this question: The gift of
miracles is named in the other place, so is prophecy and tongues, which here
as a general contains also under it the interpretation of them here
mentioned, as the power of miracles does the gift of discerning spirits: which
may satisfy him for this matter of the offices, which have ceased, and have
no further use in the Church. Whereof, he confessing some reason to have bin
rendered by the Declaration, demands, what is alleged, for the perpetuity
of those, that are said to continue: none, says he but this, that either they
are temporary, or perpetual, but not temporary, therefore perpetual. Which
reason, he grants to be good, if the parts were good, meaning, as it
seems, that, that sentence, wherein it is said, they are not temporary,
wants proof. Whereof, he might easily discern the proof, seeing it was
said, that the temporary ceased, because the gifts necessary for the
execution of them is ceased, and for that the use of them is gone. If then,
there be perpetual and necessary use of these offices in the Church, and
that, the gifts whereby men may be enabled, for the due performance of such
charges, do yet, and shall still continue: then it is plain, that these and
these only, of all the offices, given at any time to the Church, are
perpetual, and to remain for ever. But it is true, that the use of all and
every one of these four offices is necessary for the Church, and the gifts
are yet given by ordinary means, whereby men may be enabled for them, which
is not so any other. Therefore these, and these only are perpetual. The
necessary use of the most of these offices, I think, I shall not need to
labor much to prove. For it is manifest, and as I take it, without question
between us, that the calling of Pastoures is necessary, as without which,
the Church is as a flock of sheep without a shephearde. Which, if it were
denied, might be proved by the duties of his calling, and the indisposition
of men to godliness, through the corruption of nature. For men being stubburne
and disobedient by nature, are to be feared with the terror of Gods heavy
judgment, threatened to sinners, that they may yield obedience unto his holy
commandments. We are slow to every thing that is good, even after we have
received some measure of grace: and therefore need exhortation, to stir us up
to a cherefulnes and readiness to do the will of God. In afflictions we are
often cast down above measure: and therefore need the comfort and consolation
of the Scriptures, to give us hope. The same may be said, of an infinite
number of other our infirmities, according to the condition and quality,
whereof we need to have the word of GOD applied unto us. Which application
belonging to the Pastors duty, it is plain, there is most necessary use of
his office and service in all ages, and therefore perpetual, and to continue
for ever.

The administration of the Sacraments being the ordinance of God, and a duty
which the Pastor is charged with, does in like manner declare, that office to
be most necessary. But, this I think will not be denied. Of the Teachers
office, there is more question made: yet the Replyer, howsoever at some other
times, he affirm the contrary, in the 62. page of his reply, says
expreslie, Teachers are always necessary for the instruction of doctrine and
documentes of life. And again, in the page 67. grants perpetuity of
teaching. But, if he will construe his meaning to be in these words, not, of
that particular office that we affirm, which stands in doctrine, but
generally of the Ministry, and of the Pastors office: yet is it to be
noted, that he grants, enforced by the clear truth thereof, that the
teaching of doctrine, and documents of life, is necessary. But this is the
special office that the Apostle declares, to belong to the Teacher. Moreover,
the necessity of teaching is to be argued, by the ignorance which is natural
in us. For the remedy and help whereof there is need of a Teacher, who may
especially regard, the bringing of the people to the true knowledge of God,
and the understanding of his will. Which ignorance, wherein all men are borne,
being in danger to be increased, by sundry means, which may draw men from
heavenly wisdom, yea though her messengers cease not to call in the highest
streets and places of the City, as by the cares and pleasures of this life:
likewise also by the deceytes of erroures, through the manifold practices of
Satan, and his instruments, and by many other occasions: the necessity
hereof is the more plain and evident. For, so long as men are subject, to
these things, it must be confessed, that they can not be, without fit means,
for the remedy hereof: or, that the Church is miserably destituted, if it
want helps, which are needful.

Now the gifts, needful for either of these callinges, are the word, or
speech of wisdom and knowledge, as The Apostle names them, which experience
teaches, to be given by ordinary means. Therefore, the necessity and
perpetuity of these two ministeries, besides the authorities of the
scriptures, whereon they are grounded, is to be acknowledged, for the reasons
mentioned. The necessity of the Deacons likewise appears in that it is said:
You shall have always the poor with you. For, the institution of Deacons,
being for the comfort and succor of the poor, and such as are in misery, so
long, as there continewe such in the Church, which will be to the end of the
world: There must needs be, use of the help, and service, of the Deacons,
who may relieuet hem. But, of this public Ministry and charge, the
necessity and perpetuity of it, the Replyer seems to make no great
question, or rather to confess it. The great question is, of the Elders,
concerning whom it is to be considered, that they are appointed in their
special charge, to keep good watch over the life and conversation of the
people: to see what fruit they yield of the teachinge, exhortations, and such
like duties which are done to them, by the Ministers of the word: to the
end, that they being well instructed, of the proceeding, stay, or slyding
back of any, may the more fitly apply them selves and their labors, for
their instruction and stirring up, to go forwards in the ways of the Lord.
Likewise also they are to understand, what offenses arise in the Congregation,
that order may be taken for them, as appertains, These, and such like
duties, are incident into the charge of the Elders, as may appear by the
places, where mention is made of them, and namely by the 12. to the Romans,
and the 5. of the first epistle to Timothy, wherein being termed Elders, and
Ouer-seers, or Governors, and expreslie shut out from the ministry of the
word: it appears, their charge stands in matters of life and conversation:
there being no other thing but doctrine or life, whereof there should be
Ouer-seers or Gouuernours.

Now, as they have these duties, especially lying upon them, so, as
necessary parts of the Seniorie or Eldershippe, they have power, to deal in
the chiefest matters, belonging to the Church: as, in the censures, and in the
calling of the Ministers of the word, and in making constitutions and orders
meet for the Church whereof they are Elders: which duties are showed to
belong unto them, both by ancient presidentes of th'Elders, that were of the
Sinagogues of the Jews, and by express places of the new Testament, where,
these things are attributed unto them: namely in the 18. of Mat. the 15. of
the Acts, and the 4. of the second epistle unto Tim. Which being so, the
necessity of this calling in the Church, must needs be exceeding great. For
otherwise, what shall become of these duties, which are so necessary in the
Church: it being not lawful to have them done, by any other, then such as God
has appointed for that purpose. Thus the necessity and perpetuity of these
offices, do appear. But, if this do not suffice, let him look upon the 28.
of the Gospel, written by the Evangelist Matthewe, and the 6. of the former
Epist. to Tim. In the former of these two places, it is thus written, 18.19.
and 20. verse. Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given me in
heaven and in earth: go therefore, and teach all Nations baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Teachinge them to
observe all things what soever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you
always unto the end of the world, Amen. Wherein the time when our Savior spoke
this, is to be considered: which was, after his resurrection, and upon his
ascension into heaven, after he had 40. days long, as it is written in the
first of the Acts, instructed his Disciples of such things, as concerned his
kingdom. Whereinto it can not be denied, but the whole policy and Discipline
of the Church belongs, containing the laws and statutes of our Savior, for
the calling of any, to charge, in his Church, and, the due execution of the
same. For as the laws of a kingdom, appointing all the officers of the
Crown, and all other inferior Magistrates, with declaration of the order of
their calling, the duties of their places, and the manner of proceedinge, in
the execution of the same, can not be denied, to belong, to the state of that
kingdom: no more can the Discipline be said, not to pertayne to the
spiritual kingdom of Christ. Otherwise, the greatest, and most weighty
matters that are done by his authority, shall be said, not to belong to his
kingdom: as, to appoint and execute public charges, to censure, to
excommunicate, and such like. In a temporal and earthly kingdom, it would be
an absurd thing, in the judgment of all men of understanding, to say, the
appointing of Magistrates, their number, the bounds and limitations of their
power, their order to proceed by, to the casting of subjects into prison, and
the putting of them to death: did nothing belong to the state of a kingdom,
whereas in deed, these are principal effects of the power and authority of
the King, and most naturally, and essentiallie belonging to the state of his
kingdom. So can it not be less absurd, to deny the like, to pertayne to the
power and kingdom of our Savior Christ. For the Ministers of the word, the
Elders appointed for oversight, and the Deacons for the poor, are the officers
which our Savior Christ has ordained, to guide the Church under his
authority, the censures are the punishementes of his disobedient subjects,
separation from the Lords table, as commandment out of his presence to
ward, excommunication as sentence of death. Wherefore, it must needs be, that
the appointing of the number, and kinds of public charges in the Church, the
limiting of their power, the order, for their proceeding to separation from the
Lords table, and to excommunication, must needs be, things belonging to the
kingdom of our Savior Christ. Which being (as I think it must needs be)
confessed, then it follows, that our Savior Christ within those 40. days,
next before his ascension into heaven, wherein, as the Evangelist Luke says,
he instructed his Disciples, of those things, that belong to his kingdom,
informed them what public functions he appointed for the governance of the
Church, how many, and of what power every one should be, and in what order, and
upon what causes, they should proceed to excommunication, and the other
censures. Which granted, as in any sound judgment it can not be denied,
then consequently these are also of the things which our Savior Christ
commanded the Apostles, to teach such to observe, as they should make
Disciples. Further, it may appear, that our Savior Christ, in these words,
teach them, to observe all things, which I have commanded you, comprehends
also the policy of the Church, by the order of the matters, here mentioned by
the Evangelist. For, it is said, that our Savior first speaking of his fulness
of power, which he had given him in heaven and earth, to assure them, that
he had authority to command them, to do these things, and ability to
assiste and prosper them, in so doing: First, charged them, to preach the
word, then, to minister the Sacraments (for that is expreslie said of the
one, is of like to be gathered of the other in this respect) and in the end,
to teach the Disciples to observe all things, that he had commanded. Which
tenor and course of speech, shows, that he spoke to them, of the Discipline.
For, besides the ministry of the word, and of the Sacraments, what other
things are there belonging to the kingdom of Christ, but the Discipline. This
being then thus sufficiently proved, that the Discipline of the Church, is a
part, at the least, of those things, which our Savior Christ, in this place,
is said to have commanded his Apostles to teach their Disciples, to observe:
I proceed further, to show the perpetuity of these foresaid public
charges of the Church, which is the thing I have in hand. The Evangelist
says, that our Savior added to his former charge and commandment, a most
comfortable promise, saying, Behold I am with you always, to the finishinge
of the world. Which words can not be understood, of the Apostles only,
because they, as it is said of David, after they had served their time, they
died. Whereby it is of necessity to be understood, that our Savior
promises, to be with them, for their time, and after also with such, as by
their doctrine should be his Disciples, to the end of the world. Now, to be
with them is a promise of prospering, and blessing to his Church, the
ministry of such holy things, as he had commanded them, to teach the
Disciples to observe. Which may appear by the Evangelist Mark, who declaring
the performance of this promise to the Apostles, says, That they went and
preached, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by signs that
followed. The meaning therefore of the promise is, that the Lord would bless
the Ministry of the word, th'administration of the Sacraments, and the
observation of the Discipline which he had delivered them to the good of his
church, in their hands for their time, in such sort, as the quality of their
Apostolical calling did require, in extraordinary gifts and assistance: and
after, in the hands of such, as should be appointed for the ordinary service
of his people, according as their ordinary functions should need, even to the
end of the world. Which can not be, if the offices he appointed, were but
temporary, and not perpetual. Therefore, I conclude, that the ministry of
the word by Pastors and Teachers, the oversight of the church, by Elders,
th'attendance of the poor by Deacons, being the necessary and ordinary
functions and offices which our Savior has instituted and ordained in his
Church, and having promise of blessing from the Lord in their due
administration to the end of the world, they are also perpetual, and to
continue for ever: which may be further also confirmed in that our Savior, in
the 18. of Matthewe declares the effect of this promise to belong
particularly, to the execution of the Discipline. For there our Savior
appointing a proceeding for the remedy of offenses, says: And if he refuse
to hear them, tell it unto the Church: and if he refuse to hear the Church
also, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and as a publicane. Verily I say
unto you, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Again, Verily I say unto you,
that if two of you shall agree in earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall
desire, it shall be given them of my Father which is in heaven. For where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the mids of them.

Whereby, as it is manifest that the execution and Discipline is of the things
which our Savior has commanded, who says expreslie, tell the Church, so is
it plain, to be within this promise, of his presence and assistance, directly
promising, that when they shall meet together in his name, that is, by his
authority, for such purpose, and call upon him, he will be in the midst of
them, and authorize their due proceedings: binding and loosing in heaven, that
which upon earth they shall so do, according to his appointment. Moreover, for
further proof of the perpetuity of these foresaid public functions in the
Church, it is plain, that the Apostle writing to Timothy, to teach him how
to behave him self in the Church, which is the house of the living God:
instructs him, of all these offices, that is, of the Ministers of the word,
both Pastors and Teachers, and of the Elders and Deacons. For the Ministers of
the word, it is clear, in that he requires in every one to be called to
that ministry an ability to teach, which is, as he expounds it to Titus,
to deliver sound, that is holy and true doctrine. That both kinds of Ministers
are here to be understood, may appear by this, that the Apostles rules there,
are general of all the Ministers of the word, as his indifinite speech in a
general matter declares. But Pastors and Teachers also are the ordinary
officers appointed for the ministry of the word, to the Church, as appears
by the 12. to the Roman. Therefore, both Pastors and Teachers are comprehended
there, by the Apostle. Further, it will not be denied, but that this speech in
the 1. to Tit. is of the same ministers, which he speaks of here, but there
he notes both kinds, as it may apeare by mention of exhortation, the special
property of the Pastor, and of conuictio^, a peculiar part of the office of the
Teacher: therefore in the place mentioned to Tim. both kinds of Ministers of
the word, Pastors and Teachers are comprehended. That in the other name of
Deaco^s they are included, whose special name this is in the church, I think it
is not doubted. Now that elders are there also co^prehe^ded by that name, thus
I prove: The Elders office is an ordinary office in the Church, as appears in
the 12. to the Rom, and in the 5. of this epist. where it is playnlie noted,
that there are Elders (which name particularly is never given to such as by
their proper name are called Deacons) for direction of the Church, who deal
not with the Ministry of the word, as if the Apostle had said, but only with
the oversight of conversation. If it be so, then in an instruction which
The Apostle would give to Timothy, how to behave him self in all matters of
charge in the church, they can not be pretermitted. But they can not be here
contained under the name of Bishops, because teaching is required of them,
which belongs not to the Elders, as is declared in the 5. chap. following.
Therefore it must needs be they are to be understood under the name of
Deacons. Moreover in so general an instruction for ordering the house of God,
it is to be confessed that in these two names of Bishops and Deacons, the
Apostle co^prehendeth all the offices of the church as in the 1. to the Phil.
ver. 1. Paul and Timothy the servants of Jesus Christ to all the Saints, in
Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons: and in the
12. to the Rom: But he conteyneth not Elders under Bishops, for the reason
alleged therefore under Deacons: And to make all plain, in the 12. to the
Romans the Apostle containing all the functions under Prophets and Deacons,
divides Prophets into exhorters and teachers, and Deacons into Elders and
distributers: expreslie noting, when the name of Deacon is opposed to another
name, co^teyning the Ministers of the word, and is taken generally for all the
offices, not dealing with the Ministry of the word, that th'elders are
contained under this name. Furthermore, in the 5. cha. of this epist. he makes
mention of Elders that have oversight over the congregation, both in things
that concern the word, and also of other things besides the word, which
must needs be of conversation and life, there being nothing but these two,
doctrine, and life, whereof general direction and care should be taken. Being
then expreslie named by the Apostle in the aforesaid 5. Chapter, as one kind
of public charge in the Church, it can not be, that the Apostle forgot, or
pretermitted this kind in the third going before, where he gives rules for
the qualifications, requisite in every one that should be called to public
charge in the Church. But in the name of Bishopps they can not be understood,
for the property of teaching required in them, which is not so in the Elders,
as it is in the 5. chapter: therefore they are comprehended under the general
name of Deacons. Howsoever it be, yet can it not be denied, that Elders are
named in the 5. chap. as a kind of public charge in the Church.

Now I add, that the instructions which the Apostle had given to Timothy,
concerning the ministry of the word, both Pastors and Teachers, under the
name of Bishops, and concerning Elders and Deacons, partly under the name of
Deacon, common to them both, and particularly by the name of Elder, touching
such as are so specially called, are perpetual and to be followed, and kept
without default in any part, to the glorious coming again of Christ to
judgment. For proof whereof, I rehearse the very words of the Apostle: I
charge thee in the sight of God who quickens all things, 1. Tim.
6.13.14.15.16.
and before Jesus Christ, which under Pontius Pilate professed a worthy
profession, That thou keep these commandments without spot and unrebukable,
until the appearing of our Lord JESUS Christ. Which in due time he shall
show, that is blessed and Prince only the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
who only has immortality and dwells in the light that none can attain
unto, whom never man saw, unto whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.

I am not ignorant what exceptions are taken to this place, but the answer to
them, clears all such doubts. So as I doubt not but the indifferent Reader,
consideringe the reasons on all parts, will find, that this so earnest charge
and obtestation is to be extended to all the points of that Epistle.
Especially concerning the ordering of the Church. For which end, as the
Apostle plainly declares, that he wrote it, so having finished his
instructions concerning that matter, seals them up with such a seal, as
declares, that he, which shall offend against them, shall sin against the
commandment of the Lord of life, and against the example of the lord Jesus,
both whose vengeance and punishment, he is to fear, at the glorious coming of
the lord again to judgment. And again, if any man for the duetiful keeping of
those co^mandementes shall suffer, yea though it be to death, he is to be
assured, to receive his life again of the Commau^der of these things, who
quickens the dead, and following the example of that worthy profession made
by our Savior Christ, is to receive immortality and honor for ever, at his
glorious appearinge, which shall be as certainly performed, as he (in whose name
these things are denounced and promised) is the blessed and only Prince, King
of Kings, Lord of Lords, only immortal, to whom belongs honor and
strength everlasting, Amen. Thus the perpetuity of these offices is proved by
these reasons and authorities: I would to God, the necessary and perpetual
use of them, were not also manifest, by the woeful and lamentable experience of
such Churches, as do want them: according as their wantes are, either of all,
or of some, in part or altogether. Of the ignorance of the people, in things
concerning godliness and religion, what other cause can be assigned it, but that
they want godly learned Ministers of the word amongst them. Teachers to
instruct them in sound and holy doctrine, and Pastors to exhort them
according to it. If it be, life everlasting to know the only true God, John
17.3.
and who^ he has sent Christ JESUS, and, if the want of the knowledge of God
be damnable, as it is said, That the servant not knowing his Masters will,
Luke 12.
and therefore not doing it shall be beaten: and again, That the Lord when he
shall come with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, shall punish those, who
have not known God: surely then, the means which God (who would have all
men saved and come to the knowledge of the truth) has appointed for that
purpose: 1. Tim. 2.4.
is most needful to continue, both for the honor of GOD, and the salvation
of the people. Which means, being the offices of Pastors and Teachers,
nothing can be more necessary, then th'establishing of them in all places, and
continuing of the same successively to the end of the world. The same is to
be said of the other offices. All manner of offenses are committed, and remain
without redress, at the least without redress sufficient, and such as God
has appointed, to the infinite dishonor of God and disedification of the
Church where there are not Elders, nor Overseers, that in conscience, of the
calling and ordinance of God, may look unto it. In like manner the poor, can
not by any, never so wise, and politic laws of men be provided for, where
the Deacons, Fathers, and Tutours of the poor, appointed of God, in conscience
of his commandment, and their most bounden duty to him, attend not upon
the poor. Which apparauntlie testifies, the necessary and perpetual use of
them. Therefore, to conclude this point, I say, th'ignorance, the offenses, in
every sort most lamentable to behold, Atheism, profanenes, security,
blasphemy, horrible oaths, not far blasphemy, neglect, yea contempt of the
Sabbath day, the dishonor of all to whom honor is due, the murders,
adulteries, robberies, periuries, the swarms of rogues and beggars, their
dying in the fields under hedges, and in Towns and Cities, at the doors, cry
with a loud voice unto God, and all lawful authority under him, that for
want of the preachinge of the word, they perish, for lack of it they dye in
their ignorance and diverse sins, for default of the means that should bring
them to the knowledge of God and to repentance, default I say both of the
word taught and preached, and spiritual correction, yea their souls and their
bodies are destroyed, for want of the means, which God has ordained for the
salvation and comfort of them both. Whose cry the Lord in mercy hear in his
good time, and give to the higher powers also to hear it, and to take such
order for it, as may be most acceptable unto him, and most comfortable to his
people.

Thus far have I labored to show, the necessary and perpetual use of the
offices of the Ministers of the word, both Pastors and Teachers, of Elders
also and of Deacons. Wherewith I would end the answer to this section, but
that here is offered an occasion to speak a word or two more, to an other
matter in it.

The Declaration showing, that God withdrawing th'extraordinarie gifts of
healing, and such like, has withal showed that the offices depending upon
those gifts, should cease: rebukes it as a vanity in the papists to keep
still, Exorcistes and extreme Unction, and to speak with strange tongues,
which they have not by inspiration, and that without any interpretation, which
is expreslie forbidden. The Replyer, letting pass the rebuke, for the two
former points, for the third says he, belie not the Devil. Their fault was
not, that they spoke with strange tongues, which they had not by inspiration,
for if they had not had them by inspiration, and yet had they understood them,
and the people also, then had this bin no fault, except in speaking faulty
matter. These are the Replyers words: wherein he has little cause to use this
homely proverb against the Declaration. For it reports not untruly of them,
but charge them with vanity, for doing that, which they do in deed. So as,
if there be any fault here, it is not in speaking untruly of them, but, in
making that which is truly said they do, to be a fault which is none. But
this was only a quarrel picked to mainteyne speaking of Latin in the pulpit,
which the Replyer thought to be a little touched, in that the Papists are
charged with vanity for speaking with tongues, which they had not by
inspiration. Which if it be, for that cause a vanity in them, then the replier
thought, it would be gathered, to be as vain a thing in any other, that
having not the gift by inspiration no more then they, but only by study and
ordinary means, yet do use, to utter sentences in Latin and other tongues:
but co^monlie in Latin, for it is not every man's gift to understand greek and
Hebrewe, which he had good reason in deed to suppose. But how does he
answer the Declaration, which rests upon this reason, why it should be a
vanity in them, namely, because they have that tongue by study and not by
inspiration. Which is, as if it had bin more at large said, that being an
extraordinary gift, there might be yet some use for the miracle, to give
credit and do honor to that doctrine, which such a believer did profess:
but for a man that had bin trained up in school all his life, and had spent
many years in the University, to speak Latin in his sermon, as if it were a
miracle for a man, in twenty or thirty years so bestowed, to speak of him
self, or repeat out of other, a few sentences in Latin: could have no such
grace, nor use, no nor any good use, but only shows the vanity and folly
of the party that so speaks. To this reason he makes no answer, but only
says, it was no fault in them, (although they had them not by inspiration, if
both they and the people understood them) to speak with strange tongues. But
it is not enough for him to say so, with a bare word, he had need to have
showed, some good reason, to mainteyne it, the argument of the Declaration
being so strong to the contrary as it is. He could not also be ignorant,
that The Apostle reproves this ostentation in those of Corinth, who yet had it
by extraordinary gift, as a childishe folly in them, saying: Brethren, be not
children in understanding: how much more then is it worthy of that reproof
in such, 1. Cor. 13.20
as have it not by that means. In the same place The Apostle notes out of the
Prophet, that it was a punishment, 1. Cor. 14.21 Esai 28.11.
threatened from God, to speak to men in a strange tongue: so little cause they
had to glory in that abuse. After also he says, 1. Co. 14.22.
that the use of tongues, was to the infidel and unbeliever, as by the
miracle, to work in him some sense and reverence of the doctrine so
authorized, but not (says he) to the believer, for whom prophecy, that is
exposition of the holy Scriptures, in a tongue understood of all is
appointed. In the Church therefore it is impertinent to speak with strange
tongue. I speak tongues (says the Apostle in the same place) more then all
you do, yet had I rather speak in the Church five words to instruct other
with them, 1. Cor. 14.18.19.
then a thousand in a strange tongue. Wherein the modesty of the Apostle, and
his care of edifying of the Church appears. To which purpose also, he says
in another place, That he regarded not to be esteemed to know any thing
amongst them, but Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 2.1.2
and him crucified. The contrary therefore is, not to seek (as a man ought to
do) the honor only of Christ, and the edification of his Church, but
sauoureth of flesh and blood. For as it is well observed by Master Calvin, of
worthy memory, the Apostles voluntary absteyning from speaking with tongues,
Calvin co^menta. in 1. Cor. 14.19
who could have triumphed herein over them all, and his seeking to edify the
Church without all manner of pomp, conuinceth their swelling ambition who
affect the showing of them selves: whose authority, ought to draw them from
vanity. In like manner ought the perpetual and constant examples of all the
Prophets, of whom diverse, as it appears, had skill of sundry languages, and
of all the Apostles, who excelled all others herein. Of all which not one
appears, at any time, to have spoken, in his public ministry, in the
Congregation, with any other tongue, then the vulgar tongue of the people. No
more did our Savior him self, whose perpetual example in this, concerning
their Ministry, ought to be a rule to all those, who with modesty seek
th'edification of the Church. It may be added also herein, that the Fathers use
it not, nor the reformed Churches of this age: therefore, having not bin so
done by the Prophets, nor by the Apostles, nor by other in the primitive
Church, nor by the Fathers themselves, nor used by the best reformed Churches:
It were to be wished, that they, in whose favor the Replier makes this
answer, would rather conform them selves to the examples of all those, then
to the Church of Rome, where almost only this ostentation is used.

That part in the declaration which is made the next section, is the
conclusion, inferred of the former reason, that only Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, and Deacons remain and are to continue to the end, all other offices
being ceased, which were of special use, for a certain time, and of
extraordinary gifts for performance of them. Whereupon is inferred, that it
is needles, and unlawful, to institute anewe any other ministeries or charges
in the Church, beside the aforesaid offices, which are reco^mended by the
institution of God, and the practice both of the primitive church, and the best
reformed in this age, with the fruits of them in furthering of the gospel
amongst them, and the want of the like with us for default of the same. Upon
this sectio^ the Replier has written a long discourse, not only examining this
matters contained in it, and speaking to that purpose, but descanting in a
manner upon every word, tedious for extrauagant matters, and points impertine^t,
to the question in hand. Also for tautologies and repetitions, and much idle
speech, lengthned out with three or four of Aesopes fables, and such like
conceytes, as served the pleasant humor he is given unto. Which length of
handling matters had bin well bestowed, before he came to the conclusion, in
replying with sound and forcible reasons, to the points debated. But seeing it
is otherwise, I am to pray the readers patience, while I make that answer,
that is necessary, which I will do as shortly as I can, that I abuse not the
Reader, nor weary my self with following one, that will not keep his way. In
the words of the conclusion, to the number of four public charges of the
Church, he opposes contrary testimonies: the first whereof is, of a godly
Sermon, upon the twelft to the Romans, which, says he, names five. For
answer he is to understand, that the fifth, mentioned both there, and by that
Apostle, is comprehended under one of these four, that is, under the Deacons.
For they that show mercy are such of the Deacons, as regard and look to the
sick and afflicted with like misery, needing their help. The next, is of the
Scottish book of common prayers, out of which he would gather, that Teachers
are Doctors, as they are called there, into no necessary function in the
Church: because it is said there, concerning Teachers or Doctors in this
manner: We are not ignorant, that there is a fourth kind of Ministers left
unto the Church of Church, which is also very profitable where time and place
does permit: because it is said here, to be very profitable, where time and
place does permit, he gathers, there is no necessity of this office in the
Church, which is no good argument. For the same agrees to all the outward
policy of the Christ, and may be said of it, and yet not take away the
necessity of it, where it may conveniently be had. The Sacraments are left to
the church by our Savior Christ, and are very profitable where time and place
do permit. So was Circumcision the ordinance of God, and very profitable in
like manner, but sometime time and place permitted not to have it, as in the
desert. No more do they permit sometime the Sacraments to be ministered,
which are ordained by our Savior Christ, as in some grievous persecution, yet
are they the perpetual ordinances of the Lord, though not simply and
absolutely necessary to salvation: yet so necessary, as the contempt and
wilful neglect of them is damnable. Therefore this speech nothing impugneth the
ministry of the Teacher in the church. Nay contrariwise, it greatly
confirms both this and the rest. For, teaching this office, it acknowledges
it very profitable, and left by our Savior Christ, unto his Church, and to be
one of those four which are left, the other three being Pastors Elders and
Deaco^s. Whereby, as this charge, so all the rest, are plainly confirmed to be
very profitable, and to be left by Christ to his church for their edificatio^
and spiritual profit. Which book being the only book authorized for public
prayer in Scotland, and taken as he says, from the English Church at Geneua:
so carrying with it also th'allowance of the chosen company of our
countrie-men, then suffering for the Gospel, and of the Church of Geneua: I
doubt not, but so grave a testimony, with any godly wise Man, will carry more
credit and authority with it, to persuade men of th'ordinance of God in this
behalf, then not only all the iestes wherewith the Replyer scoffeth at them,
but then his most colorable reasons shall be able to prevail to the contrary.
Because there are four special public charges mentioned by the Declaration
(which is acknowledged also by the Churches of Scotland, of Geneua, and of
such of England, as were there for the Gospel) as this testimony declares,
and by the Churches of France, and the low Countries, (as has bin showed,
especially in that kind of th'Elders office, which is most impugned) the
Replyer calls them a Tetrarchie, and makes no end of this unsavory jesting
speech, forgetting th'exhortation (as it seems) which says, Colos. 4.6.
Let your spirit be gracious, seasoned with salt, giving grace and edification
to the hearers. But unfitly has he sought out this name for them out of the
Arches. For the Scripture, whose speech we are to follow, terms them not by
names carrying show of worldly rule and lordly commandment, which are given
to Magistrates, but terms them offices, ministeries, services, charges,
functions, and such like, and their work, not to rule and command, but to
serve, to guide, lead, ouersee, direct, and such like. These are also our
ordinary terms of them, wherein we rest, and leave all names of Arches, for
the Hierarchy, and degenerate Ministry, to whom they agree. Upon this
supposed difference of the Scottish Church, he takes occasion to enter into a
discreet and likely comparison of Pastors, Elders and Deacons, with the
Triumuirate, so called of Antonius Lepidus, and Augustus, who in the end drew
all to him self. Whereby he would breed a suspicion, of some secret
mischief, in mainteyninge the ministeries of these four public charges.
Whereof I can not see, what other gounde he can have, then that he hops,
belike, by so bold a calumniation, somewhat may cleave, at the least, in
minds apt for the purpose. What has come of this order in the Churches where
it is received, but the right service of God, sincerity of faith, good
examples, diligent preaching, due administering of the Sacraments, moderate
severity in censuring offenses: finally, the honor of God, of our Savior
Christ, of his Gospel, and of the Church? He might more justly fear this, in
the base ministry, that has left the preaching of the Gospel, and embraced
this present world. For, what is all that degenerate Hierarchy, but the image
of the beast, spoken of in the Revelation, Apo. 13.24.
the beast noting the Roman Empire, and the image of it, being the similitude
and likeness of the state and government of it, in the Church of Rome. Wherein
the Pope resembling Augustus Caesar the Emperor, and such as succeeded him:
the Cardinals are the image of those, by whose help he had oppressed the
former state of the Romans, and continued his tyranny over it, parting the
spoil with them: Archbi hops, and Bishops, other Magistrates of Provinces and
Countries. Which, as it began, in like manner, with oppressing the only lawful
policy and administration of the church, so the end of it has bin the most
proud and ambitious tyranny, that ever was in the world.

From this the Replier passes to that which is inferred upon the conclusion,
that is, that because these only are appointed of God, it is not lawful for
men to ordain any other besides these. In his replye to this, after he has
played a little (as he is often wont to do) with the lawless and needles
points, and demanded again warrant for these four public charges of the
Church, that we may have our quietus est of him, and such like pleasantnes of
speech: he repeateth again, a reason before alleged, Why these foresaid
functions are not therefore to be esteemed perpetual, because they were
ordained of God. His reason is, that the Priesthood of the Law, and the hie
charges of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, were also of God, and yet not
perpetual. But he should remember, the conclusion rises not of this only,
that these offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons were sometime
appointed of God: but that they were appointed for the certain standing and
ordinary offices of the Church, to abide for ever. Show this (says he) and
forthwith we yield. It has been already showed, and yet he yields not, for
it has bin proved, that, whereas these are of the gifts bestowed by our
Savior on the Church, all the rest were extraordinary, and but for a time, as
appears by their use and the gifts agreing to such offices. But both the use
and the gift, agreeing to these four, is for all times, and given of GOD by
ordinary means, and therefore these, and these only are perpetual. The use
of the Teacher, is to teach true religion and doctrine: of the Pastor, to
apply the doctrine by exhortation, reprehension, consolation, and such other
means as may serve most fit for th'edification, and as the occasions of the
Church require. Elders are to look to the obedience and practice of the same in
the life of the people: and they altogether, to guide the public assemblies
in a reverend order, and to carry the care of the state of the Church, to call
and dismiss, to and from public charge in it by due order, and to censure
offenders according as their offense is to be censured. Finally, the Deacons
are to relieve the poor and in misery. These being (I say) the uses of these
charges, it is plain, they are no extraordinary things, for which they are
appointed, but necessary and perpetual: therefore the offices which God has
ordained for such uses, must needs be esteemed alike, perpetual and
necessary.

The same is to be said of their gifts which are all such, as God gives unto
men, by ordinary means. But, such, are none of the other offices, neither for
their use, nor for their gifts: and therefore these, and only these, are
necessary and to continue for ever. Further also, the Apostles, setting by
them selves, and by the Evangelists, these functions amongst the Churches,
do plainly declare, they did it in this regard, that whereas neither they nor
the Evangelists, for the duties of their callings, could tarry still with any
one particular church, these should be their guides, to continue and remain
with them for ever. Upon these, and such like reasons declared before, the
conclusion grows and not barelie upon this, that they were sometimes ordained
of God.

Thus passes he forward (yet so as he looks back again) to an
amplification of the conclusion, wherein, the declaration, gathers together,
certain principal reasons, confirming these offices, as of the Author and
preseruers of them, with the good fruit that follows where they are
established, and the contrary, where they are not. The first reason he
denies, but stands not much upon it. The second, of the Churches exercising
this Discipline is of two parts, whereof the first is of the primitive and
pure Church enlarged by note of the time it continued it it, which is, till the
mystery of iniquity, working a way for Antichrists pride and presumption,
changed Gods ordinance, and so brought in all kind of false doctrine and
confusion. To these words he takes many exceptions, and first scorneth at
it, that the primitive church (which he him self calls that time while the
Apostles lived) is named the pure Church: and replyeth to it, that it was not
very pure soon after the Apostles. Which is a reply of no value. For it
suffiseth for the matter in hand, that it was exercised by the Apostolical
Churches, which are called pure, not in regard of obedience in life, but of
that order, for the guyding of the Church, which by the Apostles was delivered
unto them. We acknowledge that no assembly of men, yea that no particular man,
is, or can be, or ever was (the Lord him self only excepted) free from all
charge of sin in the sight of God, according as it is said, There is not one
that does good, no not one. And again, Psalm. 14.3. Romans 3.10. Psalm. 53.3.
Psalm. 130.3. Psalm 143.2. Ephe. 2.1.3.
Jf thou Lord should look narrowly what is done amiss, no flesh should
be justified in thy sight. Yea further, We acknowledge all to be borne in
sin, and by nature children of wrath, and not ceasing continually to
transgress from the mothers womb: and believe to be saved Romans 3.24
freely by grace, and only by the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus. This (I
say) we acknowledge, notwithstanding that thorough the same grace (according to
the measure of the gift thereof, in the duty of thankefulnes which we owe as
the Lords redeemed) we endeavor to walk in a good conscience without offense,
and to approve our vnfayened desire of obedience and well-doing in all things,
both to God and Man. This I have thought good to profess, because the Replyer,
by a scornful observation of pure Church, would cast upon all such as desire
a further reformation of our Church, an infamous spot of puritanisme. A name
which some popish or Samaritane priest well content that popery and the
Gospel be joined together, as they were sometime, 2. King. 17.32.33.34.
to mingle Iudaisme and Paganism, have devised, to revile them with, that
seek any further reformation: and now, commonly taken up, by Atheistes, to
disgrace and discountenance all that desire to live godly. Which if it
proceed, as of some time it has done, it is not unlike, but ere it be many
years, piety, and the fear of God, will be as odious as any heresy. This may
suffice, to let the Replier understand, that the primitive Church is not
called pure in the Declaration, in regard of their life and conversation, nor
any signification given thereby, that there is, or can be in this world, in
that sense, any Church pure and free from sin. But as touching the order
given to the Churches by the Apostles, and received of them for the rule to
guide them selves by, in the administration and direction of ecclesiastical
affairs, the primitive Church was pure, in the Apostles time, and so had it
bin at sundry times before the Apostles, and may be also in this time, for any
impossibility that is in this matter. The heavenly pattern showed to Moses in
the mountain, can not be denied to have bin pure. Exodus 25.40 Heb. 8.5. Heb.
3.5.
But Moses was faithful in all the house of God, and did all things according
to the pattern which was showed him. For he was faithefull, not only in the
things that concerned the holiest place of the house of God, or the Sanctuary
next unto it, but also in the outward Sanctuary or court, yea in the things
of the lowest Court of the Lords house. Neither thought he it enough, (as many
do now) to regard only the principal things, as the Arc of Covenant,
wherein were the two tables of the Law, and other precious and holy memorialles
of the noble acts of God, Exodus 36.
nor both them and the next unto them, as The Altar, the Table, cap. 37.
and the golden Candlestick, but also all the vessels, implementes, cap. 38.
and furniture of the Tabernacle, even to the basins and beesomes, to every
pin of the joined work, cap. 39.42.
to every ringe of the curtaynes, to the skins that covered it, and to every
inche of length, breadth, and depth, as the Lord had appointed. And not in the
place only that was appointed for the service of God, but for the whole order
and manner of the service, declaring the kinds of Ministeries, and what duty
was to be done by every one. This was a perfect and pure order of a Church,
received of God by Moses, and by him settled and continued in his time amongst
that people. It continued also such all the time of Joshua, Ioshu. 24.31.
and of the Elders that ruled with him and had seen the famous acts of God
which he had done for Israel. In David's and Salomons time for many years,
the same was restored, and after by other virtuous and noble Princes, as
Ezekiah, Jehoshaphat, and others reestablished, after that through the wantes
of all degrees, and specially of the Priests, it had bin decayed. The Apostle
testifies in one place that which is to be extended alike to all the rest of
his Ministry, 1. Co. 11.23
That he had received of the Lord that which he delivered to the Church. And
in another place: Jf there be amongst you a Prophet or spiritual man, 1.
Co. 13.37.
let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you, are the commandments
of the Lord: and says of him self, that which agrees to the other Apostles,
that is, That the Lord of mercy had given to him to be faithful, and so
accounted him, and they were all true witnesses of Jesus Christ. Whereby it can
not be doubted, but the order which they taught the Churches to keep, for
maintenance of the faith, exercises, and obedience of the Gospel amongst them,
being as perfect and pure, as that which the same Lord had showed to Moses in
the mountain, and the Apostles being as faithful as Moses, it can not be
doubted, I say, but that the Churches in regard of that administration and
policy, were pure and perfect. And not only in their time (as in the former
had bin in the time of Moses and Joshua,) but also in the time of such as with
them had governed the church and seen the mighty hand of God working with
them in the advancement of the Gospel, as the like had bin before in the
Elders that ouerliued the noble worthy Joshua. Which being so, I can see no
cause, the same order being left us from point to point, in their holy
writings: but that the Tabernacle of David being fallen down, the ruins of
it, may be reedified, and all the strength and beauty of the house of God in
that behalf restored again: if there be that religion, virtue, and zeal,
which ought to be in those, at whose hands the Lord does require it. And thus
much to show what is meant by the primitive and pure church, and withal that
there may be a pure church, in regard of the order for directing and guyding
of all ecclesiastical matters, notwithstanding the corruption of the nature of
man be such, as were the order most perfect, yet will administer and execute it
with many humane infirmities. But then the rule it self can not be blamed, but
only they, that by their own fault, are not willingly ruled by it.

From this reason, that these ministeries have bin retained in the primitive
church, he proceeds to the note of the continuance of it in the same, which
is said by the Declaration to have bin, till the ministry of iniquity,
working a way for Antichrists pride and presumption, changed Gods ordinance,
and brought in all kind of false doctrine and confusion. Nay, who there,
masters mine, not so says the Replier (such is his vain, that I say no more)
according to which, dallying a while about the sense, he resolves that if it
had bin such, till the mystery of iniquity began to work a way, etc. the
Declaration had kept better within bounds. This doubt of the sense might have
bin spared, it being not hard for him, at the first, to have conceived it so,
as he did at the last, this being the plain sense, that till such time, as
Satan began to make a way to the kingdom of Antichrist, and to all kind of
false doctrine and confusion, this order continued. For the pride of that
kingdom of Antichrist being so great, as it is this day, and has bin now for
many ages, and the false doctrines and confusions being so many, as they have
bin now a long time, this kingdom could not be set up in one day, nor all the
abominable superstitions and idolatries of it brought in upon a sudden, all
the holy ordinances of god in the whole order of the church being against it.
Therefore, these, one after another, and by little and little, (that the fraud
might not appear) were changed and altered, that by such proceeding, it might
be easily overcome in the end: which at the beginning, if it had bin openly
and at once attempted, could not have bin conquered by any violence. As in the
siege of a strong city, the enemy enters not at first and at once into the
gates, but by mines and batteries overthrows some principal bulwarks, and
places of defense to the city, and offense to the^, that so he may after the
more quietly scale the walls, or force the gates thereof. So the city of God,
being fortified by the rules of discipline, as with walls, towers, and
bullewarks: the enemy first sought how by his pioners and ordinance to cast
down some of the principal strengthes, one after another, before he could
enter it and seat him self in the middst of the temple of God. And as where a
city is well policied and governed, having good* and wholesome laws and
statutes for the ruling of it, and worthy Magistrates, that govern wisely and
justly according to the same. If any man would oppress such a state, and make
him self master of it, in vain should he attempt to do it, while those
laws and Magistrates do continue: And therefore would corrupt first some of
the Magistrates, by degrees, and then afterward, work such alteration in the
laws, as might be lest sensible, that by such means he might in the end, by
his subtle and cunninge practices, attain to that tyrannous rule, which if he
should make show of in the beginning, he could not do by any force: even so
has Satan by his secret and sutle means and practices, seeking to tyrannise
the city of God, first corrupted such as were of special trust in it, and had
greatest charges committed to them, and after by their means altered by little
and little, the orders and laws of the City, in such sort, as at the last he
set up the kingdom of Antichrist, and brought in all kind of false doctrine
and confusion.

When Julius Caesar purposed to oppress the state of Rome, he used many
preparations and means unto it, which were not easy to be discerned, yea
such as might seem to be great stays to the preservation of it. His greatness
rising by alliances and employmentes abroad the increasing of his forces, the
dispensing with home laws in his respect, the continuance of his Dictatorship,
and such like, were in appearance the means to uphold and mainteyne the state
of Rome, and some of them might have bin so in deed, if they had bin bestowed
upon a subject faithful and loyal. But in an ambitious mind they so increased
his greatness and his strength, as the state it self became to weak for him.
Such a tree as Daniel had showed unto him in a vision to represent the kingdom
of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.8.9.
Eze. 31.6.
and as Ezekiell mentions to like purpose in his prophecy, whose bows and
branches are like great trees, and the arms of it, as the Cedars of Libanus,
so as all the fowls of the heavens make their nestes in them, and all the
beasts of the field lie in the shadow of the same: such a tree (I say)
grows not up in a night, like the gourde of Jonas, but in many years: Iona.
4.10.
receiving from day to day some increases, though not sensible to the eye in
any one instant, or in a day, or in a week, yet in time it appears that it
did increase, and at last grows to huge bigness. Now to demand, what day
or what year it grew in, were a question that should have small reason in it:
such a tree being many years a growing, so as it can not be said, that it
grew in such a year, but only, that it, was growing so many years, till at
the last it came to excessive greatness. Even thus has it come to pass in the
kingdom of Antichrist, the Nebuchadnezzar that has burnt the City of God,
and the king of Babylon, the city of all confusion in the West. To demand
therefore, as the Replyer does, and as Papists do, some certainty of the
time, when this kingdom grew, and of every thing it consumed, as he says
here, of the office of Elders, whereby it grew, and increased: is an
impertinent question, and can not prove, that therefore Satan did not, by
change of Gods ordinance in this behalf, increase and strengthen him self.
It suffiseth us to show, that in so many years, this tree was a growing: in
whose bows at the last, every foul and hateful bird now does nestle, and
that a means of the immeasurable greatness of it has bin, the changing of
th'ordinances of God. Which appears manifestly in this, that these offices
(for the Declaration speaks of the ordinance of God changed in them all) are
clearlie declared to have bin used in the Churches in the time of the Apostles,
as ordinary offices, and that the same being now of many years not in use,
either in part, or altogether, before this last restoring of the Gospel again
in this age, they are all found to be transferred to others, who by them
selves or their officers, disposed of all that the other were wont to do.
Which change for the name of Bishop, was common to all the Ministers of the
word, as it is evident in the 20. of the Acts, and other places. Phil. 1.1.
1. Tim. 3.1.
The arrogating of this name by any one of that calling, as a peculiar title to
him self, was some chau^g of gods ordinance, and preparation to that which
followed. The same name in the Scriptures is never given unto any in respect of
the Ministers of the word, as to note one set over them, to see them do their
duties, (as the high Priest sometime in the law of Moses,) but always in
regard of the people, and the flock, the charge, ouerfight, and guydance, of
whom only was committed to them. When this ordinance of God was so far
changed, that by this word was noted one, set over both the flocks and the
shepheardes, endewed with a power and authority to direct and correct both, as
might seem good unto him: so much more as was diminished of the ordinance of
god, was added to the advancement of the mystery which Satan, cunningly, by
such degrees, sought to advance. But when these Bishops contented not them
selves to take the name to them as peculiar, and an authority not only of
the Church they stood charged with, and the Ministers of the word with them
in the same, but taking all occasions which might further their ambition, as of
having moderated the Synodes of certain circuites, of the fewnes of sufficient
Preachers, of the voluntary respect which was borne them for their piety and
gifts, of resort from sundry parts near unto them, for their counsel, of
the pre-eminence, wealth, and state of the Cities wherein they were seated, and
such like challenged to them selves, the like authority over the churches, and
Ministers of a large circuit: this step was not far from the seat,
whereon the man of sin was to sit him down. Another degree above this was
it, when as Bishops had dealt with their fellows the Pastors of the
Churches: so likewise other dealt with them, and became Archbishops, chalenging
and exercising authority over all the Churches, Pastors and Bishops of a
whole Province. But when as Archbishops of Provinces were in like sort
subjected to other, as they had made the Bishops subject to them, and that
four Patriarchs divided all Christian churches in the world, amongst them
selves, ranging Archbishops under them, and doing unto them as they had done to
the Bishops, and the Bishopps to the Pastors: it remained only, that one of
those four should top the rest, to make him self lord of all, and
universal Bishop over the Church. Which disorder increased after this
Hierarchy for multitude of causes brought to them out of so large circuites,
began first to slack their preachinge, and to grow negligent, and in the end
to give it over, and preach seldom (as upon hye and solemn days) or not at
all.

After also, that Emperors and Kings began to be Christians, and they to grow
in favor with them, and to receive so great gifts and honors of them, as to
bear the port and state of worldly Princes, and to meddle with civil causes,
and manage the state, growing thereby not only to neglect, but even to despise
the hye and most holy service of God, the preaching of the Gospel: after all
this (I say) what remained, but that the most ambitious of the four Patriarchs
should by practice with some mighty Potentate, set his foot upon the heads of
the other Patriarchs, and raise him self into the seat and chair of
Antichrist. Which, notwithstanding two of them, who were seated in the two
chief Cities of the East and West Empire, Constantinople and Rome, did strive
together for a while: yet in the end the Bishop of Rome prevailed, being
Bishop of that city, which had bin Lady of all the Earth for a longer time,
and having fitter occasions serving to it, as first of th'absence, the
Emperors, after by means of the decay of the Empire in the East, and of his
more ambitious diligence, who had diverse ways attempted it before, and
especially because it was prepared for him that was placed in the City that
stands upon seven hills. Which was brought to pass by practice with Zimri
the murderer of his Lord and Master, that is with Phocas the murderer of
Mauritius the Emperor, by whose favor the name and title of universal Bishop
was obtained. After which time, the Bishops of that seat, by wicked
practices, and cunning means, setting The Imperial Crown upon whose head it
seemed good to them, increased them selves exceedingly, by the donation of
Pepin, and others, in riches, lands, temporalties, and in worldly Dominions
and state. Whereby enlarging their power in church matters, and nourishing
parasites for the purpose, at the last, not only by temporal power, but by
yoke of conscience, under pretense of Peeters primacie, given to him by our
Savior, and of succession to Peeter: this man of sin, seated him self in
the midst of the temple of God, that is, of that people which sometimes had
bin the temple of God, and exalted him self above all that is worshipped or
called God. Lo, the seat of all abominations, 2. Tes. 2.4.
and the stayres, degrees, and steps, from the lowest to the highest, whereby
Satan made way in chau^ging Gods ordinance, (as it is said in the
Declaration) to Antichrists pride, and after he had so done, brought in all
manner of false doctrine and confusion. This way to Antichrists pride in
changing the ordinances of GOD, the Replier is careful, should not be
understood in any sort of Bishops and Archbishops, as if any ordinance of God
had bin changed in creating such offices as are exercised by them, or that
Antichrist could have any thing the readier way to his seat by them: and would
cast this upon the public charges instituted of God to be in his Church. His
first reason to prove this is, that Bishops and Archbishops were in the
primitive Church. Whereof, notwithstanding this be not the fit place to
speak, and that I have already refused for this cause to make him any answer
till he come orderly where it is to be debated, yet, because I see he dreameth
still of Bishops and Archbishops, and that both vnseasonablie and importunatlie
he calls upon it, it shall not peradventure be amiss, to give some answer
in the mean time, till he bring forth the rest that he has to speak in their
behalf.

It is to be remembered here, first, how little reckoninge he has made of the
proofs alleged for the office of Elders, the which yet are such, as that the
holy Scriptures make mention of such an office to have bin in the Church in
those times, and declare to what use it served, and that there were such
appointed in all the churches of the Apostles: who, to them and to the
Ministers of the word committed the standing and ordinary care over the
churches. Which proofs being so smallie accounted of by the Replier, as they
are, we are undoubtedly to have from him, sufficient and strong arguments,
authentical records and authorities, plain and clear evidences, for any
matter he will undertake to prove. But especially, as his issue is greater,
so his evidences are to be clearer, and the higher th'offices are in dignity
and power above the office of Elders, of so much more certain and chief
authority are his rolls to be, and his pleas mighty and forcible, seeinge
there are great royalties and regalites belonging to those offices, whose
patentes he would justify. The first entrance into his proof, is such in
deed. For he pleads the donation of god, the writing and instrument of our
Savior Christ, signed with the great seal of Heaven and Earth, the power
whereof the Lord declares to be given unto him. Which if it be so, surely
then could these offices neither receive any chau^g, nor consequently, the
change of them, be any way to Antichrists pride. But let us hear what his
reasons are: A man would think, breaking so often and so violently into this
cause, that from Moses, throughout all the Prophets, he would show us this
matter, and after by the whole college of The Apostles, as by a cloudde of
witnesses without all exception, he would have oppressed for ever, all that
dare say (as he speaks) that these offices of Bishops and Archbishops, Page
78.
wrought any way to Antichrists pride. But for all witnesses he brings in
the Apostle Paul: A witness in deed without all exception, though he be alone
(notwithstanding every matter was wont to be confirmed by two or three
witnesses) for the highest authority of God, whose secretary he was, in that
he wrote, Deuteronomy. 19.5. Mat. 18.16.
so as all creatures both men and Angels are to rest in that, which he by the
will of God has delivered: let us hear therefore what the Apostle speaks in
this cause.

In the primitive Church (says the Replier) Titus was made an Archbishop,
and had many other Bishops under his government. If it be demanded by whom
he was created, this was (says he) Saint Paul's act, whose act no doubt
was approved of God him self. No doubt in deed, but what that Apostle and the
rest did, concerning a settled order to govern the Church by in all time to
come, but it was the act of God him self. But if Archbishops be instituted
of God in the Church, I demand, whether this institution be alterable or no,
and whether Princes, or the Church, aduising of some other order which they
shall think better, may put down the Archbishop, and set up an officer of
another kind for that purpose. If they may, then is the wisdom of God
subject to the will of man, and they made wiser then he, who is only wise,
who takes wise men in their wyles, confounds them by those whom they esteem
as simple, 1. Tim. 1.17
and when they would be wisest, does make them stark fools. If it may not,
1. Cor. 1.19.20.27. Romans 1.22.
as I suppose the Replier will do god that honor, not to make his ordinances
subject to the will of man, nor to adore flesh and blood, above God blessed
for ever, Amen: then does he plainly confess, (which in all his treatise he
impugneth) that there is an external order, and form of government ordained
of God for the guydance of the church: If he be persuaded of in conscience, as
he would seem to be, by going about to prove their authority as by the
scripture, let him as frankly confess it, as they do, that mainteyne the
supremacy of the Pope to be due to him, iure diuino, and which necessarily
follows hereof, let him deny, that Princes or any creature, may lawfully
cause this office to cease to be exercised in the Church: And then our question
being ended of the general, whether there be any certain external order for
all ecclesiastical matters established of God, as confessed and agreed on both
parts: let us then debate, which only remains, Whether that which he
affirms to be the order of GOD consistinge in Bishops and Archebishops, be
that in deed, which God has appointed, or the order set down in the
Declaration of Ministers of the word, Elders, and Deacons.

There are Bishops, who, notwithstanding peradventure they can be as well
content to suffer him to persuade that their authority is from GOD, as the
Bishop of Rome is, that some do the like for him, yet in them selves, will
scorn this simplicity, as knowing undoubtedly (which they have also
confessed) that they hold only of the donation of Princes, and by civil
statutes, that power and authority which they exercise. But to return to his
reproof. How may it appear, that Paul, whose act no doubt (as he says)
was approved by GOD him self, did create Titus an Archbishop. It is a
marvel that he begins with an Archbi hop, whereas good order would have
required he should first have proved the instituting of a Bishop over other
Pastors, ere he had come to show an Archbishop over Bishops. But, to take
it as it has pleased him to deliver it, whereby may it appear, that Titus
was made an Archbishop, and exercised (as he says) Arch-episcopall
jurisdiction? For proof he refers him self to another place, saying, we
have seen this partly already. We are therefore to return to the place
where he spoke of this before, and to look what is to be seen there.

In that place, which is (as I take it) in the pages 64. and 65. he says
what ecclesiastical office Titus had, the very subscription of Saint Paul's
epistle unto him does declare, being this to Titus the first elected Bishop
of the Church of the Cretenses. This is the Record he brings out to prove
the office of an Archbishop. Wherein yet, it is apparent, that here is no
mention at all, neither of the office, nor of the name of an Archbishop. It is
said in deed, that Titus was first elected Bishop of the Church of Candie,
but of his Archiepiscopall jurisdiction, or name, here is no word. If our
profes for the offices we affirm to be necessary and perpetual in the
Church, were not more pregnaunt then this, and if when we undertake to prove a
Pastor, we should bring out evidences for a Teacher, the next officer in the
Church unto him, or if when we would prove a Teacher, we should show proof
for an Elder, who is next him, or pretendinge to prove the function of Elders,
should allege testimonies that do concern Deacons, as the Replyer here
goinge about to show and prove an Archebishoppe, brings a place that
speaks only of a Bishop, who in his Hierarchy is next in place and dignity
to the Archbishop: such proofs were worthy all the scorns, wherewith he has
unworthily, and without cause, scorned the sound and sufficient testimonies
produced for every public charge and office in the Church. But yet if he come
so near it as the office of a Bishop* such as he pretends to mainteyne,
though he find not th'Archbishoprike he seeks, yet if he get a Bishoprike,
at Paul's hands, his labor in seeking is largely recompensed. What force
therefore this evidence may be of, for a Bishop, let us examine. In the end of
the Epistle unto Titus, where copies of greatest credit have only this
clause, the Epistle to Titus is finished, some other have this addition which
he produces, which yet, neither the Syrian, nor the old Latin interpreter,
do read. Whereupon Master Beza, the best interpretour of the new Testament,
says, That this is a plain forgerie. For further proof he adds three
reasons, one from the mention of a Bishop in this subscription, whereas (says
he) that tyranny of the Episcopal degree had not yet forceably entered into
the Church. So as the difference of the time shows, this could not be Paul's
writing, nor be truly said of Titus, in whose life time, and long after, no
such office was known in the Church. Another, is from the diverse office of
Titus, which was of an Evangelist, the nature whereof is wholly repugnant to a
Bishop: that being not to stay in any place, but to follow the Apostles, and
by their direction to order the Churches: and the Bishops being to sit
still, and to ouersee only his own circuit. The third, is a plain
contradiction to the undoubted writing of the Apostle, subscribed in deed with
his own hand, for so he signed all his letters to prevent all fraudulent and
deceytfull practices of attributing to him that which was not his, which
contradiction appears thus: Toward the end of this Epistle to Titus, the
Apostle says, Endeavor to come to me to Nicopolis, for there I have
determined to winter. In whice verse it is to be noted, that the Apostle says
not, for here I have purposed to winter, which he should have done if he had
bin at Nicopolis, when he wrote this: But, I have purposed to winter there, as
being in another place at the writing of his letter, and declaring his purpose
to go from the same unto Nicopolis, where he meant to tarry the winter. 1.
Cor. 16.21 Colos. 4.18 2. These. 3.17.
This being plain to be thus understood in the words of The Apostle: this
feigned subscription says, Tit. 3.12.
Written from Nicopolis of Macedonia, as if the Apostle at the writing of this
letter had been at Nichopolis, directly contrary to the words and sense of
the Apostle. Whereby it is plain, that this subscriptio^ was none of Paul's,
but added to his letter, by some of later years, and of mean understanding,
that could not discern so palpable a repugnancie between the epistle it self,
and such a subscriptio^. This then being all the proof that the replyer for
this present (notwithstanding his importunate and unseasonable beating upon
this cause) is able to make, to prove the office of an Archbishop: the Reader
may perceive what authority it ought to have in the conscience of any
Christian man, the best evidence and witness that can be produced for the
maintenance of it, being a razed roll, and a suborned witness, and as they
speak in Westminster hall, A knight of the Post, even such another as the
Bishop of Rooms proctours would have proved his usurpation and unjust
authority by, if the Fathers of that time in Afric had not discovered his
fraud and folly. Thus we see, what cause he has to break so often into this
matter, for any thing he can prove by this evidence. But if this fail him to
prove Bishops and Archbishops to have bin in the primitive Church, he has
another sure argument that can not disappoint him.

There were Pastors and Teachers in the primitive church, the Declaration
says, Elders also and Deacons, but says the Replier, the office of a Bishop
or Archbishop is in substance the office of a Pastor or Teacher, so as
Bishops or Archbishops in the substance of their office are Pastors or
Teachers in the Church, and as he adds in the next page before, such as have
bin Deacons too. For answer hereunto, I deny, that they are either Pastors or
Teachers: for the reasons following. Such offices as may not be executed by
virtue of the form of ordination of Pastors and Teachers, but require another
form of ordination diverse from it, do themselves differ in substance from
the offices of Pastors and Teachers. For thus the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 7.16.17.21.
proves the priesthood of our Savior Christ, to be diverse from the
Leuiticall priesthood, because the form of ordination differed, the one being
without an oath, and for a time, the other with an oath, and for ever.

But the offices of Bishops and Archbishops, are such, as by virtue of that
calling of Pastors and Teachers, can not be exercised, but require a further
particular form of ordination, diverse from the other, as appears by the
book of their consecration. Therefore the offices of Bishops and Archbishops,
are in substance diverse from the offices of Pastors and Teachers.

Again, All Pastors and Teachers are by bond of their office and calling to
preach the word with all faithful diligence, Luke 12. 2. Tim 2.3. Act. 6.


But Bishops and Archbishops stand not bound by bond of their calling to
preach it, for which cause either they leave it altogether, or preach
seldom, and upon high and solemn days, and then only at their pleasure,
when they preach, and not by any bond of their calling.

Therefore, Bishops and Archbishops are not in their offices Pastors and
Teachers.

Further, all offices that are the same in substance, are of like and equal
power. Therefore if the offices of Bishops and Archbishops be the same in
substance with Pastors and Teachers, then is their power one and equal with
theirs: at the least in Ministry of spiritual grace, as also in word they
pretend them to be. That they are not equal, appears in that, no Pastor
nor Teacher may do sundry things, which are esteemed by them selves to be,
and some of them in deed are in their due administration, ministeries of
spiritual grace. For Confirmation is said to be a means of increase of
spiritual grace and strength. Absolution is a ministry of spiritual grace,
as testifying, and assuring the absolved, in the word of the great King of
Kings, that his sins are forgiven him. Ordination to the Ministry, is also
a ministry of spiritual grace, not only in regard of the office, but also
of the increase of grace bestowed upon such as are duly ordained to it, the
Lord him self author of the calling, giving according to his promise, to
such as in faith thereof, and in obedience to his good pleasure, yield unto it
such increase of grace as the new charge by the will of God laid upon him,
and undertaken in hope of Gods assistance does require. In all which
ministeries Pastors and Teachers whom yet GOD puts in trust with the word
and message of reconciliation and life, and with his holy Sacraments, the
seals of God to give further assurance of the same, may not deal by virtue of
such their calling, but only Bishops and Archbishops. Therefore their power
and ministry being so diverse, th'offices them selves must needs also differ.

Moreover, all Pastors and Teachers are to be ordained to the attendance upon
a certain particular Church and congregation or Parish, as we use most to call
it. For so the Apostles Paul and Barnabas did, and the rest: Tit 1.
So Paul gave charge to Titus to ordeine them, and so were all they ordained
of whom we read in the holy Scriptures. Which also the very end, use,
nature, and relation they have to the Church where they are to serve, does
declare. Therefore it is said to all the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.28
that they should look to that Church whereof the holy Ghost had made them
Bishops or Ouerseeers: so to all the Elders of the Churches of the Jews
dispersed, 1. Pet. 5.2.
that they should feed the flock of God which depended upon them. Which
point also some of the ancient Councils, esteemed so material, as they
decreed, the ordination which was not to the certain charge of some particular
congregation should be void, and of none effect. But this being so necessary
in all Pastors and Teachers, is clean contrary in Bishops and Archbishops.
For their ordination is not to any particular Church, but to a whole Dioces or
Province. And if before such ordination they had charge of any particular
Church, or were beneficed as the most common speech is, such benefices are then
void, and they discharged by law, so as they are to be given to another. So
incompatible the true duty and office of a faithful Minister of the word,
is in law esteemed to be, with the office of a Bishop or Archbishop. I might
add also, that Pastors and Teachers, as all other functions Ecclesiastical,
deal only with ecclesiastical matters, such as agree to their several
kinds and places. For our Savior testifies his kingdom not to be of this
world. John 18.36.
And from the beginning to the time of our Savior, (since the Priesthood
bestowed upon Aaron) the two powers have bin in the ordinary government of
Gods people, by the Lords own ordinance sundred, not only in persons, houses,
and kinreds, but in their tribes: so as none of the tribe of Juda, might
exercise the Priesthood, but only they, that were of the tribe of Leui, and
the tribe of Leui was to content themselves with the service of the Tabernacle,
and were neither to enjoy the kingdom, nor to bear civil offices, but the
causes of God, and the causes of the King, had their several trial, officers
and Judges. But this, a Bishop or Archbishop, even by his ordination, is not
only not bound unto, but of the contrary, being ordained to exercise the
office of a Bishop, according to the word of God, and the ordinances of this
Realm, is to meddle with civil justice. For the word of God, not speaking
any one word of such an office, and the ordinances of the Realm, laying upon
them offices and charges in civil affairs, they intermedle with all causes by
reason of their office. I might note many other repugnances in-their offices,
with the lawful charges of Pastors and Teachers, as their immoderate power in
dealing with all ecclesiastical causes of government alone, in ordayning
Ministers, giving and calling in licenses, censuring, suspending,
exco^municating, absoluing, and such like. But these reasons may suffice to
show that otherwise then the Replyer mainteyneth Bishops and Archbishops,
such as he speaks of, are not, nor can not, in any just and true account be
reckoned Pastors and Teachers. Such in deed they may have bin, and were
first ordained to be, and therefore ought to have continued in that calling.
But accepting of th'offices of Bishops and Archbishops, wherein there are so
many things, as have bin showed, repugnant to the functions of Pastors and
Teachers, they can not in any sort, be esteemed true Pastors and Teachers of
the church, such as our Savior appointed for the work of the Ministry, but
are a thing degenerate, and grown out of kind, a humane creature, and an
institution and ordinance of Kings and Princes. Thus much may suffice, to show
that Bishops and Archbi hops are not Pastors and Teachers. Whereby it is
plain, to be no consequence which the Replier makes for them in this place,
that is, because there were Pastors and Teachers in the primitive Church, that
therefore there were Bishops and Archbishops also in that time. He adds they
are such as have been Deacons too, which being admitted, it follows not,
because they have bin Deacons, and now are Bishops or Archbishops, that
therefore Bishops and Archbishops were in the primitive Church. But I deny
that ever they were right and lawful Deacons. For a Deacon is an
ecclesiastical officer attending the poor of the Church, whose Deacon he is.
The truth of this is most evident by the Deacons of Jerusalem, of whose
institution we read in the sixth of the Acts, where the Apostles discharging
them selves of this care and service, determined and bou^ded their office of
Apostleship for ever after within the bounds of preachinge and prayers, and
the Deacons office in that which they discharge them selves of, that is, in the
attendance of the poor. Which appears also by the 12. to the Romans, where
their office is limited in like manner.

Now the Deaconshippe he speaks of, which they have had, is no such matter,
but a mere humane institution, a degree to priesthood, a power to baptize,
and read the public Litargie, without power to minister the Lords Supper,
or to preach by virtue of that calling, and is nothing like the ordinance of
GOD for the relief of the poor. Therefore, even that also is not true, which
the Replier says that they have bin Deacons too. In deed, they have come by
the Deacons bag, and got into their hands that which by th'ordinance of God
and the ancient commons of the Church, should be distributed by the Deacons,
to the comfort of the poor. Which the Christian Magistrate is in all duty to
God to require at their hands, and to restore to the former right use again,
as he is, other parts of their livings, and namely that which ought to be the
living of the Pastors and Teachers, which attend upon the service of the
people, in teaching and instructing them in true religion: whose liutngs being
taken away and cast into those seas would be restored again: that the people
giving their goods to be taught in the knowledge of God, and not able to give
any more, do not perish, for want of teaching, but may receive the fruit of
this their liberality. But this, because I have not further occasion in this
place, I forbear to debate at large, only by occasion of their Deaconshippe,
I have in a word noted their just dealing as with the poor and the Deacons, so
also with the Pastors and Teachers, and with all the people of God. Whereby
appears that howsoever they are transformed and now are neither Pastors,
Teachers, Elders nor Deacons, yet (saving the work and labor of these
callings in preaching unto the people, and watching over them, with the Lords
watch, and serving the necessities of the poor) they have wholly devoured them
all. All the power, authority and living, both of Pastors, Teachers and
Deacons, yea and the treasure of the poor also, being possessed and enjoyed by
them. Thus have I answered his two reasons alleged to prove Bishops and
Archbishops to have bin in the primitive Church.

In this place, affirming them to be in their office and kind of ministry,
Pastors and Teachers, yet, says he, since he is the ordainer, or ordinary of
them, and ouerseer both of them and the people, he is in dignity of another
office, and kind of ministry different from them. For answer whereunto he
is to understand, that the word of God gives not this authority to a
Bishop, to be ouerseer of the people, and also of their Pastors and Teachers,
nor to any one man bearing ecclesiastical office, to be the ordainer, or the
ordinary, as he speaks of the Ministers of the word. As touching the
first, of oversight, the word Ouerseer, or as we call it Bishop, Acts 20.
is used diverse times in the Scriptures, but always in regard of the people,
Phil. 1.1.
and of the Church, and at no time of other Ministers of the word. If it be
otherwise, let him show where a Bishop or Ouerseer is named in respect of
other Pastors and Teachers. True it is that Pastors and Teachers may offend,
through the corruption of nature, that is in all men, and therefore are not
exempted and freed by the word of God, neither from oversight, nor punishment,
but are liable to all manner of censures of the church as any other of the
congregation and to the civil punishments of the laws, But their overseers in
such cases, are, the civil Magistrate, who is to see that they do their duties,
or to enforce them to it by civil punishments, their cause being first duly
heard, tried and judged. Further, the Eldership of that church whereupon they
attend, and all the greater Co^ferences and Synodes, whereunto by good order
agreed in the churhc, they are made subject, have the oversight of them, and
power to admonish, and censure with ecclesiastical censures of deposition from
their ministry, or of suspension and excommunication, as their offense may
deserve. So as no man in the Church, nor in the common wealth, is more
subject to censure, excommunication, and other punishment then the Pastors
and Teachers: yea they are more sharply in case they offend, to be proceeded
against, then other men are, for the great offense their evil example, may
give to the wicked. But this oversight and power to censure them is not
committed of God to any one man bearinge ecclesiastical office. For how light
a matter soever it be with Bishops and Archbishops to suspende many Ministers
from their preaching and ministry, the word of God teaches another manner of
proceedinge in a cause that concerns the staying of the preaching of the
gospel, which in highest degree imports the honor of god and salvation of
his people. It is untrue also that he says, that the Bishop has the oversight
of the people, if he understand as I doubt not but he does, such an oversight
as by his own power he may censure any of them. For the keys, whereby is
noted that power wherein the censures of the Church are contained, are not
given to any one man: Our Savior says not, if he that has offended thee be
obstinate and hearken not to thee, nor to the advise of one or two witnesses,
tell the Bishop of him, Matt. 18.17.
and whatsoever he shall do I will ratify it in heaven: but he says, tell
the Church, and if he hear not the Church, and so forth, plainly committing
this power not to any one but to many. To which purpose it is said in the same
place, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I amongst
them and in the midst of them, says the Lord. Whereby it is plain, Mat.
18.19
that they, who have power to bind or loose, are a company, assembled
together by the ordinance of our Savior Christ, for that purpose, by means of
their calling. In like manner to the Corinthes, the Apostle says not of the
incestuous, tell the Bishop, that he may excommunicate him, which no doubt he
would, if as the Replier says, he created By hops for Cities and Diocesses,
and Archbishops for Provinces (a fancy without all manner of appearance or
color) but, you being gathered together in the name of Christ, etc.
appointing that by such order as our Savior Christ had ordained, 1. Cor. 5.4.
and with all their free consentes, he that had committed that abominable
offense, should be cast out of the midst of them. And if no man have or can
have lawfully this power over the people, or the least of the Congregation, how
should he be ouerseer of the greatest in it, which are (in regard of their
calling) the pastors of the flock. Now concerning the being their ordinary
as he says, or ordainer, it is a power not agreeing to any man living, but in
like manner belongs to many. Timothy, whom the Replyer dreameth to have bin a
Bishop, was ordained to be an Evangelist by the layinge on of the hands of the
Eldership, that is, 2. Tim. 4* 5.
the assembly of the Elders: yea notwithstanding the Apostle as it seems, 1.
Tim. 4.1^
was present. And if the Apostle took not this power to him self alone, what
Bishop is he, that notwithstanding he be bold enough to take it can with
right and lawfully take such power to belong unto him. And again, if the
Apostle did not challenge this to him self to ordain Timothy alone, sure he
appointed neither Bishop Timothy, nor Archbishop Titus, (as it pleases the
Replyer, I think meerily according to his manner to call them) to ordain
Ministers of the word by their own power. Which further appears in that he
wills Titus to deal with that business as he had given him order before to
deal in it. Tit. 1.5.
2. Tim. 3.10.
To Timothy he writes that he had thoroughly seen and observed and known his
manner of dealinge in the Church, and his course of life, which is commended in
him to encourage him still, so to follow his course and carriage as that he
might in like manner both in the rest of his life, and principally in the
service of the Church govern him self as he had seen him to do before him in
like causes. Now, Timothy, having seen this president and experience in his
person of ordayning to the Ministry of the Gospel, not by any one man, no
not by the Apostle, but by the assembly of Elders, observed it no doubt, and
was so taught by the commendation given him of the Apostle, not to be
th'ordinarie of any, as he speaks, or to ordain any Ministers of the word
alone, though he were (I say not a Bishop as the Replier imagines) but an
Evangelist. Which, it were nothing to say is to be greater then a Bishop or
Archbishop, who are no body in the church by the ordinance of God, but
creatures of earthly Princes: but greater then Teachers, Pastors, or Prophets,
and next to the Apostles the highest degree of ministry in the Church. And if
Timothy an Evangelist could not do it, then Titus whom he makes but an
Archbishop, which at most is yet far under an Evangelist could not do it.
And it is plain, that he is willed to deal in that service according to the
instructions and order which the Apostle had given him for it, which can be no
other then such as he exercised him self. And thus much for the ordinary and
ouerseer both of the people and of the Pastors and Teachers: with which point,
his two arguments to prove Bishops and Archbishops to have bin in the
primitive Church, are answered.

Now follows his conclusion which is as glorious and triumphant, as his
premises have bin weak and slender. And shall we now (says the Replyer)
dare to say that this office of Bishop and Archbishop did work a way to
Antichrists pride, and so forth, with sundry amplifications of the matter.
Whereof the first is, that it is his judgment (and he says he likes his
judgment the better, because Saint Paul was of the same mind) these offices
were the best way to have stayed and repressed Antichrists pride, if says
he (referring to Princes their supreme gouuernement) they had according to
Gods word directed their Consistories, Synodes and Counsels in all matters
which are commonly called ecclesiastical. This is his first amplification,
wherein he gives the direction of all matters ecclesiastical to Bishops and
Archbishops. He adds in deed, according to Gods word, placing it
doubtfullie, that it may be taken either that their offices are according to
Gods word: or that they should in them, carry them selves according to Gods
word: But whether of both it be, imports not: for, according to Gods word,
there is no such office in the Church as I have showed already, and being no
such office, what interest can they have while they continue such, either to
direct, or to have any place at all in such Synodes and Counsels. So far of
is it, if the matter may be ordered by Gods word, that they should carry all
matters ecclesiastical. The Princes prerogative is notwithstanding here
reserved, which depends not upon his reservation, but has other such
certain title to claim by, as the Princes are not to be beholding to their
Prelates for reserving them their supreme government as of alms for them.

Another point is, that not these offices, but the encroching of th'Archbishop
of Rome over all other Bishops and Archebishops was the breaking of Gods
ordinance and the way to Antichrists pride. Adoni-bezek, as we read in the
first of the book of Judges, cut of the fingers and toes of 24. Kings, and put
them under his table at his feet to geather the crommes that fell from his
table, and the same judgment after fell upon him. Even so some Pastors cast
down all other Pastors and officers of the church within a City or Dioces
under them. After amongst Bishops some dealt with his companions as they had
done with theirs, and became Archbishops, and subdued all the Bishops in a
Province, Country or Region under them. Now, if amongst Archbishops, there
rose up one to recompense them again the wrong they had done to their
fellowe-Bishops (if yet it may be called wrong, where at the first there was
no right) what great cause have they to complain. When Bishops and Archbishops
cut of as it were the hands and feet of their fellows, and cast them under
them, to geather the crommes that fell from them, did not they teach other by
their example to do the like also to them? Yea but (says he) the Archbishop
of Room would be higher then all his fellows, and be Bishop over the whole
Church, to represent Christ. This was in deed the highest step, and even the
footestoole of the seat of Antichrist. But, how mounted he thus hye, to come
so near such a seat of pride, was not this way made by sundry steps
before, ere he came at the highest, and was he not nearer and in greater
possibility of it, being a Bishop with many other, then if there had bin none
such but all Pastors like the elect Angels had kept their original? For as it
was not possible for a man to lift up his foot from the ground to any hye
seat far above his reach, but must go to it by stairs and degrees from one
to another, till he come to the highest: So did Satan in his mystery of
iniquity make these stairs for the mounting of Antichrist: whereby at the
last, he settled him as amongst the stars. But this he seems to note as
unlawful. And no doubt it is so. But, so were also the other, according to
their degrees, which he would have to be esteemed lawefull But if the case were
such, as Christian Princes did all receive the Gospel, and that a general
Council were held, and to be continued, or renewed, as occasion should
require, and Christian Princes by consent should appoint a moderator for
direction of the Aecumenicall Counsels, and name him Pope, or give him some
other title, noting his employment greater then of any Bishop or Archbishop,
who are but, by the Replyers own rule, to direct their Synodes and Counsels
of their Diocesses and Provinces: what exception could the Replier take unto
this, why they might not so do? After they had made this first ouverture, what
can he allege why they might not, in regard of using him to such purpose,
free him from the service of any particular Congregation that he might wholly
attend upon the general causes of the Church? And because wealth, honor,
and authority may give him the more credit, and for that Monarchy is the best
kind of government, and most easy and ready for all men, who best
understand in it, their business requiringe, to whom to go, and where to seek
their remedy: what reason can he bring why it should not be lawful for them
all to do herein, by common consent in all Christendom, that which is done
in some, by any one soueraign Prince in his kingdom. Or, if without all these,
circumstances the Princes now professing the gospel, should agree that the
Archbishop of Coleyn one of the Princes Electors, or any other should have, use
and exercise over all the Churches of the Gospel, in what kingdom of the
christian world soever, the same supreme power and authority in all causes
ecclesiastical that ever the Pope had, or exercised, and should proceed by
the same course and order of the Cannon law, as the Archbishop of Room does
with one only promise, of disanulling and abolishing all such Cannons as are
repugnant to the law of God: what could the Replier allege, why either the
Archbishop of Colleyne, or any other Archbishop, or Bishop, might not by such
consent, be made a Protestant Pope, and an universal Bishop over all the
Churches of the Gospel, as the Archbishop of Rome by like consent of the Kings
supporters of the Keys and arms of Antichrist, is esteemed Pope, and
universal Bishop over all Ecclesiastical causes within all their Dominions.
What reason can he make, why Princes should not so consent, or what advise
would he give, if any Bishop or Archbishop of his acquaintance, were the man
upon whom they should like to bestow this honor, from Episcopal or
Archiepiscopall jurisdiction, to advance him to Papal Supremacy? What a
faithful Pastor should do in such a case, is not hard to say. For it is
clear, that they should do as our Savior Christ did, Luke. 12.13.
when things not agreeing with his calling were offered and brought unto him:
Who refused to part the inheritance between brethren, John 6.15.
who withdrewe him self from the people as far as he could, going up into an
high mountain, when they would have made him a King, Mat. 4.8.9.
and with detestation avoided the speech of offer of all the kingdoms of the
world and* the glory of the same. Judge. 8.23.
They should answer with Gedeon, when the kingdom, with the alteration of
the government which God had set over his people, was presented unto him, I
will not reign over you, the Lord your God, he shall reign over you, and
govern you according such order as he has appointed. They were to answer
with Daniell, Your gifts (o Kings) keep to your selves, and bestow your
regalities and honors upon some other: Dani. 5.17.
but I will declare the scripture, and the interpretation of it unto you. As
the honorable olive tree, the sweet fig tree, and the cheerful Vine, answer
in the parable of Iotham, that they would not leave their precious fruit
whereby they honored, Iud. 9.
delyted and rejoiced God and men, to go reign over the trees of the forest:
So should a faithful servant of God and of his people answer, I will not
leave the preaching of the Gospel, the ministry of the word, the honoring
and rejoicing of God and man, with my precious fruit, to take an unlawful
government upon me. This (I say) ought to be the answer of a faithful and
true servant of God, keeping his first institution, as it was ordained by our
Savior Christ. But what other advise the Replier could give in such a case to
his friend, but to accept of the offer, and the same which the Bryar made in
Jothams parable, which had nothing but a shodowe to boast of, and Abimelech
the unnoble and base son of Gedeon, represented by it, which was, whether is
it better for you that three score and ten men rule you, or that one man have
the dominion over you, Come cover your selves with my shadow, and if not, let
fire come out of the brier, Iud. 9.15.
and consume the very trees of Libanus. This must needs be his advise in
effect, except he can allege some other sufficient reason of difference, why
there may not as well be a Protestant Pope, as a Catholic Pope, or why, all
the rest of the body of the Hierarchy that is in the Roomish Church, being in
the reformed Churches, the head of it only should be wanting. For if it be
lawful to have Ministers, that by ruling all ecclesiastical causes in a
Diocese or Province, and the greatest part of a noble kingdom, as Princes
that gouuerne over Counties, and Duchies, and Prelates, that resemble the
Lords, Earls, and Dukes of the Empire, in the circuit of their government,
in their titles, state, pompes, houses, furniture, train, and living, they
which allow of these things, will hardly find any good reason, why there may
not be a chief Prelate over them, who may be the representation of the
Emperor. Peradventure he will say (for some signification of it he makes in
this place) this were unlawful, because this is a Royalty that belongs
only to our Savior Christ, to be the head of his Church: but I doubt if they
set up their rest in this cause, wholly, and only upon that reason, how it
will serve to keep the Pope out of his seat, especially such a protestant
Pope, as I speak of, who should use, or at least in general terms
(notwithstanding he obeyed little) be prescribed to use no Cannons contrary to
the law of God, and who would easily confess and acknowledge that his
headship is not in any such respect as it peculiarly belongs to our Savior
Christ, that is, by his own right to govern, and direct the whole body of
the Church, at all times and in all ages, but only to direct as his minister
and servant, the Church of his age and time, in such matters ecclesiastical,
as by lawful Cannons are referred from inferior courts by appeal, or
otherwise to him as the chief minister. It is true in deed, that the further
a man goes from the first institution, the more he offends, and so the
Pope, by the fulness of the power he chalengeth over all, is further from the
ordinance of our Savior Christ, who has appointed in the ordinary guydance
of the Church no office to be exercised by any one ecclesiastical person
greater then is the office of the Pastors, and whom he has made all equal
in every respect of ministry, jurisdiction, and of power. But otherwise, it
will be found that Bishops and Archbishops, have made such a way to the
Popedom, as it will be heard, when they are come so far, to keep them
back with any great reason from the other. And thus much of his second
amplification.

The third has no manner of reasonable coherence with any thing that goes
before, and is so absurd in sense, as sometime, I doubted, the Replyer could
not be so grossly ouerseene, as to have written it in his original, so as
by print it is delivered unto us: but thus it is printed. For else (that is,
except as he would feign have proved a little before, the breach of the office
of By hops and Archbishoppes were the way to bring in Antichrist and not their
office) why might they not as well say that Christ's universal Bishopric or
Archbishopricke did work a way to Antichrists pride and presumption, because
he pretends, usurps, and abuses that kind of ministry which is due and
proper only to Christ. Christ is called a stone of offense, if Christ then had
not bin the stone, none had stu^bled at him. Nay then if there were no Christ,
there could be no Antichrist: if there had bin no Archbishop, then the
Archbishop of Rome had not been Pope (for so I think he would have said
although his words be otherwise). And if there were no use, there were no abuse
of any thing. Thus far the Replyer: wherein to pass by some speeches that
can have no good sense, and the absurdity of this inference, and that of all
comparisons of things in heaven and in earth none could fit him for this
purpose but one, taken from our Savior Christ. I will only answer the effect
of his reason.

The Declaration intends not, by saying that the change of Gods ordinance
made a way to the pride of Antichrist, to say, that for this reason the office
of Bishops and Archbishops (in whom I think he rightly gathers it was meant
the ordinance of God was changed, as it was in deed,) made way to Antichrist,
because, if there had never bin any Bishop or Archbi hop, then an Archbishop
of Room had never bin Pope. This is not the reason, which the Declaration
intends, but the reason is manifest in this, that by such means there was
made a change of Gods ordinance, namely by bringing in such offices into the
Church. And then in departing so far from the original institution of
Pastoures, as that one came to take upon him the charge and government of
thirty thousand, or forty thousand Churches or more these chaunges of Gods
ordinance, which were made in bringing in these offices of Bishops and
Archbishoppes into the Church, made way to Antichrist to come to his seat. For
as the lower steps help a man to come from one to another, till he come to
the highest, and the higher every degree is, the nearer it aduaunceth him to
the top: So every staire that went from the Lords ordinance made way to other,
and the hye degrees of Bishop and Archbishop, brought the man of sin very
near his seat wherein he was to sit down and boast him self against God.
In every lawful trade of life, there are sundry degrees of preferrement,
whereof every one makes way to other, so is it in the unlawful and
Antichristian Papacy. The inferior degrees which Satan had procured in his
mystery of iniquity, did all help to advance that sinful man to the throne
of iniquity. Whereby appears, that the very offices of Bishops and
Archbishops made way to that presumption, and in what manner. Yet does the
Replyer enforce this proof so far, as that he would have these offices to
have bin and yet to be the greatest impedimentes to the Popes rising in times
past and to his present greatness. Whereof he alleges no other reason, but
that the Archbishop of Carthage detecting his forgeries, kept him short in
Affrike, and the Archbishop of Rauenna kept him long tackling. The first
whereof is not true, for neither was there at that time he notes, any such
Archbishop, as since have bin and now are in the church, neither was that he
means detected by any one, but by the Fathers of the Council. As for
Rauenna, not he only, but many other Archbishops and Bishops, the Abbots,
Priours, Colleges, namely the College of Sorbone have had contention with the
Bishop of Rome some before he was grown to the Popedom, and some in the
midst of his pride: So as, if Contention with that sea, be a justification of
their callings, that have contended with him, schools of error, and sinkes of
impiety, and most unlawful places and functions may be justified. This is
yet enforced further, by comparison with the order set down for the guyding of
the Church in the Declaration, as less able to hold out that pride, then
these his offices are. In deed, if a man should esteem these things by
flesh and blood, the envy and jealousy that Bishops and Archbishops may have
of the rising and greatness one of another, and their worldly means, by favor,
wealth, authority, and such like, to impeach and hinder their growing, might
in that respect be a greater impediment. But, the continuance in the ordinance
of God, had bin without all comparison the stronger mean, if we measure these
things as they ought to be measured. The Lord by the weak things which he
has chosen, 1. Cor. 1.27 28. 2. Cor. 10.4. 5.6.
confounds the great things of this world, and has given his servants
furniture for spiritual warfare, which is mighty from God, to the subduing of
every imagination that exalts up it self against God. And therefore, to make
way to this presumption, it was needful this ordinance of GOD should first be
changed. Yet is the Replyer bold to say, that the order set down in the
Declaration might sooner set up a thousand petite Antichrists, then pull
down one. For their pulling down of one by it, I have spoken, for the setting
up of any, it is not possible, this being as it is the institution of our
Savior Christ. And the institution being such, as that no one caryeth any
cause, but all things are guyded by the consent of a number, most fearing GOD,
and of best ability for that purpose, which is most directly contrary to
tyranny, this usurpation could not reasonably be feared. If there be many
Antichrists, as in some sense the Evangelist John fayeth, there are, and if
all they who directly oppose to the doctrine and ordinances of Christ be
Antichrists, some great Antichrists, and some petyte Antichrists, as he
terms them, from the Pope the top of all that Romish Hierarchy, to the
reading priest, the tail thereof, a man should clear but a feawe, I doubt,
from that foul name and crime.

Here is added an impertinent matter, that Archbishops nor Bishops have not
brought in all kind of false doctrine, although some Archeheretikes have bin
Archbishops, as Nestorius was. For so says he, also were sundry that were
Presbiters, Priests, or Elders, and Doctors. A needles point to touch, as the
rest which he has debated in this cause: the Declaration not charging any at
all by name in this place, either Bishops or Archbishops, nor by any just
collection, but in as much as in their offices the ordinance of God was
changed, whereby way was made for Antichrist, who brought in all kind of false
doctrine and confusion. Not content thus to answer for them who^ no man
impleaded, he enters again into comparison between the offices of Bishop and
Archbishop, and the order set down in the Declaration, for the direction of
the Church: affirming this to be more meet, as being of more learned men.
Wherein to grant where more are learned, there would be harder passage for
false doctrine, he utterly mistaketh the matter to think that where that order
he disliketh, should, or does take place, that there the directours of Church
matters, are, or would be unlearned. The nature of the order it self, which
admits no Minister but learned, nor any decision of weight, but by advise of
many, and with appointed conferences and Synodes of learned men for such
purposes: besides the assurance of Gods favorable blessing of his own
ordinance, and the experience of the Synodes of the reformed Churches, the
comparison of their judgments, Cannons, and other constitutions, with the
like of the other in any part, bears witness, whether the want of learning
and piety both, must needs be greater in it, then in the other.

Hitherto of the primitive Churches preserving and maintayning the order set
down in the Declaration. Now follows the like of the best reformed Churches
of this age. In the Replye whereunto, here is an occasion taken to enter into
the whole cause a-newe, by making question, whether the order now restored in
the Churches rightly reformed, be the same, that was exercised in the
primitive Church. Against which point he brings little other reason, then he
alleged before. But ere he come to the repetition of those arguments, he
finds great fault, that the Declaration uses this speech, that this order
is restored in all rightly reformed churches. This title and name, he charge
with open slander of many true Christian, and godly reformed churches besides
ours, for these are his words. Whereupon, after his manner, he reasons thus,
sporting him self, if not rightly reformed (says he) then wrong fully, and so
not reformed but deformed, as having driven out one Devil by another, and
removed one deformity to establishe another. Would a man have looked for such
a replye to this word? but to pacify his offense taken against right, he is
to understand, that such Churches are here said to be rightly reformed,
which are so, both in doctrine and in the order of the Church. In which
respect, would to God, all the Churches professing the Gospel were reformed.
But it is plain, that notwithstanding they be all in most and the
principallest points of doctrine, yet some there are, not reformed in some
points of doctrine, and more, not in the Evangelical policy, and Discipline
of the Church. Because, he only touches this point, I am not willing neither
to stand longer upon it. But, if he consider well with him self, the state
of all the Churches of the Gospel, I think (as bold as he is, to bolster
up things that need further reformation) yet he will not take upon him to
mainteyne, that in all things, all such Churches are rightly reformed.

Before he comes to his reasons to prove the order of the primitive Church
not restored, he forestalleth the argument of the Declaration, before he come
at it, taken from the benefit growing to the reformed Churches by this order,
and the contrary loss to others without it. But there is no cause to stay
upon his reply to it, this matter being after fully and at large debated by
him, where shall be answered what soever he has material to this point: and
because there is little or nothing here worth the answering, most of this
speech being spent in a tale or two out of Aesope, Of a Dog and a Fox, with
much gybing and jesting upon the same, matters fitter for some other stage
then he is now upon. For now he is upon a Theater where men and Angels
look upon him: yea the Lord blessed for ever, Amen. And where the Church
especially amongst us, attend to hear of him, whether it be in good state,
such as may promise the continuance, and the increase of the blessing of God
upon us, or in an evil estate and such as may threaten the wrath of God, and
such grievous punishments as in his anger he chastises the disobediences of
his people with, if being warned and called upon to reform them, they do not
redress nor amend them. Which presence, and expectation, requires a far
other speech and style then is here used. Therefore, I wish he may take this
warning, hereafter to leave this kind of speech, except he will occupy him
self with making plays, as he was wont to do: but if he will deal with
matters of gravity and divinity, to entreat grauilie of them, and as
becomes a Divine. Now let us come to his reasons. He argues that the order
of the primitive Church is not restored now in the best reformed Churces: for
his first reason, he alleges, that the offices of Apostles and such like
are not restored. Wherein, knowing his answer to be ready, that it is to be
understood of that order which was settled in the primitive church to continue,
these being but temporary and extraordinary, he makes him self this
answer, and then replyeth to it, that so were also the Elders whose office is
restored, or if it be otherwise, that they were to remain always, why then
did they not always continue, but have ceased so many years, till they were
now in this age restored again. Whereunto it is to be answered, as he
partly teaches, that most of the principal points of the doctrine were not
known, in the public ministry of the Church for many years, at the least,
not so, as all parts might take knowledge of it. I am not ignorant that there
are many notable testimonies that in all ages, the truth of Religion, was
through the goodness of God made known to some, and so was it also (I doubt
not) in the matters of the Discipline of the Church. But as in the most public
and apparent visible Churches, in all parts, the holy doctrine it self
ceased, and the true worship of God was turned into superstition and idolatry.
So in the order and guydance of the church, the right means and only lawful
instituted and ordained of God ceased in them. This yet does not satisfy the
replyer, because he says of the rest, Pastors, Teachers, and Deacons, we are
able to show that there were in all ages, good and badde, why then should not
the like be showed of the Elder, if it were alike perpetual. In which replye,
it is by the way to be observed, that he acknowledges the perpetuity of the
Teachers office, and so good witness to warrant it. For the continuance of
these in the church, he did well to shuffle good and badde together. But,
lawful Pastors, Teachers, and Deacons, such as our Savior appointed to be in
his church, where will he show them to have continued, I doubt not, but he
will allege the popish Priests, Doctors, and Deacons: but he is to
remember, thar he set down in an other place, that the Church of Room does
overthrow the foundation, which he declares to be Christ JESUS in an other
place, without whom neither can any particular man be saved, nor any assembly
be the visible Church of Christ.

And if the church of Room have not been for many years a true visible
Church of Christ, then could not the priests and other their Cleargie-men be
true and lawful Pastors or officers in any place of the Church. This he
thinks to take away with saying, good and badde. In deed, if their evil
had been only in life, or in some one principal point of doctrine, it were
something he said. But, their defect was in the very calling. For Christ
being the door, and GOD that opens to the Pastors that enter by it, and all
that enter otherwise, are thieves and murderers. What reckoning can be made of
their calling to be lawful, since the time that the doctrine of salvation by
Christ JESUS, and by faith in him only was condemned. But to deal more
easily with them, and not to bring them to the trial of the word which they
are in no sort able to endure, and to judge them by the Cannons: amongst so
many as they were, where can he show any, for many years together,
lawefully called, according to the best Cannons: whereby a dew examination of
learning and life going before, the free consent of the Church, whom it
concerns, and ordination or layinge on of hands by those to whom it
appertains is so required, as if default be made either in the examination,
or election, the whole action is disanulled and made void. Now, if the
Symoniacall compactes and bargaynes the brybes to procure favor for benefices,
the buyings of aduousons and resignations, which are general mischiefs in
the popish Church (And I would to God it might be said they are only there)
and the agreede and authorized default of due election in all, be compared with
these Cannons: it will be found, that for many years, no one of their Priests
has been by those Cannons lawfully called. But if the manner of calling them
were lawful, how unlike are the offices and functions exercised with them, to
those which our Savior has appointed. Their Priests are ordained not to
preach the Gospel, or to any other duty of a true Pastor, but to offer
up Christ in sacrifice for the living and for the dead. Teachers they have
none at all, but school Doctors, and created by the Popes writ, which is
nothing like the Teacher of the Church set in it by our Savior Christ for
the work of the ministry. A Deaco^, by the first institution should be the
disposer of the liberality and bounty of the Church, bestowed for the relief
of the poor, such as are in misery: whereof no shadow appears in their
Deacons, and I would this were only true of theirs. Whereby appears, that
in the Romish Church, if he mean that, as I take it, he must needs do, he
shall not find in it, for many years, any lawful Pastor, Teacher, or
Deacon, neither by the word of God, nor by the better Cannons that have bin
made concerning their calling: yet now the third time the Replyer helping him
self with good and bad, tagge ana ragge, mainteyneth, that Pastors, Teachers,
and Deacons, have always continued in the church: that by such pretense, he
might seem to say somewhat against the Elders office, because, as he says,
it did not so continewe. But I have already showed, this was no continuance of
the holy ministeries which our Savior ordained, but other humane deuyses and
creatures of Popes, Archbishops, and Bishops. Which yet, if it do not content
him, I may say further, that this office of Elder, continued in such sort,
as he affirms the other to have done. For, what were the Ciuilians, Doctors,
and Proctours, Chauncelors, Commissaries, Officialls, and the rest of that
traffic, Officers, and Retaylers to the great Marchaunts of souls,
Archbishopps and Bishods: who, notwithstanding they were lay men, did
administer the censures of the Church without any due and ordinary
ecclesiastical calling in deed at the appointment only of their Lords and
Masters the Bishops, to a foul profanation of the holy censure of the Church:
whether it be done in Babylon or in Syon. For this iniquity also is to be
found even in the Church of God. Yet, in their administration, the office of
the Elder, is as much, and a great deal more to be seen, then true and
lawful Pastors, Teachers, and Deacons appear to have continued in such tagge
and ragge, as were in the popish church. But, the truth is, that all
Evangelical charges, and the Gospel it self, was deteyned in unrighteousness,
and the free, right, and original, nature, use and benefit of these offices
ceased and was interrupted for a time, as the like has come to pass in other
such wastes and desolations of the Church, as in the time of some of the
Judges, in the reign of Manasses, and in the captivity, the ordinary offices
and duties were interrupted, and God extraordinarily preserved his people. All
these things were for a time, Luke. 20.9.
as the inheritance, in the parable of the Gospel, in the hands and
possession of unjust and rebellious servants. But now the Lord sends out
his servants, and demands of his servants that fruit, service and
honor, which is due unto him: with a part whereof he will not be satisfied,
but will have all his rightes and regalities, prerogatives and offices restored
unto him, or else will punish them as rebels and unjust withholders. This is
the answer I make to this point, which the Replyer bolteth out, in ceasing by
de facto, and not de iure, and when he has done, replyeth to it with an idle
question, if they were once, where they have bin hidden or banished all this
while? or if they were dead and buried, etc. not worth any answer.

Another reason why the order used in the primitive Church should not be
restored now in the reformed Churches, is because they have no Bishops nor
Archbishops, whom he affirms to have bin in that time, yea and ordained by
the Apostles to have authority over them, in the Regions and Cities limited to
them. Which superior and old standards to displace (says he) to bring in
young and inferior Seignours, as they, who having seen the old temple did
also see, the laying of the foundation of the new: So would it make a man's
heart throbbe and bleed, to see how the beauty of the Church is vaded, her
ornaments spoiled, her body haled, under pretense of reforming. This argument
needs no long answer to it, having bin sufficiently showed before, that it
is a vanity to think, that such offices, as Archbishops and Bishops now
bear over the Churches, and the Ministers of the same, to have bin in that
time. Here it may suffice, as it is but affirmed with a word of his, without
any manner of proof, so to deny it with another, upon the reasons before
alleged. As for his weeping to see the old standards pulled down, and the
Church spoiled of her ornaments, if he mean hereby the manours and royalties
that are in other men's hands, who^ can he blame for it more then such, as care
not how the successors do, so they may aspire to the dignity they
couetouslie and ambitiouslie seek and labor for. If he mean not those
branches, but the trees them selves, from whence they grow: let him consider
the bitter fruit they have borne, and the unwholesome shadow they have cast,
from the first root they took, and especially of late: he shall have no
cause to weep to see the axe making ready to be laid to their roots. His
heart should rather bleed to see, in the garden of God, any trees, wherein
unclean birds make their nestes, and unclean beasts take their reast, and
from whence the clean are driven for fear of annoyance, and which suffer no
fruit or heavenly plant to grow under them, or near unto them. Then would
he pray with the watchmen of whom Daniell writes, Dan. 4.11.
Cut down (o Lord) these great and noisome trees, which are strong to evil
and not to good. Many a fair tree has the Lord plucked up, and, in time, it
is to be hoped, that he will do the like to these, For our Savior has
said: Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
up. Mat. 15.13.
His heart bleedeth to see the goodly leases that are drawn from
Church-liuings, and the great Lordshippes that are gone from the Clergy, and
Cathedral Churches, and peradventure some other gifts, to see the
dispensations which seem to threaten the carrying away of an I Will, and an
Earldome, from some who would feign enjoy them still. But whose heart is
moved with compassion of the people of God (which is in deed his true
church) to see the word of God daily taken from them, and they left as a
flock of sheep upon the mountains without their shephearde, to see the
Preachers forbidden to preach the Gospel, to see the church kept as in
captivity, under a reading and lordly ministry, that neither teach the
people them selves, nor suffer other that would to teach them to see goodly
assemblies, which have made heaven and earth to ringe and resounde again with
the praises of God, scattred and distolued, to see the places like Eden the
garden of God, before the storm, laid wast and desolate as the desert places,
to see the zealous people of God running as in a drought, to find a spring of
sweet waters, where they may quench their thirste, and faynting in their
souls for want of it, so many fountaynes being stopped and sealed up they
that have the bowels of Christ in them, are to be moved with these things. As
for matters of grief here mentioned, the matter is not so great, so that
things be done by due order and with consideration of sufficient maintenance of
those which God has appointed for the work of the ministry, of all the
ordinances of God, and the edification and comfort of his people.

Hitherto in this section the Replyer has discoursed of the former sort of
reasons of this section, which is of the causes confirming the order set down
in the Declaration. Now he proceeds to the other argument remaining, which
is of the great fruit and benefit of this order in the Churches which have
received it, and the want of the same in such as have not yet restored it
again. Wherein, first scanning upon all, he denies the order of the
primitive Church to be restored in all, and alleges for reason the
differences amongst them in one point or other, of order, office, discipline,
ryte or ceremony. Of all which, or any of them, he gives no one instance.
After repeating this again, in mention of the Scottishe Church, he asks,
whether their government and order, their making of officers, and their
administration of Sacraments, and book of common prayers, be all one with
the book which has bin now three times exhibited in Parliament. With this
repetition, having gotten the advantage to make mention of a book of common
prayer: here he rests and takes this one example for all, to show the
differences amongst the reformed Churches. Which he would show by affirminge
of differences between the Scottishe book of common prayer, and the book
presented in Parliament written, and the same printed at Middelborough, at
London, and at Scotland, above three hundred differences, being a book little
bigger then an Almanacke. All which points, if they were true, what reformed
Churches are these that differ one from another, which he undertook to prove.
The Scottish Church is one, true, but where is the other, from which it
differs, except the other be the book presented written in Parliament in
England he names none. But concerning the books, if they have so many
differences, why did he not note, at the least, some two or three of the
principal.

It is not possible almost, for a man to write out one and the same copye
oftentimes, or to print it, but that there will be some sentence, clause,
word, syllable, letter, title, or distinction changed. If the differences had
bin material, notwithstanding it were never so impertinent, I doubt not, but
having fallen into the mention of it, he would have taken pain to have noted
some of the principal printed copies of that which was written and presented,
he names three, which should be printed in three sundry Countries, England,
Scotland, and the low Countries, a matter of as much untruth, as the rest of
his replies. As for the bigness of the book of common prayer presented in
Parliament, which he, to disgrace it, says, was the bigness of an Almanacke. I
know not of what bigness he may have seen some Almanacke, for all are not of
one equal bigness, but if he would justly have found fault with that book,
for being too little, he should have noted that it had wanted some point
necessary to be in such a book, either for public prayers, or fot
administration of Sacraments, or any such like matter. But if it have all such
things in it at large, there is no fault justly to be found with the
smallnes of it. It might easily have bin greater, if it had bin stuffed with
impertinent matters nothing belonging to the Ministers office, nor warrantable
by the word of God, as with orders for private administrations of the
Sacraments, Churching of Women, Buryall service, Confirmation, making of
Priests and Deacons, Bishops and Archbishops with a number of other such like.
But these, and such like, being matters neither warranted by the word, nor
set down in the ancient Lyturgies bearing the names of James the Apostle, of
Chrysostom, and of Basile, nor in the Liturgy of the reformed Churges, it
seems there was no cause to make it bigger with such stuff. A little point
of a Diamond is more worth then a great deal of such silver as we had at the
beginning of her Majesty's reign, and now (to her highness immortalll praise,
and enriching of all the subjects, with out any offense for the innovation,
and to the great contentement of all men) is made finer, and brought to the
ancient standard appointed by law. Books, and namely of this use, are not to
be wayed at the Kings beam, where they waighe packes and vessels of great
bulk and quantity, but in golden waightes and balances, where things of
price and valewe are used to be wayed. A mass of owre and an ingotte of silver
or gold, are greater before they come to the furnace, but after the fire has
tried and refined them, from dross and base metal, the body of it is not so
great, yet is it more rich and precious, then it was before. In like manner,
that little book, if it have bin well purged and tried, and oftentimes refined
in the Lords furnace, by workmen of skill, and faithefull in their service,
notwithstanding it be but little, yet may be much more worth then some other of
greater bigness and embased with much allay. No man finds fault now that a
shilling is near as little as a slyp-tester was at the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, but rather acknowledged herein that her Majesty has
deserved all humble thanks of all her subjects, with most faithful duty and
service, to her highness great praise and honor. Oh that it might please GOD,
in whose hand the hearts of Princes are, as the Bardge is in the Bardgmans, to
turn whither he will, to turn this Royal Bardge of her Majesty's heart,
toward the Lords sanctuary, to consider well all things in it, and to touch
the gold and silver of it (which ought to be ritchest as the sicle of the
Sanctuary also was wont to be) and finding it, besides all the abominable
dross that her Majesty through the goodness of God has taken from it, to
hold yet much allay and base metal: to command it to be tried and refyned
yet seven times in the fire, till all the silver and gold in it, and the
treasure belonging to it, should be fine and precious, and answerable to the
standarde ordained by the law of God, and the Temple of the Lord in a
spiritual manner, rich and royal as in the days of Solomon. Surely, if the
Lord should vouchsafe so to bless us, much less cause should any man have to
quarrel at the small quantity of the book of common prayer or any other
pieces of the holy treasure and vessels of the Sanctuary being incomparably
enriched in estimation and price, but rather should have more just cause then
for crying, Down the bace money, and enritching our coin according to a
standarde appointed by the laws of the Realm, to acknowledge with all humble
thanks and increase of most duetifull love and allegance, a care so Princely,
so Christian, so agreeing with the like presidents of her right noble
Ancetours, her Highness Father and Brother, of worthy memory, and her own
religious and most honorable beginnings, to the exceeding great increase of
the honor of Almighty God, her Majesty's immortal praise with God and men,
and the unspeakable rejoicing and comfort of many thousands of her most
loyal and duetifull subjects. Therefore it is not the smallnes of that book
that can disgrace it, seeinge that comes of the taking away of many
unnecessary parts, and seeing that it conteyneth all such parts in it, as
are necessary and like to have bin in any Liturgy reported to have bin within
any time of five hundred years after Christ, or are now found to be used in
any of the reformed Churches. And thus much upon the occasion here offered of
this book. Again having thus answered the Reply to these words, all rightly
reformed churches, I am now to proceed to the examination of his exceptions,
to the fruit alleged by the declaration to come of this order of discipline
prescribed in tbe word, and the want of the like where it is not received. The
declaration herein says, that the foresaid order is now restored again in all
rightly reformed churches with such daily increase and glory of the kingdom of
Christ, and suppression of the tyranny of Satan, that the only experience of
it, might be a sufficient persuasio^ to us to leave this disordred state of
ours, wherein we have so long labored with so little profit. The reply to this,
begins with a tale out of Aesops fables, of an Ass lode^ with salt, which
is unsavory, I dout not to the discrete reader, howsoever he would make it taste
with his moral. I wish he did as well consider Balaams ass and the reproof
wherewith the du^be beast, speaking with man's voice, 2. Pet. 2.15.
reproved the madness of Balaam, who desired the reward of iniquity, that is,
of cursing the people of god: a warning to al prophets to take heed they be
not carried away with hope of rewards (although they might hope thereby to
atteine to greatest honors) to oppose them to god and his people, to curse that
which is blessed of god, and be an occasion of the fall of Israel. The next
point in this reply is a matter of no coherence with that which was propounded,
of the fruit of discipline where it is established, but a denial that we are
bound to follow their examples herin: yea or that of the primit. church it self,
for these are his very words, which declare, says he, what we may do, but bind
us not by any law or commandment of Christ and his Apostles. Which because he
says it is the very point he demureth upon, I will show him such books for
it, as he shall have cause to say the law of god is clear and to demurre no
more upon this matter. What good example there may be any wheresoever we are
bound to follow it by the Apostles rule saying, What things soever are true,
reverend, just, pure, amiable, co^me^dable, Phil. 4.6.
if there be any virtue, or any praise think of these things: and do these
things, which ye have learned, received, heard and seen in me, and the God of
peace be with you. Which rule not being of particular persons only, but
extending it self also to the Churches, as concerning here, as well the body of
the Church of the Philippians, as any special member in it, declares, that
Churches are bound to follow the good examples of other Churches.

To the Corinthes the Apostle says, in a matter that concerned a part of the
government of the Church: Jf any seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. Which I think, leaving the consideration of
it to the christian Reader, because it is commonly taken otherwise, may carry
this sense, that besides all the former reasons which he had used in that
matter, they should allege to such as were contentious, his contrary
custom, and the contrary custom and example of the Churches: meaning, that
both he in his person, and also all the Churches, so used that order of an
outward decency in the presence of the public ecclesiastical assembly,
whereof he there speaks as he willed the Church of Corinth for to use it. In
like manner does he press them with the examples of the Churches in another
point of Discipline, alleging the same, as binding them to correct and
reform their abuses, by the example of the good order in such points which
was used in other churches. Came the word of God (says the Apostle) from
you, or, is it come to you only? By which words, the Apostle presses them,
as constrained by contrary example of the churches, to reform their
disorders, except they would be singular, and esteem them selves only wise.
Wherein it is also to be observed, that the first says, Came the word of
GOD from you, for notinge hereby the Church of Jerusalem, planted by t'haduyse
and counsel of the Apostles, he declares, that other Churches were to cast
their eyes, as upon all the churches that were at that time, to conform them
selves like unto them: so especially that they were to have care to be like the
church of Jerusalem. From which church, as the word of God came, (as it was
said, The Law should come out of Syon, and the word of God from Jerusalem,
Act. 1.8.
according whereunto charge was given to the Apostles to testify of our
Savior in Jerusalem first then in all Jury, after in Samaria, and from
thence to the ends of the world) so did also the Discipline of God, and the
order appointed by our Savior Christ to be kept in all the churches: So as
there seemed the pattern to be, which all the churches were to follow, as
Moses was to express that which was showed in the mountain. To like purpose,
in another place, the same Apostle says, speaking of an order to gather for
the churches of Jewrie: So I have appointed in all the Churches of Galatia. 1.
Cor. 16.1.
Again, by the example of other churches, urging the church of Corinth, to
that which was duty for them to do. All which testimonies prove, that the
examples of the churches, in that wherein they are set before us in the word
of God to follow, and especially of the primitive Church, (which is by the
Replyer expounded to be the Church of the Apostles times, and of their
planting, whose example for that end is reported to us in the word of God)
do bind other churches to conform them selves unto them. There were in deed
some things extraordinary in them, which are easy to be discerned, and belong
not to our example. But that which was ordinary in them, for the same reason
it was delivered unto them, binds the churches of all ages to the like.

Now, the holy story reports, that the Apostles them selves, and by the
Evangelists, settled the Churches, in an ordinary course wherein they were to
continue, after their departure from them. Which, for what cause all should
not be bound unto, I see no sufficient reason that can be alleged. For, the
reasons for which such order was given to them, were the same for which we have
no less need of that order then they had. There were ordained Teachers in the
ptimitiue Church, because men are by nature ignorant of the will of God.
Pastors or Exhorters, because by nature men are disobedient and rebellious,
even to the known will of God. Elders as watchmen of the City of God, because
there are dangers without, and dangers within, Romans 7.
that may hazard the good estate thereof. The assembly of Elders, that the
solemn and public meetinges of the faithful, for the service of God, may be
carried with a holy and reverend gravity, offenses censured, and fit men
appointed for the public charges of it.

Last of all, Deacons were ordained, because we are to have the poor always
with us, and because that God naming him self the Father and the protector of
the poor, and enioyning his people to have care of them. This ought
principally to appear, in the public assemblies of Gods people gathered
together in his name. Of all which points, and of the rest of the Discipline
of the Church, what one is there, that we, for the same reason have not need
of, as well as they? and therefore stand bound to conform our selves to
their example. Which being constantly and universally practiced and used in
all the primitive Churches by order from the Apostles, and for reasons which
concern us, as much as they did them, is sufficient to prove that such
examples of the primitive Church do bind all later churches, although we
had no word of commandment otherwise to constrayne us. But, because he
rests upon this point, to see commandments for these things, let him
consider that which follows.

The general doctrines of the Apostles, which they taught the Churches to
observe, do so command the churches, as in duty and obedience of God they
are to obey them: according as it is said, He that hears you, hears me,
and he that despises you, or your doctrine, despises me. But the Discipline
of the Church is a part of the doctrine of the Apostles, which in general
appears by the 12. to the Romans, and the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and
in particular, in the several members and branches of it, shall god willing
hereafter appear. Therefore, it is plain, to be necessary by the Law and
commandment of Christ, that the churches keep that discipline which was
delivered them by the instruction and doctrine of the Apostles. Further, it is
a plain commandment of our Savior Christ, Mat. 18.17.
Tell the Church. Again, our Savior is said, with charge and commandment,
that they should be observed, Acts 1.2.3.
to have delivered to his Disciples such things, as for the space of forty
days, he declared to them, concerning his kingdom. A part whereof (it has
bin already showed) must needs be understood to have bin of the government
of his Church, which necessarily depends on his kingdom. The Apostle
likewise calls the instructions which he gave to Timothy, for guyding of the
Church, commandments, 1 Timothy 6.13
and charge him with most earnest charge and obtestation, as he will answer
it to God, who gives life to all things, and consequently withdraws it at
his pleasure, and to his son Jesus Christ, (by whom he will judge the
world) and who bare witness to the truth, even unto the death: that they
should be kept without any default, to that glorious coming again of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Further, of sundry particulars, the Apostle says, This
says the Lord, 1. Cor. 7.10. 1. Co. 11.23 1. Co. 14.37
This I have received of the Lord, and these are the commandments of the
Lord, with such like speeches. Which, being not always spoken of the most
weighty and principal points of the Discipline, sufficiently show, that
which is spoken of them to belong to other, which are greater then they, or
like unto them. And thus much to his demurre upon the point of the law.

Now proceeds he to the effects and fruits of this Discipline, mentioned
by the Declaration, to be seen in the churches where it is established, and
not to be seen where it is not received. Concerning the first point, he makes
instance of the troubles of the reformed Churches, and supposes, they would
say Amen to him, wishing therein, as he speaks, good luck, and that their
case were no better then ours, on condition it were no worse: which speech is
smallie to the purpose. For, the fruits of the Discipline, noted by the
Declaration are these, the increase of the kingdom and glory of Christ, and
suppression of the tyranny of Satan: which is not disprooued by this reason,
that they are persecuted for the Gospel, and in troubles, but rather
confirmed. For when was ever the kingdom of Christ more increased, and in
greater glory, then in time of persecution? This glory is in deed spiritual
and not worldly, but yet so truly glorious in the sight of God and his
Angels, as all the glory of this life is not to be compared to it. 1. Pet.
1.7.
The trial of faith (says the Apostle Peter) is much more precious then of
gold that perishes. Again it is said, That gold and silver, and precious
stones, yea all manner of riches are not to be compared with wisdom and the
true knowledge of God. Psalm. 19.11. Psalm. 119.14 Pro. 1.9. Pro. 4.9. Pro.
3.10.11 1. Pet 3.4. Matt. 13.44.
The same Solomon in his wisdom says, That the fear of God does more grace
those that are adorned with it, then brooches or chains, carcants, or
bracelettes, or any other ornaments. The like the Apostle Peter affirms of a
meek and quiet spirit. The kingdom of heaven (says our Savior) is like
the field which had a hidden treasure in it, a vein, and a mine of gold, for
purchasing whereof, a man sold all that he had, that he might make that field
his own. And again, It is like a pearl orient, Matt. 13 45.
and so fair, that it stained all other: and so ravished the merchant
Ieweller with the love thereof, that having many iewelles of great price, he
sold them all, to buy that one, that so far passed and exceeded all other.
In respect of which incomparable, but yet spiritual glory of this kingdom in
the Prophet Esaie, and in the Revelation the City of God is thus described:
Esa. 54.11.12.
Behold I will lay thy stones with carbuncle, and thy foundation with
Saphires: And I will make thy windows with Emeraudes, and thy gates shining
stones, and all thy borders of pleasant stones, Esaias. 54. ver. 11.12. In the
Revelation thus: He showed me the great City, holy Jerusalem, descending out
of heaven from God, Apoc. 21. ver. 10.11.12. ver. 18.19.20.21.
having the glory of God, and her shining was like unto a stone most precious,
as a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal. And had a great Wall and high, and had
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and the names writ ten, which
are the twelve Tribes of the children of Israel, etc. And the buylding of the
wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold like unto clear glass.
And the foundations of the wall of the City were garnished with all manner of
precious stones, the first foundation was Jasper, the second of Sapphire, the
third of a Chalcedonie, the fourth of an Eneraude, the fifth of a Sardonix, the
sixth of a Sardius, the seventh of a Chrysolite: the eight of a Beryll, the
ninth of a Topaze: the tenth of a Chrysoprasus: the eleventh, of a Iacinth: the
twelfth an Amethist. And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, and every gate
is of one pearl, and the street of the City is pure gold, as shining
glass, Apocalip. 21. ver. 10 11.12. etc. 18.19.20.21.

By all which places it appears that the glory of the kingdom of Christ, is
not in outward things, but the glory of his kingdom is in the conquest of
sin, and of Satan, it is in the preaching of his word, the ministry of
his Sacraments and Discipline, it is in faith, in the knowledge and fear of
God, in the obedience, constancy, and patience of his saints. These are not
in deed orient pearls of the East Indies, but pearls of heaven, and gold
and silver out of the Lords own treasury. And in this respect, Daniel in the
Lions den, Dan. 6.
for calling upon God, was more honorable then Darius in all his Persian pomp
and Majesty. Paul in his chain wherewith he was bound for the Gospells
sake, was of more true honor with God and all that belonged to him, then Nero
with his imperial Diadem persecuting the Church, and bearing him self as a
monster in nature. Matt. 27.29.
The crown of thorns wherewith our Savior was crowned upon the Cross, was
in regard of his obedience to God, in that kind, incomparably more royal,
then the crown of Tiberius Caesar, under whose debite he was crucified, or of
any other profane Prince, yea the^ the crown of Solomon (a most wise, and at
that time, Cant. 3.11.
a most virtuous Prince) which his mother prepared for him against the day of
his marriage. Therefore the glory of the Kings of this world is one, and the
glory of the kingdom of Christ is another. The honor of the one, is in
worldly peace, riches, strength and glory: The honor of the other is, when
our Savior Christ reigns in the midst of his enemies, when his sword
divides the Father from the Son, and the son from the Father: yea and a
man from him self, parting the soul, Heb. 4.12.
and the spirit, the joints and them arrowe. Do ye think, (says our
Savior, that I came to bring peace into the world, J tell you nay but a
sword. And again, I came to set the world on fire, and how am I in pain
till it be kindled. Not that his doctrine is of it self ennemie to outward
peace, Luke 12.49.51.53.
for it teaches the right and most happy peace with GOD, and is the only
assurance of all good peace amongst men, as it is in the song of the Angels,
Glory to God, and Peace upon earth, and in the Prophet, Luke 2.14.
who speaking of the kingdom of Christ, says, That day they shall turn
their spears into sythes, and their swords into spades. And again, That the
Lamb shall without hurt lie with the wolf, Esa. 11.6.7.8.9.
and the child play with the serpent, and that in all the mountain of the
Lord there shall be no war. Esa. 60.18.
But by reason of th'iniquitie of men, opposinge them selves to the word of
GOD, except all should conspire together with Satan and his accomplices against
GOD and his anointed, to their most certain and irrecouerable destruction, it
can not be otherwise but that the zealous profession and exercise of true
Religion will be mightily opposed unto by the ungodly, and so procure their
great trouble and affliction in this world. This is the most ordinary state
of the true Church of God, notwithstanding that it pleases God sometime to
give a little quiet. According whereunto, if some of the best reformed Churches
be now, and have been of many years in great troubles, and persecuted with
all outrage and extremity for the gospels sake, yet the kingdom of Christ may
be, and is, more glorious and more increased by them, then in other, which
enjoy outward peace, and use it not to the right end for which it is given. In
France the troubles have bin exceeding great, by open wars, by pretense of
laws, by most unchristian and barbarous practices: whereby men that for
wisdom, valewe, and all manner of virtue and honor, were to be reckoned with
the worthiest of the Earth, Psalm. 44.23.
yet were slain, as sheep appointed for the slaughter. Their bodies (as it is
said in the Psalm) were cast out to the fowls of the air, Psa. 79.2. Psa.
79.3.
and the beasts of the field, and the streats have run with their Noble
blood, powered out like water. But yet is not the glory nor the increase of the
kingdom of Christ therefore the less.

The most precious blood of our Savior Christ the son of GOD, was also
spilt, and shed as water, which was worthy to have been received by Angels
in vessels of gold, and his body cast down to the ground, but not without
great increase of his kingdom and glory: for his blood became as the four
springes that went out of Eden, to water all the earth, and his body after it
was cast, John. 12.24.
as a most precious seed into the earth, it brought forth more fruit then it
had done before.

When did Satan full like the lightening from heaven, Luke. 10.18
at any time more, or when did the glory of the kingdom of Christ more
increase, then in the time of persecution? When was there ever the like
knowledge, faith, zeal, obedience, righteousness, peace unity through the holy
Ghost, Romans 14.17.
wherein the Apostle says, The kingdom of God stands, and not in meat and
drink, or other like outward things as there has bin in the primitive
Church? Then were the windows and gates of heaven opened to power down
abundantly, and to rain upon the earth the spiritual gifts without measure,
to comfort and save the world: as sometime they had bin opened for pouring
down water to destroy it: every head was crowned with one grace or other, and
every hand received some gift, Then was there but one heart, Act. 4.32.
and one soul of the multitude of those that believed. Then the kingdom of
Christ so increased, as in some one day three thousand were adjoined to the
Congregation. The like in a degree may be said of the times ensuinge, Act. 2.41.
for some hundred years. But not to seek so far. In the cou^tryes that are
yet under the sword for the Gospels sake, and of whose present troubles the
Replyer speaks, notwithstanding their outward trouble, the kingdom of our
Savior Christ has bin mightily aduau^ced. What churches are there this day
in the world, where the gospel is so thoroughly and sou^dlie in all points
established, They wanting the favor of their Kings, the benefit of Schools
and Universities, yet depart they not from the ordinance of God, to make any
ministers of Sacraments that are notable in some profitable measure to
edification to expound the word. For all Ministers with them are Preachers.
The doctrine taught by them, as it appears by the confession signed by them
all, is the sound and holy doctrine of the word of God. Their uttering and
delivering of it, is sincere without ostentation and boast of learning, or
mustring of foreign writers, as being richly satisfied with his doctrine, in
whom we are complete, in whom the godhead dwells bodily, Colos. 1.19. Cap.
2.3.9. Ephe. 2.20.
and all the treasures of wisdom are laid up in store, buylding the Church
upon the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the corner and foundation
stone. There is no ministering of Sacraments privately upon any occasion,
neither by women nor private men, nor the Ministers them selves. The
Sacraments are administered only publickely, and by the preaching Minister,
after the preaching of the word, and according to the first ordinance of our
Savior Christ, without any humane inventions added to them. Their Deacons are
not half ministers, to minister Baptism and to read public prayers, Act. 6.
but agreeably to the original institution, only for service of the poor.
The Discipline is not administered by men not lawfully called, but only by such
as according to the order appointed in the word of God, are charged with it.
There is no commutation of penance, no respect of persons, but the notorious
offender whatsoever, is rebuked with authority, and every soul yields to
it, not disdayning nor repyning at it, as base and misborne children do the
correction of their Father, but as natural and noble sons and daughters of
God (according to the exhortation that Solomon gives by his wisdom) they
humble them selves under the hand of their heavenly Father, Pro. 3.13.
knowing that he corrects every child that he receives. Heb. 12.6.


Memorable is that rare, but right christian example of Theodosius the
Emperor, publikelie humbling him self under the hand of God, and professing
his repentance, for his bloody commandment, and the cruel execution done
according to it. A president well worthy so Christian a Prince, the honor of
the Discipline, yea and of the whole church of that age. Such Theodosians have
the reformed Churches of this age to speak of, to the high honor of Almighty
God, and his only begotten son Christ Jesus King of Kings. Wherein a Prince
of blood Royal, and by birth within a step or two to one of the greatest
Kingdoms of these parts of the world, and for Princely gifts worthy to have
borne a Scepter in his hand and a Dyademe upon his head, when as another
David, he had bin overthrown by Satan, and committed things for which the
Name of God was evil spoken of: endured to hear the servant of God (as David
did Nathan) to rebuke him, and lamenting his offense openly before the public
assembly of the Church, desired pardon of God, and rejoiced heaven and earth,
men and Angels with his conversion from sin to the obedience of the living
God, blessed for ever, Amen. Whose christian president, both a crowned King,
and also a worthy son of that noble Father, have followed, after that by
terror of as barbarous cruelty, as has bin committed in any age, they had
done otherwise then Daniell and the young Princes brought up with him, did, in
a case not unlike to theirs, what should I rehearse other examples of that
piety and honor of those Churches, which might make an infidel and
unbeliever fall down on his face, and confess, 1. Cor. 14.24.25.
that undoubtedly God is amongst them, and in the midst of those Churches.
And this is the glory of the kingdom of Christ, which the Declaration
means, may be seen to shine amongst them.

His meaning was not that in them Christ sits glorious is Solomon in his
regal Throne, with John and James like great Princes sitting the one at his
right hand, 1. King. 10.18.21. Mat. 20.21.
and the other at his left. Because our Savior answered them when they
requested such a matter of him, that these are things agreeing to earthly
Princes, it shall not be so with you, but he shall be of greatest honors with
you that is greatest in labors and service of others, for which cause they
do not affect nor desire these things. Therefore, I conclude, that the praise
given to the reformed Churches by the Declaration, and namely to those which
are persecuted with cruel and bloody wars for the Gospells sake,
notwithstanding all their troubles, is most true, and due unto them, and that
all this their blessed fruit and honor is of their entier and whole obedience
which they yield to God in receiving all the holy doctrine of our Savior
Christ, both concerning things to be believed, and also concerning the
spiritual policy, Discipline and order, for guyding of his Church.

But yet, all the Churches thus reformed are not in like sort as these are
traveled and pursued: but through the goodness of God, some of them have
enjoyed peace and quietness for some time, and in it yield the like obedience
and honor to God. So as the Replyer can not object continual wars and
troubles unto them all. But of the state of the reformed churches, this may
suffice.

The want of like happy fruit in our Church, for want of like obedience in
all parts of the Gospel, the Declaration notes after this, saying, that the
former might be a sufficient persuasion to us to leave this disordered state of
ours, wherein we have labored so long with so little profit, and to embrace
that most beautiful order of ecclesiastical regiment which God so
manifestly does bless and prosper in our neighbors hands. At these words
the Replyer is so moved and disquieted, as he wanted but Saules spear to have
nailed David to the wall. But I will prove if David's harp may quiet and
pacify him again. Our ecclesiastical state and policy (of which only, it
is as clear as the light, that the Declaration speaks and of no other,
howsoever he would wrest it) is blamed in deed as disordered. But, there are
rebukes that are profitable, and of necessary and excellent use, to those who
are so rebuked. The Prophet David having prayed to God, that he would not
suffer his mind to be inclined to any evil thing, to practice matters by
wickedness, with the workmen of iniquity, yea, and that he might not be taken
as with a bayte with their pleasant things: adds further thus, Psalm. 141.
Let the righteous strike me, it shall be a kindness, and reprove me, it shall be
a most excellent oyntement: let him not keep it from mine head, the more he
shall do it, the more shall my prayer be for them in their eu lls. By that he
have well hearkened to this, and considered of it, I hope he will not be so
highly offended, for one word, that sounds not to his liking. Likewise
Solomon says, The wounds of a friend are better then the kisses of an
enemy. It is always lawful to blame that which is blame worthy, so the
reproof proceed from the zeal of God, and love of those who are reproved.
The Prophets who most sharply reproved all estates of the people, and namely
the priests were they whose lips were fined from earthly corruption, and
set on fire with the coals of the Lords altar by an Angel of heaven, and
whose mouth was sanctified of God. Esa. 1.10.11
Hear the word of the Lord (says Esaias) ye leaders or Princes of Sodom,
and hearken to the doctrine of God, o ye people of Gomorrah: What have I to do
with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the lord? I am full of the burnt
offringes of the Rams, and of the fat of the fed beasts, and I desire not
the blood of Bullockes nor of lambs nor of goats. And again, Their watchmen
are all blind, they have no knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they can not
bark, they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping. Iere. 8.10.11.12.
Likewise Jeremy says, I will give their wives unto others, and their
fields to them that shall possess them: for every one from the least even to
the greatest is given to covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the
Priest, every one deals falselie. For they have healed the hurt of the
daughter of my people with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace, when there is
no peace. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they
were not ashamed, neither could they have any shame, therefore shall they fall
among the stayne, when I shall visit them, they shall be cast down, says the
Lord. If it be objected that these Prophets might live in some wicked Kings
days, wherein the holy worship of God was wholly suppressed, and superstition
only and Idolatry took place: I answer: that they exercised in deed their
Prophetical office and ministry in diverse kings times, whereof though some
were wicked, yet some also were godly, and ouerthrewe idolatry, and set up
the true worship of GOD, yea some of them, namely Josiah and Ezeckiah, were the
two rarest Princes for piety and zeal that ever after David were kings over
that people: yet did no honest man (much les any true Prophet) esteem their
most just reproof of the iniquity of all states, to be injurious or
derogatorie to the honor of those noble Kings, no nor any of the Priests that
did their duties. They were in deed hereby warned, as by the voice of God, to
look to such enormities, and to see them reformed, otherwise, they were to
feel as they were threatened with the wrath of God, who would require it at
their hands, if for default of employing the authority, which GOD for such
purpose had given them, notorious transgressions, chiefly in things belonginge
to the service of God, were not redressed: yet did those Prophets honor and
love their Church, their Country, their Princes, and all estates of the
people, as we do, (the Lord bearing witness to us, that we speak the truth)
and as we ought to honor, all lawful authority and power, in the common
wealth or in the church. In deed they had not sworn Canonical obedience to
any of their Priests, as the Replyer says, peradventure some of us have done,
for this is an oath which God never commanded, and howsoever it be suffered,
if it might be duly examined, would be found meet and necessary to be
reformed, both in regard of God, and of the crown and dignity of the Prince.

But to return to my former purpose, how dear were the Churches of Corinth,
of Galatia, and other places to the Apostle Paul, who loved them to live and
dye with them, to deal unto them not the Gospel of Christ only but even his
own soul, yet how sharply does he rebuke them? Was he therefore their
enemy because he did so, and told them the truth? In the Revelation John
writes by commandment to the Churches of Asia, without derogation to any
thing that was in good state amongst them, yea to the commendation of that
which was such, but yet so sharply reproving them for certain enormities that
were amongst them, as that he threatens the removing of their golden
Candlestick, and the goodly light of the Gospel of Christ which shined
amongst them. If then the writer of the Declaration have rebuked in a word
the disorder of the policy and Discipline of our Church, in that good sort
that is meet, or if any of us do the like, are we therefore (as the Replier
would have us) not thankful nor faithful Ministers to God, or not loving and
obedient subjects? We may (I hope) truly profess, that we both fear God, and
honor the Prince, and love his Church amongst us, and are faithful and
obedient according to Gods word unto both. But the fear of God, our most
bounden duty to our dread sovereign Lady the Queen, and our zealous love
to our Church do constrayne us, to rebuke that which is reproueable by Gods
word: not to dishonor our church, or any whom the state thereof may concern,
but to procure the further reformation of it, and thereby to increase the
honor of it incomparably more then ever heretofore, both with God, and in all
the Churches. I would to God we had cause to say with the Apostle, We rejoice
to see the stayednes of your faith, and the order that is amongst you. I would
to God we might say, it were without spot or wrinckle, and might truly speak
of it all the most honorable things that are spoken of the Church of God, and
say, It is clear as the morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, and
that what else Solomon according to his wisdom in his excellent Song
commends the Church by, or any other of the Prophets, or whatsoever the
Apostles do praise any of the churches for, might be verified of it. This
should be our comfort and our joy, our honor and our crown. And therefore do
we not cease by earnest prayer and most humble suit to God, and to the
authority which he has set over us, and by all duty agreeable to our
calling, to procure the increase of the good and honor of it with all power.
But it being subject to a curse, to call evil good, and justly reproved in
former times, to say all is well, where GOD is displeased with many things that
are not well, but need most speedy reformation; conscience to God, and loving
duty toward the Church seem to have moved the author of the Declaration,
to note that disordre which he esteemed to be in the state of our church, and
ought to enforce us to do the like upon just occasion.

If all things be ordered according to the word of God in our Church, then
surely was the author of the Declaration deceived in judgment, but in
affection and purpose of heart committed nothing against it. But I demand, If
by the word of God, unlearned men of all occupations and trades, be sufficient
Ministers to take charge of the holy things, of Gods word and Sacraments,
and of the souls of the people. Is the state of the Church well ordered,
which having the favorable countenance of a gracious Queen according to the
promise, Queens shall be thy nurses, and great peace, large revenues for
maintenance of learning, the benefit of Schools and Colleges, houses of noble
fou^dations for students, two so famous Universities, of long time, for men of
excellent ability in all good knowledge: and all these helps now almost 30
years together without intermission or interruption, besides the former time
of king Edward of noble memory, and yet notwithstanding all these is so
unfurnished of sufficient and able godly learned men, as that by far the
greater part of it should be in the hands of an insufficient and unlearned
ministry without any manner of co^petent ability to expound the word of god,
without divinity, without science, without art (other then such as they were
prentises at) and in a great part without both piety and religion. Does the
word of God allow, that men called to the ministry may take civil callings,
to deal by offices in causes of state and justice, or to forsake the charge of
particular co^gregations in serving them in the greatest and highest service of
preaching the gospel to them, to rule over the churches and ministers of a
whole Diocese? Is it good order, allowable by Gods word, to make a number of
ministers at once, whereof no one is called or desired to any particular
Congregation, but must seek and sue for places after, where to bestow them
selves? Dispensations and faculties for non residents, and plurality of
benefices, and a court of faculties for sundry like purposes, can it be
justified to be good order by the word of God? Does the word of God give
power to any one man under heaven, to make Ministers alone, at his pleasure to
grant license to preach, and to call it in again at his own pleasure, to
suspende, to release, to excommunicate, to absolve, and all as seems good to
him self? The same word allows not for good order, that Sacraments should
be administered privately by any, much les that it be so by private men, and
least of all by women. Nor that they be publicly ministered without preaching
of the word. It approves not such cases of necessity as enforce these things,
nor the doctrine of conference of grace by them for the work wrought. To make
that inequality of the Sacraments, that one should have power to minister
Baptism that should not have power to administer the Lords Supper, and
another power to administer both: yet not to preach, and another to do all
three being the sacred and hye ordinances of God, and yet not to confirm
children, can not be showed to be the orders or ordinances of God.

In like manner can it not be showed by the word of God, that Chauncelours,
Commissaries, and such Officers of Bishops and Archdeacons, should deal with
the censures of the Church, having no manner of lawful ecclesiastical callinqe
unto it, nor that excommunication is to be for pecuniarie causes and payementes
of registres, fees, or such like.

But what do I reckon particulars, whereas, if the Cannon law be the rule for
church-gouernement, the abuses must needs be infinite. If these disorders be
in the reformed Churches, notwithstanding their want of all outward means,
and the heavy displeasure of their Princes, and the whote and fiery
persecutions wherewith they are pursued, which yet were a time of tolleration
and bearing with things amiss, if there were any, their state were to be
held disordered, and to need reformation, for fear of the most just wrath
and indignation of God to fall upon them. But if all these and such like
matters be well ordered in them, and the same far otherwise in our Church,
notwithstanding all the means and helps to have procured the good ordering
of them, much more conveniently then with them: is the Declaration to be
blamed, for exhorting to leave such a disorder, and to receive that order which
is according to God? Now as the glory and kingdom of Christ is highly
advanced and increased where this obedience is given to him, to order his
house according to his will whose it is, so on the other part, there must
needs be so much wanting of the glory and increase thereof, where that
obedience is not yielded to him. Which would to God it were otherwise, and that
the enormities of all sorts did not show the want of that glory of Christ's
kingdom, that would be if his orders were obeyed, nor the exceeding great
apostasy and falling away from God to Atheism, Epicurisme, and profanenes,
and namely the multitudes of recusantes of late years so greatly increased,
did not show how smallie the glory of the kingdom of Christ does increase
amongst us. As for our peace and other blessings whereof the Replier
speaks, it is in deed to be acknowledged to the high honor of Almighty
God, that neither at this present is any Nation under heaven so blessed in all
respects, nor has this Land bin so at any time heretofore. The Lord make us
thankful for all his ritche mercies bestowed upon us, and continue with great
increases all the prosperity and happy estate of our Land and people. But
that he says, we are so blessed above all other churches, even in this estate
of ecclesiastical gouuernement established, sounds, as if he would have one
ecclesiastical estate, to be taken to be the cause of all these blessings.
Some attribute the cause hereof to the troubles of our neighbors, and some to
the gracious government of her excellent Majesty, and the great wisdom of
the right Honorable of her Counsel, Divines (as it best agrees with their
profession, yet with due honor of all the noble instruments of this grace, as
every one has deserved) to the provident and watchful care of Almighty God
over us, in giving all the good means of this our estate which we enjoy, and
many times by extraordinary favors, discovering the secret practices of our
enemies, and working in deed (as the Replyer says) wonderfully and
graciously for us. But, no man yet that ever I heard of, before this,
attributed this honor to Archdeacons and Archbishops, to Chauncelours and
Bishops to Commissaries and Officialls, or the rest of that train. This is a
garlande would not become those heads in any sort, let them wear it to
their great honor that have deserved it. Is it for that that they are the
Officers which God has set in his Church, and therefore does power his
blessing upon his own ordinance? It has bin already showed what agreement
they have with the word, and from what original they proceeded. If it be
said notwithstanding they be of man's creation and appointement, yet they may
be employed in such affairs, as might procure this blessing to the state: let
it be considered wherein they have bin occupied since her Majesty's reign,
and it will easily appear, how far it is of that they should have any
part of this honor.

If there were a commission granted, to examine what has bin done by these
officers, and their Courts, for these nine and twenty years, what good they
have done, and on the other part what insufficient Ministers they have made,
what godly learned Ministers they have put to silence, and deprived of their
benefices, and other places of ministry, what ceremonies and subscriptions
they have urged: what constitutions and articles they have set out, and sworn
men to present, what conuocations and scenes they have kept, what faculties and
dispensations they have granted and taken, what censures, suspensions, and
excommunications, they have set forth, how many, of what sort, and for what
causes, they have cast into prisons, how long, and in what prisons and order
they have kept them there, what oppressions and extortions have bin committed,
what covering and cloakinge of foul and shameful matters, with a number of
such like. I doubt not, but all men, that indifferently considered these
things, would be constrained to say: It is the mercy of the Lord that we are
not consumed, that the enemy has not entered into the gates of Jerusalem, even
for the sins of the Prophets, and for the iniquities of the Priests.

There are a number no doubt within the land that fear God vnfeynedlie, his
Name be praised for it. There are also some faithful servants of God, that
kneel before him day and night, to be merciful unto us, and to continue his
gracious favor toward us, the chariots and horsemen of Israel in deed.
There are also a great number of godly strangers, that have left their
countries, to serve God, where they may be suffered to serve him as he has
commanded, by whom he has set up before all the people of the land, a goodly
president and example of that reformation which we ought to proceed forward
unto, for whose sake the Lord may be merciful to us, till he have made
ready some other place to lodge them in, or opened their own country for
them, to return unto again. But, which is principal, the Lord for his own
Names sake, and the praise of his mercy, vouchsafes thus to bless us, that
by his benefits he might provoke us to that further duty, of reformation of
the Church, and obedience to his word, which he requires. These and such like
causes of this our present happy estate, might have been noted, if he would
needs inquire into that matter. As for that which he alleges to be the
cause of these blessings, is so far of from being any cause of them, as
contrariwise, it cease not to provoke the fiery wrath of God, to lighten and
thu^der, upon all the state of the land and people, till he have consumed
both, as being the very root and cause of the ignorance of God that is in the
land, the nurse and cherisher of recusantes and obstinate papists, and other
heretics, and in a word, of all the great iniquities and abominations that
are committed within the kingdom. And thus far in answer to his reply to
the conclusion, wherein the Declaration upon former reasons, concluded four,
and only four ecclesiastical offices, namely of Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
and Deacons, to be appointed of God for the ordinary guydance of particular
Churches.

This conclusion is enlarged by the Declaration, with an answer to such as
might think, in such a treatise of the government of the Church, the first
point should be, to speak of the Magistrate. Which answer is, that because
the purpose of the writer is to treat of ecclesiastical government, and that
civil Magistrates are not ecclesiastical officers, but overseers set over
them to mainteyne them in the due execution of their charges, and to punish
them ciuillie, if they offend: therefore it seemed more pertinent to the matter
in hand, to speak first of ecclesiastical officers, and then of the supreme
authority of the Sovereign over them all.

The Reply to this section is the most impertinent and tedious that may be.
For differing nothing from the Declaration in opinion of any matter here
directly set down, yet stands he playing in a manner, upon every word. A
man would think the second person, in charge of souls, in a whole diocese,
as he reckons him self to be, and having it, may be, some particular
charge. Besides, if he would needs leave all to attend upon his business, yet
should have bent him self to handle only material points, and that as
soundly, pithilie and briefly, as he could, that having finished it, he
might have returned to his charges again, that Satan, who goes about
continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, have no more
advantage of his absence from his flock, then the work he has set him self
unto of necessity might require. But to see him thus discourse upon every
second or third word, and to play and sport him self, as if he were at
great leisure, and had as little to do as one that should play with a
feather: may show how easily men of his coat, bear the burden of the
Church. But, howsoever his leisure serve, if he can not employe it better then
in so friuoulous trifles, as in great part he wastes the time withal, I
think it meet, both for mine own regard, and for the Readers, not to stand
upon aunswering every idle discourse, but only that, which of all his speech
may carry the greatest show of objection, to any substantial point of the
Declaration. For, having already hitherto at large debated these matters
which he often returns unto, as principal things in his reply, and stopped
as it were the springes and fountaynes of all his treatise, at laysure, and
carefully, from the beginning to this place: the particular points, and little
streams that flow from them, will be more easily dammed up. Now therefore to
come to his replye to this section, whereas it is said by the Declaration, as
by way of an objection. But while we speak of ecclesiastical government, it
may be thought that we should first treat of the supreme authority of
Christian Princes, and so forth. The Replyer after he has played with the
word, while, discourses upon the words Ecclesiastical government. Wherein
he first answers for her Majesty to the papists, and then shows what he
takes the Supremacy to be, which is recognized by statute to be in her
Majesty. Of which points neither the one nor the other belongs any thing to
the matter in hand. For touching the first, there is in these words of the
Declaration, no manner of occasion to speak of the papists, except he take it
of the words, ecclesiastical government, and for the second, concerning the
exposition of a statute, it is fitter for a Reader in a house of Court, or for
Judges upon the benche to speak of, then for Divines. Another point of as
little valewe, and as unsuitable to the matter of this sentence, is that he
says, the Declaration attributes amiss ecclesiastical gouuernement to
Elders, except it be intended by ecclesiastical, that which any way belongs
to the church. By which reckoning he would gather, that Wydowes are also
church-gouernours, and that the Declaration would have women ecclesiastical
persons and governors. Answer to that he says of the Elder he needs none,
alleging no reason, and the authority of the Apostle calling them Governors,
is so weighty for it, as if he had put all the reasons he could allege into
the counterballance, they would way no manner of weight against it. That which
he speaks of Wydowes, 1. Cor. 12.
shows he has not bin of any long time exercised in these points, but for
some purpose has drawn and forced him self. Now, to seek an occasion three
or four years after the publishing of the book he deals with, to be seen
to be a Defendour of the present state of our Church. For otherwise he might
have understood that Deacons are not accounted governors, much les Wydowes,
but only Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, to whom only the guyding of the
public state of the Church belongs. In the next place with as much
agreement with the matter of the sentence which he discourses upon, as the
former were, he compares Elders with syde-men and churchwardens, whereby it
seems, he had before apprehended the matters so, as if none should be
esteemed ecclesiastical persons, but such as were within some degree of
priesthood, and had taken orders as they call it. But he understands it
better now, for as he compares it, they are no more of the ministry then
sydemen and Churchwardens are. The next point is of the sense of
ecclesiastical government, if by it (says he) be meant, that her Majesty
takes upon her to minister the word and Sacraments (For that I take it he
would say in his dark speech) this is a slander of the papists. If her
government in or over ecclesiastical causes, we admit your sense, and
proceed to the objection and answer. I answer, the Declaration means
neither of both, which are as far from the matter spoken of in the
Declaration, as if with his long wandering he had both lost his way, and him
self too. There was no cause, why he should stand thus guessing at the
meaning, the sense being plain to be this, that in a treatise of
ecclesiastical government, showing the order which God has appointed for the
directing of his church, it may be some would look such a treatise should
treat first of the supreme power of christian Princes. So as ecclesiastical
government is that, which the Declaration says to be appointed of God, and
neither concerns the slander of the Papists, nor his construction: and
therefore notwithstanding that be not the sense, it were time he proceeded to
that which follows. In the first sentence of the Declaration wherein the
foresaid objection whose answer follows, is laid out, the Replyer chooses
certain words to discourse upon before he come to the substance and body of
the matter contained in the sentence. According to which purpose of his, he
has spoken first of, but while the two first words of the sentence in this
place of the Declaration, and then of ecclesiastical government, being of the
next, now he proceeds to the word some, it being said in the declaration,
that it may be thought of some, and plays with some and many, and such like
speech. After, it being said in the same sentence, that it may seem to some,
we should treat first of the Supreme authority of Christian Princes, he
stands upon the words Supreme authority, and demands whether it be so
called by way of supposition, or assertion: then resolving him self of the
latter, he demands again, how this agrees with that, which was said
before, that all ecclesiastical matters are to be directed only by four
officers of the Church, which he scornefullie calls Tetrarkes. He might
easily have discerned the answer to this with a little consideration. For
the words of the Declaration are these: There remains of these before
rehearsed only in the Church, these ecclesiastical offices instituted of GOD,
namely Pastors, Doctors, Governors, and Deacons: by which the Church of God
may (according to his word) be directed in all matters which are commonly
called Ecclesiastical. Wherein it is plain, that the Declaration speaks of
such officers as should deal in their own persons, in preaching the word,
ministering the Sacraments, executing the power and censures of the Church, and
relieuing of the poor, and says that of all the gifts and offices as
Apostles, Evangelists, and such like which God gave to his Church in the
beginning, there only now remain these ordinary officers for directing and
dealing in these cases of the Church. Which although it be as far of as the
East is from the West, from excluding the supreme power of the civil
Magistrate, by the civil sword to protect or punish such as in those
callings acquit them selves well, or fail in duty, yet he not only moves
this question, but prosecuteth it in this manner.

First, he demands whether the Prince be one of those four, and if no,
because they are all ecclesiastical officers, and the Prince not, but a
supreme Gouuernour, yet how can they direct all causes and the Prince be
supreme Gouuernour, except there be some quircke found out between direction
and government. And then they directing, and the Prince governing, according
to their direction, they give the name to the Prince, and keep the power to
them selves, as the Pope of Room deals with the Emperor, which were but a
mockery. But if they truly and unfeignedly acknowledge Princes supreme
Governors in all ecclesiastical causes, then stoop gallant: all these four
estates are topsie turnie ouerturned. And then why yield they not to the
ecclesiastical government, by such authority established. And if they have
the first degree in dignity, why may they not have the first place in the
treatise, except the last place be greatest with them in power as in Parliament
the voice of the Prince. And then a Gods name proceed on, let them say as the
Gentlemen-ushers do before Princes: On before my Lords, let all these four
estates take their places before, because these our learned discoursers so
assign them. We will not strive about the room, so the right be reserved,
yet no reason to the contrary, but that they should first have entreated of
the supreme authority of Princes, and after of the rest, that so it might have
bin perceived, whether they had encroched upon their power or no. And this, me
thinks, had bin a better order then where all are placed, to say, Your
Majesty is come late, these four are your Senyours, you are but their punyes,
be content, you must take that which is left. And thus far upon the sundry
words, and parts of the first sentence, containing the objection, which is
answered. To books which are full of such matter as this is, may it be fitly
applied that Solomon says, There is no end of making them, and that they are
a wearines to the flesh. Eccle. 12.14
What fruit may there be of all this wast speech, that is nothing to the
purpose? and what a wearines is it, to follow one that runs at no certain
mark? The Magistrate is supposed to be wronged upon no just reason, and of a
wrong supposall ryseth a number of impertinent and idle questions, mingled with
many unsavory iestes, which are not according to his rule, that said, Reprove
with all authority, Tit. 2.15.
and with a reverend gravity. If there had bin any such thing in the
Declaration, it would have bin soundly and with sufficient arguments disproued
by the word of God, and those arguments would have bin laid forth in a grave
reverend manner, seemly to the calling of the persons who counterpleade one
another, and agreeable to the action in hand, which concerns serious and
weighty points of duty to God, and the chiefest Magistrates he has set over
men, and especially as might be seemly before the Lord him self, and all
his Church, before whom these matters are debated: without regard of all which
due considerations, as he has trifled upon the words of this sentence, so
does he likewise upon the words of the next following. Wherein because it
were a tedious idleness to follow him from point to point: I will briefly
answer the effect of all this part of his treatise which he has caused to be
set up on the top of the pages in a diverse lettre, that it might be in the
eye of the Reader, in these words, The Princes supreme authority slaundered.
Mine answer whereunto is this, that the words of the Declaration are so
clear and plain, as no man of sound wit or perfect sense can gather that it
attributes to her Majesty, any thing either disagreeing from her high Honor
and dignity, or unseemly for a most loyal and duetifull subject to utter.
For it is said only in the Declaration, that ignorant persons, who think
all things in the ecclesiastical state ought to be disposed by the absolute
power of the civil Magistrate, may suppose that a treatise of ecclesiastical
government, should begin with the power of the Sovereign. In which words,
malice it self, can not with any color find, how this should attribute any
thing inconvenient to her excellent Majesty: of whose Royal person, state,
power, and dignity, the Declaration in all places, and upon all occasions
speaks so duetifullie and reverently, that except by the witnesses which
said, We heard this man say, Mark. 14.58.
I can pull down the temple of God, and raise it up again in three days, or
as honest men as they, the Declaration could never be charged upon these
words, to speak any thing of her Majesty's power, that is not godly or not
seemly. Th'obiection which is made in the Declaration that the Treatise
should begin to treat, first of the power of the civil Magistrate, is set
out, by noting those, to whom this may so appear, namely, ignorant men
that think all ecclesiastical matters should depend upon the absolute power
of the Prince. Which point is enlarged by opposing to them, other which are
more moderate in that behalf, and refer only indifferent matters to the
Prince, who^ yet it reckons not indifferent persons in this behalf, because
they would have that without any further inquiry to be held indifferent,
that the Magistrate or them selves shall account so to be.

Now the Replyer passes on to the other, whom the Declaration esteems more
reasonable then the former, in that they give only indifferent things to the
Sovereign Magistrate, if they did rightly judge what were indifferent.

This sentence is as sore racked by the Replyer, as ever was any innocent
Christian man by the Fathers of the holy house of Inquisition, or such as were
by them appointed for their torturing. No part that has not felt the weight of
his plummets, no joint that he has not vexed and strayned. The end and scope
of this whole sentence he would have to be, to give colome to the wrong done to
the highest Magistrate, for not treating first of his sovereign power. Wherein
it appears, that neither there was, nor in reason could be meant, any wrong to
the high power of Sovereigns. For in all places where occasion serves, no
writing can be more reverend, in speaking of that soueraingtie appointed of
God, then the Declaration is. And the order to be used by any author, is not
to begin to treat first of that which is the chiefest and highest point of his
treatise, but to begin with that which is most single in his nature, and most
common to all that follows: that so he may by his degrees, and due
proceeding, come at length to that which is more principal. As in Grammar a
sentence is more worthy then a syllable, or a letter, and in Logike a
Syllogism then a sentence or single argument, yet the Grammarian begins not
with his Syntaxis, but first with the parts of a word, which are his letters,
and syllables, and so proceeds to the general kinds, and after to the more
special, and particular, till at last he have declared all things agreeing to
several and single words, and then considers of words joined and framed
together in a sentence. So the Logician begins with his arguments
severally and by them selves considered, then after of sentences, wherein such
arguments are first joined together, then of Syllogismes, wherein sentences,
last of all of the method of whole Treatises, wherein all these sundry things
are examined. Which order, as nature and skill teach to be the only way for a
man to teach any thing in best order, and to most use of his Readers or
hearers. And before this time, was there never, I think, such an exception
taken against it, by any man professing learning, as the Replier does take,
to charge this method with some degree of lesae Majesty, and of treason.
Aristarchus they say, when he found a fault in Homer, would mark it with his
pen, and Phalaris the tyrant for as little faults, would put men to great
tortures. If there had bin in deed a fault in the Method, I perceive the
Replyer would not be content as Aristarchus, to make a note of it with his pen,
but would bring a question of Method to the bar at the Kings bench, and
arrayne it of high treason, and do as cruel execution for such an offense, as
Phalaris was wont to do for as little. But if he be never so earnestly
affected to pursue a fault in Logike, with fire and sword, yet it were great
reason, he first understood what good order and method were, before he
condemned a man of treason, for the order of his treatise: but of this I shall be
forced, by his tantologyes and vain repetitions, to speak again. After the
deprauing of the general end and scope of this sentence, he proceeds to the
particular vexing of sundry parts and words of it, which that it may be
better understood, is here set down as it is in the Declaration.

Others there be, with more color of reason that refer only indifferent
matters to the disposition of Princes: but in determining indifferent matters,
they show them selves not to be indifferent Judges. For whatsoever shall
please the civil Magistrate or them selves to call or count indifferent, it
must be so holden of all men without any further inquiry. But of the supreme
authority of Christian Princes in ecclesiastical causes, how far it
extends by the word of God, we shall have better occasion to entreat
hereafter, when we have described the ecclesiastical state.

Here he first stands upon the word others, with much tryfling and toying,
seeking who these others may be, which in general he may plainly perceive by
the declaration of their opinion, that is, that those others are such as hold
the opinion there declared. Next he examineth these words with more color of
reason, then these words, of indifferent matters. Whereof he would enforce the
Declaration to affirm, such others, to leave all indifferent matters to the
only disposition of Princes at their pleasure. Whereunto he replyeth, that no
good Prince does without advise of their counsel determine of matters:
notwithstanding, he affirms the authority and life of such decrees, to lie
only in the Princes disposition.

For Solomon him self had his counsel: yet shows he not by any sufficient
authority or reason, that Solomon, or any of the godly and virtuous Kings of
Judah, determined by advise of their counsel, and commanded any such matters
of the Ministers apparel, or any order, government, ryte, or ceremony in the
Church, or what the Replyer may think to be most indifferent in that kind.
Which had bin very fit for him to have done, the matter being of no small
importance, which he also sets out to the uttermost, saying: That it is this
day a great question, and touches the matter to the quick, what the
authority of Christian Princes is, in the disposition of indifferent matters.
Why then did not he, if he would gage thus deep into this vessel, as to
affirm all indifferent things to be, as touching power and authority, meerlie
at the disposition of the Prince, allege us some authority of the Prophets
or Apostles, or some ancient President and example of David or Solomon, or
some other of the godly zealous Princes and Kings of Judah? But it was not
because he would like a grave and sound Divine resolve his Reader of this
point, but for that, as he says, it touches the quick, and might serve him,
to bring some man to question of his life, as denying the Supremacy, that he
urges so much this matter.

Which yet as her Majesty has not at any time so pursued, so is it to be
hoped, her gracious disposition, to religion and justice, will not suffer her
hereafter to pursue, how clamorouslie soever such advocates of injustice, shall
cry out, that it touches the supremacy. For so long as it is acknowledged,
with all duetifull and godly reverence, of her Majesty's Sovereign
authority, that the same power belongs to her highness Royal state, Crown
and dignity, that at this time any sovereign Prince upon the earth does
lawfully exercise over his people, or any of the Kings of Judah ever enjoyed in
their time by the word of God: although it be denied that that fulness of power
which the Pope most unlawfully usurped in things, either contrary to the
commandments of Amightie God, or peculiar to our Savior Christ, can be
lawfully challenged by any Christian Prince: Religion and Justice will answer
in such case that this is no more, Luke. 20.25.
then as we are taught in the Gospel, Give to God that which is Gods, and to
Caesar that which is due to Caesar.

The Replyer here, rayseth great expectation, in his reader, to look for some
resolution, by the Declaration, concerning this question, what the power of the
sovereign Magistrate is in matters indifferent: affirming this case to be
moved by the Declaration, and therefore to have bin thorowlie answered, being
so important, which is nothing so. For the Declaration names no such case nor
question, as to enter into the debating of that matter, which would be here
wholly out of place: but by the way, and upon such occasion as has been
declared, makes mention of some vn-indifferent men's opinions, concerning the
power of Princes in indifferent matters. A usual thing in all good writers,
and allowed by all men of sound reason and judgment, by occasion to touch a
matter, without being bound thereby, to enter into the discourse of it. But if
he were so desirous to have this matter treated of, why did not he take this
occasion, to show us, by the word of god, what the power of christian Princes
is in such cases, and to prove, by sufficient and strong authorities, and
other reasons, that the ordinary guyding of the Church in matters
indifferent, as well as in all other, is not left of our Savior Christ to
ecclesiastical officers, that is, neither to the particular assembly of
Elders, for a particular Church, nor for more, to a more general, nor for the
Church of a nation, to a lawful National Synod.

He should have showed us by like proof, that the Christian sovereign
Magistrate, receives increase of civil power over the Church, by reason of
his Christian profession and faith. Then should he have proved, that if any
of the Princes which are Heathen, were by the mighty work of GOD, converted
to the obedience of the faith of Christ, he should not only thereby stand
charged to honor God with the lawful and holy use of that civil power which
he had before his conversion, applying it now to the maintenance of Gods true
service and servants, protecting and comforting them in well doing, as far
as his civil power and authority may do it, and enforcinge by the same power
all men to that which by the same holy religion is duetifull for them to do,
as all other men are in like case to use their gifts of understanding,
knowledge, counsel, wisdom, power and authority, or what soever, when they
have found favor of GOD to be converted to the precious faith of our Savior
Christ: but that together with the faith, he receives, besides the charge of
the holy use of the power which he had while he was yet in his paganism, a
further increase of power whereby he may in matters appertayninge to Religion,
appoynte and ordain of all things indifferent, so as the assemblies of
Elders, and Synodes, Provincial, and National, are to leese that authority
in such cases before exercised by them, and to render it up to that power, as
of right and duty belonging to it.

But leaving the proof of all, or any of these points, he complayneth, that
by any occasion this matter was once mentioned by the Declaration, except it
had bin thoroughlie debated: yet, least he should leese all his labor in
sifting and winnowing like wheat these words of the Declaration, he
labors to gain some allowance from it of this point.

Which is, that indifferent matters are to be reserved only to the
disposition of Princes, which he would enforce in this manner. The Declaration,
as has bin said, setting out the objection of treating in the first place of
the sovereign power of Christian Princes, with two sorts of men and opinions,
that may seem to require the same, the first, which refer all Religion to
that power, and the other more reasonable, which refer only indifferent
matters to their disposition: adds, that these men have more color of reason
then the other, but yet are not indifferent Judges, in determining what is
indifferent. Here upon would he gather, that the Declaration acknowledges
this latter point for true, if they which mainteyne it judged rightly of
indifferency.

Wherein, he is to consider, that the word but, which he would ground upon,
is not to be referred to the allowance of their opinion, but to the qualifying
of their former commendation, as if it had been said, in referring only
indifferent matters to Princes they are more reasonable, but in determining
what is indifferent, they are also to be blamed: upon that the declaration
says, they are not indifferent Judges, in determining what is indifferent, the
Replyer asks how they can be any Judges at all, if the disposition of such
things be referred only to the disposition of the Prince. Wherein, he takes
that granted by the Declaration, which is not granted, and discerns not
the word judges to be taken here not in his proper signification, but to be
spoken as by similitude and comparison: in which sense many a weak chaplain
may be said to take upon him to judge of indifferent and not indifferent, and
of other waightier matters of Religion, whereof he understand th no more, then
to read within a book of them, that which is laid before him. In which place
the Declaration is charged also as going about to take away from the Prince,
some right that justly appertains to the Crown, wholly without any other
reason but this, that the cause debated by it, might partake with our Savior
Christ in that respect, as in other, whereof it is said, I paid or was charged
with that, which I never took. For saving of the Prince from which wrong the
Replyer very soberlie, says he dare hazard thus far of all good
Christian Princes, and will presume by her Majesty's leave, to give warrant for
our most gracious Sovereign that she will not abuse her authority, nor has
done, nor would mainteyne or allow them that so do, if any do so. What a
needles palpable flattery is this? Does the Declaration call any Princes
using their authority, into question? If it do, show in what words: if not,
why does he take upon him to mainteyne that, which the Declaration no where
depraueth: but, as is meet in all Christian duty speaks reverently and
duetifully of it, where any occasion serves for that purpose: yet against all
good reason and modesty, the Replyer concludes this section, noting it also
in the margent, least any man should not attentively take heed to it, that her
Majesty's right and doings are unworthily defaced. Neith r contented with
this, he follows this matter still in his reply to the next sentence,
wherein he notes a want of reverence and duty that the Declaration uses
this term of civil Magistrate, which is a word both in Scripture, and all
good writers, and daily speech commonly used, and he him self uses in this
his reply oftentimes more homely, and more unsitting, then this is a great
deal: yet is this, being spoken generally, as in a general treatise and
doctrine, increased and aggreeued by circumstances from the person of her
Majesty, and also of those whom he supposes to have bin authors of that
treatise, or for whose sakes it was published, whom he exhorts to humble
confession of their fault, and craving pardon for so great offense committed
against her Majesty's Royal state and dignity, as in the generality of the
civil Magistrate, he supposes the Declaration here to have fallen into. For
euicting whereof, he takes upon him to plead for the Declaration, and to
speak what might be said in the just defense thereof, and after
counterpleadeth him self again, enforcing such points as he thinks to be
somewhat worth, to charge the Declaration in some degree with offense of
highest nature: as if the tyrannous usurpation of the Pope were noted in that
sacred sovereign power by the declaration, and as if such excuse in that
behalf, as he can affourde it, were but like the pretense of rebels, who
notwithstanding they seek the subversion of the highest estates, yet pretend
but to blame some near unto them. Lo the discreet words and charitable
spirit of the Replyer.

In deed I perceive if he might appoint the writer of the Declaration his
attorney, his learned counsel, and his Judges, or might be all this him self
to him, he were like to receive such sentence, as a whole court of injustice
might afforde. For by the title set upon the top of sundry pages together,
which is, The Prince slaundred, and sundry other like speeches in his margent,
and in his text, to like purpose: it appears what sentence he were like to
give in this matter. Of which crime if there has never bin found any guylt,
nay any color or shadow of a color, in any of those, in whose names the
Declaration is published, no more then was in Naboth, who was most innocent,
although he were charged with like offense: then what may the Replyer differ
from one of Nabothes witnesses, who deposed against him, that he had spoken
evil of the king. Many such also were there that misinformed of David, of whom
he often complayneth in the Psalms. But Jonathan his brother, 1. Sam. 19.4,
Cap. 21.14.
and Achimelech the priest answered for him, and said, David has not offended
against the King, nay rather his doings are exceeding good, and serviceable
unto them. For he has put his life in hazard for them against the enemies,
and has procured a great safety to all Israel, thou have seen it, and
rejoiced in it. And again, who is amongst the Kings servants, faithful and
loving in allegeaunce and duty as David is? In like manner do we hope,
notwithstanding the Replyers misinformation, that all that fear the Lord
aright, as did Ionathn and Achimelech, may answer for us, that we have
committed no offense against her Majesty's Royal person, state, or dignity,
but are of the most faithful, loving and duetifull of all her subjects or
servants, not holding our goods, or our lives, or any thing we enjoy dear
or precious unto us, in comparison of the duty we owe in that respect, even
of conscience of the ordinance of God, and of most loyal hearts to the
maintenance of her Majesty's right excellent estate and royal person. Whereof
having testimony in our own consciences, and in the sight of all just and
indifferent men, and which is principal, of Almighty God, who sees the
secret of our hearts, and bears witness to our sincerity in this behalf. I
rest well satisfied herewith against all the false and slanderous accusations
of all our adversaries, and so hold it needles to speak any more to this
matter, how often soever the Replier shall charg us, and proceed on to the
consideration of such other matter as in the rest of this his first book he
has laid before us. Proceeding on with this sentence, He rayseth like hues
and cries upon the declaration, for the words what pleases them: after, for
these, of all men, and last of all, upon these, without all further inquiry,
naming many idle questions, and pulling hard to strain this to reach to all
politic matters. The effect whereunto he tends, is, that nothing is urged
for indifferent amongst us, that is not indifferent, and that things being once
so established as they are, all men should rest in such determination without
further question. Which things he is content barelie to affirm, but it may
appear by the petition presented to the Convocation house for resolution, that
sundry godly learned and faithful Ministers, not finding many points so
clear as they are made in this place, desired to be resolved upon what good
warrant of the word of God, they might read in their public ministry,
Apocrypha books for Canonical Scripture, and that for this respect, as more
edifying the church then some Canonical, like assurance they desired to have
for to read sundry most evident and apparent abuses of the holy Scripture,
directly in sense and in words contrary to the text. Likewise also how as
indifferent or not repugnant to the word, they might hold the reading
ministry, the exercise of civil power in the Bishops, and their so large and
immoderate power in causes ecclesiastical, and their forsaking the work of
their calling, and the service of particular Congregations, the justifying of
baptism by Women, cases of necessity for private administration of them,
rytes mystical, and with signification of doctrine, besides those which are
instituted of our Savior Christ, an office of Deacon without all charge of the
poor, and for reading of divine service, and ministering only the one Sacrament
of Baptism. Of these and many other like points debated at large both in that
petition, and in the first part of this defense, they desired to be resolved
upon what ground of Gods holy word they might hold them indifferent, or not
repugnant to the word of god. And yet without any answer to their peticion,
without any warrant of the Law, either of God, or man: A subscription is urged
upon them, not only as the Replyer sets it down, but as it likes him,
whose it is, though it bear neither his image nor superscription, and sometime
in this form, to promise faithfully by it, neither privately nor
publicly, directly nor indirectlie, to deprave, reprove, or reprehende
any government, order, ryte or ceremony established, etc. What cause
therefore the Declaration has to esteem some not indifferent in showing what
is indifferent, appears by these Articles.

Now whereas secondly he would have no inquiry of things established, let him
show either that all things established once by authority, are well
established, and ought without any question to be received of all: or else he
must needs leave it to the Church and to all the people of God, to examine and
try orders settled and established by authority. But the former can not be
proved by any sufficient or likely reason. For that were to continue popery
and paganism, and every false worship amongst men for ever. And to enforce men
so without all inquire to receive what soever religion, or matter in religion,
is ordained by the civil Magistrate: were to make every state established, as
abominable an idol, as was the golden Image of Nebuchadnezzar, and exalts
Princes of the earth, above the heavenly King, blessed for ever. Therefore, he
must needs leave it free to the people of God, to consider of the ordinances
of authority. Which being lawful, as it is, and not lawful only but also
duetifull and necessary, then, in case that any, either of the Ministry, or
other calling, shall discover any thing to have bin otherwise decreed then by
Gods word appertains, it must needs be granted, that such in a reverent
and duetiful manner may offer the consideration of it to the higher powers: that
reuisiting their own former acts upon further knowledge of the will of God,
they may amend and reform whatsoever by the word they shall discern
necessary to be reformed. And thus far to the effect of the rest of his
discourse upon the sundry words of this sentence. The last sentence of this
section, wherein the Declaration refers over the intreatinge of the
Supremacy till that be declared that concerns Ecclesiastical officers, the
Replyer, after having played withal a while, and sought to make him self and
his friends merye with unseasoned jesting speech, without any grace of
edificatio^, or matter worthy answer, passes on to the next section.

In that part which he makes the next section, the Declaration first
affirms it not needful nor agreeable to good order of teaching, to begin in
that treatise: First, with the Sovereignty of Princes, and after argues it,
by reason that that the Church was perfect in all her regiment, when no Princes
were Christians, and at this day is in good estate, where it has small favor
of them. Whereupon it concludes, that the regiment of the church depends not
upon the authority of Princes, but upon the ordinance of God. Which
conclusion is enlarged by this, that god has so established the Church, that
as it may greatly prosper with the comfortable aid of christian Magistrates so
yet it may continue or prevail against the adversaries of it, without that
help. For the church receives help of the same to proceed more peaceably
and profitably, but receives all her authority immediately of god. The Replier
begins with the first of these sentences, wherein it is affirmed, to be
neither needful nor orderly, in teaching, to begin to entreat of the
supremacy, in a discourse of this nature that the Declaration is of. And in
this sentence, he first undertakes to reprove that it is said not to be
needful. Whereunto he enters with an untruth, affirming the Declaration to
have already alleged for one cause of this order, to be, least the opinion
of such as give the disposition of all Religon, or at least of all indifferent
matters in religion to Princes, might be otherwise favored: whereas the
Declaration made not mention in any sort, of those opinions for that purpose,
but to take occasion from them, to satisfy all men, concerning the order
followed in that treatise. His reply to that the Declaration says, it is not
needful to begin with the Supremacy, is in effect of no valewe, but yields
to the judgment of the declaration. For the Replier confesses in plain
terms, it is not needful as of necessity, and after alleging Peter the
Apostle speaking first of Magistrates, says likewise, that that order is not
so needful neither that it should prescribe. Which if it be so, what a
frivolous reply is this, when confessing that to be true which is said, yet he
rests not in it, but will reply to it, and say somewhat to disprove it. The
color he shadoweth this withal is, that notwithstanding he grant it not
needful as in necessity, yet that it should be needful for conuenience,
duty, reverence to the Prince, and to avoid suspicion both of the Prince and
others, the rather for the prophecy of the Apostle Paul, 2. Timothy 3. and
the experience of such in the Papists and Anabaptists. Whereupon he
concludes, that in a treatise of the government of the Church, next after
Jesus Christ, the christian Princes power should be spoken of. Which
conclusion, he renforceth with the example of the Apostle Peter, settinge out
first, duties to Magistrates, and after to Husbands, Wives, etc. Which
argument is increased by this, that if the Apostles at any time did so, when
Princes were not Christians, much more ought it now to be done, when they are
Christians, and in possession of their Supremacy. This is the effect of his
allegations, the rest is but sporting with like sound of needful and
heedfull, and needles and deedles, and a difference of his own making,
between needful and necessary, with such like toys. As for his
allegations, if it were needful for the reasons he alleges, it were in
deed needful to keep such order. But we deny that either conuenience,
duty, reverence of Princes, care to avoid suspicion of the faults
prophesied to abound in the latter time, the example of them in Papists or
Anabaptists, or the president of Peeter binds hereunto. If it do, then all
they which have not kept that order, which Peter does in that place, have
offended against all these things, which were most absurd to acknowledge. For
of the good Writers that have written of the Church, how many keep a diverse
order from this. Surely so many, as I think I may truly say, not one that
follows this order, which for so many respects he holds needful to be
followed. And to attaint so reverend a company as there is of these, who have
written of these matters, of such a number of the crimes he notes, I think no
Jury in England would do it, except he take them of the Hierarchy, and of
their Doctors, Proctours, Registers, and Sumners. The trial of our duty and
allegiance to the Prince stands not upon this, whether in our books we
first speak of the Supremacy. Our service of her Majesty in the places
whereunto we are called, and our readiness to serve her, not with our travel
only, but with our goods and with our lives, with our children and with our
friends, does and will so testify of our most duetifull love and loyal
devotion to her Highness: as for a point of Logike, what order and method we
keep in our books, we fear no prejudice of it, neither with our gracious
Soueraign, nor with any other, that have but as small a spark of heavenly
grace, as the least star in heaven seems to be.

For the crimes of the latter age noted by the Apostle, and the accomplishment
of that prophecy in the papists and Anabaptists, they could give the author
of the Declaration, nor those in whose names it is published, any just cause to
have kept the order he likes better. Not only for that, if there were cause
of suspicion of such things, this is a poor advise of his, for the taking of
it away: but especially because they, whom this his speech concerns, may
truly say, I hope, God and man bearing them witness herein, that they speak
the truth, that they are as free from these crimes, as the whitest Surplesse
or Rochet that he may be boldest to boast of. Pieters example is to small
purpose alleged, as is all the rest of this speech, he him self confessing
it not to prescribe. Which if he did not confess, were to be euicted from him
by many contrary examples, both of Prophets and Apostles. Whereof I will
take at this time, but one or two for all, and such as may fit best that he
alleges. The Apostle Peter in the same exhortation he speaks of passinge
from public duties to domestical and private, begins first with the
duties of servants, and then proceeds to the duties of masters. And
after in the Chapter following, first with the duties of Wives, and then of
Husbands. Whereby appears that his own example, proves directly against
him, that the order of speech is not needful to be, according to the
worthiness of the persons. Likewise, the Apostle Paul, in the like argument,
Ephesians. 5.22.25. Chap. 6.1.4. Col. 3.18.19 20.21.22.
both to the Ephesians and to the Colossians, first exhorts Wives to their
duties, and then the Husbands: first to children, and then the parents:
first the servant, and then the Masters: whereby it map appear, how small
a quarrel this is, and what good regard the Replyer has in alleging of the
Apostles.

Now whereas he would enforce an argument, that if the Apostles did thus
sometimes when Princes were not Christians, much more ought it to be done now
by us they being Christians, and in possession of this supremacy: this may be
of his refuse, that he serves us now, For it is nothing worth. For it
imports not the honor or authority of the Prince one grain, in what place
of a treatise, their estate and power be spoken of. Therefore, well might he
have spared him self, and the Reader and the Defendant of the Lords right in
his kingdom, the good time that might have been better bestowed, then about
this vain and frivolous cavil. The unreasonable grossenes whereof is so much
the more apparaunt in this, that the Declaration follows in this order the
Apostle Saint Paul step by step, who after that in the twelft Chapter of
his Epistle to the Romans, he had spoken of all the officers of the Church in
the beginning of the thirtienth, entreats of Magistrates, and the duties
which are due unto them. This therefore may suffice him, for needful. Now
is it to be considered, what good reasons he has to oppose to the Declaration,
saying also, that it is not agreeable to good order of teaching, to begin
first with this matter. But for reason, he falls to a reproach of ambition,
which he sets out by comparison of our old popish Archbishops striving for
places. In deed many a bitter and bloody bickering has bin amongst the
Bishops and Archbishops, whom he mainteyneth. Canturburie striving with London
and York, for the hiest room, and many such like ambitious quarrels, which
he had no cause here to mention, but that he would even with his own loss
and hinderance of the cause he deals in, raise some suspicion of the offices
appointed of God. For how soever he add for caution, that this was amongst
popish Archbishops, yet could he not without disgrace of that grace which he
speaks of a little after, note their seats to have been the seats of fiery
contentions, for ambitious rooms. It is not an vnconsecrate palle that can
sanctify a man, but that protestant Archbishops may be by their own fault,
through the judgment of God, as well heirs to these disgraces, as to the
graces they succeed them in. Having made a doubt, that ambition should have
bin the reason of the order of the Declaration, he increases it by this, that
the Ministers which seek a further reformation of our church, can not abide
these names of grace, of honor, and of lords. Which were a just reprofe, if
they did either in deed or word take that upon them, which they dislike in
other, but the order of the declaration, in speaking first of ecclesiastical
officers, and then of the civil Magistrate is far from any color of that
suspision. As for not abiding, as he speaks of these names, no man is so
ignorant, but knows these terms to be lawful, and greater then these too, if
they be lawfully used, as when they are given to those of the civil state
according to their degree. But for ecclesiastical persons, which are not
greater then Apostles, as none are, our Savior Christ has expreslie
forbidden, that it should be so with them, saying That Princes are called
gracious lords, but it shall not be so with you, Luke 22.25.
but he that will be greatest amongst you, let him be your servant. Whereby he
teaches, that the greatness of a Minister stands not in the vsurpinge of
Princely titles, but in his greatest labors and services of God and of his
people. Which thing the Apostle Paul well understood when as arguing this
greatness he says, In labors more abundant, in peril often, and so forth.
2 Cor. 11.23 26.
Therefore by the rule of our Savior Christ, the ministry most to be
esteemed, is that which preaches most diligently, and which labors most in
the work of the gospel: which howsoever men have devised to call it the
inferior ministry, and the idle ambitious prelacy the superior, yet by the
rule of our Savior, the honorable Ministry is that which is painful in
preaching, the other which embraces this present world, and abandoneth the
preaching of the word, is an inferior, base, and degenerate ministry, as
little regarded with our Savior Christ, as it is highly esteemed with men: even
as it is said, That which is high and glorious before men, Luke 16.15.
is abominable unto God. The rest of this section concerning that Kings,
Queens, and Emperors must backare, and come after the ministry, is a matter
that has bin found in some of the graces of the Hierarchy, examples Thomas
Becket, the proud Archbishop of Canturburie, and in his holiness (most
unworthily so called) next above them, but never any shadow of it, in any
faithful Minister and Preacher of Gods word.

Now follows to answer his reply to the reason of the Declaration, why to
treat first of the Magistrates power in a treatise of ecclesiastical
government is neither needful nor agreeable to good order. Which reason is,
because the church has stood in the primitive age of it without them. It
does so at this day in some places, and may do so hereafter: whereupon it is
concluded, that the regiment of it depends not upon Princes authority, but
upon the ordinance of God, and consequently, that in such a treatise it should
not be needful to treat first of them. The Replyers first quarrel at this is,
that the reason is not plain because it is not in form. For answer
whereunto he is to understand that he shall seldom find in any good Writer a
Sillogisme or reason in his full parts and form laid out according to the
exact rules of logike. The cause whereof is, that the writer supposes, his
Reader of so much understanding, that if any one part be wantinge he may
easily be able to supply it out of the rest. When children are first taught
to read, they are helped with a fescue, which is after taken from them, when
they are grown more perfect. So in Logike for the help of children rude and
ignorant, every part is laid out at full, and in his order, when they are
grown to understanding it is presumed they are able if any part be misplaced,
as it is in the best writers, more often then otherwise, or wanting, by
themselves to discern it, and put it in such order as it ought to be in. But
because he would have it so, thus is the reason in his perfect form.

It is neither needful nor agreeable to good order, to treat first in a
treatise of the government of the Church, of that power, without help whereof
the Church has bin governed in times past, is governed at this present in
diverse places, and many be so hereafter.

But the power of sovereign Princes is such,

Therefore it is neither needful nor agreeable to good order in a treatise of
Church-gouernement, first to treat of their power in the Church.

Another quarrel is, that the question is not between the Church and Princes
whether were first, but between ecclesiastical officers (which he in his
play-stile calls Tetrarkes) and Princes, and so not between the whole and a
part, but between one part and another. And then (says he) if in an anatomy
a man would first treat of the head, and after of other parts: or in
description of a house speak first of the roof, or that which was builded
last, he might orderly do so. Wherein it appears, a man had need first to
have read and expounded the Declaration to him, if his sense be no readier to
conceive that which is written, and so plainly laid before him. For the
reason of the Declaration being such as has bin showed what an impertinent
sense has he devised, making the reason so as that for the first sentence of
it he supposes this. That which is in the regiment of it was perfect, before
other is to be treated on before. In deed of such a proposition, no other
conclusion could be inferred, but such as he makes that is that the Church is
to be treated on, before he speak of the power of Princes, which were nothing,
to prove that which the Declaration intended. Yet as if he had gathered this
skilfully and like a good Logician, which it is like he either never thoroughly
learned, or has forgotten many years agone. He stands a long time upon
examining the truth of it. In which rouing although he be a mile from his
mark, yet I see I must either follow him or give him over. First he says,
that under the name of the Church, it is set down in this proposition, that
the four ecclesiastical offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons,
were before the Church: this is the first point he says is included in this
sentence. The next point he touches, is the multiplicitie and manifold
significations of prioritie, which is time, nature, order or honor and cause,
as he adds after upon better remembrance.

Having made him self this way he begins to examine which of these ways
th'ecclesiasticall officers of the Church should be before Princes in the
opinion of the Declaration, and grants that in time they were before, but
denies that in a treatise that should be always first, which is first in
time: his reasons for it, are these. Though Moses did so, describing the manner
how things began in the creation, yet we are not tied to this order, this is an
objection against him self, whereto he makes a slender answer. Calvin
begins with the knowledge of man, and so ascends to the knowledge of God:
If this example be regarded by him, then why does he charge the Declaration
with treason, for not treating first of Princes, when as Calvin, whose example
he sets for a president, and not without cause, was bold to treat first of
man and after of GOD, which in his divinity must needs be blasphemy, if the
other be treason. A third reason that Paul teaches not the Romans amiss,
saying, that the invisible things of God being understood by his works
through the creation of the world are seen, that is, both his eternal power
and godhead. Whereby he means that although God were before things created,
yet he teaches them not amiss to know God by his works. Wherein he has
forgotten that he undertook to prove that in a treatise, that which is first
in time, ought not always to be first in place. Which if he had showed in the
Epistle to the Romans to have bin observed, although it were nothing to the
Declaration, yet had he hit his mark that he has chosen to roue at. But in
bringing us for an example of a whole treatise, not half a treatise, no nor
one whole chapter, nor half a chapter, but one single sentence, he is far
from his own mark he shot at. Such an other example of a sentence out of the
fourth to the Ephesians he alleges: whereto this answer serves. Last of
all that the declaration makes Elders before Apostles, and yet place Apostles
after in the treatise, which were nothing to his own purpose if it were true.
But that Elders in the Church of Christ are said by the declaration, to have
bin before Apostles, is not true. This is his discourse of time, fitter as a
great deal of the rest for some homely use, then to spend good time about.
His next point concerns prioritie of honor, wherein he reasons wholly
against him self, and for the Declaration. For his discourse of it is to this
effect, that that which is before other in honor, ought not always to be
treated on before, but may be handled first or last, notwithstanding the
preeminence of honor, which he examplifieth in treatises of moral and
natural philosophy, and which is above all, in God, of whom he says, that
although he be before all things in time, in honor and in all respects, yet
first or last may be treated upon by good order of teaching. Which if it be
true, why draws he the Declaration to the Kings benche, and enditeth it of
treason, only for that the first place of that treatise, is not of the power
of soueraign Princes in ecclesiastical matters? If it be no treason against
God, but good order to treat of him first or last, is it treason so to treat
of earthly and mortal Princes? O more then palpable flattery! The Lord so
direct all christian Princes, and chiefly our sovereign Lady the Queen, to be
so far from aduau^cing those, that shall thus lift up any flesh and blood,
above the living and immortal god, as that contrariwise they may seuerily
punish those that shall dare to speak or write things, for pleasing of them,
that are so unmeet to be spoken and written of the hiest Majesty. This shall
be the honor of Christian Princes, to endure no such thing to be attributed
unto them, but to provide that God may be honored above all things, to whom
only all glory and honor appertains. His conclusion of this part should
have bin that things are not necessary to be treated upon according to their
worthiness and honor, but having forgot him self again, he falls upon the
former point already dispatched of the prioritie of the time. The reason
whereof seems to be, that by such error he might yet vent a new argument
concerning the necessity of treating first of that which is first in time,
which is that this is the papists argument for traditions. For (says he)
they say, that the word was delivered by tradition, before it was written, and
therefore of no less authority. If any man may make a chain of sand and
cause it to hang by linkes together, he may happily make some coherence of
this argument, with the matter he is in hand to prove. All the help he
gives the Reader to discern how this is to be applied to his purpose is
this: The papists encroch from the time to authority as our brethren here
do. Where do the brethren so? We are brethren with him in a manner at every
word, but yet we are with him like papists, like Anabaptists, undutiful to
Princes, nay traitors to them, and what not? Such brethren had Joseph, who
devised to kill him, Genesis 37.2.18
because he told their Father of their evil deeds, as we discover theirs to
the authority that is to reform them. Of such brethren the Church complayneth
by Solomon, saying: The sons of my mother were angry against me, Canti. 1.5.
etc.

It were to be wished you were more natural brethren then you are. But for the
matter, where and in what words does the Declaration gather any such thing,
not a little that sounds that way. In deed he will needs force upon them,
that they gather so, because they say, that the Church was perfect in all her
regiment, before there were any Christian Princes. But what authority is
collected from this? yet if it had bin so, is every argument proouing a thing
to be better, because it is order, a popish argument. Does not our Savior
reason thus when he says, It was not so from the beginning, but in the
beginning it was thus. And the Apostle to the Galathians directly reasons
thus from the time, saying, that the Law which was given 450. years after the
promise, could not make it void and of none effect. The places of arguments
are as the light of heaven and the water of the river, common to all, whereof
some use them to lawful and good uses, and some unlawful and ungodly. If any
heretic have reasoned from the causes, shall therefore the arthodoxe and
sound in faith be barred from using at time an argument from the causes. This
is as simple a point in divinity, as he has handled all this while in Logike,
concerning the method and order of a treatise. If we use their arguments to
the same purpose, let him disprove it, which yet he and whosoever takes in
hand the defense of the Hierarchy, must needs do. For all their principal
reasons to prove By hops and Archbishops, are the same that Turrianus and other
popish writers allege for the Popes supremacy, as in deed they must stand
or fall together.

Thus at the last has he done with the question of method and order of a
treatise, whereby it appears, (for all his double order of Synthesis and
Analysis) that he understands little more of it, then to sweep things
together, to make a heap of them.

Now follows his examination of this sentence of the declaration, that the
Church of God was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any Christian
Prince. This he says is not true. For proof whereof he takes a double
course. First, admitting that there were then no Christian Princes, and so
denies he that the Church was then perfect in all her regiment without them,
understanding it of the ordinary external regiment, and not of the temporary
and extraordinary supplies of Apostles and such like, His reason for this
repeated infinitely in sundry confused questions shufled, according to his
method together, is in effect but this, that the^ there should rise no benefit
nor commodity to the church by Princes, receiving the faith of Christ. I
answer, that this argument follows not: for the benefit may be exceeding
great, as it is in deed in every respect, when Princes become according to the
Prophet, Nurses and Fosterfathers to the Church: although the Church without
them be said to be perfect in all her outward and ordinary regiment. And
first what reason he may have to deny the ordinary external regiment of the
Church of Christ to have bin and to be perfect in it self before there were
any Princes Christian, let him consider of this that follows. That ordinary
external regiment of the Church is perfect, which proceeds from our Savior
Christ as Mediator. For in that respect he is said to be our Lord and to be
the head of his Church, and to have received all power both in heaven and
earth. Now he that is a Lord governs sufficiently and perfectly his
servants, and the head rules the body, especially being such a one as has
all power. But that ordinary external regiment of the Church which is
merely ecclesiastical, and consists in th'offices of such only as are
ecclesiastical officers, proceeds from our Savior Christ as Mediator: For
the administration of the Church, tending to bring all things subject unto God,
and which shall be given up in the end, that God may be all in all, proceeds
from him only as Mediator and not as God, blessed for ever, in which respect
he abides for ever. Therefore the ordinary external regiment of the church,
which is merely ecclesiastical, and consists in the offices of such only
as are ecclesiastical officers is a perfect, ordinary, and external regiment
of the Church. The power of Magistrates depends in deed also upon him, but
in regard of his Deity and Godhead, and not of the dispensation that was
committed unto him for our redemption. Further, every thing is then perfect in
his own nature being severally considered, when it consists of all the
parts that are natural, necessary, proper, and essential unto it, and
requires not to the making of it perfect in his kind any thing not necessary
nor essential to it, but of another and diverse nature. So every creature in
his own nature, is perfect when it has all such parts and properties, as are
necessary and natural to it. The heavens, and in them the Sun, the Moon,
the stars: In the earth a Man, a Lion, a tree, and such like, are all perfect
in their own kind, when they are furnished with all such parts as are
natural and essential to them. To the perfection of the world in deed any one
creature is not enough, because the world consists not of one creature only,
nor of many, but of all, but considered in it self every thing is perfect when
it has all things requisite to the constitution of his own nature: which
being so in all other things, must needs be so likewise in diverse societies,
powers and gouernmentes, so as powers and administrations that are diverse are
every one perfect in their nature, when they have all such things as are
requisite for their nature. But the civil and ecclesiastical societies,
powers, administrations and regimentes, are distinct and diverse one from
another. For the civil is of God only, it is only temporal and civil: yea,
even when they deal with things ecclesiastical, yet is it but ciuilly, and is
given by civil constitutions. The other is of our Savior Christ as mediator,
it is merely ecclesiastical and spiritual, and even in civil things deals
but in a spiritual manner, and is bestowed by an ecclesiastical manner of
calling appointed by our Savior Christ for that purpose. Further also in the
time of Moses as touching the ordinary government these two powers were
distinguished not only in persons and families, but in their tribes. Therefore
being in so many and some other respects so diverse, it is plain that the
perfection of the one state and power depends not upon the other. For the
government of a people both in civil and ecclesiastical matters in deed,
they are both requisite, and the one must needs concur with the other, and
help to the perfection of the other to that same end. But for their several
natures, either of them may be perfect in their kind without the other, And
whereas so many states of the heathen and other superstitious kingdoms have
bin and are yet at this day as perfect in their civil estate and government
for that which is essential to the same, as any other where the perfect
ecclesiastical regiment is received: Why of the other part should we not
esteem, the ordinary regiment appointed for the church to be perfect in it
self without the civil. Wereby it is not to be understood that the
ecclesiastical government is perfect without the civil, so as the civil
Magistrate should not be needful for government of the people, but the
ecclesiastical so perfect, as for all purposes, it only should be needful.
For the power of the Magistrate is most needful in his kind: although the
regiment of the Church be never so perfect, that is as touching the ordinances
and laws whereby it should be ruled, never so agreeable to the word of god:
yea and although the Magistrate were not Christian, and much more if he be
christian. Because the people of God having bodies and goods as well as souls
and spiritual benefits, stand in need of a civil power to protect and
defend them with an arm of flesh and blood from injuries in that kind, and
to maintain them for the things that properly concern this life, according
to a course agreeable to entertayne and preserve the good estate thereof.
Which is not only of men whose necessities enforce them hereunto: but it is
so th'ordinance of Almighty God. But for ecclesiastical government and
th'administration of things which belong to that power, the order appointed by
our Savior Christ is sufficient and perfect. This may best appear in the
government of the people of God amongst the Jews, wherein God him self
ordained not only both powers, but appointed several laws and persons for
th'administration of them: both which being of God, and most perfect in every
respect, it must needs be confessed, that either was perfect in his kind, and
for such purpose as he had appointed them. To the good government of that
people for all purposes both powers were necessary, and neither the civil
perfect without the ecclesiastical, nor the ecclesiastical without the
civil, but either of them perfect for that end and purpose, for which either
was appointed of God.

Now our Savior Christ, altering the form of the ecclesiastical
government, and so much of the civil as depended upon it, or only concerned
that people, is to be thought to have given as an administration of his church,
no less perfect for like use then that was, which before was given to the
Fathers. Whereupon it follows that the ordinary ecclesiastical government
of the Church was perfect before there were any Princes become Christians.

Moreover, th'ordinarie external administration and regiment of the Churches
is then perfect, when all ordinary external things belonging to the Church
have their officers and orders meet for the due administration of them. But
the primitive Church before there were any sovereign Princes become
Christians, had their officers and orders meet for all the ordinary and
external regiment of the Church. For what is belonging to the outward
ordinary regiment of the church. But the ministry of the word, of the
Sacraments, of the Discipline, and the relief of the poor. For all which
uses the primitive Church was sufficiently and perfectly furnished, having
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons. Whereof as the Church of Jerusalem is
a perfect president, and the rest of the Churches, planted by the Apostles: so
was namely that of the Colossians, of whom the Apostle says, That he rejoiced
to see the stayednes of their faith, and the order that was amongst them. If
it had bin otherwise, the church for the space of about 300. years should have
bin left imperfect, being without any perfect ordinary extetnall regiment
for so long time, and that also such, as most of all required such an order by
reason of the persecutions: which could not stand with the wisdom and love
of our Savior Christ toward his church. As it can not stand with his
office of Mediator, that to the perfection of the outward ordinary regiment
of the Church there should be requisite any other officers then such as he by
virtue of that office appointed, which are only ecclesiastical officers, as
has bin said, the temporal powers being ordained by him only as God and not
depending of his office of mediation and redemption of mankind. When he did so
bless his people as that both the civil and ecclesiastical government
procedde immediately from him self: yet was either of these perfect in their
kind, and for such use as they were appointed without the other, which
appeared in the ecclesiastical regiment as in other ages, so in the times of
Phineas and Jehoiada.

For conclusion of this point I add, that such outward ordinary regiment of
the Church must needs be perfect as is established according to all the
commandments and ordinances of our Savior Christ, and such as suffices for
the due, full and perfect execution of them, and which brings these who are
governed by it, to highest persecution, namely to the salvation of their souls.
But all these things did the outward ordinary regiment of the primitive
Church perform before there were any Christian Princes. Therefore, before such
time the outward ordinary regiment of the Church was perfect.

Concerning the second point, that notwithstanding the outward ordinary
regiment of the Church was perfect before Princes became Christians, that
follows not therefore that the Church has no benefit, help nor comfort by
their conversion to the faith of Christ, but is to be acknowledged, that
exceeding great and gracious is the favor which GOD does to his Church when
Princes are joined to it.

The outward ordinary regiment of the Church for the time of the Law (which
was showed to Moses in the mount, according to which he was commanded to see
all things performed, and is said to have accomplished it accordingly) was so
perfect as proceeding immediately from God wholly and only perfect, could not
be made any more perfect by any creature whatsoever. It was perfect
therefore, when that the Arc was at Silo, in the time of the Judges, and after
in the time of David, when it was brought to Syon. But yet can it not be
said, that the Church received no increase of comfort by Solomon.

For when in steed of a Tabernacle, Solomon had builded a Temple of stone, for
the buylding and for all the furniture of it, for the matter and for the
workmanship of as great magnificence and state as nature and any skill of man
was able to work it: although there was nothing added to the perfection of the
pattern given to Moses, yet was the joy and comfort of the Church exceedingly
increased. In the time of the Apostles, while the Church was yet in Jerusalem
only, the regiment established in it was perfect, and after when Churches
began to be settled amongst the Jews in the land of Jurie, and in other
parts before the conversion of the Gentiles, the regiment outward and
ordinary established in them was perfect and received no increase of
perfection in it self by addition of all the world unto the faith. But yet
infinitely was the joy and comfort of Gods people increased by it. For if
Angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of one sinner, how great do we
think the joy of heaven and earth, of men and Angels must needs have bin,
for the conversion of the world. Neither was it only so great an increase of
the comfort of the church, but withal of infinite benefit and help. For by
this means, the Church and the regiment established in it obtained as many
protectours, friends, and mainteyners of it, as there were souls amongst the
Gentiles, that received the obedience of faith, who all brought with them to
mainteyne and honor the faith they had received to the blessed hope of
everlasting life, all the gifts which God had bestowed upon them. The ritche
their riches and treasure, the strong their strength, the wise their counsel
and advise, the eloquent their persuading speech, the learned their knowledge,
and the Magistrates their authority. Whereof the Prophets foretold, saying:
Rejoice, Esaias. 54.1.2
o barren, that did not bear, break forth into joy and rejoice, thou that
did not travail with child: for the desolate has more children then the
married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy Tents, and let them
spread out the curtaynes of thine habitations: spare not, stretche out thy
cords, and make fast thy stakes. For thou shall increase on the right hand
and on the left, and thy seed shall possess the Gentiles, and dwell in the
desolate Cities. Whereby it is manifest, that the Gentiles marvelously
increased the joy of the Church by their conversion to the faith of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and brought exceeding great help, benefit, strength,
protection, defense, and furtherance to the holy faith which they received,
notwithstanding that they made no new orders in the Church, nor were not to
make any, but rested as it was duty in them in that perfect order which our
Savior Christ before had established amongst his people. Wherein they carried
them selves according to that duty which the Proselytes yielded, and were to
yield to the ancient church and Synagogue of the Jews. For if any in that
time adjoined them selves to the people of God to worship the true God, as he
had declared it to his people, he would be worshipped. They adjoined them
selves as members to keep, follow, and obey the orders they found already,
settled amongst his people by the ordinance of Almighty God, and not as
masters or Lords over the holy Religion they embraced, to take away the least
curtayne-ring that was mentioned in the Law of Moses, nor an inche of the
height, length or breadth, the just measure whereof was already set down, nor
to add any new office, ryte, order, or ceremony, or to alter in any sort
whatsoever was according to the Law of the Lord. Which is to be
understood, not only of the common people of other countries that should be
converted to the faith and religion of the Jews, but of the most Noble
amongst them, such as was Naaman the Syrian, upon whom the King his Master
leaned when he worshipped his idol: 2. Kin. 5.18.
or the Noble man that was Treasurer of Queen Candaces, Queen of the
Aethyopians. Nay, I add further, Acts 8.27.
that if Naaman had persuaded his master the King of Syria, or that noble man,
the Queen of Aethyopia, to have received the religion of the Jews, and to
have turned their whole people with them to the same, or if Cyrus that great
Monarche, or the Queen of Saba, famous for her wisdom and riches, 1. Reg.
10.1.
who both had dealinges with Gods people, had so received their faith, and
would have established it amongst all their people in all their Dominions, it
had not been lawful for them to have altered the least jot or title of the
Law of Moses, but even they must have yielded them selves and all their people
obedient to all things prescribed in it, notwithstanding their soueraignitie
which they had over their people, and which should have continued with them,
and neither have diminished nor increased for their conversion to the faith,
but remained altogether such as it was lawfully, at any time before over
their people. Only they were to mainteyne that holy profession which they
had so received, not as other private men, but as Sovereign Magistrates,
honouringe GOD in the maintenance of his true Religion, with that power and
authority which they had received at his hands.

For as no man that him self is sufficient for wisdom, and all other
respects, takes a servant into his house, or adopteth him a son, or being
a Prince, receives a forreyner, and incorporateth him into his people, by
making him free, whatsoever quality or condition he were of: yea although he
were a Sovereign Prince and Governor, to alter any order of his house, or
any law or statute in his kingdom, but to enjoy the comfort and benefit of
his house or kingdom, the orders and laws thereof, such as he has thought
meet and convenient for the government thereof: So neither Cyrus that Persian
Emperor, nor Candaces the Ethiopian Queen, being received by such profession
of true religion into the house and kingdom of God, who is only wise, and all
sufficient to govern his own, were to alter any order of Law of the same for
all their Princely Sovereignty, but to keep in their persons, and to enforce
their people by their civil power to observe all such orders, laws, and
statutes, as God had commanded to be observed in his house and kingdom. For
how great soever their power were, they had a Lord paramont over them, in
respect of whom they were vassalls and servants, who being compared with
their people, were Lords and Princes over them. Which appeared in those who
were not sinners, of the Gentiles, but Jews by nature: of whom when any
attempted the alteration of any thing as diverse of the Kings of Judah did,
namely Achaz and Vzza, 2. King. 16.1 2. Sam. 6.7.
they were reproved and grieuouslie punished for it. Notwithstanding which
matter that they who were natural Princes of the Jews, or if any of the
Gentiles had bin converted to their faith had no power to add or take away, or
in any sort to alter the least thing which God had appointed: yet both
exceeding great was the benefit of the King amongst the Jews, And very
profitable the conversion of the Princes of the Gentiles would have bin unto
them. The same is to be said of Christian Princes: For our Savior Christ
before the conversion of any of them having settled offices, orders and laws
for the guydance of his church in a perfect manner, their conversion gets
them no power to alter any jote of that he before had established. Who, if they
have believed in him, is their Lord, to whom they owe all homage, service and
obedience, but are in as great duty as any other to keep and to maynteyne
them, observing the same in their own persons, which belongs unto them, and
by their public authority enforcing ciuillie all such as are subject unto
them, to like obedience. Which service being done to the Son of GOD, who is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is no unseemly thing for them, but both
profitable and honorable for them and for all their people. Yet is not
therefore the conversion of Princes to the faith of Christ a matter of no
benefit or commodity to the Church. Nay the commodity is infinite to the
Church of such a Prince as I have spoken of, as enters into the Church not as
a Lord and master over Gods house, to alter and change at his pleasure, but
as a duetifull child to keep and see other, to keep in Gods house, that
which God has commanded to be observed. For bringing together with him self
the whole people that is subject to him, not only the comfort, but the help
and benefit of the church is unspeakably increased. Which is plain, in that
there is added to the maintenance of the Church and the true service of God in
it, the wealth, the strength, the wisdom, the favor, and all the abilities
of a whole people: Of whom, such as are truly converted unto God, will hold
nothing dear nor precious unto them, no not their own lives, in comparison of
the maintenance of Gods true Religion and worship, and the faithful
professors of it, but will employe all the good means which God has blessed
them withal, to encourage and mainteyne the same. In all whose gifts
dedicated so to God, as the Church has great help and comfort: so especially
in those which most yield that help and comfort such as are the blessing of
authority and power bestowed of GOD upon sovereign Princes, which being
sanctified and consecrated to the service and honor of God that gave it, the
wicked both in the ecclesiiasticall and civil state are by civil power and
punishment enforced to do their duties, and the godly in both estates are
protected in their innocence and well-doeing from all such as would oppress
them.

The holy story declares that religious and noble Kings of Judah have made
sundry civil statutes to th'enforcing of all to worship God in general, and
by their power have punished false prophets and idolatours: have commanded
the priests to do such duties, as they stood charged to perform, that the
true service of God, might be restored and established again amongst his
people. Iere. 26.16.
We read that when the Priests would most wickedlie and unjustly have
condemned Jeremie to death, diverse of the Kings counsel came upon them, and
by their authority delivered him out of their hands. Ierem. 38.11 12.13.
Another time a noble man having favor with the king, delivered him out of
prison. And an other time the King him self relieved the Prophet by remoouing
him from Iehonathans prison. Iere. 37.15.16.17.
Like examples read we many, of the Emperors Christians, to the immortal
praise of God for it, and the perpetual honor of such Princes. We see diverse
such Josias, and Constantins in this age, of which spirit the Lord pour out
yet greater abou^dance from above, for the exceeding great help and comfort
that we find, and upon such a largess hope yet to find in greater
abundance by the sanctified power of Christian Princes. For they looking into
former presidentes of ancient times, and seeing cause of like duty to be
performed by them selves, no doubt, will be careful that all ecclesiastical
offices and orders not of God nor agreeable to his word, be abolished, and all
such established as he has commanded. Then not only Princes shall receive
honor of their style of Supremacy, but the Church shall receive also great
comfort and benefit by it, in punishinge such as shall without just cause say
to the Prophet, Prophecy not, and to the Preachers, preach not: a matter not
only in highest degree offensive to the Majesty of Almighty God, and against
the salvation of men's souls, but also unprofitable for their Crowns: seeing
ignorance is the mother of all rebellion, and the knowledge of God, of all true
love and obedience. If any of them beat their fellow-seruauntes,
or sit down to drink with the drunken, and neglect the Lords household,
they will take knowledge of the abuses and wrongs offered to the servants of
God, and graciously hear and redress their injuries. So great difference is
there between Gallio suffringe a man to be beaten at his bar, and profanely
neglecting it, and caring for no such things as were questions of Religion, and
a Christian Prince fearing God in truth and in deed. In questions amongst
the Ministers according to the example of Constantine and others, they would
cause the matters to be heard and debated in a soly and free Synod and
assembly, and without respect of persons, authorize that which should be most
agreeable to Gods word. In cases of public calamities threatening or lying
upon the Church, if the ecclesiastical officers were negligent and careless
in it, they would cause by due order a public fast to be kept by all their
subjects, that the wrath of God might be turned away, and his favor
reconcyled again unto his people. Finally, their civil power would enforce
all men to honor God, and live in duty one to wards another as they ought,
defending the godly against the mighty oppressor, the staff of the wrath of
the good and the violent man, and punish the iniquities of the wicked
according to their deserts in justice and equity. These and many more which
by these may be considered, are the helps, commodities and benefits which the
Church of God does, and may receive by means of Christian Princes.
Notwithstanding they make no other laws, officers, nor orders in the Church
then our Savior Christ has already made, and established. Which may suffice
for a number of the Repliers questions and other speeches tendinge to this that
there should be little or no use of christian Princes, if the regiment of the
church be perfect without them.

In which discourse allowing in some sort the regiment of the primitive Church
perfect, because of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, whom then God
gave to the church, he says, those offices were given as temporary aids to
supply th'aydes of Christian Princes, which can not be so in any sort. For
there is no manner of proportion between their offices, the one being for
preaching the word and other such like ecclesiastical functions, the other for
civil government: the one by a spiritual power, the other by a temporal,
besides a number of other differences which may easily show the one could in
no sort serve for supply of the other. Further, if it had bin so, then should
the Apostles and the rest of those extraordinary officers, who he says were
given for supply of the want of the ordinary authority of Princes, they
should then have continued about 300. years longer then they did, even to
Constantines time. Nay then they should have been always such to this day, and
shall be to the end of the world in such parts of the Church, where the former
are enemies to Religion: otherwise wanting both them, and the supply, the
Church might seem weakelie provided for. But as the novelty of this point,
now first devised, the vanity is so easily manifest, as I shall not need to
tarry longer upon it. wherefore now I proceed to that which follows in his
reply.

Hitherto the Replyer has labored in vain, to show, that if it were
granted that in the primitive Church there was yet no Prince become Christian,
notwithstanding the regiment of the Church was not perfect before there was any
christian Prince. Now he pretends to proceed further to prove that
proposition untrue, which says there was not any christian Prince then. For
this untowardly has he set it down: so as it can not be plainly understood
to what time his then, is to be referred, and changes the words of the
declaration, which are these: That all the regiment of the Church was perfect
before there was any Christian Prince. Which proposition he should have
undertaken to have spoken to, if he would have said any thing to the
Declaration. But after he has set down this proposition to him self to
prove it untrue, that there was not any Christian Prince then, he leaves
the matter he undertook, and turns aside to another thing, saying albeit so
this be no good argument, nor this, nor this, and so makes three sundry
arguments of his own, as if they were used by the Declaration, but are not,
and denies them to be good, which is nothing to the matter he took in hand.
For if he make a hundredth ill arguments, as he has done in this book, and
can more easily do them, then make one good one, there is no reason to charge
the Declaration for such a cause as he mainteyneth. From this he goes to show
that it is not meet our brethren should use the same arguments that the
Anabaptists do against Princes. Wherein he names us, our brethren, as
scorning us. Whereof I know not what example he may have, but of Ismaell, who
is said to have scorned Isaac: whereupon The Apostle says: As he that was
begotten according to the flesh, persecuted him that was borne according to
the spirit, even so is it now.

The rest of that marginall note showing whereabout he goes, is, that our
brethren use the same arguments, which the Anabaptists do against Princes.
Which is so doubtfullie set down, as if he could be content the Reader took
it, not only that the Anabaptists use arguments against Princes, but also
that the Declaration uses the same arguments against Princes. The Replier him
self has not so far lost all conscience and modesty, as to charge us in
any sort with any part of the damnable errors of the Anabaptists, but
plainly acknowledges that we detest them, but somewhat he would feign should
cleave unto us. And therefore would have it understood, that we have some
indisposition against Princes, and that we have thus much good liking of the
disputations of the Anabaptists, as to use their arguments against Princes.
But the Lord who sees the secrets of all hearts, knows, that in our most
inward spirit we reverence and honor Magistracy, as the holy and necessary
ordinance of God, even amongst Christians, and yield all willing and cheerful
obedience unto it, even for conscience sake of the will of God. Therefore, the
accuser of our brethren him self, as he is termed in the revelation, can not
accuse us with any manner of color of their errors. As for using their
arguments, where did ever the Anabaptists use this argument, that in a
treatise of ecclesiastical regiment, good order requires to speak first of
ecclesiastical officers, before a man treat of the sovereign power of
Princes, because the Church was perfect in all her regiment, before there was
any Christian Prince. Is this any argument against Princes? or does it weaken
any thing at all the power of the Christian Magistrate, that their authority
be treated of in a book, so as may stand best with good order? Where did ever
any Anabaptists use such an argument? It were flatly contrary to their
error, to use such a one as plainly implies allowance of the Christian
Magistrate, and stands only for a reason of the order of the treatise. But
if the Declaration had used any arguments of theirs, being not to the same
end, or like purpose that they used them, that is, to disprove the necessary
and most lawful ordinance of God concerning Magistrates, that had not bin
blame worthy. For as has been said, th'argumentes of Logike are as common to
good and badde, as are the rules of grammar: yea as the Su^ne, and the rain,
so as if he would have us forbear all the arguments that ever the
Anabaptists used, and by consequence any other heretics, he may as well
forbid us to use the same rules of grammar, yea the same Sun, air, water,
and other things necessary for this life. But how stands this with his
maintenance of the Popish Hierarchy and Jurisdiction, and so many popish
superstitions as he mainteyneth, all which it were more reason he should
refuse, then to have common with them and other, things of most necessary use.
But it is not for nothing that he obiecteth this, for by this means he has
gotten the advantage of stuffing his book with another man's labors. In deed
if it be a fault in a book to be little, as he scorned the book of common
prayer presented of late in Parliament for being little, he has found a good
remedy to avoid that fault, which is easily avoided, if one write so many
not sentences, but pages and leaves as he has done out of other men's books.
The Author he alleges is one Gellius, a godly learned man, as appears by
his writings: but where he says, it may seem the declaration took many
things out of him, he is greatly deceived, for the declaration was written not
a few years before the book of Gellius, which he says so much is taken out.
As for his writing against the Anabaptists, he has dealt, as may well commend
both his piety and learning, and be of very good and profitable use unto the
Church, but to the matter of the declaration he says nothing at all. Therefore
there is no cause to make any answer to him, who speaks nothing against us.
But if he allege him because he otherwise expounds a text of scripture,
then the Declaration does, it is not worth his labor of writing, this being
no new thing that good writers may take some one text in other sense then
another does: provided, that the sense be always such, as may stand with the
proportion of faith. So as the declaration is no more in that case to be
pressed with the opinion or authority of Gellius, then Gellius or any other,
is to be with his that wrote the Declaration. Which yet if he will press
further, the truth is that the declaration in the exposition of the 12. to the
Romans, and the 12. of the former epist. to the Corinthians, has both the
truth it self to bear witness to it, and the best writers of this age. For it
is clear, that the word Governor in those places notes only ecclesiastical
officers, all sure and circumstances of that place so enforcing it. Another
point he would take of Gellius, is, that he says, that Magistracy and
ministry have bin most nearely joined together, even from the beginning, as
appears by Moses and Aaron. Which is godly and truly said of Gellius: but
what is this, either for the replier, or against the declaration. The reason
gathered hereof is such, as I think no man of reason would have looked for,
that is, as he notes in the margent, that the civil Magistrate has ever from
the beginning bin joined with the ecclesiastical ministry, intending thereby
that then it must needs have bin so likewise in the primitive Church. But
Gellius his meaning is so far from this, as it may seem he has been
cousined in it, and given to light credit to other that have abused him, or
else to have used small either diligence or conscience in this collection.

For the purpose of Gellius is far other in that place, namely, to show that
Magistracy and ecclesiastical ministry, are not as the Anabaptists would
have it, things that can not stand together. For (says he) these fight not
between them selves, but from the beginning were most nearily joined together,
although the property of either be distinguished in the Church, as is plain
in the examples of Moses and Aaron. Wherein Gellius godly and truly proves,
that these two ordinances of God are not enemies, so that the one should not
abide the other, but rather that from the beginning they were of good and
friendly agreement, which is well proved by Moses and Aaron, who being
brethren, and either of them bearing the chief office in either state both
civil and ecclesiastical, shows a natural and brotherly respect between
these two states, and that naturally from the beginning they have maintained
comforted and cherished one another. This is it only which Gellius means
there, which is as far from the Repliers collection, as those two states are
said by Gellius, and are in deed, near one to another, as may appear most
evidently by sundry other circumstances of that place, and the direct
opposition of these words, they fight not between them selves, to these, but
have bin always most nearely joined together, and the adjective there used in
the superlatiue degree of comparison, in which sort no man speaking Latin
would say, that these two had bin always together, but in the positive. To
like purpose he notes out of another place, a little after in the margent, the
civil and ecclesiastical power joined always in the Church, and in the text
of the words of his translation, sets down in a diverse letter these
words, have always bin joined together. Whereupon he gathers thus: If it
were always joined together, that is to say, the Magistracy and
ecclesiastical ministry, it was even then joined when our brethren avouch
that it was not only disioyned, but that the one was perfect, when the other
was not at all. Wherein he commits the same gross oversight that he did
in the former place. For Gellius in this place gathers his general
conclusion of sundry arguments alleged before. Whereof this, having bin of
the good agreement that has always bin in the Church from the beginning
between these two functions, together with the rest, he reckons up this
almost in the same words, he had set it down in before. Which seeing it can
have no other sense in the conclusion, then it had before, it is plain, no
such thing can be gathered of it as the Replyer pretends. As impertinent are
his other collections and observations out of the same author, as that those
churches so much commended before by the Declaration, are troubled with
Anabaptists. His purpose was to prove, that there were Chrstian Princes in
the primitive Church, but how far wide roueth he from this mark, in telling
us of another matter, of Anabaptists. Of whom yet that he says is not
true, that the Churches commended before by the Declaration, are the same that
are said by Gellius there, by accident to be troubled with that sect. But if
it were, should that discommende their reformation according to Gods word? Nay
rather it commends them, that they are so amongst them, as that they are not
hidden nor allowed nor suffered so to continue, but discovered and disprooued in
word and in writing, and in public disputation for their recovery, if it
were possible, or else for the keeping of those who are yet sincere not to be
seduced by them. Yet if this must needs be an embasing of the honor of the
reformation of those Churches, I would he could say for ours that there are
none of the family, no recusants, yea no Anabaptists nor Libertines, nor of
any other erroneous sect amongst us or could show in any part of the world
any field of the Lords, where the Enemy sows not tares amongst the
wheat, or any flooore where the wheat is not mingled with chafe, and that
not only in regard of evil life, but also of erroneous doctrines, according
as it was said to the church of Corinth, there must be heresies amongst you,
that they who are tried and sound in faith, may be made manifest.

His next observation out of Gellius is, that the state of the old Testament
and new is all one, which, as Gellius there teaches, that is, concerning the
way of justification and the obedience to the moral law is very true, but
nothing to the Replyers purpose.

The next observation, which is, that God did by an extraordinary power
punish the wicked, where the ordinary was wanting, that is, as he expounds
by the Apostles Peeter and Paul punish Ananias, Saphyra, and Elymas, when the
chief and ordinary Magistrates over them were not Christian Princes: is not
only nothing for his purpose as the former, but directly against him. For him
self confesses contrary to that he pretended to prove in the beginning and
by a former observation out of Gellius, that always the two functions of
Magistracy and ministry have bin joined in the church, and his collection
upon that. Therefore even in that time, when it is denied by the Declaration to
have bin so. He now confesses that the chief and ordinary Magistrates were
not then Christian Princes. If he had not confessed it, the truth hereof is
manifest by the Acts of the Apostles in Paul's appealing to Caesar, and all
the stories of that age. But his own confession against him self, Acts 25.11.
was not to be pretermitted. Yet as if he knew not his own voice, or would
deny his own hand, he continues his purpose to prove out of Gellius, the
former untruth, that Princes should have bin Christians in that time.

To which purpose, although it be in deed nothing to the purpose, he notes
out of him, that contrary to the assertion of the Declaration, Gellius
shows, that there were Magistrates in the time of Christ and the Apostles. As
if the Declaration denied that the world was then gouuerned by Magistrates, as
it has always bin, or that any bearinge any civil office received the faith
of Christ, and yet continued their calling. Neither of these is denied by the
Declaration, to which end Gellius fitly alleges the examples of Cornelius
and other: but, the Declaration speaks expreslie of sovereign Princes,
saying, But of the supreme authority of Christian Princes, and after in the
words which the Replier has undertaken to disprove, that the Church of God
was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any Christian Prince. Yet of
this most impertinent reply, and of this his so fruitless labor this is to be
noted, that he confesses the question to be concerning the time of Christ and
the Apostles time. In whose time if he pretend any sovereign Prince to have
bin Christian, he were worthy a better reward then he can by any reason look
for. But where as he reprochfully and despitefullie sets it down that
Gellius proceeding comes to the Anabaptists objection of this self same
reason that our brethren in this learned discourse do urge, that is, that the
Church of God was perfect in all her regiment before there was any christian
Prince. Behold what words of Gellius he cites to prove it. But they object
(says Gellius) that in the time of Christ and of Paul, there was no
Christian Magistrate. If this be their objection, how is it the self same
reason that is used by the Declaration, which speaks not of all Magistrates,
but only of sovereign Princes. Further Gellius begins his answer
thereunto thus, as he him self has translated him: The authority of the
Magistrate is not therefore weakened, albeit in the time of Christ and of
Paul, Emperors and Kings set in high estate were aliens from the faith. Could
any thing be spoken more directly against that which he would prove by this
testimony, or more expresselie, for that which the Declaration says, and he
would improve. Yet from this page he begins to set these words in the top
of the page, in a diverse letter, Christian Princes from the beginning, and so
continues in the next, Christian Princes in the Apostles times, and from these
being the 136. and 137. pages, to the 145. in which and the next he has,
Christian Princes from the beginning. All which conteyne little else, but Gellius
words, word for word translated. A preatie way to make a show to the state
of having taken great pains to mainteyne the ecclesiastical government of
it. If he can help him self thus, with stuffing his book with other men's
writings. We have heard how Gellius enters into that discourse, playnlie
disauowinge the proof of that, in the very beginning, for which he would
have him speak. Upon which place, it served well for his purpose, to make that
note in the margent: but surely modesty and shamefastnes never aduysed him, to
set so direct an untruth so hye in his book, that all men might see it. For
in all the rest of Gellius words, in so many leaves as I have noted, rehearsed
by him, there is no such matter intended nor proved. Only in naming such
Magistrates as were called to the faith of Christ, he reckons up the Mat. 8.5.
Ce^turion in the gospel, and cap. 27.57
Joseph of Arimathea, and Luke 1.3.
Theophilus, to whom Luke dedicateth his writing of the Gospel, John 3.1.
Nichodemus, Acts 13.7
Sergius Paulus, the Acts 8.27
Treasurer of Candaces, and (g) Captain Cornelius, with certain other of Asia,
of Rome, and of Caesar's house. Wherein let every thing be enforced to the
utmost, yet will he come short by many degrees, of a sovereign Prince of the
faith of our Savior Christ in that time. Which principal purpose
notwithstanding he miss of, yet supposed he not to leese his labor in writing
out so many leaves of an other man's book, to stuff his own withal, and
therefore has scattered observations as he goes, in the margent, which,
belike, he thought the Reader should take as admonitions, that such a matter
served for him, and made against the Declaration. Whereof one in his margent
is, A Church without a Magistrate, never seen: whereby he would seem to give
his Reader to understand, that Gellius should deny that ever there had been
seen any Church, where the people have not been governed by christian
Magistrates, which is nothing the meaning of Gellius. For he speaks of
Magistrates in general, and the use of it in the ordinance of GOD, to punish
the wicked, and to protect him, that lives according to his duty, what
soever the Magistrate be in regard of his religion. And in this sense
denies, that ever there has been seen any Church where the people of it
have not been subject to Magistrates, which is very true. For even in the time
of our Savior Christ and the Apostles, the Empire of Room flourished, and
ruled in a manner all the world, as it is noted in the third Chapter of Saint
Lukes Gospel. And as there were Magistrates that ruled then over men in all
places, so the ordinance of God in Magistracy,, What soever the religion of
the Magistrates were, was needful and profitable unto the Church. Whereof the
reason is evident, for that thereby, they were oftentimes in their innocence
delivered from those who would have done them wrong, as Paul was by appealing
to Caesar. Therefore, whereas he notes in the next place, that the godly
have need of the Magistrate, is likewise true: yea and the next to it, which
he notes out of Gellius, that the use of Magistracy is such, as that it were
rather to be wished there were no common wealth without a true Christian
Magistrate, then the Christian Magistrate should be excluded from the Church of
God, that is that a christian bearing civil office, should therefore be cut of
from the church as the Anabaptists would. For this is plainly the meaning of
Gellius, howsoever he have set down the note of his words shortly and
obscurely, and fitly to make the reader gather another sense, as if Gellius
meant to say, rather, no common wealth without a Christian Magistrate, then a
Magistrate excluded from the Church, or not to be reckoned an ecclesiastical
office. But the sense (as I said) is plain. In which meaning also is that
written whereof he makes after this note in the margent, The Magistrates
office necessary to the church, not that the Church cannot stand, except the
Magistrate, where the Church is, be of the faith, but that what soever he be
in that respect, his office in the ordinance of GOD, is necessary, and
comfortable to the Church.

To which end Gellius adds for proof in the very next words, otherwise
why did Paul and Peter write of that matter to the faithful that were subject
to the discipline of Christ. For the Romans to whom he wrote, were under
Nero, as were also at that time the other. His next note in the margent upon
Gellius his words is, that certain of the Prophets and Apostles exercised
also the office of the Magistrate. This is another of his impertinencies, I
might say untruths, for here Gellius attributes this no more to the
Apostles, then to our Savior Christ, who directly said, His kingdom was not
of this world: John 18.36.
but I chiefly note his impertinencie. For what is this to prove, that he
undertook (to wit) that there were Christian Princes in the Apostles times.
But he had a meaning to admonish the Reader to stay and consider of the
points here handled by Gellius, whereunto also tends his next note, why God
distinguished those offices. For there Gellius shewinge, that these functions
are not contrary, so as for the contrariety of their nature, they could not
meet together, but that the one should destroy the other, as fire and water,
seeing Melchisedech, Eli, and Samuel exercised both: and the distinguishing of
them, was not for their repugnancie, but because one man was scarce sufficient
to exercise both. He might think peradventure, the Reader might gather here,
something by the way for the maintenance of the co^fusio^ of both offices in
those that are of the ministry. But of this there will be a fitter place to
speak. Here it may suffice to admonish the Reader of the insufficiency
which Gellius notes to be in men for exercising of both offices. For which
cause God did distinguish and sever them to be administered by diverse persons.

Thus proceeds he on still with Gellius, noting in the next place the example
of Christian Magistrates in Christ and the Apostles times. Which is that place
where Gellius makes mention of the Captains or Centurions, of Joseph,
Nicodemus, and such like, whereunto I have answered before already.

Now the Replyer having fought a great while with another man's weapons, and
persuading him self that his own right hand had done valiantly, begins
to sound his trumpet as if the victory were his own, saying, thus we see
most evidently, how weak this reason is, to wit, of the perfection of the
Churches regiment before there were any christian Princes, and with what a
multitude of far better reasons, yea with a cloud of witnesses, it is beaten
down. Wherein he rejoices as if a blind man striking often at a venture,
because he has wearied him self, should triumph, as if he had driven his
enemy out of the field. Yet having in the midst of this his blind vanity
some glymse that this reason comes still like an armed man upon him, he
holds out this bucklar against it, that it avails not to say, they were no
Emperors. For (says he) it euicteth the cause sufficiently, that they were
Princes, or at least any kind of Magistrates.

In deed, if it may suffice, to show that any Magistrates in the time of our
Savior Christ received the faith of the Gospel, he has won his spurs,
and is worthy if not to be knighted, yet Bishopped, which I think he had
rather be. But the question is only of sovereign Princes, whether any such
were Christians in that time. Which his cloud of witnesses vanishing away
like a cloud, or as a cloud without water, driven about with every wind,
has not bin able to do for him. Yet is he not satisfied thus to leave the
matter, but obiecteth against him self, that those Magistrates exercised no
authority over the Church, but were in it as private men. Which is very true,
but not alleged by the Declaration, and therefore no cause he should enter
into the disprooue of that, except he can not endure that any truth stand
before him. To this having little to say of him self, he says that Gellius
says somewhat to this, out of whom yet he notes no one word to this purpose,
but to another, he notes, that the churches regiment, is more happy, where
Christian Princes are. Which thing the Declaration might have taught him. And
thus far has he reasoned out of Gellius, against the first part of the
argument of the Declaration, affirming the Churches regiment to have been
perfect before that any Princes were Christians.

For that which he adds after of his own, of Paul's appeal to Caesar for
the decision, as he says of an ecclesiastical controversy, is of so small
color of likelihoode, as can not easily abuse any. For, who will be so
absurd, as to think that Paul referred the decision of the question he had
with the Jews, concerning salvation by our Savior Christ, as it is
Ecclesiastical, to Nero, who understood nothing of those matters, and was
him self a great enemy, as the Apostle seems to call him, as a Lion, ready
to devour all that made profession of that faith. 2. Tim. 4.17
It were time now to proceed to his replye to the other part of the
argument, but that the Reader is first to be admonished concerning Gellius,
out of whom the Replyer has written so many leaves, (because of all other he
thought him to write most soundly and favorably of the office and power of
Magistrates,) that this same Gellius, so duetifull to Magistrates, is an
earnest defendour of that ecclesiastical gouuernement, which the Replyer in
all his book oppugneth. Whereof it is to be observed, that the reformed
Discipline, which is desired to be established amongst us, is in no sort
prejudicial to Christian Princes, or other Magistrates. For Gellius, who
writes as earnestly for the maintenance of the reformed Discipline as any,
the same also writes as duetifullie of the office and power of Magistrates,
and as largely: yea and more against the Anabaptists, then ever did any of
the Roman Hierarchy, or unreformed Discipline. Therefore, notwithstanding
our seekinge to advance by all good and lawful means, that holy ordinance of
GOD, of the only lawful Discipline, whereby the Church ought to be guyded:
we may be, and are by the grace of God, as loyal and loving subjects, as
duetifull and obedient, as any are of their white coat, which they strive so
much for. Besides this, the Reader is to observe the good discretion of the
Replyer, in resting so wholly upon the authority of Gellius in this matter.
Whose testimony if he acknowledge so grave and of such credit, as if it had
bin against us, he would have given sentence against us upon it, why should
not the same man's witness, be of like weight and credit to justify our cause,
and to prejudice his, if so be his testimony may be showed to be with us and
against him in this cause of the Discipline of the Church. But this is
manifest, by a treatise of Gellius, expresselie written of ecclesiastical
Discipline. Out of which I might write more leaves to show his judgment, and
his reasons in the diverse points of Discipline, for that only lawful and
holy order which the Replyer has audaciouslie set him self against, and
oppugneth, then he wrote out of him, to no purpose, for the office of the
Magistrate. Whereby it is clear, that if he stand to the witness of Gellius,
he has lost the whole cause he labors so greatly to mainteyne. Now I
proceed to the rest of his replye.

The Declaration for proof of the order to be followed in that treatise,
having alleged, that the regiment of the church was perfect before there
were any christian Princes, adds further, that it may and does stand at
this day in most blessed estate where the civil Magistrates are not the
greatest favorers. The reply to this, begins with such an exclamation, as a
man would think he heard and saw the hye Priest, mentioned in the Gospel,
renting his clothes, and cryinge, He has blasphemed, what need we any more
witnesses? Mat. 26.65.
Behold now you have heard his blasphemy, what think you? yet was it no evil
that was spoken, but a most holy truth, which that priest of all other ought
to have perceived. There follow next idle repetitions, as of other things, so
of his former vain demaundes, what use then there may be of Christian
Magistrates, to the Church? Whereupon I have already answered, shewinge the
Magistrates to be ordained of GOD, for the protection of the good, and
punishment of the evil doer. And that as in other matters, so also in things
that concern religion, that we may live under them, a peaceable and quiet
life, in all piety and honesty. For of such things have they charge also,
especially Magistrates which are of good Religion. For which cause the Kings
were commanded in the law of Moses, to have by them a copye of the law, and
charged to see the same observed, Deuteronomy. 17.18.
not in one part only, which concerns the duties of the second table, but
also of the first. All which things while Magistrates procure and further by
their civil power and authority, blessed are they in so holy and honorable
service, and blessed is the Church that receives so exceeding great help,
benefit, and comfort by them.

A little quarrel here is in the next place, against the words, most blessed.
Whereunto it is replied, that the Church can not be said to be most blessed
till it be in heaven. But he is to understand, that it is not spoken of the
Church simply, but in some respect. Which also he grants, a little after,
saying him self of the primitive church, that it seemed in most blessed
estate in some respects.

As therefore the Church may be said to be in most blessed estate, when it is
ordered in all things according to Gods commandment, which is the greatest
blessing it may have in this life, so the Declaration speaks of the Churches
which are blessed in that respect. The state of the ancient Church of the
Jews, was then in most blessed estate in such respect, when all things in it
answered the pattern showed to Moses in the mountain, and the primitive
Church, when it was ordered according to the rules of our Savior Christ. So
are the Churches of this age, said for the same respect to be in most blessed
estate.

From this he returns again to his question so often moved before, what use
then there may be, of the Christian Magistrate. For which he is to be returned
again in like manner to his former answer. Which is, that the use of them is
exceeding great in every sort, and would be yet a great deal more if their
godly proceedings were not hindered by misinformations of such, who, for their
place and the trust reposed in them, ought both to know and declare the will
of God, to Christian Princes, to the furthering of the reformation of such
abuses, the continuance whereof provoke the wrath of God against both the
Prince and the people: Who mainteyning that all is well, (when in the
governance of the Church, so many things are amiss, and need most speedy
reformation) abuse them selves and the Princes whom they ought faithefullie to
serve, (as Azariah and Hananias the Prophets did Asa King of Juda: 2. Chro.
15. 1 Cap. 16 7. Ierem. 1. 2.
Jeremy Josiah, with sundry other) and so hasten upon them and their people
the fiery flying vengeance, that for such enormities may come, so mightily and
suddenly, that there will be no turning of it back, nor escaping from it.
Wherein, God be merciful and spare his sanctuary, that it be not made
desolate, for the Lords sake, but to return to the service, Dan. 9.17.
whereby for my part, I may endeavor to procure so great a blessing, in
maintenance of the truth of God, in the cause of the further reformation
needful in the discipline, as it has bin through the goodness of God made in
the doctrine. I proceed to answer his next point of reply to this argument.
This reply is an injurious and a bitter discourse, of the difference of the
state of the Church in persecution and in peace, which he affirms to be her
most blessed estate. It is set out by opposition of Princes persecuting, and
protecting the Church, as of Pharao and Moses, Saul and David, Manasses and
Ezechias, the Turk, Sophi and Cham, and the Christian Princes in England,
Germany, Scotland, Denmark, etc. The end whereof, is to charge the
Declaration, with a gross and foul absurdity as if it affirmed the Church in
times past to have been in better state under Tyrants and persecutours then
under godly and virtuous Princes, and in this age under the heathen, then under
Christian Princes. Whereupon he cries out, O blind (what should I call it)
malice, no, but selfe-willed opinion, that to deface the good estate of the
church of God, wherein we are (under such a right defendor of the faith)
defended and shielded from all our enemies, in a far more blessed estate then
we deserve, will make such an odious comparison as this is. But as the old
saying is: Itch and ease can no man please. If a beam of a Bishoprike had not
hindered his sight, he might have seen more clearly, both in many other
places, and in this, that there is no such comparison made as he cauilleth
about. It is said in the Declaration, that the Church at this day stands in
most blessed estate where the civil Magistrates are not the greatest
favorers. Whereat although he iestingly demand after his manner, whether this
be in Vtopia, or where yet either he must be stark blind, or else he must
needs see that it is meant of the Countries near unto us, wherein the
Churches are in some respect in most blessed estate. Which blessedness if he
scorn at for the persecution which they endure, what will he answer to our
Savior Christ, saying: Blessed shall ye be when men reuyle you, Ma. 5.11.12
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you. Further also, in regard of the full
reformation of the church, both in the doctrine and discipline of our Savior
Christ, which the Lord that is rich in mercy has for their more abundant
comfort, given them to enjoy in this their outward troublesome and persecuted
estate. For these and such like respects, declared upon occasion before in
this treatise, the Declaration calls their estate most blessed. In reproach
whereof he exhorts the Ministers, zealous of the further reformation of our
church to be gone into those countries, if they judge the estate of the^ to be
better then our own. I marvel not if the successors of Amazia would feign
have the successors of Amos to depart both out of the Court, Amos 7.12.
and country too. For then might they more freely abuse whom they would. But
the duty of our calling, whereunto almighty God of his great mercy has
called us, which is to serve especially the church of our own nation and
people, amongst whom we are borne and brought up, whose language is ours by
nature, and with whom we are to have all things common both blessings and
punishments, as the servant of God in Iewrie had, will not suffer us to
hearken to his rude motion, least we should with Jonas fly from the presence of
the Lord. Further, as the terror of God, so the love of our people and
nation, our kindred and acquaintance, not only in the flesh, but also in the
Lord, is more dear and precious to us, then that we may depart from them, for
whose sake, we ought to be ready, to want, even that so great a blessing, as
from our heart we acknowledge it to be, as to live in a church reformed both in
doctrine and discipline, and wholly in every respect, under the government of
our Savior Christ. Moses and the Apostle Paul were carried so far beyond
this in a like zeal and love of their people, Exe. 32.32. Romans 9.3.
as (whatsoever the Replyer think) they that suppose any part of their spirit
to be in us, need not marvel, although for some like cause, we should
deprive our selves of such a blessing, as we want, in not being in those
churches. Further also as the worthy servants of God, the Ministers of the
Gospel there, left not their countries because they wanted this full
reformation in the beginning, but knew it to be the calling of God that they
should labor by all good duties to procure it: So likewise do we
understand, that we are charged with like duty to our church, to further as
much as by any godly means, agreeable to our callings, we may possibly do,
the further reformation of our Church, that we may see and enjoy the fulness
of the glory and mercy of god upon it. Wherein howsoever the hinderer of
reformation that stood at the right hand of Jehosuah, Zach. 3.1.
have hindered us hitherto: yet do we hope in God, that he will show us
mercy in time, to take away all things which hinder the glory of God in his
Church: as those garments whereof Zachary speaks did in Jehosuah, and the
restoring of the ancient honor of that Church, was figured in the putting on
of his holy garments which were according to the law of God put upon him: so
likewise do we hope, and pray, that the Lord will cause the honor that
sometimes shined in it to be seen again, and that holy, Zach. 3.2.
seemly, and only lawful government of the church which he has commanded to
be restored. For restoringe of which comfort and glory, as the Lord has
begone to rebuke Satan the Prince of the Angels of darkness, and ministers of
iniquity, and hinderers of the full reformation of the church: and has taken
our Church as a brande out of the fire wherein it consumed, so has he given
thereby just cause of hope, that he will in his good time do it all honor. In
which hope we stand before the Lord, and wait still upon him, till he may
give order and commandment for the taking away of all unholy and profane
ceremonies, superstitions, and usurpations from his Church, and especially
ignorance, negligence, covetousness, and ambition from the Ministers of it,
which as unseemly and defiled garments dishonor the glory of the same, and
for the furnishing of the Church with lawful and holy orders, offices, and
authority, and the ministry of it chiefly with godly wisdom and
faithfulness, which may be unto both, as the ornament of Aarons head, promised
to Iehoshuah. This is the answer that I have to make to this sober
exhortation of the Replyer, Zach. 3.5.
and to all such as being herein no better aduysed then he is, shall at any
time use the like. The next quarrel is about the sense of civil Magistrates,
under whom the Declaration says, the Church is so blessed, notwithstanding
they be not the greatest favorers of the Church.

Wherein first inquyring whether this be meant of her right Excellent
Majesty, (a question void of all reasonable judgment and understanding, the
words being most direct to the contrary) he gathers after, sundry things,
which uncharitably he would impute to the Declaration. But the Declaration in
all places speaks reverently and duetifullie, as it becomes one, that is
well instructed of the honor that is due to that high and sovereign
authority, which God has honored her Majesty withal, to the great comfort
of all her faithful and loyal subjects: although in deed it use not that
glosing style nor palpable flattery, neither in mention of her highest estate,
nor of the estates near unto it, which is used by ambitious suitors for
benefices and Bishoprikes. The speech of the Declaration being such as I have
said, and having no eye to the soueraingtie, which God has set over us, yet,
as one that will not leave to use wringing and violence till he draw blood, so
cease he not, but strayneth and wringeth till he may draw out some bloody
accusation of slanderous and vnduetiful speech of her Majesty. Prou. 30.33.
Which because it needs no answer on our part, and the very repetition of
his unseemly speeches and stryuing about them, can not but be offensive to the
duetifull subject: I stand not upon it. But whereas he would prove both by
other places and by the Prophet Esaias, that God does a great favor to his
Church, when he raises up Princes to favor and perfect them, he is to
understand, we no les acknowledge the goodness of God herein, then any other.
The words of the Prophet which he alleges, are these: Esa. 49.23.
Kings shall be thy nourcing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nources: they shall
worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and like the dust of thy
feet: and thou shall know that I am the Lord for they shall not be ashamed
that wait for me. Wherein the Prophet notes by the similitudes of Foster
fathers and Nourses, the love, care, faithfulness, watchfulnes, and diligence
that Princes shall have to preserve, mainteyne, nourishe, and comfort the
Church: and in the bowing the head to the ground, the honor they shall do
to our Savior Christ, the head of the Church, and consequently to the
Church it self, in him. For in bowing them selves to low, as doing homage to
the Son of GOD, they promise all faithful duty, service and obedience unto
him.

The performance whereof is to renounce in them selves, and to aboli he from
amongst their people, all false worship, and idolatry, with like zeal as
Ezekiah and Josiah did, and to establishe in all parts the true worship of
God, as our Savior Christ has taught it, and commanded it to be observed. We
ought to rejoice when any yield any manner of obedience to our Savior Christ,
and should we not much more rejoice to see any obedience in Princes? But when
they bow so low before our Savior Christ, and do that honor to him, as that
at his commandment, most notorious superstition and idolatry is publicly
cast out of their kingdoms and countries, and the doctrine, necessary to
salvation, is authorized to be preached and published to their people.
Exceeding great cause of comfort and rejoicing ought it to be to all the
Church. Which is yet increased as their obedience and service shall abound, and
when the Church does see them bow down so low, to the Son of God, as to
honor, serve and obey him in all things, which he has commanded. For
exceeding great increase is it of the honor of our Savior Christ, and
therefore consequently also of the comfort and joy of the Church, when the
house and kingdom of God is guyded by those ordinances and laws only which
the only Lord thereof has appointed. When no offices have place in his
Church, but such as he has ordained, and when all such are placed in it, as
he has commanded. When they are called to these charges by such order as he
has prescribed, and walk duetifullie in the same as aperteineth: the
establishing of these things in their due order in every competent congregation
of Gods people, and the obedience of all estates of the same, is so great a
benefit, as he were worthy to sorrow, that should not rejoice at so great
blessings. Which being as in all other parts of the Land, so more carefully
observed in every place, as it excels other: both for the honor of them whom
God has so exalted, and their good example amongst the people, must needs be
a joyful and comfortable spectacle to all the church. But yet a more heavenly
sight (all men must needs acknowledge it) to see the Royal house and court of
a sovereign Prince, to have such order established in it, that is the holy
Gospel of our Savior Christ, upon the Sabbath day, and other convenient times
in the week, to be soundly and sincerely preached in it by ministers not
charged with any other people, but appointed for the service of that chief part
of the Church, and therefore also of greatest graces of godly wisdom, and
faithfulness, and every good and heavenly gift meet for so precious a charge,
the holy Sacraments duly administered, the Lords watch carefully set, for the
preservation of the chief tower of Jerusalem, his holy Treasury regarded, and
all those sacred assemblies carried with a godly reverence. In all which high
solemnities and heavenly meetings for the worship of Almighty God. How great
a joy to see present there the sovereign Prince, as David, Solomon, Hezekiah,
Josiah, and other Kings of Juda, 2. Sam. 6.15.16.1. 1. Kin 3.1.5. 2. Kin 19.1.2
14.15. 2. Chr. 29.20 2. Chro. 34.29.30.
are reported to have bin, and to have had their place, for the purpose
provided for them, where to present them selves before the Lord, to increase in
the knowledge and obedience of his will, by the ministry of his servants? How
great a joy, to see their right honorable counsel of estate keeping the Lords
Sabbath in such order, and all the Princes and Nobles, which for any honorable
service, give their attendance with all other officers of the household,
together yielding audience and worship to Almighty God, and his only Son
Christ Jesus, according to the golden saying of that famous and worthy
Joshua, I and mine house will serve the Lord, and according to the
exhortation, which says: Be wise now therefore ye Kings: Psa. 2.10.11.12.
be learned ye Judges of the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in
trembling. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when
his wrath shall suddenly burn, blessed are all that trust in him. To see
these things would be greater joy, then the joy which the Queen of Saba had
for the like sight in Salomons Court, and the greatest that the Church can
have, till it be taken up into the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. ver 22.23.24.
to the most solemn and glorious assembly of the spirits of the just that
are perfited in heaven, to the thousands of Angels, and to the presence of the
living God, and of our Savior Christ his only begotten Son, the Mediator
of the new Testament, and the Reconciler of us to God his Father by his
precious blood. Lo, the benefit and the comfort that we acknowledge the
Church of God receives, when that prophecy of Esaias is fulfilled. Therefore in
vain and to no good purpose, does the Replier ask whether this blessing be
turned into a curse, and whether we can conclude because the gold is finer
that is tried seven times in the furnace, and the persecutions of the Church
redounde in the end both to the greater glory of God, and the better
confirmation of the church. Whether I say for this cause we can conclude, that
in persecution the church is more perfect in all her regiment, and in most
blessed estate: applying corruptly hereunto that place of the Apostle, because
where sin abounded, grace did more abound, Shall we therefore abide in
sin, that grace may abound? Romans 5.20. Romans 6.1.
So if by an extraordinary mercy of God, the church seemed in some respects to
be in most blessed estate in persecution, shall we say that persecution is
better for the Church then peace and prosperity under a Christian Magistrate?
The answer whereunto is plain, that all other things being alike, and the
difference of the Church stand only in this, of being defended by a Christian
Prince, or persecuted by an Enemy, it is to be esteemed a special and hye
favor of God to be so shielded and comforted, and fitter for the general and
ordinary course of governing the Church, then times of trouble which are
subject to a thousand inconveniences. But this nothing concerns the
Declaration, which only showing by experience of former and present times that
the regiment of the Church was, is, and may be most perfect even where it
wants the great comfort of the favor of an earthly Prince, argues thereby
the order which is followed in that treatise, to be lawful and good. So as if
he would have spoken to the point, that the declaration stands upon, he had
been to show that the regiment of the Church never was, nor can be perfect,
without a Christian Magistrate. Which point he would seem also to grow
nearer to, in that which follows, wherein he labors to show the
imperfection of the regiment of the primitive Church by these reasons. The
regiment says he, was abused in those that had gifts of tongues, of healing,
etc. Which is not so, for the abuse of a thing proves not t'him perfection of
it. The light of the Sun by day, of the Moon and stars by night, yea all
the creatures of God are abused: yet this proves not the light of the Sun to
be imperfect, or the state of other creatures in their original creation, at
which time also they were abused. The word of God is abused diversely, Phil.
1.15.
some preaching it for contention, some for vayn glory, some for covetousness
to attain to great worldly livings and dignities, yet is the word perfect, 2.
Cor. 2.17.
as the Prophet says in the Psalm. So in the primitive church, Psalm. 19.7.
the regiment and the order of it set down, whereby it was to be governed,
might be perfect, as it was in deed, notwithstanding it were true, that some
abused it, but that also is not showed that the regiment is abused. For the
abuse of the spiritual gifts was a disorder of particular persons, and not
any imperfection in the regiment. Where by when the disorder brake out, it was
corrected and redressed. The perfection of the regiment of the church can not
make that offenses and disorders should not be committed, which through the
infirmity and corruption of our nature will be, and has bin at all times, but
it may remedy and reform them when they break out. The same is to be said
of his next reason, that at that time there were false Apostles, Pastors,
Teachers, and Deacons, which being granted argues not the imperfection of the
regiment of the Church at that time, but rather it being plain, that they who
were such, were by that regiment discovered and corrected as appertayned,
proves the perfection of it. His third and last reason, is, that there were no
such governors in the primitive Church to guide it, as the declaration
affirms there were, or else their authority extended not to correct so many
foul offenses, as were in that time, or else they did not their duty, or the
people would not be ruled by them. Any of which latter points being such as
might fall out, and yet the regiment perfect, as if his proof rested wholly
upon this, whether there were any such Elders in the Church at that time or no,
he leaves all the other, and goes about only to prove that one point. Which,
because he does it most impertinentlie by alleging 1. Corinthians. the 6.
Chapter, which serves nothing willingly his purpose, but is drawn and
haled to it by violence. And because I doubt not, but if he think in deed
there be any thing in that place for him, we shall hear it again, and
especially because he has a whole book after of that matter, I leave it till
we may come to it in order.

In his discourse upon this place, besides the chief purpose of handling it
already touched, he notes that under Christian Princes, we are not bound to
set up private men to judge our causes, as they were wished, and hereupon
gathers that it were a dangerous thing to follow the primitive Churches
regiment in so doing. Wherein, if there be a spark of true light in him, he
might perceive that they were willed to do so, 1. Cor. 6.1.
to avoid pleading before infidells. Which cause being taken away, where God
gives his Church Christian Magistrates, it is plain, that ought to cease with
the cause. Further, that was no part of the ecclesiastical regiment, that the
Apostle there speaks of: yet he grows from this particular to a general
caution, of not making ordinary rules of particular examples, or
commandments of the Apostles, nor of our Savior Christ, Mat. 10.9.10
examplifying it by the commandments to the Disciples, of not taking any
thing with them in their journey to preach, of absteyning from Idols, blood,
and strangled (where I know not why he has left out fornification, which is
also mentioned with the rest in that text) and of praying bareheaded, as he
translateth it, 1. Corint. 11. But, says he, although there be no express
mention, how long these things should continue yet leaueling these by the
analogy of our faith and Christian liberty we find no necessity of these or
any other such like orders, whereby he would implye the like of the regiment of
the Church then used, and leave it now to our selves to devise an order that
may be thought meet. Which reason if it were good, would overthrow all
Christian Religion. For if it be so as he teaches, what shall bind the
church. If neither examples, nor commandment, neither of our Savior Christ,
nor of his Apostles shall bind us, but he will say, he speaks of
particular examples and rules: but I answer he would apply this to general
and perpetual examples and commandments such as that Discipline set down in
the Declaration is grounded upon, as has been showed before. And for those
that are particular, he leuelleth fair, but comes not near the mark by a
mile, for none of those he mentions were contrary as they were commanded,
either to the analogy of faith, or to Christian liberty: for if they had,
they could not have bound those to whom they were given at that time.
Therefore to hitte his mark, he must take another level, and consider the
reason of such rules and commandments, which caryeth in it the light and the
life of the commandments. For where that reason holds not, there are we
free from the commandment, but where the reason is in force, there are we no
les bound to the substance and effect of such particular commandment then
they were. So if there could be like reason as caused that commandment to the
Disciples, we were in such case to keep it, and where the same offense is
justly to be feared in eatinge of meats forbidden, as was then and may be in
many like cases now and to the end, there that order of the Apostles binds.
As for the last place out of the 1. Corinthians. 11. if he look better upon it,
he shall find that the Apostle groundeth that order there prescribed upon so
general and necessary reasons of the ordinance of GOD, the glory of our
Savior Christ, the regard of Angels, and the voice of nature, and the
custom of all the Churches, as he has taken his level far amiss to leave
it at liberty, whether a man keep it or no: provided, that he understand
the Apostles meaning aright: which is, that men and women, especially being
present in the public assemblies of the church should carry the mark of their
creation, agreeable to the sex whereof they were: the woman wearing upon her
head a veil or kerchief, or such other attire, (according to the lawful
custom of their Country and place of aboade) as declares her sex and
subjection to man by such couerture of her head. And the man, by not wearing
any such attire upon his head, as is proper to womankinde, but by want of any
such upon his head, hew the glory of Christ, and the honor that in the order
of creation is bestowed upon men. Therefore notwithstanding his caution or any
thing here alleged to the contrary, it remains firm and stable, that the
constant and perpetual examples of the Churches, the orders, rules, and
commandments of our Savior Christ, and of his Apostles, both for the points
of doctrine to be believed, and also for such as are to be obeyed and
practiced in the public government of the Church, and in the private life of
every one, do bind the conscience of all the people of God to keep and to
obey them: yea the most particular rules, the like case and reason being in us,
that was in them to whom they were given. There follows a little needles
proof, that Magistrates are necessary, which being known sufficiently, and
confessed of all, I proceed to that which follows. That which follows is a
reply to the conclusion, which the Declaration gathers of the former reason
set down in these words: By which it is manifest, that the regiment and
government thereof, depends not upon the authority of Princes, but upon
the ordinance of God, who has most mercifully and wisely so established the
same, that as with the comfortable aid of Christian Magistrates, it may
singularly flourish and prosper, so without it, it may continue, and against
the adversaries thereof prevail. For the Church craves help and defense of
Christian Princes to continue, and go forward more peaceably and profitably,
to the setting up of the kingdom of Christ: but all her authority she
receives immediately from God.

The Replyer can not or will not see that which is manifest, but denies this
consequence to seem so to him, and here his seas rise so hye, that, he says,
it is manifest violent conclusion, yea a manifest injury both to God and his
Church, and to all the authority of all Christian Princes, and most manifest
wrong unto her Majesty. If the law of God had not forbidden it, that any
matter should be held certain in judgment under two or three witnesses: and
if the testimony of one man were enough to condemn another, it would have
gone hard. I see, with the author of the declaration: but seeing his word is
to carry no more credit with it then he can bring sufficient reason for it to
make it good, let his reason be considered. His reason is, that it is
insinuated that her Majesty, for clayming supreme authority in
ecclesiastical causes claymeth withal that the regiment of the Church
depends upon her authority. Which if any reasonable man living, that is not
a parciall favorer, or favorite, of the Hierarchy, can gather out of these
words of the Declaration, I plead for it no longer. But this (he says) is
aggreeued in the opposition of Gods ordinance, to the authority of Princes, as
if Magistracy were not the ordinance of God: addinge, that neither Papists
nor Anabaptists could have set down a sharper conclusion against
the authority of Princes then this is. Which are false alarums, and
exclamations, or accusations as vain as the curse that is causeles, Prou. 26.2.
and therefore (as Solomon says) vanishe away in the air. Which although it
have no proof nor sense it it, yet passing on to the next words of the
Declaration, Which (he says) are added to smooth the former, he makes
another loud outcrie: This is another great injury offered to Christian
Princes, who by these words are thrust not only out of all authority in the
Church, but either out of the Church altogether as no part of it at all, or at
least a contentions part, striving in the Church for authority.

His proof is this: For what else mean they by these words, The Church craves
help and defense of Christian Princes, but that they separate the Christian
Prince, and the Church. If the honorable sword of justice committed to
sovereign Princes, for protecting the good subject, and punishinge the evil,
were at the commandment of such Chapleynes, as this Replyer is, I see by his
often accusations of slaundering, and iniuring the Prince, without all cause or
color, it would leese the honor it ought to have, being made a weapon of
injustice. In the law of Moses, if a man had charged another with any crime,
Deuteronomy. 19.19.
if he made not good proof of his accusation, as he would have done to another
by his false witness, so was it to be done to him, whether it were a matter of
member or of life. If the Replyer feared to be dealte with according to this
rule, he would not be so ready, to lay so great crimes to any man's charge
upon no reason. But because informers may be heard, they say, for the
Prince, and never come to question, although the accusation be never so unjust,
it seems he emboldeneth him self upon some such like assurance.

By this occasion he inquireth who should be meant by the Church, whether the
people, (which he thinks can not) or the four Tetrarkes, as he calls
them in his scorners speech, and this he takes, and compares them with
popish priests, who he says, gave the same power and authority unto
Christian Princes, that is given here, and with better terms. Wherein if he
look back to former times, or consider well what the papists esteem of the
oath of the Supremacy, and what is done in kingdoms subject to the Bishop of
Room, and compare it with that which the Declaration, and all they in whose
behalf it was published, do most willingly acknowledge by protestation, and
also by oath, to be the most due honor of the Sovereign Magistrate: he
shall easelie see, how unjust this charge is, as well as are his other. There
was a purpose, I think, he will say, when the statute for recognition of her
Majesty's Souueraingtie was made, to agnise to the uttermost by that oath all
the Regalities, rightes and honors due to that high and sovereign estate.
Which if it were attained unto, how can he charge any with derogation from
the Princes right, and just authority, that takes willingly that oath, and
acknowledges the authority there agnized, even as it is expounded by her
Majesty's own injunctions, by the Articles of the convocation house, and
sundry books published with great allowance of the state. But to this point
there is sufficiently said before, both in this treatise, and in the answer
to the preface of his reply.

He cauilleth here about that the Declaration says, All the authority which
the Church has, is immediately of God, and moves many friuoulous questions
about it. But if he had disallowed it, he should have entered into the handling
of it, and showed by sufficient proof of holy Scripture, that the Church
holds not all her authority immediately of God, but holds some part of it,
mediatlie of Princes, as mean Lords under the highest. Some offer he makes
of it, alleadginge the authority of the godly and virtuous Kings and Rulers
of Jsraell and Judah, which if it be all that he can say in that cause, let him
understand, that as it has bin in this cause professed on our behalf by some
other, so now again we truly and unfeignedly profess to acknowledge in
Christian Princes, all that power and authority that the Prophets do any
where justify to have bin in the Rulers of Gods people at any time.

I add yet further, that whereas he pretendinge to speak most largely of
this authority, says: Princes have not the ecclesiastical Ministers
peculiar offices and ecclesiastical authority to execute the acts, proper to
their ecclesiastical functions, but have authority to ouersee, govern and
direct all ecclesiastical persons to do their duties in all ecclesiastical
causes, and have the highest authority (that is civil) in the Church, for the
orderinge, disposinge, and authorizinge any order or constitution
ecclesiastical in indifferent matters:

We acknowledge and profess the same.

Where, if we be nothing short, of the largest measure that he can lay before
us, I trust he will hereafter teach his tongue to speak, and his pen to
write of us more agreeably to Christian charity, wisdom and modesty, then
he has done in this first book of his Reply. Which ending here with a
contrary conclusion to the Declaration for the order of the treatise (a matter
little worthy the striving about) I leave the consideration of it to the
Christian Reader, upon such reasons as have been debated between us, and end
also here the first part of this my labor.

FINIS.

