THE Exercise of the faithful soul: That is to say, Prayers and Meditations
for one to comfort himself in all manner of afflictions, and specially to
strengthen himself in faith:

Set in order according to the Articles of our faith, By Daniell Toussain,
Minister of the word of God:

With a comfortable Preface of the Author, unto the poor remnant of the Church
of Orlians; containing a short recital of extreme and great afflictions which
the said Church has suffered.

PSALM. 90. Turn thee again (O Lord) at the last: How long? and be gracious
unto thy servants.

Comfort us again after the time that thou have plagued us and for the years
wherein we have suffered adversity.

Englished out of the French, almost word for word, by Ferdenando Filding.

Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton for Henry Denham. 1583.

To the right worshipful and his especial good master, Walter Raleigh esquier.
RIght woorshipfull, the great and good affection, which I have borne to you
ever since J was first acquainted with you, has always bin a stirring me
forward to bewray the force of my inward good will, by some outward show: and
now at length it has compassed that which it coueted of long, and offers
unto you in value more than great, first written in French by a worthy man,
whose name and profession it bears, now denized in English, almost word for
word, by a well willer of yours, though scant able to reach to the original
depth of the native writer. Yet J thought it good rather to hazard my own
credit, with some note of infirmity, than to have this argument vnharboured
in English, with the infinite loss of so great a commodity. For what is more
profitable to a Christian man, than to have his soul continually exercised in
the train and practice of a lively faith? the performance whereof, this
treatise undertakes, whose recommendation I will not meddle with, least by
saying either too too little, or too too base, J impair that which will
commend it self beyond comparison. To the English Christian I discharge my
self, by uttering that in zeal which J conceive to be most profitable for
each his soul. To your worship I recommende my labor, as the true sign of a
trusty mind: wherein, if it shall please you to bestow some, though the
least time, I dare assure you of great profit for the comfort of your
conscience, and beautifying of your soul. Almighty God prosper you in all
your good and virtuous attempts, and send you that good, which both J wish you,
and this book pretends. London, the 14. of June, 1583.

Your obedient servant Ferdenando Filding.

PRINCIPAL matters contained in this book.
1 A Preface briefly reciting the calamities of the Church of Orlians, and the
comfortes that we ought to oppose against the same evil. 2 The principal
Creedes and confession of the universal Church. 3 Many notable places of the
old and new testament fitly applied to every article of our faith: enriched
with considerations, meditations, and prayers. 4 A comfortable discourse of
death. 5 Prayers for diverse necessities. 6 A Treatise of S. Cyprian concerning
prayer.
FINIS.
UNTO THE poor remnaunt of the Church of Orlians, which are scattered here and
there, groaning with true faith after the Lord: grace, health, comfort, and
peace, from and through our Lord Jesus Christ.
ABout ten years past, when the Church of Orlians was in her flowers, and I
then having this honor to be one of the Ministers thereof, then I set forth
certain Prayers and Meditations upon certain notable places of the
scripture, which I had gathered out and laid aside for mine own private use:
yet notwithstanding, being requested of sundry good and godly men, I was
content, that many others should enjoy the same. And that they might be
pricked forwards to ardent prayer, and to all holy and Christianlike
Meditations, who were accustomed to wax cold, or at least but leukewarme, in
time of prosperity: foreseeing likewise, that all the rest, wherewith the
Church does glad her self in this world, was but a truse and small respit:
and that it behooued them, 2. Timo. 3. ver. 12. The late M. Calvin in his
preface upon Daniel. 61. truly advertised the Churches, that they should have
as yet great fightes. Psalm. 66.27. Psalm. 42. The said Church was of number a
seven thousand persons in time past. James 5.
which were determined to serve God purelie, to make their account, that they
must suffer great persecutions, during which, prayer is the very stay and
comfort to the faithful soul. As alas long since, we have well proved, when
that all the billows and storms of the Lord, since these x. years have
passed, not alonelie generally through out all France, but particularly
upon this poor Church of Orlians, which in times past we have seen a garden
of great pleasure, a retraite to many good men, and of all sorts and
conditions: to be short, it was as the repair and fould of the Lords sheep,
in the midst of all France, Now we do see it turned into dust and ashes,
and to become the dwelling place of Dragons and Scorpions: we I say, unto whom
God has given this grace, to escape so many blouddie Alaroms: yea so many
fearful deaths, that we have perceived of what force earnest prayers be, and
what satisfying and contentation, the faithful soul has with God, when as
all other things do seem to fail him, in such sort as we have matter to say
with the Prophet David in the 119. Psalm. verse 92. Had it not bin that thy law
was my delight, I had even then perished in my afflictions. Now as the true
servants of God have a zeal unto the ashes, and ruins of Sion, when it is
turned into dust, Psalm. 10^ 9.
and forsaken of all the world: So cannot I (so long as the soul pants
within me) cease ever with a burning desire to pray unto God, or to have care
of this so desolate a Church of Orlians, willing truly to say with the
prophet Esaiah, in the 62. Chap. For the love of Sion, I will not keep
silence, and as concerning Jerusalem, I will not cease until her
righteousness shine out as the light, and that her salvation be kindled as a
Lamp: in such sort as setting before my eyes that at no time prayers were ever
more necessary than in these days, being on every side full of calamity,
neither yet the use thereof better understood of the true faithful, than when
as men are in their true school, that is to say under the Cross. And being
likewise since the decease of this second Josias and so Christian a prince, as
the late my Lord Elector Palatine Federick (under whom I have had this honor to
preach the word of God, more tha^ 4. years) being as it were into mine own
wilderness a part drawn to meditate and lament the miseries of our time: I
took again into my hands these prayers, that heretofore I had set forth and
brought to light, and dedicated to the Church of Orlia^s, as well to put the^
together again, and so to digest the^, by a better order, as also to seem
not to have lost the remembrance of that Church, which of good right amongst
other I have always loved and honored, having served there, the space of eight
years, and received very much credit and friendship of many good men: or,
least I should seem to have lost all hope to see it again reestablished, or
at the least somewhat gathered together after so many and fearful storms.
Now concerning the order which I have held in this book, it shall be spoken
hereof in the end of this Preface.

But now, I will lay out the causes which have made me yet to hope, that this
good God will not altogether forsake this poor flock. And therefore it makes
me yet again to direct this little book unto the residue as unto a small
corner of the fould: to the end to sort out, and call back the rest of the
flock unto a true faith, hope, and calling upon the name of God. It is a
thing certain, that in these later days the devil is come down in great
anger, knowing that he has but a small time. And in this is fulfilled all that
which the Lord foretold thereof in the 12. of the Apoc. and as the miseries
foretold are fulfilled, in like manner the promised deliverance shall be
accomplished, and always this goodly sentence shall remain true that is in
the 76. Psalm: That the anger of the ungodly shall return unto the praise of
the Lord, and that he will restrain the rest of their furies.

And that which S. Peter speaks in the 3. Chap. of his first Epistle, Who
shall hurt you, The favors that Orlians has received at other times of the
Lord.
if you follow goodness? O but some man will say, in times past Orlians has
found such favor at Gods hands, as in the time of Atila, when all the
country being covered over with rude people, the city was kept by the prayers
of good folk, or when it was in times past, (as some say) miraculously kept,
rather than by any help of man from the siege of the Englishmen: or if we
must come unto the things more certain and fresh in memory, when as in the
year of our Lord 1560. in the time of king Frauncis the second of that name,
the most furious force that might be in man's remembrance was in the city, and
the preparation most cruel against so many notable and singular men of name,
who had as they say the knife set to the throat, many good and honorable
citizens wandering up and down from one place to an other: when I say, the
Lord in a moment turned the sorrow of his Church into gladness, and their
captivity into freedom.

And again in the year 1563. Orlians beseeged.
at the beginning of the spring time the city environed with a victorious
army consisting of Frenchmen, Swyssardes, and Spaniardes, it was at unawares,
and by a hap unlooked for, not only delivered of the siege, The peace of the
Valins with Orlians.
but honored with a peace, which was made with the Orlians, and endured for a
certain time, leaving the city for some years in a tolerable estate. Since
the said peace, certain massacres, treasons, and conspiracies, which then
were had there, both on the right hand, and on the left, as in the country of
Man's, Orlians stripped again.
at Tours, at Blois, and in many other places of France, it being altogether
stripped, as it was in the year 64. and for the most part a booty unto
tyrants, and being in time of need the place for those of the Church to come
unto, it was then maintained in good rest, and in the exercise of the pure
religion, The second troubles.
whatsoever contrary governors were there being in garrison, until the year
1567. in which time, toward Michaelmas, the second troubles began again, and
a strange coniuration being made, as well in France, as in the low countries
against the faithful, notwithstanding the enemies were in great number and well
armed within the city, awayting but the watch word, to cut the throtes of all
the faithful. The foresaid city, together with the citidell, was by a
special favor of God kept and defended with a handful of men, the most part
of the Church not knowing any thing thereof, even against so many adversaries
and subtle devises, and to the end it might serve for the second time, The
peace at Chartres.
for a place of rest and retire, which out of all parts of France placed
themselves there, by reason of the cruelty which was then through all
exercised against the Christians.

And in this behalf ought a man to keep secret the favor, which the Church
of Orlians proved by the God of hosts? When as this miserable peace made at
Chartres, being made in the year of our Lord 1568. in the month of March,
the city was delivered into the hands of the adversaries, foming with rage
against a city, which at two sundry times had made resistance and was the
refuge of Princes, Lords, and other, bearing as then arms for the common
wealth: when I say with a governor enemy of the reformed religion, there were
brought into the said city, The regiment of county Brissakes.
ten ensigns of the brauest and skillful soldiers, that could be chosen, to
swallowe up as it were in a moment the said Church: but God in the mean
season did show this favor to my fellows and me, even there to preach in a
goodly assembly even in the sight of the soldiers, for the space of five
months, amongst a thousand and a thousand dangers, mutenies, and
harquebusers, and infinite distresses: the city being in this time kept, that
no citizen man or woman of the religion, could pass out of the gates, without
a thousand dangers: when our houses were daily overthrown, the gates of our
assemblies environed by troops of the enemies soldiers: And that for
presidents, (as a man would say) we had in our consistories Captains,
renouncers of God, and other such people as it pleased those gouerners to send
thither: Then in truth we felt such an assistance of the almighty,
notwithstanding that men walk in the shadow of death, and when they burned in
good hour the Temple, with the street of Illiers, and as many may well
remember there, the soldiers of the garrison, seeing the patience and
constancy of the Church, as it were touched at the heart, and tamed, in part
being without comparison more favorable, and gracious unto those of the Church,
than were the citizen papists, who having been at the foresaid wars for the
most part assisted and hid, as it were in our bosom in their dangers, and all
as it were rendering a very ill reward to their citizens of the religion.

During this time, some one will say the Church of Orlians has felt, yea the
great favors of God: Psalm. 120.
in such sort as oftentimes it has been said of them: God works woonders
unto them: and sundry and many times have they song and song again in a
godly assembly, whereof I cannot remember my self without tears, the Psalm.
124. The Psalm of ye Church of Orlians.
For Israel may now well say etc. Which Psalm. the Church of Orlians esteemed as
her particular Psalm, for the aforesaid deliverances. But alas will some
answer, since the xv. of September, in they year 1568. even until now, what
other thing has a man seen, but calamity upon calamity distilled upon the
said Church, and so sharp and violent affliction, as it is hard to think
thereof without a man's hair standing and staring for fear and horror on his
head? For from that day which was upon a Sunday: The first Massacar at Orlians
in the year 1568.
I having preached at vi. a clock in the Estape, which place then only
rested to us, and having greatly to the purpose (alas in this last preaching,)
expounded the text of the xvi. of S. Mark upon the history of the passion:
The last preaching made within Orlians.
My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? For even just thithertow as I come
in the exposition of S. Mark: Master De Gallars, then also Minister of the
said Church, having made his Sermon at eight of the clock in the same place,
and following the order of Psalms which they did sing, having song this
funeral and lamentable Psalm, which fell out to the very purpose, without any
special choice made thereof, to wit, the Psalm. 88. which is the last that was
sung in Orlians in the assembly of the Church, where amongst other things it
is said,

I am free among the dead like unto them that be wounded and lie in the grave.

Also,

Thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms.

As the second preaching was ended, and the Psalm aforenamed sung, behold
certain stones thrown against the assembly, and a Mutenie of people, which
then did accompany a procession, that was made all for the nonce, who rushed
upon the assembly, which was a godly assembly, with an extreme fury, and
had knocked down all the troop, if so be this good God had not raised up some
of the strange soldiers, (which did show themselves more gentle than the
Citizens, thirsting for the blood of their fellow Citizens,) if they I say, had
not covered a great part of the assembly, whereof notwithstanding there were
seuenscore slain and hurt. After dinner, the people not being satisfied with
this cruelty, did set fire on the Church of Estape at noone day with all kind
of insole^cie, and disorder* threatening the night following, to make a sack of
all the Protestants houses, during which storms God did amongst other
wonderfully preserve the Ministers which were five in number: and namely the
two, who had preached that day as it was said before. Until this time the
Ministers notwithstanding the dangers that they had found, couragioslie and by
the advice of the consistory, and of all the chief of the Church, continued
in their charge. But this fury being so kindled, and all the Church out of
order, and the wars flaming throughout all France, and Anguleme besieged:
Then with great difficultnesse were the Ministers of the said Church drawn out
from this furnace, and conducted in safety. The gates were straightly kept, and
ambushes laid throughout all the ways, and namely in the cross streets: as
in deed some of my brethren, Ministers imprisoned.
and chief and faithfullest Ministers of the said Church, M. Robert Mason,
otherwise named Fountane, M. Matthew Berold, Professor of the Hebrew tongue,
and I: we fell into the hands of our enemies, and there we remained with
most imminent dangers from the 26. day of September, until the 15. of
October, even until that some notable and well affected persons of the Church,
seeing that the people were daily about to drown or murder us, and that we
had yielded unto them faithful service even to the uttermost, redeemed us out
of the soldiers hands. Now since this time, truly this poor Church of
Orlians was overwhelmed with so many calamities, that a man can not easily
find the like examples of cruelty, as those which have been exercised
against the said Church, although that in France there has been a long time
great persecutions, Persecutions in France under Antonius Verus.
namely at Lions, as from the year 170. under the Empire of Antonius Verus: as
may be seen in the fifth history of Eusebius the 1.2. and 3. Chap. by the
Epistle that the faithful of Lions wrote thereof unto the brethren of Asia and
Phrygia: and since these troubles of France, the said city of Lions has
suffered as much as any other city, especially from the time of these horrible
massakers in the year of our Lord 1572. But that which is happened unto the
faithful of Orlians, and has continued a long time, does rightly follow that
which was song in the last assembly, as it was said before in the 88. Psalm.
Lord, thine indignations lie hard upon me. For since this first massaker,
done on the fifth of September in the year 1568. they have not ceased as well
in the streats, as in the houses to slay some of the faithful, to spoil their
houses, and to draw them with ropes through the streates, not suffering them
neither to pass in the city, nor to live in the same city. The burninges of
houses in 4. places, and of madame de Boiblandin.
Such cruelties I say, did continue even unto the year 1569. until the month
of Iulie, that they did set fire on two houses at noone day, where they had
imprisoned more than seven score of all sorts of qualities and ages, which
continued constant in calling upon the name of God, and in the purity of his
service: they I say (alas what spectacle) in presence of this furious enraged
people, notwithstanding that prisons ought not to have bin forced,
notwithstanding likewise the cries of their wives, their parents, and their
children, The horrible and unnatural murder of certain faithful ones being
in prison.
were burned all quick, and if so be the flame had spared any of them, then
the bloody hands of the mad people, or of the soldiers with their
holbardes, partisans and knives would not have spared them. And as concerning
an other troop of four score of the faithful, the most part being citizens
of the same city, which having been locked up in a great tower of the city,
were certain months afterward (when as they feigned in a morning to bring
them forth to justice) stabbed in with daggers one after an other. O that I
could recite these things, without saying with the Prophet Jeremy in the 9.
Chap. O, if I had my head full of water, and that mine eyes were a fountain of
tears, to the end that I might lament day and night, the slain of the
daughter of my people. But what? The peace being concluded for the third time:
(O peace more cruel than any war,) the year 1570. in the month of August,
the faithful of the Church of Orlians thinking to enjoy and use the benefit
of the said peace, were daily threatened, beaten, robbed, and were for the
most part even for the space of one year let and hindered, both to enjoy the
greatest part of their goods, as also to gather the Church together, until the
year of our Lord 1571. in the month of September, by the friendly soliciting,
that the late Lord Chatillio^ Lord admiral, and through the great zeal and
goodwill that he had unto these virtuous and notable men, of name, the late
master Baylife of Orlians, The establishment of the Church of Orlians in the
Isle.
master Jerome Groslot Lord of the Isle, with certain other notable citizens
of the said city, the Church began to gather together, as the pieces of a
broken ship, in a great sheepwracke, unto the said place of the Isle a two
small miles from Orlians, where I was called thither again to exercise the
ministry, and to begin to rear up this poor tabernacle, which was so
desolate. But as our Lord Jesus Christ, being scarce borne, and lodged in a
little place at Bethelem, forthwith had such kickings and assaults, that he was
constrained to retire himself into Egypt: even so the said Church of Orlians,
as a man would say being but about to be borne again, and a little to gather it
self together, that she might know her self, felt right soon the
encountringes and forces of the enemy, the exercise being broken off in the
same place for a time through extorted commandments and wrasted proclamations,
such as we read to have been in the fourth of Nehemie, when for a time the
building of the Temple was hindered by one Sanbulat and his accomplices. Now God
granting grace to this little flock, to ouerpasse such lets, and stops, and
the exercise being a new agreed upon in the said place: the fury and the
slaughter of these papisticall people was no whit appeased: in such sort, that
in steed of taking pity of v. or vi. hundred persons (which went out
ordinarily every sunday to hear the preaching and exhortation, as women,
children, young and old, and that often in unseasonable times, Cruelty against
those, which returned from the preaching in the Isle.
and by very long journey) they commonly received them with flinging of
stones, with myer and dirt, cast in their faces with injuries, outrages, and
all kind of scornings and derisions, which the poor faithful ones yea the
women patiently did bear, praising God, who had given them this honor, to
suffer any thing for Jesus Christ's sake, The day of S. Bartholmewe.
until that that glowning, fearful, and blouddie day, of the 24. of August in
the year 1572. was come, on which day I made the last Sermon in the said place
of the Isley: There followed a general deluge of Christian blood, through out
all France, and that which might stint even one of the fairest and
flourishingest Churches in all France, to wit, a 700. and more, as some say
Bourgeses, Inhabitants, Counselars, Advocates, Doctors, and men of all
qualities and conditions were cruelly slaughtered and Massacred, amongst
other, there was slain Monsieur de Champeaux: the ancientest Counselor and
next in place unto the President, one of the most courteous of all the city,
The murder done at Orleans.
Doctor Taillebois, the advocate Patas, master John Baudet, and Gilles le
Boiteux, two of the most honorable and best affected citizens, and so many
others, without sparing one of the most worshipful and ancient old men of the
city, who all his life long had been honored amongst the chiefest bourgeses,
and beloved for his liberality, and integrity, to wit, Monsieur Framberge,
Lord of Bretache, who drawn through the fields where he was in a waggen, was
cruelly stricken down in the suburbs of Portereau, and he who had all this
year with great zeal, and to his great charges, lodged the Church, to wit,
the Lord of the Isle, The Massacre of the Lord of the I Will being Bailife of
Orlians.
of whom mention was made before, and who was there at the wedding of the king
of Navarre among the most ancient servants of his house, this man was partly
shot in with Harquebusiers, and partly stricken down by Halbardes within the
city of Paris.

Now who sees not will some man say, that yet this wound bleedeth, and that
ruin droppeth down without ceasing upon the desolate, as was said in the
destruction of Jerusalem, in the 9. Chap. of Daniel. Lord where are thy former
mercies whereon we do wait? Psalm. 89.
Where is the zeal and the strength of the Lord, and the compassion of his
bowels, which are so dull, that the Churches of long time in France be as
though God ruled not in the midst of them? Esai. 63. Lament. ^.
Yea who seems to have delivered his people so into the hands of them, of
them (I say) out of which they cannot be recovered and stand up.

What hope is then there, will some say, or what are these remnantes of the
Church, seeing that the greatest part has been lead as it were unto a
butcherie or to slaughter: the remnant for the most part forced by impatience,
is in such sort turned and fallen away from the truth, that it seems, there
is no trace or path of a Church left, or that ever there had been any
reformation had at Orlians, or in the most part of the other cities? These are
(O alas) the things that are most true, and that which has bin recited, is
not the thousand part of the outrages, violences and miseries which have come
to the said Church. For what tongue can express, or what speech can utter and
set forth, so many lamentable cries as well of women, as of children, seeing
slain cruelly before their eyes their husbands and fathers, as well by
enforcementes of their bodies, as of their consciences, and other such like
outrages, that would make the posterity even by only thinking of it to quake
and tremble, and now makes us as it were beside our selves, when we do but by
the way make any mention thereof: as for example, this preface can not be a
full laying out, of such lamentable Tragedies: neither is it my meaning at this
time, leaving those to entreat of this argument more at large, that can do it
better, and with an higher style, and that are better informed of all the
particularities, than I can be.

But this is to the end that we may now see, and as it were put into the
balance, on the one side the afflictions and miseries of the said Church: And
again on the other part, may see the consolations wherewith the scriptures
have furnished us, to the end we should know whether we have occasion
altogether to droupe and to lose our courage, as alas to my great sorrow, I see
that many have done: and not rather even to stir up through our prayers
those mercies and bowels of compassion in the divine Majesty. For we must
well remember in this behalf, the place, that is in the 14. Chap. of the
Prophet Osee, Who is wise, and shall understand these things? and prudent, and
shall know the^? A consolation against the extreme miseries wherewith God does
exercise his children.
For the ways of the Lord are right: and the just also shall walk in them:
But the ungodly shall fall therein. By which words it is showed unto us, that
it is a great wisdom, rightly to mark the proceedings of our God, and to
understand the end of them, as well in his promises, as in his threateninges:
for they be always just and right, and there are none but Infidels and wicked
men, which stumble and fall in them. But men commonly offend, in this that
they measure the thoughts of God, according to the thoughts of men, and do
persuade themselves, that things ought to go, and to take such course, as
they imagine in their understanding, the which is altogether contrary to the
Scripture. For my thoughts (says the Lord) are not your thoughts, Esai. 55.8.
neither my ways your ways. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so
be my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts.
Now we know that the thoughts of our God are not to destroy his Church, Mat.
16.
against which the gates of hell can have no power, and for this cause we are
commanded to believe the Church, howsoever she seem not to appear in the
world: as faith is not of things which be apparent unto carnal eyes.
Although then that sometimes, storms, tempests and calamities be so extreme
as it seems, that there is no more face neither any tract or footing of a
Church on the earth, and moreover that GOD has left his house, and as it were
altogether forsaken his heritage, and as it might be, leaving the well-beloved of
his soul, in the hands of his enemies: (Lo the very words, that the Lord
uses in the 12. of Jeremy:) yet will he daily have as it is said in the 6.
Chap. of Esaiah) a tenth part: And the Church shall be made bare as a Birch, or
as an Oak when they shall cast their leaves, and yet there shall be substance
within, even so shall be the substance of the Church, a holy seed. So that
even then when she shall walk in the midst of adversity, Psalm. 138.
the Lord shall quicken her, The meaning of the Lord in sending calamities.
and shall not leave the work of his hands: I say he shall quicken her, no
otherwise, than if of dead and dry bones, being inspired with a new soul and
strength, they should be gathered together and live: as it is said in the 37.
Chap. of the Prophet Ezechiel.

And as concerning the Lords purpose, when he sends such deluges and
floudes to come among us, it is partly to the end to show forth unto the
whole world, his power, providence, goodness, and righteousness: partly to
the end, that we should learn to walk by faith, to renounce our selves, and
in this so frail and miserable a life, to aspire unto that which is
everlasting. He shows his power, when he vpholdeth his Church, in the
midst of so many evils and diseases: when as he shall raise it up as it
were from the dead: Psalm. 68.2.
when as in a moment he shall make his enemies to vanish as a heap of smoke.
He testifies his providence, when as he makes the determined season come,
to deliver his: And contrariewise, Psalm. 102.
when he brings the appointed day upon his adversaries, as it is said in the
lamentation of the Prophet Jeremy the 1. Chapter. He likewise shows his
providence, in that of evil, he can draw forth good, Romans 8.28.
and make all things to work to the good and salvation of his: drawing out of
afflictions, remedies, and profitable medicines for his Church. He shows
also his goodness, first in that he tempereth his corrections, and in the
midst of the greatest fires, he comfort and sustaineth his children, as
it is said in the 94. Psalm: When I had many thoughts in my self thy
comfortes have recreated my soul. His goodness shines also in that he has
appeased his own wrath, putting an end to all calamities, as it is said in the
30. Chap of Esaiah. Therefore does the Lord put off, to the end that he may
have mercy upon you, and likewise that he may be exalted, when he does
pardon us. He makes his righteousness appear, when as he spares not, no
not his own children: making his judgments to begin at his own house:
even as S. Peter says in his first Epistle and 4. Chap. But in as much as he
has established a covenant with his Church, the which is not grounded upon our
works or worthiness, but upon his well-beloved son Jesus Christ, in whom
he has chosen us, loved, and blessed us: this covenant is everlasting: Ephesians.
1.^
And for the love thereof he turns himself toward his people, and he
makes them this goodly and certain promise, that is in the 89. Psalm: I
will visit their offenses with a rod, and their sin with scourges: But I
will not utterly take my louing-kindnesse from him: nor suffer my faith to
fail him. And in the 54. Chap. of Esaiah: Although the mountains shall
remove, and the hills shall fall down: yet my loving kindness shall not
move, and the covenant of my peace shall not fall down from thee, says the
Lord, who has compassion of thee. Behold thou poor vexed and despised without
any consolation: I will make thy walls of precious stones, and thy foundation
of Saphires etc. Now the whole is that we awaite for him, as it is said in
the 30. of Esaiah: Blessed are all they that wait for him.

But man is of a nature, first, The imperfections of man. Lib. De patientia.
Romans 8.
very impatient, so as Tertullian has not said without cause, that
impatiencie is the cause of all evils. Seco^dlie man is of this nature, that he
will not believe but that which he sees: a thing altogether contrary unto
faith. For that faith and hope which ground themselves upon that which is
seen, are properly neither faith nor hope. Thirdly, man is so corrupted, as
S. Chrysostom says very well in his 4. Homily unto the people of Antioch,
that he fears that, that he ought not to fear: and fears not that which
he ought most to fear. Men fear death and miseries that in deed be
nothing, for they cannnot separate us from the grace of God, and they are so
far off from being able, The use of afflictions.
says Chrysostom, to separate us, that if thou have many vices, afflictions
will tame them: if thou have virtues, afflictions will make them shine, and
appear. But men fear not sin which makes a division betwixt God and us:
and the reward thereof, be all afflictions, poverty, and ruins, which we
do see fall out in the compass of the whole world. Men complain enough of
their losses, of their sorrows, and pouerties: but how few are there that
frame their complaints against their vices, against their falsehood and
infidelity, against their impatie^ce, against their covetousness, against
their ambition, and such like wickedness? To be short, all, says S.
Augustine, complain of the miseries of this life, and yet the most part set
their hearts upon it, and are more affected to it, than to the everlasting
and heavenly life. How would it be then, if this life were left unto us
altogether quiet, sweet and delectable? Who would remember the kingdom of
heaven? Who would ever aspire unto Christ, and unto the glorious and
everlasting life? Go to then, let us acknowledge the vanity of our thoughts,
and in steed of vexing our selves and fainting, let us wonder at the divine
providence: acknowledging that then his helps are more near at hand, when it
seems that GOD is farthest off from us. As Philo the Jew once answered his
fellow citizens, when as he had an ill answer of the Emperor Caius, toward
whom he had bin sent, to entreat for the Jews. Eusebius 2. book and 5.
Chap. The objection that has been a long time awaited.
It must needs be now, says he, that the infallible succors of God be
very near, sith that all succor from man fails us. Yea but some man will
say, with the Jews in the 8. Chap. of Jeremy: We have looked for peace, and
we fare not the better: The time of health, and lo, here is nothing but
trouble. 4. of the lamentation of Jeremy the prophet, that their eyes are
consumed with waiting for a vain help, and for looking after an empty hope,
for looking for a nation that neither would, nor could save the^. But it is
said in the 3. of Sophonie, I will cause a poor and an afflicted people, to
remain in the midst of thee, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.
See him, on who^ we must look, with true faith, amending so great corruptions,
that are in the midst of the Churches, by fervent and constant calling on his
holy name. Moreover others in steed of awaiting on the Lord, and in place of
taking adversities, as a warning from the divine majesty, these were (and that
alas, in great number) strongly thrown down into the puddle of Idolatry
with the Papists, Revolt or turning back.
thrown down say I, yea and rushed in, even as a furious horse rusheth into a
battle: so that they carry there all the sway, and in who^ there is found
greater eagerness after Idolatry, and toward all kind of iniquity, than
in those old Idolaters, who all their life long have been nourished up
therein. I speak it with tears and in deep sorrow of heart, to be most
true: for I did see those which were of the same troop and band, which did go
with us unto the holy assemblies, to whom God had already given favor to
overcome many assaults, now to be so wandering and given over to a spirit
of dark understanding. O what other thing then are all men living but vanity!
O how true is this which is spoken in the 17. of Jeremy: That the heart of man
is false and full of deceit, and as it is said in the fifth Chap. of the same
prophet: O Lord, are not thy eyes on the truth? Thou have stricken them, and
they have not sorrowed: Thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive thy discipline: They have made their faces more harder than a stone,
and they have refused to return unto thee. Fear ye not me, (says the Lord)?
Or will ye not be afraid at my presence? O how much more happy were they
which passed into the four cornerd house, and into other places, as it were
true gold through the fire, constantly calling upon the Lord, than those
which burned them quick, seeking after Idolatry, and the vanity of the
world, taking the way to that fire, that never shall be quenched. But what? As
it is said in the 8. Chapter of Jeremy, Shall he which is fallen not rise
again? Or he which is turned away, shall he not turn again? Ah my
brethren, I hope yet there will many be found, who will say: What have we
done? And there shall be of those of whom S. Cyprian speaks in his treatise
concerning those which are fallen, whose bodies were rather overcome than their
heart. Although that this saying of Tertullia^ is more true, In his book de
corona militis.
that is to say, that in the matter of faith, and religion, this excuse of
necessity and of force can have no place: as if of necessity one might be
compelled to do any thing against his religion. Nonecessitie to evil.
For no necessity ought to be pretended to do evil, forasmuch as there is
(says he) but one necessity that ought to command us, and which is simply
necessary, to wit, to obey our God. If there be any thing therefore that should
fear man, or should lay any necessity by enforceme^t upon him, it is the
greatness and terror of that which is most great and terrible, that is to
say: of the living and everlasting God. If there were any allurement, pleasure
or commodity, that ought to draw a man, it is the river of the Lords delight,
they be the promises of everlasting treasures, and of the life to come: which
if we tasted were it never so little, all the world with her delight should be
nothing unto us. And so likewise a faithful man is greater and more excellent,
than this world, being the child of God and an inheritour of him and a
coheire with Jesus Christ. See wherefore such a one desires nothing of the
world, but his whole life is a renouncing and forsaking of the world. If the
question be of punishments, banishments, or other penalties: they are not
miserable which die or be in banishment for the name of Christ: but they who,
howsoever they yet live, and are in their palaces in the midst of all their
delights, are judged and condemned by the word of God, and by the laws
thereof: being guilty and worthy of a thousand deaths, and of a thousand
banishments, as for example these murderers, ydolaters, and other such like
are, who have their hands embrued in the blood of our brethren. A city is not
unhappy to be unwalled, spoiled, A city when he is unhappy.
robbed, and outwardly ruined, and sacked: but if it be deprived of the favor
of God, if it be filled full of ydolatrie, with vanity, with theft, blood, and
with pride. Furthermore, if we do feel our selves very weak, to sustain
the assaults, threateninges and fears amongst cruel Idolaters: why do we
tempt God, in dwelling amongst them? Heb. 13.
Why do we not come out of our tents, to bear the rebuke of Christ? Why go
we not out of Babylon, to the end we be not partakers of her sins, and that
we receive not of her plagues? How many means might a man have had since
this five years, to have retired himself from amongst these fleshly people,
so thirsty after the blood of the faithful? Who is he that would abide one
night amongst Scorpions? Who is he which would not quickelie vnharbour
himself, Dwelling amongst Idolaters, very dangerous.
seeing his house on a fire, how dear soever it were unto him? Who is he
which would remain in the fairest city of the world, in which he could have
no bread? What order then is there, that they should soiourne amongst them so
long time, Dwelling amongst Idolaters is very dangerous.
amongst whom there can be found no true bread, and amongst whom there is
neither faith, nor love, nor yet respect of any person? We are in this world
to know and serve God: and the time of our life being so short, ought we not
to enforce our selves to the uttermost to bestow that as well as is possible?
For as S. Cyprian has very well said in his treatise of twofoulde
Martyrdom, All the life of man ought to give witness to GOD: not that he has
any need or makes much reckoning of our Martyrdom or witnessing of him, but
that it pleases him, that his glory should be thus advanced, and declared
amongst men, by men. Now my brethren, Whence infirmities proceed.
considering that these great infirmities, which are at this day found in
many, proceed from no other thing, but only through default of not being well
grounded and rooted in the faith, and also because we pray not unto God, Mark.
9.23.
so often and so earnestly as were requisite: (For all things are possible to
the believer: and the believer also has this advantage, that God hears and
fulfilleth his desires) I have thought to comfort, and to strenthen more and
more those which through the grace of GOD remain firm and constant until
this present: Psalm. 145. The purpose of the Author in this book
as also to give courage again unto them which have lost it, and suffer
themselves willingly to be borne with the tempest of Idolatry, that there is
nothing more fit and to the purpose, than to set before your eyes the
Articles of our faith, with short meditations and prayers, that shall give unto
you a brief knowledge and understanding thereof, being as it were the very
juice and substance: to the end also, that this may shortly put you in
remembrance of the pure doctrine which was preached unto you. For this is our
glory, 2. Cor. 1.
even of us all which have been your Pastors, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness we have been conversant
amongst you, preaching unto you the word of God. And we are not ignorant, in
mean while that this is an ancient subtlety and craft of the Devil, and of
the wicked, The slau^ders of the adversaries.
in the midst of their greatest wickedness, to slander good men, and the
truth. So was Elias slaundered by Achab, as a seditious person, so was Jesus
Christ charged with faults. So did that abominable Nero, who having set the
city of Rome on fire, laid all the fault upon the poor Christians. We do
not doubt at all, but a man may find some of our renegates, which to receive
the service to the contrary side, and to reap the benefit of a flattering
tongue, both have and do strain themselves to misuse us in speech: and not
only with the like speech falselie to misuse us, but also to make odious even
the whole doctrine of the holy Gospel. But he whom we do serve knows us,
and we call none other but the conscience of those who have hard us, and have
seen our behauiours in witness of our affection toward you, and of our
cheerfulness and readiness, wherewith all we have been always accompanied,
preaching unto you the pure word of God, so much as was possible for us, and
that you could be suffered to hear the same. The world has also seen and
known of long time the impieties of this seat of Rome: many Emperors, yea and
many kings of France, have proved their insolency, and cruelty. France,
alas, sees at this day the detestable untrustiness, treasons, violences, and
murders, the like not heard, which that Apostaticall Romish seat has bredde
and brought forth unto us, and for the which they have many times made
bonfires, yea and great triumph: but all in vain: we shall weep and the
world shall laugh: in the mean time our heaviness shall one way be turned
into joy which the world shall not be able to spoil us of. And how much better
shall it be to weep in this world than in the other, and to rejoice in the
life to come, than in this vale of miseries? The order then that we keep in
this book is, The order kept in this book,
that we draw to the Articles of the faith, as close as is possible, certain
places of the holy scripture which serve best to explane them, and make them
clear, with prayers and meditations to that purpose, to the end that as faith
and prayer ought to be joined together, so every one might be resolved in the
faith, and be pricked forward to prayer. True it is that in that which tied me
to those prayers and meditations which were before imprinted, I have not
altogether kept such order as I desired: nevertheless, these prayers now are
brought into a better order, than those that were before, and are augmented
with many goodly places. And this book will serve as a Christian Manuel, to
the end to teach every one to see every hour of the day, and every Month
of the year, that is to say continually what he ought to believe and
meditate upon: as also, what was the whole Catechism or manner of instruction
of youth used by the ancient fathers, like as Augustine witnesses in his
Enchiridion, that is to say, in his Manuel, that it contained the meaning and
exposition of the Creed and the Lords prayer. Wherefore I hope that this
little treatise so reuiewed and digested into such order, will serve not only
to direct us, how to make our prayers, for all kind of necessities and wantes,
but also for an instruction, more and more to confirm those that are the true
faithful, in the principal points of our salvation, whereby the true Church
of God is discerned from that false and bastard Church, which wants both true
faith, Ephe. 3.14
and true invocation. Now I bow the knees of my soul to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the end that according to the riches of his glory, The
Pastors of ye Church of Orlians that were preserved. M. Gallars M. Anton.
Chanorrier. M. Robert Mason. M. Pet. Baron. Daniel Toussain.
he will grant us, that we may be strengthened by his spirit: that Christ may
dwell in you through faith, through the which you may be rooted and grounded in
all true knowledge of his will. And as it has pleased him in the midst of so
many floudes miraculouslie to keep the Pastors of your Church, whom God be
praised, he employed always to his service: that it will please him to show
you this favor, raising up your estate as from death, to have strength to
rejoice again and that quickly: to the end that we may altogether, as it were
created anew, sing unto him a new song, to his honor, under the protection of
the shadow of his wings. From S. La^bert, within the cou^tie Palatine this 20.
of July. 1578.

Daniel Toussain.

THE FOUNDATION and spring of all holy prayers and christian meditatio^s ought
to be faith. Behold where fore we shall set here in the entry, the articles
of our faith, which some call the symbol of the Apostles, as in deed they
contain a summarie of the Apostles doctrine, as is to be seen of that which is
written in the 15. Chap. of the 1. unto the Cor. verse. 3. and elsewhere: and it
is to be seen by the writings of the elders (as by the cathechisme of Cyrill,
and the treatise of S. Ambrose, of Cayne and Abell, and in the 8. Chap. of S.
Augustines book named Enchiridion that is to say Manuel) that these Articles
of the faith were holden amongst them as the true beginninges, and foundation
of Christian religion.
I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne
of the virgin Marie. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, he descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. He
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the Holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The communion of
Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.

IN the year of our Lord 273. in the Synod of Antioch, was condemned the
heresy of Samosatenus, who would not auowe Jesus Christ to be the word
subsisting: but made thereof a sound or decree of God, not a second person of
his divinity: in such sort as against his errors was published a confession by
George Neocoefariensis, as is to be seen in the 3. book of Eusebius.

IN the year of our Lord about 332. 1. Synod called universal.
was under Constantine the Great assembled a Synod, or Council, to the
assisting whereof there were 328. Bishops at Nice a city in Bythinia, there
where was chiefly condemned the heresy of Arrius: who dinied the true son
of God equal with the father, and of the same substance. In this Synod were
made plain and clear against Arrius the Articles of faith which concern
Jesus Christ by a confession as follows.

1 I Believe in one God, The Symbol of Nice.
the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and
invisible.

2 And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God, begotten of
his Father before all worlds.

3 God of God, light of light, very God of very God: begotten, not made,
being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things were made.

4 Who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven.

5 And was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, of the virgin Marie, and was made man.

6 And was crucified also for us, under Poncius Pilate, he suffered and was
buried.

7 And the third day he arose again according to the Scriptures, and ascended
into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father.

8 And he shall come again with glory, to judge both the quick and the dead,
whose kingdom shall have none end.

9 And I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who
proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son
together, is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets.

10 And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church.

11 I acknowledge one Baptism, for the remission of sins.

12 And I look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to
come. Amen.

IN the year of our Lord 386. Second Council.
there assembled at Constantinople the second Synod called universal, which
confirmed and ratified the confession made at Nice, adding only that which
follows against the heretic Macedonius, who denied the true divinity of the
holy Ghost:

We believe in the holy Ghost Lord and giver of life, proceeding from the
father and the son, who with the father and the son together is worshipped
and glorified.

Here follows the Symbol or confession of Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria, being chosen five months after the Council held at Niece, who
has abiden great combats for the pure doctrine of the son of God against the
Arrians.

















The Father incomprehensible, the

The Father eternal, the Son

And yet they are not three eternalles:

As also there be not three incomprehensibles,

So likewise the Father is almighty,

And yet they are not three almighties:

So the Father is God, the Son

And yet are they not three Gods:

So likewise the Father is Lord, the

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.















the unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in unity, is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved,

Furthermore, it is necessary to

For the right faith is, that we believe

God of the substance of the father,

Perfect God, and perfect man: of

Equal to the Father, as touching

Who although he be God and man,

One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking of the
manhood into God.



















IN the third general Council which was assembled at Ephesus under the
Emperor Theodosius the younger about the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 450.
The third counsel.
was refuted and condemned the error of the heretic Nestorius: the which
would not acknowledge with the Christian Church, when as the word became
flesh, that the two naturs divine and humane were knit in one person or
substance, and that vnseparablie: But did teach how they were only knit by an
assistaunce or dwelling together: whereof he would not auowe that the virgin
had borne the son of God, or that the son of God had suffered for us.
That which was to make nothing even all the mystery of our redemption: if he
which was borne of a virgin, and has suffered for us, had not been true God:
having personally knit unto himself our nature, after the which he was borne
of the virgin and has suffered on the cross.

In the fourth general Council, in which did the Emperor Martianus assist at
Chalcedon: was condemned the heresy of Eutiches the monk: the which monk
fell into another extreme error contrary unto that of Nestorius: in such sort
knitting the two natures in Christ as he confounds them, and in place of a
person, he leaves as it were but a nature: Whereof the Fathers of the council
to make clear this matter, did set out the confession which follows.

We confess and acknowledge one only Jesus Christ our Lord: perfect in
divinity and also in humanity, very God, and very man, of a reasonable
body and soul: equal to the Father as touching his Godhead, and coequall
with us as touching his manhood, and like unto us in all things sin
excepted: begotten of the Father before the worlds according to his Divinity,
and in the latter days begotten of the virgin Marie mother of the Lord, for
our sakes and for our salvation as concerning his humanity: One only and
also Savior in two natures, without confusion, conversion, division, and
separation: The difference of natures be not taken away through the union, but
rather the property of both natures being kept concurring in one person or
substance: not to divide them into two persons, but to the end that he alone
might be our only Savior: as the Prophets have prophesied thereof, and he
has taught us, and the Symboles of the Fathers confess him.

It is to be noted that although the said Symbols and confessions are amongst
the papists, yet notwithstanding they cease not to persecute to the uttermost
those which with all their hearts believe the alone comprised Doctrine:
Wherein is to be seen that they have not those confessions but upon the
paper, for they do not believe in them: and that instead to be the true
Catholics, they persecute them. For as we see in the Code of Justinian and in
the 9. book of his tripartite history the 7. Chap. The Gretian Emperors,
Valentinian and Theodosius made an Edict and declaration, that they would hold
those for good Christians and good Catholics, which followed the Doctrine that
was taught by S. Peter, and did believe in the Trinity and of Jesus Christ
according as it is here before said. Now men do not hold them for Catholics,
unless one believe the blasphemies of the Pope and of his train, who sits
in the Temple of God, as a God, making laws at his pleasure, and profaning the
pure service of the Lord.

Here follovveth the consideration of the first Article of our faith,
containing many goodly Doctrines.
Of Faith. Of the Trinity. Of the Creation. Of the Providence.
Meditations and Prayers upon the Articles of the Faith.
I believe in God.
Of Faith.
CONSIDERATION.
ALL and every Science has his rule and their principles: Ruffin upon the
Symbol.
but the true foundation of Christian religion, is to believe.

For after that man by distrust, The principle of Christian Religion.
and through curiousness had sinned and was fallen, it was the counsel of God
that by faith he should be saved: And willing as it were to be too ouer-wise,
Genesis 3. 1. Cor. 1.2^
and so to know good from evil, he straied out of the way, that through the
preaching of the cross of Christ, that is reputed for folly in the world, he
might be guided to salvation. In the Book of the prescriptio^ of heretics*
Let therefore says Tertullian curiousnes now give place unto faith: and let
faith be no more aucthorised by men or by the people: But let all people and
men be tried and proved by faith, and then approved only, when they shall
believe. For it is also never spoken or said in the Scripture, thy great skill
or knowledge, Matt. 9.22. Ioh. 20.31.
thy great riches, or thy great pre-eminence saves thee: but, Thy faith has
saved thee. Wherefore was the Bible.
And behold wherefore all the Bible is written, to wit, that we might believe
how Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that believing therein we might have
everlasting life. O therefore how much is the doctrine of the Gospel
necessary and fit for us, seeing that it is as Paul says in the 10. to the
Romans, the word of Faith, whereby the Lord kindles and maintains faith
in our hearts! O how great also is the unspeakable goodness of this mighty
God, which gives us blessedness and everlasting life for nothing: and requires
no other thing of us but that we put our trust in him, and that we do believe
in his word! O blessed we, for whose sake he has so lovingly spoken, yea
sworn and made an oath, that he would be unto us a father and savior: But
woe and more than accursed are those that believe not in the Lord, who has
confirmed and ratified so many goodly and solemn promises by oath, yea, by
the precious blood of our Savior. What Faith is.
For Christian faith is not an opinion or light belief of all that a man might
set before us, but it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 3. and a work of God, John 6.
by which gift, and work of the Lord, we are brought unto a certain
knowledge of his will, by the means of his holy promises made in his word,
as S. Peter, in the sixth of S. John, says, We have believed and do know,
that thou art Christ: and S. Paul in the first of the second to Timothy, He
has given us a spirit of a sound mind: and we know very well, in whom
we have believed, and we are persuaded, that he is able to keep that gage,
etc. Romans 4.2^.
And therefore we give glory unto God, believing in the promises of our God,
being certain and fully assured, that that which he has promised unto us,
he will and can do it, to wit, to forgive us our sins, The effects of Faith.
and everlasting life, through Jesus Christ, who was delivered to death for our
sins, and rose again for our justification: by whom also we have peace with
God, and have access through faith unto his grace, wherein we stand and
rejoice under the hope of the glory of GOD to come: calling also upon his name
in all our needs and necessities, as it is said in the Psalm 116. I have
believed, and therefore have I spoken: and in the tenth of the Romans Let us call
on him, in whom we do believe.

Things contrary unto faith.
By this it appears, that there are three things, which cheeflie are contrary
unto faith.



Double errors in the Papaltie, in the manner of Faith.
if a man do not assure himself of his salvation as it is seen in the
Papists, how they in this behalf do commit a double fault. In the first
place, as it is to be seen in the sixth session of that goodly council of
Trent, 9. Chapter. They taught how it was a vain trust, when as men did fully
assure themselves of Gods grace, and that none could know an assuredness by
faith, that he had the grace of God. O how bare, weak and unable of power
should our consolation be against sin, the devil and hell, namely in the
article of death, if this doctrine took place! For that which they say, how
man because of his infirmity, cannot so assure him in his God: The answer is
easy, to wit, that the certainty of faith, is of God and of his word, and not
of our strength and merits or deseruings: and therefore it overcomes all our
weakness. For we be also saved not after the greatness and weakness of our
belief: but through the excellency and mightiness of him, in whom we do
believe, that is to wit, Jesus Christ: in such sort as weak faith leaves not
off to be a faith to salvation, because it apprehends the everlasting son
of God. The other error of the Papists is, that not fully trusting in the
Lord, they call upon Saints of both kinds, not considering, how that we do
believe in one only God, and we must also call upon God alone: For we do
call upon him, in whom we do believe and fully put our assurance, Romans 10. as
also in the 44. Psalm: The Church protests not to have lifted up her hands
to a strange God. To be short, there is nothing more contrary unto faith, than
the distrust of the goodness, favor, and assistance of our God, or to think
yt he has not heard our prayers: seeing that it is his property to hear
them, as David says in the 65. Psalm, All creatures shall come unto thee,
because thou hear their prayers. They sin there also against the nature of
faith, which do not believe that which they do see, and so soon as they see
no succor, prosperity, and riches, they are discouraged and leave religion.
And as it is said in the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, and there proved by
many goodly examples; that faith is the rest or stay of the thing a man
hops for, and a show of things a man sees not.

For S. Augustine says, Man believes with the heart, not by the hand unto
righteousness: so as diverse believe not that which they do touch with the hand,
or do see with the fleshly eye.

Thirdly, this of all other is contrary unto faith, to purpose or to set
forth, or to establish any other thing than Christ the son of God, Romans 10.
upon whom we ought to trust, be they our works, riches, or men: for
establishing us upon our selves; we do overthrow so much as lies in us the
righteousness of God. And so we deceive our selves, because that there is none
other name, but the name of Jesus, Acts. 4.
by whom we shall have life, prosperity, salvation, and in sum, all manner
of blessings.

A Prayer unto God to obtain true Faith and increase therein.
OUR Lord God, Father of light, from whom proceeds every good and perfect
gift, S. James. 1.17.
which have promised to power upon thy servant the spirit of grace, and of
prayer: Zach. 12.10
we most humbly beseech thee, Ephesians. 1.
that for the love of thy son Jesus by whom it has pleased thee to choose
us, and to bless us in all spiritual blessing, let it please thee also to
give us a trueness of faith, by the which we may comprehend this largeness,
depth, length, and height of thy delight toward us, to trust and comfort our
selves in thee all the days of our life, and to bring forth ye fruits to thy
honor and glory, and to the comfort of our neighbors: Let this faith be a
lively faith, Galat. 5, 6.
a speaking faith that may call upon the name of thy Son only, a woorking
faith through Charity, a faith pacient in adversity, a faith ouercomming the
world, 1. John. 5.
by the mean of thy invincible strength, and that thou have a desire to be
ours. O Lord this is thy commandment that we do believe in the name of thy
son Jesus Christ, 1. John. 3.
and that we love one another. But alas, we do know that faith is not given
to all men, 2. These. 3.2
and how that it is an old complaint of the Prophets and also of the Apostles
which say, Esai. 53.1.
Lord who has given credit or belief unto our preaching? Romans 10.
O God and Father, there are of the other side so many false Prophets and
deceivers of the world, that set forth their dreams and words in stead of
thy holy and infallible word, and that know in the mean time to transform
themselves into Angels of light, 2. Cor. 11.
so many are the assaults of miseries and persecutions, which make men wild
or fearce: to be short, so great is the vanity and weakness of our nature,
that it suffers us to be easily carried away, if thou (most merciful Father
and mighty GOD) did not work in us that which thou do command us,
John. 6. Ephesians. 3.
and if thou thy self did not bring us to thy Son, we could not come
unto him, John. 16.
and unless he did give us leave to come unto thy throne of grace, Romans 8.
we could not approach thereunto: and if thy spirit did not guide us into all
truth, and yield unto our hearts this witness, how thou art our Father, we
could not cry Abba Father. Therefore will thou grant unto us O thou only
true God, three persons in one substance, Acts. 1^.
God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, according unto thy promises, to
purify my heart through faith, making thy abode in thy poor creature, keep
my spirit from all temptation of error, John. 14.23.
my heart from delighting in any other thing, than in thy good pleasure, and
in thy word: and my will to desire none other than thy self, that art the
sovereign goodness, which art my all, my portion, and that having thee and
loving thee, I may despise this world, and forsake all vanities, to taste, and
to savor the delights of thy dwelling place, loving nothing but thee: and for
the love of thee, 2. Cor. 5.
to awaite the blessed hour when as I shall no more by faith, Ephesians. 4.
but by sight, and that daily so increasing in faith, 2. Timot. 4.
I may come unto the measure and fullness of perfect stature, one day to
receive the incorruptible crown of glory, having fought the good fight of
faith, and in the beholding of thy face at thy right hand to feel the true
fullness of joy and gladness. Psalm. 16
So be it.

There is set down unto us a goodly example and pourtraict of Jacobs
wrestling, and of the faithfuls victory in the 32. of Genesis.

Then there wrestled a man with Jacob unto the breaking of the day, and when
he saw that he could not prevail against him, he touched therefore the holow
of his thigh, so that the holow of Jacobs thigh was loosed as he wrestled with
him, and he said, Let me go, for the Morning appears: who answered, I will
not let thee go except thou bless me. Then said he unto him, what is thy
name? And he said, Jacob. Then said he, thy name shall not be called Jacob any
more: but Israel: because thou have had power with God, thou shall also
prevail with men.

A MEDITATION upon the said text.
Man's life, to be compared unto the truth, is but a continual combat upon
the earth: and namely the life of the faithful: yea, and whosoever does
truly believe, ought to make his account, that he must suffer many assaults.
Now the temptations are not of one kind, wherewith it pleases this gracious
God to stir up those with warfare, to whom he has bestowed any of his
graces. Gene. 12.
Abraham going forth out of his country, was tried and proved by dearth, and
not long after, through wars which he had upon his arm or hand: and then,
unto the measure as he did warfare, Gene. 14.
he was yet further proved with a stronger temptation, when it was commanded
him to offer his only son Izaac in sacrifice. Gene. 22.
Jacob the good Patriarch, had truly his part of temptations with Laban, and
also of the behalf of his brother Esau. But the fight was very rude and hard,
when as the Lord himself sought against him. For it appears that the match
was very ill made, when that the Everlasting should wrestle against a creature
which was not but like stubble, or as dust in his presence. But this was the
fight that did get unto him also the greatest honor, and has richly
beawtified him with this name Israel, as if that he had been the ruler of the
Lord.

Behold, how the greater that the assaults are which do ariue or come unto
the faithful, so much the more is the victory glorious. Therefore let us not
find it strange, neither be discouraged if men do wrestle against us at any
time, for God himself also will so do, when as it seems that he will
neither comfort nor hear us. So wrestled he with David, when as he said in the
77. Psalm. My soul refused comfort. I did think upon God, and was troubled.
I prayed, Matthew. 15.
and my soul was full of anguish. So wrestled Jesus Christ with the woman of
Cana, and as it seemed to repulse her altogether. But how had she the victory?
Even through faith and perseverance, in such sort, as the Lord suffering
himself to be overcome, said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith, be it to
thee as thou desire. See how the invincible Lord suffers himself to be
overcome by our faith, and also by our prayers. For first of all, he does not
assaie and prove all his strength against us. Secondly, he himself furnishes
us with armor and weapon, in such sort as we be (as S. Paul speaks in the
6. to the Ephesians) strengthened in the Lord, and in the power of his might
and force, and clothed with all the armours from God. Therefore it is not with
out some check mate, and without also receiving some little wound, as Jacob
had a certain crush in his thigh. For he will make us truly feel how we be
but men, and that we should walk in humbleness. What brave soldier is he,
that would not have his Thigh crushed in pieces, or else receive some other
sore wound, so that he might have the victory? Are not these the marks of
the valiant soldiers, whereof they vant and bost, to wit their skarres and
maimes, to show how they have been the first at the medley or fight?
Therefore let us not be grieved, if we do receive in this world some loss,
beatinges and skarres for Christ's sake, and let us not think to be overcome,
what evil so ever happens, but to be ouercommers, so long as by faith we do
surely hold ourselves in the Lord.

An other goodly example taken out of the 13. Chapter of Job to be used in
the midst of the greatest Temptations.

Lo though he slay me, yet will I put my trust in him, and will reprove my
ways in his sight. He shall be my salvation also, for the Hypocrite shall not
come before him, etc.

CONSIDERATION.
BEcause of the doubtfulnesse of this word Lo, in the Hebrewe tongue, some
read this Text thus: See, he will slaie me, and I will not awaite or look for
any more, as if he should say, I have nothing else to awaite after.
Nevertheless, this is the meaning and intent of Job, to say, Albeit that God
kill me, and that there is not herein any apparaunce after my death, to look
for any more good of the Lord: yet so it is, that I will not leave off from
acknowledging my self a sinner, reproouing my ways, and to hold him for the
God of my salvation, who also quickens dead things, as by the deawe of the
spirit, he causes to spring forth those things that seem as dead: even as
it is said in the 26. of Esaie. 5.19. Therefore it is the property of Faith
not to limite any thing to God, but to suffer him, yea if he would kill us, or
bring us to dust. And in the 78. Psalm the Jews are reproved in tempting God
and to limite the holy one of Israel. Contrariwise, the faithful say: My
soul keeps silence unto God. Even as it is said in the 62. Psalm. ver. 1.
and patiently abides in the Lord and suffering him that knows to draw out
of darkness light, and out of death, life: and who also declares his Power,
Strength, and Virtue in our weakness 2. to the Cor. 12. Wherefore do not we
remember this infinite power of the everlasting Lord, in the midst of our
Anguishes? Why do not we behold the Prince of life, in the midst of the
shadow of death: and also unto him who through his death has given us life?
And whose goodness is better than life it self? As it is said in the 63.
Psalm, O that we had truly the excellent greatness of his power before our
eyes done to us which do believe through his force and strength, whereby he
has wrought it in Christ, when he raised him up from the dead, and made him to
sit at his right hand, according as S. Paul speaks in the 5. Chap. of his
Epistle to the Ephesians. How much more of courage would we be, when namely we
should receive it as the sentence of death in our selves: if we do come again
to consider thereof, Philip. 1.21.
how Christ lives in us, and that to die in him, is life and advantage? To
be short, in place to murmr against God in our anguishes, we should reprove
and blame our ways, and our sins, with Job: for our only sins are they
that do destroy mankind.

Certain notable sentences touching Faith taken out of the Psalms, and an
assurance of the true faithful.
Out of the 27. Psalm.

Hope in the Lord and be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and trust in
the Lord. Though that my Father and my Mother should forsake me yet the Lord
will gather me up.

The 36. Psalm.

How excellent is thy mercy O God: and therefore the children of men trust
under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be satisfied with the fatness of
thine house, and thou shall give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures.
For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light.

The 40. Psalm.

Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust, From a hearty Faith,
proceeds ye confession of the mouth.
and regards nor the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. I have not hid
thy righteousness within mine heart, but I have declared thy truth and thy
salvation. I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great
congregation. Withdraw not thou thy tender mercy from me, O lord, let thy
mercy and thy truth always preserve me.

The 50. Psalm.

Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee and thou shall
glorify me.

The 55. Psalm.

Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: he will not suffer
the righteous to fall for ever.

The 62. Psalm.

In God only is my trust, in God only is my salvation: he is my rock, my
castle, and my defense: therefore I shall not be moved.

Yet my soul keep thou silence unto God, for my hope is in him: in God is my
salvation and my glory.

Trust in him always ye people, power out your hearts before him: for God is
our hope.

Yet the children of men are vanity: the chief men are lies.

Trust not in oppression nor in roberie, be not vain: if riches increase, set
not your hearts thereon.

The 63. Psalm.

Because thou have been my helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings will
I rejoice. My soul cleaves unto thee: for thy right hand vpholdeth me.

The 71. Psalm.

In thee O Lord I trust, let me never be ashamed. For thou art mine hope O
Lord GOD, even my trust from my youth.

Upon thee have I been stayed from the womb: thou art he that took me out
of my mothers bowelles: my praise shall be always of thee.

Cast me not off in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

The 73. Psalm.

Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And I have desired none in the Earth with
thee.

My flesh fails and mine heart also: but God is the strength of mine heart
and my portion for ever. For lo, they that withdraw themselves from thee,
shall perish. As for me, it is good for me to draw near unto God: therefore I
have put my trust in the Lord God that I may declare all thy works.

The 84. Psalm.

Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they will ever praise thee.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee.

I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
Tabernacles of wickedness.

For the Lord God is the sun and the shield unto us, the Lord will give
grace and glory, and no good thing will he withholde from them that walk
vprightlie.

O Lord of Hosts blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

The 91. Psalm.

Thou have said, the Lord is my hope: thou have set the most high for thy
refuge there shall none evil come unto thee. For he shall give his Angels
charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways. Because he has loved me,
therefore will I deliver him. I will exalt him because he has known my name.
When he calls upon me, I will hear him. I will be with him in trouble, I
will deliver him and glorify him, with long life will I satisfy him and show
him my salvation.

The 118. Psalm.

The Lord is with me, therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. The
Lord is with me among them that help me, therefore I shall see my desire upon
mine enemies. It is better to trust in the Lord than to have any confidence in
man. I shall not die but live and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord has
chastened me sore, but he has not delivered me to death. Thou art my god and I
will praise thee, even my God; therefore will I exalt thee.

The 125. Psalm.

They that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion which cannot be removed,
but remains for ever. As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord
about his people, from hence forth for ever.

A MEDITATION and PRAYER as concerning Faith, and invocation drawn out of
certain Psalms.
SAint Paul in the 3. Chap. to the Romans says: That all have sinned, and are
deprived of the glory of God. But because that by faith we do put on us
Christ, who dwells in our hearts, we be so pleasing unto him as his
wisdom, as it is said in the 8. Chap. of the Proverbs: and took his delight
in the children of men. Therefore are young and old, great and little, bidden
to praise the Lord even as we do see in the 148. Psalm. O what an honor is
this unto us, that God will be praised by us! Who is he says S. Chrysostom,
that to be honored and praised by the worms does much care for it? We be such,
yet notwithstanding he will have us praise and glorify him.

From whence comes this honor, except it be by faith which yields us
pleasing and sets us in honor? Yea so pleasing, Psalm. 145.
as the Lord offers himself to work the desires of those that call upon
him in truth. What is it to call upon him in truth, unless to pray in
Faith, and to confirm our requests and desires, unto the word of GOD which is
the only truth? Wherefore sounds not out the^ the whole world, the praises
of the Lord? Why then go so many people roming after strange Gods, that
cannot save them? What iniquity have men found in the living God, that they
dig pittes, where there is no water, Jeremy. 2.
and forsake the fountain of life? Is not our help in the name of the Lord,
Psalm. 124.
who has made both heaven and earth? Is this he, who has given us occasion
and assurance to trust in him, even from the time that we sucked our mothers
pappes? And though that he chastise us, holds he not daily the affection of
a Father, when as in chasticing us, he corrects us: and in correcting us,
aduaunceth our salvation, in such sort, as David himself confesses, that it
was good for him to be chasticed, Psalm. 11^.
to learn the judgments of the Lord? Yea, and albeit, that death should be
before our eyes, Psalm. 68.
is it not he that has the issues of death in his hand?

O Lord suffer us not to be led away by them that go far from thee: A prayer.
Neither yet let us at any time communicate with the bloody Sacrifices of
Idolaters. Psalm. 125.
Psalm. 16.
Rather grant mercy unto the poor, bringing them with us unto thy
sheepefold. Make strong the weak: and keep us from being too presumptuous,
Romans 11.
seeing that it is by faith and by grace that we stand fast.

Keep us O good Father standing that we do not fall. 1. Cor. 10.
Let us prove our selves, if we be in faith, and let this faith increase, that
it may shine as gold in the midst of afflictions, that it be also stirred up
in us without ceasing, and strengthened by a daily hearing of thy word,
meditating of thy bounties, and by supplications and prayers, that in this
frail and old ruinous age of ye world, Psalm. 62.^.
(since yt the infidels are as an old tottering wall,) we may be strong, sure,
and constant, daily leaning upon this strong tower and rock thy son Jesus
Christ. So be it.

A consideration upon this which is spoken of the use of Gods word, taken out
of the 30. Chap. of the Proverbs.
Every word of the Lord is purged, and is as a bucklar unto those that have
proof in the same. David speaks almost the same in the 12. Psalm. Now for a
truth the words of the Lord are pure words as the silver: be it that we
behold his subject, for it interprets not of worldly vanity, as does other
doctrine: but of holy and heavenly things: be it that a man consider his
effects. And they which do receive it by faith, feel by it their hearts
purged of earthly thoughts, be it, that a man respect the Author of this
word, which is pure, and faithful in his holy promises, more purer than any
fined silver. But as concerning mankind there is in them no assurance, nor no
faith: as it is said in the first of Esai. Thy silver is become dross: in
short, there is nothing in men, but corruption and deceit. And if a man would
behold the manifold fires and persecutions, wherethrough the word of the Lord
has passed, it should be seen, how much she has made trial, in that it can
consume nothing, nor hinder the course of Gods word. Great a do have they that
strive or storm against the word of GOD: when they shall persecute it, it will
shine so much the more, and will be always a bucklar unto the children of God,
against all manner of temptations, even as Jesus Christ has showed us a godly
example in the 4. Chap. of S. Matthew: when he was tempted of the Diuill, how
we must be helped with this bucklar.

Certain godly textes taken out of the Prophets: concerning Faith, and the
assurance that we ought to have in God.
The 7. of Esai. ver. 9.

IF you believe not, James. 1.
sure you shall not be established. For he that wauereth, is like a wave of the
Sea, tossed and carried away of the wind.

The 12. of Esai.

The faithful feeling their deliverance by Christ, shall say, Lord, I give
unto thee thanks, and albeit thou have bin angry with me, thy wrath is turned
away, and thou have comforted me. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and
will not fear: for the Lord God is my strength, and song: he also is become my
Salvation. Therefore with joy shall you draw waters out of the wells of
salvation.

The 25. of Esai. The manner of the faithfuls thanksgiving.

O Lord thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name, for thou
have done wonderful things, according to the counsels of old with a stable
truth.

For thou have been a strength unto the poor, even a strength unto the needy
in his trouble, a refuge against the tempest, a shadow against the heat: for
the blast of ye mighty is like a storm against the walk.

Thou shall beat down the noise of the strangers as the heat in a dry
place. And he will destroy the covering that covers all people, and the veil
that is spread upon all Nations.

He will destroy death for ever, and the Lord GOD shall wipe away the tears
from all faces: and the rebuke of his people will he take away out of all the
earth, for the Lord has spoken it.

And in that day shall men say, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him: and
he will save us. This is the Lord, we have awaited for him: we will rejoice and
be joyful in his salvation.

The 30. of Esai.

Your strength shall be in silence, and in hope.

The 41. of Esai.

For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not,
I will help thee. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will
help thee says the Lord, and thy redeemer the holy one of Israel.

The 42. of Esai.

I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will not I give unto an other,
neither my praises to graven Images. And I will bring the blind by a way that
they know not, and lead them by paths that they have not known.

I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These
things will I do unto them and not forsake them. They shall be turned back
that trust in graven Images, they shall be greatly ashamed.

The 50. of Esai.

The Lord God is my helper, therefore shall not I be confounded. Therefore have
I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near
that justifies me. Let us stand together: who is my adversary? Let him come
near to me. Behold the Lord God will help me: who is he that can condemn
me?

The 51. of Esai.

I, even I, am he, that comfort you. Who art thou that thou should fear
a mortal man, and the son of man which shall be made as grass? And so
forgettest thy Lord thy maker, who has spread out the heavens, and laid the
foundations of the earth: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
earth shall wax old like a garment: and they that dwell therein shall perish
in like manner. But my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall
never be abolished.

A complaint of the unbelief and Apostasy of men.
The 2. of Jeremy.

THus says the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that
they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become
vain, and have not said where is the Lord: where is the Lord that brought
us out of the Land of Egypt? And lead us through the land of Wilderness,
through a desert and wast land, through a dry land, and by the shadow of
death, by a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt, and I
brought you into a plentiful country, etc.

O ye Heavens be astonished at this, be afraid and utterly confounded says the
Lord. For my people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, to dig them pittes, even broken pittes that can
hold no water.

The 9. Chap. of Jeremy.

Thus says the lord: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches:
but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows
me: for I am the Lord, which show mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the
earth: for in these things I delight says the Lord.

The 17. of Jeremy.

Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man, that trusts in man and makes flesh
his arm, and which draws his heart from the Lord: for he shall be like the
heath in the wilderness, and shall not see when any good comes, but shall
inhabit the parched places in the wilderness.

Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: for
he shall be as a tree that is planted by the water, which spreads out her
roots by the river, and shall not feel when the heat comes: but her leaf
shall be green, and shall not care for the year of drought, neither shall
cease from yielding fruit.

O Lord the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be confounded: They
that depart from thee shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken
the Lord, the fountain of living waters.

A godly example of the three companions of Daniell and of their constancy
and faith, taken out of the 3. Chap. of the Prophet Daniel. ver. 16.
SHadrach, Meshach and Abednego answered and said unto the king, O
Nabuchadnezar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. Behold our
God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the hot fiery furnace, and he
will deliver us out of thy hand O king.

But if not, be it known to thee O king, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor
woorship the golden Image which thou have set up.

An observation upon the said place.
NOte ye that first these good men did very well see that in partaking never
so little in the service of Idols it was to serve the devils, To partake with
the Idolaters is to serve the devils.
as it is said in the 106. Psalm ver. 37. and also in the 1. to the Corinth.
10. Chap. ver. 20. As God threatens also to root out all those that shall
swear by the Lord or by Melchon in the 1. Chap. of Sophonie.

For as one Marcus Arethusius answered, Marcus Arethusius.
in the history of Theodoret. When men would not bestow but one Tournois,
unto a wicked act: then did every man contribute. And as on a day the
Christians answered according as it is written in the same Theodoret, in the
4. book and 20. Chap. When as the tyrants fumed yet more with rage and fury
than before they were wont: we could not deny nor start from the truth,
seeing that in the world, Renouncing of the truth.
there could not be found a greater torment, than to renounce the truth. There
is also a goodly history in the 4. book of Eusebe and the 13. Chap. When
there was mention made of the Edict, that Anthonius the Emperor proclaimed,
forbidding to persecute the Christians: for said he, You shall make them
victorious, through their persecutions, in that they love better to die than to
obey you.

An exposition of the text which is in the 5. chapter 2. book of Kings.
That which some men to cover their wickedness and ydolatrie do allege the
place of the soconde book of the Kings the 5. Chap. and the 18. ver. when
Naaman the king of Syreas Connestable said unto Eliseus: The Lord be merciful
unto the servant, that when my master goes into the house of Rimmon, to
worship there, and leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of
Rimmon: the Lord be merciful unto thy servant in this point, when I do bow
down my self in the house of Rimmon: to who^ he said, Go in peace. They have
this objection in this text. We answer that first this favors no whit at al
these Apostats and Time-seruers, who do partake with ydolatrie against their
conscience. For the question is not of that which a good man ought to do, or
may do, whether he may in safe conscience be partaker with the Idolaters:
But it is a demand of a particular, that is only founded upon a service,
which he pretends to owe unto his king, by the occasion of his charge: for
in the former verse, he protests no more to sacrifise unto strange Gods, but
only unto the Lord.

Secondly, in asking forgiveness of the Prophet, he without noise confesses a
fault, and that he found therein a burden in his conscience.

Thirdly a particular example cannot be taken for a rule, seeing that for a
rule, we have the commandementes of our Lord God, wherein every one is bound
to look unto. Furthermore that the answer of Eliseus, Go in peace, may be as
soon taken for a leave that he gave unto him to go away, or a sending away of
him, then a counsel or any resolution, whereon a man may make a groundwork.

The 2. Chap. of Habacue ver. 4.

Behold he that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in him, but the
just shall live by his faith, yea in deed, the proud man is as he that
transgresses by wine, therefore shall he not endure.

A consideration of the excellency of Faith.
If those things be recommended unto us, either for their beginning, or for
their excellent subject, or for their great effects: what thing is more
recommendable than faith, because it comes from the Lord, which does
inspire it by his holy spirit, seeing that it is founded upon the infallible,
everlasting, and most mighty word of God, Cor 4.
which is mighty to salvation to all believers, Romans 1.
and that it makes the soul to live, who through the perceiving of her
sins, and the wrath of God, would die a thousand times a day: who also
should be in continual unquietness, having no peace, neither yet rest, if it
were not assured and bound to quiet faith, who reposeth it self in God, and
suffers him to do his will being assured of his wisdom and goodness, and
that all miseries are but as clouds passing away: as the Hebrews have a word
greatly signifying, which is in the 18. Psalm and 19. ver. E D, which
signifies Calamity, either a mist or a cloud? As a good old man said in
the time of the great persecutor Julian the Apostata, That it was but as a
cloud which would quickly vanish or pass away. Therefore let us hold fast
the ancre of our hope, Heb. 6. ca. 19
staying us upon the Lord. For as the Harcubuziers never shoot a good shot,
neither can well aim at their mark, if they shake their Harcubuzes here and
there without stay or rest: even so likewise, we do nothing that is worth,
neither at any time shoot at a true mark if we do not behold God aright,
constantly awaiting of him the promise of deliverance.

A consideration upon the Temptations of the faithful, taken out of the 4.
Chap. of S. Matthewe upon the Temptations of Jesus Christ.
THe Lord has truly borne our miseries, and was tempted in all things, sin
excepted: but in this sort, as he overcame the temptor. And as we see the
masters of fence, will play themselves and skirmish before their scholars, to
teach them the nimblenesse and readiness in drawing their blows: even so
Christ was willing to be tempted in this world, that we might consider by this
temptation, how we must overcome Satan, and that being truly exercised, we may
not cower down or bend to temptations. For there be many particularities that
must be noted upon this deed. Christ was tempted a little after Baptism.
Even so often shall those be assaulted with many and diverse temptations, which
shall receive the guiftes of God, or that shall be received into the Church.
First, because that the graces which God gives us are to strengthen us: then
after, temptations are given unto us, to hold ourselves in modesty, that we
should not lift up our selves above the guiftes of the Lord: 2. Cor. 12.
Thirdly to make known, how we have truly forsaken Satan, and that we be
made strong through his divine strength.

True it is, that we ought not to put upon our selves temptations: So was our
Lord lead by the spirit into the wilderness: Therefore when God brings us
thither, then is it that we should lay abroad our faith. But I pray you, let
us mark how willingly the devil tempts the faith of man, Temptation by the
belly.
by food and by the belly. Even so Eve was tempted. For although it was
through pride and presumption, yet was the occasion taken by the sight of a
delectable fruit.

Therefore this is a warning to us, to have for suspect the counsels of the
belly, and so not to be subject to the food or diet, because that God will
destroy both the meat and the belly. In like manner let us consider, 1. Cor.
6.13.
how that the devil awaiteth upon us with afflictions, especially, where need
is, and then when he presupposes to flatter us with many things. For
sometimes it seems, that the children of GOD do lose their labor and pains
in serving of God, as it is said in Malachie, Malac. 3. v. 14.
representing here this temptation, how that for great things, the world
gives clean contrary.

But let us remember, that the world is as a smoke, and all the goods of the
earth, as a shadow: and that only God is our all, and man's true wealth. Then
let us not hunger after earthly goods, neither worldly honors: but let us
hunger and thirst after righteousness: for so are we exhorted in the 5. of S.
Matthew: for it is that which is most necessary for us poor sinners. Now
this true righteousness is reueiled unto us in the gospel. For what purpose
served those goods or riches unto the evil rich man, with his great provision,
seeing that in the end, his want grew greater: for did not he esteem much
more a drop of water if he might have got it, to have cooled his thirst? Let
us acknowledge that our life, our food, and that of our children, depends
not of the world, but of the grace and favor of God: and to withstand the
devil and all his temptations, The armor of Christians.
let us daily arm us, with this true bucklar of Gods word, as Jesus Christ
did: neither let us go into fight without armor. Let us exercise, and stir
up our selves in the scriptures that we may be able to encounter and make head
against the devil: for he himself does allege the scripture, and therefore if
we be not well seen or exercised therein, he will trouble and overcome us. Let
us also pray this good God, that he will give us his holy spirit, which is the
true teacher and expounder of the scripture: the which the devil in not being
able to have, has nothing but the barcke of the scripture, and is easy to be
vanquished and overcome, by those which are carried by the spirit of God.

Of prayer, which is one of the effects of Faith. 7. Chap. of S. Matthewe

Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened.

PRAYER.
O Lord GOD, seeing that thou thy self do offer thy self unto us with so
great kindness and sweetenes, suffer us not, that we be negligent in calling
upon thee, neither permit, that we become restiffe in asking, when as thou art
ready to give. And to this effect, grant us grace to feel how much thy
help is necessary for us, even for us poor creatures, which have not,
neither possess we any thing, but of thy favor and grace: and yet neither
that which we have, can prosper without thy blessing. We therefore, namely do
acknowledge the great wantes and defectes which are in us, in respect of those
heavenly things. For neither faith, hope, nor charity, can be in us, unless
thou do store us with thy light, S. James. 1.
and help our infirmities. For all good guiftes do come from above, from thee
thou father of light. Wherefore should we not then call upon thee, having thy
promises? Or wherefore should we go elsewhere, since that in thee is all
abundance and sufficiency? Give us grace O good God, not only to pray to
thee, but also to knock at thy gate. It seems that it is sometimes shut
against us, and that thou have no care over us: as in very deed the gates of
grace were shut up against us because of sin. But we have our mediator Jesus
Christ, at thy right hand, who has promised to open it unto us. Open
therefore unto thy children that knock: thou which have given thy dear son
for us, give us faith that may bring us unto thee, and also hope, which may
entertain us in faith, and give us in sum that which thou know far
better than we, to be necessary for us, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake.

A notable sentence, to hold the faithful in a true confession of Gods name,
taken out of the 10. Chap. of S. Matthew.

Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: But
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both the Soul and body in hell.

Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my father which is in heaven.

But whosoever shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my father
which is in heaven.

MEDITATION.
THe fear of death is the thing that does most turn away men from our Lord,
The fear of death.
and from the embracing of his word. For Jesus Christ shows what the folly
of man is in this: we fear death, for fear of losing life. But man cannot
take away life, wherefore are they then afraid? For life is in the hand of God,
who has given it. But if it be a question of sorrows and torments, then
death is no more it that we fear: Job. 5.
for they are the sorrows wherein we be borne, as the bird to fly, and those
which we ought patiently to bear, even as a valiant soldier bears certain
wounds, to be after crowned.

As concerning the body, that is put in the grave, we do not think it lost,
because that nothing is lost but the infection and corruption, the which we
do desire to loose. And our bodies shall rise again glorious bodies. For it
is eue^ as when a man melts a great mass or lump of Copper to make a fair
Image of. Truly then is not the copper lost, but fined and set in honor.

Moreover, as a good martyr named Simeon said, (of whom is spoken in the
Ecclesiastical history, of Sozomene in his second book and 10. Chap.) Seeing
that of nature we be already mortal: wherefore should we not account this for
a great honor, when we die for Jesus Christ? But our Lord does yet use an
other Argument. If we fear death, then we must fear the great danger that is
everlasting. And that is, wherein God may cast those down headlong that offend
him. This is the second death whereof is spoken in the Apocalypse in the 21.
Chap. ver. 8. Blessed are they that fear God more than men. Alas, he asks no
great thing of us: to be short, he requires, but that we trust in him, and
that we confess his name. The Elements, Psalm. 16.
the earth, the trees, and the rivers do declare his glory: Psalm. 148.
so do ye birds on the branches. Wherefore is it, that man which is created
unto his likeness will not praise the Lord? And when we do confess him, it
does serve him but for little: marry it does bring much unto us, that he
confesses us in his glory, and that he acknowledges us to be his. Now,
what pity is it, when so many men show themselves so slack, and unfaithful
unto the Lord, some forsaking him and openly blaspheming him, other some being
ashamed of him, having the knowledge of the truth hidden and shut up in them?
Moreover, Titus. 1.16.
how many be there which confess him by their tongues, and deny him in their
hearts and wicked life?

O Lord therefore open our lips, and make clean our hearts, so as we may
believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth, that we be not confounded
in this great coming of thy son Jesus Christ: but rather that we may have
his honor, to be reknowledged, and also declared thy children, and heirs of
thy kingdom.

That through faith we go unto Christ, and what the yoke of the faithful is,
11. Chap. of S. Matthew.

COme unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye
shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light.

A consideration upon the said text.
BLessed are those says David, in the 119. Psalm that are upright in their
way, and walk in the law of the Lord. But what? Where is the man that walks
vprightlie? For they are all gone out of the way, taking damnable paths: as it
is said in the 14. Psalm: and in such sort through infidelity and
disobedience are men turned away from the Lord, and walk after vanity: they
are turned again into their course, says Jeremy in the 8. Chap. as the horse
that rusheth into the battle.

Now see the son of God, who so graciously does call you again, and bid
you to come again unto him. For so is there none other mean to find
salvation and life: Or whither shall we go elsewhere? He has the words of
everlasting life, as S. Peter says in the 6. Chap. of S. John. But it is not
with the feet of the body that we go to him: it is the soul that ought to
march forwards, and to draw near to him by faith, who does approach so near
unto him, that it joins and buindeth us with him: yea, it does graft us in
him even as the branches are grafted in a vine stock, John. 15.2.
that in him we might have good consciences, and bring forth fruits agreeable
or pleasing unto God. So might we then well say:

O Lord, thou which do call us, Peter
draw us if it please thee, unto thee: draw and turn our spirits and wills
unto thee. Be thou thy self ye Adama^t, Romans 9.
which drawest our hearts, more harder than iron. Romans 9.
For alas, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in thee
O God, that show mercy. And because thou pitiest not the proud and
high-minded that feel not ye charge of their sins, Zacha. 3.
which are more heavy than a great lump of lead; but show mercy to the
broken, contrite, and sorrowful soul, and beholdest all those that do groan
under the burden of their sorrowful sins: give us grace to humble our
selves, that we may be exalted, and to feel our death, that thou may quicken
and make us a live, and that O Lord, we do not despise or refuse thy yoke,
seeing that it is an easy yoke, when as by thy spirit thou will guide us, and
by thy word govern us, giving us a daughterly spirit, which is the spirit of
adoption, seeing also that to serve thee, is to reign; to obey thee, is to
rule and so to triumph over the devil and sin. This is not the fearful
yoke of the law, that threatened condemnation to all those which did not
fulfill it. This is not the damnable yoke, wherewithal the sinners are wrapped
in: whereof is spoken in the 1. Chap. of Ieremies Lament. The yoke of my
transgressions is bound upon my hand: they are wrapped and come up upon my
neck: But Lord, who would refuse thy yoke, which is so easy, seeing it gives
rest unto the soul, seeing it vnbindeth and riddeth us out of the devils yoke,
and from the oppression, as it is said in thy Prophet Esai, 9. Chap. Therefore
receive again unto thee thy poor creatures, and bring us O Lord, and gather
us together, as the poor straying sheep, unto that great shepherd Jesus
Christ.

Of the continuance which is required in the Christians, taken out of the 24.
of S. Matthewe.

Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you, for
many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. And ye
shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, see yt you be not troubled: for all
these things must come to pass, but ye end is not yet. For Nation shall rise
against Nation, and Realm against Realm, and there shall be pestilence, and
famine, and earthquakes in diverse places: and all these are but the beginninges
of sorrows. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill
you, and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name sake. And then shall many be
offended, and shall betraie one another. Furthermore many false prophets shall
arise and shall deceive many, and because iniquity shall be increased, the
love of many shall wax cold: but he that endures to the end, he shall be
saved.

A MEDITATION upon the same Text or place.
The very same we do see in worldly affairs, that it is nothing to begin,
except a man guide his enterprise unto the full. And when a man freeth himself
of one leap, he looks not unto the difficulties, but he resolves to pass
further. So says S. Cyprian in the 5. Epistle of his first book: Faith saves
us not, Ad Furiam.
to be received only once, but to be kept. For as S. Jerome writes: Men seek
not the beginning of Christians, but the end. S. Paul had ill begun, but he
ended well. Contrariwise, Judas had a good beginning, but his end was very
evil. Therefore it is a special gift of God to be able to hold out, and in
such sort to run in this race, 1. Cor. 9.
as we may be able to get the wager. For here we must beware of presumption:
and in all humbleness to ask of God, that he will make us strong. Men do see
how S. Peter did make himself resolute: yet did the voice of a chamber maid
astonie him. Behold, what our weakness is. Besides that, it offers unto
us, fightings without, and fears within, as S. Paul declares in the 7. Chap.
of the 2. to the Corinthians, in such sort as there is no occasion to think
well of ourselves, Philip. 4.
and to resolve us against such difficulties, and distrusting of ourselves,
Romans 16.20.
unless we take courage and boldness in him, by whom we may do all, and
that will also tread down Satan under our feet. Now to the end that all
may be prepared to fight the good fight, and that to a holy perseueraunce,
Jesus Christ has foretold unto us the Allarmes that we shall have: namely in
the later days, wherein the backeslidinges, reuoltinges and most dangerous
temptations shall be seen. He foretells of the one side, that there shall
be seducers, that shall have fair outward show, but will show themselves in
the end robbers of the Church, pretending reformation: as is seen how the
Anabaptists and Schwencfeldiens lamented the corruptions, Anabaptists.
manners, and offenses which were in the Church, and of the misusing of those
which did abuse the Gospel, and therewith did not only hatch up in them an
intolerable pride and presumption: but also, strong errors, overthrowing the
foundations of faith and all policy. All this ought to make us practice that,
which is said in the 4. Chap. of the 1. Epistle of S. John: Dearly beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God: for
many false prophets are gone out into the world. Moreover, good heed must be
taken therein, because that besides the manifest ydolaters, as the Papists
are, besides open heretics, and blasphemers as the Arrians be, denying the
true divinity of the son of God, and other like that are found in the
midst of the Church, which daily shall make divisions, and will prefer
their discourses, as Oracles, willing yt men should believe them, as Gods word,
and will defend frowardly and obstinately their goodly interpretations, that
rather than they will yield, they would set before the old heresies, even as
it is to be seen in many, who stubbornely willing to defend the opinion of
Luther in the point of the supper, which is altogether builded upon the
doctrine of Pope Nicolas, as Luther confesses it, in his great confession,
have invented this strange doctrine of the vbiquitie or the Alpresence of
Christ's body; Of the vbiquitie.
attributing a body unto Christ, which is through all, and invisible, that is
to say, which is not a body. Now many seeing these divisions, would blame the
doctrine of the Gospel, and take an occasion to mistast the same. But has not
the Lord foretold it? Were there not also divisions amongst ye Apostles?
Ought this to keep us from going forward? No: for our faith is not builded
upon men: and further, when a man looks near thereunto, it is easy to try
the spirits, and we must praise the Doctors of the Church, which have in them,
those guiftes: and likewise acknowledge their imperfections, and read them
with judgment. As Luther himself; A warning by M. Luther.
in the preface of his first Tome of his Latin works, besought that men would
read his works with pity, judgment, and discretion: and that men should
remember him to be an enraged Papist heretofore, and a poor Moonke, which
could not see, and perfectly comprehend forthwith, all the points of
religion. Also when one sees the Church of God so assaulted within, by
divisions and heresies: without, with so cruel persecutions: it were enough to
shake him, if he be not well settled, and to make him think whether it were
possible that this company, which we call the Church, being so contemptible
and so subject to great offenses, be the Church of GOD or no: or at least,
whether it be possible yt God does love it, laying it open to so many evils.
These are in deed the violent assaults, which the faithful daily do prove
in this wretched world, wherein one may see so many contentions, and
affections boiling with ambition, and pride, and so many hearts more than
frosen in matter of zeal and charity. Wherefore if there be any sentence now
at this day to be considered, this is it: that he which shall continue to the
end, shall be saved. For as Jesus Christ speaks in the 11. of S. Matthew,
Those that suffer once, and continue in their zeal, shall carry away the
kingdom of heaven. Therefore let us not be fleeting children, and carried
hither and thither by every puff of doctrine through man's deceit; but
followers of the truth with charity, growing in Christ with love, and above
all other things holding sure our Catechism, and the Articles of our Faith.
Suffering afflictions patiently, 2. Timo. 2.
seeing this word is certain, that if we do suffer with Christ, we shall
reign with him: considering also that this world waxes old as does a
garment, 2. Pet. 3.
and that the Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth shall be
dissolved, let us aspire unto the kingdom which cannot be shaken, holding
grace fast, by the which we may serve God, in reverence, fear, and assured
hope, awaiting the great day of Christ's coming.

Other godly places speaking of Faith.
The 3. of S. John.

GOd has so loved the world, that he has given his only Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And he
that believes in him, shall not be condemned: but he that believes not in
him, is condemned already, because he believed not in the name of the only
son of God.

The faithful ought not to seek but the glory of God.

The 5. of S. John the 44. ver.

How can ye believe which receive honor one of an other, and seek not the
honor that comes of God alone?

Places taken out of the Epistles of S. Paul out of the 1. Chap. of the Epistle
to the Ephesians. ver. 13.

Ye are in Christ, having heard the word of truth, even the Gospel of your
salvation, wherein also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the possession purchased unto the praise of his glory. Therefore
also after that I heard of the faith, which ye have in the Lord Jesus, and
love toward all the Saints, I cease not to give thanks for you in my
prayers.

The 1. of the Thessal. 1. Chap.

We give GOD thanks always for you all, remembering your effectual faith,
and diligent love, and of the patience of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ,
in the sight of God our Father, knowing beloved brethren, that ye are elect of
God. For our Gospel was not unto you in word only, but also in power and in
the holy ghost, and in much assurance.

The 2. to the Thessal. 1. Chap.

We pray always for you, that our God may make you worthy of his calling,
and fulfill all the good pleasures of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and
ye to him, according to the grace of our God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The 1. Epistle of S. Peter. 1. Chap.

You are kept by the power of GOD through faith unto salvation, which is
prepared to be showed in the last time wherein ye rejoice, though now for a
season (if need require) ye are in heaviness, through manifold temptations:
that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than Gold that
perishes, (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom you have not seen
and yet love him.

I believe in God.

Here follow certain Meditations, and prayers of one only true God, and of
three persons in one substance or essence.

CONSIDERATION.
AS it is said in Athanasius Creed, the general faith is that we worship one
God in one Trinity, and one Trinity in one unity. Let us not confound the
persons, nor divide the substance. For we must know God, as he reuealeth
himself otherwise we should but woorship a fantasy, in place of knowing and
woorshipping the true God. Now the true God, in whom we do only believe,
John. 7.
and that is man's sovereign good, (for this is life eternal that we know him)
has thus declared himself in his word, and in his most excellent works, that
is to say, in that he is one only true God in substance, as it is said in
the 6. Chap. of the 5. book of Moses, and in the 4. of the Ephesians, but in
this one substance we do acknowledge three persons subsisting, that is to say,
1. Tim. 1.
this only true God, which is the king of worlds, immortal, invisible, wise
only, only good, who manifests himself so, as we do see one God maker
of heaven and earth. And yet all this, by his word, which word is not a sound
in the air, or a thing having beginning: but was from the beginning with God,
and was God, of whom is spoken in the 33. Psalm, and also in the first Chap.
of S. John. And afterward the holy spirit spread and moved himself above the
waters. For the spirit cannot signify in this place the air, or the wind,
that was not yet created but is taken for a person subsistent. Afterward in
the 1. Chap. of S. Mark, we do see the son, which was baptized, the father
bearing witness of the son: and the holy ghost coming down upon him. As
it is also commanded in the 28. of S. Matthew to baptize in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost. Now think it not to be a small thing,
to acknowledge three persons in one divine Essence. First of all, the
Christians faith is so discerned from that of the Turks, Jews, and Painims,
which do not woorship the true God, not acknowledging him as he has
manifested himself. Secondly, this knowledge guides us in our prayer and
serves us as a great direction, because that we call upon GOD, by Jesus
Christ, in the partaking of the holy Ghost. Thirdly by this distinction of
persons, we do euide^tlie see the principal benefits of our God, beholding
how the father, the son, and the holy ghost, have wrought in our creation,
and also how they do work in our redemption. The father sends the son,
the son takes humane nature, the holy Ghost is he through whose operation he
is conceived in the womb of the virgin: This is he that is the comforter,
which inspireth and seals in our hearts, the promises of God. Wherefore
although that all people do vaunt of the knowledge of God, yet so it is that
there is not but the true Church, that knows God truly even as he
manifested himself. As it is said in the Psalm 147. He has declared his
words unto Jacob, and his statutes and judgments unto Israel: He has not
so dealt with all Nations, neither has he given unto them to know his
judgments.

A prayer concerning the Trinity drawn out of S. Augustine his Book of the
private Meditation of the soul with God. 37. Chap.
O Three Persons coequal, and coeternal, one God and true God, the father, the
son and the holy Ghost, which dwell a lone in eternity, and in the light
not able to be come unto: which have laid the earth by thy power, and
gouernest the world, by thy wisdom: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts,
terrible and strong, just and merciful, wonderful and loving, one only GOD,
and three persons, one substance and goodness: open unto me crying, the gates
of righteousness, that being entered therein, I may praise thee O Lord. O
household father, great and rich, I poor beggar do knock at thy gates: open
unto him that knocks, thou that have promised to open unto those which will
knock. For O most merciful father, the desires of my entrails hungering
after thy grace, do knock at thy gates. All my desire is before thee, and my
groaning is not hid from thee. And thou O Lord turn not away thy face any more
from me, neither in thine anger draw thy self back from thy servant. Father
of mercy hear the groaning of thy pupil, and stretch forth unto me thy
helping hand to pluck me out of the deep waters, out of the lake of
misery, and out of the stinking puddle and myer, that I perish not in the
sight of thy mercies and beholding the bowels of thy clemency: but that rather
I may come even unto thee which art my God, to see the riches of thy kingdom,
and to behold thy face, and to sing praises of thy holy name, unto thee O God
that do woonders, that from this time forwards my heart may rejoice,
through the only remembrance of thee, who lightnest my youth: despise not
also mine old age, but give joy unto my bones, to make my years revive, as
those of an Aegle, that I may praise thee for evermore.

A prayer upon the same Argument.
Everlasting God, thou which with thy only son, and the holy ghost art one
only true GOD, and only Lord, seeing that it has pleased thee to make known
the secret of this glorious Trinity unto us thy servants: give us grace, that
always acknowledging through one true and entire confession, the property of
the three persons, the unity of the substance, and the equality of the
majesty in one only true God, we may for ever worship, thee and that by this
sure faith, we may be defended against all temptations. And as the Angels
praise thee, and the powers do worship thee, and all the armies of heaven do
magnify thee, let us thy poor creatures, have this honor to be able to join
our songs, and our agreementes which this heavenly company, to be agreeable
and pleasing unto thee.

A prayer of S. Augustine out of the 32. Chap. of his Meditations.
O God he that would live, it behooves him to know thee: and he that would
rule, he must first serve thee: he who would have gladness in his heart, it
behooves him to praise thee. Wherefore, my Lord I praise and worship thee
with my lips, with my soul, and with all the power that is within me. I also
thank thy clemency and bounty, for all the goods that thou have stored me
withal. Unto thee Lord, that art the holy of holies, do I sing songs of
praise: O Lord, I will call upon thee which art in three persons but one
only, and alone substance, beseeching thee, that it will please thee, to come
unto me and to make me a temple of thy glory. I pray the father by the son:
I pray the son: I pray the holy Ghost: that all vices may be far off from
me, and that all holy virtues may be planted in me. O infinite God, of whom and
by whom all things are visible and invisible, that do compass thy works
without, and fillest them within; that couerest them from above, and bear
them below; keep me that am the work of thy hands which trust in thee, and
have none other confidence, but in thy mercy. Keep me, before and behind,
here and every where, now and ever, within and without, above and beneath:
to be short, on all sides, that neither taken at unawares, nor by ambushment of
my enemy I may be endamaged. Thou art the almighty God, the protector and
defender of all those that trust in thee, without whom nothing is sure, neither
free from danger. Thou art the true God, and there is none other God but thou
alone, neither in heaven above, neither in the earth below. Thou do wonders
without number. Therefore unto thee does appertain praise, honor, and
thanksgiving. The Angels praise thee, the heavens also do honor thee, as the
creature is bound to honor his maker, and the servant his master: even so
ought all flesh, and all souls to praise the holy and inseparable Trinity.

A prayer of S. Augustine out of the 33. Chap. of his Meditations.
Give me grace O Lord, so long as I shall be compassed about with this frail
body, that my soul may praise thee, that my tongue may bless thee, and that
all my bones may agree to speak of thee.

Lord, who is like unto thee? Thou art the almighty God, whom we do
worship in three persons, and one divine substance: the father, that never
was begotten: the only son of the father, and the holy Ghost, proceeding
from both, the holy and inseparable trinity: one almighty God: Thou Lord,
have made us strong and mighty, when as we were not: and when we were lost
through our offense, thou have restored us miraculously, through thy goodness.
Therefore never suffer us O Lord, that we show our selves unthankful, and to
yield us unworthy of so many thy mercies: grant rather good GOD to increase
in us faith, hope, and charity. So by this thine accustomed grace, make that
we may be steadfast in faith, apt to all good works, that by thee we may come
unto everlasting life, and that one day Lord seeing thy glory such as it is,
we may worship thy majesty, singing unto thee this song, Glory be to the
father, which has created us: glory be to the son, that has redeemed us:
glory be to the holy ghost, that has sanctified us: glory be unto the most
high and inseparable Trinity, whose works are inseparable and Empire
everlasting.

Here follows to the Articles of the Faith, The father almighty maker of
heaven and earth. Of Gods almighty power. Of the making of all things, and of
his divine providence. Of Gods almighty power.
TO the end that the knowledge of our God be not acknowledged in the air: and
that we may see also, that they are good tokens, that we should put our trust
in him: it is written in these Articles of our faith, that in his word he is
revealed even as well as by his works, that we might also so much the more
discern our selves from the people that do not know him aright and truly.
Thererefore this is the very proper gift of the Church, to know God such as he
is, to wit in substance, and therewithal these three persons, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. And he who knows not the Father, knows not the
Son, John. 14.11.
and he that knows not the Son, knows not the Father. Now albeit that he
is also our Father, as we do call him in the Lords prayer: yet, be we not,
but the children of adoption, received and adopted, Psalm. ^
for the love of his only son, everlasting, and eternally engendered of the
Father: in whom he takes his good pleasure. Behold, how God is here called
Father: to show unto us, that our only faith is builded on God alone. But
this very God, whom the Church woorshippeth, and in whom it believes, is
the Father, How God is manifested.
the son, and the holy ghost: the which God has truly showed himself in
the world by four divine works, and most excellent above all, by the
creation, by the redemption made of mankind, by the assembly and conservation
of the Church, and by the wonderful gifts that God did partake unto this
Church, giving unto her forgiveness of sins, and everlasting life, in that
she confessed the true God, so as by the means of this knowledge, Romans 15.
we might say as S. Paul did in the 3. 1. Cor. 3.
Chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinth. that all things are ours, because
that we be unto Christ, as Christ is unto God, who is the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as S. Paul many times calls him.

Now is he called also Almighty, and thus lifted up above all creatures, and
above the Gods of the Gentiles, and their Idols, Psalm. 115.
that have hands and cannot touch, Eyes and cannot see: But our God that has
his throne in heaven, does what him pleases. And as concerning us poor
creatures, we know not to make, alas, one slip of grass, and there is none
that with all his care and industry can add one cubite unto his stature or
height. Mat. 6.
This is then for you, to woorship and to fear the almighty, that has power
over heaven, over earth, over bodies, over souls, goods, children, and over
all that which is unto us, Psalm. 149.
over kings, over the prowdest princes, yea to buind them in chains, when it
shall please him to use his judgments, and to bring them to nothing. Lift not
up your horns on high, says David, in the 75. Psalm, for it is GOD that is
your Judge, who lifts up, and sets down as it pleases him. How was it
that he tamed Pharao? How did he put down Nabuchadonozer, whom he made to
feed with beasts for seven years space? And this it is, as Job speaks in
the 21. Chap. Against the wicked shall grief of mind and trouble be
strengthened, because he has stretched forth his hand against the Almighty.
Esai. 33.
And how should man help himself before his face, that is as a consuming fire?

Who is he, that would abide in continual burninges? See we not the
mountains leap and tremble before him, as it is said, in the 19. of Exodus,
and in the 68. Psalm? But what say I, the mountains? Yea, the very devils
are constrained to tremble, James. 2.19
knowing and feeling that there is a God. Therefore, what blockishnesse is
this, what hardness, what mischief, that man shall sometimes be so froward,
and presumptuous, that he, as it were, would spite the Lord? Even as men may
see enough therein, who despise his threatninges, and do sooner fear earthly
man, that is with all his glory, but as a flower and grass, than the
Almighty, before whose face the fearce and foming Sea, the hard rocks, and
the earth also do quake and tremble: as we do read in the 114. Psalm.
Wherefore let us remember, even all the days of our life, that which was
spoken unto Abraham in the 17. of Genesis: I am the God almighty, walk thou
before me. And I pray you, what better Master could we find, than him who
has all abundance in himself, and yt may do all yt he will? For his power is
joined with truth and righteousness. He can do that which he will, but he
will not any thing saving that which is agreeable to his truth and
righteousness. John. 10.
We ought to have remembrance, namely in our afflictions, of this
Almightinesse of the Lord, and that none can take away his hand from us: When
God nourishes, sustaineth, and preserves his, not only by ordinary means,
but also, by wonderful means, when it pleases him, as he showed, when he
divided the Sea, to make his people to pass through: conducting them with a
clowdie Pillar, yea and a fiery Pillar, giving the^ Manna, and so many other
his woonderful benefits, 1. Cor. 2.
and singular works as one may yet daily mark.

Therefore blessed are we, whose faith is not builded on the wisdom of man,
but on the power of GOD. But Owe thrice yea four times unhappy, if we do
not trust in the almighty, but doubt in his promises. For that which is hard
before our eyes shall it therefore be hard before the eyes, of the
everlasting himself? Like as he speaks in the 8. Chap. of the prophet
Zachary, and as it is also said in the 18. Chap. of S. Luke, Those things
that are impossible to men, are possible, yea, and very easy unto our God:
For as David says in the 33. Psalm, That which he spoke, is; and that which
he commands is established: he scatters the counsel of the people, Esaias.
2.22.
his counsel remains fast, and sure. O then says he the people are blessed,
whose God is the Lord: and the people whom he has chosen for his heritage.
Cease therefore from man that is nothing, neither let us be affraide of them so
much, which are but a vapor and whose breath is in the nostrels, in such sort
as stop their nostrels, and they die. And let us worship and reverence that
almighty God, putting all our trust and confidence in him.

Maker of heaven and earth.
Of the creation and providence of God.
CONSIDERATION.
Amongst other titles that are attributed unto the Lord our God to know him,
and to discern him from false Gods, this is, that he is the Creator, as we see.

Esaie 40. Chapter.

WHo has measured the waters in his fist, and counted heaven with a spanne,
and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains
in a weight, and the hills in a balance? Who has instructed the spirit of
the Lord, or was his counselor, or taught him? All nations before him are
nothing. To whom now will ye liken me, that I should be like him says the
holy one? Lift up your eyes on hie, and behold who has created these things
and brings out their armies by number, and calls them all by names? By the
greatness of his power and mighty strength, nothing fails. Why say thou
O Jacob, and speak thou O Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my
judgment is passed over of my God? Know thou not, and have thou not hard
that the everlasting GOD has created the ends of the earth? He neither
faints, nor is weary: there is no searching of his understanding.

And in the 10. of Jeremy, it is written in the Chaldie tongue, that the
superstitious Chaldies might understand it.

Thus shall you say unto them, the Gods that have not made the heavens and the
earth, shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.

This is he who has made the earth by his power, and established the world by
his wisdom, and has stretched out the heaven by his discretion.

He gives by his voice the multitude of waters in heaven, and causes the
clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth: he turns lightninges to
rain, and brings forth the wind out of his treasures.

Every man is a beast, by his own knowledge. Every founder is confounded by
the graven Image: for his melting is but falsehoode, and there is no breath in
him.

They are vanity and works of errors, in the time of their visitation they
shall perish.

The portion of Jacob is not like unto them: for he is the maker of all things.

To create.
This therefore is proper to our God, to create, that is to say, to give to all
things beginning, and to make to be, that which was not: and to bring forth
of nothing, some thing. Even as S. Paul says in the 4. Chap. to the Romans,
He gives life unto the dead, and calls those things which be not as though
they were, And in the 11. of the same Epistle: For of him, through him, and for
him, are all things: to him be glory for ever and ever. Creation a work of
the Trinity.
And because, the creation is a work of all the Trinity as here before it
was already declared, it is said in the 1. Chap. to the Colossi. that in
Christ all things were created, to wit, by him and for him. For that which is
called in the 15. verse. the first borne of all creatures, is not as if the
everlasting son of God, had beginning, and were numbered amongst the
creatures. For according as it is after said in the 17. verse. he is before all
things, and through him all things consist: But he is called first borne, not
as if we should say that he was created, but to show his prerogative and
domination, how he is the beginning and head of all things.

Now must we not here give place to the curious speculations of the flesh,
That the world has had a beginning.
and of the Philosophers, amongst whom, some of them have thought that the
world was eternal as the These Philosophers had ye name of studying as they
went about or walked.
Peripaticiens, and others have thought that it was made by chance or
adventure, as the Epicurians: the one sort disputing, how it was possible that
of nothing all things should have been made, indeuouring to measure the
infinite power of the deuinitie, according to their idle discourse, through
want of knowing his force, and the strength and virtue of his word. Therefore
we must with faith believe that which the understanding cannot comprehend, as
it is said in the 21. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews: Through faith we
understand, that the world was ordained by the word of God: so that the
things which we see, are not made of things which did appear. For we have
very plain places of the creation in the scripture: as also there is no
history so ancient from the first beginning of all things, as that which we
have in the first book of Moses: there say I, do we read in the first Chap.
That in the beginning God created heaven and the earth, Genes. 1.
the sea and all things that are in them.

He created by his word

Of nothing, The spreading out or firmament which he calls the heaven and the
earth.


Of the earth, The beasts and afterward man.


The waters, Which he makes to bring forth fishes.


Out of man's body, he took and created the woman.

It is likewise spoken in the 33. Psalm, and in the 16. of the Proverbs of the
creation; The Lord has made all things for himself, yea the wicked for the
day of calamity: not that God has made the evil, for as it is said in the
1. of Genes. All that he had made was very good. But he would show the
wisdom of the Lord, which turned the malice of the wicked unto his glory.

Also in the 89. Psalm.

O Lord God of hosts who is like unto thee, which art a mighty Lord, and
thy truth is about thee?

Thou rulest the raging of the sea; when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest
them. The heavens are thine, the earth is thine also, thou have laid the
foundation of the world and all that therein is. Thou have created the north
and the south.

And in the 45. of Esaias.

I have made the earth and created man upon it. I whose hands have spread out
the heavens, and have even commanded all their armies.

Also in the 1. Chap. of S. Paul's Epistles unto the Colossians.

By him were all things created, which are in heaven and which are in earth,
things visible and things unvisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions,
or Principalities, or Powers. It appears by this place, that when it was
spoken in the 1. ver. and the 1. Chap. of Genes. how God created heaven and
earth, Creation of Angels.
we must comprehend there also the creations of the Angels.

But as Athanasius says in his questions unto Antiochus: Moses would not
willingly speak much of Angels in the beginning of his history, then knowing
the superstition and curiousness of the Jews, where of after (the Church
being more advanced) was spoken of by the prophets and Apostles.

Also mention is made in the first of the Hebrews of the creation: by the
son has God made the worlds. Thou Lord in the beginning have established
the earth, and the heavens are the work of thine hands.

The creatures of God are good.
Now must we know, that God is not the only creator of all things: but also
all that which he has created as it proceeded from him, is good, as it is
said in the 1. Chap. of Genes. and in the 4. Chap. of the 1. Epistle to
Timoth. But the creatures in part are turned away from God, as the wicked
Angels that have not kept their beginning, as it is said in the Epistle of
Jude. And in speaking lies they spoke of their very own, not according to
their first creation: man was also lead away, by the old serpent, which is the
Devil, as we do read in the 3. of Genes. and in the 12. of the Apocalypse.
The creatures which in part had been created for man, having sinned, were
subject to vanity, as it is said in the 8. to the Romans: and the earth was
cursed, as may be seen in the third of Genes. Men also greatly abused the
creatures, Abuse of the creatures.
of Iron, and steel to murder: of wine, and of other meats, and food, and
so of many other creatures, the which we ought to have received as Gods
gifts, 1. Cor. 10.
and to use them with all reverence and unto the glory of the creator. For so
ought the creature be unto us as a book, as a certain Aegiptia^ Eremit named
Anthony, of whom is spoken in the 8. book of the tripartite history and the
1. Chap. says, that the Cloister of this whole world was a goodly book,
wherein there is as many leaves as there are creatures, and wherein a man might
with great pleasure read, yea and daily read again and learn to know God,
who shows his name great and wonderful in this great and large world as
David sings in the 8. Psalm, and S. Augustine in the 21. Chap. of his
private Meditation.

O Lord how great and wonderful shall the riches be, S. Augustines prayer.
which thou preparest for those that love thee, in the true country and
everlasting kingdom, when as we shall see thee face to face? For if thou do
unto us so many good turns in this world which is but a prison, and do
show us so many excellent things: what will thou do then, when we shall be
in thy Palace? Grant unto us therefore grace O Lord to aspire unto this
happiness, that eye has not seen, neither ear heard, and that man's tongue
cannot express.

But the wise man does well exhort us in the 12. Chap. of Eccles. to remember
our maker, before the days of adversity come. In the mean time, men for the
most part care not at all, as the Lord complayneth in the 5. Chap. of Jeremy:
Fear ye not me says the Lord? Or will ye not be afraid at my presence, which
have placed the sand for the bounds of the Sea, by the perpetual decree that
it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof rage, yet can they not
prevail: though they roar, yet cannot they pass over it?

But this people has an unfaithful and a rebellious heart, they are departed
and gone. For they have not said in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our
GOD, that gives rain, both early and late in due season, he reserueth unto
us the appointed weeks of the Harvest. Gene. 6.
Notwithstanding it appears, that the world was not created for the wicked:
for so soon as all flesh had corrupted his way, God sent a flood upon the
earth. And as David says in the 37: Psalm. That the wicked and ungodly shall
be rooted out, and the godly shall inherit the land. For they shall possess
all things in God.

The Philosophers, and others have truly considered the creatures of God, and
have commended them: yet notwithstanding they have strayed to all vanity, more
woorshipping the creatures, Romans 1.25.
than the creator, not seeing how these visible signs ought to guide us unto a
consideration of invisible things. For when we do see any fair piece of
work: this makes us to inquire after the woorkeman that wrought it: even so
ought a man to inquire after the Lord. Furthermore, this world, how fair
soever it is, is a bondsman, and sigheth awaiting the deliverance of the sons
of God. How much more ought we to aspire unto heavenly things, because that
we tread the earth under our feet, to show unto us how that man ought to make
but little account of earthly things, but ought rather to have his
conversation in heaven, Philip. 3.20.
where as our head is preparing a place for us.

Of Gods providence.
NOw, if God had only created the world, and that he did not govern it,
dispose and maintain it, with all her parts, he should not be the almighty,
but a half God. This is because, when as one speaks of the creation. It is
necessary always to join daily the doctrine of the providence of God, as
also the Scripture does, with the wonderful disposition of all things which
are in this whole world.

For having made his work, especially man, which is as the head of his
work, he did not there set him and leave him: but wrought with the Son, and
the holy Ghost, daily blessing, multiplying, preserving, restoring, and
disposing all things to his glory, and the salvation of his elect, as it
does appear by these places and examples that follow.

The 28. of Job.

God daily woorketh. The winds, the rain, The thu^ders.
God beholds the ends of the world, and sees all that is under heaven:

To make the weight of the winds, and to weigh the waters by measure:

To make a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightnings of the thunders.

The 37. of Job.

God thundereth marvelously with his voice: he works great things which we
know not.

For he says to the Snow, The snow.
be thou upon the earth: likewise unto the small rain, and to the great rain
of his power with the force thereof he shuts up every man, Men.
that all men may know his work.

At the breath of God the frost is given, Frost.
and the breadth of the waters is made narrow.

The brightness comes out of the North: Brightness.
the praise thereof is to God which is terrible.

The 22. Psalm.

It is thou that did draw me out of the womb, and thou give me hope
even at my Mothers breasts.

I was cast upon thee, even from the womb, thou art my God, from my mothers
belly.

All the 107. Psalm is full of testimonies of his divine providence, where
amongst all other things it is said,

Seamen.
And those that go down into the sea in ships, and occupy by the great
waters: they see the works of the Lord, and his woonders in the deep.

For he commands and raises stormy wind, and it lifts up the waves
thereof.

When they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he turns the storm to calm,
so that the waves thereof be still.

When they are quieted they are glad, and he brings them unto the haven
where they would be.

He turns the floudes into a wilderness, Wilderness.
and the springes of water into drienesse,

And a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

Again, he turns the wilderness into pooles of water, and the dry land
into water springes:

And there he places the hungry, and they build a city to dwell in,

Fields. Vines.
And sow the fields, and plant vineyardes, which bring forth fruitful increase:

For he blesses them and they multiply exceedingly, and he diminishes not
their Cattle. Cattle.


Again men are diminished, and brought low by oppression, evil and sorrow.

He powers contempt upon princes, Princes.
and causes them to err in desert places out of the way.

Yet he raises up the poor out of misery, The poor
and makes them families like a flock of sheep.

The righteous shall see it, and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.

Who is wise, that he may observe these things? For they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

Out of the Psalm. 147.

Great is our Lord and great is his power: his wisdom is infinite.

The Lord relieueth the meek, and abaseth the wicked to the ground.

Sing unto the Lord with praise: sing upon the Harp unto our God which
covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes
the grass to grow on the mountains.

He gives to beasts their food, The young Ravens.
and to ye young Ravens that cry. O Jerusalem praise the Lord: praise thy God O
Sion: for he has made the bars of thy gates strong, and has blessed thy
children within thee.

Peace.
He sets peace in thy borders, and satisfies thee with the flower of wheat.

The 21. of the Proverbs.

The heart of kings.
The kings heart is in ye hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters: he turns
it whither soever it pleases him.

Every way of man is right in his own eyes: but the Lord pondereth the
hearts.

The 45. of Esai.

God has not alonely created but disposes also.
Behold what the Lord says (that created heaven, God himself that formed the
earth, and made it: he that prepared it he created it not in vain: he formed
it to be inhabited) I am the Lord, and there is not other.

I am the Lord, and there is none other.

I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the
Lord do all these things.

Ye heavens send the dew from above, and let the clouds drop down
righteousness: Let the earth open, and let salvation and justice grow forth:
Let it bring the^ forth together, I the Lord have created them.

Woe be unto him that strives with his maker: the Potsheard with the Potsherdes
of the earth: shall the clay say unto him that fashioneth it: What make thou?
Or thy work has no hands.

Woe unto him that says unto his father: What have thou begotten? Or to his
Mother, What have thou brought forth? Thus says the Lord GOD, The holy one
of Israel: and his maker Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and
concerning the works of mine hands. Command you me, I have made the earth
and created man upon it: I, whose hands have spread out the heavens: I have
even commanded all their army.

The 54. of Esai.

Behold I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the fire, Wherefore
the armies of the enemies are not to be feared.
and him that brings forth an instrument for his work. I have created the
destroyer to destroy. But all the weapons that are made against thee shall not
prosper.

The 3. of Amos.

A trumpet shall be blown in the city, and the people shall not be afraid.
Adversity.
O what evil shall be in the city and the Lord has not done it, to visit
their sins: for adversities are great pains, to punish the evil and guilty
man and the faults of men.

The 6. Chap. of S. Matthewe.

The fouls.
Behold the fowls of the heaven: for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry
into barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much better than
they?

Which of you by taking care is able to ad one cubite unto his stature? And why
care ye for raiment? The lilies of the fields.
Learn how the lilies of the field do grow: they labor not, neither
spinne. Yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these.

Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field which is to day, and to
morrow is cast into the oven: shall he not much more do unto you, O ye of
little faith?

The 10. Chap. of S. Matthewe.

Sparowes.
Are not two Sparowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on
the ground without your father? Yea and all the hayres of your heads are
numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many Sparowes.

Our steps, our going, and coming.
The 4. Chap. of the Epistle of S. James.

Go to now ye that say, to day or to morrow, we will go into such a city,
and continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain, and yet you cannot
tell what shall be to morrow. For what is your life? It is even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away. For that we ought to
say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or that.

Certain prayers taken out of the Scripture grounded upon the doctrine of the
providence of God: taken out of the 93. Psalm, and digested in form and
manner of a prayer.
Our Lord and God: although it seems that the devil rules at his pleasure
in this wretched world, and that the wicked and ungodly do those things,
that unto them seem to be good: yet so it is, that we do acknowledge and
confess thee to be the true raygning God and king of all kings, who have made
fast the world by thy power, and have clothed it with an invincible strength.
And so is it as easy for thee to appease and make calm the raging of the sea,
and the most greatest rivers, to whom thou have also given their bounds: so
shall it be as easy, when it shall please thee to still and appease the
storms and tempests that we do behold in these days, and to tame the fury
of the enemies. But grant us grace O heavenly father, that among so many
storms we may stay ourselves upon thy holy and undoubted witnesses, that we
have in thy word, that we may remain constant in all thy services and in thy
house, until that thou have drawn us out of the waves of this world, to
guide us unto the blessed and happy life, and unto the haven of salvation. So
be it.

A prayer grounded upon Gods providence.
O Lord our God, thou God of vengeance, and judge of the earth, if ever it
were time, that thou should show thy self clearly displaying thy
judgments upon thine adversaries, and upon thy people thy mercies, now it is
O Lord, that thy children of so long time have been, and are oppressed by the
conspirators of Antichrist, yea massakers and murderers, yea with more
horrible disloyalty and cruelty, than ever man saw: in such sort O Lord, as
it makes the wicked to lift up themselves and wax proud, as if we were
utterly undone, and as if there were no God in heaven that cared for his poor
Church. And moreover O God, the long time and the greatness of these
afflictions, would make us a thousand thousand times lose courage, were it
not, that we should be more than brutish, if we did not assure ourselves that
thou see our miseries, and understand our sorrows and mourneful
complaints: thou Lord, which have made the eye, and planted the ear of man:
yea thou great God, by whom we live, and have our moving and being: to be
short, thou which have governed this whole world, by thy so great wisdom,
from the beginning of the world, chastise these people and make them know and
see thy judgments. It is the remembrance of thy so great works, and of thy
providence, which comfort us, and causes us to have patience in our
afflictions: seeing that it is certain, that thou shuttest up our tears in
thy barrels, and keep all our bones that not one of the^ is broken.
Therefore O Lord, thou shall be our defense, for thy helping hand has
gathered us together, ever since we came forth of our mothers womb, and shall
be the rock of our trust for ever more, who know well to reward both in
place and time unto our enemies, their outrage, and to destroy them through
their own malice.

A prayer taken out of the 26. of Esaie upon the same matter concerning the
providence of God.
TRust ye in the Lord for ever more: for the Lord is strong for ever: for he
will bring down them that dwell on high the high city he will abase, even
unto the ground will he cast it down, and bring it unto dust. The foot shall
tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy. The
way of the just is righteousness: thou will make equal the righteous path of
the just. Also we O Lord have awaited for thee in the way of thy judgments,
the desire of our soul is in thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, with my
soul have I desired thee in the night, and in my spirit within me will I
seek thee in the morning: for seeing thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitance of the world shall learn righteousness. But yet, let mercy be
showed unto the wicked, and he will not learn righteousness: in the land of
uprightness, will he do wickedly, and will not behold the majesty of our
Lord. O Lord they will not consider thy hie hand: but they shall see it, and
be confounded with the zeal of the people, and the fire of thine enemies shall
devour them. Lord unto us thou will ordain Peace, for thou also have wrought
all our works for us.

Goodly warninges grounded upon Gods providence, that the mother made unto her
seven sons executed by Antiochus, taken out of the 2. Book of the Machabees
and the 7. Chap.
THe mother did valiantly exhort every one of her seven sons, saying: I can
not tell how you came into my womb: for I neither gave you breath nor life.
It is not I that set in order the members of your body but doubtless the
creator, of the world, which formed the birth of man, and found out the
beginning of all things, will also of his own mercy give you breath and life
again, as ye now regard not your own selves for his name sake.

The Apostles prayer upon the same matter out of the 4. Chap. of the Acts.
O Lord thou art the God which have made the heaven and the earth, the sea and
all things that are in them, which by the mouth of thy servant David have
said, why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vain things? The
Kings of the earth assembled, and the rulers came together against the Lord,
and against his Christ. For doubtless against thine holy son Jesus, whom
thou had anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
the people of Israel gathered the^ selves together, to do whatsoever thine
hand and thy counsel had determined before to be done. And now O Lord,
behold their threatninges, and grant unto thy servants with all boldenes to
speak thy word.

Certain goodly examples of Gods providence, turning away the enterprises of
the wicked and helping his, taken forth of Gene. the 50. Chap.
Joseph being sold by his brethren: and seeing the^ to have some remorse of
conscience after his fathers death, said thus unto them.

Fear not, for am not I under God? when ye thought evil against me, God
disposed it to good, that he might bring to pass, as it is this day, and save
much people alive.

Behold how in one selfsame thing the work of man is evil and that of Gods
both good and holy: the disloyalty of Iosephes Brethren was evil and to be
reproved.

But as S. Augustine says, our God is so mighty and good, that he would
never suffer evil to happen, if he were not the almighty, and that he cannot
turn it unto good. And let us mark therefore, what S. Augustine says
elsewhere of the same, that is to wit, that the judgments of God may well
sometimes be hidden, but the unjust never.

An other example taken out of the 1. Chap. of Exodus.
ANd Pharao said unto his people, Let us work wisely against the children of
Israel, least they multiply, and it come to pass, that if there be war,
they join themselves altogether unto our enemies, and fight against us and get
them out of the land.

A Prayer or Meditation.
O everliving and almighty God, who is he therefore that shall fear man's
enterprises? Pharao wrought well: and his people did agree with him. They
bestowed and employed all their wisdoms together. And wherewith was it, that
they had so great a fear? What was it, that gave so many torments unto their
minds and spirits? It was, O mighty God, these poor people that were
captive: certainly thou art great in the midst of thy people. For thy
children all together poor and little, that be in the world, are terrible unto
the wicked, because that they lean and stay vndoutedlie upon thy strength:
Herod trembled hearing of a child that was borne at Bethelem. Therefore a
miserable man, a miserable people, a miserable kingdom which has none other
strength, but upon his own arm and upon their own counsel. The wicked have
greatcraft to consult subtilitie to work deceites, and are subtle and
presumptuous: But all this O Lord, is nothing before thy face, but a great
heap of smoke, the which, the higher it ascends, the more it vanishes away.
On the other part, thy people walking in their simplicity, are afflicted, and
lie open to many wrongs. But thou redressest them by thy mighty hand, even
in such sort, that as the seed dying in the earth brings forth greater
abundance of fruit: even so does thy Church increase and wax fruitful under
the cross: by means of the deawe of thy grace: In such manner, as neither the
hot son, nor ye cold moon, nor any other difficulties can be hurtful unto
thy children. Seeing then O eternal God, yt against thee there is no power
nor, deceit, and that in thee we have our strength and wisdom: grant us
grace that we fear nothing but thee: neither put our trust in any but in
thee: and that we bost not ourselves but in thee, through thy son Jesus
Christ. So be it.

An other example of Gods fatherly care of his people in their need, out of
Exodus the 3. Chap.
ANd the Lord said unto them, I have surely seen the trouble of my people,
which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, because of their taske-maisters:
for I know their sorrow, and am come down to deliver them out of the hand of
the Egyptians.

A prayer necessary in these days.
O Lord how great wrong have we, when as we do not think that thou do see
us in all our afflictions, and that thou art far from us, as the world is
persuaded, that thou have no care or keep over us. For albeit, thou be great,
yet despise thou not thy little ones: And although that thou art a glorious
God, yet cast not away those that are in affliction and sorrow: And albeit that
thou art a spiritual substance, yet thou have eyes to see, that is to say, a
wonderful providence, the which does not alonelie behold, but does govern
also the whole world. Thou have thy ears open of mercy and pity, to
understand the prayers and cryinges of thy people. Thou have thy hands of
strength and might to help us. Thou have the feet to come down swiftly:
that is to wit, the readiness of thy force and good will, which thou in
need make us to know. Now if thou have had any pity of thy people Israel
in Egypt: yea, if the great exaction and violence, which was done unto them
has moved thee to provide for them: it is now surely time, that thou help
thy Church. Their malice, unfaithfulness, extortion, and tyranny, are they not
come unto their fullness? Was Egypt then more cruel than those which rise up
in these days against thy people? Was Pharao more hardened in heart, than our
adversaries? No Lord, for he stra^e to drive away Moses: But these thirst
without ceasing after our blood, and do daily invent new torments and
cruelties. O God almighty, wherefore will thou (who have the hearts of kings
in thy hands) not bend them, as thou have done Manasses, and that of
Nabuchadonezer, and therein do thy just judgments, and show thy glory and
thy power against the tyrants, as thou have done in times past against
Pharao? And as concerning thy people, O Lord, draw them out of Egypt, and out
of this harder bondage, than to make Brick: since that it is servile unto
Antichrist and Idolatry. Make soft their hearts that are revolted: give them
grace to know the horrible captivity, where they be under Antichrist, that
neither the Garlic, nor the Onyons, neither any other stinking pleasures of
the flesh and world, do let them or stay them, to come out of Egypt to seek
out the places, wherein thou art both purelie served and honored, to call upon
thee in pureness and sincerity of faith, and in rest and peace of conscience
through our Lord thy Son Jesus Christ.

A consideration of this place, which is in the 13. of Exodus, of the Clowdie
Pillar in the day, and of the fiery Pillar by night, that departed not from
the people.
O How blessed are the people of whom GOD is the Lord: for as he is the
creator and Lord over all things, so does he make all his creatures, to serve
as a commodity unto his chosen. May it be possible to see a more greater care,
providence, and louingnesse, than that which the Lord has showed unto his
people, who did not alonelie withdraw the^ from a wretched and hard bondage
that was too much, but was also a guide, and an assistant, and companion
likewise, with his signs and witnesses so wonderful of his favor? Where
then are they, which always are afraid to want, and to be destitute, if they
pass out of Egypt, and give over their idolatry and therefore look daily
back, as Lots wife did? Yea, but some will say, we do see no more these
signs, neither the fiery Pillar, nor the cloudie pillar. Truly they cannot
be seen to them whose eyes the brightness of worldly honors do lighten,
and that have no more sight than the back, or mouldiwarpe. But the children of
GOD do sufficiently acknowledge the most certain testimonies of Gods
presence. For have they need of the clowdie pillar? The holy Ghost shall
refresh them, and yield them contented, and strengthen them in the midst of
temptations. GOD is also their fiery wall, which daily kindeleth in them
faith, and other gifts most excellent: In sum, The pillars which do guide
and comfort us in world.
the children of God do not require more fairer and goodlier Pillars, to guide
them and comfort them in the pilgrimage of this veil of misery, than the pure
Ministry of Gods word and the pure administration of his holy Sacraments.

Having this Pillar of truth, they are certain to be surely grounded, to
be well guided, and to be well directed in all their lives: when as the people
of the world shall be drowned in the puddle of Idolatry, with Pharao, and with
the pleasures of this present world that shall perish. Why should we then be so
unhappy, to forsake the pure service of our God, and to do service unto
strange Gods, eue^ like as it is said in the 32. of Deuteronomie, that we would
recompense the Lord? Is he not our father? our possessour? has he not made and
fashioned us? Let us consider says he in the same place, the years of so
many generations, and how his people are the portion of the Lord, he has
found them in the wilderness and has guided them, he has given them
understanding and has kept them as the apple of his eye: and as the Egle
soaring over his little ones, and bears them. The Lord alone has led them,
and with him there was no strange God.

An other example of Gods providence in the history of Manna, that is written
in the 16. Chap. of Exodus.
ANd the children of Israel said, O that we had dyed by the hand of the Lord,
in the land of Egypt when we sat by the flesh pots, when we did eat bread
our bellies full: For ye have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this
whole company with Famine. Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will cause
bread to rain from heaven to you, and the people shall go out and gather that
that is sufficient for every day, that I may prove them, whether they will
walk in my ways or no. But the sixth day they shall prepare that which they
shall bring home, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.

Also out of the 8. Chap. of Deuteronomie.

THe Lord humbled thee, Wherefore Manna was given.
and made thee hungry, and fed thee with Manna which thou knew not, neither
did thy fathers know it, that he might teach thee ye man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord does a
man live.

Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell these 40.
years.

Know therefore in thine heart, that as a man nurtureth his Son, so the Lord
thy God nurtureth thee.

Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, not keeping his
commandments, and his laws, and his ordinances, which I command thee this
day: Least when thou have eaten and filled thy self, and have built goodly
houses, and dwelt therein,

And thy beasts and thy sheep are increased, and thy silver and thy gold is
multiplied, and all that thou have is increased: then thine heart be lifted
up. Beware thou say not in thy heart, my power and the strength of mine own
hand, has prepared me this abundance.

But remember the Lord thy God: For it is he which gives thee power to get
substance, etc.

A Meditation upon the aforesaid places.
IF there be any thing that greeueth man in the world, it is the care of
those things which do concern the belly, which is ye God of many, as S.
Paul in the 3. to the Philip. does witness: and notwithstanding, we do see,
that it is Gods blessing, which does nourish us, and not the bread: Forasmuch
as earth could not bring forth, but thorns and thistles, unless that GOD did
put thereunto his blessing. And although the earth should bring forth and carry
the best fruits of the world. What is it, if GOD did not give thereunto his
strength and his property to nourish us? As men do see, when that the Lord is
angry, he breaks the staff of bread, and causes that a man is not
satisfied, yea although he do eat much. Moreover we do see that this
almighty God is not tied unto man's means: But that he can help his
extraordinarily, and sustain them, against all means. For God would surely,
Second causes.
that man should be helped of the second causes, but not that man should rest
therein, and wholly to depend of them. Seeing then that we cannot tell what to
do, therefore we be bound to lift up our eyes unto the Lord, even as did
this good king Iosaphat: as we do read in the 20. Chap. of the 2. book of
the Chronicles.

A PRAYER.
LOrd GOD and father: because that our nourishment depends not of meats, but
of thy pure grace and especial providence, and that thou have so many
wonderful means to help us: Psalm. 24.
Grant us grace, that we may rest our selves upon thy providence, and
goodness, Psalm. 23.
of the which thou art the God, unto whom does appertain the earth, and the
contents thereof, who art also our true shepherd, that alone feedest the
soul and the body, in such wise, as the great and mighty Lions of the world,
being hungry and thirsty, as it is said in the 34. Psalm. Thou give unto
thy children food, and fillest them. As also those that gathered up store of
Manna, had no more than they which gathered but little. Now as they did the
sixth day gather the double of Manna, for the day of rest, grant us grace in
this last age, which is, as the fixed day, to prepare our selves unto this great
and last day of rest, that we may gather up a good quantity of this
spiritual Manna, and that thou would so furnish us, ^. Kings. 19
for the everlasting life, wherewith, we being sustained as Elias was in times
past, by the food which was presented unto him by the Angel, we may come
unto thy holy mountain, and unto thy blessed rest.

A conclusion upon the Article of the Creation.
A PRAYER.
O Lord everlasting and almighty God, that have made me when I was nothing,
and can bring me again to nothing, when it pleases thee: grant unto me thy
poor creature grace truly to acknowledge my maker, and rightly to use those
creatures, whom thou have subjected, and given unto men, to reverence thee as
my Lord, and to depend upon thy providence, and assure me in thy power: Esai.
45.
And as thou have taken us from our Mothers womb, Romans 8.
so grant to bear us also in our old age, and to maintain us, Prouer. 3.
Hebr. 12.
being a father and savior unto us for evermore. And furthermore O good God,
because that all things do help to good to those that love thee, Psalm. 73.
Psalm. 37.
and whom thou do cherish thou do fatherly correct: give me grace
patiently to bear thy corrections, and voutsafe to give me understanding in
the sanctuary of thy holy word, to comprehend and understand the wretched
issue, that the wicked shall have, to the end I may never bear malice unto
them. Grant me therefore the patience and constancy that David had, when as
Semei cursed him: that I may acknowledge in sum, that there happens never
any thing without thy ordinance: and that which thou do appoint, is for the
wealth and health of thy children. Moreover, O Lord, for so much as we are not
fit and apt of our selves, to think any good thing: 2. Cor. 3.
inspire me thy poor creature daily, direct and guide my steps, my thoughts,
speeches and dooinges: and above all suffer not that I do forget thee, thou
that art my creator: Galen. de vsu. partium.
for as much as the heathens themselves, only seeing and acknowledging the
wonderful work, whereof our bodies are made, and the use of all the parts of
the same, yea, the least whereof have been constrained to praise and magnify
thy mighty name. Therefore unto thee O God be eternal praise and glory for
evermore. So be it.

Errors contrary unto this Article.
The Epicures, and all those which think that this world is governed by
adventure.

The Manichees, and others which do establish more beginninges than one.

They which do not acknowledge Gods providence in all things, and in the
very same things which seem strange and little.

They which put their trust in any other, than in one only God.

They which think how GOD has created some thing to ill purpose, and think
to make it more perfect than God.

They which abuse the creatures of God, not using them to his glory, and with
thanksgiving.

And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.
CONSIDERATION.
THe creation of the whole world, together joined with a providence, justice
and wonderful wisdom, is the first witness, that the Articles of our
belief do set down unto us of our GOD, to the end to reverence him, and to
trust in him.

Yet follows there an other more wonderful witness, and that presents
together unto us a passing goodness and infinite power, that is to say the
work of our redemption. For to redeem, and to quicken the creature that was
lost, and to buie him of such a price, to wit, with the precious blood of Gods
everlasting son, and not to deliver him only from bondage, and death, but
also to communicate with him everlasting life, this is so great a work, and
so singular a benefit, as no tongue can express, nor heart can sufficiently
comprehend it. Hence it is that God has so loved the world, that he has
given his only son, to the end that all those which believe in him, shall
not perish, but have everlasting life. Man was therefore created, good and
perfect as it is said in the 7. Chap. of Ecclesiastes: But he tarried not in
this happy estate: But following his own inventions, and discourses, with the
evil counsel of the Devil, he was so turned from his GOD and by this means
cast headlong into destruction, as he made himself and his posterity guilty
of death and everlasting perdition. Romans 6.
For death, and all the things belonging unto death, as are all kinds of
adversities, be the reward of sin. Oseas. 13.
Even so comes our destruction of our selves: For as much as man abusing his
freewill, yielded himself a slave unto the devil, and by this means drew
upon him the just vengeance of the everlasting God. O What a change and
pitious alteration was this: when as the Image of God was so defaced in man,
and that of so noble a creature, he was become vile, miserable, and full of
sin and filth? For albeit, that man was fashioned of the dust of the earth,
yet so was it that the spirit of God, if he had not sinned, had swallowed up
that which was of the earth, corruptible, and had freed man of his weakness
and putrefaction. But having chased away from him, Gods good spirit, Gene. 6.
he remains a foul lump of flesh, and is not now of his nature but dust
and clay, and his heart from his infancy altogether froward.

For although that there is but one GOD, in whom we do believe, Jesus Christ
the matter that our faith only looks on
as S. Jerome very well says upon the 4. of the Ephe. Yet so is it that the
son, which is the second person of the divinity, who is one substance is the
true object and foundation of our faith, and not without cause. John. 14.9.
For first in believing in him, we do believe in God: because that he is God
blessed for evermore, as S. Paul says in the 9. of the Romans. Secondly, he
it is, of whom Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms have spoken, and unto
whom they have directed us: as it is also said in the 24. of S. Luke.
Thirdly, it is he that the father likewise wills that we hear, and that
is the subsisting Image of the invisible GOD, Colos. 1. Hebr. 1.
the brightness of his glory, and the ingraued sign and mark of his person:
by whom also, the father has spoken and done all things. Lastly, this is
the person that has taken our nature: and he who is called Immanuel, God with
us, and GOD manifested in the flesh. So that this is the cause why S. Paul
says, that no man can lay any other foundation, than that which is laid, to
wit, Jesus Christ, and that he would not know any thing save Christ: Not
that he would not likewise know and understand the Father and the holy Ghost,
but because that in him man knows all, 1. Cor. 3.
both the Father and the holy Ghost as it is said in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians and second Chapter, 1. Cor. ^
And that without him, we can, neither know the Father, neither have access
unto this light not able to be come unto, unless the Son give us both
assurance and access: Even as Saint Paul teaches us in the 2. Encridion* 5.
Chap.
Chap. to the Ephesians. ver. 18. And as Saint Augustine yet teaches, how
many heretics do speak of Jesus Christ, vaunting them of his knowledge:
yet so it is, that when a man does neerelie look therein it is found, that
they have only but the name, and that they are but words without truth and
effect. For where as they will neither speak, neither yet understand, or teach
as it behooves concerning his Person: or teach any evil concerning his
Office: So is this a proper gift unto the Christian Church, to know with a
wholesome knowledge, the eternal and living GOD, that is to say, John. 17.
to know him in Jesus Christ, and to call upon him, through him, holding
Christ for very God and very man, and the only mediator between God and
man. That which thing neither the Turks, neither the Jews, neither Papists,
nor many heretics do, as in deed the devil does labor to raise up false
Prophets in all times, to darken, and utterly to overthrow the knowledge of
Jesus Christ on the earth, who is as a sign or a mark, against which every
man gainsayeth, even as Simeon did speak in the 2. of S. Luke. But against
such kind of people, we must retain these Maxims or rules. Maxims.
First, that such a mediator and savior, is necessary for us to have, which
was very God, and very man, and who partaketh to the end, (to be a mean)
with the natures of those that were at strife, in such sort as he might
overcome sin, death, and the devil, and give men access unto the light not
able to be come unto. Ephe. 1.
It was necessary, that he should be stronger than all creatures, to wit,
God, and the well-beloved of the Father, unto whom we might be fit and
agreeable: As of the other side, it was meet that the same flesh which had bin
overcome, Romans 8.
Esai 53.
should have the victory, and that the flesh which had sinned might bear the
pain the which also he has charged upon him: in short that to the end to
have pity on us, Hebr. 2.
he might partake with our flesh, and with our miseries, to the end to make us
his brethren, and so to carry into heaven, our nature, as ye gage of our hope,
even as he has given unto us a counterpledge, that is to say, the holy
Ghost: as Tertullian has written very well, speaking of the resurrection and
of the flesh of Christ. When therefore we say, that we do believe in Jesus
Christ, it is not, as if we had many kinds of faith. For there is but one
God, and one faith: Ephe. 4.
and the father and the son are one, as it is said in 10. of S. John. To
believe in Jesus Christ.
But this is that we believe in God according as he has showed himself, in
the making of heaven and earth, as also in his holy word, that bears record
unto us, how that the everlasting Son of God Jesus Christ, taking our nature
in the fullness of time, to be the mediator of the covenant of our God, the
two natures divine and humane being knitte together, he has reconciled us to
God his father, when by his merit, and obedience, and through his strength and
incomprehensible goodness he has by his death and passion made satisfaction
for our sins, and by his resurrection overcome death and hell, and is
ascended into heaven, to make intercession for us, so as for ye love of him,
god loves us, and his righteousness is imputed to us as if it were our own.
God holds us for righteous, and so be we sure yt neither ye law has power to
condemn us, against which we do set this perfect righteousness of Jesus
Christ: neither death nor ye devil shall astonie us, for seeing ye Christ for
us has overcome ye world, death and all yt which was fearful. In sum, we
do believe, not only the history of ye birth, passion, death, resurrection
and ascensio^ of Jesus Christ: But every faithful person does apply all ye
benefits yt he has gotten for us, assuring and comforting themselves, in his
holy and lovely promises, and do lay hold upon him as ye true Jesus, saving
and blessing us, and having prepared an everlasting salvation and a most
blessed life by his precious blould. For what we shall be, does not yet
appear: but we do know yt when he shall appear, V;s;e. 13.
we shall be like unto him, and shall see him as he is. And whosoever has this
hope in him is purified, as he is also pure. This say I is ye first Maxim, and
first foundation, yt we do set against the heretics, and others, which know
not Jesus Christ true God and true man. It is ye wonderful counsel of God,
which has provided for us such a mediator and savior as did behooue us to
have. Secondly, we do set against them the agreement of ye old and new
Testament, concerning Jesus Christ: where we see how yt which ye ceremonies of
the law had figured, was fulfilled in Christ: as it is said in ye Epistle to ye
Hebrews: 1. John. 3.
for so does S. Paul witness and prove, how Christ was the end of ye law.
Lastly we do set against the^ the effects of this healthful knowledge, which
gives peace, and rest of mind unto ye faithful: So as many have suffered
death with great joy, for ye name of Jesus. Now on the other part, ye issue of
those who have blasphemed, as Cerinthus, Manes, Arrius, and others, were
always miserable. And how soever it were, yt many times ye heresies of those
which have striuen, either concerning ye true divine nature; or concerning ye
verity of Christ's human nature, were for a season maintained by violence and
impude^cie, God in this giving place unto his judgments, and proving ye
consta^cie of his own: yet, it is clear by the Ecclesiastical Histories, how
the Lord has made his truth daily to triumph, yea and that many times by
weak Organes, and has confounded ye wise men of ye world, preserving his
truth, and the Articles of our faith, even unto our time: whereof we ought to
thank this good God, without ceasing, and to beseech him, yt he will likewise
have pity also of our posterity, and suffer them to enjoy this wholesome
treasure, not suffering that for our unthankfulness, and by the damnable, and
ambitious contentions of certain wicked members, that at this day do trouble
the Churches: the truth should be darkened, and this good Savior Jesus, true
GOD and true man should be misknowne to the world.

Now to the end, that every faithful man might so much the better taste and
learn, what this son of God is, and what foundation we have to believe in
him, and to hold him for our mediator: the holy scripture does attribute two
names chiefly unto him: Jesus Christ.
whereof the one is Jesus, and the other is Christ: to the end that we may
note and mark in the first, what is the person of the son of God, to wit,
that he is God the savior, and the word of life, manifested in the flesh: In
the second his Office: because that Christ does signify as much as Messiah:
that is to say, Anointed, which was anointed for us, destined and ordained of
the father, and dwelling in him in all fullness, that he should be our king,
our sacrificer, and our Prophet and Doctor.

As concerning ye first name, which is Jesus, it was given to ye Lord, not by
adventure: but by a heaue^lie Oracle declared by ye Angel unto Joseph, as we
do read in the 1. Chap. of S. Matthew: Thou shall call his name Jesus: For
he shall save his people from their sins. The like was said unto Marie, even
as we do read in the first Chap. of S. Luke: Thou shall bear a son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus: He shall be great, and shall be called the
son of the most highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of
his father David, and the Angel speaking unto the shepheardes in the 2. Chap.
of S. Luke, interpreting this word of Jesus, said: Behold, I bring you tidings
of great joy, that shall be to all the people: That is, that unto you is borne
this day in the City of David a savior which is Christ the Lord.

Moreover, Irenaeus, a right ancient Doctor in the second book against the
heresies of Valentinus, witnesses, that the Greeks called him Soter, that
which the scripture called Jesus, that is to say, Savior. The which Jesus
Christ was in deed, straightway declared himself so to be healing the sick,
and raising up the dead. Especially by this everlasting salvation, and that
salvation of the souls which he has gotten for us: who is the true
salvation, of whom we ought to make reckenning of: 8. Pet. 1.5.
as S. Peter says, that he should be fully revealed in the latter days.

Now such a Savior was not Joshua how brave a Captain soever he was, having
this honor to conduct the people into the promised land: Neither likewise
Iehosuach the Son of Iosedec the high Priest, of whom the Prophet Zachary
speaks, that were but simple men, and have done nothing, but through
borrowed strength: neither also were they other, but the shadows of this great
Joshua, and mighty Savior, that is Jesus Christ, the only true and
everlasting Savior, so as there is none other name, by the which a man may
have the grace of God, Acts. 4.
or obtain any thing of him: or to come to ye most blessed life. It is this
name, or rather this virtue and power, before whom, all knees ought to bow,
that are in heaven and on the earth. To be short, this is he, whom all tongues
shall confess to be the Lord, Jesus Christ.
unto the glory of God. He is the Lord, because that the father has brought
all things in subjection under him, to this person, I say, Hebr. 2.
which is very God and very man. For he is particularly our Lord, because
that he has purchased us unto him, through his precious bloudshedding, so as
we be not unto our selves, 1. Cor. 6.
but unto him that has bought us. Therefore, he whom the Jews have crucified
for envy, him has God raised and lifted up, and has made him Lord and Christ
as it is said in the 2. Chap. of the Acts. Psalm. 2. Col. 1.
Let us then rejoice of such a Lord, who is the Lord and savior. Let us
willingly do service unto such a Master, who has gotten us by his precious
blood, and delivered us from the power of darkness, and even so has in deed
made us free. In him, John. 8.
it is easy for us to overcome the world, for he is greater than the world:
John 4.
Yea in him is Satan trodden under our feet, even as S. Paul speaks in the
16. of the Romans. Wherefore, let us say with Esai in his 26. Chap. Howsoever
it be O Lord yt other Lords besides thee have ruled us: yet will we remember
thee daily, and thy name. For there is but one God and savior that is
properly Jesus Christ: of whom is spoken in the 9. Chap. of Zachary, and 9.
ver. and in the 1. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paul unto Titus, ver. 3. and 4. O
how happy are they, that do put their trust in him, as it is said in the 2.
Psalm, and that do embrace the son which is Christ, that is to say, the
anointed of the living God, and do not only acknowledge him with the mouth,
but do likewise suffer him to reign in them by his word, and through his
spirit, and seeking none other oblation than the everlasting oblation, Heb. 10.
which is of a perpetual efficacy and strength which he has offered unto his
father on the Cross once for all, as a perfect and everlasting priest.

But alas, whereto serves this goodly title of a Christian, if vice do
reign in thee: if the flesh and the world master thee: if thy soul will not
suffer it to be commanded by the anointed Christ, and consecrated to reign
in us here below by his grace, until such time as he shall bring us unto the
kingdom of his glory? And whereto serves it, to sing, to cry, and to roar
out the Apostles Creed, as was done in the Papacy, fince they seek for other
Masters than Christ, and other sacrifices than his, persecuting with all
extremity, those that do hope and trust in him alone. Jesuits.
But what shall we say of those which are ashamed at these days to be called
Christians, Acts. 11.
which is the ancient name of the disciples of Jesus Christ: and are not thus
contented to have part in the Lords anointing, that he promised unto us by
the holy spirit; but will also boldly sease upon that name, 1. John. 2.20
that does belong to him only, inasmuch as he is the alone savior, calling
themselves Jesuits, as though they would outface all the rest of Christendom.

A prayer to have and to retain the true knowledge of Jesus Christ.
O Lord our God and father: John. 17.
for so much as this is eternal life, that we do know thee, and to know thee
we cannot but in thy ingraued Image, and in thy son which was declared in the
flesh: may it please thee to lead us by thy holy spirit unto the true
knowledge of thy son, likewise giving unto us such a resolution, as that we
may esteem all things as dung, Philip. 3.
in respect of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ. First of all, give us
grace, O God, rightly to feel and understand our necessity, to wit, that we
ought to have such a sovereign high priest as should be holy, Heb. 7.
innocent, without spot, separated from sinner, which was very God and true
man. Moreover, O heavenly father, print lively in our hearts, the knowledge and
acknowledging of this thy woonderful charity, yea a love and favor so great,
which thou have showed unto us poor sinners, Titus. 2. Titus. 3.5
making thy wholesome grace to appear in thy son Jesus Christ, and saving us,
not through the works that we should have done, but by the only merit of the
death, and passion of thy son Jesus Christ. O Lord: what grace, O what
favor, O what humbleness is this, that the eternal son of the living God
has taken the form of a servant, and has humbled himself, even to die for
us miserable wretches? Ephe 4.20.
But above all, give us grace, to learn Christ aright, and not to be like unto
the^ that live vnorderlie, and do abuse through a fleshly liberty, this
blessed and wholesome knowledge, which should rather draw us to follow his
aim, to wit, yt by the same we might be humbled, and so confounded in our
selves, in seeing how horrible and great our sins have bin, as it behooved us
to have them bought again by so great a price, to the end we should not
esteem and magnify any thing but thy bounty, and that all our joy and
glory might be in thee: In sum, that we should cast our eyes upon this good
Jesus, in all our adversities and miseries, aspiring unto, eternal salvation,
that he has prepared for us, forsaking our selves, to live unto the praise of
him who has redeemed us.

O God do not suffer poor Christendom to be brought back again into a
bottomless pit of darkness, and to be deprived from so wholesome a knoweledge,
by this damnable sect of Arrians, the which, alas, would spring up a fresh in
the world, and who have denied the true divinity of Jesus: or through this
miserable heresy of the Martionites, Eutichians, and others, blotting out and
utterly frustrating the proprieties of the humane nature of the same thy dear
son as much as lies in them, shrowding them selves notwithstanding with the
name of Evangelical Doctors, O Lord for the love of thy name, and of our
poor posterities, maintain the truth of these articles of our faith.
Preserve and keep the relieuers of thy Church, and give unto the^ victory
against all assaults of enemies, for this great savior Jesus Christ his sake.
So be it.

Certain notable places concerning Jesus Christ, drawn out of the scripture.
Out of the 3. Chap. of Genesis.

The Serpent.
After the fall of Adam and Eve, the Lord spoke unto Satan, which is the
ancient serpent, leading or tempting the world, as it is said in the 12. of
the Apocalypse:

I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed: He shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The Chaldie
translation, or rather Paraphrase in stead of seed, puts thy son, and her
son: meaning by the son of the Serpent, Antichrist: and by the son of the
woman, the promised seed: By the same were the fathers comforted: and namely
S. Paul says in the 3. to the Galat. that the promised seed was Christ.

Out of the 49. of Genesis.

The seed.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, not a lawgiuer from between his feet,
until Shiloh come, and the people shall be gathered unto him.

Now the Chaldey Paraphrase, and the Targum Ierosolomite do not only expound
it of the Messiah: but also the most learned of the Hebrews are constrained so
to do.

And in the same Chap. and the 18. ver. the good Patriarch Jacob says:

O Lord I have waited for thy salvation.

Thereupon writes ye Targu^ of Jerusalem: I do not awaite for a salvation,
says Jacob, or a deliverance from a Gedeon or from a Sampson, whose
deliueraunces were temporal: But I do awaite for that which the Messiah shall
bring.

Out of the 18. Chap. of Deuteronomie.

I will raise up unto them says the Lord unto Moses a prophet, from among their
brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him.

This place cannot be understood but of Christ: as also it is said by this
occasion in the 1. of S. John and the 45. ver. how Moses has written of
Christ. And in the 3. of the Acts. S. Peter does also in the 22. ver. apply
there this place unto Jesus Christ. For albeit that GOD has raised up many
Prophets: Yet so it is, as it is said in the last Chap. of Deuteronomie, There
arose not a Prophet in Israel like unto Moses. So as a man cannot understand
the said place, but of Jesus Christ the leader of his people, and true Prophet,
by whom God has spoken unto them in these last times, as it is said in the 1.
Chap. to the Hebrews.

Out of the 19. Chap. of Job.

I know well that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth.

Out of the 2. Psalm.

Why do the Princes assemble together against the Lord and against his
Christ? I have ordained him king upon Sion mine holy mountain. I will declare
ye decree, that is, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the nations for thine
inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession.

Now that this Psalm is properly referred unto Christ a man may plainly see
it. First, because that he called him his everlasting begotten son, as it is
expounded in the 1. of the Hebrews: secondly in the 11. ver. the same son
is called Iehoua, and the kings of the earth are exhorted to reverence and
embrace him. Thirdly yt his kingdom spreads forth it self even unto ye
ends of ye earth, yt which a man cannot understand of ye kingdom of David.
Last of all, it is said, how they are blessed which have their hope and trust
in him: For as S. Paul speaks in the 10. to ye Romans, such shall not be
confounded. Therefore the Apostes had reason to apply in the 2. of the Acts,
this Psalm. unto Christ.

Out of the 8. Psalm.

What is man that thou art so mindeful of him? and the son of man yt thou
visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower than God, and have crowned
him with glory and honor. Thou have made him to have dominion over the works
of thine hands. Thou have put all things under his feet.

Howsoever it be that this place sets out ye dignity and excellency of ye
first Adam: yet we see by ye 12. Chap. to ye Hebrews, how this is applied unto
the second Adam, yt is to say unto Christ in whom our wretched nature, yt was
fallen from his first glory, was restored again to honor in such sort as God
has no less showed his wonderful goodness even with advantage in the
restoring of man again, as he has done in the first creation. And as
touching the Psalms, we have very many goodly testimonies of Jesus Christ:
as of his death and passion in the 22. and 69. the which are alleged in the
27. of S. Matthew and in the 1. of the Acts, ver. 20. of the resurrection in
the 16. Psalm, the which is alleged in the 2. of the Acts.

Of his Ascensio^ in the 68. Psalm that is alleged in the 4. Chap. to the
Ephesians.

Of his Priesthood, in the 110. which is alleged in the 22. of S. Matthew: to
prove that he is the son and Lord of David altogether, and in the 5. Chap.
to the Hebrews.

Of the calling of the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospel, in the 19.
Psalm. and 72. which are alleged in the 10. of the Romans.

Of the kingdom of Christ in the 2. and 67. Psalm.

Out of the Prophet Isaie, who is by many called the Evangelical Prophet: And
therefore S. Ambrose did exhort S. Augustine before his conversion, to read him
diligently, thereby to give unto him taste of the grace of God, like as S
Augustine does witness in the 9 book of his Confessions.

Out of the 7. of Isaiah.

The Lord himself will give you a sign: behold a virgin shall conceive and
bear a son, and she shall call his name Immanuell.

Of this it is spoken in the first of S. Matthew verse. 23.

Out of the 9. of Isaiah.

Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given: and the government
upon his shoulders, and he shall call his name wonderful, counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of peace. His government
shall be enlarged, and peace shall have none end there: he shall sit upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom to order it, Luke. 1.
and to stablish it with judgment.

Thus is Jesus Christ described unto us ye son of David, Romans 1.
according to the flesh in the 11. of Isaiah, and this is alleged in 13 of
the Acts, and the 23. verse.

There shall a twig come forth of the stock of Iessay, and a branche shall
increase out from his root, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,
the spirit of wisdom, and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of
strength, etc.

2. These. 2.
He shall judge the poor in righteousness, and reprove them in equity, to
maintain the afflicted on the earth, and will smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth, and shall slay the wicked by the breath of his lyps: the which cannot
be understood but of Jesus Christ, and of the power of his Gospel.

The 53. Chap. of Isaiah is altogether Evangelical and is very often times
aledged in the new testament, how Christ has borne our stripes: See ye 8.
Chap. of S Matthew, the 1. to the Corinth. and the 15. Chap. Acts. 8. Chap.
ver. 37.

The 61. of Isaiah the 1. ver. and 2. is aledged in the 4. Chap. of S Luke, of
the office of Jesus Christ, who is sent to bring the good tidinges unto the
afflicted, and to heal the broken hearted, and to preach deliverance unto the
Captives, and to publish the acceptable year of our Lord.

Out of the 23. Chap. of Jeremiah, verse 5. and 6.

Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous
branch, and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and
justice in the earth. In those days Israel shall be saved, and Israel shall
dwell safely and his. And behold, the name whereby they shall call him: The
Lord our righteousness.

Out of the 34. Chap. of Ezechiel, ver. 22.

I will save my sheep, and they shall no more be spoiled, and I will judge
between sheep and sheep.

And I will set up a shepherd over the^, and he shall feed them, even my
servant David. Note ye that Christ is called David. First, because that
according to the flesh, he is descended of him. Secondly, in that the kingdom
of David was a figure of the Messiah. Thirdly, for that he ought to sit on the
throne of David, and to confirm it, being established eternal king. It
follows in Ezechiel, he shall feed the^, and he himself will be their
shepherd, and I will make with them a covenant of peace, etc.

Out of the 9. of Daniel.

There are in this Chapter amongst others, two notable places of Jesus Christ.
The first in the 17. verse: Hear O our God the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, for the Lords sake. The other place is in the ver. 26. and 27.

After threescore and two weeks, shall Messiah be slain.

But he shall confirm the covenant for one week,

And he shall cause the sacrifice and the offering to cease.

In this Chap. is foretold the time of Christ his coming, his death spoken of
before, and his office.

Out of the 5. Chap of Micheas.

And thou Beth-leem Ephrathah,

Out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the ruler in Israel,
whose goinges forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.

Out of the 9. of Zachary.

Rejoice greatly O daughter Zion: shout for joy O daughter Jerusalem: Behold
thy king comes unto thee: he is just, and thy Savior.

Malachie the 4. Chap. and 2. ver.

Unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise, and
health shall be under his wings.

There are many other places: But behold the chief out of the old Testament.
They of the new are innumerable, for all the new Testament bears witness of
Jesus Christ, and diverse have been already alleged in that consideration out
of the 16. Chap. of S. Matthew. Who say you I am? Simon Peter answered, and
said, Thou art Christ the son of the living God.

Out of the song of Zachary: that is in the 1. Chap. of S Luke.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his
people.

And has raised up the horn of salvation unto us in the house of his servant
David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which were since the
world began, that we should be saved from our enemies, etc.

Out of the 2. Chap. of S. Luke, being the song of Simeon.

Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. For
mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of
all thy people, a light to be revealed unto the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel.

Out of the 1. of S. John.

The Law was given by Moses: but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

This is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

Simon said, we have found the Messiah, that is as much to say, as Christ.

A Meditation out of Chrysostom upon this place of the 1. of S. John: All we
of his fullness have received grace for grace.
WIthout Jesus Christ we can find no grace: and if we do think to draw
any thing without him, those are as it were dead Cysternes: But behold a good
spring, and a flowing fountain, to wit, our Lord Jesus Christ. For yt he has,
he has it not by love or by participation, as other creatures have: but he
has it as the spring and fullness of all good things. O what comfort is it,
in that this fullness is not shut up, or hid for Christ only, but that it is
opened unto us, to the end that out of the same may be powered upon us all
those graces which for us are necessary. And yet there is much more. For let
us draw from hence so much as we will: yet, all plenty and fullness daily
remains in Christ, and he does never lessen any whit his abundance in
giving unto us: and thus he does even fill us again with the floudes of his
graces. For the Prophets and Apostles have all drawn of this fountain: To be
short: Man has nothing except that which proceeds from this fullness. O Lord
blessed are those which have this good hap to participate of this. For thou
Lord art not nigardlie in thy gifts. Thou give unto us grace upon grace.
Thy blessings are manifoldlie heaped up, and they are sovereign. As soon as
thou give us forgiveness of our sins, so soon thou do bestow upon us
everlasting life. So that one grace follows upon an other. For as much then
O heavenly father as thou do store us with so excellent riches, give unto
us grace, O good God, to honor thee: and also to despise the world, that has
not this fullness of grace, that we may for evermore depend upon thy great
mercy.

Upon this place out of first Chap. of S. John.

No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son, which is in the
bosom of his father, he has declared him.

CONSIDERATION.
WHat makes this for us, will some say, if ye do assure you to believe that
out of the divine fullness, all abundance of grace is given unto us? Who is
he that has seen God? Who was his counselor? Esaiah. 6.
It is the son who has revealed him to us, who was with the Father from
everlasting. Now as touching us, we alas never saw God. Exodus 33.
For the very Angels do hide their faces before him. And man unless that he
died could never see his majesty: yea, man such as he is on the earth, a
sinner and mortal. But oh, happy and blessed shall that day be, 1. John. 3.
and this hour ought to be desired of us, when as we shall see this great
God, such as he is: with a soul altogether clean, and a glorified body. The
knowledge of God from henceforth is unto us, as Nazianzen says, in respect of
the spirit, as the sun is unto the body. This is a light well liking unto
us, but happy is the soul that shall see him face to face, and in seeing him,
shall live for evermore. In the meane-while, let us put our trust in the son,
who speaks in his Gospel of that which he has seen, and has partaken his
secrets unto us, John. 15.
as unto his friends and lovers.

Upon the 3. Chap. of S. John.

God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

MEDITATION.
S. Paul oftentimes says, how he would not boast but in Jesus, and the same
crucified. And in deed if man would consider these things at leisure, which
are contained in this sentence of S. John, he would easily agree with that
which S. Paul speaks, and should find, that there is no knowledge in the
world, that gives so much contentation, as the knowledge of Gods love through
Jesus Christ, in such sort as this sentence of S. John ought to be as a
precious, owel, which a man daily wears about his neck: even so ought we
to imprint in our hearts, this excellent witness of Gods love. For what are
men, that GOD loves them? What cause has the immortal, to love the poor
woormes of the earth? The righteous, to love sinners? The Master, the ingrate,
and unfaithful servants? Are we not of nature the children of wrath? Ought
he not without ceasing, rather to represent unto us the hatred and the just
anger of this mighty God, and that because of our corruption? And moreover, if
GOD had been affectioned to some just or excellent men, yet say I, this should
be greatly to debase him. But O divine love: Oh wonderful divinity. Thou
have loved the world, without considering any certain world, any Sex, any
Quality: yea, all the creatures which are come of the earth since Adam and
Eve, men and women, great and little, poor and rich, fools and wisemen. And
all the cause and occasion that thou have had to favor them, was not for their
beautiful eyes, but it was even thy great and extreme bounty. All their
righteousness is as an unclean cloth before him. Esaiah 64.
And their excellency is but as a flower, Esaiah. 40.
which withers and fades from day to day. Therefore, it has pleased thee O
God to love man. But what, say I to love? What tongue shall not judge himself
insufficient: yea, what heart shall not be unable, to deduct or comprehend
this so great a love, which has brought thee to give one only and innocent
son to death, and that to give life unto those creatures that are so
unthankful and so corrupted? Where is it, that one shall find a man in this
world, that will pledge himself, even to suffer death for an other, were he
his friend, and an honest man? Truly it is very rare. But what? O Lord, thou
have done truly more: For thou have not given an Angel, or an Archangell,
but thou have given thy only son unto a sorrowful and most shameful
death, for to redeem thy enemies, that were revolted from thee: but alas,
wherefore is not this friendship alike? Wherefore do we not love thee with a
burning desire, as thou have loved us? Wherefore complain we of a little
earth lost in thy Service: and thou have not co^playned at all of the death of
thy well-beloved son of thy delight, when the question was of our redemption?
When a prince does not give us his good countenance and favor, then we are
sore troubled and grieved: and yet in respect thereof we make, ah alas, but
small reckenning of thy love, which art the king of kings, and the eternal
God. Therefore that which we do want, is, that we do not sufficiently taste
how much the Lord is good and sweet. Seeing now O Lord that thy love is
endless, grant us hearts, that may comprehend his infinite goodness, and
that we may forthwith feel therein an endless comfort, which may swallow up
all the sorrows of this wretched life. So be it.

Out of the 6. of S. John.

Simon Peter answered Jesus,

Master, to whom shall we go?

Thou have the words of eternal life.

And we believe and know that thou art the Christ the son of the living God.

Out of the 3. Chap. of the first to Timothy.

Without all gainsaying, great is the mystery of godliness, to wit, that
God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and ascended up in glory.

Out of the 4. Chap. of the first Epistle of S. John.

Hereby know ye the spirit of God.

Every spirit, that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God.

And every spirit which confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom you have
heard how that he should come, and now already he is in the world.

And we have seen and do testify, that the father sent the son to be the
Savior of the world.

Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and
he in God. And we have known and believed the love that GOD has in us.

Here follows: Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin
Marie.
CONSIDERATION.
THis is not unto us, as says S. Basyl, in a Sermon which he made of Jesus
Christ's humane nature, neither for us, much to inquire, how Christ is come
down here below: And wherefore God is served with such a mean rather than
with any other: For thou man (says he) thou wast lost, and so recoiledst
back from the face of thy God, that thou could not come near thereunto.
Since now that he is so humbled and brought low to come unto thee, would thou
dispute much thereuppon? Rather acknowledge in all humbleness, this blessing
of ye son of God, yea and with as great affection as thou can or may: who
is according to the everlasting divine nature engendered by the Father, not
made, nor created, as it is said in Athanasius Creed, both without Mother and
without beginning: but is according to the humane nature a like unto us, sin
excepted, begotten of a woman, and the son of David: In such manner as
Sedulius says in a Hymme, The creator of the world has taken shape of a
servant, to the end that he might redeem our flesh through his flesh, and
that those should not perish whom he had created. Therefore, behold two
natures, but knit together in such sort, as there is but one only Savior:
even as the soul and the body are gathered together in one only man, in the
mean time keeping their proprieties as it is known, that some proprieties are
of the body, and others of the soul: but let a man mark the^, and put a
difference between those proprieties, yet does he not therefore separate the
body from the soul. The scriptures then, and also the ancient Doctors,
speaking of Jesus Christ, have sometimes respect unto ye propriety of the
natures: And then it is said: that Christ knew not ye hour of Judgment, when
he was wrapped up in swaddling bands, when he did increase in all wisdom:
and had respect but unto the humane nature. Sometimes that he is the Image and
brightness of his father, that he will be with us even unto the end of the
world: 1. Cor. 2.
having respect unto his nature and divine Majesty. And sometimes the
scripture does consider these two natures of Christ knit together. When it is
said, that the Lord of glory was crucified. Wherefore? Because that Christ
has yet suffered in the flesh. Yet so it is, that he who has suffered, was
the Lord of glory. For this flesh is knit with the eternal word of the
personal union. So it is said, that God has redeemed us by his blood: Acts.
20.
because that this blood is the blood of this body, which is knitte with the
son of God. As we do say for the union of the body with the soul, when a
man is dead, albeit that there is but the least part dead, to wit, the body,
the soul being as we know immortal. From whence heresies do proceed.
This is to be noted: because ye most part of heresies do come forth in that,
whereas either a man confoundes the natures of Christ, or that one sundereth
the natures, and they leave not this ground or this foundation that we have in
the scripture, to wit, that there is but one Christ. And that this Christ is as
mediator knit unto two natures, and to acknowledge them, it is necessary that
the proprieties do remain. For how should we know the humane nature, if it
were invisible, and in all places as some dream? What God should Jesus be, if
he were created, even as Arritus did blaspheme? The humane nature therefore of
Christ has reciued great prerogatives, Prerogatives of Christ's humane nature.
as to be sanctified from the beginning by the holy Ghost, to be knit with the
divine nature, and to abide in the same: so as of this man, it is said, that
he is the son of God: as in having all fullness of grace, all treasures of
wisdom in the eternal word, which is declared and laid abroad in ye
humane nature, and so far forth as was needeful, and might bring to him. To
be short, we must hold that as the humane nature taken to the son of God,
has not weakened the divinity: So has not the divinity swallowed up the
deity, nor consumed the humanity, as the Schuencfeldians thought. For our
savior is true God, and man, and not a man deified. Moreover, we must have
daily remembrance of our religion, which is faith, whereunto all curiosities
are contrary: These mysteries as this is the greatest of all, and the true
secret of God, having ordained that his everlasting son should take upon him
humane nature, that in our flesh he might make satisfaction for our sins.
These mysteries I say, we do believe them, when as all humane reason, all
discourse, and all the world would say or think to the contrary. And in
thus believing, we are not lead by opinion, or ill grounded, but assured of a
most certain knowledge, that is more surer than all the sciences of the world,
because that it proceeds from the show of the spirit of God.

Here follow certain goodly places of the conception and birth of Jesus
Christ, out of the 1. Chap. of S. Luke.

THe Angel said unto Marie: Lo, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a
son, and shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the
son of the most high: and the Lord God shall give unto him, the throne of
his father David.

And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
shall be none end.

Then said Marie unto the Angel: how shall this be, seeing I know not man?

The Angel answered and said unto her, the holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most high shall ouershadowe thee, therefore also that holy
thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God.

Therefore behold three great prerogatives in this child that is given unto
us.

First, this person is the son of God.

Secondly, eternal king, and established for Messiah, and true restorer of the
throne of David, and of the Church, head and chief thereof, that which a man
cannot speak of any creature.

Thirdly, he is the holy, as many times he is so called in the prophets, and
has in such sort taken our nature, as he has made it holy from his mothers
womb. This conception therefore by the holy Ghost, is not that the spirit had
been as the father, or as if his body were of a spiritual substance: But the
Angel says, that which seemed impossible that a virgin should conceive,
shall be done by the virtue of Gods spirit, to whom nothing is hard, and the
same spirit shall make, the virgin not alonely to conceive and bear a son:
but also to conceive and bear him, which shall be holy, and making holy all
mankind, making holy the nativity and conception of all those that are of his
faithful and chosen. Wherefore Christ was baptized.
For that that he was baptized, and circumcised, was not in the respect of him
that he had need of it, he who washed and circumcised our hearts: but because
that he had brought himself under the law in our name, and being made our
pledge, had charged upon him our sins, to make us learn, in what reverence
we ought to have the Sacraments.

Out of the 1. of S. John, ver. 14.

This word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof:
I say the glory, as of the only begotten son of the father, full of grace
and truth.

Out of the 1. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans.

God which had promised heretofore the Gospel, concerning his son, which
was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and declared mightily
to be the son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification and by the
resurrection from the dead, that is to say, our savior Jesus Christ.

Out of the 16. Chap. of the Romans.

To him now that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel and
preaching of Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began:

But now is opened and published among all nations by the scriptures of the
prophets at the commandment of the everlasting God, for the obedience of
faith: To God I say only wise, be praise for ever.

Out of the 4. Chap. of the Epistle to the Galathians.

When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman,
and made under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of the sons.

Out of the 2. Chap. of the Epistle to the Philippians.

Let the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus, who being in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God. But he made
himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was
made like unto man, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross.

Out of the second Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
him self likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death
him that had the power of death, that is the devil. And that he might deliver
all them, which for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

For he in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.
Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be merciful, and a faithful high priest in things concerning God,
to the end he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

Borne of the virgin Marie.
The history of the Lords Nativity we have it with all the circumstances
thereof in the 2. Chap. of S. Luke.

How he was borne under Octauian Augustus the Emperor. Borne in Beth-lehem
the city of David, was wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a cratch: for
he became poor, to make us rich. 2. Cor. 8. Chap.

This birth was by the Angels declared to the sheepeheardes.

Moreover the wise men of the East were guided by a star unto Beth-lehem. 2.
of S. Matthew.

A MEDITATION upon the conception and birth of Jesus Christ after the flesh.
WHo is he that would not desire to behold with all reverence, and with great
wonder, this mighty mystery of our God, concerning the incarnation of Jesus
Christ, and our redemption: seeing that the very Angels, desire to look
thereon, as S. Peter speaks, in his 1. Chap. 1. Epistle? For it is the Gospel
that does declare and reueile this hidden secret, Romans 16.
at all times figured through diverse ceremonies, and truly fulfilled in the
latter days. O that so many kings, patriarks and prophets have desired to see
him: but now men make little account of this so great a secret. O how beautiful
are the feet of them that do declare unto us this Gospel of peace. O and how
much are the heretics to be abhorred, yt would turn away from us the
knowledge of this Christ, true God and man: who has not done this honor unto
the Angels, to take upon him their nature, and to redeem them which were
fallen: but has showed this favor unto us poor^ worms of the earth, Psalm. 51.
as to take on him our nature. We, alas, are conceived in sin, and in
iniquity: But the holy of the Lord, which was conceived by the working of the
holy spirit, is come into the world, to sanctify and save us. Ephesians. 2.
We are borne the children of wrath: But the well-beloved of the heavenly father,
was given for us: and now is our nature in honor and grace, because that the
everlasting word was made flesh: not leaving that which it was, but taking unto
him that, that he was not, that is to say, our nature. ^. John. 1.
O what an excellent word: considering that is spoken of it, that it was and
did always rest with God, as the second person of the divinity: but if a man
have respect unto his essence, it was, and is God as S. John says in the same
place. And that it is so, all things have been made by it, the life, the
light, and all fullness is in it. By it has the Lord spoken, and reueiled the
secrets of Paradise. But what is it, that this has taken and knit with him
this word? Our flesh. And what is our flesh? Flesh.
When as ye scripture would speak of our poorness, it calls us flesh, as
in the 78. Psalm: And the Lord remembered that they were but flesh. Howsoever
that Jesus had taken upon him all our nature, that is to say, the body and the
soul, as he is the redeemer of all mankind: yet so it is, that we be but
flesh, and rottenness. He has not therefore taken this flesh, which was
sinful, or the affection and passions of the flesh: but the substance, the
weaknesses, and the alterations, that are in the flesh, here withal did he
charge himself. He was not then ashamed of us, as ye Schuencfeldians think yt
it should be to debase him too much, if it were said, yt he had bin made flesh.
For the scripture says the same, that he was made flesh, that is yet a more
vile word, than the word creature. But as S. Bernarde says. The more that
thou considerest the humility of Christ, so much the more see thou thy
glory, and the honor that God has done unto thee, how also God has exalted
thee, and has given thee a name above all names: in such sort, as they that
forsake and despise thee, shall one day feel that they shall have to do, not
with any poor creature, but with the king of kings, and with the judge of
this world.

A prayer of S. Jerome, concerning the incarnation of Jesus Christ.
O Lord Jesus thou art my God, and my savior that have suffered for me. And
although thou were true God, before all ages, begotten everlastingly of the
father, and of an unsearchable generation: yet would thou to be conceived in
the womb of a virgin, and to be made man like unto me: and in such manner, as
thou art true God and true man. For thou have in such sort taken humane nature
in the virgins womb, as thou art God and man, so as the divinity is not the
humanity, neither the humanity the divinity. Thy two natures are not
confounded, and yet do they make one and the self same person.

O eternal word, that was made flesh to become our brother. Thou have had
hunger and thirst. Thou have taken our weakness upon thee, sin excepted,
which did never enter in thee, as we bare it even from our mothers womb. Now
in thee O Lord dwells bodily all fullness of grace and divinity. Thou art
made less than the father, if a man do respect thy humanity. And if one do
consider thy divinity, thou art equal unto him: and now, that thou have
debased thy self, he does acknowledge thee for his well-beloved son. O good
savior have mercy on thy brethren: come unto them and dwell in them.

A prayer concerning Jesus Christ, for to know him rightly.
O Lord my God, seeing thou have provided for us so precious a gift, giving
unto us thy son Jesus, fill my soul with the feeling of his bounty: kindle
in me a true desire of thy dear son, and of his grace: quench in me all
evil affections: neither suffer that my soul be vexed by worldly cares, but
lift it up O Lord, and draw it unto a perpetual meditating of thy son my
redeemer. Let his name be in my mouth: let his mercy be shed in my heart, to
run through all my bones and marowe: and that I may never taste any other thing,
than this good savior, that is dead for me. Grant me also grace, to correct my
manners, and take away from me that which displeases thee, for to give me
that which is agreeable and pleasing unto thee. Alas, who shall make man clean
that is conceived in uncleanness, if he be not washed and made righteous by
thy son Jesus? My health lies in thee good GOD, and my weakness is before
thee. Heal this, and by thy grace grant unto me the other. For it is thou
that healest the infirmities, and keep them that are healed, and all through
thy mercy.

An other prayer on the same matter.
O Lord, if our eyes be so tender and weak, that they be not able to bear
the light of the sun: how can we (alas) behold thee, if thou had not
declared thy self in thy son, which is the eternal word, and brightness
of thy glory?

O wonderful secret, that is not understood by man's wisdom, the which is
come out of the heavenly closet. This is it that GOD was made man: the
everlasting is made mortal: he that was not subject to suffer, was made
subject to suffer: the master to abide the death for his servants: and he
which ought nothing has paid the debt, to set us poor sinners free. O the
great goodness of our savior, to abide and suffer so much for us: O great
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to overcome death. Hell had thought to have
swallowed him up: but it is he that has overcome hell. And in such manner it
is come to pass therein, as unto fishes, the which are taken when they think
to take the bait: even so death taking our redeemer was himself taken. And
now Lord, who is he that will not trust in thee, seeing that thy son is
risen again on the third day, so gloriously and tryumphauntly: seeing that
he is ascended above all the highest heavens, and has delivered man from his
captivity, to make him way even unto the heavenly dwelling place? It is there
where he sits on thy right hand, and where we do worship him with thee
the father, and with the holy Ghost the comforter of the afflicted.

This is thy son our Lord who is our life, and our resurrection. This is the
hope, and trust of the afflicted: this is our light in our darkness: this is
the dew of our thirsty souls. This is he that does strengthen us in our
weaknesses: and that heals our wounds. We are sinners, but our sin is
not so great and mighty as is his mercy. We be wanderers in this world, but
he is our shephearde, and we do awaite upon him with a most earnest desire,
that our bodies may be alike unto his glorious body, and that we may O
mighty God behold thy face.

A prayer and meditation upon the birth of Jesus Christ, taken out of the 15.
Chap. of the Meditations of S. Augustine.
O Exceeding goodness, O inestimable love of thee my God, who have given thy
son to redeem thy servant. God was made man, that man being lost, should be
redeemed out of the devils paws. It must be O Lord true, that thy son Jesus
has right tenderly loved mankind, seeing yt he has not alonely brought him
self so low, to be willing to become man, and to be borne of a virgin: but
did willingly yield himself, unto the punishment of the cross, and that for
our salvation. The good savior is come unto us: he by his goodness is come,
to seek out that which was lost: he has sought out the lost sheep, and
having found him, he has taken him upon his shoulders, to carry him unto the
sheep fold. O good Lord: O true shephearde: O wonderful charity. And who
is he that may hear these things, without being astonished from the bowelles
of this mercy? Who will not marvel thereat, or rather rejoice therein, in
that thou have so much loved us? Lord, thou have sent thy son in the
likeness of a sinful man, that he who was without sin, might overcome
sin, and that we might of thy righteousness rejoice in him. For he it is
that is the true Lamb without spotte, and that has taken away the sins of
the world, and that in dying has destroyed death, and in rising again has
brought life.

But alas, O Lord what shall I yield unto thee, for these so excellent
benefits? What praises, what thanksgiving shall I give unto thee O Lord?
Although we should be indewed with the knowledge of Angels, yea, though all
our members should be turned into tongues, yet should we be insufficient,
and unworthy to praise so great a loving kindness: for thy inestimable
charity, that thou have showed unto us poor and unworthy creatures, does
overcome all knowledge: Because that thy son has not taken the seed of
Angels, but of Abraham being made like unto us, sin excepted. Therefore,
having taken humane nature, and glorifying it, and through his resurrection
decking it with immortality, he has lifted up him self above all heavens,
and has placed him at thy right hand: where he is, he that is thy son,
worshipped and feared of Angels. Now behold my comfort and my hope, and we
all have a portion in his flesh. And since that he, that has taken our flesh
reigns with it, I do believe that I shall reign: because that my flesh is
glorified in the person of Christ, we shall be also glorified. Albeit that my
sins may let me therein, yet will this conjunction that I have with Christ
take away the lettes. My God is not so rigorous and severe, to despise man,
seeing he has carried man and the humane nature up on high. How should he
forget that that he has with him? Truly this good Lord is gentle and
loving, and loves his flesh. And if the Father love his son, as in deed he
loves him, he also loves all ye which does appertain unto him, so that
from henceforth, we be as raised up in Christ. We be already seated in the
kingdom of God: since that the humane nature is gone up thither with Christ.
No man has ever hated his own flesh. We be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh. Oh that this is a great secret says the Apostle, this of Christ and of
his Church. O wonderful thing, that the conjunction of humane nature is made
with ye divine, without changing of natures, and also without any confusion of
persons therein. For Christ has so knit the natures together, as he both God
and man, is in divine substance but one person, with the father and the holy
ghost. O strange thing: we were not worthy to be servants, and now we be
children and coheires with Christ. And now I pray thee good God, grant me
grace in good ernest, to acknowledge thy virtue that I may with a burning
desire love thee all the days and time of my life, and that my faith, be
stayed on my redeemer, who was seen in the world, and was lifted up into
glory.

It Follows: Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified dead and buried, he
descended into hell.
CONSIDERATION.
Ye need not to marvel, that in this Article of our faith, we do pass
from his nativity unto his death. For first, all his life was a preparatiue
unto death, and a perpetual passion. Secondly, the death and passion of Jesus
was the true witness of his obedience, and then was ended this true Sacrifice,
that has abolished sin and death. Even as the ancient high Priests did
take of the people that which they had to sacrifice: so has he also taken of
us our nature, and this body, which he has sacrificed on the cross, being
the sacrifice and the sacrificer. Therefore, he had will to suffer truly in
our flesh, and to die, that in him we might have life: And that we may live
and die in him, daily dying to the world and to vice, to live unto all
righteousness, and to his glory who has redeemed us. Death, the grave, and
hell, are very terrible things, yea more than terrible: But Jesus Christ has
triumphed over death, and arising again, he has sanctified our graves, and
has by his virtue overcome the sorrows of hell, and has broken all the
boltes and chains, to make free, and to set in safety all his elect, so as
there is no condemnation unto those that do believe in him. Romans 8.
Away with these sacrifices of these popish Priests, seeing that this true
sacrifice made with the shedding of the blood of the Lamb without spot, John.
1.
takes away all the sins of the world.

Places of the holy scripture, testifying the death and passion of Jesus
Christ.
Out of the Prophecy of David, 22. Psalm.

For Dogs have compassed me and the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me,
they pierced my hands and my feet.

I may tell all my bones: yet they behold and look upon me.

According to the exposition of some: as if the should have said: he shall not
be overwhelmed with troubles and sorrows. For he is the everliving son of of
God, and of an everlasting generation. But this is for our sins and by the
counsel of God that it should happen unto him.
They part my garments among them, and cast lottes upon my vesture.

Out of the 69. Psalm.

I was constrained to restore that which I took not.

They gave me gall in my meat: and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

A prophecy of the death and passion of Jesus Christ.

Out of the 53. Chap. of Esaiah.

Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet did we
judge him as plagued, and smitten of God. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chasticement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed. All we like Sheep
have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way: and the Lord
has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth: he is
brought as a sheep unto the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearer is
dumme, so he opens not his mouth. He was taken out from prison and from
judgment. And who shall declare his age? For he was cut out of the land of
the living, and for the transgression of my people was he plagued. And he made
his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had
done no wickedness, Unto the rich,
neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet the Lord would break him and make
him subject to many infirmities, This was Joseph of Arimathe.
when he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed
and shall prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

Of the abasing of Jesus Christ in this world, Daniel also has prophesied in
the 9. Chap. and 26. verse.
ANd after threescore and two weeks, shall Christ be slain, and shall have
nothing, and some do translate, there shall none remain to help him, or he
shall be altogether made of none effect.

This death of Christ was figured by the offering of weathers and Lambs, and
likewise by the offering that Abraham made of his son Isaac in the 22. of
Genesis: The brazen serpent.
and by the brazen serpent set up in the wilderness, whom those that did
behold, were delivered from the venomous bitings of serpents: as it is written
in the 21. Chapter of Nombers. This brazen serpent did signify, that Christ
should take the form of a sinner, and should be notwithstanding without
sin. That which was set up on a tree, did signify that Jesus Christ should
be lifted up upon a cross: as we do read it in the 3. of Saint John: As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness: so must the son of man be
lifted up: That whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have eternal
life.

And to show in deed that it was not in the brazen serpent, that had any
virtue annexed to it, but that we ought to look more high: King Ezechias
seeing how the people did go a whoring after this Serpent, ^. King. 1^
he brake it in pieces, and named it Nehustan, that is to say, a vile thing,
and worth nothing.

The history of the passion and death of Jesus Christ, we have drawn out by
the four Evangelists, especially in the 22. and 23. of S. Luke.
THe causes of the passion and death of Jesus Christ, The causes of Christ's
death.
were first the unchangeable counsel and providence of GOD: as it is said in
the second of the Acts and the 23. verse, He was delivered by the determinate
counsel of God. And again the love of God toward mankind: God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten son as says S. John in the 3.
Chapter. And we do read in the 5. Chap. to the Ephesians and the 25. verse,
how he also loved us, and gave himself willingly for us. If we must come
unto other outward causes of this death, and which be inferior: there is the
hatred of the devil, and the enmity, whereof it is spoken in the 3. Chap. of
Genesis, between the serpent and the seed of the woman. There is likewise the
envy of the Scribes and Pharisees: as it is written in the 27. Chap. of S.
Matthew and 18. verse. There is the cruelty of the Jews and the treason of
Judas, as S. Steeuen reprocheth them in the 7. Chap. of the Acts, that they
were traitors, and murderers of the just. Notwithstanding, these were our
sins that caused this death, as it is said in the 4. Chap. to the Romans. For
our sins was he delivered to the death.

The fruits and effects of the death and passion of Jesus Christ.
Out of the 12. Chap. of S. John, Jesus answered them saying, the hour is
come, that the son of man must be glorified. Verily, verily I say unto you,
except the wheat corn fall into the ground and die it bideth alone: but if it
die, it brings forth much fruit.

Out of the 3. Chap. to the Romans.

The righteousness of GOD is made manifest, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all and upon all that do believe. For there is no difference, for all have
sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: Justification in the blood of
Jesus.
And are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus,

Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood.

Out of the 6. Chap. to the Romans.

If we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be
to the similitude of his resurrection, knowing this that our old man is
crucified with him, To die unto sin
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. For he that is dead, is freed from sin: wherefore if we be dead
with Christ, we believe that we shall live also with him.

Out of the 8. Chap. to the Romans.

What shall we then say to these things? if God be on our side, who can be
against us? Who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death.
How shall he not with him, give us all things also?

Out of the first to the Corinthians 6. Chap.

Ye are bought for a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit: for they are Gods.

Out of the 2. to the Corinthians. 5. Chap.

God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their
sins unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. And he
has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, (to wit because that
our sins were imputed unto him, and for them was made a sacrifice) that we
should be made the righteousness of God in him: that which came also by
imputation.

Out of the 2 Chap. of the Epistle to the Galathians.

For I through the law am dead to the law: and that I might live unto GOD I
am crucified with Jesus Christ.

Thus I live yet: not I now, but Christ lives in me: And in that that I now
live in the flesh, I live in the faith by the son of God, who has loved me
and given himself for me.

Out of the 5. Chap. to the Galat.

They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and the
lusts.

Out of the 6. Chap. of the Galathians.

The cross of Christ.
God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me.

Out of the 5. Chap. to the Ephesians.

Walk in love even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, to
be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

Out of the 5. Chap. to the Ephesians, verse 25.

Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it,
and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word: that he might make it
to himself a glorious Church, etc.

Out of the first Chap. of the Epistle to the Colos. verse 19.

It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell.

And by him to reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at peace through
the blood of his Cross both the things in earth and the things in heaven.

And you which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your minds
were set on evil works: he has now also reconciled in the body of his flesh
through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in his
sight, if ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith.

Out of the 2. Chap. to the Colossians.

He has quickened you together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses:
in putting out the handwriting of ordinances that were against us: he even
took it out of the way and fastened it upon the cross. Wherefore if ye be
dead with Christ, from the ordinances of the world, why, as though ye lived in
the world, are ye burdened with traditions? As touch not, taste not, handle not.

Out of the first Epistle to the Thessalonians 2. Chap.

Ye are become followers of the Churches of God which in Judea are in Christ
Jesus: because ye have also suffered the same things of your own countriemen,
even as they have of the Jews who have likewise killed the Lord Jesus.

Out of the first of Timothy 6. Chap.

I charge thee in the sight of God, who quickens all things: and before
Jesus Christ, which under Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession: that thou
keep this commandment without spot and unrebukable, until the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Out of the second of Timothy 2. Chap.

This saying is true, if we be dead with him, we also shall live with him. If
we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he also will deny
us.

Out of the 9. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Christ being come a high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, that is not of this building, neither
by the blood of Goats, and Calves: But by his own blood entered he in once
unto the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. For if the blood
of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinckeling them that are
unclean, sanctifies as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more
shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit offered himself
without spot unto God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God?

And for this cause is he ye mediator of the new Testament, that through
death, which was for the redemption of the transgressions that were in the
former Testament, they which were called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance.

And in the 24. verse.

Jesus is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands, which
are similitudes of the true sanctuary: But is entered into very heaven, to
appear now in the sight of God for us, not that he should offer himself
often, as the high Priest entered into the holy place every year with other
blood (for then must he have often offered since the foundation of the world:)
but now in the end of the world has he appeared once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself.

So was he once offered to take away the sins of many, etc.

Out of the 10. to the Hebrews

For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.

Out of the first Epistle of S. Peter, the 3. Chap.

It is better (if the will of God be so,) that ye suffer for well doing,
than for evil doing.

For Christ once has suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God: and was put to death concerning the flesh, but was quickened
in the spirit.

Out of the 4 Chap. of the first of S. Peter.

Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, which is, that he who suffered in the flesh has
ceased from sin, that he henceforward should live (as much time, as remains
in the flesh) not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.

Also in the 13. verse.

Rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's suffering, that when his
glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice.

A prayer on the death and passion of Jesus Christ.
O Lord my God, since that this fair and goodly Image according to which man
was created, was thus through sin disfigured, draw me near unto thy son
Jesus, in whom thou have created us as it were anewe. Acknowledge in me thy
work, and blot out that which is not thine. Behold not that which is from me,
or from Satan: Look O Lord upon the humanity of thy son, to take pity on
mine infirmities: Consider the punishment of the redeemer, and forgive him his
sins, whom he has bought again. Wherefore was it, that he who was so
obedient, should suffer punishment of disobedience, unless it were to save us?
This is he, who is the good shepherd, who has brought home the straying
sheep, and has presented before thy face those that were straglers and
runagates, by means of their sins. O good God, therefore look upon thy
dear son spread abroad upon the cross, bow down thy head to see thy poor
creatures, for the love of whom, thy well-beloved yielded up his spirit upon the
cross, and has bowed down his head.

Behold his wounded hands, and forgive the offenses of our hands. See his
innocent side, whereout ran blood and water in the day of his passion. Alas
good God, wilt not thou content thy self with so precious and dear a payment,
as was paid for our offenses? Behold the feet pearsed with nails, which
never walked but in thy laws, and in thy obedience, and have compassion upon
us, which have walked in the way of sinners: O glorious passion, that have
slain our enemy Satan, and have purchased for us so great a friend even the
eternal God. O what an exchange is made, through this blessed and happy
Passion, when as everlasting life is offered unto us, in stead of eternal
torment. Thy son went down to hell, His desceding into hell.
and has felt the horror and wrath that we had deserved, to exalt us into
heaven. O death where is thy strength? O hell where is thy dread and fear,
sith Christ has redeemed us from both? O good God grant me grace now, that as
thy son has suffered for my sake, so many torments and rebukes, that I
also may patiently abide punishment for his name. And as he was stripped out
of his garments, to go to the cross, so let me be unclothed of these worldly
cares, and uncovered of my fleshly affections, yea and above all, of pride and
of presumption, to be arrayed with a true faith, and with pitiful and hearty
affections toward my neighbors. And even as the same Jesus Christ did make a
free confession before Ponce Pilate, so likewise before all the judges of the
world, yea, before all men, let me also confess him, when I shall have need.
Pilate the unjust, O my God has condemned the just: But thou just Lord, have
mercy on me unjust, for thy sons sake unjustly condemned: who was hanged on
a tree, and made accursed, that I might be blessed in him and by him, granting
me grace daily to die to sin and to live to righteousness. So be it.

Errors contrary unto the before said Article of Jesus Christ's death.
They that think, how he has made a show to suffer, and has not truly
suffered in the flesh.

1. Pet. 3.18.
Item the Schuencfeldians that think, that the divine nature has suffered:
because that the son of God has suffered in the flesh, the divinity being
insufferable. They that seek other sacrifices and offeringes for sin, than
the only sacrifice of Christ once suffered on the cross for all.

Philip. 3.
They whose bellies is their God, which are enemies to the cross of Christ, and
would have a vellot Gospel.

They that live in all worldly wantonness not having any mortification.

They that do worship crosses of wood, stone or of silver, in steed to
worship and honor him, that was crucified, and in place to bear the true
cross, which they do cause the poor martyrs to carry. To be short, these
here tread under their feet the blood of the covenant, as it is said in the
10. Chap. to the Hebrews, that having the knowledge of the truth, do
willingly sin, neither will they amend their lives.

The third day he rose from the dead.
A prayer and meditation upon the Lords rising again.
NOw praised be God, since that which was esteemed most to be feared of the
world, very death, is now overcome and destroyed.

Praised be the Lord, by whom death has lost her sting, and that there is no
more condemnation for us.

Now it is that sin is overcome, since that Christ is risen. For seeing that
he was our pledge, if death had yet any power against us, it had kept our
pledge. But for so much as he is risen and was not kept in the grave, we see
how he has destroyed death, and has brought life and immortality unto light
through the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.
Our righteousness is now manifested: for if the righteousness of Christ that
was given and imputed unto us, had not been perfect, he had still been kept
by death and hell: For death is ye reward of sin. Romans. 6.
Let us therefore, rejoice for such a savior, Romans 4.
yt was dead for our sins, and is risen again for our Justification.

This is the cause why the Evangelists and the Apostles have made thereof so
often mention, as is to be seen in the 2. Chap. of the Acts, and in the 15.
Chap. of the first to the Corinth. O Lord give us also grace, that we be not
drawn away, in the desire of earthly things, neither yet to be buried in
worldly cares, but that being risen again with thy son Jesus, we may seek
the things from above, Colos. 3.
even until such time as our bodies be raised also, at the last coming of
Jesus Christ.

The history of the resurrection, is right diligently brought forth by the
Evangelists, Matthew. 27.
to show the folly of the Scribes and Pharisees, who having rolled a great
stone on the tomb, thought to let this rising again and moreover to hide it:
afterward they gave money that they should say how he was taken up by his
disciples.
THis was the cause wherefore he was yet conversant in the world 40. Christ's
appearinges.
days after his resurrection: and appeared unto his, diverse times showing
them his hands, feet, and wounds. S. Mark makes mention that he appeared
three sundry times, and that the Angel declared his rising. First he did
appear to Marie Magdalene: the second time he did appear unto two that were
in the way going into the fields: the third^ time, unto the eleven, that were
sitting at a table. Likewise S. John 20. Chapter, S. Luke. 24. do make mention
of three appearinges, and S. Matthewe in the 28. of two appearings. S. Paul in
the 15. Chap. 1. Epistle to the Corinth. recites many appearings, and how he
was likewise seen to mo than 500. brethren. But specially he appeared unto S.
Peter, that had denied him, as we read in the 24. of S. Luke. and in the 15.
of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

The fruits and effects of Jesus Christ his resurrection.
Out of the 2. Chap. of the Acts.

Psalm. 16.
Whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was
impossible that he should be holden of it: for David speaks of him.

I have set the Lord always before me: for he is at my right hand, therefore
I shall not slide. Wherefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices: my flesh
also does rest in hope. For thou will not leave my soul in the grave, neither
will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Thou will show me the path
of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy.

Men and brethren, I may boldly speak unto you, of the patriarch David, that
he is both dead and buried and his sepulcher remains with us unto this day.
Therefore seeing he was a prophet, and knew yt God had sworn with an oath to
him, that of the fruit of his loins, he should raise up Christ concerning the
flesh to set him upon his throne: He knowing this before, spoke this of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in grave, neither his
flesh to see corruption. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are
witnesses.

Out of the 5. Chap. of the Acts, 30. verse.

The God of our fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a
tree. Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a prince and a savior,
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins: And we are his
witnesses concerning these things which we say: yea and the holy Ghost, who
God has given to them that obey him.

Out of the 14. Chap. to the Romans.

Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: whether we live or die we are the Lords. For Christ therefore died and
rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the
quick.

Out of the 6. Chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

God has also raised up the Lord, and shall raise us up by his power.

Out of the 15. Chap. and the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

Now if it be preached, that Christ is risen from the dead, how say some among
you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? For if there be no
resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. And if Christ be not risen
then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.

Out of the 4. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinthians.

We know that he which has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by
Jesus, and shall set us with you.

Out of the 1. Chap. to the Ephesians.

The Lord give unto you the spirit of revelation to understand the exceeding
greatness of his power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from ye
dead, etc.

Out of the 3. Chap. to the Colossians.

If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at ye right hand of God. Set your affections on things which are
above, and not on things which are on the earth.

Out of the 2. Chap. of the Second to Timothy.

Remember that Jesus Christ made of the seed of David, was raised again from
the dead according to my Gospel: wherein I suffer trouble as an evil dooer
even unto bonds.

S. Peter in the 3. Chap. of his first Epistle says that we have witnessed
with a good conscience before God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

He ascended into heaven.
CONSIDERATION.
How is it, that death should be overcome, if we had not an other life, or an
other hope, than in this vale of misery? And that we should here daily crawle
in this dwelling place of serpents and dragons? What is it to come forth of ye
grave, if a man did not but enter into the world, which is but a gulf and
bottomless pit of all evils? What had this been, if the children of Israel
had gone out of Egypt, and if they had not been guided into the promised
land flowing with milk and honnie? To the end therefore that our
deliverance might not be imperfect and maimed, and that we may know whereat
we must aim or level aright: to be short, that we may see that our heritage
is out of the power of ye prince of this world, and from all the children of
the world: this Jesus our Lord would ascend into heaven, and that in the
sight of all his Apostles, making his body to tryumphe, that a little before
was crucified, taking again the full possession of that glory, which was not
lost, John. 17.
but as it were hidden, when as he did abase himself to present unto God this
clensing Sacrifice for our sins. O Lord, what are we, that thou go up on
high to prepare for us a place? Alas, we be not worthy to live on the earth.
John. 17.
As our fathers in deed were driven out of the gardein, wherein thou had
placed them: so do thou now give unto us far better than that garden of
Edon, out of the which was Adam and Eve driven, when as in our name and with
our nature, thou take possession of the most high heavens, and of the manner
house of thy glory, to inuest us thy children therein: to the end that where
thou art, they may be there also. Alas Lord, is this reason, that thy
servants should be as well as their masters? But also good God thou have
done unto us this honor, to call us thy friends to whom thou have
communicated thy secrets: to call us (O Lord Jesus) thy brethren as we do
read in the 15. of S. John. I will say no more servants: for the servant
knows not what his master does: But I have called you friends: for all
things that I have heard of my father, have I made known to you. And in the
20. of S. John, where it is said unto Marie Magdalene: Go unto my brethren,
and tell them that I am gone up unto my father, and unto your father, unto my
God, and unto your GOD. O Lord, who shall comprehend sufficiently, and praise
thy goodness? For yt truly which thou have prepared to thine, are things that
the eye has not seen, 1. Corinthians.
neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart.

Give therefore unto us thy holy spirit, the which sounds all things, to the
end that we may understand and know those things that thou have given us,
and that in knowing them, we may account thereof, to forsake the earth and
aspire unto heaven, where our head is, and where there is true fullness of joy
and comfort. So be it.

The history of Jesus Christ his ascending is described unto us in the 16.
Chap. of S. Mark and 19. verse.

After that the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and
sat on the right hand of God.

In the 24. of S. Luke the 50. verse.

After he lead them out into Bethania, and lift up his hand and blessed them,
And it came to pass that as he blessed them, he departed from them, and was
carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him and returned to Jerusalem with
great joy.

In the first Chap. of the Acts, ver. 9.

And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld he was taken up: for a
cloud took him up out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward
heaven, as he went, behold two men stood by them in white apparel, which also
said: Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gasing into heaven? This Jesus which is
taken up from you into heaven so shall come as you have seen him go into
heaven.

Out of the 3. of the Acts, ver. 21.

Whom the heaven must contain, until the time that all things must be
restored which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets.

Out of the 10. to the Romans, ver. 6.

That righteousness which is by faith, speaks thus: Say not in thy heart,
who shall ascend into heaven? (that is to bring Christ from above) or who shall
descend into the deep? (that is to bring Christ again from the dead). But
what says it? The word is near thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart:
this is the word of faith which we preach. As if he said, that all doubts
are taken away by faith: and that the faithful are assured by Jesus Christ to
go up into heaven, and to enter into everlasting life.

Out of the 4. Chap. to the Ephesians, ver. 7.

Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ: wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he lead captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. Now in that he is ascended, what is it, but
yt he had also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? He that
descended is even the same that ascended, far above all heavens, that he
might fill all things.

A Meditation upon the said Text.
And although the benefits of our savior Jesus Christ shall truly be felt,
even now again in the life to come: Yet so it is that from henceforth we be
already quickened by faith and are as it were set with him in heavenly
places: as it is said in the 2. Chapter to the Ephesians, verse. 8. Moreover, I
pray you how great is this consolation, that we have not only our pleadge
already in heaven: but also our high priest, that makes intercession without
ceasing for us, even as it is written in the 7. Chapter to the Hebrews.
Furthermore S. Paul in this text out of the 4. Chap. to the Ephesians, where
in we be greatly comforted, when he says that our enemies, the world, the
flesh, and the devil, were lead away in tryumphe, when as Christ ascended up
into heaven. Wherefore should we then fear them? And this triumph was figured
by the tryumphes and victories, wherofare spoken in the 68. Psalm. But yet
that we may not be deprived from the presence of our savior, and that he is
not retired from us in such sort, as we should no more rejoice in him: S. Paul
declares unto us, how it was expedient, according as Christ had said in the
16. of S. John, that I go away, and no more bodily to be conversant in the
world. Because he had obtained for us many graces, whereof he storeth and
decketh his Churches, and is present with us, as it is declared afterward by
the ministers of his word, How Christ is present with us.
both the virtue and efficacy that he therein gives: to be short, he is
present with us, according as his spiritual kingdom bears him: and he being
our head, he does govern and guide us by his holy spirit, drawing us unto him
that we forsaking more and more, the world, and the earth, we may be made
citizens in ye kingdom of heaven, where he is and from whence we do awaite for
him to be our full deliverance. S. Augustine therefore says very well, in the 50.
treatise o^ S. John, and in the book of faith unto Peter, the 2. Chapter, If
any man ask, how I shall hold Christ now, which is absent: Send unto him
(says he) thy faith, and thou shall hold him. For our predecessors which
were in his time, have seen him and laid hold of him in the flesh: hold
thou him in thine heart. He truly has set his body in heaven: but he has
not withdrawn his majesty from the world. And he would as touching his
body be absent from us: to the end that our faith might be edified, which
could not be truly faith, if it did bodily see, and hold Christ here.

A prayer.
O Lord our God, vouchsafe through thy goodness and mercy to fill us here
full of thy graces, and join us together, through faith with thy son Jesus,
until that we be partakers of the fullness of thy glory, 1. These. 4.
when we shall be gathered together to be daily with the Lord.

And sits on the right hand of God the Father almighty.
CONSIDERATION
IN these Articles of our faith, there is nothing superfluous. For the article
going before does show unto us, that he was truly received into heaven:
which is the throne of God, Matthew. 5.
and the abode of the blessed: so that to ascend into heaven, is not a
vanishing away: or as some do interpret it by a figure, to ascend into
honor and high degree: but Christ is in heaven, from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead: and there where the place is for all the elect.
Lib. de fide and Symbolo.
Insomuch as S. Augustine says: As it is a curiousness to ask how, or in
what sort Christ is in heaven: so must we faithfully believe yt he is there.
But in the mean while, he is not there simply, as Henoche who was lifted
up, or Helie that was ascended thither: Gene 5. 2. King. 2.
or as the other his faithful members: but he is there as Head, and he is
there as he that is set on the right hand of his father. For Jesus Christ, as
the son of God, has had truly always all power in heaven, and in earth.
And now this Jesus, who has taken humane nature, this person that is true God,
and true man, governs all things and has a glory and empire above all
creatures, whereof it does not follow, as some railers think, that this his
humane nature is in all places and every where. For although that the right
hand of God, and his mightiness is infinite, yet is it not said, that he is
made the right hand of God, or that ye body of Christ is become the right
hand of God: but that he is set at his right hand.

Now to sit at the right hand of God, is not to spread his body throughout
all, but to govern all with the father. And likewise that which is spoken of
the whole person, cannot be particularly and simply understood of his humane
nature, which keeps always his properties. Furthermore, the scripture by
this sitting at the right hand of God, does not conclude, that the body of
Christ is throughout all: but that he is in heaven as it may appear by the
places following.

Out of the 26. of S. Matthew, verse 64.

Hereafter shall ye see the son of man, sitting on the right hand of the power
of God, and come in the clouds of heaven.

Out of the 16. of Mark.

Jesus was carried up into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God.

Out of the 2. Chap. of the Acts, verse 33.

To wit as Christ and by his might. For he was laid in the grave awaiting the
resurrection. How Christ sits at the right hand of God.
Since then that he by the right hand of God has bin exalted, and has
received of his father the promise of the holy Ghost, he has showed forth
this, which ye now see and hear. For David is not ascended into heaven, but
he says, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a
surety that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus I say whom ye
have crucified.

Out of the 5. of the Acts, verse 30.31.

The God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a
tree.

Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Lord, to
give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.

Out of the 7. of the Acts, and 55. verse.

S. Steven being full of the holy ghost looked steadfastly into heaven, and
saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.

Out of the 8. Chap. to the Romans, verse. 34.

Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather which is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us.

Out of the 1. Chap. to the Ephesians. verse. 20.

According to ye woorking of his mighty power, which is wrought in Christ, when
he raised him up from the dead, and set him at his right hand in the heavenly
places far above all principality and power, and might, and domination, and
every name that is named not in this world only, but also in that that is to
come. And has made all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him
over all things, to be the head to the Church.

Out of the 3. Chap. to the Colos. verse 1.

Seek those things which are above, where Christ sits a^ the right hand of
God.

Out of the first Chap. and the 3. verse to the Hebrews.

The son has by himself purged our sins and sits at the right hand of
the majesty in the highest places.

In the 13. verse.

Unto which also of the Angels said he at any time, sit at my right hand, til
I make thine enemies thy footestoole?

Out of the 8. Chap. to the Hebrews, verse 1.

We have such an high priest, that sits at the right hand of the throne of
the majesty in heaven, and is a Minister of the sanctuary and of the true
Tabernacle.

Out of the 10. to the Hebrews, verse 12.

This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever on
the right hand of God.

And from henceforth tarieth, till his enemies be made his footestoole.

Out of the 12. to the Hebrews, ver. 2.

Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at
the right hand of the Throne of God.

Out of the 3. Chap. and first Epistle of S. Peter, verse 22.

Christ is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, to whom the Angels and
powers, and might are subject.

A prayer.
O Lord my God, give me grace, never to be ashamed of the Cross of Christ,
seeing that he is exalted at thy right hand, and that he is the Lord of all
creatures: And seeing that thou have so much honored our nature, let me despise
all rebukes for thy name, and patiently awaite the hour, in the which all thy
enemies shall be made thy footestoole.

From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead.
MEDITATION.
OH the wonderful counsel of God, that he who was wickedlie judged under
Ponce Pilate, is established, not only a mediator and Savior, but also
judge of the quick and the dead: O Judge truly to be feared of all
unbelievers: John. 3.
For he that does not believe in thee, is condemned, and subject already to
perdition, Romans 8.
how proud and gallant soever he be: But yet to be desired, and awaited of
all the faithful, to whom there is no condemnation, for so much as they are
grafted in thee. Oh that diverse and many times, do the faithful lift up their
heads amongst these unjust and most tyrannous going forewardes of these wicked
Judges, in so many torments and persecutions, daily looking for such a
Judge, who will judge the causes of his little ones, and those that the world
treads under foot. Psalm. 12.
It is from heaven and not on the earth, that we must awaite for such a Judge,
who shall bring the hidden things, and shall do this honor unto his
servants, that they shall be as his benchars, counselors, and companions in
judgment, as it is said in the 6. Chap. of the 1. unto the Corinthians: That
the Saints shall judge the world, and in the 19. of S. Matthew: That the
Apostles shall judge the tribes of Israel: insomuch as their glory, shall be
the condemnation of the world, who did oppress them and persecute them. O Lord
come quickly to judgment, that all eyes may see thee, yea those, who have
pierced thee, Apoca. 1.
and do daily make wars to thee in thy members.

Witnesses out of the scripture concerning the judgment.
In the 25. of S. Matthew, verse 31.

When the son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from an other, as a
shepherd separateth the sheep from the Goats. And shall set the sheep on
his right hand, and the Goats on the left. Then shall the king say to them on
his right hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundation of the world. And unto those that shall be on the
left hand: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

Out of the 5. Chap. of S. John, verse 22.

The Father judges no man but has committed all judgment unto the Son,
because that all men should honor the son, as they honor the father. As the
Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given unto his son, to
have life in himself, and has given him power also to execute judgment, in
that he is the son of man. As if he should say, although the father the
son and the holy Ghost do work, Judge, and govern together, yet will the
Lord that we should cast our eyes upon the son of man, by whom we are
guided, and through whom God has declared himself.

Out of the 17. of the Acts, verse 30.

And the time of his ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonishes all
men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day, in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has appointed,
whereof he has given an assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead.

Out of the 5. Chap. 2. to the Corinth.

We covet that both dwelling at home, and removing from home, we may be
acceptable to him. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the things, which are done in his body,
according unto that he has done, whether it be good or evil.

Out of the 4. Chap. and 1. Epistle to the Thessalonians.

For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the
voice of the Archangell and with the Trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ
shall arise first: then shall we which live and remain be caught up with
them also in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever
be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort your selves one an other with these words.

Out of the 2. Epistle of S. Paul to the These. the first Chapter.

For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you which are troubled, rest with us when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them, that do not know God, and which obey not unto
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints and to be made marvelous
in all them that believe, etc.

Out of the 3. Chap. 2. Epistle of to S. Peter.

Against scorners or mockers.
There shall come in the last days mockers, which will walk after their lusts,
and say. Where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers died, all
things continue alike from the beginning of the creation. For this they
willingly know not, that the heavens were of old, and the earth that was of
the water and by the water, by the word of God. But the day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, etc.

I believe in the holy Ghost.
CONSIDERATION.
AS it was said from the beginning, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost
are but one only true God, and this only true God is in such sort declared
to the world, that the Father is named maker, the Son redeemer, and the holy
ghost our Doctor and sanctifier. For albeit, that this Trinity works
together, yet notwithstanding, for our great comfort, it is in such manner
manifested, that we may acknowledge how all these three persons do work
together in all things that do appertain unto our salvation. Now as the son
is everlastingly begotten of the Father, so likewise does the holy Ghost
proceed everlastingly from the Father and the Son. So then believing in the
holy Ghost, we do not believe that the holy Ghost is only some moving or
inspiration: But chiefelie we do believe, against the Macedonians ancient
Heritikes, that he is very true God, of the same substance that the father and
the son is: see then wherefore we do believe in him. And we be also
baptized in his name, as of the father and of the son, he is an eternal
spirit, as it is said in the 9. Chap. of the Hebrews: and from him also
comes grace and peace as it said in the 1. Chap. of the Hebrews: Being the
temple of the holy Ghost it is said that we be the temple of God. To be
short, the father, the word, and the holy Ghost are all one: as it is said in
the first Chapter of the first Epistle of S. John. Then do we believe, that
for the love and in the name of Jesus Christ, the holy Ghost does comfort,
wash, and sanctify us, and that by the inspiration of him the holy Prophets,
and the Apostles have spoken, and it is called the gift of God: and in the 2.
of the Acts: because that he, who is but one in himself has brought forth
diverse operations in us, of ye which it is spoken in the 12. Chap. of the 1.
to ye Corinthians. And as S. Bernarde says upon the Canticles we were dead
in sin, and as stinking creatures, but Jesus did embawlme us with his holy
spirit, and has anointed us therewith, to the end we might know, taste,
and feel his mercy. This is the heat of the Sun which warmeth us. This is
the goodly and fair water of the heavenly ryuers, which does refresh and
water us. It is the Bawlme that embalmeth us, it is the Oil, which does
strengthen and make us glad.

Now what tongue is it that can express this goodness of God toward us, of
the Father that has created us, unto his image, of the Word who has bought
us again with his blood, of the Holy Ghost, that has sanctified us by his
power. Therefore let us give place unto this Holy Ghost, Ephe. 4.
and let us not sorrow for our uncleanness, filth, and sin, that he may
bring us into all truth, and that he may sanctify and strengthen us unto the
end, comforting us in this Article of death, praying, Romans 8.
and sighing for us with gronings that cannot be expressed.

Witnesses out of the holy Scripture concerning the Holy Ghost.

Out of the 12. of Zachary, verse 10.

I will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of grace and of compassion, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced.

MEDITATION.
BY the first Adam, alas, we become barraine and unprofitable, and were shut
out of the grace of God, but the Lord promising the establishme^t of his
Church again by Christ, promised to pour out his gifts and graces in great
abundance. For although, that in our fathers days, God had wrought great
favor unto the people, yet so it is, that this is proper unto Christ, to give
unto us the spirit of grace, mercy, and invocation. And this is the richest
gift that GOD could impart unto us, for so much as it is said in the 8. Chapter
to the Romans: That we could not know how we were Christ's, and the children
of GOD, without this spirit: For he was woonderfullie and extraordinarily
given in the day of Pentecost: But yet does he daily join together his
woorking with the preaching of the Gospel, and woorketh in us, that we do
call upon God with full assurance. Oh that this spirit of grace is to be
desired. 1. Sam. 18.
It is not this evil spirit, which was given unto Saul, that vexed and
troubled him, but it is the spirit of grace and of compassion. This is the
Lord, that we must woorship in spirit and truth.

Out of the 4. Chap. of the Evangelist S. John.

Jesus said unto the Samaritane: Whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst
again: But the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life.

A MEDITATION.
OH how has David truly felt the virtues of these living waters, when as he
said in the 42. Psalm. Like as the thirsty Heart runs with swift course
unto the rivers of water: even so does my soul also long and pant after thy
divine grace. For what is it likewise, to inioie all the pleasures of the
world, since that they take not away his thirst, neither yet quench this
alteration, but do increase and make the people like unto men filled with
dropsies, which the more they drink, the more thirsty they are. But behold,
two things, that this water does greatly recommend unto us, whereof Jesus
Christ talked with the Samaritane. It is that they which drink thereof, are no
more tormented with thirst: feeling in them a well of living water, that
springs up always without ceasing and cannot be drawn dry. Besides, this
water that man feels in his soul, and that runs about his heart, does
never forsake us: but quickens us unto everlasting life.

Therefore, blessed are they, which do feel in their souls such a running
water, which does not for a truth spring out of the veins of the earth, but
from the hiest heavens, and out of the true heavenly paradise. Now as S.
Chrysostom says: This water is the strength and woorking of the spirit of
God, working by the word of the Gospel. For it behooves that we take heed of
the error of the Massalians and Scuencfieldians: Against ye Massalians
who do separate the spirit from the word, and do dream; in the
revelations of the spirit. But S. Paul teaches us in the 3. to the
Galathians, That we receive the spirit, through the preaching of faith: and in
the second Chap. of the 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians he joins together
the sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of truth. Moreover, this
spirit has diverse effects, and is by this occasion some times called fire,
Matthew. 3.
because that it purifieth and consumes our evil affections; and kindles in
us a zeal, as in the disciples going to Emaus, Luke. 24.
whose hearts burned within themselves hearing Jesus speak. Now it is also
called water, thorough his working, because that this holy spirit refreshes
us against the burning heat of temptations, and also does wash and serve to
quench the fiery darts of Satan: let it then never come to pass, Ephesians. 6.
for us to do as the ydolaters, of whom God complains in the 2. Chap. of
Jeremiah: Who forsaking the fountain of living water, dug to themselves
dead pittes and dry cesterns, that can hold no water.

Out of the 7. Chap. of S. John, verse. 38.

Joel. 2.
He that believes in me, as says the scripture, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of water of life.

Now this spoke he of the spirit, which they that believed in him should
receive.

Out of the 15. of S. John.

A witness of the spirit, and of the preaching joined together.
When the comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the father, even
the spirit of truth which proceeds of the father, he shall testify of me
and ye shall witness also because ye have been with me from the beginning.

Out of the 16. of S. John.

When he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear,
shall he speak.

Out of the 8. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans.

For if you live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye mortify the deeds
of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. For as many as are lead by the
spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

S. Paul prays by the spirit.
Out of the 15. Chap. to the Romans, verse. 30.

I beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the
spirit, that ye would strive with me by prayers.

Out of the 3. Chapter of the 1. to the Corinth.

Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you?

Out of the 12. to the Corinth. 1. Epistle.

There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit: and there are
diversities of administration, but the same Lord: and there are diversities of
operation, but God is the same, which works all in all. But the manifestation
of the spirit, is given to every man to profit withal.

Out of the 13. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinth. and 13. verse.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the holy Ghost be with you all.

Out of the 4. Epistle to the Ephesians, verse. 30.

Griue not the spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.

Out of the 5. Chap. and the 1. to the These.

Quench not the spirit.

Despise not prophesying.

Out of the 1. of S. John. 2. Chap.

The anointing which ye received of me dwells in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you, for the same anointing teaches you.

He would not simply say, that they have no need of instruction: but that
they being kindled by the holy spirit, might not suffer themselves to be
deceived by Antichrist a people altogether rude and ignorant.

A prayer out of the 51. Psalm.

Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast
me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me.
Restore in me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.

I believe the holy Catholic Church.
A consideration upon this Article.
AS there is but one only true and very God, to wit, these three persons, the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost: even so there is but one faith, whereof
it was spoken in the former Articles. We do therefore protest now, that we do
believe the Catholic Church: for we say not as before time, I believe in the
Church: but it is God in whom we do put all our whole trust: it is he as we
do read in the first Chap. of the Apocalips that is a and o that is to say,
the beginning and the end. And as it is written in the 43. Chap. of Esaiah:
Before me there was no God that was the maker of the world, neither shall
there be after me. I even I am the eternal, and beside me there is no savior.
What is it then to believe the Catholic Church?

First it is to believe that whatsoever corruptions, ydolatries, persecutions,
and disorders there have been in the world, that this great God, creator, 1.
Peter. 2.
redeemer and sanctifier, has gotten out his chosen people, whom he has
called out of darkness into his wonderful light, Psalm. 147.
unto whom he is reueiled through his holy testimonies, ye he has washed and
sanctified, 1. Tim. 3.
and that is his Church, and the house of the living God, builded upon the
pillar of truth, Matthew. 16.
and upon this corner stone which is Christ, so that the gates of hell shall
not prevail any thing against it because that all things help unto the
profit and wealth of the children of GOD, Romans 8.
2. Tim. 2.
and that this foundation rests sure, how God knows those which are his,
as in the times of Eliah he reserved to himself seven thousand men, 1. Kings.
19.
which had not bowed their knees unto Baal.

Secondly, we do witness, protest, and believe by this article of our faith,
that we be members of this true Church, Heb. 10.
and do join our selves to it to be good and faithful citizens therein, Heb.
10.
following the holy assemblies, and making that profession and confession of
the name of God, that all true faithful ought to do.

Thirdly, by this article we do believe and also do protest, that we do not
acknowledge all assemblies indifferently, for the Church of God, but that as it
is declared in the symbol of Nice, that which is Apostolic: that is to say,
which does hold it self unto the doctrine of the Apostoles, and is not tied
unto any certain place or city but is universal, gathered together by the
preaching of the Gospel and through the use of the holy sacraments, Ephesians. 1.
Colos. 1.
in all the parts of the world, under this only head, that is Jesus Christ,
1. Colos. 12.
in whom is grounded this communion of the saints, which in him are made
members of one and the self same body, Acts. 2.
partakers of one and the self same spirit, of the same Gospel, of the same
sacraments, how so ever the outward ceremonies be not altogether alike, yet
are they knit by the same bond of peace, and joined through the true love,
calling upon one and the same savior, and the awayting as brethren, for one
and the same heritage which is the blessed life. For these be the offeringes,
that God makes unto his Church, which he has purchased for himself, to wit,
the forgiveness of sins, and the life everlasting, which a man can not find
out of the true Church. Whereupon, it is to be noted, that the faithful are
called holy, yea in earth, not that they should be perfect and void of sin,
as some do imagine a perfection to be: for so should they have no more need of
the forgiveness of sins: But they are called holy, because they are
sanctified and because of their calling which is holy and to all holiness
whereunto they do aspire without ceasing: not that they have already
apprehended all, but because they do follow after, seeking to learn drawing
toward the mark in respect of that heavenly calling as S. Paul says in the
3. Chap. to the Philippians.

Figures of the Church. Noah's Ark. In the 7. Chap. of Genesis.

By the flood every thing in whose nostrels breathed life, died: Noah only
remained, and they that were with him in the Arc. And S. Jerome writing unto
Damasus says: that there is no salvation without the Church: and as there is
but one Arc, even so there is but one Church: and as he himself writes unto
Euander, we ought not to think, that the Church of Rome is any other, than
that which is in other places of the world, where that Jesus is worshipped, be
it in France or in England, or else where. There is the Church, where it is
bound in Christ and knit together by the band of love. But if we must speak
of authority, the authority of the world is greater than the authority of a
city, and the authority of Churches spread throughout the world greater than
that which is in one place.

A Prayer.
O Lord our God and father, although that thy ordinance is, Genes. 8.
that thou will not smite any more the whole world with the flood of waters,
and that from hence forward the seed time and harvest, and cold and heat,
and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease, and that so long as
the earth remains, in confirmation whereof, thou have established the
heavenly arc for a sign: Notwithstanding, O my God, what is this poor life,
but a flood of euilles? But in this, my soul is comforted, then when as namely
in thy wrath, thou did power out the ouerflowinges of waters upon the
land, then, at that time, O God, thou did power out by thy favor, thy
grace, and protection upon the Arc of Noah. For why was it that he did not
perish with the rest? Did he see the same floude? Was he covered with the same
waters? Yes truly. But in his Arc he had thy promise. He had thy grace which
did defend him, in such sort as thousands fell at his right hand, and
thousands at his left hand, he was sure under thy wing. So Lord, although
that in this world a like flood of euilles does fall both upon the good and
the evil, Eccle. 3.
and that both the one and the other dies: yet we know, that thou will save
those which are in the Arc of thy Church, and that have thy word, and thy
promises, and with whom thou art reconciled: as thou have promised by thy
prophet Esaiah: Esaias 54.
That although for a time thou hidest thy face away from thine: yet
nevertheless thou have sworn as in the days of Noah, that thou would no
more suffer the waters to ouerflowe the earth: so also have thou sworn, that
thou will be merciful unto thy people. 1. Peter. 3.
Whereof thou give unto us assurance in the sacrament of Baptism, in which
thou show unto us, both life and death: as unto Noah, death in the waters,
and life in the arc. Our sins O Lord are (the means of thy wrath)
sufficient to drown us: but in receiving us into thine Arc, which is thy
Church, and graffing us in thy son Jesus, whereto thou give us a visible
sign and testimony in baptism, we be saved and quickened.

Albeit therefore though the faithful be in small number, as was also the
family of Noah, made only of eight persons, yet suffer not that I turn away
for this from thy Church: or that ever O my God this desperate spite take me,
to drown and destroy my self with the multitude. But O heavenly father give
me rather grace to watch, and to continue, that I be not overwhelmed, and
set upon, by thy judgments: even as they were in Noah's time, which sported
themselves and gave themselves over to their delights: Matthew. 24.
but rather that I may be found watching, and awayting patiently, and
constantly the coming of my good master Jesus Christ. So be it.

Jerusalem was also a figure of the Church of God.
For as it is said in the 122. Psalm: Jerusalem is builded as a city, that
is compact together in it self: whereunto the Tribes, even the Tribes of the
Lord go up, (according to the testimony of Israel,) to praise the name of
the Lord: It is called the house of the Lord, in the which the brethren are
set in order.

In the 56.7 of Esaiah the temple shall be called the house of prayer for all
people.

The tabernacle that was also so well-beloved, for the testimonies that God gave
therein of his presence, Psalm. 84.
and that there they did seek the Lord as it is said in the 33. of Exodus,
was a figure of the Church, where is the meeting and congregation of the Lord.

The Church in the 10. Chap. of S. John is compared unto a sheepefolde, whereof
Jesus is the sheepehearde, and in the which the sheep do hear and
understand the voice of the shepherd.

In the 5. Chapter of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians, as also often
times in the prophets, the Church is compared unto a well-beloved spouse, in
whom the Lord takes his pleasure, and of whom he is the head, as the
husband of his wife, whom he makes much of, and for whom he has given
himself. So then the true Church is compared in the scripture unto a heavenly
Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.
and has most excellent titles, when as man does respect the chosen of God,
and the company of the true faithful, which the Lord knows and approves.

But when the scripture beholds this visible Church, and considers it at
once and outwardly, then is it compared unto a great field, that yields
maniefolde and sundry kind of grains, where amongst, and in which there is
great store of Darnell: or else like unto a net, Matthew. 13.
that has taken all manner of fishes. For all they which are outwardly Jews,
as S. Paul says in the 2. to the Romans, be not therefore very Jews in
deed. So likewise all they that say, Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7.
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. But God does always reserve some
seed, in the midst of these corruptions: and without that, we had as Esaiah
says, even a good while agone been as Sodom and Gomorra.

Certain places of the scripture, concerning the Church of God, and the
profit of his word.
Out of the 93. Psalm, verse. 5.

Thy testimonies are very sure O Lord: holiness becomes thy house for ever.

Out of the 94. Psalm, verse. 12.

Blessed is the man, whom thou chastenest O Lord, and teach him thy law,
that thou may give him rest from the days of evil whiles the pit is dug
for the wicked.

Out of the 119. Psalm, verse. 32.

I will run the way of thy commandments when thou shall enlarge mine heart.

A prayer.
O Lord my God because that the way of thy salvation is declared unto us in
thy word, and that by so many testimonies of the prophets and Apostles, we do
understand what is the true and right way, suffer me not to lose my self,
wandering through the large way of the world and going in the counsel of the
wicked: or following the traditions of men. Psalm. 73.
Make me to know that all they which trust not in thee are in dangerous and
slipperie places. And suffer me not O good God, that in this fair way wherein
thou have set me, I wax feeble, or slowly walk, but that rather I may run
out this holy course even unto the end, and that I may remain constant in
thy obedience: and that I may by a true faith overcome the offenses and lettes,
that Satan offers unto them which do run unto thee. Alas O Lord I truly
know that the best runners are some times subject to stumble, but keep me
from falling: and if I fall, let thy holy hand relieve me and soon set me
upright, that so Lord feeling thy goodness, and sweetness, that I serve
thee not unwillingly and grudgingly, but where as in times past I ran after
vanities and ydolatrie, I may now run O my God in the way that thy word
does appoint us: and to the end I may run, set my heart at liberty, Psalm.
32.
for our spirits are naturally so much let with worldly cares, that we are
become more duller and restiue than ox or mule. But it is thy virtue wherein I
so hope and trust: it is thy aid that I call for, that by thy mighty spirit,
my weak spirit may be vnswathed and vnroled, there may be nothing to stay me
from walking in thy fear, to the end I may vow my self in thy service. O
Lord blessed are they which be in thy school, where thy word sounds and thy
spirit governs, which comfort and strentheneth us against all
afflictions, namely against death: 1. Cor. 9.
declaring unto us that we run not in vain, but for the incorruptible
crown of glory. O Lord give me grace so to run, that I may learn him and
come even unto thee. We do require as David says, Psalm. 119.
in this world, they face in thy Church: But we do not see as yet thy face
uncovered: we see thee in thy word, and in part. But O happy are we, when as
we shall see thy glory, and that we shall see thee such as thou art, without
sacrament or figure: inioying the truth and presence of thy majesty. O God
thou art my treasure, grant me grace to have my heart there, where my treasure
is, and to meditate night and day in thy word, which is the light that guides
my steps, and is in tribulation more sweet unto my heart, than honny is unto
the mouth. The reason of man was truly O Lord a goodly lamp, that thou
had given unto man: but as it is darkened, it cannot show the way, which
leads man from sin to righteousness, and from death to life: and they which
otherways are not lightened but by the same, do perish as beasts. Psalm. 49.
Now since it pleases thee to have a Church on the earth, which thou have
gathered together through the preaching of thy word, inlighten my eyes to
behold and see the spiritual state and magnificence of this house, to the
end I may love it, and delight my self therein. And because that I am a
stranger in the land, inlighten me in such sort, that seeing the way of
everlasting life in thy word, I may follow it, until I come unto the true
country which is in heaven.

Out of the 59. Chap. of Esaiah, verse 21.

Behold my covenant with them faith the Lord: my spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even for ever.

CONSIDERATION.
THese words do declare unto us, that the only people which have the word
of GOD, and the pureness of the Doctrine, are avouched the true people of the
Lord. For with this word, God works, and unfolds the force of his spirit:
Romans 1.
as by this occasion is the Gospel also so called the power of God, to
salvation to all believers: to be short, by the mean of this word, 2. Cor. 5.
and through the ministry of reconciliation, God has established his covenant
amongst us, being favorable unto us, and forgiving us our sins: Therefore,
this Church is not governed by swords or by Crosses, but by the spirit and by
the word of God: And because that this word, is everlasting, it is not in the
power of the world to stop the course thereof. But God, to punish our
unthankfulness, draws it back sometimes from us, and in the mean while, it
is in such sort, as he makes it to wax fruitful elsewhere, and that which
we do not see, our posterity shall see it, with whom the Lord has also his
covenant. O the folly of mankind, which hears not wisdom cry out in the
streets and bids us come unto her. Prou. 1.
Therefore of good right does she laugh at the destruction of all those which
despise her.

A Prayer upon this place. Out of the 15. Chap. of S. Matthew.

Every plant, which mine heavenly Father has not planted, Prou. ^0.
shall be rooted up. O Lord my God, because that thine only word is pure,
clean, and a buckler unto all those that trust in thee, give me grace to love
thee, and since that thou thy self inuitest us unto ye wholesome waters, that
thou give for nothing, guide me unto those running brooks: keep my soul
from being led away by this enemy, which sows Cockle, and evil herbs in
the world: 1. John. 4.
Give me the spirit of discretion to prove the spirits, and suffer me not to
be lead with every wind of Doctrine, 2. Tim. 1.
but daily to hold the true pattern of thy wholesome word, 1. Cor. 11.
which is in faith and love in Jesus Christ. And albeit to prove thine, thou
do suffer many times the evil plants to increase, and permittest heresies
as is to be seen of old, when as the blasphemy of the Arrians took root
as it were in all the East, and in our days popish Idolatry has done in the
West. 2. These. 2.
So in likewise have we also seen how thou have vnrooted them, and manifested
the dreams of men, so that there is none now deceived but those, whom
despise the truth, and love the Epicures life, yielding themselves worthy to
be led away by the spirit of blindness and error. In the mean while O GOD
beat down them which make Sects, Partialities, Romans 16.
and Scandals a part, against the pure Doctrine: grant power and might to the
Ministry of thy holy Gospel, that all heresies and errors may be rooted out
of men's hearts, and that in quiet peace and concord we may praise thy name
all the days of our life. Also show thy favor unto us, and now that it is so
late, in the end of our time, yea and that it seems, O Lord, that this fair
sun of truth would go to rest, whom thou have showed in the world, Mat. 28.
may remain with us, and strengthen us in thy knowledge, following this thy
promise, that thou have made to be with us even unto the end of the world. So
be it.

Of the hearing of the word of God. Out of the 11. of S. Luke.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

MEDITATION.
BLessed are they then, not that hear much, know much, and speak much of the
word of God: But that keep it in obedience of faith. For whereto serves the
seed thrown into the ground, if it took not root there to increase and
bring forth fruit? Whereunto serves as says Jesus Christ in the 7. Chap. of
S. Matthew, to make a high building, if upon the blowing of the first winds,
the house fall? They love me, says Christ in the 14. of S. John, that do not
only hear, but also keep my commandments. For how shall we hear, if he
do not pearce our ears, Psalm. 40.
and open our understandings, because, that it is nothing to hear outwardly,
unless that God do speak unto us inwardly, and if it be not heard within
us. Men truly have ears: But they have not all ears to hear, and to make
their profit of the word of God. Now since that they are undoubtedly accursed,
which neither hear, nor keep this word, and do love better to hear worldly
songs, or foolish follies: Let us pray without ceasing, this God, that he
will open the hearts to understand his word, as he did unto this Lydia, a
seller of purple, of whom mention is made in the 16. Chap. of the Acts. And
that we do not take it of the Lord in ill part, when he shall punish us,
because that in so doing he does open our ears, to receive instruction, even
as it is said in the 36. of Job and the 10. verse.

A prayer upon the same matter.
O Most gracious and merciful GOD: thou have declared by thy dearly beloved
son Jesus Christ, that they which hear thy word, and keep it are blessed.
Does it not rather belong unto us O Lord, to acknowledge and to marvel at
thy blessedness, and felicity? It is for us to speak of thine, and thou
do unto us this honor, to speak of ours. Thou pronouncest by thy son,
that we are blessed, in hearing thy word: and that when we have it, and hear
it, that does not come of our selves, but through thy great mercy. It is thou
thy self, which openest and stoppest our ears. Oh heaue^lie Father, how great
is thy mercy? But woe unto this damnable unthankfulness of them that laugh and
gaude thereat, in place of hearing it. Woe unto this our sluggishnesse, that
hinders us to pray, and to demand none other thing, but that thy word might
have his course, ^. These. 3. Ephe. 6.
and might be glorified, and that thou raise up good shepheardes, to whom thy
word may be given, that with open mouth, and with boldness of heart, 1. Sam. 3.
the secrets of the Gospel may be made known: And yt it happen not unto us
that thy word be take away for our unthankfulness, Ephe. 3.
as we do read that in the time of Eli it was rare in the request, and there
was little to be had of any manifest vision. Now unto him, which by his power
may do all in all abundance, more than we do ask or think: unto him be
glory in the Church, in Jesus, and in all ages. So be it.

Out of the 5. Chap. of the Gospel of S. John.

Search the scriptures: Of the profit in the true understanding of the
scriptures.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me.

MEDITATION.
MEn have a natural desire to the everlasting life. But where is it, that they
do seek it? In themselves or in men's traditions. And in so doing, they go
far off, in place to draw near to it. For it has pleased this good God, to
comfort and quicken the people, giving unto them his scriptures, which is
called the word of life: in such sort as it is a wonderful benefit that God
bestows on a people, when he gives unto them his word. Luke. 10.
And as it was said unto Martha, that it was needful for us to labor with
care after so many things. But there is one thing yt is truly and in every
respect necessary: John 6.27. To labor after the heeuenlie food.
All the rest is, but as an accessarie. Let us therefore travail and labor
after the food that shall never perish. For there is no question to labor
much, the son of God presents it to us. Let us seek into it. Let us here
apply our studies, and there let us embrace it, and let us choose as Marie did
the better part. We must not hear make ready, neither arms, teeth, nor
mouth, to labor after this heavenly meat. We must believe as S. Augustine
says in the 25. treatise upon S. John. But what? many do read the word of
God, but as it were to run from it, so that this is as a book closed up, and
out of the which they bring no profit. For it behooves to inquire thereof,
truly to sound, weigh, and confer the one with the other, with calling
upon it in the name of God. All even as they do, which dig for the treasure
of the earth, they must employ their labor, and try with all diligence the
mettales: For if they do but scratch the earth above, they shall never find
out the Ore or Metal. Other some do read it, as the Jews, but it is with a
veil, and without seeking him there, who is the end of the law, to wit, Jesus
Christ. The heritickes do read and read again the scriptures, as the
Anabaptists, and others: In what manner the heritiques do allege the
scripture.
But as faith Clement Alexa^drine in his 7. book Stromat: Although the
heretics do in deed allege the scriptures, yet may a man by and by see
their deceit: for either they do not confer the scripture with scripture,
or they do allege it by piece meal, and by little and little morsels, and
not wholly: or else they will not acknowledge the phrase or manner of speaking
of the scripture, neither the scope or end of it. And as an other very
ancient Doctor named Irenaeus says in his third book and 15. Chapter against
heresies: The heritickes to the end they might not be discovered, do allege
the scripture well at the beginning, to draw on the people unto them: But so
soon as they have gotten scholars, they wrest the scriptures to their own
side, and make men believe that their rauing or raylinges be the scripture,
and do scorn at all the good Doctors, Of correction. Donat.
falselie accusing and slaundering them. Now the Lord (says S. Augustine)
suffers heritickes to be, that our faith and love might be tried together:
Our faith, whether we do suffer our selves to be led away: Our love, when as
we seek to reform and instruct them. Therefore, let us beware of such a
company of scoffers, which say, What have we to do to torment our selves,
after the reading of the scriptures? One cannot know at these days, what to
believe: some expound it thus, othersome so. Every heriticke does allege the
scripture. It is true. But as it is said: if we be deceived, it is for that
we will be beguiled, because we will not truly seek out the scriptures. Is
it not easy enough to discern the Spider from the Be? The one turns all
into poison: The other into honey. Such is the difference between the
heretics and the true faithful. How the scripture ought to be read.
Now the faithful reading the scripture, will read it with prayer, that God
may open his understanding, to know the woonders of his Law: such prayers
David made in the 119. Psalm: Then he will read it, not to be turned away
from the preaching of the word: But rather so much the more to know and
understand the doctrine which is preached. Thirdly, he will not read the
scripture to halues, but will compare the old and the new Testament together.
Lastly, he will not seek out there in subtilties nor curiosities, but he
will seek there Jesus Christ, for whose love all was written, as we do read
in the 20. Chap. of S. John: And therefore will he read the scripture to
strengthen him in the faith, always having before his eyes the Articles of our
faith, as a guide, to which he will refer that which he reads as unto
certain common places. Therefore, Christ is the end of the law, and of
sacrifices, Christ is he to whom the Prophets have yielded witness: and
this is the scripture that reuealeth it unto us, and not Philosophy or humane
reason.

Of the true offspring of sects and heresies.
Out of the 8. Chap. of S. John, verse 44.

The devil has been a Murderer from the beginning and abode not in the
truth, for the truth is not in him. If any keep my word says Jesus Christ,
he shall never taste of death.

CONSIDERATION.
THey who have known Martin Luther, that servant of God in his time, write,
how he having long experience, and amongst many temptations, learned the
deceites of the Devil, oftentimes said, that one day he would put hand to
pen, to write a great volume against Satan, to discover his wiles and
crafts, and all the kinds of temptations, wherewith he was accustomed to
fight against us. Besides this he did daily advertise the people, both
privately and openly, that it was not a thing so light as men thought it, to
have daily Satan at our heels, and an enemy so crafty, that spied out but
the occasion to sift us, and to destroy us. Now on a time Luther being
requested (by a good man, who suffered many temptations and other
unquietness) for some comfort: He wrote this unto him that follows, in a
book briefly expounding this sentence of S. John set down before.

Satan from the beginning of the world was a liar, and through lies has a
desire to tempt mankind. Behold how Adam and Eve our first parents were
overtaken and caught, which were created unto the Image of God: For having
beguiled them through lies, he was therein also a murderer, in that that of
the immortal, they became mortal. Not long after, he set Caine against his
Brother Abel, and did thrust forward the brother to imbrue his hands with the
blood of his brother. And this is the manner and guise of all Satan's kingdom.
He began through lying to seduce men: afterward he cease not, to stir up
persecutions, against the true faithful, which would not cleave unto his lies.
In the mean while, he brings his maintainers to despair, as it is to be
seen of Caine, Judas, and others. Therefore it is for us to beware of so
cruel and crafty an enemy. Let us also beware and take good heed of his
false and dreaming doctrines which comes forth out of his shop, the end
whereof is utter destruction. To be short, let us take heed of lying and
cruelty, seeing both the one and the other comes of the Devil.

Moreover, let us mark, that our comfort is, that Jesus Christ was given unto
us, who appeared to overthrow and destroy the works of the devil. And in
deed, he was found the stronger, that did buind his enemy Satan, and drove
away the Prince of the world. Against his leinges, he has armed us with the
truth of his Gospel. Against death, he gave us life, giving himself to be
our Emanuel, that is to say, God with us. What greater comfort should we know
to desire? For if a man would say, yea: but Christ is in heaven. Behold, that
which Jesus says: If any man keep my word, he shall not perish. The
doctrine of the law accuses us, and sets down before us our condemnation:
But the Gospel is the word of life and power of GOD to salvation. O miserable
and wretched world, that forsakes this precious word.

The ancient Fathers have woondred at a herb called Panacea, which as some
say healed all manner of diseases. And seeing many times we do see, that men
esteem more of some little experience of Physic, that they shall have
against any sickness: Why then do they not commend and praise above all, the
doctrine of the Gospel, which heals us against death? Is it because that the
world is so earthly, and lustful, which is not otherwise guided, but by
fleshly considerations, and neither trusts in God nor in his promises? But
we must fear the judgments of God. For as they, which do keep this word
shall not fear death: So contrariwise, they that keep it not, shall see the
first and the second death. And howsoever it seem unto men, yt they pass away
with eyes closed up unto death, yet nevertheless, they do see death, when the
bitterness thereof, and the wrath of God, present themselves before their
eyes. Now concerning the children of GOD, they see them daily dying, and
themselves also do die: But because their souls learn the word of GOD, they
see not death. For he teaches them, even as those that do go into dark
places by the light, who see not the darkness which is overcome by the light.
So a faithful man, which possesses Gods grace, does not behold death in his
nature, and as Gods judgment, but as a sweet sleep, whereby we do pass
into heavenly rest: and how much the more we believe, so much the more are
we assured and certain against death. But the more we be negligent to hear
the word of God, so much the more we lie open to terrors and fears. O how
strong is therefore the faithful man, who is a member of the Church which
staieth himself upon the word of God.

The great warriers Alexander, Julius Caesar and others having braued in the
world, have been famous for their only prowes: they are dead, and those
commonly are the most astonished when death comes: as it is read of Adrian the
Emperor, The Sorrows of Adrian the Emperor.
who at the point of death made such like mournings.

O poor soul, naked, and a vacabond, into what place go thou now to yield
thy self? Alas, what shall become of thee thou companion and ghest of my
body? Thou from hence forewardes shall have no more pastime. Lo this is the
unquietness, and unsettledness of the people of this world. Let us pray
therefore as in the 90 Psalm, that God will give us grace to consider the
shortness of our days, to the end we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

A prayer upon this place. Out of the 14. of S. John.
If any man love me, he will keep my word and my father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and will dwell with him.

O Lord, who is he which will not love thee, sith that thou have so loved us,
to have given thy son for us? Now because that thou discernest those which
do love thee in deed, from hypocrites, when as they love and keep thy word,
give me grace, yea unto me, that naturally love but vice and vanity, to love
thy word: unto me that can do nothing but in thee, and by thee, to keep thy
word, and to yield obedience unto thee. For what a benefit is it to have thy
company, yea this sweet company of thee, and of thy son Jesus, and of thy
holy spirit, which thou have promised to them, that will yield themselves
affectionated unto thy word? What greater mischief could happen than to be
thrust back and deprived of such a company? For whosoever is not with thee,
it behooves that he be with Satan, that is to say with all evil. Because yt
in as much as thou give peace, felicity, and life unto them, with whom thou
dwell: even so also is satan the author of all evil, and of all
mischief. Therefore O Lord, give me grace to abide in thee, as the branch in
the vine, to bring forth the fruits of thy glory, to live in thee, and unto
thee, to feel thee daily with all the comfortes that thou give unto thine.
Let thy good spirit succor me in my weakness, Romans 8.
that that which is an offense unto the world, 1. Cor. 1.
to wit, the Gospel of the cross, may be my comfort and my treasure, that I
may feel the virtue, power, and strength of this thy word, even in all the
parts of my soul, from this time forth and for ever more. So be it.

Of the use of the holy Scripture. Out of the 3. Chap. of the 2. Epistle of S.
Paul unto Timothee.

The whole scripture is given by the inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness: that the man of God may
be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

The first use of the scripture is to teach us: for where is it, that a man
shall find in other books, the secrets that the scripture teaches us? It
learneth us on the earth a science which shall remain in heaven, as S. Jerome
says it teaches us to know Christ, and in him the life everlasting. The
Angels do wonder at this same doctrine, as it is said in the 1. Chap. of
the 1. Epistle of S. Peter. We ought therefore to bring our children unto this
school, and the eldest also have to learn in this science all the days of
their lives.

The scripture is also given to confute the gain sayers, to and overcome
heretics, to correct vices, and to hew them down as it is said in Hosea:
Hoseah. 6.
for in teaching that which is good, it turns us from evil. It is also fit
to instruct us, and to give many aduertisementes for the government of our
lives, toward magistrates, fathers of houshouldes, and unto other particular
persons.

A meditation upon the holy supper, whereby we do grow in the Church, and do
strengthen our faith, drawn for the most part out of S. Cyprian.
WHen as this good savior went to take the cup and drink so bitter of his
death and passion, his pleasure was to ordain and offer unto us the sweet and
wholesome lyquor of his blood, with the partaking of his body. He raised up
Lazarus going to death, and appointed the supper to make our souls to live.

He then that gave life unto others, could he not well defend himself
against death, could it have been any other than a willing obedience, whereby
he would so fulfill our redemption? O how great was the providence of this
good savior, which has given unto us the partaking of his body before his
death, to show unto us that by death, he should not be destroyed, and that he
would never leave his Church. But how? What banquet is this here, to eat the
flesh of the Lord and to drink his blood? Truly, it is a wonderful thing,
as we do see in the 6. Chap. of S. John, that the Capernaits could not
comprehend. But behold the secret, Jesus Christ spoke of his flesh:
notwithstanding, he did not speak fleshly: he spoke to eat, but it was not
for our teeth, neither for our bellies, concerning the substance of this
sacrament: his words are spirit and life. So as these sacred meats, be of
none other taste, nor of any other savor unto a carnal and sensual man. But
whereas humane sense cannot pearce through, there can faith enter: and the
manner of speaking, which seems hard unto us at the first sight, we shall
find them fitly applied, if we do understand the language of the scripture.
Therefore the word of God sometimees calls this sacrament bread, and
sometimes body, and flesh, that by the help of these known things and
visible, we may comprehend the things that are invisible and spiritual. For
as the bread nourishes the body, even so does Christ nourish the soul. As
the flesh is a substance, so is it not by imagination, that our souls are
nourished, but the son of GOD incarnate, is the cause of this so substantial
a food of our souls, because that he was crucified for us. As the life is in
the blood, so Christ also by his blood has given unto us life, and is our
life, our flesh, our blood, and our life was of a wretched condition: but by
Christ, all the parts of our life are restored. But from whence comes this
new commandment to partake with the blood of Christ? Was it not forbidden in
the law, to eat the blood of any beast, because that the life was in the
blood? Behold also, the undefiled Lamb. The blood of beasts did show unto
us, that our life ought not to be brutish, or that we should be given to
cruelty. And the blood of Christ which we are commanded to drink, teaches
us, how our lives ought to be Christian like and pure: that we might say with
S. Paul in the 2. Chap. to the Galathians, It is not I that live, but Christ
lives in me. Therefore this communion is not a consubstantiation with the
Trinity, for there is but the father, the son and the holy Ghost which are
consubstantiall. It is not a confusion of persons in Christ: but it is an union
of the head, with the members, it is an union of affections, and of wills, a
partaking together of the everlasting riches, and in the life of Christ. This
is a warning to be short, that we must not live unto our selves, but unto God.
And as they that have eaten some excellent meat, that has in it some good
savor, do feel there in a good nourishment and sweetness of breath: even
so must it be that they which are sedde with this sacred meat, and wherein
Christ dwells, that in all their words and deeds, a man may feel a good
smell, and that may increase to edification: and that all that which they do,
may be unto the glory of this great GOD. And so we do see, that it is not
the teeth which we do sharpen coming unto this holy banquet, but that we do
bring hither faith, to distinguish the sacrament from the thing of the
sacrament: the earthly element, from that which is divine and heavenly: and so
to consider in one only Christ, the union of two natures divine and humane.

For altogether like as in the person of Christ, Note this comparison of S.
Cyprian.
the humane nature was seen here below, and the divinity was not seen, yet
did it not leave to work great things without the changing of one nature
into another: so in the supper, we do see bread and wine: but the body of
Christ, we do not see: yet does it not leave to work in us, now that he is
ascended into heaven. And as the body of the light which is on high, is entire
in himself, how so ever it be spread abroad hear beneath: So is Christ
entire there on high, and yet leaves he not to partake himself fully to
every one of us, without lessening himself, when as he gives himself unto
us which be weak, without being enclosed in the bread, when as he is
notwithstanding received by us, without darkening his majesty, when he
enters into our small tabernacle, and when he will that our hearts be as
his temple. O right blessed are they that thus do eat the flesh of the Lord,
having a desire to remain with him, and to obey him. The body of Christ set
forth in his word is our food. The mean and way to eat him is faith that
does stay upon his promises, and is joined unto him. On earth, we do
communicate with Christ by the help of his word, and sacraments: but on hie
in heaven we shall eat this heavenly bread, without any outward help, and
shall drink this holy drink, feeling effectually his presence and the joy of
that glorious life. O happy time so much desired in the which we shall eat
with the holy Angels, at the table of the Lord, in his kingdom: O we now very
happy and blessed from hence forth, seeing we savor already the sweetness
of the life to come in Christ. O how easily may we despise the rich men's
tables, and their iounket and delicate meats, to partake the blood of Christ
in the Church of God. Yea, this blood, yea this is our victory and glory,
this is it that we ought to take chearefully in the supper, and so to bear
with Christ all afflictions in this life: although the banquet of the cross
seem very thin and troublesome, unto the beastly and ignorant world. But
they which do possess Christ care not to possess the world: and they yt have
drunk of the Lords cup, care not, they are at a point to power out their
blood for the name of Christ: for their lives are most assured in their
savior. Rejoice thou the^ flock of the Lord, seeing thou have so liberal a
sheepeheard, which feeds thee with his blood, that thou may live by his
life. For they that live not but of the infected blood of Adam, and of the
carnal and sensual life, are more wretched than the beasts. To this feast
are not only bidden the sacrificers and priests of Leui, but all ye Church.
But above all, let us take heed that this gift of God be unto us a wholesome
gift, and that we partake not therein to our condemnation. Let us therefore take
on the wedding garment, and make clean our vessels, to receive so excellent a
gift. Let us also beware of having therein any profanation, in steed of
devotion. Let us keep our selves from communicating in darkness, when we do
come near unto this light. And as S. Jerome says writing unto Theophilus,
When we draw near to Christ, let us not give him a Judas kiss. Let us know,
that these are the poor in spirit, that shall find comfort in that banquet.
These are not the worldlinges, nor the high in degree, neither the ouerweening
and brablesome persons. For if Christ declare that every oblation displeases
GOD, without reconciliation, how should he make an offering unto us, of a
thing so singular, if we have not peaceable hearts? And if we be not knit
together with our brethren, how would we that he should knit himself with us?

A prayer concerning the holy supper.
O Lord God the heaven of heavens cannot comprehend thee, and yet thou do
unto us this honor to have fellowshippe with us. Alas who are we, that thou
should take pleasure to be with us yea in us? Nevertheless, we do thank
thee in that through thy mercy thou make us able to receive thy graces,
whereof, Psalm. 36.
of our own corrupt nature, we were altogether unworthy. For in truth, they
only are blessed, that do not depart from thee, and they that do partake
with the body of thy son on earth, begin already to live in heaven. The
Israelites have eaten manna in the desert: but the most part in the mean while
are dead in the wilderness without seeing the land of promise. But they that
eat of this sacred food, are assured to come to the everlasting heritage. O
what comfort is this unto us, in this vale of misery, to be refreshed with
such a pasture. O wonderful pasture, which seems to be eaten with teeth,
in so much as the signs do bear his name, and yet in the mean space, is
never consumed, but nourishes the soul with great virtue. That which Adam and
Eve did eat in the earthly gardein by the temptation of Satan, caused them to
die. But O Lord, this meat that we do eat by thy appointment brings unto
us life. Now Lord, seeing it has pleased thee to join the earthly with the
heavenly by this sacrament, the humane creatures with the celestial, grant us
grace truly to consider these so hie mysteries, and to use them withal
innocence and reverence. For Lord, Job. 14.
who is he that shall make clean that which is unclean? O father, who have
redeemed us, by the blood of thy son, thou can only wash and sanctify us
by thy spirit. And as the fullness of joy and gladness is to see thy face,
and to feel thy presence: So let our souls feel effectually the sweetness
of thy son Jesus, let us feel the increase of strength and of faith, by the
means of this holy sacrament, and suffer us not to follow the example of
Esau, who for a mess of pottage lost his birthright: but rather, that we do
not forsake thee, for any worldly thing: But that all our consolation may rest
in thee. Grant us O Lord, that thou keep that assurance, which thou have
promised: and likewise as thou will that we keep a remembrance of thy son
and of his death, so have thou daily remembrance of us: and as he was given for
us, so let us yield ourselves loving unto our neighbors through christian
love: and that above all, our hearts may be lifted up, where our head Jesus
Christ is in thy glory. Further more, for so much O Lord as we do eat at thy
table, as thy children and family of thy house, let us also walk in all
goodness as it is becoming those, which do belong unto such a Lord. And for
so much O God, as this sacred meat beseems not an irksome and full
stomach: Grant us grace that we may have a true and a right hunger yea and a
holy appetite unto these graces: that we may sauourly taste these meats of
thine, and well degest the^: tasting how gracious and sweet, thou art, and
also how bitter all the delights of the world are, in comparison of the
sweetness of Jesus Christ, So be it.

Another prayer concerning the supper.
What tongue, O Lord, can express, and what heart can comprehend thy
wonderful love toward us, for that to redeem a wretched creature, thou
would that thy son should suffer so many labors and sorrows, even to be
sacrificed on the cross? And howsoever it be that thou do not content thy
self with all these things that are already done: but to the end that the
remembrance of thy love should not be blotted-out of our hearts, or that our
faith should flite, or be shaken, sith that thy son is ascended up to thy
right hand, thou leauest not yet to nourish our souls, and have left unto us
amongst others the sacrament of the supper, that we should be assured, how
his life does flow into us. O what a refreshing is this to us in this our
pilgrimage, yea to them that feel and lay hold of such like graces? By the
press men do draw forth out of the grapes, the lyquor of wine. And thou O
Lord, thou have put thy son upon the press of the cross, to make us drink
of this holy lyquor. But now O Lord my God, to the end that I do not
unworthily present my self unto this holy table and food, which is marueled
at, and honored by the Angels: purify and cleanse my heart by thy holy
spirit. Power forth thy love, through all the parts of my soul, that I may
take increase in all virtue, and holiness: and that I may so continue, in this
blessed fellowshippe of the body of thy son, that I may draw out of him,
strength and life, as the branch out of the vine stock: and that being knitte
with thy son Jesus, I may be one with thee, that I may live to thee: until
the time I do come even unto thee. So be it.

A giving of thanks after the supper.
O Lord, I give thee thanks for thy inestimable love, for that not only I
have this benefitte of my being and moving in thee: but chiefly in that it
has pleased thee, to make me to live for ever in thy kingdom, redeeming me
from everlasting damnation, which I had deserved through my sins. But good
God I beseech thee that this precious blood be not shed in vain for me: but
daily nourish my soul, by the partaking of the flesh of thy son. Quicken me
in his blood, that I may be of the number of thy children, and a member of the
body of thy Church: that I be not so unhappy, to abuse these sacred meats
which have cost so dear a price of thy dear beloved son Jesus, to prepare
them for us: that I be not also like unto the dogs, which return unto their
vomittes, and swine that go back again unto their puddle. Alas Lord, make
me that I never forsake thy holy covenant, for any thing in the world. For
whither is it that I should go, but unto thee that have the words of
everlasting life? Let it not be a day only, that the remembrance of thy
sons passion be before my eyes: But that I may for evermore honor this good
savior which has left unto us so fair an heritage, by his testament, and
has given us thereof so goodly an earnest in the supper.

Now to thee, O God my creator, to thee Christ my redeemer, to thee holy
Ghost, my comforter, who works this holy conjunction of men with GOD, and of
earth with heaven, unto thee one alone true God, be honor and glory. I poor
creature do recommende my self unto thee glorious God: being well determined,
through thy grace to go in peace, and in joy to death, when the hour shall
come since that Christ is my life.

Auaunt from me all delights and earthly meats, which do turn into doung:
sith that I have a food which turns me to immortality, the bread of
Angels, the bread which we shall eat, without signs and sacraments, when
as we shall inioye that felicity being in heaven.

Prayers for the Church.
A Prayer against the adversaries of the Church.
Almighty God, since that thou see thine adversaries so proud, yea with a
devilish rage, to force against thy Church, cause that we may feel how thou
art the very same, whom all thy faithful have proved in times past in all
ages, to wit, that thou have the care of the salvation of those that call upon
thee with a pure heart, yea, and seek thee in extreme distress and
necessity: that although thou stretchest forth thy hand at this day, and
repressest this rage which thou see to be kindeled against all thy servants
and children, to the end that last of all, the reprobates may feel and
understand, and that to their destruction, how they have not undertaken wars
against a miserable people, corrupted, stripped, and naked of all aid: but
against thine inestimable virtue: that being confounded, albeit they have no
shame, and rore out ye more against thee and against thy power: yet they may
serve notwithstanding for an example, and be for a manifest instruction, that
thou art not only faithful, in all thy promises: But also furnished and
garnished, with such virtue, that thou can execute and fulfill all that which
thou have promised for the safe keeping of thy Church, until such time as thou
have fully delivered us out of our enemies hand.

An other prayer upon the same matter.
Almighty GOD, forasmuch as thou see, how we be at this day compassed about
on all sides, with so many enemies, who practice continually our overthrow,
and that we are so weak and feeble: make us learn to look unto thee, and
that our faith may so rest upon thee, that into whatsoever dangers we be
put, and howsoever our flesh says, we may never doubt, but that thou art
stored with a mighty power, to make all our enemies afraid, yt amongst the
dangers of this life, we may live in rest of spirit, and that we cease not
from calling upon thee, as thou have promised to be a faithful protector of
those that call on thee in Jesus Christ his name. So be it.

A prayer to persevere in the doctrine of the Gospel.
Almighty God, seeing we be so much inclined unto corruption, that with great
hardness we do enter into the listes, so lightly we retire our selves from
the course: and being well instructed, yet we fall off and do easily
degenerate: grant that being by thy spirit furnished with constancy, we may
persevere to the end, in that same right way, that thou have showed unto us by
thy word. Furthermore, though that many are cast into diverse errors, yet that
we may take pleasure to call and to withdraw them back again, yea if we
do not profit any whit therein, yet at the least, that we be not allured
after them: but that we may remain constant in faithful obedience, until
such time as having achieved all our Combats, we may be gathered together to
that blessed rest, which is kept for us by our captain and savior Jesus
Christ in the heavens.

A Prayer to be constant in Religion against all lettes or withstandinges.
Almighty God, since that Satan sets before us at these days many fears,
and dreades, which might altogether cast us down, and make us lose courage as
in deed we be but feeble and weak: grant, that we having our eyes lifted
up to heaven, we may consider this invincible power, wherewith thou art
furnished, to make us overcome all lettes. Besides, although nothing do
appear in this world, but that which is contemptible, which may confirm or
maintain our faith: yet notwithstanding, grant that we may pearce by the
eyes of our faith into this secret virtue: and so we may not doubt, but that
thou in the end wilt work that, which the world thinks otherwise at this day
to be impossible: and therefore do mock thereat: And that we may constantly
continue in this trust, that every one of us do bestow our labors of thee,
and study to the end, and that we lose no courage to advance the spiritual
building, until we be gathered together with the Angels, when thy son
shall appear to be wonderful to his chosen, placing us with him in his
everlasting glory.

I believe the forgiveness of sins.
THe Church then, was never in this world so clean, but that it had and has
occasion to demand of God: Lord forgive us our sins. For we do protest in
this Article, that we do believe by the word of God, who does witness it,
that our sins are freely forgiven us for Jesus Christ's sake. Thus this
Article, The confession of our sins.
first represents before our eyes our sins: the which are such, as there is
no humane satisfaction, that can absolve us therein: But we must humble our
selves, and bowing down our head, throw our selves at the feet of Jesus
Christ, as David says in the 32. Psalm.

I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: I thought I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the punishment of my sin. Therefore shall every one that is godly make his
prayer unto thee.

And S. John in the 1. Chap. of his first Epistle: If we say we have no
sin, we deceive ourselves, and there is no truth in us. But if we
acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say we have not sinned,
we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

Now insomuch as it is against God that we sin, as it is said in the 51.
Psalm. It is also unto him, that we do confess our sins, we must note,
that we do not buy, neither do we deserve the forgiveness of our sins:
but we do believe it, that is to say, we do hold it of the pure grace of
God. Simon the Magician was reproved in the 8. Chap. of the Acts, who thought
that the gift of God might be bought for money.

Let us come then without silver, and have recourse unto the throne of grace,
where we shall find forgiveness, not of one sin, but of all. For there is
nothing condemnable to the children of God: And as all sins are deadly unto
the reprobate: even so are all sins venial unto the faithful for Jesus
Christ's sake, who is the advocate for all our sins, as S. John says in the
2. Chap. of his first Epistle: And for this cause has he established in the
world, the Ministry of reconciliation, to the end that in his name there
might be preached unto us the forgiveness of sins. 2. Cor. 5.19. Chap.
O horrible Idolatry, and Simonie of the Papists: that make trafique of
pardons, and cause that to be sought for in the bowels of the Pope, which the
son of God has purchased for us by his precious blood. For it is he that
has declared unto us the true Iubile, and year of redemption and grace,
bringing unto us good news, Esaiah. 61.1.
granting to the captives deliverance, and healing the hearts of the
desolate. This is he of whom Jeremy speaks in the 31. Chap. who ought to
set his law in our hearts, forgiving us our sins, without having any more
remembrance thereof.

A confession out of the Psalm. 51.4.

AGainst thee, against thee only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight,
that thou may be known just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest.
Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Thou shall purge my sins with Hisop, and I shall be clean. Make me to
understand joy and gladness. Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right
spirit within me, etc.

A prayer.
O Lord our God, for so much as thou are not merciful, but unto those that feel
their sins, and acknowledge them, beholding with thy merciful eye the
sorrowful and broken hearts: I do fall down before thy face, confessing and
acknowledging that I have offended thee, not only in this that I am conceived
in sin, and a poor child of Adams, but also through so many vain
thoughts, distrustes, so many evil mouinges and desires, that fight against
thy word and holy will: so that if all the men in the world would absolve me:
I know, that I have to do with thee, because it is thou that triest the
hearts: it is also against thy law, that we poor creatures sin. Thou
therefore art always just: and I am unjust. Thou art pure and unclean, and I
am defiled from my mothers womb, and my sin makes me abominable. But
cleanse me Lord, thou that art ye God, and none the like, which only art God
the savior, far passing above our sins, and purging it with this sweet
Hisop of the blood of thy son Jesus Christ. Now for so much Lord as the
total sum lies in the feeling, as it is fit: grant me grace to feel in
good earnest not only my wretchedness, and to be touched therein to the
quick, to humble my self before thee: But also give me feeling, and true
assurance of thy grace, and of the forgiveness of my sins, by thy holy
spirit, that my sorrowful soul may rejoice in thee, that this free and
sonnelike spirit may drive away from me, the servile fear and horror of thy
judgments, and that thus being comforted, I may declare thy blessings, and
praise thy mercies for ever.

A thanksgiving for the remission of sins.
Out of the 103. Psalm.

My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, which
forgiueth all thine iniquities and heals all thine infirmities: which
redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassions: Which satisfies thy mouth with good things: And thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles.

MEDITATION.

THe Prophet recites here six great blessings of God, for the which, all
Christians are truly bound to praise thsi good God with all their hearts.

The first benefit is, that all our sins are forgiven us, through his divine
clemency. That comes to pass, because that Christ charging upon him our
miseries, by the oblation of his very precious self, has reconciled us, and
is our true mediator and sacrificer.

The second benefit is, that the infirmities, which remain in us, namely
since this reconciliation, be it of body or of spirit, are healed: because
that our sins are not imputed unto us: And that in our infirmities God
shows his strength and power in sustaining us.

The third is, he redeemeth us daily from many mischifes and dangers of
death. For this nature is so frail, as we should fall every moment into the
grave, if God did not hold us up.

The fourth is, that he does cover us with his graces, and with his mercy
he does crown us, making us there to feel it mightily: And by the same,
does bless and exalt us, in stead of destroying us.

The fifth is, that he does satisfy us, and gives us that that is
sufficient, a thing that is special unto the children of God. For God is not a
niggard in his gifts: But as concerning us, the most part are never contented.
So that contentation is one of the great blessings of the Lord.

The sixth benefit is this, Renewing, and this comes unto us by Christ, in
whom we be made new creatures, and in whom we shall receive a new and
lasting life.

O how then has the soul which feels such benefits good cause to bless
and praise the Lord.

A confession and prayer out of the 9. Chap. of the Prophet Daniel.

WE pray thee O Lord our God, which art great and fearful, and keep
covenant and mercy toward the^ that love and keep thy commandments, have
mercy on us: For we have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedlie, yea, we have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts and from
thy judgments. For we would not obey thy servants the Prophets, which spoke
in thy name to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, and to all ye
people of ye land. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open
shame, as appears this day, unto the man of Judah, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, because of their offenses, that they have committed against thee. O
Lord unto us appertains open shame, to our kings, to our princes, and to our
fathers, because we have sinned against thee. Yet compassion and forgiveness
is in the Lord our God, albeit we have rebelled against him, and have not
harkened unto the voice of the Lord our GOD, to walk in his laws which he
had laid before us by the ministry of his servants the Prophets. Yea, all
Israel have transgressed thy law, and are turned back, that they might not
hear thy voice: therefore the curse is powered upon us, that is written in the
book of Moses the servant of God, Dan. 27.
because we have sinned against him. The Lord has made the plague to come
upon us, for the Lord is righteous in all his works which he does: But we
would not obaie his voice. And now O Lord our GOD, that have brought thy
people out of the land of Egypt, with a mighty hand, and have gotten thee
renoume, as appears this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedlie. O
Lord according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee let thine anger and thy
wrath be turned away, from thy city Jerusalem. Hear now O God, the prayer of
thy servant, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary, that lies wast
for the Lords sake. O my God incline thine ear and hear: Open thine eyes,
and behold our desolations, and the city whereupon thy name is called: For
we do not present our supplications before thee, for our own righteousness,
but for thy great tender mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive us, O Lord
consider and do it: defer not for thine own sake, for thy name is called
upon thy city, and upon thy people.

A Prophecy of the forgiveness of sin: which is given to the Church by
Christ.
Out of the 13. Chap, of Zachary, verse 1.

In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.

This is it that S. Paul speaks of in the 3. Chap. to Titus. We our selves
also were in times past disobedient, serving to diverse desires: but when the
bountifulness, and love of God our savior toward man appeared, he saved us.
Not by the works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to his
mercy, by the washing of the new birth and the renewing of the holy Ghost:
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus: that we being justified by
his grace, should be heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

That Jesus Christ has power to forgive sins.
Out of the 9. Chap. of S. Matthew.

Jesus said unto the sick of the palsy: Son, be of good comfort: thy sins
are forgiven thee: And that ye may know, that the son of man has authority
in earth to forgive sins: then he said unto the sick of the palsy, arise,
take up thy bed, etc.

MEDITATION.

THe greatest adversity to the man sick of the palsy, was not his outward
palsy: for as Jesus Christ did heal the sickness of the body, so would he
show, that it was he which did take away the diseases from the soul, which
are the most dangerous, howsoever men care not for the^ so much as for the
bodily sicknesses. Health is therefore nothing: and it is nothing to be
delivered out of a sickness: if we be lying under ye wrath of God: if sin be
not forgiven, which is the cause of death, and of all torments. Now, when the
question is of the forgiveness and healing of their sins, men are
ordinarily much distract: or when they do not consider how necessary it is:
or rather, when they do seek such a benefit there where it is not: But the
Lord teaches us, what is the true Purgatory. Purgatory.
A material fire cannot purge the soul, and nothing can make clean sin but
God only, which is the sovereign cleanesse as Micheah in the 7. Chap. of his
prophecy: and David in the 130. Psalm do attribute that unto God as his own,
to tread down sin, and to yield grace and mercy to poor sinners. And to the
end, we should be assured thereof, the son of God is come into ye world, and
by his blood has reconciled us. He therefore has power to forgive sins,
for he is very God. He has also right to pardon us, for he has satisfied
for us. Now if any would charge us again for our sins: We, I say, which do
believe in Jesus, it behooves us to cleave unto him, forasmuch as he is our
warrant. Therefore there is neither Angel, nor any other creature, which has
this power, but he which is God, and who has fully paid for our sins: O
how rightly is his doctrine called the Gospel, that is to say glad tidinges:
Seeing that it gives boldness and comfort unto poor sinners: for so much as
it calls us his children, and considering that it declares unto us the
forgiveness of our offenses, which would bind us to eternal death, and all
through the blood of the Lamb, that takes away the sins of the world, not
taking them away in such sort, as there is no more sin remaining, but that it
might not be imputed, John. 1.29. Sin how it is taken away.
that it might not reign, and to be short, that it might be forgiven? Let us
therefore take heed of the Devils temptations, which is an accuser that
accuses us, and without ceasing lies in wait for nothing more than to throw
us down headlong into despair, and to make doubtful this Article, for the
forgiveness of our sins, to the end to trouble our poor consciences. Let
us hold I say this for an undoubted article, as it is said in the 10. of the
Acts: that all the prophets do give this testimony of Jesus, that through
his name, all that believe in him, without exception of persons, shall receive
remission of sins. We have indeed strongly to wrestle, and we feel yet the
law of our members, which kicketh against the spirit: Romans 7.23.
neither also do we believe an utter putting off of our sins, but the
forgiveness of our sins, and therefore we cry out with S. Paul: Alas
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, from the body of this death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, who as it is said in the 4. Chap.
to the Romans, is ordained an oblation for the forgiveness of our sins.

Prayers and meditations to dispose a man to the acknowledgement of his sins.
A prayer of S. Augustine out of the 11. and 24. of his private meditation of
the soul with God.
O Lord, I thy poor creature will yet have hope in the shadow of thy wings,
all sinful that I am, having remembrance of this thy goodness, according
to the which thou have created me. Help therefore thy creature, that thy
goodness would frame, and suffer not that he who^ thy mercy has made, be
destroyed through my malice. For if I O Lord return to dust, whereto shall thy
creature serve thee? It was not my deseruinges, neither the grace that was in
me, then when I was but dust, which could lead thee to create me: let then
this clemency which moved thee to create me, let the same lead thee to keep
me. Whereto shall it serve thee, that I was made, if thy right hand hold me
not up? Alas my God, I very well know; that thy hand is not shortened that it
cannot save me, neither is thy ear likewise stopped, that it cannot hear. But
I truly feel, that they are my sins which have made the division between
thee and me, between darkness and light, between death and life, between
vanity and verity, between this daily life, and the everlasting life.
Notwithstanding, O mighty God, I that am the work of thy hands, I will call
upon thee, yea I will cry upon thy name O Lord. For it is not in my self,
neither in my strength that I have set my hope. It is thy arm that shall save
me, it is the light of thy covenant that shall make me glad. Otherwise alas if
thou weart not my hope, I should despair. But thou art my maker, which never
leauest them that trust in thee. Thou art a great God loving, sweet, pacient,
disposing all things with an unmeasurable mildness. True it is, that we are
as a withered lea^e, or as a little flower, and all our life is but vanity, and
a wind that passes away. For this cause we beseech thee also that thou
proceed not against us in thy wrath, yea seeing that we be thy little children,
that thou have made of the earth: alas would thou try thy strength against
a leaf, or against straw and stubble? We have heard so much praise of thy
mercy, in that thou desire not the death of us poor sinners. Therefore
suffer not death, whom thou have not created, to rule over thy creature. I
desire O Lord to be saved, but in having a will thereto, I have not the power
thereof: to be short, I can do nothing unless thy power comfort me, I do not
know to will and desire that I ought, unless thou grant me grace, that thy
will be done in me, as it is in heaven. Thou art the Lord of the whole
world, and the prince of all flesh. That which does like thee, thou do
fulfill in heaven, in earth, and in the depthes. Let then thy will be done in
us, on whom thy name is called upon: and that thy creature, whom thou have
created to thy likeness perish not.

A prayer upon the same matter.
O Lord how dare I name thee my father, and esteem my self thy child,
seeing that in me there is no obedience? How dare I lift up my eyes to heaven,
seeing I am unworthy that the earth should bear me? For death is the reward
of sinners, and my iniquities are before me, which set thine anger in my
sight* I have alas so often offended, and my sins have fought against thy
mercy. Thou have given me understanding to know thee, and a heart to honor
thee. Thou have given me eyes to behold thy works, and hands to stretch
forth to the comfort of my neighbor: to be short, thou have fashioned me to
thy glory. But O God, I have turned back: my spirit does apply it self to
iniquity. My heart has served this wretched body, which is but a vessel of
dung, and must be a pray for worms. My soul has not loved thee, with all her
strength, neither has meditated in thy word. My eyes have been fixed on the
ground. I have stretched out my hands to do sooner evil than good. My feet
have walked in the way of the world, and not in thy paths. And in such sort O
Lord, as if thou should go forwards against me in thine anger, I could
not awaite for any other thing at my departure out of this world, than to
make my abode in hell. I cannot awaite but for thy judgment, and this horrible
sentence, that shall flash and lighten upon the wicked, when they shall be sent
unto everlasting fire. But O good God, I have yet my trust in thee: for it is
not the assurance of my works whereon I rest, it is in thy great mercy, it is
in thy son Jesus, which is flesh of my flesh, and bones of my bones,
according to his humanity. Behold then his precious blood which was shed
for me. Forgive thy sinful servant, for thy innocent sons sake. Wipe away
that tract that Satan has made in me: and grave in my heart thy
commandementes. Quench vice in me, and there kindle faith, and true
godliness. Take from me a stony heart, and give me a heart apt to be taught,
which may love thee, honor thee, and delight in thy word: and that so I may
have part in thy kingdom.

Another confession of sins.
O Lord my God, I have sinned against thy majesty, I have provoked thy wrath
against me, and also my soul is in sorrow. For it feels the condemnation
that it has deserved, and has no satisfaction that may content thee. What
then O Lord, shall I perish in mine iniquity, must I in steed of breathing
again, despair in my self? It had been much better that I never had been
borne in the world than to be here without thy grace. Whereto does this life
serve me if thou which art life do not favor me? Alas my God, by my sin I
have lost thy favor: but thou never loosest thy goodness: therefore look not
upon me a sinner, in thy righteousness: behold rather thy creature in thy
loving kindness. Thou have bidden us come unto thee, then when as we sought
thee not: and thou have saved us, when we were thine enemies. Cast not therefore
now away them which seek thee, and with all humbleness call upon thee. For
that that I make my self strong with thy clemency, is not through
presumption, but because of thy promises that do assure us of thee, thou will
not the death of sinners, but their conversion and life. And to make them live,
which were dead, thou have caused thy only begotten son to die, and would
also, that he should bear the name of a savior. Wherefore shall I distrust
then of grace? Wherefore should my soul live in sorrow, sith yt it finds in
thee so great a sweetenes? O Lord my God, I remember the poor Publican, who
humbling his eyes to the ground, groaning under the burden of his sins, and
requiring thy mercy, went down into his house justified. I remember the poor
thief, who confessing his fault and acknowledging thy son Jesus upon the
cross, whereon he was hanged, went to paradise. I consider also the example of
thine Apostle, who having forsaken his master three times, was not put out of
his favor, nor out of his Apostleship, because ye weeping bitterly he was
converted to thee. But God grant me ye Publicans hu^blenes, the confession of
him yt was hanged with Christ, and the repentance of thy Apostle, ye holding on
the way which they have held, I may with them enjoy thy favor and enter into
thy glory.

A prayer upon the same matter.
O Lord what man is he yt dare speak unto God? How dare we ask thee life,
seeing we have deserved death? From whence comes this boldness, to have our
recourse unto thee, whom we have offended? Is it not thy great mercy, that is
so noted throughout the world? Was it not because that thou art slow to
anger, and of great clemency? But if thou would enter into judgment with
us, no man living could be justified before thy face. I pray and beseech thee
therefore O Lord, that thou would understand my gronings, and hearken unto
my prayers. I was, Alas, conceived and borne in sin: and my iniquities are so
great in number, that I can not know them by the one half: so as O Lord,
this burden would ouerwhelme me, if thy mercy did not comfort me. But I pray
thee chastise me not in thy wrath, neither assay thy might against me:
otherwise I were utterly undone, and in the twinkling of an eye, thou
could destroy me in thine anger. Change rather my heart, that I may be an
organe of thy glory: and a vessel of honor in thy house. Imprint in my soul
all righteousness and godliness, that I may serve and honor thy majesty. I
have wandered like a poor sheep, but bring me again into thy fold, and be
thou my shepherd for ever. For Lord when thou have brought me to nothing,
and confounded me: Alas I shall not any more bless and praise thee. But if thou
be merciful unto me, I shall render unto thee thanks giving: I shall vow my
self to thy service, and I will remain in thy holy temple to worship thee.

A prayer to ask of God true repentance.
Almighty God, seeing that our sins continually cry unto heaven, and when
one of them is overcome, an other forthwith springs up, so that ambition
being overcome, covetousness does tempt us, and covetousness being
vanquished, presumption does solicit us, or some other greedy desire: grant
us grace carefully to walk, and to fight this good fight against our selves,
truly to examine and to sound our selves, and so we co^demning our selves, may
prevent thy judgment, stirring up one another, to true repentance and
amendment of life, to the end that it be not in vain that thy healthful
grace may appear unto us, and that we make not sad thy holy spirit, and that
so O God walking in thy fear we may be made true partakers of the forgiveness
of sins, that thy son has purchased for us, by his blood shedding, that we
might grow up according to the new man, and make the old man to die, until
that we being unclothed of this mortal body, we might come unto that
perfection, then O Lord, when as thou shall be all in all; and that being
gathered together in thee, we shall behold thy glory in thy kingdom. So be
it.

I believe the rising again of the body.
TErtullian, an ancient Doctor very well says, in the book which he has
written of the resurrection: that this article is proper to Christians, and is
their special comfort, to believe that this flesh shall rise again at the last
day, whereof the philosophers, and Sadduces did but make a mock. But he who
has given us these bodies, can very well bring to pass that they shall live
again out of ye dust, as we do protest yt we believe, not here giving place
to any thing but unto faith: no not to the speculations of reason. Christ is
also risen again being made as it were the first fruits and the honorable
head of all those which are risen, or hereafter shall be raised again. For
this was through his only virtue. This also is the reason, that that body which
did suffer so much, should be likewise partaker of life and glory. For Christ
has wholly redeemed mankind, and without this trust we should be miserable,
we which do suffer so many torments in our bodies, for the name of Jesus. Now
to comfort and resolve us more and more in this article, we must consider of
these witnesses following.

Out of the 19. Chap. of Job.

I am sure that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand up the last of the
earth.

And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in
my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold.

Out of the 26. of Esaiah.

The dead shall live, even with my body shall they rise. Awake and sing, ye
that dwell in dust: for thy deaw is as the deawe of herbs, and the earth
shall cast out the dead.

Out of the 13. Chap. of the prophet Hosea.

I will redeem them from the power of the grave, I will deliver them from
death. O death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy destruction.

A meditation of OEcolampadius.
The Lord shows by this place, that if the people had repented, they should
have been delivered, though they had bin as it were in the grave already.
The Hebrewe word signifies Hell, or ye grave, and is often times taken in the
scripture, for some great and extreme danger: as also by the word of the
plague, is understood a great destruction. S. Paul in the 1.5. Chap. of the 1.
Epistle to ye Corinthians, when he entreats of the resurrection, he alleges
this place according to the greek translation of the 70. interpreters rather
than after the Hebrewe text, and thus takes it: Where is thy sting? As
preparing himself against death, and showing that she had no more power, since
that Christ is risen again. Now will some say: how does this place agree
with S, Paul? We must consider the things more nearer. It was said, that if
the people had turned to God, he had delivered them through his divine mercy.
But forasmuch as there was nothing in us but sin, and so likewise death, it
behooves us to look upon Christ, who has overcome death, and vanquished Hell,
in such sort, as they cannot hurt the children of God. For being graffed in
Christ, we fear nothing. Wherefore S. Paul, who rejoices himself in Christ,
and in his righteousness, and who considers that through him salvation is
given unto us, does with good right dispite and triumph over death: and as
concerning him, he does not recite the words of the prophet word for word,
but he has a respect to the intent and meaning of them. By Christ then are we
quickened, and therefore have we sure hope of the resurrection, so as that
which the righteousness of the law could not do is fulfilled and wrought
through Christ, in whom we fear not death. Thus by faith we are delivered
from the whole curse.

Out of the 22. Chap. of S. Matthew.

Jesus disputing of the resurrection against the Sadduces, said:

And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read what is spoken
unto you of God, saying:

I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaae, and the God of Jacob? God is
not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Out of the 5. of S. John.

The hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves, shall hear the
voice of the son of man.

And they shall come forth, that have done good unto the resurrection of
life: but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation.

Excellent witnesses of the resurrection out of the 15. Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians.

If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen:

But Christ is risen and was seen of many:

Then is there a resurrection of the dead.

If we have our only hope in this life: we shall be most miserable of all
mankind.

But our faith is not in vain, neither the witness, that the holy Ghost does
yield unto our hearts, that we be the children of God.

Then is there another entire life of man, and consequently a resurrection.

The second Adam is truly as mighty at the least, as the first. Now all
these die which are borne of Adam: it follows then, yt they which be borne
again in the second Adam, which is Christ, are also made living after the
body and soul.

The sacrament of Baptism is unto us also a sacrament, which does represent
unto us our mortification, our life and resurrection, when the people were
drawn through the water.

The saints and faithful neither fought, nor suffered in vain. For if there
were not another life, in vain should they suffer even unto death. We have
likewise says S. Paul, an example of the resurrection in the grain of corn,
and in other seeds, which die in the ground, and in dying do in the spring
time rise again more fairer: wherefore is it that that should not so likewise
happen unto our bodies?

Out of the 3. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians.

Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto himself.

Out of the 2. Chapter of the 2. Epistle to Timothy.

S. Paul reproves Hymeneus and Philetus which have erred from the truth,
saying that the resurrection is past already, and do destroy the faith of
certain.

I believe the life everlasting.
Everlasting salvation is the end of our faith, as says S. Peter in the 1.
Epistle and 1. Chap. This is truly the glory of God, which ought to be our
end, and that whereunto we do aspire, even the price which is promised to
this militant Church, that is life everlasting. The soul of Lazarus separated
from the body, Luke. 16.22.
was received to everlasting rest. It was said unto the good thief (as he is
called) which confessed Christ with repentance* To day shall thou be with me
in paradise.

Now who is he which could express the blessedness of the life everlasting?
For this word Life comprehends all joy, peace, glory and honor, as S. Paul
says in the 2. Chap. to the Romans: Unto those which with patience are given
to goodness, shall be given, Glory, honor, immortality, and life everlasting:
And they shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of their father: as it is
said in the 13. of S. Matthew. Contrariwise the Infidels shall be cast out
from the face of the Lord, with anger, with everlasting torments, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Behold, what is the ancient faith, that the Apostles have held, and S. Peter
has preached, for the which our Churches are persecuted, and we are called
heritikes. But what? We oftentimes call to remembrance that goodly admonition
that S. Paul made to Timothy in the 6. Chap. of his first Epistle: Fight the
good fight of faith: Lay hold of eternal life: whereunto thou art also called,
and of that which David speaks in the 138. Psalm. Lord though I walk in
the midst of trouble, yet will thou revive me. And of this goodly place,
which is in the 25. of Esai: The Lord will destroy death for ever, and will
wipe away the tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his people will he take
away out of all the earth. And in that day shall men say, Lo this is our God:
we have awaited for him, and he will also save us. This is the Lord, we
have awaited for him: we will also be joyful and rejoice in his salvation.
And though we be delivered to death, for the name of Jesus: yet do we know
that his life shall be manifested in our mortal flesh, as it is said in the
4. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinth. But the fearful and unbelieving, the
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, Idolaters and
liars, shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone
which is the second death. Apoca. 21.8.


Comfortes against death taken out of many ancient Doctors.
IT is not without great reason, that the great philosopher Plato says, that
the life of a wise man ought to pass in a continual meditation of death. For
we shall in deed avoid a number of offenses, if we have in remembrance our
end, and the estate of this life, which is so short, as it is said in the 7. of
Ecclesiast: Now it is a strange thing to consider the blockishnesse of men in
this case, which by daily experience well see that they must die. They see
well, that our bodies be not made of iron nor of steel, but of a weak and
variable substance. And yet nevertheless, they dispose not themselves unto
their end, neither make any provision for those things which concern the
time to come. The beasts herein do pass us, as Jeremy shows in the 8. of
his prophecy. For by the sky, the Storke knows the season of the year, and
the Turtle, and the Crane do mark what time is fittest for their coming, and
all these birds do well know, how that it is not always Summer, and that
Winter will come.

But men mark not the judgments of God, but sleep in the world, as if they
should never remove. It is a thing very certain, that we must all die:
seeing that we be all sinners, and that death is the reward of sin, as S.
Paul writes in the 6. to the Romans. True it is that the scripture sets
down unto us three kinds of death. The one is the sundering of the soul from
the body, with making nothing of the body, until the resurrection. An other
is, the death of sin, as it is often said: that men which are nourished in
their sins, are dead. And Jesus Christ speaking of those which knew not God,
said, Let the dead bury the dead.

The third is called in the Apocalypse, the second death, sometimes the eternal
death, whereunto the wicked shall be condemned in the last judgment. Now
albeit that the Painimes sometimes seem to have spoken prettily of death: Yet
so it is that two things have made them uncertain in this matter and
unprovided of sound consolation.

The first is, that they never well understood the cause of death, neither the
remedy thereof: The one whereof was by the fall of Adam: the other given by
Jesus Christ.

Moreover, they never understood the spring of true life that lies in God,
and in the beholding of his face, where of the children of God shall after the
resurrection be the beholders both in soul and body. Although then that Adam
before his sin, was created according to the body of the dust of the earth:
yet in deed, so it is that if he had not sinned, the divine virtue and Image
of God had swallowed up in him all corruption, and defended him against death:
in such sort as without grief, when it had pleased God, he should pass into
heavenly life. But his wilful transgressing made him with his posterity
servile unto death, so as he had received for him and for his, a most blessed
condition, if he had not sinned. And as concerning that the death of Adam did
not follow for his sin all at one time: it was not but through the mercy of
our good God whose will is to preserve mankind: in the mean time punishing
sin, in that that Adam and all his raze have bin and are of one mortal
condition, full of labor and misery. We do also see the pitiful entry that
we do make into the world: casting forth a thousand gronings and sighs from
our first ariuall into the world.

Furthermore every one will easily confess, that death is a thing most
fearful that can happen unto man: because that it does represent unto us at
one time the wrath of God, and a miserable undoing of our life, whereof
naturally we are so desirous. Behold wherefore wise men are many times given
to search out co^forts, wherewith to sweeten for us the soreness of death.
But those that have not tasted of the word of GOD, have nothing to stay upon,
not finding any resolution, but that we must bear that which is ordained for
us by an irreuocable arrest. Many of ye Heathens being endued with a knowledge
somewhat higher than the rest, and affirming the immortality of the soul,
hold this for a resolution, that in the other life, the state of good men shall
be happy: seeing that here below they be ordinarily subject to many
miseries.

And in deed we must come to this point, yt by the temporal and present
estate, one cannot judge of men's happiness: as also contrariwise, they that
most do prosper in this world in earthly things, die oftentimes as brute
beasts having a soul buried in earthly things: albeit that there is a
difference betwixt man and beast, because everlasting death is reserved for the
wicked: and because the end crowns ye work. Though that in this world a man
received great gifts of God, yet the continuance, and all the virtues do
declare and show themselves chiefly in the Agonies of death. Therefore even as
one wretched nature has brought us unto one like condition of death, so does
the grace of God make the difference, that the one, to wit, the ungodly, die
to their destruction: And the other, which be the children of God, guided by
his spirit, and by his word, Psalm. 116.
do die for to live more happily, so that their death is precious before GOD.
Then let us say that which is said in the 23. of Numbers: I pray God I may die
the just men's death: which are assured as Job says in the 19. Chapter, that
one day they shall see GOD in their flesh. This was the cause that men were
customed to bury the dead with a certain special care. For as men lock up
their apparel in a chest, meaning to wear them again: even so are the dead
bodies buried in full hope of a certain rising again.

Truly we ought well to wish this time where as Christ says in the 22. of
S. Matthew, when we shall be like unto Angels, in happiness and in pure
conversation, and thoughts. Then shall this be the true fulfilling of our
redemption, when as we shall be gathered together on high, where there is
neither cold nor heat, Apoca. 7.
hunger nor thirst: but a lasting blessedness. But to whom is death pleasant,
but to those that do labor? The poor day-laborer is glad that he has done
his days labor. So is death sweet unto the afflicted, and the remembrance
thereof is bitter to those that rest themselves in worldly things. The chief
point is, let us labor whilst it is day, and let us learn to know God so long
as we be in this world, seeing that in the knowledge of him lies our
salvation. Oh what a comfort does a faithful soul ^inde, in that that Jesus
has spoken in the 17. Chap. of S. John: My Father, I will that where I am,
those may be there also which thou have given me? So then when as we do
meditate of these things in good time, death will be sweet unto us. And
thereuppon it comes to pass, even as to those whose discourses and thoughts
have bin sweet unto them all day long, that likewise their dreams be all the
night very pleasant and quiet. But the troublesome men and busy trotters up
and down, have their dreams commonly full of unquietness. Such like shall
the death of those be that do incomber themselves with worldly things. And
as S. Augustine says, What is this but death? This is the leaving of the
earthly body, and a heavy burden: provided always that an other burden more
dangerous, which is sin, do not ouercharge us: or (as says S. Paul in the
third Chap. to the Thessalontans) we must then let our conversation from
henceforth be in heaven, whence we do await after our Savior Jesus Christ,
who shall transform our bodies and make them conformable unto his glorious
body. Oh wonderful mercy of this great God, that presents life unto us not
deserved: and puts death far from us that we have merited. Oh what light
is this word of God, that gives us light in the grave, and in the midst of
death makes us to see? Therefore now the children of God do no whit fear
death: But as S. Cyprian writes in a letter which he sent unto ye Confessors
and Martyrs of Jesus Christ: He that has once overcome death in his person
daily beats it down in his members. So as we have Jesus Christ not only a
beholder of our combats, but an assistant and wrestler with us.

And as this good Doctor writes in a treatise which he made of the mortality,
the only way for a man yt will not come to Jesus Christ, is to fear death: And
not to be willing to come to him, is as much to say, as not to be willing to
reign with him. What trauailer is he, which drawing near unto his home,
rejoices not, having passed through many dangerous ways? And who is he yt
will not willingly run out of a house that is ready to fall down about his
ears? What pleasure have we in this world which approaches daily to his end,
and wherein we buy the pleasures so derely which we receive in this life? What
other thing is it but a continual battle, and a sharp medley, wherein we be
wounded, sometime with envy, sometime with one thing, sometime with an other,
besides the alaromes which do give us in our bodies a number of diseases? Why
shall we not say then with S. Paul in the first Chapter to the Philippians, I
desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. Wherefore we pray daily, Let thy
kingdom come, but only for ye desire yt we have to see ye accomplishme^t
thereof in an other life. For as S. Ierom does largely declare in ye funeral
Sermon of Nepotian unto Heliodor, if ye Panims have oftentimes conquered their
mourninges, loosing their friends, by ye simple knowledge yt they had yt they
were mortal: Wherefore do we sorrow and groan with so many sighs and tears, ye
death of Gods children, whom we know to be blessed? Jesus Christ wept upon
Lazarus: And S. Paul to ye These. does not altogether forbid mourning: yet is
it for us to behave our selves more virtuously than ye Painims, and not to
show so great a mourning for men, as it were a disparing in us of Gods
mercies. And as Saint Cyprian says, Wherefore do we put on our black mourning
weeds, when as our brethren go to do on their white garments to rest with ye
Lord? Let us sorrow for them rather as absent, than dead: and not as people
that we have lost, but yt we a wait for to see again. Alas yt which is to be
wailed for, it is that which men do see in this world. We read of Xerxes
the great Lord and general, how that he had a desire one day to view his
whole army, which was of a marvelous number of people from the top of a
mountain: and seeing so many people began to weep, considering that within
one hundredth year after there should not be one of the^ left alive. But if
any one could not get up upon such a mountain whence he might discover so
many sins as be in the world, so many murders as be committed so many
cities and realms as be ruined: so many deceites and cousinages as be
practiced: so much poverty and infirmity as is every where: Alas he should
have great occasion to fetch many a sad sigh, and to shead many a whotte
tear.

We see not in our selves the changes that happen unto our persons, first in
our infancy, then in our youth, then in our full age, last of all in our old
age, and so many crosses the rest of our days, whereby we must pass. Then
that which we ought to do, is so to mislyke of this life, which is but a
vapor and a shadow of a true life, a traueling and a frail life, that we
suffer Christ to reign and live in us, to the end that by him we may have
everlasting life, the which only deserves to be esteemed and called a life.

A Prayer.
O Lord my God, if thou have advertised the king Ezechias by the Prophet Esai,
Esaias. 38.
to dispose of his affairs when he should die: much more thy will is, that
we going to death, should have regard to the disposition of our souls: to
present our selves before thee. For alas, death is certain, but his hour is
uncertain: and there is nothing more dangerous than to leave the soul in this
fight doubtful and uncertain. The sentence of S. Barnard
O Lord what a Porter have thou given us, at our passage from this world, which
will not suffer us to carry away any thing with us? But as we came naked into
this world, even so death causes us to pass out of the same state. Wherefore
should we then torment our selves so much in worldly things? O Lord, what is
it, that I should dispose of my self? It is in thee, to dispose of us: it is
in thee to command, and in us to obey. Bear up our weakness through thy
mercy. For how is it, that we should not be afraid of death, since the horror
thereof has made thy son Jesus to sweat water and blood? Mar. 14. Esai. 53.
But seeing that it is even he, who has also borne our sorrows, and that was
wounded for our iniquities, what gain or advantage should death have over us,
sith that thy son Jesus has saved us? And if thou be for us who is he that
can be against us? Yea man borne of a woman is thraled to many miseries and
vanishes away as a shadow, or flower of the field. But yet O good God, we
do know how thou desire not the death of us sinners: Ezech. 18.
thou rather would that we should turn and live. We do shed here many
tears, but thou will, even at once make dry all my tears by calling me unto
thee. Now O Lord strike here below, so long as thou will, hurt, wound,
seeing that thou art merciful and favorable unto us in the everlasting and
life to come. A sentence out of S. Augustine. Romans 8.
What sorrow or affliction should we fear, since that all things turn to
thy children for their good? Alas who would take much pleasure in this life,
since that man living in it can not see thee, and that all that is in it is but
transitory, and miserable? Grant me therefore grace, patiently to awaite thy
will, that I may be found a watching faithful servant. And as the prince of
this world, coming toward thy son Jesus, John. 14.
found nothing what to bite upon him: so also the same enemy may not have any
thing against me, seeing that I do belong to thy son Jesus. By faith O
Lord, have our fathers overcome kingdoms, and closed the mouths of the
Lions. Therefore O Lord grant me grace, that I may also overcome by faith all
tentations, until that this faith being ended I may enter into thy everlasting
^est.

A prayer against the sorrows of Death.
O Lord GOD my father, who weart willing that thy son Jesus should yield
up his spirit to save me, grant me grace that I may bear in my heart the
remembrance of his bitter sorrows and passion: and that I may forthwith
remember the sweet and tender affection that thou bear unto us poor
sinners, saving them with so precious a price, that of one part I may with a
true sorrow die unto sin, and forsake all mine iniquities, and of the other
part, the remembrance of thy grace may make my soul live: let thy mercy O
good God be unto me a lamp and light to lighten me in the darkness of death,
until that I come unto thee. O Lord, if thou weart unto me so good a father
in life, be also the same unto me in death. Leave me not then when as my
strengthes shall fail me. And even then namely when my mouth shall be no more
able to speak, leave not off Lord to hear my desires, unto the last breath of
my life. Comfort again thy weak creature, and receive my soul into thy
glory, who yields up to thee. Thou O Lord have saved me: into thy hands I
recommende my spirit. Grant me the last words of thy son Jesus in his voice
upon his cross, that they may be my last words in this life. Behold the
earthly abode of this body, which dissolueth it, to yield my self ioiful of
this tabernacle most blessed, which is not made with man's hands. This great
prophet Elias, when he was taken up into heaven, let fall his cloak: so
willingly would I also leave this garment both earthly and corruptible, to be
clothed with immortality. Heretofore I was a wayfarer, now am I come into my
true country. Even until this time was I in fight, and now go I to triumph
with our head Jesus Christ. I begin to see already this haven, which I have so
long desired, hulling amongst the tempests of the world. To be short, I
joyfully pass out of darkness into light, from dangers of this world to a
place of assurance, out of a lamentable case into a blessed state, from
battle to victory, and from an earthly to an everlasting life. Here am I
blind, and there shall I receive light. In this place was I hacked with many
wounds, and there shall I receive healing. O wretched life. O frail and life
uncertain in this world, how deceitful and yrksome art thou? The more thou
think or beleeuest, the more thou distrustest and misbeleeuest. The more one
goes in this world, the more is he charged with faintness and miseries.
Blessed is he which knows the vanity of this world: yet more blessed; that
does not set his affection therein: and most blessed, which is withdrawn from
thence, to be with thee Oh my God and my savior.

A prayer upon the same Argument.
Alas, when shall I come before the face of my God, and when shall I have my
abiding in his house? How long shall I be in this exile, whereunto for sin
we were banished? But how shall a sinner stand before this great God? How shall
this poor flesh get up into everlasting paradise? But praised be my God, who
has given unto us so good an assurance in his holy word. Blessed be GOD,
which has ordained for us this good ladder, by the which we ascend up into
heaven, to wit, Jesus Christ: so that which was unto us impossible, is possible
to the believer. Therefore look not O Lord into the manifold sins that are
within me: But rather remember that I am thy creature and the work of thy
hands. I am unworthy to be called thy child: but it has pleased thee to
be my father. Thy will was that thy son Jesus should come down here below
to us, to make us ascend up to thee. I fear not then death, seeing I have life
with me. Thy son has destroyed death for all those which do believe in him:
And albeit that this body be gnawen with worms, yet the soul goes forthwith
into rest, and the body awaiteth the resurrection. I do desire therefore to die,
to behold thy face, and willingly leave this life to be with Christ.

Oh my God, if the simple sound of thy word which I hear on earth does cause
my soul to live already, what life and what countenance shall I have there on
high, when as I shall receive it in my heart, seeing thy glory, and being in
so blessed a company? Open unto me then O Lord the gate of thy kingdom. Make
me to hear this sweet voice, which was prepared for the poor thief on the
cross: To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Alas Lord, I am unworthy
thereof: yet thy mercy gives me assurance. Grant me also O father, strength
to persevere, give me daily this desire of the life to come: for if we be so
much affectioned to this earthly life, that is but for a day and full of
miseries, with what wish ought I to desire that glorious life, which thy son
Jesus has purchased for us?

Other short prayers for certain necessities of the Churches. To demand
perseverance.
Almighty God, seeing we be knit together by the guide and counsel of thy
son to this body of the Church, which was so often scatered and dispersed:
grant that we may abide in this unity of faith, and that we may constantly
fight against all temptation of this world, and that we may not turn away
from a true and right intent though it come to pass that troubles upon
troubles do happen, offenses upon offenses: seeing our faith is not builded
upon the holiness of man, or upon their persons, but upon thee O true and
almighty God. And whatsoever euilles or deaths, that shall be offered unto us,
we may not be possessed with such fear, as may pluck away our hope out of our
hearts: but that we may rather learn to lift up our eyes, yea our
understanding and all our wits unto this thy power, by the which thou
quicknest the dead and raisest up that which was of nothing, that our spirits
may always aspire unto everlasting rest: albeit it behooued us daily to die,
until at the last, you shall show, how thou art the true fountain of life,
granting unto us the immortality through thy son Jesus Christ.

A prayer to have steadfastness and constancy.
EVerlasting and almighty God, al good and merciful, seeing we be here
subject to so great adversities, and of so many sorts, which lift themselves
up like sudden tempests: grant that we having our hearts directed up to
heaven, may nevertheless repose our selves upon thy secret providence, and
what so ever troubles there be in our senses, we may rest assured in this
principal, and hold it as certain, that is, that thou art he, that will be
our father, and govern us by thy wisdom, to the end that in all our
troubles, we may always acknowledge thy hand, and thy counsel, full of
righteousness, and of great and singular wisdom and justice, that we may call
evermore upon thee, and save our selves at this haven, that is to wit, that
although we be driven and tossed hither and thither, yet thou hold us up by
thy hand, until we be received into thy rest.

A prayer to obtain victory by Jesus Christ.
Almighty God, forasmuch as we be filled full of so many desires, which might
defile the pure and holy gifts of the spirit: grant that we may receive in
good worth the chastisementes which thou do send unto us, to tame the
said desires, and that acknowledging thee for our sheepeheard, we may suffer
our selves to be governed by ye hook of thy sheepeheardes staff, daily
profiting under thy corrections and tasting thy goodness in thy displeasure,
we may not lose courage, but as walking through blame and dishonor, yea in the
midst of death, for thy names sake, we may rejoice in thee, esteeming all
things loss, in comparison of the knowledge of thy son. Let therefore that
same spirit, which has sanctified us strengthen us also, that being partakers
of this anointing of the holy Ghost, we may be likewise partakers of the
victory of thy son Jesus Christ.

A prayer patiently to abide poverty when God shall send it.
Lord God and father, since it has pleased thee to abase thy self, even to
take care over us, namely for ye respect of this life, and to promise us daily
bread, granting us wherewith to pass on our way here beneath: grant that we
may learn to rest our selves peaceably upon thee, who art our God, and of our
children, and have had care of us, when as we were nothing: that so resting us
upon thy blessing, we may behave our selves, not only from all theftes and
unlawful means, to pluck away other men's goods: but also from all
covetousness and impatience, as we O Lord may content our selves under thy
fear, and that we may learn so to bear poverty on the earth, that being
satisfied with the riches, which thou have offered unto us by thy Gospel, and
whereof we be already partakers through faith, we may cherefully bend to the
fullness thereof, and unto this perfect conjunction with thy son Jesus Christ
in his kingdom.

A prayer for the morning.
O Lord God and father, I poor creature, which am naturally swathed in
darkness, durst not lift up my eyes unto thee, that dwell in a light not
able to be come unto, were it not that thy dear son Jesus Christ, which is
the brightness of thy glory, has made me way unto the throne of thy grace,
through the shedding of his most precious blood. So now my God, I do
acknowledge how that it is a great benefit, that I which am unworthy to live
upon the earth, and that have deserved through my sins, to be cast into utter
darkness for ever more, I have this blessing to see the light of the day, and
of the sun, and to behold the works of thy hands, with the inioying of the
earthly riches, that thou have stored us with all. And for so much as O God,
that thy sun shines as well upon the wicked, as on the good, and that this
outward light is not but to guide our bodies: grant O God, to shine upon us
the brightness of thy face, in blessing me, and in lightning my understanding,
begetting and sanctifying me a new, that I may walk in the way of thy
commandments, and that I may behave my self in my calling in such sort, as
all my thoughts, words and deeds, may be to thy honor and glory, and the
edifying of my neighbors. Thou have O Lord withdrawn me, from the darkness
of ydolatrie and ignorance, and thou have taken from before mine eyes the
bend of superstition. Thou have also in our time made shine, or as it were
lightened again the fair lamp of the preaching of thy Gospel. But suffer me
not, that having eyes I see no whit: inlighten O Lord, all the parts of my
soul, and cause all that is in me, to be employed to render unto thee all
honor and obedience, and that in my calling thy fear be before mine eyes. And
because thou esteemest not to be beloved of us, unless we love our
neighbors: imprint in me a faith working by charity, in such sort as with
hope I may have a good conscience, not doing to any, but that I would to be
done unto my self, that I may have a merciful heart, and loving, that my
entrails be not shut up in the behalf of the poor and needy: To be short,
that seeing how the figure of this world passes, I may use the world as
passing through it, remembering my self always, yt heaven is the place of my
corporation. Grant me peace amongst my family, give blessing to my labor,
contentment to my spirit, rest and comfort to the poor afflicted, and full
deliverance to thy Church, by thy son Jesus Christ. So be it.

A prayer for the Evening.
O Lord God, thy people Israel did present to thee the morning and evening
sacrifices, in token of confessing thee, how that thou keep us both evening
and morning. But what more liking sacrifice can we offer now, than our
sorowefull hearts, and our tongues, that do praise and bless thee? Wherefore
(O Lord) I present my self in all humility and reverence before thy face,
beseeching thee, that thou would not enter into an account, neither into
judgment with me thy poor creature. For be it that thou look into the first
or the second table of thy commandementes, thou shall find that I have
offended thee many ways. Notwithstanding, like as the child has always his
recourse unto his father: even so have I my refuge and my retire to thee O
Lord that art not lightly angry but of great mercy, beseeching thee, that by
thy goodness, thou cover my faults, even as all things are covered by the
darkness spread forth over the earth. Alas my God, I know that satan goes
about as a roaring lion: and I do know that he is the governor of
darkness, and prince of this world: but if thou be for me, who shall be
against me? It is thou that have thousands of Angels, which are encamped about
us: it is thou that have created the hot son, and the shattering cold
moon: it is thou that gouernest the whole world, and do never slumber.
Grant me therefore grace, to rest this night in peace, and not to sleep in
earthly things, but more and more to acknowledge thy goodness, until thou
call me unto this so desired a rest, which thou have prepared for us. O how
sweet and loving shall this awaking be, when as in our graves we shall hear
the voice of thy son to raise us up again, in a glorious immortality? Yet
while we do awaite for this last coming we recommende our selves unto thee,
O heavenly father, the peace and preservation of thy Church, superiors
magistrates, and all those which have need of thy succor: beseeching thee,
that in this oldenesse of the world wherein all kingdoms of the world do
shake, yt thou would be the stay of thy poor people, and in steed of so
many sorowefull days and years, as we have seen, we may behold some rest in
ye midst of thy Church. Raise up daily O Lord some softer father, and also
some retiring place for thy children, yt no violent oppression ouerwhelme them,
and that for thy sons sake, in whom I trust, and upon whom I rest my self.
So be it.

Here follows a little Paraphrase and short exposition of the Lords prayer,
taken out of S. Cyprian almost word by word.
THe doctrine contained in the Gospel, is no other thing than the ordinance of
our master God, the ground whereon to build our hope and to strengthen our
faith, the food wherewith to nourish our soul, the pylates whereby to guide
our ship in this navigations, the helps by whom we come to salvation, in such
sort as when the faithful heart yields it self to be trainable here in
earth, it is a mean to bring it up unto heaven. It has pleased God that many
things were often spoken by the prophets and heard by them. But how much more
excellent ought that to be reputed which the father has said and pronounced by
his son, than that which he has said by his servants? For in them spoke
the spirit of Christ, and he himself has spoken in the later time in his
own voice. He does not now command, that men prepare the way unto him that
comes, because that he himself is come, and discovers the true way, that
we which go wandering, and groping in the darkness of death, may be by the
light of his wisdom directed in the way of life. Now amongst so many good
lessons as he has left us for our salvation, The form of prayer.
he has chiefly given unto us the right form of prayer, he that has made
us to live, has taught us also to pray, yea he has done it after his grace
and goodness wherethrough he has stored us with all things, and wrought it
unto the end yt his father might the more willinger hear us, when we pray
unto him, in that prayer that his son has taught us. He did foretell how that
the hour should come, wherein the true woorshippers should worship him in
spirit, and truth. He has also fulfilled that, which he had promised, giving
us his spirit to worship him. The Lords prayer.
What prayer may be now more spiritual, than that which has bin given unto us
by Jesus Christ, by whom also the holy spirit has been sent unto us? What
prayer shall be more true and perfect before God, than that which comes from
the son, who is the truth of Gods own mouth? In manner as otherwise to
pray, concerning the substance then he has taught us, is not alonely an
ignorance, but also a blockish fault: as he rebukes the Jews elsewhere, how
they did despise Gods commandment, to set up their traditions. Let us
therefore pray my brethren, even as he which is both our God and master has
taught us. That prayer is agreeable unto God, when one prays with a prayer
that is his, and when we make the words of his son to mount up unto his
ears. The father does acknowledge his sons language: when we do pray, let
him that dwells in our heart be also in our voice and upon our tongue. And
seeing that the son is our advocate, as often as we do demand forgiveness
for our sins, let us take in our mouths the words of our advocate. For
seeing that he says how all that we shall ask of the father in his name, it
shall be granted unto us, when shall our prayers have greatest strength, but then
when we shall call upon him by the peculiar prayer which he has made? It
behooves those which pray to keep a certain form in their speech, with a
stayed manner, and full of all reverence and humbleness. Let us remember that
it is before Gods face that we present our selves. Let us therefore seek to
please him, as well in the behavior of our bodies, as in the conueiance of our
voice. It is an ill favored thing and a sign of impudency, to use much crying
out in prayer, and there is nothing that does set it out more than modesty.
To be short, we do see that the Lord does allow that prayer which is made
privately, in secret, and in ones chamber: a thing that well agrees with our
faith, to the end to make us understand that God is present throughout all,
that he hears and sees all, and that the fullness of his majesty pearceth
into the most hidden and secret places as the scripture speaks. I am thy God
near at hand, and not afar off. If a man be hidden in a privy or close
place, do not I see him? Do not I fill both heaven and earth? Then when we
shall come together with our brethren, we must in good order solemnise the
sacrifices of God, not thinking to make our prayers to take place before the
Lord with chaunting and crying out.

God understands the heart, not with the voice: for it is not needeful to
advertise him, by a lifting up of a voice who sees our thoughts. This is it
that he often says, that he is the searcher of hearts, having the knowledge of
our most secret thoughts.

We have a goodly example in the good woman Anna, mother of Samuel, who prayed
unto the Lord not with a strong or lifted up voice, but secretly, soberly, and
in her heart. Her prayer was secret, but her faith was open: she spoke not
with the voice, but with the heart: knowing very well that the Lord our God
so hears his and in such sort, she received in effect, that which by faith
she had required. We have another example of a prayer right well directed and
very modest in the person of the Publicane. He went up into the temple, and
made his prayer not in a rude and presumptuous manner as the other, without
lifting up his head, or his forehead: he only fell down, and confessed with
his mouth his sin, that he felt shut up in his heart: in such sort as God
heard the prayer of the humble that rested not upon his own innocence. For
who is he that is innocent? His prayer was humble, and he which aduaunceth
and favors the humble, heard the poor Publican. Thus much concerning the
fashion and countenance that we ought to keep in our prayers. Let us now
consider how our master has taught us to pray. When you pray, says he, say
thus:

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us,
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. THe first thing
which we learn in the entry of this prayer, An exposition of the Lords
prayer.
is that the Doctor of peace, and the Master of all true union and concord,
would not that our prayer should be particular for one alone. See wherefore we
do not say, My father which art in heaven, give me my daily bread, etc. Thus
it appears, how this prayer is public and common, and we pray not for one
alone but for all: because in deed all Gods people is but one body. God would
that one only making his prayer, should pay for all the other, even as one
only man has saved many: and through one only spirit he governs all his
childrens hearts. And to this does agree that which we do read of the
Apostles, Acts. 1.
who continued together in holy prayers, so as there was but one heart
amongst them all, and of their holy company. Now my brethren, it is an
incredible thing how many great secrets there be here in this prayer of the
Lord, that is so well trussed up, and short in words, but of most great
strength, and right well furnished of all demaundes that are needful and
necessary for us. Ye shall say then, Our Father.
Our Father which art, etc.

Oh the happy and loving beginning of our prayer. For mark ye how the new
and regenerate man, that is reconciled unto God, such a one calls upon God
his father, because that he has already begun to be the child of God. To
all those that have received him, John. 1.
he has given unto the^ this privilege, to be made the children of God:
unto those I say that do believe in him. In such sort as the believing man, to
make an acknowledgement unto the Lord of such a favor, Deuteronomy. 33.9 Not that he
ought to despise his father, but God ought to go before and those places are
not simply to this purpose.
both to strengthen his faith, and also to make witness to whom he does
belong, ought to call upon God as his father before all things, and to reckon
him for such. In ye 33. of Deuteronomy. he says of his Father and Mother, I have not
known nor seen him, such a one is praised, because he stays himself to
keep the statutes and covenants of ye Lord. To this has our Lord respect in
the 23. of S. Matthew saying, Let us not name ye Father on the earth, Mat. 23.9.
because yt we have a father that is on high in heaven. Matthew. 8.22.
And in S. Matthew, he said unto a young man, Leave off from burying thy father
which is dead: which was to the end yt he might study to do rather his
duty toward ye living and heavenly Father. Go to then, behold God which is
in heaven: but see ye consolation of Christians, how he is ours, and we are
his, in as much as he has chosen and sanctified us. The Jews.
The wretched Jews that have mistook Jesus Christ, and cruelly have put him
to death, cannot call God their father. For as the savior reprooueth them to
their great confusion, John. 8.
the devil is your father, seeing that you fulfill his desires. God did then
this honor, to communicate himself with them. But he says by Esai, Esaias. 1.2*
I have nourished and chosen children, and they have mistaken and disdained me:
that which the Ox and the Ass have not done, who know the stable and crib of
those which owe them. Therefore my brethren, let us consider how God by ye
mean of our faith, begins to be our father, and for the Jews unbelief,
cease to be theirs: are we then given over to sinnne? We be no more
children but servants according unto that our Lord says, Whosoever sins,
is a servant to sin. The son remains always in his fathers house, that
which ye servant does not. Let us therefore my loving brethren acknowledge and
acknowledge again, what favor it is for us to dare, and be able to present our
selves before God, in the quality of Gods children. Who durst have been so
bold as to have given himself such a title and to have undertaken it, if the
true only, and everlasting son of God had not given us leave and
commandment? It is for us to have remembrance, that having God for our
Father, we must behave our selves according as it is becoming for the
children of such a Lord: And if we be well contented of such a father, let us
also do in like manner, that he may of his own part in like case have just
occasion not to be mislyking of us. Let us not become bastardes, but let us
become spiritual and given to all holy and praise worthy things, after the
example of our father: and that it may appear how we be the children and
temple of this great God.

Now what is the first demand that we do ask of our Father? How the name of
God is made holy.
Hallowed be thy name. Not that our prayers do make the name of God holy,
but we pray that his name may be made holy in us. What is he, will some say,
that shall sanctify the name of God? Is it not he, which sanctifies all
things? We are admonished in the 20. of Leuiticus: Be ye holy, as I am
holy. Therefore let us pray him, that he will grant us grace to enter into
the holiness, whereof we are advertised in our baptism to continue therein.
And so be we, who ask to be sanctified: yea always, for so much as our
sins do daily defile us: in such sort, as the name of God and his word are
not made holy and honored by us, unless we our selves be also sanctified.
Afterward he says, Thy kingdom come. Gods kingdom is everlasting, and was
before that ever we were. But it is in the respect of us that we do ask,
Let thy kingdom come: That we which have served in the world and to Satan,
may have from henceforward Christ reigning in us.

This kingdom is gotten unto us by the blood of our Savior, and shall be
truly fulfilled, when we shall hear this sweet saying: Come ye blessed of
my father, into the kingdom which is prepared for you etc. Now we do well to
require the kingdom of heaven. For there is also an earthly kingdom: But he
that has tasted the least thing in the world what the heavenly things are,
does despise the earthly. And it is a thing unto the which we ought
diligently to watch with Prayers and supplications, least yt we be shut out of
Gods kingdom: But that we may be under his guide and Empire.

Many shall come, says he, from the East and West, and they shall sit with
Abraham. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outward
darkness, there where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The Jews were
the children of the kingdom so long as they were the children of God, and
having lost this quality, they have well changed both their condition and
their estate. It follows then:

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. We say not, let God do that
he will, but that we may do that he will. For who is he that will resist
against God? What is he that shall let him to do his will? Now, because that
the devil is continually about us to turn away our hearts from obedience to
God, and to do that which God would: we must be helped by himself, and none
alas is assured but by his grace. Our Lord Jesus being in the agony of death,
and according to the infirmity, strongly fighting against a number of
temptations has left us yet a fair example: When he bursteth out in this
sort: If it be possible O father, let this bitter cup pass away from me:
Yet nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done. There is (in the second
Chapter of the first Epistle of S. John) an other fair sentence; Love not the
world, for in so doing the love of God is not in you: Seeing that the world
with all his desires shall pass away. And as concerning God he is
everlasting: and he that will dwell with him for evermore, must do the will of
the everliving God. Now, The will of God.
what is the will of God? It is that which Christ has fulfilled, and that he
has taught unto us. And what is that? Humblenes in conversation, stayednesse
in faith, modesty in words, justness in doings, mercy in works, discipline
in manners, and not to do wrong unto an other, and to abide it in himself, to
keep in peace with his brethren, to love God with all his heart, to love him
as a father, and to fear him as God: and to have nothing more dearer than
Christ, for he also has nothing more dearer than us, to keep our selves
vnseuered in his charity, to bear him company courageously in his cross,
when his name or glory is called in question: And in our talks to show a
stayed confession, and an assuredness in our aunsweres, when we be set
upon: and to show patience in death, seeing that by it we are crowned. To do
these things, is to be willing to be coheires with the son, and to fulfill
the will of the Father.

In heaven and in earth. We may take the spirit for the heaven, and the flesh
for the earth, that all our parts may be obedient unto God, or rather that we
do the will of God as Angels.

Give us our daily bread. This may be understood spirituallie of Christ, which
is the living bread: as S. John in his 6. Chap. says. But it is certain that
here the Lord would teach us, not to be carried away with the cares of this
present life: for as it is said elsewhere, it suffices for every day to have
his miseries. Mat. 6.
And in deed, this will not agree well to desire the kingdom of God, and
withal to love the earthly life, and to delight therein. Now as S. Paul
says, 1 Timothy 6.
since that we brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any
thing away: wherefore do we not content our selves with food and apparel:
seeing likewise that those which do aspire unto riches, fetter themselves in
many sorrows, and easily fall into the snares of the devil? To be short,
the coveting of riches is the root of all ill.

This is a goodly show that our Savior makes in the 12. of S. Luke, Oh
wretch that thou art, this day shall they demand thy soul, and for what
purpose shall the great heaps of thy riches stored up serve thee? And will we
be well disposed to follow Christ? It behooves us at ye least to hinder ye
causes of worldly things. In the mean time the just remains not forsaken,
neither brought into an extremity by famine. The heavenly Father which
provides for the young Ravens and Sparowes, Pro. 10. Psalm. 37.
well knows to furnish us of our lackes that are necessary.

We do see by example apparantlie that which happened unto Elie, in the first
book of the kings and the 17. Chapter, where we read that namely a Raven
carried unto him wherewith to refresh him. After we do pray, that the Lord
forgive us our offenses, as we do forgive them that offend against us. Now
having received assistance of our food we do demand the forgiveness of our
sins, to the end that he who is nourished of God, may live to God, and that
so we may not only have our bread in this life, but that we may also have
the inioying of the other, that is far better, and whereunto we cannot
enter, if our sins be not forgiven us.

Now our sins are called debtes: as likewise in the 18. of S. Matthew: I have
forgiven thee all thy debt, because thou have required it of me. We are then
my brethren here warned, that we be sinners, praying to God for the
forgiveness of our sins, and asking grace of God, the conscience being
overcome through offense.

Therefore let none of us set up our selves, what gifts soever we have,
seeing that daily we sin, and do ask mercy of GOD. If we do confess
our sins says S. John in the first Chap. of his first Epistle: he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins: But if we say that there is no
sin in us, we do lie. And since that this good Jesus does make us ask
forgiveness o^ our offenses, he gives us a certain assurance to find it,
he I say, that makes us strong through the mercifulness of his father.

The condition that he has joined to this demand, buindeth us before GOD to
forgive others, if that we will that he forgive us. This is it that he
speaks in an other place. With what measure you mete unto others, the same
shall they measure unto you. And in the 18. Chap. of Saint Matthew the servant
that goes on against his companion with all rigor, is reproved, cast into
prison, and declared unworthy of the favor of his Master.

And yet this is more clearelie expressed in Jesus Christ. When ye shall
appear before God to pray unto him: If you have any thing against any body.
Forgive him: otherwise your father will not forgive you. Then do we never
make this prayer, but that we do condemn our selves, if we forgive not one
an other. For as the Lord calls us to peace, in regenerating us: so will he
that we do continue in that brotherhoode and friendship. And in deed this is
the fairest sacrifice that we can offer unto God, that is, our loving hearts
knit together. For God loves the offering of him who has a loving heart: But
if the heart be froward, then does nothing of his actions or doings please
the Lord. A thing that is plainly seen in the histore of Abel and Cain. In
short, for so much as he which hates his brother is a murderer, 1. John. 3.
and God will have no acquaintance with murderers: let us make no account to
obtain his divine favor, if we be not loving and at peace with our neighbors.

Afterward the Lord warns us how we should pray.

Lead us not into Temptation. ANd in this behalf he does warn us, how the
adversary can do nothing against us, but in so much as the Lord does suffer
him, to the end that all our fear and reverence be always made ready to the
Lord. We read in the 24. Chapt. of the second book of the Kings, how God
did deliver the city of Jerusalem into the hands of the king of Babylon. For
it was by the occasion of our sins, that the wicked were let loose against
us: as it is said in the 42. of Esai: Who is it that gives Jacob for a spoil?
Is it God against whom they have sinned? And in the first book of the Kings
and 11. Chap. The Lord threatened Solomon to raise up an adversary against
him, because yt he had forgotten himself in committing so many vilanous
things. Wherefore we be tempted.
And as concerning these powers and temptations which he prepares against us,
they are for two diverse causes: Either it is to punish us when we do offend:
or else to make us victorious, when as by them we be only proved and tried:
which may be seen in ye history of Job. The Lord in the 19. of S. John,
speaking of himself, said unto Pilate: Thou should have no power over me,
if it were not given thee from above.

Now this prayer whereby we do pray, that the Lord lead us not into
temptation, does represent before our eyes, man's weakness, that is subject
unto so many knockes; in such sort as it is not for him to do any bravery,
but rather daily to watch, to the end that he enter not into temptation
following so many warninges as are made unto us. The spirit is ready but the
flesh is weak, what then shall we do? Let us pray the Lord: and that that
we shall ask with humbleness, he will grant us for his fidelity. There is in
the end of the prayer,

But deliver us from evil. Under this is comprehended all that our enemies can
devise and platte against us, and wherewith we be defended if ye Lord does
hear our prayers, and lend unto us his help. Well then, when we do pray to
be preserved from evil, it is to be delivered from all danger, and from all
enterprises whether it be from satan, or the world: in such sort as having the
protection of God against evil, we may well hold us most assured. For how shall
he fear any ill in this world, that is kept of God in this world, and
compassed about with his safeguard? To be short, this is the life everlasting
and the fullness of all good hap, John. 17.
to know one only true God, and him whom he had sent into this world, Jesus
Christ our Savior. Now our Lord Jesus has not only commanded us to pray,
Luke. 6.
but he himself has given us an example, withdrawing himself often up, into
ye mountain to make his prayer. And if he did pray which was exempt from
sin: how is it then yt we poor wretches do not pray to God? The prayer of
Jesus Christ.
And if he have passed some times whole nights therein, wherefore do we leave
off a thing so necessary? His prayer was not so much for himself, as for us.
And we see that which is spoken, how yt Satan had desire to sift the
Apostles: but that he had prayed that their faith should not fail them. In ye
17. Chap. of S. John he says: I pray not only for the^, but for all those yt
shall believe in me. O what bounty and affectioned love was that of our
savior, that was not contented to redeem us by his blood, but had moreover
great desire to pray for us. And he has prayed that we might be all one, well
knowing that in the kingdom of God no discord does enter.

Now, when we pray my brethren, let all fleshly things be far from us,
that the spirit may think upon none other thing but upon only prayer. And
thereof comes the manner that we have, when as one in the beginning of our
prayers pronounces these words: Lift up your hearts. And the people
answer: We lift them up unto the Lord. So that it is requisite that our
hearts be shut up from Satan, and open unto our God.

The Devil is crafty and he seeks some clift, creuie or chinke by the
which he may slide into our understandings, and to turn them away from God:
So that by this mean he makes us to have one thing in our hearts and an
other thing in our tongues: and yet in the mean space it is the heart that God
demands, and not the sound of the mouth. For what lack of consideration is
this, for a man to be wretched in many thoughts in praying to God, seeing
that it is a thing wherein we ought so much to take heed how we pray unto
this great God? How would thou that GOD should hear thee, when that thou
do not hear thy self? Would thou yt God should have remembrance of
thee, and thou do nowhit at all remember thy self? This is to give our
selves for a pray unto our enemy, and to offend the majesty of GOD: This is
also to watch with the eyes, and to sleep with the heart. Furthermore it is
needful that the prayer have his effect, and not be barren: and this is the
cause wherefore the scripture has often times joined with it alms and
fasting, as the examples are thereof in Toby, and in the good captain
Cornelius, whereof it is spoken in the 10. of the Acts. And in the 58. of
Esaias, amongst other things that the Lord requires of those which call upon
him, it is that they break their bread unto those which have hunger.

Behold here the chief points that are requisite in true prayer that S.
Cyprian describes.

Blessed are those whom the Lord shall find waking and praying: be it that
he take us by death, or else that we be changed in the twincking of an eye to
appear in his judgment. Now, O Lord give us grace to praise thee: unto whom
be all honor and glory for ever. So be it.

2. Thessalonians Chap. 2.

Brethren stand fast, and hold the ordinances which ye have been taught,
whether it be by our preaching, or by our Epistle. Our Lord Jesus Christ, and
God and our Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope in grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in
all good saying and doing.

FINIS.

